==PAGE:1==
Master of Science (M.Sc.)
M.Sc. in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Deep reinforcement learning for automated
discovery of atomic transition pathways
Bjarke Arnskjær Hastrup⋆
(s151602@student.dtu.dk)
Supervisors
Arghya Bhowmik†
(arbh@dtu.dk)
Tejs Vegge†
(teve@dtu.dk)
Ole Winther⋆
(olwi@dtu.dk)
Peter Bjørn Jørgensen†
(pbjo@dtu.dk)
Jonas Busk†
(jbusk@dtu.dk)
⋆Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
†Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Kongens Lyngby
April 6th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis we lay the groundwork for the adoption of deep reinforcement learning
based search methods for automatic discovery of minimum energy pathways (MEP)
in chemical systems. For this purpose, we introduce the SurfRider environment, a
python based simulation engine for sampling transition pathways through steered
molecular dynamics, built on top of the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE).
Through the repeated interaction with the SurfRider environment, deep reinforce-
ment learning agents can be trained to navigate the high dimensional potential energy
surfaces of chemical configuration space, guided only by a purely physics based scalar
reward signal received from the environment.
In the past few years, graph neural networks (GNN) have become the new state-of-
the-art for molecular property prediction. In a simultaneous endeavour, we therefore
investigate the potential for incorporating these networks in the decision model of a
SurfRider agent. Since the particular GNN architecture does not explicitly process
directional features in its message passing layers, we extend the encoded atom em-
beddings with an internal coordinate representation, that pertains to the geometry
of the episode.
Whereas the interaction with the SurfRider environments works as hoped for and
allows for more than a dozen episodic rollouts per second, the agent, in its current
format, does not guarantee suﬀicient exploration of the chemical configuration space.
We believe the necessary exploration can be achieved by allowing the agent to use an
additional intrinsic reward signal based on the novelty of sampled transition path-
ways.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background: Rare events and the minimum energy path . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Computational approaches for MEP discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Nudged Elastic Band . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Machine learning enhanced NEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Graph neural networks for chemical property prediction . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Reinforcement learning for molecular design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
ASLA and MolGym . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Thesis organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Deep Reinforcement Learning
11
2.1
Markov Decision Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Environment transition probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.2
The reinforcement learning objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Policy gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Value based learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Fitted Q-iteration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Monte carlo control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
19
3.1
Objectives and considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Dimensionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
The agent atom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Unreachable goal states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.4
Goal location prediction and identification . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
The SurfRider environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Episode task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
3.2.4
Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.5
Reward shaping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Agent design
31
4.1
Agent model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Atoms to graph transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Graph neural network: Message passing with edge updates
. . . . . .
33
4.4
Internal coordinate representation of neighborhood atoms . . . . . . .
36
5
Experiments
39
5.1
Static map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Map generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.2
SurfRider speed tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.3
Nudged Elastic Band analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.4
Monte Carlo control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.5
Importance of internal coordinate presentation . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Sequential model learning: Randomized alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.1
What just happened?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion
51
7
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
A
Random agent
63
A.1 A stochastic agent for benchmarking and off-policy training . . . . . .
63
B
Performance test on reduced architectures
67
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this introductory chapter we give an informal introduction to the concept of rare
events and minimum energy paths in chemistry and explain why these cannot easily
be studied using conventional molecular simulations (Section 1.1). We then provide a
brief review of the literature on existing computational approaches for approximating
the minimum energy path (Section 1.2), highlighting in particular the popular Nudge
Elastic Band method, before moving on to cover recent developments in deep learning
for prediction of molecular properties (Section 1.3) as well as reinforcement learning
(Section 1.4), in order to motivate the scientific objective of this thesis which is to
train graph neural network based deep reinforcement learning agents to discover the
minimum energy paths (Section 1.5). An overview of the remaining chapters is then
presented in Section 1.6.
1.1
Background: Rare events and the minimum
energy path
Often the most important dynamical behavior of atomic scale systems is determined
solely by the occurrence of rare events which are the thermally activated spatial
rearrangements of atomic coordinates that correspond to transitions between meta
stable states, also known as long lived states, each of which is some local minimum
on the high dimensional potential energy surface. Examples of such rare events could
be a chemical reaction, a conformational change of a molecule or perhaps a diffusion
process on a solid-liquid interface.
In a numerical computer simulation experiment, the naive approach to study rare
transitions between reactant and product states would be to start in the reactant
state and then propagate the system forward in time according to the known equa-
tions of motion, a simulation method commonly referred to as molecular dynamics
(MD). In an MD simulation the dynamical motion and stochastic fluctuations of
the constituent atoms are simulated by numerically solving Newton’s equations of
motion using available force fields or electronic structure software (Mortensen et al.,
2005) until the particular transition has been observed, thereby shedding light on the
qualitative reaction mechanism responsible for the transition and offering a detailed
description of how the system transitions from state A to state B; which atomic in-
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
teractions are essential for the transition to occur? Do some atoms swap places in
process? And what is the entire sequence of intermediate states visited?
Even more importantly, if we could obtain the minimum energy path (MEP) between
the two states, which according to statistical mechanics is the statistically most prob-
able path connecting the states, then by measuring the energy barrier of the path,
we could even deduce the expected rate of the transition - a number that is known to
decay exponentially as a function of the barrier height according to harmonic tran-
sition state theory (Vineyard, 1957). This would allow us to answer the following
profoundly important question: How long time on average does the system spend in
state A before it transitions to state B?
Unfortunately, the large forces and small length scales involved in atomic scale sim-
ulations, that aim to also adequately resolve the atomic vibrational modes, demand
a very small timestep of the MD method, typically on the order of a femtosecond
(10−15s) or less, making it near impossible to simulate such systems for long enough
to actually observe the rare transition. For instance in molecular biology, it is of-
ten necessary to simulate a protein for an entire second, just to observe a single
folding/unfolding event. Simulating just a millisecond of MD data could easily take
years, even on modern computing clusters, and is still infeasible for most molecular
systems - this is referred to as the sampling problem.
To obtain the MEP, the best way forward is instead to study the transition in isolation
by simultaneously focusing on both the reactant and product state and then perform
some sort of interpolation with these two endpoints states as boundary conditions,
using the potential energy surface (PES) to guide the interpolation path towards
the MEP. This removes the need of brute force MD simulations, thus avoiding the
sampling problem entirely.
Sadly, there is no perfect method to achieve such interpolation as the guaranteed
convergence towards the true MEP would require full knowledge of the PES in the
area between and around the two endpoint states, but the past few decades have
provided the scientific community with new computational methods that can find
a sequence of intermediate states on the MEP and require only a limited number
of function evaluations of the PES between the two states.
These methods work
extraordinarily well for most systems, but in rare cases they may identify a non-
optimal MEP, and it is in fact the goal of this thesis to investigate novel algorithmic
approaches for identifying the true MEP in those few anomalous cases when all other
methods fail.
1.2
Computational approaches for MEP discovery
Existing algorithms for the automatic discovery of the minimum energy paths come
in various shapes and sizes; some are double ended algorithms that performs inter-
polations between the two states. The string method (Weinan et al., 2002) forms an
initial guess of a set of intermediate states on the MEP, and then optimizes all these
intermediate states along the path simultaneously without favoring one end of the
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Computational approaches for MEP discovery
3
path over the other. It optimizes the path shape sequentially in a two step procedure;
an evolution step that guides the string toward the MEP, and a reparameterization
step that redistributes the intermediate states along the string. The growing string
method (Peters et al., 2004) on the other hand, finds minimum energy pathways and
transition states without first having provided an initial guess for the pathway. The
pathway is found by constructing two separate string fragments, one from each of the
endpoint states, and then growing these until they converge.
There also exists a whole range of single ended methods, sometimes referred to as
surface walking algorithms. Some surface walking algorithms assume full knowledge
of the product state but start in the reactant state and then calculate the direction
of the MEP by combining local information of the PES with the intrinsic motivation
to arrive at the other state eventually, thus biasing the path in the correct direction
(Chen, 2017). The dimer method (Henkelman and Jónsson, 1999), on the other hand,
finds saddle points on a potential energy surface without having any knowledge of the
final state of the transition. Single-ended surface walking can also be performed with
metadynamics (Laio et al., 2002), a type of biased molecular dynamics simulation
that iteratively alters the potential energy landscape using a sum of Gaussians along
the trajectory of states visited. By ”filling” up the free energy landscape, the system
is forced to migrate from one minimum to the next, thus accelerating the sampling
of rare events (Bussi et al., 2020).
1.2.1
Nudged Elastic Band
The perhaps most important double ended algorithm is the Nudged Elastic Band
method (NEB) (Henkelman and Jónsson, 2000; Jonsson et al., 1998) which is currently
considered as a state-of-the-art algorithm for automatic MEP discovery. It initializes
its search for such a pathway by first creating a sequence of intermediate images that
(at least in the original version of the algorithm) are initialized as a linear interpolation
between the two endpoint states. The most important feature of the NEB method is
its decomposition of the force vector into two orthogonal components, one component
in direction of the path tangent, and one component in the perpendicular direction.
This effectively decouples the path optimization into displacements in the tangent
direction from displacements in the perpendicular direction.
The ”elastic band” refers to its treatment of the tangent force component. For any two
adjacent images along the path, the NEB method introduces an artificial harmonic
spring force between the two images which has the effect of providing an even image
distribution along the path and avoids the case where images collide into the same
local minima along the path. If desired, variable spring forces can provide additional
image density in particular regions of interest, fx. in the vicinity of the transition
state (high energy states). Since the most important feature of the minimum energy
pathway is simply the energy barrier of the path, it is highly desirable that one
image converges toward the highest saddle point along the MEP. This feature was
implemented with climbing-image NEB (Henkelman, Uberuaga, et al., 2000) in which
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Introduction
the algorithm allows the highest energy image to actually perform gradient ascent on
the potential energy surface, in the tangent direction.
For the perpendicular force projection, the NEB uses the fact that on the true MEP,
the gradient of the potential energy has zero component in the direction perpendic-
ular to the MEP tangent. The algorithm therefore performs gradient descent in the
perpendicular direction until the perpendicular force projection vanishes.
In its original format, the NEB procedure had convergence issues that was caused
by its linear interpolation initialization which had a tendency to accidentally place
atoms at unrealistically small pair distances. This issue was addressed in (Smidstrup
et al., 2014) in which a better procedure was devised for generating the initial guess
of the NEB images. The new initialization allowed the algorithm to converge faster
by initialising the images closer to the true MEP, and by also avoiding the unrealistic
atomic pair distances, it improved robustness since small distances are known to
destabilise energy evaluations in electronic structure codes.
1.2.2
Machine learning enhanced NEB
As it is common practice to use the NEB algorithm in combination with electronic
structure methods such as Density Functional Theory (DFT), it requires tremendous
computational resources to make the image band converge, and a single NEB opti-
mization can easily involve tens of (if not a hundred) DFT evaluations per image.
Moreover, it is common practice to do several isolated NEB runs, each with a dif-
ferent guess for the initial images. Despite this being a tedious procedure, it can be
necessary since there is no general guarantee that the NEB actually converges on the
true MEP, i.e. that it actually converges on the global solution to the pathway search
problem. It is therefore no surprise that in the past few years, many efforts have been
put into finding new ways to speed up the NEB algorithm using statistical learning
theory, or machine learning as it is commonly referred to.
Since the computational bottleneck of the NEB method is the energy function eval-
uation, which usually also provides a gradient estimate at negligible additional cost,
a special attention has been directed towards fitting the potential energy surface us-
ing the data points collected during the NEB optimization. Assuming that the PES
is a suﬀiciently smooth function of the atomic coordinates, a deep neural network
model of suﬀicient depth should be able to approximate the PES to arbitrary accu-
racy given a large enough amount of training data (Hornik et al., 1989). This has
indeed been demonstrated in several works (Artrith et al., 2011; Bartók et al., 2010;
Behler et al., 2007; Lorenz et al., 2004). Inspired by these demonstrations, (Peterson,
2016) employs (within the Nudged Elastic Band framework) a deep neural network
using the Amp toolbox (Khorshidi et al., 2016) to construct a surrogate model for
the potential energy. By carrying out a complete NEB relaxation in the surrogate
model instead of using fx. the intensive energy evaluations of an electronic structure
code, the algorithm is allowed to move much further, and thereby closer to the true
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Graph neural networks for chemical property prediction
5
MEP, before finally arriving at a new set of images for which energy evaluations are
again performed with the heavy electronic structure code. If these evaluations reveal
that the images do in fact form a minimum energy path, the task is completed, and
if not, the new image data points can be added for surrogate model training, after
which a NEB relaxation is again performed in the improved surrogate model. Since
obtaining energies using DFT is orders of magnitudes slower than performing a NEB
relaxation in a surrogate deep neural network model, this approach provides a very
significant acceleration of the NEB algorithm.
Often, a better way to approximate a function in the sparse data regime (ultimately
the goal of NEB is to use as few energy function evaluations as possible) is to employ
a kernel based approach such as a Gaussian process regression model1 for potential
energy function fitting. Such a model is implemented and incorporated in a NEB
setting in (O. P. Koistinen et al., 2016; O.-P. Koistinen, Ásgeirsson, et al., 2019;
O.-P. Koistinen, Dagbjartsdóttir, et al., 2017) and shall collectively be referred to
here as GP-NEB. Since a Gaussian process model is a non-parametric model, it
is a parameter free model (ignoring hyperparameters) that is fitted to the training
data in an exact or analytical sense, meaning that the GP-NEB doesn’t face the
risk of getting stuck in a local minimum in parameter space, as is the case for the
parameterized deep neural networks in (Peterson, 2016). Furthermore, a Gaussian
process is a probabilistic model in the sense that when the model is evaluated at
some trial input data point, it not only predicts an expected output value but also
outputs an associated standard deviation. This attribute is particularly intelligently
utilized in the one-image-evaluated (OIE) algorithm presented in (O.-P. Koistinen,
Dagbjartsdóttir, et al., 2017). Here the algorithm evaluates the true energy and force
only at the image with highest posterior variance and then adds this image to the
training data, thereby saving DFT calculations at images for which the GP model is
already quite sure about the outcome.
1.3
Graph neural networks for chemical property
prediction
Although neural networks have been applied to chemical modelling in a variety of
contexts for more than a decade, we are now seeing an explosion in research on
graph neural networks (GNNs) for molecular property prediction as these have been
shown to significantly outperform previous models, setting a new state-of-the-art
on potential energy predictions. (Gilmer et al., 2017) reviews important GNN im-
plementations and proposes a unified framework knows as Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNNs).
Using a large dataset of atomic structures and their associ-
ated energies, GNNs can learn empirical potential functions that effectively captures
1A Support Vector Regression would likely have many similar benefits.
==PAGE:12==
6
1 Introduction
complex atomic interactions.
Based on atom types and mutual distances, GNNs
first learn high-dimensional atomwise representations (also known as embeddings)
through a message passing algorithm, with messages being sent between atoms that
are connected by an edge in the graph. The embeddings are then finally used in
an aggregation procedure which maps to a scalar prediction of the potential energy.
This is known as the readout phase.
The Schnet architecture (Schütt et al., 2018) is a highly popular GNN that uses
continous filter convolutions in the message passing phase.
Also, it was the first
application of GNNs for energy predictions on a materials dataset (The Materials
Project, Jain et al., 2013).
Materials are usually modelled as periodic structures
that extends infinitely in all directions and this creates some level of ambiguity as
to how the graph connectivity should be determined. Using a modified version of
the Schnet architecture, (P. B. Jørgensen et al., 2018) evaluated various procedures
for graph connectivity determination, such as a k-nearest neighbors and fixed cutoff
distances. Their main contribution consisted of an edge update network in which the
edge features are updated during the message passing layers and depend on the node
state representations (the embeddings) of the two atoms the edge connects.
1.4
Reinforcement learning for molecular design
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a subfield of machine learning that deals with se-
quential decision making. In the standard reinforcement learning setting, an agent
interacts with an external environment in order to maximize some notion of reward.
It is customary to formalize the agent-environment interaction as a Markov decision
process (MDP) which has a solid theoretical foundation, dating all the way back to
the 1950’s, around the same as dynamic programming techniques (DP) were intro-
duced. DP is a recognized algorithmic principle used for solving many reinforcement
learning problems and provides a rigorous framework for learning in small and/or dis-
crete state spaces. Due to the curse of dimensionality, these DP techniques have not
been able to properly scale to higher dimensional problems often encountered in prac-
tical engineering applications, such as computer vision and robotics. It is only after
the advent of flexible high dimensional function approximators such as deep neural
networks that reinforcement learning, now more appropriately coined deep reinforce-
ment learning, has become a serious contributor to these fields. Inspired by profound
new achievements in RL, such as Deepmind’s AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016), the first
computer program to beat a human professional Go player, we have, just within the
past five years, seen an explosion in applications of the deep reinforcement learning
methodology. This new development is primarily accelerated by better open-source
machine learning frameworks (Martı́n Abadi et al., 2015; Paszke et al., 2017) as well
as cheaper and faster graphics processing unit (GPU) based computing resources.
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Reinforcement learning for molecular design
7
1.4.1
ASLA and MolGym
Despite the wide adoption of RL for artificial intelligence and engineering applica-
tions in general, the adoption of RL in chemistry has been rather slow. But with
the realization that RL can also be applied to computational tasks that are not in-
herently temporal of nature, several frameworks have now been proposed that aim
to construct low energy molecular configurations by framing the molecular design
task as an sequential decision making problem in which atoms are being placed on a
canvas one atom at a time.
Such autoregressive design procedure is used in the Atomistic Structure Learning
Algorithm (ALSA) (M. S. Jørgensen et al., 2019) which builds 2D structures and
planar compounds atom by atom. During the course of an episode, the agent builds
the structure by sequentially placing atoms in a real space grid until a predefined
number of atoms have been placed. When the episode is finished, the agent receives
a reward based on the thermodynamic stability on the final configuration, which is
evaluated with a DFT calculation of the potential energy.
Inspired by similar architectures from image recognition, the agent chooses the loca-
tion of the next atom by using a convolutional neural network to predict Q-values
for each pixel in the 2d grid, with the Q-values reflecting the agent’s prediction of
the potential energy of the atomic configuration once all atoms have been placed.
The agent is trained using Monte Carlo control, which resembles Q-learning but does
not use any bootstrapping, meaning that the regression target for the neural net-
work’s Q-value prediction is the realized (observed) return, rather than the sum of
the immediate reward and the (discounted) expected Q-value of the subsequent state
(estimated by the same neural network).
Another example of reinforcement learning for molecular structure generation is the
MolGym framework (Simm et al., 2020).
Contrary to the ASLA framework, the
MolGym agent builds molecules by placing atoms on a continuous 3-dimensional
canvas. The episode is initialized with an empty canvas and ”bag of atoms” containing
the atomic species and counts of all the atoms that must be placed before the molecule
is complete and the episode is finished.
The agent’s policy, a mapping from state to action space, is a fairly involved generative
procedure with an action space consisting of both discrete and continuous components.
At every stage of the construction, the agent must first choose a focal atom from the
molecule generated thus far. To decide on the focal atom, it uses the atom embeddings
from the Schnet graph neural network mentioned in Section 1.3 together with an latent
representation of the remaining atom bag. The focal atom becomes the origin of a
spherical coordinate system that is aligned using the nearest neighbors of the focal
atom. Dependent on the focal atom, the agent then chooses the chemical element
of the next atom to be placed by picking an element from the remaining bag, before
finally sampling the three spherical coordinates that specifies the location of the new
atom.
Whereas ASLA has no intermediate rewards, the MolGym agent receives a reward
==PAGE:14==
8
1 Introduction
signal according to a quantum-chemical energy calculation after every new atom
placed. Also, the training of the MolGym agent is also significantly different from the
ASLA training. Like ASLA, it does performs state value estimation (a critic), but
MolGym uses an explicit policy representation where states are directly mapped to
action probabilities (a policy gradient method), and the agent is trained with Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman, Wolski, et al., 2017), a type of Advantage
Actor Critic (A2C) that clips the gradients to avoid too rapid policy updates, thus
guaranteeing a more stable training.
1.5
Problem statement
The goal of this thesis is to discover chemical transition pathways that are inaccessible
to the Nudge Elastic Band method and its machine learning extensions due to
• Purely local optimization on the PES: This limits its potential for finding
unintuitive or anomalous transition pathways far from the initial interpolated
guess. This also leads to bad performance on high entropy systems.
• Atom clashes and failure to break symmetry: The chemically uninformed
initialization can cause numerical instabilities if atoms are placed too close to
each other. Also, for certain symmetric systems, the gradients will be zero and
the optimization will stop even if the interpolated path is not a minimum energy
path (we will see an example of this in Chapter 5.1).
• Lack of model transferability: A common feature of the NEB and the other
MEP search methods mentioned in Section 1.2, is that there is no advanced
”learning” going on.
The type of learning that takes place in the Gaussian
Process based NEB (GP-NEB) consists of a regression model for a fixed number
of covariates with each covariate being related to a specific atom. So although
the GP-NEB does speed up NEB convergence for a particular system, whenever
the system changes slightly, a complete new model must be learned again from
scratch.
Reinforcement learning to the rescue
To build an algorithmic MEP search procedure without these issues, we will look
toward the field of deep reinforcement learning. Inspired by other applications of RL
for chemistry, such as ASLA and MolGym, we shall attempt to design an agent that
learns how to navigate the high dimensional potential energy surfaces of chemical
configuration space in order to find pathways with low energy barriers.
Similar to the NEB, we shall consider full information of both initial and final states,
but unlike the image interpolation property of NEB, we wish to construct paths that
grow from one configuration to the other (more on this in Chapter 3).
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Problem statement
9
Purely physics based learning
Although ASLA and MolGym only produce single structures and not entire sequences,
which is ultimately needed for specifying a transition pathway, these frameworks are
particularly interesting because they do not attempt to model chemical bonding di-
rectly or base their rewards on empirical properties such as drug-likeliness. Instead
they use purely physics based rewards, obtained from total energy calculations using
first-principles quantum chemical programs. In this thesis we will take the same ap-
proach.
Explicit forward dynamics with a cheap energy calculator
Our approach will need to deviate significantly from ASLA and MolGym in regards to
one particular aspect. At every stage of the agent-environment interaction in the RL
loop, they use no environment response (apart from the scalar reward signal), mean-
ing that the RL state transition is deterministically specified by the agent action alone.
This is because their task is inherently non-temporal and the agent-environment in-
teraction an artificial construct. Our path construction task, on the other hand, is
actually temporal of nature and will resemble that of metadynamics where a chemical
system evolves from one configuration to another in a sequence of temporally ordered
steps. Because our agent does not directly construct the entire path himself, but
does so in an interplay with mother nature represented by the forward dynamics of
the environment, we will need to propagate the system forward in time in response
to every agent action which consists of a small perturbation of the atomic positions
with the purpose of bringing the system closer to the goal configuration. This ex-
plicit forward propagation of the system state requires a very high number of energy
evaluations per episode. To accommodate this need, we will employ a cheap energy
calculator based on effective medium theory (EMT) (Nørskov et al., 1980) in both the
reward function and the state propagator. Whatever this calculator lacks in accuracy
is hopefully compensated by a significant gain in speed.
Learn internal representation of surroundings
Through the repeated interaction with a simulation environment, the agent will learn
to navigate the energy surfaces by forming an internal representation of its local
chemical environment. We therefore face a big challenge in choosing a suitable neural
network architecture that most effectively facilitates this learning. To this end, we
will take particular inspiration from the MolGym architecture because it incorporates
graph neural network embeddings in the agent’s decision model.
Plan of action
Specifically, we will need to do the following:
1. Build a custom made reinforcement learning simulation environment that allows
for sampling transitions between two end-point configurations.
2. Design a spatially aware graph neural network based agent to ”play” the envi-
ronment.
==PAGE:16==
10
1 Introduction
3. Develop reinforcement learning algorithms for training the agent to reach opti-
mal play.
4. Devise an experimental strategy for training the agent on relevant systems.
1.6
Thesis organisation
The remaining part of this thesis is organized as follows:
• In Chapter 2 we briefly introduce the principles of reinforcement learning and
explain how agents can be trained using deep neural network based policies.
• In Chapter 3 we then move on to describe our own custom made reinforcement
learning environment for pathway search which will be referred to as SurfRider.
• In Chapter 4 we propose a graph neural network based architecture for the
agent’s decision model.
• In Chapter 5 we then test the performance of our agent (and environment) using
various experiments with different RL algorithms on both static and dynamic
systems.
• Finally, we finish off with a discussion of the methodology (Chapter 6) and a
conclusion of our work (Chapter 7).
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Deep Reinforcement
Learning
This chapter attempts to give a brief theoretical introduction to the broad field of
deep reinforcement learning. As we do so, we will assume the reader is already famil-
iar with the fundamentals of deep learning. This does not seem to be a particularly
controversial choice since neural networks are already used extensively for applied
mathematical modelling - in chemistry and beyond. Also, it allows us to focus on the
core concepts of reinforcement learning which may not be a well known topic for the
wider audience.
In Section 2.1 we start out with a brief introduction to Markov decision processes.
This section will serve as useful background information when reading about the
SurfRider environment in the next chapter. This presentation is largely borrowed
from (Sutton et al., 1998), an excellent textbook on the fundamental principles of RL
(although not for modern algorithms or deep learning implementations).
We then move on to present approximate solution methods to the reinforcement
learning objective using both policy based (Section 2.2) and value function based
methods (Section 2.3).
2.1
Markov Decision Processes
In the standard reinforcement learning setting the learning problem is framed by
using the two fundamental entities: an agent and an environment. Informally the
agent can be defined as an actor faced with the task of making sequential decisions
and the environment as the place in which the decision is executed.
The environment is typically formalized as a Markov decision process (MDP), an
idealized mathematical model that provides a firm theoretical basis for developing
reinforcement learning agents.
The MDP gives an explicit and fully probabilistic
treatment of all components of the agent-environment interaction, and it can there-
fore be formalized how actions influence not only immediate rewards, but also the
future evolution of the system and thereby also the distribution of future rewards
==PAGE:18==
12
2 Deep Reinforcement Learning
to come. This explicit treatment allows for the design of smart agents, that can in-
telligently steer the state evolution trajectory towards regions associated with high
rewards, while simultaneously handling the trade-off between immediate and long-
term rewards.
In each step of this agent-environment interaction, the agent receives some repre-
sentation1 of the system state, St ∈S, and then selects an action, At ∈A, with
S and A denoting state and action spaces respectively. Once the agent has chosen
and executed the action, the system evolves into a new state, St+1 (according to
some potentially stochastic system dynamics not explicitly known to the agent), and
the agent will also receive a scalar reward signal, Rt+1 ∈R ⊂R. See Figure 2.1
for an illustration of the agent-environment interaction. Informally, it is the goal of
reinforcement learning algorithms to train the agent so that through its actions it
maximizes the cumulative sum of rewards received from the environment.
Agent
Environment
State
Action
Reward
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the agent-environment interaction
2.1.1
Environment transition probability
We will now add a bit of probabilistic terminology to the quantities just mentioned.
The fundamental distribution, and from which the MDP is derived, is the environment
transition probability2
p(s′, r|s, a) = Pr{St = s′, Rt = r|St−1 = s, At−1 = a}.
(2.1)
It is the joint probability distribution that describes the immediate reward distri-
bution as well as the one-step evolution of the environment state, conditional on
choosing action a from state s. As it is a probability distribution
∑
s′∈S
∑
r∈R
p(s′, r|s, a) = 1,
for all s ∈S, a ∈A.
(2.2)
1If the true state, st, is only partially observable to the agent, the decision process is known
as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), and then it is necessary to distin-
guish between the state and the agent’s observation of the state, ot = o(st), which comes with a
corresponding observation space O.
2In this subsection we assume the sets of states, actions, and rewards all have a finite number of
elements, effectively making the MDP a finite MDP. This simplifies the exposition tremendously, as
we don’t need to juggle between probability mass functions and probability density functions in the
same equations.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Markov Decision Processes
13
Summing over the reward in equation (2.1), we obtain the state transition probability
as the marginal probability distribution
T (s′|s, a) ≡p(s′|s, a) = Pr{St = s′|St−1 = s, At−1 = a} =
∑
r∈R
p(s′, r|s, a).
(2.3)
The most important assumption of a Markov decision process is the Markov property,
i.e. the assumption that the transition to the next state st+1 ∼p(·|st, at), meaning
that it solely depends on the current state st, and the action take from here, at.3 In
a similar fashion, we can instead marginalize w.r.t. s′ to obtain the distribution over
rewards
p(r|s, a) = Pr[Rt|St−1 = s, At−1 = a] =
∑
s′∈S
p(s′, r|s, a).
(2.4)
Naturally, almost all reinforcement learning tasks are empirically driven and the agent
does not have direct access to these distributions.
2.1.2
The reinforcement learning objective
Let the return at time t be defined as the discounted sum of all future rewards
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + ... =
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1.
(2.5)
The discounting factor, γ ∈[0, 1], represents the decrease in utility of receiving one
unit of reward after 1 time period compared to getting the reward now. High γ-values
corresponds to the agent being indifferent as to when the reward is received and for
small γ-values the agent only cares for more immediate rewards. Often, the agent-
environment interaction can be broken up into independent sequences called episodes.
Let T denote the duration of the episode which can either be a fixed/predefined
duration or a dynamic quantity determined by the activation of some state dependent
termination criteria. For the episodic case the return from time t is defined similarly
as
Gt =
T
∑
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk.
(2.6)
Formally, the Markov decision process consists of the 6-tuple M = {S, A, T , R, p0, γ}
where we have also included the initial state distribution, p0(s0), and is the goal in
reinforcement learning to find an agent policy, π(at|st) (a mapping from states to
3Notice that within RL terminology, a state transitions from st to st+1, while in chemistry
(and transition state theory (TST) in particular) a transition can also refer to the entire transition
pathway corresponding to a rare event. In later chapters, it will hopefully be clear from the context,
which type of transition we are referring to.
==PAGE:20==
14
2 Deep Reinforcement Learning
probabilities of selecting each possible action), that maximizes the expected return
from the initial state
π∗= argmax
π
Est+1∼T (·|st,at),at∼π(·|st),s0∼p0(·)
[ T
∑
k=1
γk−1Rk
]
.
(2.7)
2.2
Policy gradient
The most direct method for finding the optimal policy in equation (2.7), would be
to express the policy as a parameterized neural network, πθ(at|st), and calculate
the gradient of the expected return w.r.t. each parameter in the network. By then
updating the network parameters using the calculated gradients we can increase the
expected return of the agent. This direct method of improving the policy is known
as policy gradient (PG).
At this point it would probably be beneficial to introduce the concept of a trajectory,
τ, which is defined as the combined sequence of states and actions visited during
the episode. The distribution over trajectories is then a function of the agent policy
and implicitly also the initial state distribution and transition probability function,
but here we are only interested in how the trajectory distribution depends on the
parameters of the policy. It can be written as the factorized distribution
pθ(τ) = pθ(s0, a0, ..., aT −1, sT ) = p(s0)
T −1
∏
t=0
πθ(at|st)p(st+1|st, at).
(2.8)
Using the neural network parameters and the trajectory distribution, we can instead
express the RL objective as the problem of finding
θ∗= argmax
θ
Eτ∼pθ(τ) [G(τ)] ,
(2.9)
where G(τ) is the total return of that episode. We define the objective function J(θ) =
Eτ∼pθ(τ) [G(τ)], which is approximated by generating samples from running the policy
on the environment and averaging over the received rewards.
PG algorithms use
gradient ascent to improve the objective function, i.e. gradients of J(θ) are computed
and the parameter vector, θ, is subsequently moved in the direction of the gradient
θ ←θ + α∇θJ(θ),
(2.10)
with α being the step size (or learning rate). Computing the gradient with respect
to an expectation, ∇θJ(θ), would appear to be the greatest challenge in terms of
implementing a policy gradient method but the policy gradient theorem (Williams,
1992) provides us with a useful expression in order to evaluate this gradient
∇θJ(θ) = Eτ∼pθ(τ)
[( T
∑
t=0
∇θ log πθ(at|st)
)
G(τ)
]
.
(2.11)
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Value based learning
15
This tells us we can evaluate the gradient as a sample mean by rolling out the policy,
and computing the return G(τ) and gradient of log πθ(at|st) along each sample. This
algorithm is known as the REINFORCE algorithm, and has the major disadvantage of
very slow convergence due to a high variance as a result of computing gradients using
Monte Carlo sampling. The standard way to reduce this variance (while keeping the
bias unchanged) is to introduce a baseline, b(s), which is subtracted form the return.
Also advantage estimation and reward normalization are popular variance reduction
techniques (Chung et al., 2021; Schulman, Moritz, et al., 2018).
2.3
Value based learning
In value based learning methods the agent learns the value of his actions and then
chooses actions based on these estimates. This type of learning differs significantly
form the policy gradient method (PG) which uses an explicit policy representation
for which it must obtain meaningful gradient estimates through Monte Carlo sam-
pling. These gradient estimates will only be relevant to the current policy if they are
calculated from data that was in fact sampled using the current policy. For value
based methods, this is not an issue, and they have the advantage that trajectories
can be saved in an experience replay buffer and reused again and again if necessary.
For these reasons, policy gradient is referred to as an on-policy method and value
function based methods are referred to as off-policy methods.
2.3.1
Fitted Q-iteration
Specifically, we want the agent to learn the true state-action value function Q : S ×
A →R defined as
Qπ(st, at) =
T
∑
t′=t
Eπθ[r(st, at)|st, at],
(2.12)
for the greedy policy
π(at|st) =
{
1
if at = argmaxat Qθ(st, at)
0
otherwise.
(2.13)
Qπ(st, at) represents the expected sum of future rewards (return) by taking action at
from state st and following the policy πθ from then on. To find an optimal policy, we
must converge on a Q-function that satisfies
Q∗
θ(s, a) = max
π
Qπ(s, a),
(2.14)
which is the Q-function for the policy with the highest expected return.
When fitting the Q-function we do not use the actually observed return but instead
use a technique from dynamic programming known as bootstrapping. The procedure
is the following:
==PAGE:22==
16
2 Deep Reinforcement Learning
• a) We run the agent policy on the environment and save (into a buffer B) a
transition data point for every time step consisting of the tuple (si, ai, s′
i, ri),
where the elements are the state, action, next state, and the immediate reward.
• b) We then sample a batch of N transitions from the buffer and construct the
bootstrapped regression targets
yi = ri + γ max
a′
i
Qθ(s′
i, a′
i),
i = 1, ..., N.
(2.15)
As the estimated Q-function is represented by a neural network which takes a
state, s, and outputs a discrete number of state-action values, Qθ(s, aj), j =
1, ..., |A|, the max operation in equation (2.15) is trivial to perform, as we just
evaluate the network on s′
i and write down the largest state-action value output.
• c) We then take a gradient step (or rather some number of gradient steps)
θ ←argminθ
1
2
N
∑
i=1
||Qθ(si, ai) −yi||2,
(2.16)
using some stochastic gradient descent procedure, e.g.
an Adam-optimizer
(Kingma et al., 2017).
This has the effect of minimizing the Bellman error
defined as
E = 1
2E(s,a)∼B
[(
Qθ(s, a) −[r(s, a) + γ max
a′
Qθ(s′, a′)]
)2]
,
(2.17)
which is the expected difference (under the state-action distribution of the
buffer) between the predicted state-action value and the ”better” bootstrapped
state-action value. If the Bellman error goes to zero, then it means that the
optimal policy has been found.
2.3.2
Monte carlo control
Whereas fitted Q-iteration uses bootstrapping to estimate the value of a state-action
pair (equation (2.15)), Monte Carlo control methods use the actual realized return.
Unless the discount factor, γ, is extremely close to zero, these returns are only avail-
able once the entire episode is complete and the sequence of future rewards is known.
Since this thesis only deals with episodic rollouts, this is not an issue for us, and the
only change to the above procedure is that we will instead have the regression target
yi = Gi,
i = 1, ..., N.
(2.18)
and the Bellman error
E = 1
2E(s,a)∼B
[
(Qθ(s, a) −G(s, a))2]
,
(2.19)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Value based learning
17
where G(s, a) is the total sum of future rewards (the return) from taking action a in
state s. A pseudo code for the Monte Carlo control algorithm is provided in Algorithm
1. In practice, many of the operations in Algorithm 1 contain several subroutines, e.g.
for the final ”Update network parameters” step, we first need to calculate the loss,
then calculate gradients through back propagation and calling an optimizer step. For
the implementations in this thesis, we used pytorch, but naturally, anything goes.
Algorithm 1 Monte Carlo Control
1: θ: randomly initialized network parameters
2: B: empty replay buffer
3: for each iteration do
4:
for each environment step do
5:
at ∼πθ(st)
Sample action from policy
6:
(st+1, rt+1) ∼p(st+1, rt+1|st, at)
Take environment step
7:
end for
8:
GT ←0
Set return of terminal state
9:
for each step of episode, t = T −1, T −2, ..., 0 do
10:
Gt ←γGt+1 + rt+1
Calculate return for time t
11:
B ←B ∪{st, at, Gt}
Save data to replay buffer
12:
end for
13:
for each update do
14:
ν ∼B
Sample data from replay buffer
15:
θ ←argminθ
1
2
∑
i∈ν ||Qθ(si, ai) −Gi||2
Update network parameters
16:
end for
17: end for
==PAGE:24==
18
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
SurfRider: An RL
environment for
pathway search in ASE
This chapter describes the building of a reinforcement learning environment for chem-
ical transition pathway exploration using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE),
an open source library for atomic scale modelling in python.
Whereas many student projects in reinforcement learning deal with the actual learn-
ing algorithms used to solve some predefined environment, using algorithms such as
DQN, policy gradient or Q-value policy gradient algorithms, in this project we take
a step back and first create the environment from scratch, one that is tailor made for
the scientific objective of this thesis, namely to automatically discover the minimum
energy path (MEP) between two atomic configurations using a growing set of inter-
mediate states.
The implemented reinforcement learning environment that is presented in this chap-
ter, and which we aim to solve in subsequent chapters, will be referred to as SurfRider.
This is particularly fitting, as it is the task of the agent to navigate the high dimen-
sional energy surfaces of an atomic scale system, with the goal of getting from point
A to point B by crossing over the smallest energy barrier possible. Furthermore, all
case study systems considered in this thesis will contain some diffusion process of an
adsorbate atom on an surface structure, so it is in fact riding on surfaces in a much
more concrete sense.
We begin the chapter by outlining the various objectives of the RL environment
along with some general considerations about the problem at hand (Section 3.1), be-
fore we describe in full detail how each component of the Markov decision process is
constructed (Section 3.2).
==PAGE:26==
20
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
3.1
Objectives and considerations
The overall objective is to build a reinforcement learning simulation environment such
that RL agents can be trained to solve chemical pathway search tasks. Similar to the
Nudged Elastic Bad method (NEB) algorithm, the environment will need two input
states, sA and sB, corresponding to the initial state and the goal state respectively.
Optimal play by a trained RL agent will then result in a sequence of intermediate
state images on the minimum energy path connecting sA and sB.
3.1.1
Dimensionality
Before presenting the SurfRider framework, a brief discussion about the dimension-
ality of a MEP search would be appropriate. As just mentioned in the introductory
paragraph, an atomic configuration resides on a high dimensional potential energy
surface. The configurational dimensionality of a system of N atoms is 3N as the
position of each atom contains 3 coordinates, (x, y, z)i, i = 1, ..., N 1. But since the
discrete representation of a minimum energy path is the collection of T of these states,
the path itself resides on a 3NT-dimensional surface which may contain many non-
optimal local minima.
The Nudged Elastic Band method (NEB) operates directly on this 3NT-dimensional
energy surface since it calculates forces for all atoms in all images and uses these
to update atomic positions in every iteration. Due to its rigorous mathematical def-
inition, the NEB has excellent convergence properties and is able to navigate the
3NT-dimensional energy surface locally. This means that even though it’s able to
find a local minimum with high precision while simultaneously making sure that one
image (the climbing-image) is located on the saddle point on the 3N-dimensional
energy surface of atomic configurations (not paths), it does this using only local gra-
dient information and therefore converges to the nearest local minimum which is not
necessarily also a global minimum. By allowing the SurfRider to construct a growing
sequence of images instead of nudging an already existing set of images, the SurfRider
has, at least in principle, access to all local minimum energy pathways right from the
get-go. But this only serves the purpose of increasing the effective size of the reach-
able space of transition paths, and the high dimensionality seems to be an even more
severe issue for the SurfRider than for the NEB. This is tremendously important to
bear in mind when designing the environment and any simplifying or dimensional-
ity reducing features will be highly welcome.
One such simplifying feature is the
introduction of the agent atom.
3.1.2
The agent atom
By selecting images in an growing (autoregressive) fashion, decisions need only to be
made for one image at a time, thereby reducing the number of atoms that need to
1Ignoring nuclear velocities as well as all electronic degrees of freedom in this phase space.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Objectives and considerations
21
updated in every iteration by a factor of T. Furthermore, as it would be wise to be
somewhat conservative in regards to the amount of intelligence we can expect to put
into an RL agent for finding transition pathways, we design the environment such
that the agent only updates the position of a single atom in every iteration of the RL
scheme, thereby further reducing the number of atoms to be updated by a factor of N.
This atom is referred to as the agent atom and is the atom that is mostly responsible
for the transition (even though a transition is mathematically a collective transition
involving all atoms in the system). For example, for diffusion of an adsorbate atom
on a surface, we would obviously choose the adsorbate atom itself as the agent atom.
Roughly, we want to construct a reinforcement learning scheme in which, at each
iteration, only the agent atom is perturbed by the RL agent, and it is then up to the
environment to respond to this move by doing some sort of structural relaxation on
all other atoms in the system. This way of restricting the agent to only move a single
atom is shown in Figure 3.1 where the agent traverses the unit cell in order to arrive
at the desired location. It does so by choosing actions from a discrete set of actions
Figure 3.1: A simple illustration of the task of dragging the agent atom through the
unit cell so as to arrive at the desired location. At each step the agent atom is faced
with the decision of taking a step in one of a discrete number of action directions.
Notice that the action space in this illustration corresponds to the ”unit cell aligned”
action set described in Section 3.2.3 and is not the one used for experiments in later
chapters
where each action corresponds to some spatial displacement of the agent atom (see
Section 3.2.3 for details on the action space). Notice that the non-agent atoms are
not shown in the illustration.
==PAGE:28==
22
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
3.1.3
Unreachable goal states
This ”dragging” of the agent atom from point A to point B comes with a severe
limitation. Surely, we can drag the agent from point A to point B inside the unit cell,
but this does not automatically mean that the state of the system, which is defined
by all atomic positions, is also going to evolve from sA to sB. By repeatedly updating
the agent atom position and allowing the surrounding atoms to perform structural
relaxation in response to this move, the evolving system will be in a kind of local
minimum energy state, conditional on the off-equilibrium movement of the agent atom
of course. But if two or more atoms are ”responsible” for the transition, meaning that
both of their atomic coordinates need to be suﬀiciently out of equilibrium in order
for the transition to spontaneously occur, then the single agent atom approximation
simply breaks down and it will not be possible to sample it with just one agent atom.
This methodology is therefore not applicable to all types of transitions.
3.1.4
Goal location prediction and identification
Apart from the diﬀiculty (or impossibility even) of actually sampling some transitions,
another complication arises from the fact that the agent’s goal location, xagent
B
, is
actually a moving target that has to be recalculated or predicted at every step. This
is necessary since those neighboring atoms, that ultimately define the location of the
goal site, may have been pushed away during the evolution of the episode. But even if
the agent arrives at the location it believes (predicts) to be the goal location, it should
be evident from the discussion in section 3.1.3 that this is not necessarily a goal state
for the system as a whole. Special care most therefore be put into defining some
robust goal state acceptance criteria that goes beyond just measuring the distance
from the agent to its predicted goal location. Without a good metric for measuring the
distance between the current state and the goal state, dt = ||st −sB||, it’s impossible
to know whether a transition pathway has actually been discovered.
3.2
The SurfRider environment
In this section we cover all the various components of the SurfRider environment
needed for having a fully specified Markov decision processes, as presented in chapter
2. The SurfRider API was implemented in python and designed to conform to the
software conventions of the OpenAI Gym framework (Brockman et al., 2016), a toolkit
for reinforcement learning research.
3.2.1
Episode task
The agent’s task is to get to the goal state by crossing the smallest energy barrier
possible.
The agent is incentivised to do so, as it receives positive rewards when
successfully arriving at the goal state and penalties when unsuccessful. The lower the
==PAGE:29==
3.2 The SurfRider environment
23
energy barrier, the higher the reward. More on reward structure in section 3.2.5.
In order to define the pathway search task, the environment needs two input states, sA
and sB, corresponding to the initial state and the goal state respectively2. The episode
is initialized in state s0 = sA and progresses with the repeated agent-environment
interaction consisting of a small spatial perturbation of the agent atom (section 3.2.3)
followed by the structural relaxation of the neighboring atoms (section 3.2.4).
It
continues until one of the following three termination criteria is reached:
i) The agent atom reaches the predicted goal location
ii) The agent runs into an energy wall
iii) The episode has reached some maximum number of steps
Each of the three termination criteria involves some hyper parameter. For i) the state
is accepted as a goal state when the agent is within some fixed threshold distance
dgoal from the predicted goal location. For ii) an energy wall is said to have been
struck when the difference between the state energy Et = E(st) and the minimum
state energy during the episode exceeds Ewall, i.e. when
Et −min
t′≤t Et′ ≥Ewall,
(3.1)
and for iii) we terminate the episode after Tmax number of steps if neither i) nor ii)
has been activated.
3.2.2
States
In pure physical terms, the state of our evolving configuration is solely defined by the
positions, Xt, and the atomic number of all atoms, Zt3. But for the reinforcement
learning task of finding transition pathways, the state should also contain information
about the location of the start and goal sites. The state is therefore given by the tuple
st = (X, Z, A, B, n)t.
(3.2)
Here Xt ∈RN×3 is the position matrix, Zt ∈{1, 2, 3, ...}N is a vector of atomic
numbers of all atoms in the system, At ∈R3 is the vector pointing from the current
agent position to the initial agent position (as predicted by the environment) and
Bt ∈R3 points from the agent to the goal position (as predicted by the environment
also). The last vector, nt is needed in order to align the agent’s action space with its
surroundings. This vector will be introduced in the next section.
2In python these will simply be inputted as two Atoms() objects from ASE.
3Even though atomic numbers don’t change within an episode, we want to construct larger
training schemes in which the agent must solve a new task in every episode, so atomic numbers need
to be included in the state.
==PAGE:30==
24
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
3.2.3
Actions
In every step in the SurfRider environment, the agent faces the decision of moving
the agent atom some fixed distance in one of 6 directions, corresponding to positive
and negative directions of three mutually orthogonal vectors. Whereas the simplest
action space would be a unit cell aligned (UCA) action space4 given by
AUCA = {±∆x, ±∆y, ±∆z},
(3.3)
we will use an action space that is aligned to a coordinate system that is constructed
from two vectors derived from the atomic positions of the system, instead of the ar-
bitrary basis used for specifying atomic positions in the ASE simulation.
The goal aligned action space
The first vector needed to construct the coordinates system is the vector pointing
from the agent position to the predicted goal position5
B = xagent
B
−xagent,
(3.4)
and when normalised ¯B =
B
|B|. The other vector, n, which we will assume is of unit
length, should be chosen such that it points in some physically relevant direction, such
as towards a specific atom or site, or in some other geometrically relevant direction.
For example, when navigating on surfaces, we will simply use the surface normal. It
is up to the modeller to define and specify this vector using chemical intuition. Just
like B, this vector is also time dependent and in general has to be recalculated at
every step, although for the surface systems used in this thesis, it doesn’t change
with time. Since the purpose of this vector is to construct a more physically relevant
coordinate system, in conjunction with B, n and B are not allowed to be parallel or
anti-parallel since this would make the two vectors linearly dependent.
Just as the unit cell aligned action space, this goal aligned action space A = {aj}j=1,..,6
also corresponds to positive and negative displacements (of equal step length) along
three mutually orthogonal vectors. Using just B and n, it is possible to define all 6
actions using the cross product. The mathematical definitions of the action directions
are given in Table 3.1. Directions Left, Right, Up and Down are all perpendicular to
B and do not bring the agent atom any closer to its predicted goal location. Whereas
the Left and Right directions are defined to be perpendicular to the plane spanned by
B and n, the Up and Down directions do lie in this plane and are defined such that
they are orthogonal to the other 4 directions.
4We also experimented with a 26 dimensional action space (corresponding to all subcubes on a
Rubik’s cube excluding the middle subcube of course), but such an action space increases the size
of the neural networks used to represent the agent’s decision model and a continuous action space
would probably be preferred instead.
5Notice we have omitted the time index t from all three quantities in equation (3.4). The agent
position is obviously time dependent but so is the predicted goal location cf. the discussion in section
3.1.4.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 The SurfRider environment
25
Action
Definition
Interpretation
a1
¯B
Towards goal
a2
−¯B
Away from goal
a3
n × ¯B
Left
a4
−n × ¯B
Right
a5
¯B × (n × ¯B)
Up
a6
−¯B × (n × ¯B)
Down
Table 3.1: The 6 directions of the goal aligned action space. Here we assume that n
has already been normalized. Notice that these directions need to be scaled to some
fixed length ∆x when updating the agent position
In order to visualize how this action space looks like for a particular system, consider
a surface system with n chosen as the surface normal. Then the 6 actions are as
illustrated in Figure 3.2.
The reason we prefer this goal aligned action space to the unit cell aligned action
space, is that it is more general. In fact, it is about as close as we can get to a proper
internal coordinate system, although it could be argued that for surface systems in
particular, the unit cell aligned action space could work well, as long as all surface
slabs used in training have a surface normal that is parallel to either the x, y or z-axis,
which they actually have. In section 4.4 in the next chapter, we will again use B and
n to obtain an internal coordinate system representation of the atomic neighborhood
used for the agent’s decision model.
Finally, it should be stressed that the agent is not allowed to choose an action that
causes the agent atom to leave the unit cell. Should the agent choose this action
anyway, the agent atom position will be updated as if the agent had chosen a1 (the
goal direction) which surely will keep the agent atom inside the original the unit cell,
at least when the predicted goal location is also inside this unit cell which we have to
assume.
3.2.4
Dynamics
BFGS-relaxation of local atomic neighborhood
Upon receiving an action, at, which has the effect of moving the agent atom only,
the environment responds back by doing structural relaxation on all neighborhood
atoms within some fixed distance, dactive, excluding the agent atom itself. The rea-
son that far away atoms (as well as the agent atom) must be held fixed during this
optimization, is pretty straightforward. Imagine starting in state s0 = sA which is a
structurally relaxed configuration to begin with, i.e. a local minimum. If we simply
move the agent atom and relax all other atoms, the system will fall back into the
==PAGE:32==
26
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
Figure 3.2: The illustration shows the construction of an action space from the two
vectors B and n. The agent atom has been moved far from the surface such that it
becomes more visible that the Up direction is not the same as the surface normal
same local minimum, only now all positions have been translated a distance of ∆x
within the unit cell in the direction of the agent action. Therefore the transition can
never be sampled, unless we fix the relative position of the agent atom and the far
away atoms during relaxation.
The optimization is performed with the BFGS-optimizer in ASE. Its task is to update
the atomic positions so as to minimize the potential energy, subject to the constraint
that the agent atom, as well as those atoms further than dactive from the agent atom,
must be held fixed.
To evaluate the potential energy it uses the EMT calculator
(Nørskov et al., 1980) which is also available in ASE.
As a convergence criteria, we must specify a maximally allowed force on any atom
that is being optimized. When this threshold has been reached, i.e. when
max
i
|Fi| < fmax,
(3.5)
the optimization is done and unless any of the episode termination criteria of section
3.2.1 are activated, the RL loop proceeds to the next iteration.
Adaptive convergence threshold
During the environment step just described, one serious issue emerges.
Since we
are artificially pushing the system up the energy hill, it can be hard for the BFGS-
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The SurfRider environment
27
optimizer to find a structure that meets the force threshold of equation (3.5). As we
intend do run >100, 000 episodes during RL training, we cannot allow the algorithm
to get stuck for very long in a single environment transition update. We therefore
implement the following workaround in the BFGS-optimizer:
If the optimizer has taken kmax update steps inside a single environment transition
update, we begin to increase the force threshold by a factor of rf for every step, i.e.
fmax(k + 1) = rf · fmax(k), for k ≥kmax.
(3.6)
As a concrete example, we will typically initialize every relaxation with a force thresh-
old of fmax = 0.05 eV/Å and begin to increase this by 10 percent after 10 iterations,
so rf = 1.1 and kmax = 10.
3.2.5
Reward shaping
The final component that is needed in order to have a fully specified Markov decision
process is the reward structure.
Ideally we would like to provide the agent with
as little assistance as possible through reward signaling and only use the obtained
energy barrier of the sampled episode trajectory but such a reward structure can be
too sparse. In fact, by choosing any reward structure that is misaligned with the
overall scientific objective (discovering low energy transitions), it will not be possible
to adequately convey to the agent what actually constitutes good behavior.
One has to be careful when designing reward signals, as it is a delicate procedure that
requires some degree of trial and error, and it can be extremely diﬀicult to decide
whether the root cause of any failed attempts to solve the scientific objective should be
attributed to a bad environment, a bad RL algorithm, a bad parameterization of the
agent’s decision model (the neural network architecture) or a bad reward structure, if
not all of them at once! Here we present how the reward is constructed from several
components, each intended to have some positive influence on the agent’s behavior.
As described in section 3.2.1 the episode terminates when the agent reaches the goal,
hits an energy wall or runs out of iterations. These three termination cases yield the
following rewards.
Terminal rewards
• Energy barrier reward (goal only): The most important reward, as it is
directly connected to the overall objective of sampling low energy transitions.
We use a linear relation, with lower barriers yielding higher rewards.
Rbarrier = −cb · Ebarrier + Rgoal
(3.7)
Here a constant, Rgoal, is added to make sure the agent is reward and not
penalized for reaching the goal location. This is the case if Rgoal ≥cb · Ewall.
Notice that observed energy barrier can never exceed Ewall, as this would have
triggered another termination criterion, see Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:34==
28
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
Figure 3.3: Energy barrier reward
• Energy profile penalization (goal only): In addition to finding low energy
pathways, it is also desirable that the agent learns to avoid high energy states
all along the path, and not only at the saddle point. Reward penalization of a
high energy profile (EP) is calculated as
REP = −cEP · 1
T
T
∑
t=0
(Et −E0) ,
(3.8)
with cEP being a hyper parameter and E0 the energy of the initial state. This
should incentivize the agent to walk along the true minimum energy path and
do less corner-cutting.
• Energy wall penalty: In order to avoid sampling regions with unrealistically
high energies, the episode is terminated at time t if
Et −min
t′≤t Et′ ≥Ewall,
(3.9)
and the agent receives the penalty Rwall = −cw ·Ewall. Hitting an ”energy wall”
doesn’t necessarily mean the energy increased very much in the final step, but
that it was simply ”the straw that broke the camel’s back” so to speak.
• Max iterations: It is not entirely obvious whether the agent should be re-
warded for being able to stay alive or penalized for running out of iterations
without finding the goal, and it is also highly dependent on all other reward
signals. It might be a good idea to initiate the training with a zero or positive
reward and then turn it into a penalization later on, after the agent has learned
to find the goal location. Although it might be redundant, we will define this
contribution as Rmax_iter = −cmax_iter.
In addition to the terminal rewards, some rewards are given at every step within the
episode.
Within episode rewards
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The SurfRider environment
29
• Energy difference: This reward is intended to teach the agent not to walk
into energy walls:
R∆E = −c∆E · ∆E = −c∆E(Et+1 −Et).
(3.10)
• Progression reward: A very important reward, especially in the early stage
of training, when the agent has not yet learned to arrive at the goal location
where the reward signal is stronger. The progression reward consists of two
separate components: The agent is rewarded for increasing the distance to its
initial location while simultaneously being rewarded for decreasing the distance
to its predicted goal location:
Rprog = cprog [∆distA −∆distB]
(3.11)
A full list of hyper parameters is given by the end of this chapter in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:36==
30
3 SurfRider: An RL environment for pathway search in ASE
Symbol
Description
Typical value
Termination
dgoal
Goal threshold
0.5 Å
Ewall
Energy wall
1 eV
Tmax
Max episode length
100
Agent
∆x
Agent step size
0.2 Å
Dynamics
dactive
Agent distance beyond
which atoms are fixed
5-10 Å
fmax
Maximum force
0.05 eV/Å
kmax
Optimization steps before
increasing fmax
10
rf
Increase factor for fmax
per step after kmax steps
1.1
Rewards
cb
Energy barrier
penalization coeﬀicient
10 eV−1
Rgoal
Goal reward
15
cEP
Energy profile penalization
4 eV−1
cw
Energy wall
penalization coeﬀicient
1 eV−1
cmax_iter
Max iteration penalty
1
c∆E
Energy difference
penalization coeﬀicient
0.25 eV−1
cprog
Progression reward
coeﬀicient
0.1 Å−1
Table 3.2: Hyper parameters used in SurfRider environment
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Agent design
In this chapter we take on the challenge of designing a deep reinforcement learning
agent that solves the transition pathway search problem by repeatably interacting
with the SurfRider environment described in the previous chapter. The RL agent’s
decision model is built on a graph neural network architecture (GNN). These types
of neural network architectures are particularly appealing since they allow for repre-
senting atomic configurations in a manner that is agnostic to the chemical phase of
the compound.
Before we attempted to build a deep reinforcement learning agent, we started out
with the construction of a simple agent that is capable of dragging the agent atom
from A to B, but is built without any sort of learning mechanism and is entirely
agnostic about its local atomic environment. This agent has now been moved to the
appendix.
The construction of this simple agent serves three purposes. First, in the development
of the SurfRider environment, it served useful to have an agent that could generate
realistic episodes (compared to an entirely random agent with an uniform action
distribution which would just wiggle around). Second, when performance evaluating
the RL agent, the simple agent can serve as a great benchmark - if the RL agent
is no better than the simple agent, something is clearly wrong. Third, the simple
agent can be used to quickly gather complete trajectory samples which can be used
for off-policy training of the RL agent.
4.1
Agent model
This section presents the construction of a graph neural network based deep rein-
forcement learning agent, designed with the purpose of reaching optimal play in the
SurfRider environment. The illustration in Figure 4.1 shows the various components
of the agent network, from state input in the upper left corner to the Q-value output
in the bottom right corner. The architecture builds on the one presented in Neu-
ral Message Passing with Edge Updates for Predicting Properties of Molecules and
Materials by (P. B. Jørgensen et al., 2018). Their model is inspired by the SchNet
architecture (Schütt et al., 2018) but employs an edge update network in which the
edge features are updated during the message passing layers and depend on the node
state representations of the two atoms the edge connects.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 Agent design
Graph
  transformer  
on        
  Internal coordinate  
representation
using            
node
states      
concat
(fc, C/2, softplus)
sum
(fc, 6,
identity)
C/2
Graph neural 
  message passing:  
Schnet with 
Edge Updates 
C
concat
#agent_neighbors
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the computation pipeline of the deep reinforcement learning
agent
Here we will reuse their architecture during the message passing phase but replace
the readout network with one that maps to a vector valued output corresponding to
state-actions.
Since the hidden states are inherently invariant to translation, rotation, and inversion
of the atomic structure, they do not provide the agent with any directional information
on which to base its action decision.
Also, the action space is aligned using the
vectors Bt and nt which are both unknown (and generally unrelated) to the graph
neural network, and therefore also the hidden node states, thus confirming the need
for augmenting the node states with additional directional information. To provide
the agent with this information, we construct internal coordinate representations of
the spatial locations of neighborhood atoms which are then concatenated to their
corresponding node states before the final readout layers. A detailed description the
internal coordinate representation is provided in section 4.4.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Atoms to graph transformation
33
4.2
Atoms to graph transformation
The first operation in the agent pipeline is the construction of a graph representation
of the atomic structure.
As this graph representation only involves the physical
structure itself, it does not require any information related to the progression of the
episode, i.e. the vectors At, Bt or nt. But instead of directly feeding the ”atoms-
to-graph” transformer with the position matrix, Xt, and nuclear charge vector, Zt,
these are implicitly outputted from the SurfRider environment in the form of an
ASE.Atoms() object. This is particularly convenient since the task of constructing
a graph representation of the atomic configuration can be accomplished using the
ASE.neighborlist functionality. For each atom, the neighbor list is constructed by
searching, not only within the original unit cell but also all immediate surrounding
unit cells, for any atom within a cutoff distance, rcutoff, of typically 4 or 5Å. All these
neighbor pairs will be connected by two directed edges (of opposite direction) and
the graph data1 takes the form
DG
t = ({Zv}v=1,...,N, {(dk, rk, sk)}k=1,...,N e)t ,
(4.1)
where Zv is an atomic number, N is the number of vertices (atoms), dk is the Eu-
clidean distance between atoms rk and sk (receiver and sender) and N e is the number
of edges (which is twice the number of atom pairs because the edges have directions).
As the graph data is passed on to the graph neural network, the atomic numbers will
serve as vertex features and the Euclidean distances will serve as edge features.
4.3
Graph neural network: Message passing with
edge updates
Upon receiving the graph data, DG
t , the agent performs a forward pass of its deci-
sion model which is implemented in pytorch. Whereas the final readout layers of the
forward pass are explicitly shown in Figure 4.1, both the graph initialization and the
following message passing layers (also referred to as interaction layers) all take place
inside the block named ”Graph neural message passing: Schnet with Edge Updates”.
The network architecture of this block is shown in Figure 4.2, an illustration borrowed
from Jørgensen et al., 2019P. B. Jørgensen et al., 2018 but modified such that the
readout layers have been removed from the flow chart on the left.
Graph initialization
The neural network takes the graph data as input and constructs a graph consisting
of vertices (nodes) and edges. Each node will be associated with a hidden node state
1Although somewhat confusing, we distinguish between the graph data and the actual graph
itself, which is only formed inside the neural network (section 4.3).
==PAGE:40==
34
4 Agent design
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the computation pipeline in the graph neural network. Left)
The overall architecture with atomic number embeddings, edge distance expansions
followed by three interaction layers. Center) The interaction network in which mes-
sages are calculated and then used to update the hidden node states in the state
transition function. Right) Edge Update Network. The illustration is borrowed from
Jørgensen et al.P. B. Jørgensen et al., 2018 with the modification that their readout
function has been removed
which is is a vector representation (encoding) of the atom that the node represents.
Likewise, each edge (which is directed) will be associated with a edge state2.
For each node, we initialize its hidden node state using the embedding
h0
v = ℓ(Zv),
(4.3)
where l : N+ →RC maps from atomic numbers (strictly positive integers) to C-
dimensional hidden states. The embedding consists of trainable parameter vectors,
one for each atomic species, and is initialized randomly at the beginning of training.
It gives an atom representation which is independent of its atomic environment.
2For our purposes, the graph, once constructed, can be defined as the tuple
G = (V, E),
(4.2)
where V
= {hv}v=1,...,N is the set of nodes with hv being a hidden node state, and E =
{(ek, rk, sk)}k=1,...,Ne is the set of edges with each edge tuple containing the edge state and the
index of the receiving and sending node. To ease the notation, we will write the receiver and sender
indices directly in the subscript of the edge state i.e. evw
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Graph neural network: Message passing with edge updates
35
Similarly, we create an edge state by first doing a Gaussian expansion of the edge
feature, dvw, into a Ce-dimensional vector
(εvw)k = exp
(
−(dvw −k∆)2
∆
)
,
k = 0, ..., kmax,
(4.4)
where the edge state dimension is chosen implicitly by specifying the maximum neigh-
bor distance and the Gaussian step length, i.e. Ce = kmax −1 = ceil
( rcutoff
∆
)
−1. This
is the ”RBF expansion” block (radial basis function) of Figure 4.2. We then update
each edge state using a two layer fully connected feedforward neural network on the
concatenation of the previous edge state (at this point the previous edge state is
simply the raw RBF expansion) with both the receiving and sending node states
e0
vw = E0(h0
v, h0
w, εvw) = g(W 0
E2g(W 0
E1(h0
v; h0
w; εvw))).
(4.5)
Here (; ) denotes concatenation, {W 0
E1, W 0
E2} are trainable weight matrices3 and
g(x) = ln(ex + 1) −ln(2) is the shifted soft-plus activation function.
Message passing layers
Once initialized, node states are updated in the ”interaction network”, depicted in
the central diagram in Figure 4.2, with the purpose of encoding information about
the local atomic environment into the node states. When updating ht
v, messages are
sent from each node, w, it connects to. The messages are calculated as element-wise
products of a one-layer fc transformation of the sending neighbor node state and a
two-layer fc transformation of the corresponding edge state
Mt(ht
w, et
vw) = (W t
1ht
w) ⊙g(W t
3g(W t
2et
vw)),
(4.6)
where {W t
1, W t
2, W t
3} are trainable weights.
Summing together all these messages
received from its neighbors w ∈N(v), we get the combined message
mt+1
v
=
∑
w∈N(v)
Mt(ht
w, et
vw) ∈RC,
(4.7)
which in the state transition function, St(ht
v, mt+1
v
), is subject to a two-layer fc trans-
formation, before finally being added to the old node state in order to get the updated
state
ht+1
v
= St(ht
v, mt+1
v
) = ht
v + W t
5g(W t
4mt+1
v
),
(4.8)
where also {W t
4, W t
5} are trainable weights.
After each node state update (of all node states), the edge states are updated in edge
update network which performs a transformation similar to the edge initialization of
equation (4.5)
et+1
vw = g(W t+1
E2 g(W t+1
E1 (ht+1
v
; ht+1
w ; et
vw))),
(4.9)
3Bias vectors are used, but are left out to simplify the equations.
==PAGE:42==
36
4 Agent design
where {W t+1
E1 , W t+1
E2 } are also trainable weight matrices. Notice that the difference
between edge states evw and ewv relates to the order in which the two node states
appear in the concatenation in equation (4.9).
Readout network
After 3 interaction layers, we then discard all nodes that are not connected to the
agent node in the graph. For each node that is connected to the agent node, we
concatenate its hidden node state with its internal coordinate representation, as de-
rived in section 4.4. These concatenated states, (h3
v; αv; βv; rv), are then mapped to
dimension C/2 through a single fc layer and a shifted soft-plus activation (see Figure
4.1), before they are summed together to form the state
hfinal =
∑
v∈N(agent)
g(W6(h3
v; αv; βv; rv)),
(4.10)
where N(agent) denotes the neighborhood of the agent node, as defined by the graph
connectivity. Finally, the Q-values are obtained by concatenating hfinal with the Eu-
clidean distances from the current agent position to the agent start and goal position
respectively, and then applying a final fully connected layer
ˆQ = W7(hfinal; rA; rB),
(4.11)
with {W6, W7} being trainable weight matrices as usual.
4.4
Internal coordinate representation of
neighborhood atoms
Whereas an internal coordinate system can fairly easily be constructed for molecules
using dihedral angles, which is exactly what is done in the MolGym framework, this
is not as trivial for crystalline structures or more disordered systems where chemical
bonds are not well defined. But by following the same principle used for constructing
the SurfRider action space, which required us to specify two vectors, B and n, we
can construct an agent atom centered spherical coordinate system for representing
the position of neighborhood atoms in a way that pertains to the geometry of the
SurfRider episode.
Let x ∈R3 denote the position of some neighborhood atom4 for which we wish to
construct an agent centered episode internal spherical coordinate representation, and
let ˜x denote the position of this neighborhood atom relative to the agent atom5, i.e.
˜x = x −xagent.
(4.12)
4Here neighborhood is defined in terms of graph connectivity to the agent atom.
5Notice that B and n are already defined relative to the agent atom position.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Internal coordinate representation of neighborhood atoms
37
The episode internal coordinate representation will contain two angular and one radial
coordinate:
• α ∈[0, π]: The angle between B and ˜x.
• β ∈(−π, π]: The dihedral angles between the two planes spanned by (B, ˜x) and
(B, n) respectively.
• r ∈R+: The Euclidean distance from the agent atom to neighborhood atom.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the internal coordinate system.
The direct angle between ˜x and B is calculated as
α = arccos
( ˜x · B
|˜x||B|
)
.
(4.13)
and the radial distance is
r = |˜x|.
(4.14)
The calculation of the dihedral angle, β, is slightly more involved. One way to do this,
is to project both ˜x and n onto the plane perpendicular to B which goes the agent
atom, and then measure the angle between these two projections. The procedure is
the following:
First, a basis is found for the linear subspace corresponding to the plane perpendicular
==PAGE:44==
38
4 Agent design
to B. For this purpose, we can use the two vectors corresponding to actions Left and
Up given by6
˜xleft = n × ¯B
(4.15)
˜xup = ¯B × ˜xleft = ¯B × (n × ¯B),
(4.16)
where ¯B =
B
|B|.
Next, the relative neighborhood atom position ˜x is projected onto this perpendicular
plane spanned by ˜xleft and ˜xup (dashed line in Figure 4.3). Since these two vectors
form an orthogonal basis for the plane (subspace), the projection of ˜x onto the plane
is given as the sum of the projections of ˜x onto the individual basis vectors, ˜xleft and
˜xup:
˜xp =
˜x · ˜xleft
˜xleft · ˜xleft
˜xleft +
˜x · ˜xup
˜xup · ˜xup
˜xup,
(4.17)
where the ”p” in ˜xp is for ”perpendicular”. Similarly, n can be projected onto the
perpendicular plane, but this projection will be parallel to ˜xup by construction and
is therefore unnecessary.
The direct angle between ˜xp and ˜xup is now calculated similarly to equation (4.13):
β0 = arccos
( ˜xp · ˜xup
|˜xp||˜xup|
)
.
(4.18)
This direct angle, β0 ∈[0, π), is not exactly the dihedral angle we are looking for,
since it doesn’t reveal on which side of the (B, n)-plane, ˜x is located on. To solve
this problem, let
κ = sign(˜xp · ˜xleft),
(4.19)
and define the dihedral angle as
β = κβ0.
(4.20)
β will positive when ˜x is located in on the ”left hand side” of the (B, n)-plane, and
negative on the other side. In the example from the illustration of Figure 4.3, β would
be positive since ˜xp · ˜xleft > 0.
6We are also using the tilde notation for these vectors in order to convey that they are expressed
relative to the agent atom.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments
In this chapter we perform two experiments that aim to test the performance of our
proposed framework in two profoundly different ways.
In the static experiment of Section 5.1 every episode task (or map) is identical to the
next, meaning that it is initialized in the same initial state and has the same goal
state (equivalent to a zero variance initial state distribution, p0(s0)).
In Section 5.2 we go on to generate new alloy surfaces (a new map) after every 250
episodes. We do this to test if knowledge can be transferred from one map to next,
thereby assisting in faster and faster minimum energy path discoveries.
5.1
Static map
5.1.1
Map generation
In this experiment we consider an Ag fcc100 surface of size 3×3×3. An Au adsorbate
atom is placed in a hollow site and the structure is relaxed using the EMT calculator
and a BFGS optimizer (same as in forward dynamics of the SurfRider step) with a
maximum force threshold of 0.05eV/Å. The structure is then copied and the adsorbate
atom moved to a different hollow site where another structural relaxation is carried
out. These two structures, slabA and slabB, will serve as inputs in the initialization
of the SurfRider environment, along with the specification that the adsorbate atom
is the agent atom, see Figure 5.1.
5.1.2
SurfRider speed tests
In the training runs we are about to show, the models were trained on a Tesla v100
GPU with 32 GB memory which proved suﬀicient.
Depending on the duration of the episode (did it hit an energy wall after 10 steps,
or did it wiggle around until the episode’s maximum iteration at 100 steps?) we had
approximately 3 cycles per second, which each cycle consisting of
• one episode rollout with a neural network evaluation at every decision step
==PAGE:46==
40
5 Experiments
Figure 5.1: The static map: An Au agent atom must navigate from one hollow site
to another on an Ag fcc100 surface. Left) slabA, side view. Center) slabA seen from
above. Right) slabB seen from above
• one Adam optimizer step on the agent’s neural network parameters with a batch
size of N = 64.
For the random agent described in the appendix it was possible to rollout 10-20
SurfRider episodes per second on this particular map.
This agent has no neural
network evaluation and no training. This shows that the environment is really fast,
and that the only potential bottleneck in terms of speed, is related to evaluation and
optimization of neural network architectures.
5.1.3
Nudged Elastic Band analysis
As mentioned in the problem statement in Chapter 1, for some systems the NEB
method can fail to break symmetry and will terminate its optimization procedure
prematurely. Our static map is exactly one of these types of systems. The illustration
in Figure 5.2 shows the path that NEB converges on (green) and the two minimum
energy paths (black) that both have lower energy barriers.
In order for NEB to
converge to either path, some immediate images have to be displaced in the direction
perpendicular to the initial path. If we do this, we obtain the true minimum energy
barrier, otherwise we get a higher and incorrect value:
Etrue
NEB = 0.516 eV,
(5.1)
Efail
NEB = 0.654 eV.
(5.2)
The Nudged Elastic Band method is a solid method that works well when it works.
Therefore we can safely treat this calculated energy barrier (the true one) as ground
truth, limited mostly by the quality and accuracy of the EMT-calculator used in the
optimization.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Static map
41
True MEP
True MEP
Figure 5.2: The illustration shows the two true minimum energy paths (black) along
with the direct path chosen by NEB due to its failure to break the symmetry (green).
5.1.4
Monte Carlo control
Given NEB’s failure to converge onto the correct path, as shown in the previous
section, the goal is now crystal clear:
Find a transition path with a barrier smaller than 0.654 eV.
Here we show results and observations from training the RL agent with the Monte
Carlo control method described in Chapter 2.3.2. We used Boltzmann exploration,
meaning that actions were sampled at every decision step, where actions with high
Q-values were sampled with a higher probability than those with low Q-values
π(at|st) ∝exp(Qθ(st, at)).
(5.3)
Inspired by (M. S. Jørgensen et al., 2019), every fifth episode was rolled out with
a fully greedy policy in order to obtain the best possible transition paths according
to the estimated Q-function.
A detailed list of all SurfRider hyperparameters is
shown in Table 5.2 and agent hyperparameters are shown in Table 5.1. On the RL
algorithm side, we used a replay buffer of size 50,000 (corresponding to a minimum
of 500 episodes), a batchsize of 64, the Adam optimizer from pytorch with default
parameters (i.e. a learning rate of 0.001).
Results:
As shown in Figure 5.3, the RL agent was quick to find a low energy pathway, beating
the failed NEB energy after just a few hundred episodes.
This can be seen from
the ”best energy barrier”-plot in the center-left position. Over the course of a 1000
episodes we see that more and more episodes reach the goal state (center-right plot)
and that the total reward obtained increases rapidly (top-left plot) also. Statistics
are also shown for the random agent described in the appendix but because we used
a maximum energy barrier of 1 eV, the random agent always ran into energy walls
==PAGE:48==
42
5 Experiments
Hyperparameter
Value
Node state size, C
64
Interaction layers, T
3
Update edges
yes
Neighbor cutoff distance, rcutoff
4.0 Å
Gaussian expansion step length, ∆
0.1 Å
Table 5.1: Hyper parameters related to the agent’s decision model based on the graph
neural network.
Symbol
Description
Typical value
Termination
dgoal
Goal threshold
0.5 Å
Ewall
Energy wall
1 eV
Tmax
Max episode length
100
Agent
∆x
Agent step size
0.2 Å
Dynamics
dactive
Agent distance beyond
which atoms are fixed
5-10 Å
fmax
Maximum force
0.05 eV/Å
kmax
Optimization steps before
increasing fmax
10
rf
Increase factor for fmax
per step after kmax steps
1.1
Rewards
cb
Energy barrier
penalization coeﬀicient
10 eV−1
Rgoal
Goal reward
15
cEP
Energy profile penalization
4 eV−1
cw
Energy wall
penalization coeﬀicient
1 eV−1
cmax_iter
Max iteration penalty
1
c∆E
Energy difference
penalization coeﬀicient
0.25 eV−1
cprog
Progression reward
coeﬀicient
0.1 Å−1
Table 5.2: SurfRider related hyperparameters used in the Monte Carlo Control train-
ing.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Static map
43
and its performance is not very interesting for this particular run.
Ignoring the
random agent, we observe from the top-right plot that upon episode termination, the
agent finished closer and closer to the desired goal location and further away from its
starting location. The heatmap (bottom-right) shows the agent position distribution
over all episodes. For each episode, a little black dot marks the final position of the
agent atom in that episode. As we use a goal state acceptance threshold of 0.6 Å, the
episode is terminated when the agent comes within this distance of the goal, hence
the black ring shape of terminal locations around the goal.
Energy profile penalization: Comparing the top-left and the center-left plots, we
observe a rather peculiar feature of this training. Even though the rewards continued
to go up, the agent could not improve on the best path it had found after just 400
episodes. This seems to be caused by the ”energy profile”-penalization term in the
reward function
REP = −cEP · 1
T
T
∑
t=0
(Et −E0) ,
(5.4)
which was implemented to incentivize the agent to walk along the true minimum
energy path, i.e. do less corner-cutting. Judging from the heatmap, this seems to
work perfectly. The heatmap shows that most trajectories actually walk along the
minimum energy path. This just shows that the agent actually does what we tell (or
program) it to do.
Boltzmann exploration for smooth propagation: The Boltzmann exploration
improved the performance of the agent quite significantly1. When the Q-value net-
work outputs equally high probabilities on the two actions corresponding to ”forward”
and ”right” in the goal-aligned action space, the agent is effectively enabled to walk
both forward and to the right at the same time, like a bishop on a chessboard (nat-
urally, the agent can only do so in expectations and it has to zig-zag to accomplish
this). Whether or not the benefit of Boltzmann exploration extends to other systems,
we do not know. Had the action space instead been unit-cell-aligned, it would prob-
ably not have such a large positive effect.
Continued training: If we allow the agent to continue its training, we see from
Figure 5.4 that the energy barrier gets very close to the 0.516 eV which was the true
NEB target.
Although this particular training looks like a definite success as it found a minimum
energy path, we cannot accept that it never explores the other path (the symmetric
counterpart). This happens for two reasons that we have unfortunately not yet solved:
1We have not included performance diagnostics for trainings without Boltzman for comparison,
but these were really bad.
==PAGE:50==
44
5 Experiments
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Avg. total reward
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
0
1
2
3
4
5
Avg. final distance to start and goal
Distance to start - Random Agent
Distance to goal - Random Agent
Distance to start - RL Agent
Distance to goal - RL Agent
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Number of training episodes
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Best energy barrier
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Number of training episodes
0
20
40
60
80
100
Goal
Wall
Max_iter
0
500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
Number of training episodes
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Avg. readout_mlp weight
rA weight
rB weight
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
y
START
GOAL
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
number of visits (log-scale)
Figure 5.3: Reinforcement learning training by Monte Carlo control with Boltzmann
exploration on the static map. The individual figures are described in the text.
• The first reason relates to the concept of group symmetries in the space of state-
actions. More specifically, it is caused by the failure of our learned Q-function to
be equivariant under group transformations, such as reflection through the axis
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Static map
45
0
5000 100001500020000250003000035000
Number of training episodes
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Best energy barrier
Random Agent
RL Agent
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
y
START
GOAL
0
2
4
6
8
10
number of visits (log-scale)
Figure 5.4: The plots show the continued training of the Monte Carlo control method
of Figure 5.3 and reveals that the agent never explores the other minimum energy
path. Also, it finds the minimum energy path by doing much less corner cutting
compared to transitions paths it discovered in the initial phase of training (Figure
5.3).
displayed in Figure 5.5. If it were equivariant to this symmetry transformation,
it would output equal values for the two state-action pairs. Likewise, for the
very first action in the episode, it should ideally also output equal values for
the two actions, n × ¯B (left) and −n × ¯B (right). The two paths trajectories
would therefore have equal probability. We discuss potential solutions to the
lack of equivariance in the ”Agent policy equivariance” section in the discussion
chapter.
• The second reason relates to the fact that we are not explicitly asking it to keep
exploring. The Boltzmann exploration feature merely allows it to wiggle a bit
extra, not seek entirely new pathways. We discuss potential solutions to this in
the ”Continual exploration” section in the discussion chapter.
5.1.5
Importance of internal coordinate presentation
In this thesis, a lot of effort has been put into designing a graph neural network based
agent with spatial awareness, or rather orientational awareness. But to what extend
did we actually help the agent by concatenating the internal coordinate representa-
tion onto the atom embeddings of the agent’s neighbors?
To test this, we change only one thing from the previous (successful!) run. The con-
catenation of the three internal coordinates is left out. Everything else is the same.
Figure B.2 shows the similar training diagnostics as for the previous experiment and
==PAGE:52==
46
5 Experiments
Figure 5.5: The illustration shows an example of two equivalent state-action pairs for
which the agent policy should ideally output equal probabilities.
here we notice a few subtle differences. First, it took about 10 times longer to find
a pathway with a barrier smaller than 0.6 eV. Second, judging from the heatmap,
it does not learn to walk along the minimum energy path but does corner cutting.
Third, it seems to base it actions solely on the distance to the start location and the
goal location of the agent atom. This can be seen from the bottom-left plot. It shows
the first row of the weight matrix, W7, responsible for the final fully connected layer
in the readout of the graph neural network, see equation (4.11) on page 36. Whereas
the weights for hfinal (a 32 dimensional vector from the previous layer in the readout
network) are pushed towards zero, the weights for the two concatenated distance val-
ues grow bigger as training progresses. When training with the internal coordinate
concatenation, these weights had similar magnitude (Figure 5.3), meaning that is was
actually using the data it received from hfinal. Here it seems to just fit a sequence
of best actions to the two distance numbers rA and rB instead. If there ever was a
thing called overfitting, this would certainly qualify.
In order to eliminate the possibility of just overfitting to the distance values in the
final layers, we run two more tests. In both cases, the architecture is without the
distance value concatenation.
• In the first case, the architecture is without the concatenation of the internal
coordinates. This is shown in Figure B.1 in the appendix. It shows that it
cannot learn anything without the concatenation of the internal coordinates.
• We this compare this to the case where it does use the internal coordinate
concatenation. This is shown in Figure B.2. It shows it can still learn a lot
from the internal coordinates alone, but clearly still needs access to the distance
values in order to properly predict the Q-values.
But this begs the following question; is it just overfitting to this internal coordinate 3-
tuple also? It is impossible to test the ”deep learning capabilities” of our agent when
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Static map
47
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Avg. total reward
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Avg. final distance to start and goal
Distance to start - Random Agent
Distance to goal - Random Agent
Distance to start - RL Agent
Distance to goal - RL Agent
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
Number of training episodes
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Best energy barrier
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
Number of training episodes
0
20
40
60
80
100
Goal
Wall
Max_iter
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
Number of training episodes
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Avg. readout_mlp weight
rA weight
rB weight
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
y
START
GOAL
0
2
4
6
8
10
number of visits (log-scale)
Figure 5.6: Training diagnostics from training without the concatenation of the in-
ternal coordinate representation.
the prediction target is always the same, namely a sequence of about 50 actions.
==PAGE:54==
48
5 Experiments
5.2
Sequential model learning: Randomized alloys
In principle, the single most important qualitative difference between the SurfRider
agent and the Gaussian Process based Nudged Elastic Band method (GP-NEB), is
that the SurfRider agent can be trained on one system(s) and then be moved to an
entirely new system for evaluation. This is not something the GP-NEB can do.
Save NEB
convergence
time,         
Train agent
Sample alloy
atom types
Structure relaxation
NO
YES
Create new map
NEB barrier
calculation
Rollout 
SurfRider
episode
Within NEB
threshold?
Save trajectory 
in buffer
Output energy barrier
Max
episodes?
NO
YES
Map
solved
Map
failed
Play
map
Input structures 
A and B
Figure 5.7: Flow chart of random alloy experiments.
Here we test whether the SurfRider agent can improve the time it takes to find a
transition pathway with an acceptably low barrier. To do so, we iterate through a
sequence of maps, where the agent is allowed to play up to 250 episodes on each map.
Each map looks like the map used in Section 5.1, but the top two layers are now a
randomly generated mixture of Ag and Al, see Figure 5.8. As soon as it finds a path
with a low enough energy, we record the number of episodes it took to find it and
immediately move on to the next map. The acceptance threshold for map k is
Ek
thres = 1.1 · ENEB(map(k)),
(5.5)
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Sequential model learning: Randomized alloys
49
Figure 5.8: Random alloy mixture with Ag and Al in top two layers, with each
atom sampled independently from a 50-50 Bernoulli distribution. The bottom layer
is always Ag.
so whenever a map is created, a benchmark NEB calculation must be performed in
order to specify an energy barrier threshold. If it doesn’t find a solution within 250
episodes, it ”fails” the particular map and goes on to the next. To ensure we are
calculating the correct NEB energy, NEB optimizations are performed on either side
of the central atom. The true NEB energy is then given as the smallest energy barrier
along the ”up+right” and ”right+up” paths.
Results:
Figure 5.9 shows the required number of rollouts before it reaches the NEB threshold.
The failure to improve does not come as a surprise to us. The behaviour is the same
in every episode as it always goes ”right+up” (compare to heatmap in Figure 5.3).
5.2.1
What just happened?
The ”dynamic” experiment we did here, is really just the static map in disguise, since
the optimal action sequence is again the same. At least in the eyes of the agent. Even
though the optimal path might be ”up+right”, rather than ”right+up”, the Boltz-
mann induced wiggliness only serves to validate that the chosen path (”right+up”)
is in fact a local minimum on the 3NT-dimensional transition path energy surface.
But this locality was exactly what we criticized NEB for in the introductory chapter,
and in the problem statement in particular. Now, it appears we are doing the exact
same thing. Without some degree of network equivariance and an explicitly enforced
curiosity (novelty search), this is never going to work.
==PAGE:56==
50
5 Experiments
Even though this experiment was a lot more degenerate than we had hoped for, the
flow chart in Figure 5.7 still serves as a pretty good template for constructing diverse
episodes and testing the agent’s ability transfer its knowledge between these.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
maps played
50
100
150
200
250
episodes until NEB precision  (threshold=1.1*E_neb)
Exponentially weighted mean, alpha=0.05
max episodes (not converged)
Figure 5.9: The plot shows the number of episodes the agent needs to play on an
particular map before it reached the NEB energy threshold (110% of the NEB energy).
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Environment
The most basic contribution of this thesis is the development of the SurfRider envi-
ronment which turned out to work well for sampling transitions related to diffusion
of an adsorbate atom. But not all types of transitions can be sampled within the
”single agent atom” framework. But that doesn’t mean we couldn’t come up with
some simple extensions of the framework that could accommodate these transitions.
Perhaps it would make sense not to have the same agent atom throughout the entire
episode. Perhaps we should choose the agent atom at every step, just like MolGym
chooses a focal atom. And just like the MolGym, we could then sample the three
coordinates (continuous actions) from the episode internal coordinate system. This
would be fairly trivial, now that we have already done the hard work of defined the
episode internal coordinate system.
Also, by giving up the notion of a particular agent atom that must traverse the entire
unit cell, we could easily accommodate more exotic reactions, such as one atom going
into a surface and another one popping up somewhere else. Whether this is possible
using the constrained optimizer in the forward dynamics of the RL transitions step
is more questionable though.
Within the current framework with a specific agent atom, there are already several
features that could really use an upgrade.
Currently, the agent atom is confined to explore only within the original unit cell.
This restriction was deemed necessary in order to avoid a unit cell border crossing
and reappearance at the other end of the unit cell (like in the classic game of Snake),
which would effectively make the agent chase a goal site different from the original,
and in principle grant the agent access to an infinite number of goal sites. Since its
navigation is assisted by a vector, Bt, pointing towards the desired goal location, this
vector would therefore need to point back into the original unit cell, meaning that
we would need to keep track of all border crossings, if we were to allow them. In a
future version, this unit cell confinement should be removed. Generally, working with
periodic structures has been one of the major obstacles for this framework.
Also, a quick glance at the reward related hyperparameters in Table 3.2 on page 30 re-
veals a much too complicated reward structure in the current version of the SurfRider
environment. Trimming these down to a few fundamental reward components would
simplify the environment significantly.
==PAGE:58==
52
6 Discussion
Finally, there is one particular feature of the SurfRider environment that was not in-
vestigated, namely the degree to which the structural relaxation of the agent atom’s
local neighborhood in the RL step transition allow the system to elude the true transi-
tion state. Whereas the climbing image property of the Nudged Elastic Band method
encourages one image to actually climb the potential energy surface in the tangent
direction (while still doing gradient descent in the perpendicular direction), thus po-
sitioning itself on the peak of the MEP, no such feature has been built into the RL
framework of this thesis.
Graph neural network with orientational awareness
By comparing the performance between different architectures, it was shown in Sec-
tion 5.1.5 that concatenating the 3-tuple of internal coordinates onto the node states
of the agent atom’s neighbors, improved navigational ability and allowed the sam-
pling of the minimum energy path.
Despite this, it would be interesting to investigate the potential for applying a net-
work such as the recently developed Directional Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
(Klicpera et al., 2020). They encode the direction of every message instead of only
the atomic pair distance. In our current setup, we are only providing 3 numbers to
represent this direction. Representing these directions with entire embeddings, that
are updated in message passing layers, could provide the agent with a much stronger
orientational awareness.
Continual exploration
A very negative property of the implemented agent, is its inability to keep exploring
new pathways. This was seen in most experiments in Chapter 5 but is really no sur-
prise, since we didn’t explicitly specify to the agent that it should do so. For future
work, we should take inspiration from (M. S. Jørgensen et al., 2019). They use reward
penalization when the agent creates a structure that is similar to previous structures.
Were we to do something similar, it would require that we develop a distance met-
ric that measures the degree to which two sampled pathway trajectories are alike.
Since a trajectory consists of a large sequence of structures, this could potentially be
computationally intensive to implement, especially if every new trajectory must be
compared to a large number of previous trajectories. But by restricting the analysis
to only consider the agent atom, i.e. the action sequence, it might be feasible. This
type of exploration strategy resembles that of metadynamics which gives, not a re-
ward penalty exactly, but an energy penalty that incentives the system to seek new
horizons.
The procedure just outlined is often referred to as novelty search (Jackson et al., 2019;
Savinov et al., 2019) and it would appear this is an absolutely necessary extension to
our current framework.
Agent policy equivariance
One way to ensure exploration of both paths in the test system, is to design agents
==PAGE:59==
6 Discussion
53
that obey the principle of MDP Homomorphic Networks (Pol et al., 2021). These are
neural networks that are equivariant under symmetries in the joint state-action space
of an MDP, meaning that whenever the agents learns a Q-value for a particular state-
action pair, it automatically generalizes this learning to all equivalent state-action
pairs (w.r.t. some symmetry transformation).
A significant amount of time was actually spent trying to adopt this concept of en-
forcing equivariance into the layers of the network, but with the particular readout
network used in GNN agent, this was infeasible.
A much easier (but less satisfying) solution to the equivariance issue would be the use
of data augmentation as shown in Figure 6.1. We tried to implement the mirroring
strategy shown in this figure which entails the calculation of the mirrored atomic po-
sitions through the plane spanned by Bt and nt. Together with the mirrored actions,
these data points (states) should be saved into the buffer along with the originally
obtained return. Unfortunately, it turned out there was a flaw in this strategy, caused
by mirroring atoms out of the unit cell, so we had to discard this augmentation feature
for the training in the experiments chapter, but rest assured, a bug fix is underway.
agent
mirror plane
Figure 6.1: Data buffer augmentation strategy.
Reinforcement learning algorithms
In this thesis we focused our implementation efforts on value based RL algorithms,
generally referred to as Q-learning. Although we implemented conventional Q-learning
algorithms such as DQN and Double DQN (Hasselt, Guez, et al., 2015) which both
use bootstrapped estimates for the return following a visit to a particular state-action
pair, we were most successful when using Monte Carlo sampled returns as regression
targets for the Q-function. Anyone with a basic knowledge of modern reinforcement
learning would know this is not an ideal procedure. Regarding the unsuccessful imple-
mentation of Q-learning, it could seem we had run into what is often times referred to
as the deadly triad of function approximation, bootstrapping, and off-policy learning
(Hasselt, Doron, et al., 2018).
==PAGE:60==
54
6 Discussion
To get access to thoroughly tested state-of-the-art parallelized reinforcement learning
implementations, a significant amount of time was spent trying to make the SurfRider
API compatible to the rlpyt framework (Stooke et al., 2019). Regrettably, we were
unsuccessful at this, and as time was precious, we had to give up on this endeavour.
By conforming to a standardized framework, we would also get quick access to RL algo-
rithms for continuous action spaces, such as Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) or Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman, Wolski, et al., 2017), with-
out having to build these ourselves (of course we would need to change the SurfRider
environment to accommodate this). These types of algorithms would allow for auto-
matic exploration through entropy maximization.
Even though future work should address this need for better RL implementations, it
turns out we are actually employing an algorithm equivalent to the one that is used
in ASLA (M. S. Jørgensen et al., 2019), although this was purely coincidental.
Model transfer
The ultimate goal with framework is to learn models that can be transferred between
systems. This requires the development of an automatic environment generation pro-
cedure that ensures suﬀicient diversification among episodes. This turned out to be
slightly out of the scope of this thesis because it took a long time to build and debug
the various components required to just drag an atom across a surface in the first
place. But once we have fixed the exploration and equivariance issues, we at least
have a well functioning code template for the sequential map generation and training.
Also, we don’t actually need to do NEB calculations as benchmarks. As long is the
initial state distribution is constant (or at least stationary), we can just see if the
sampled barriers decrease in expectation.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
State of the art numerical methods for searching atomic-scale reaction pathways rely
on the Nudged Elastic Band algorithm (NEB), a well-justified method with firm roots
in transition state theory. Due to NEB’s limited ability to converge onto the true
minimum energy path (MEP) when being initialized far from it, it requires the mod-
eller to perform several NEB optimizations, each with a manually specified initial
guess. This is both time consuming and prone to errors.
In this thesis we look towards the field of deep reinforcement learning for automat-
ing the pathway discovery procedure. To this end, we have proposed the SurfRider
environment, a python based simulation engine for steered propagation of atomic con-
figurations, which can be used for training reinforcement learning agents to discover
low energy reaction pathways.
A great deal of effort has also been put into the development of a graph neural net-
work (GNN) based agent designed for playing the SurfRider environment. For this
purpose, our main contribution consists of a spherical episode internal coordinate rep-
resentation (Section 4.4) of neighboring atoms. When used together with the atom
embeddings (node states) of the Schnet ”Edge Update” model of (P. B. Jørgensen et
al., 2018), this representation serves the purpose of giving the agent atom a hint about
the direction of the neighboring atoms, in relation to the geometry of the episode task.
Despite comparisons showing that concatenating the internal coordinates improves
navigation, it is still hard at this point to determine whether the proposed agent really
uses this information. But having almost fully converged on the MEP after less than
400 episodes, we can hardly believe the node states to be responsible for this, as they
would need much more training.
The performance of the agent was seen to suffer from a lack of exploration. This
should not be too surprising though, as no novelty/curiosity feature has been imple-
mented yet. Solving the exploration issue will allow us to conduct more meaningful
architectural comparisons and evaluate model transferability through the sequential
generation of diverse maps.
==PAGE:62==
56
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Artrith, Nongnuch, Tobias Morawietz, and Jörg Behler (April 2011). “High-dimensional
neural-network potentials for multicomponent systems: Applications to zinc ox-
ide.” In: Phys. Rev. B 83 (15), page 153101. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.83.153101.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.153101.
Bartók, Albert P. et al. (April 2010). “Gaussian Approximation Potentials: The Ac-
curacy of Quantum Mechanics, without the Electrons.” In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 104
(13), page 136403. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.136403. url: https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.136403.
Behler, J. and M. Parrinello (2007). “Generalized neural-network representation of
high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces.” In: Physical review letters 98 14, page 146401.
Brockman, Greg et al. (2016). OpenAI Gym. eprint: arXiv:1606.01540.
Bussi, Giovanni and Alessandro Laio (March 2020). “Using metadynamics to explore
complex free-energy landscapes.” In: Nature Reviews Physics 2, pages 1–13. doi:
10.1038/s42254-020-0153-0.
Chen, Changjun (May 2017). “Fast exploration of an optimal path on the multidi-
mensional free energy surface.” In: PLOS ONE 12.5, pages 1–21. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0177740. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0177740.
Chung, Wesley et al. (2021). Beyond variance reduction: Understanding the true im-
pact of baselines on policy optimization. arXiv: 2008.13773 [cs.LG].
Gilmer, Justin et al. (2017). Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry. arXiv:
1704.01212 [cs.LG].
Haarnoja, Tuomas et al. (2018). Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep
Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor. arXiv: 1801.01290 [cs.LG].
Hasselt, Hado van, Yotam Doron, et al. (2018). Deep Reinforcement Learning and the
Deadly Triad. arXiv: 1812.02648 [cs.AI].
Hasselt, Hado van, Arthur Guez, and David Silver (2015). Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing with Double Q-learning. arXiv: 1509.06461 [cs.LG].
==PAGE:64==
58
Bibliography
Henkelman, Graeme and Hannes Jónsson (1999). “A dimer method for finding saddle
points on high dimensional potential surfaces using only first derivatives.” In: The
Journal of Chemical Physics 111.15, pages 7010–7022. doi: 10.1063/1.480097.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.480097. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/
1.480097.
— (2000). “Improved tangent estimate in the nudged elastic band method for finding
minimum energy paths and saddle points.” In: The Journal of Chemical Physics
113.22, pages 9978–9985. doi: 10.1063/1.1323224. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.1323224. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1323224.
Henkelman, Graeme, Blas P. Uberuaga, and Hannes Jónsson (2000). “A climbing
image nudged elastic band method for finding saddle points and minimum energy
paths.” In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 113.22, pages 9901–9904. doi: 10.
1063/1.1329672. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1329672. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/1.1329672.
Hornik, Kurt, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White (1989). “Multilayer feedfor-
ward networks are universal approximators.” In: Neural Networks 2.5, pages 359–
366. issn: 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0893608089900208.
Jackson, Ethan C. and Mark Daley (2019). Novelty Search for Deep Reinforcement
Learning Policy Network Weights by Action Sequence Edit Metric Distance. arXiv:
1902.03142 [cs.AI].
Jain, Anubhav et al. (July 2013). “Commentary: The Materials Project: A materi-
als genome approach to accelerating materials innovation.” In: APL Materials 1,
page 011002. doi: 10.1063/1.4812323.
Jonsson, Hannes, GREG MILLS, and KARSTEN JACOBSEN (June 1998). “Nudged
elastic band method for finding minimum energy paths of transitions.” In: pages 385–
404. doi: 10.1142/9789812839664_0016.
Jørgensen, Mathias S. et al. (August 2019). “Atomistic structure learning.” In: The
Journal of Chemical Physics 151.5, page 054111. issn: 1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/
1.5108871. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.5108871.
Jørgensen, Peter Bjørn, Karsten Wedel Jacobsen, and Mikkel N. Schmidt (2018).
Neural Message Passing with Edge Updates for Predicting Properties of Molecules
and Materials. arXiv: 1806.03146 [stat.ML].
Khorshidi, Alireza and Andrew A. Peterson (2016). “Amp: A modular approach to
machine learning in atomistic simulations.” In: Computer Physics Communications
207, pages 310–324. issn: 0010-4655. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.
2016.05.010. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0010465516301266.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
59
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Ba (2017). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
Klicpera, Johannes, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann (2020). Directional Mes-
sage Passing for Molecular Graphs. arXiv: 2003.03123 [cs.LG].
Koistinen, Olli Pekka. et al. (December 2016). “Minimum energy path calculations
with Gaussian process regression.” In: Nanosystems: Physics, Chemistry, Mathe-
matics, pages 925–935. issn: 2220-8054. doi: 10.17586/2220-8054-2016-7-6-
925-935. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.17586/2220-8054-2016-7-6-925-935.
Koistinen, Olli-Pekka, Vilhjálmur Ásgeirsson, et al. (2019). “Nudged Elastic Band
Calculations Accelerated with Gaussian Process Regression Based on Inverse In-
teratomic Distances.” In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15.12.
PMID: 31638795, pages 6738–6751. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00692. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00692. url: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.jctc.9b00692.
Koistinen, Olli-Pekka, Freyja B. Dagbjartsdóttir, et al. (2017). “Nudged elastic band
calculations accelerated with Gaussian process regression.” In: The Journal of
Chemical Physics 147.15, page 152720. doi: 10.1063/1.4986787. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/1.4986787. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4986787.
Laio, Alessandro and Michele Parrinello (2002). “Escaping free-energy minima.” In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99.20, pages 12562–12566. issn:
0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.202427399. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/
content/99/20/12562.full.pdf. url: https://www.pnas.org/content/99/
20/12562.
Lorenz, Sönke, Axel Groß, and Matthias Scheffler (2004). “Representing high-dimensional
potential-energy surfaces for reactions at surfaces by neural networks.” In: Chem-
ical Physics Letters 395.4, pages 210–215. issn: 0009-2614. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cplett.2004.07.076. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S000926140401125X.
Martı́n Abadi et al. (2015). TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Hetero-
geneous Systems. Software available from tensorflow.org. url: https : / / www .
tensorflow.org/.
Mortensen, J. J., L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen (January 2005). “Real-space grid
implementation of the projector augmented wave method.” In: Phys. Rev. B 71
(3), page 035109. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035109. url: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035109.
Nørskov, J. and N. Lang (1980). “Effective-medium theory of chemical binding: Ap-
plication to chemisorption.” In: Physical Review B 21, pages 2131–2136.
Paszke, Adam et al. (2017). “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch.” In:
==PAGE:66==
60
Bibliography
Peters, Baron et al. (2004). “A growing string method for determining transition
states: Comparison to the nudged elastic band and string methods.” In: The Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics 120.17, pages 7877–7886. doi: 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1691018.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1691018. url: https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.1691018.
Peterson, Andrew A. (2016). “Acceleration of saddle-point searches with machine
learning.” In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 145.7, page 074106. doi: 10.1063/
1.4960708. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4960708. url: https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4960708.
Pol, Elise van der et al. (2021). MDP Homomorphic Networks: Group Symmetries in
Reinforcement Learning. arXiv: 2006.16908 [cs.LG].
Savinov, Nikolay et al. (2019). Episodic Curiosity through Reachability. arXiv: 1810.
02274 [cs.LG].
Schulman, John, Philipp Moritz, et al. (2018). High-Dimensional Continuous Control
Using Generalized Advantage Estimation. arXiv: 1506.02438 [cs.LG].
Schulman, John, Filip Wolski, et al. (2017). Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms.
arXiv: 1707.06347 [cs.LG].
Schütt, K. T. et al. (June 2018). “SchNet – A deep learning architecture for molecules
and materials.” In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 148.24, page 241722. issn:
1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/1.5019779. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.
5019779.
Silver, David et al. (January 2016). “Mastering the game of Go with deep neu-
ral networks and tree search.” In: Nature 529, pages 484–489. doi: 10.1038/
nature16961.
Simm, Gregor N. C., Robert Pinsler, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato (2020). “Re-
inforcement Learning for Molecular Design Guided by Quantum Mechanics.” In:
ArXiv abs/2002.07717.
Smidstrup, Søren et al. (June 2014). “Improved initial guess for minimum energy path
calculations.” In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 140.21, page 214106. issn: 1089-
7690. doi: 10.1063/1.4878664. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4878664.
Stooke, Adam and Pieter Abbeel (2019). rlpyt: A Research Code Base for Deep Re-
inforcement Learning in PyTorch. arXiv: 1909.01500 [cs.LG].
Sutton, Richard S. and Andrew G. Barto (1998). Introduction to Reinforcement Learn-
ing. 1st. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press. isbn: 0262193981.
Vineyard, George H. (1957). “Frequency factors and isotope effects in solid state rate
processes.” In: Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 3.1, pages 121–127.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
61
issn: 0022-3697. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3697(57)90059-8. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022369757900598.
Weinan, Weiqing Ren, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden (August 2002). “String method for
the study of rare events.” In: Physical Review B 66.5. issn: 1095-3795. doi: 10.
1103/physrevb.66.052301. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.66.
052301.
Williams, Ronald J. (1992). “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for con-
nectionist reinforcement learning.” In: Machine Learning, pages 229–256.
==PAGE:68==
62
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Random agent
A.1
A stochastic agent for benchmarking and
off-policy training
Since we have reduced the pathway search task to only involve the repeated updat-
ing of an agent atom, this is a fairly low dimensional problem seen from the agent’s
perspective.
All we have to do is to randomly shoot trajectories from A to B in
3-dimensional space. In this section we therefore present our efforts to design a sim-
ple agent capable of this shooting/dragging of the agent atom from point A to point B.
Our random agent will interact with the SurfRider environment in the usual way,
meaning that it will be endowed with the usual goal aligned action space and is
expected to choose between these 6 different action directions in every step of the
episode. The agent will be encouraged to find it way to the goal location through the
following two separate mechanisms:
• A repulsive ”force” pushing the agent away from A,
• An attractive ”force” pulling the agent towards B.
These are not forces in the physical sense but merely mechanisms for biasing the agent
to walk away from point A and towards point B. The strength of the two forces will
vary throughout the episode. Initially, we only want to repel the agent away from A,
but as the episode progresses, the strength of the repulsion will gradually decrease
while the strength of the attractive force will increase.
The agent decides on an action by sampling from its policy, which is a probability
distribution over its actions, represented as
π(a|s) = softmax(z),
(A.1)
For each action, the input to the softmax distribution is a linear combination of
contributions from the repulsive and attractive forces respectively:
zk = λzrepulsion
k
+ (1 −λ)zattraction
k
,
k = 1, ..., 6,
(A.2)
with
λ =
{
tS−t
tS
for t ≤tS
0
for t > tS,
(A.3)
==PAGE:70==
64
A Random agent
where λ represents the gradual switching from repulsion to attraction which happens
linearly as a function of the step count, t. Here tS denotes the step count beyond
which the repulsion is no longer in effect (see Figure A.1).
Figure A.1: Illustration of the gradual switching from repulsion from A, to attraction
towards B, represented by λ (equation (A.3))
Let A, B ∈R3 denote the vectors pointing from the current agent position to its start
and goal position respectively. For each action vector ak, k = 1, ..., 6, we calculate
the repulsive force contribution as the projection of the action vector onto A using
the dot product
zrepulsion
k
= −ak · A,
k = 1, ..., 6.
(A.4)
The minus sign is needed since action vectors pointing in the opposite direction of
A correspond to repulsion and should have higher probabilities coming out of the
softmax. As an example, consider the illustration in Figure A.2. If we ignore the
attraction toward B, and only focus on the repulsion from A, is should be clear that
the action vectors a4 and a2 should have higher probabilities than a3 and a1, because
they have negative dot products with A.
For the attractive force contribution, action vectors are instead projected onto B:
zattraction
k
= ak · B,
k = 1, ..., 6.
(A.5)
Most transitions obtained using this procedure will likely have prohibitively high
energy barriers, but by shooting suﬀiciently randomly, we might observe a few fairly
decent pathways. Since we are ultimately interested in only the best transition out
of all the transitions we obtain, it is desirable that the agent behaves as randomly
as possible. We therefore add an additional layer of stochasticity by introducing two
time dependent multipliers, mr(t) and ma(t), that are multiplied onto each of the
force contributions of equation (A.2), so it instead reads
zk = mr(t)λzrepulsion
k
+ ma(t)(1 −λ)zattraction
k
,
k = 1, ..., 6.
(A.6)
The two multipliers evolve according to separate Cox-Ingersoll-Ross stochastic differ-
ential equations, generically written
dmt = −ξ(mt −θ)dt + σ√mtdWt,
(A.7)
==PAGE:71==
A.1 A stochastic agent for benchmarking and off-policy training
65
Figure A.2: The illustration shows the agent atom with a goal aligned action space.
Two actions are not shown here, as these will be assumed to be perpendicular to the
plane of the illustration. The crosses are action vector projections onto A
which ensures that mt is a mean reverting process around some specified mean value,
θ, and that it remains positive due to the square root in the diffusion term. Should
mt approach zero, the diffusion term will be negligible compared to the upwards lift
of the drift term and it will surely revert back towards the positive mean value. For
each process, we must specify the mean reversion coeﬀicient, ξ, the mean value, θ,
the diffusion magnitude, σ as well is initial value, m0. With two multipliers this is 8
hyper parameters in total.
==PAGE:72==
66
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B
Performance test on
reduced architectures
==PAGE:74==
68
B Performance test on reduced architectures
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
2
0
2
4
6
Avg. total reward
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
1
2
3
4
5
Avg. final distance to start and goal
Distance to start - Random Agent
Distance to goal - Random Agent
Distance to start - RL Agent
Distance to goal - RL Agent
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Number of training episodes
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Best energy barrier
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Number of training episodes
0
20
40
60
80
100
Goal
Wall
Max_iter
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Number of training episodes
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Avg. readout_mlp weight
rA weight
rB weight
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
y
START
GOAL
0
2
4
6
8
number of visits (log-scale)
Figure B.1: Training diagnostics when training without the concatenation of the
internal coordinate representation and without the concatenation of the two distance
values in the final layer. It is evident from the plots that there is no learning going
on.
==PAGE:75==
B Performance test on reduced architectures
69
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Avg. total reward
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
0
1
2
3
4
5
Avg. final distance to start and goal
Distance to start - Random Agent
Distance to goal - Random Agent
Distance to start - RL Agent
Distance to goal - RL Agent
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
Number of training episodes
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Best energy barrier
Random Agent
RL Agent
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
Number of training episodes
0
20
40
60
80
100
Goal
Wall
Max_iter
0
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
Number of training episodes
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Avg. readout_mlp weight
rA weight
rB weight
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
y
START
GOAL
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
number of visits (log-scale)
Figure B.2: Training diagnostics when training without the without the concatenation
of the two distance values in the final layer. It show good learning curves, but is clearly
not as good when it has access to the distance values.
==PAGE:76==
70
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
