==PAGE:1==
 
 
01-05-2021 
Role of zooplankton egestion and microplastics in 
the biotransfer of oil pollution to mussels 
Morten Højen Kristiansen, S145430 
M.Sc. Eng. Aquatic Science and Technology 
Technical University of Denmark 
Abstract: Ingestion of crude oil droplets and microplastics has been found in zooplankton. However, it is 
currently unknown whether zooplankton fecal pellets facilitate the biotransfer of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) to coastal benthic communities and whether microplastics will affect the bioavailability 
and uptake. In this study copepod (Acartia tonsa) fecal pellets were experimentally investigated as vectors of 
PAHs to mussels (Mytilus edulis) when copepods were exposed to crude oil droplets with or without 
microplastics. 
Blue mussels were exposed to non-contaminated fecal pellets (control) and to fecal pellets containing oil alone, 
oil plus microplastics, and microplastics alone for 7 days. The fecal pellets were produced using 
environmentally realistic concentrations of crude oil after spills (1 µl L-1) but with high microplastic 
concentrations (53 MPs mL-1). A depuration test was performed after the exposure experiment, where mussels 
were exposed to filtered seawater and food (Rhodomonas salina) for 7 days. The concentration of PAHs in 
water samples, fecal pellets and mussels were determined by stir bar sorptive extraction–thermal desorption–
gas chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. 
The concentration of PAHs in samples was close to the detection limits, and no significant differences between 
the controls and experimental treatments were found, which makes it difficult to have clear conclusions. The 
experimental results suggest that the ingestion of fecal pellets contaminated with oil droplets is not a significant 
contributor to the uptake of PAHs in mussels at environmentally relevant concentrations. Statistical 
comparison of the crude oil plus microplastics co-exposure with the crude oil exposure treatment showed no 
significant differences in PAH uptake in mussels, providing evidence against the microplastic vector effect 
hypothesis. Mussels from the depuration experiment showed a significantly higher accumulation of PAHs than 
non-depurated mussels. Thus, the elimination test did not provide any conclusive results on the elimination of 
PAHs in mussels.  
Given the uncertainties from the PAH analysis, it is recommended that the experiment is repeated using high 
concentrations of contaminated fecal pellets for the exposure experiment to properly quantify the PAH 
concentration and composition of the fecal pellet samples. This thesis contributes to the development of an 
experimental design/setup that investigates the biotransfer of pollutants from pelagic to benthic organisms, 
which is needed to determine the fate and impact of pollution in the marine environment.  
Keywords: Mytilus edulis, Acartia tonsa, Benthic-pelagic coupling, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs), Microplastics vector effect, Zooplankton fecal pellet uptake pathway, Depuration. 
INTRODUCTION 
Marine coastal ecosystems are facing changes from 
maritime and land based anthropogenic activities 
introducing drivers of ecological change and 
deterioration at alarming rates (Kennish 1997). 
Several distinct pathways funnel these drivers into 
coastal ecosystems, and a common denominator is 
that a significant part of these drivers is derived 
from land-based human activities. The most 
significant land-based pathways are run-off, 
waterway discharge to coastal areas and ocean-
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
atmosphere interactions, while maritime activity 
such as ship engine combustion processes, waste 
management, shipping accidents, oil spills, 
offshore drilling and mining constitute less than a 
fourth of all pollution (Clark, Frid and Attrill 
1989). The marine environment is facing 
increasing pressure from anthropogenic activities, 
with very low impacted areas of the oceans 
consisting of high-latitude Arctic and Antarctic 
poles due to the harsh environment and sea ice 
acting as barriers for human activity (Halpern, et al. 
2008). However, 13% of the oceans are considered 
low impact areas and are found primarily in the 
high seas (Jones, et al. 2018). In contrast, coastal 
areas that are habitat for many key organisms is 
amongst the most vulnerable marine ecosystems 
and are highly impacted by contaminants derived 
from marine and land-based human activities 
(Kennish 1997).  
        Plastic waste as a driver of ecological change 
and deterioration in coastal ecosystems is presently 
in scientific focus. Larger plastic waste will 
eventually degrade into smaller plastic particles (< 
5 
mm) 
known 
as 
microplastics 
(MPs). 
Unfortunately, this trend has led to the observation 
of microplastic in marine environments all over the 
world. Thus, it has been observed at most ocean 
surfaces and also at the deepest parts of the oceans 
(Cózar, et al. 2014, Singh, et al. 2021). 
Consequently, the degradation of plastic results in 
an overlap in size of microplastics and planktonic 
organisms, 
increasing 
bioavailability 
of 
microplastics for a multitude of organisms and in 
particular zooplankton to ingest (Enders, et al. 
2015). 
        Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are 
drivers of ecological change and deterioration that 
are ubiquitous in coastal ecosystems. PAHs are 
organic compounds composed of two or more 
fused benzene rings made of hydrogen and carbon 
atoms (Neff 2002). A mixture of a wide array of 
mono- and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
constitutes the major partition of crude oil, which 
can be refined for a variety of uses, e.g., fuel for 
combustion processes or plastic production. Crude 
oil also contains many different heterocyclic 
compounds of other elements than the typical 
hydrogen and carbon, with the most common 
elements being sulphur, oxygen and nitrogen, 
including traces of rare metals such as vanadium 
and nickel (Selley 1986). Crude oil composition 
varies depending on origin, but in seawater light 
PAHs will evaporate while heavier compounds 
degrade from a combination of photo- and in 
particular biodegradation, where 28% of the 
substance are expected to be degraded within 8 
weeks at 20°C (Coleman 2003) (Dutta and 
Harayama 2000). A degradation time of several 
weeks will inevitably allow crude oil to interact 
with the marine environment. Crude oil is 
hydrophobic and is therefore typically seen as a 
thin layer on top of the water column. However, 
crude oil can be suspended in the water column 
under turbulent conditions as aggregates formed 
from interaction with suspended particulate matter 
or chemically via oil dispersants facilitating the 
formation of oil droplets (Loh, et al. 2020). Crude 
oil is a collection of many ecotoxic compounds of 
which some can enter the aquatic food web at 
planktonic levels through bioconcentration or 
particle vector effects (Kirso and Irha 1998, 
Hartmann, et al. 2017). Food chain magnification 
factors (FCMF) of 0.52-0.68 for PAHs in pelagic 
food chains suggest that PAH is not subject to 
trophic magnification, but is instead trophically 
diluted from metabolic processes (Nfon, Cousins 
and Broman 2008). The bioaccumulation factor 
(BAF) depends on the metabolism of the organism 
and biotransformation typically increases with 
higher trophic levels (Broman, et al. 1990). 
However, while PAHs do not significantly 
biomagnify to higher trophic levels due to 
increasing effectiveness of biological elimination 
processes, PAHs can still bioaccumulate at lower 
trophic levels in organisms such as zooplankton 
and benthos that mainly prey on primary producers 
(phytoplankton). In contrast, blue mussels are 
relevant bioindicators for environmental pollutants 
with a BAF of 4 ∙103 for some PAHs, classifying 
them as bioaccumulating (Broman, et al. 1990). 
Crude oil has in recent times received a lot of 
public attention as it is a natural resource that 
humanity has been and still is highly dependent on. 
However, crude oil spills have been very 
detrimental to the health of affected ecosystems 
and with the two-decade forecasted global oil 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
demand, PAHs in marine environments is expected 
to be a long-term issue (IEA 2020). 
        The highly abundant planktonic organisms 
constitute the base of the marine food web that 
sustains marine life. Marine copepods are the most 
abundant metazoans on earth and they mainly prey 
on the primary producers (Turner 2004). Marine 
copepods serve as an important link in the food 
chain energy transfer to higher trophic levels and 
contribute to the sequestration of organic carbon 
through the production of fast sinking fecal pellets 
packed with primary producers (Jónasdóttir, et al. 
2015). The carbon sequestration rate is high in 
coastal areas due to the high abundance of biota and 
a low biological consumption and remineralisation 
of carbon from microbial organisms that occur 
rapidly in the deepest parts of the ocean in the 
twilight zones (Buesseler, et al. 2007, Turner 
2004). In shallow coastal ecosystems, benthic 
communities are sustained by the nutrient flux 
originating from the pelagic zone. Pelagic 
copepods and benthic suspension feeding mussels 
share habitat and will compete for prey, i.e., 
primary producers. In the event of stratification, 
mussels can clear the bottom part of the water 
column for prey, allowing copepods to control 
phytoplankton populations in the pelagic layer 
(Jonsson, et al. 2009, Nielsen and Maar 2007). In 
such cases, fecal pellets produced by copepods in 
the pelagic zone will then contribute to the diet of 
mussels resulting in a link between benthic and 
pelagic communities in a process known as 
benthic-pelagic coupling (Gili and Coma 1998). 
Therefore, a concern is that benthic-pelagic 
coupled ecosystems enable the flux of pollutants 
from pelagic to benthic organisms. 
        Copepods grazing on phytoplankton will 
mistakenly ingest mechanically dispersed crude oil 
droplets (Almeda, et al. 2014). The following 
egestion of crude oil packed fecal pellets could play 
a significant role in the transfer of PAHs to benthic 
suspension feeders in a benthic-pelagic coupled 
marine ecosystem. Additionally, PAHs in the water 
column can be adsorbed and accumulate on the 
surface 
of 
microplastics, 
increasing 
the 
bioavailability of PAHs for copepods that ingest 
microplastics (Wang and Wang 2017) (Koski, et al. 
2021) (Giacomo, Stefania and Francesco 2017). If 
the presence of microplastics in the upper water 
column further facilitates the transfer and uptake of 
PAHs in benthic suspension feeders, a microplastic 
vector effect can be proven.  
        The aim of this study is to investigate the role 
of copepod egestion in the export of PAHs from 
pelagic to benthic communities. More specifically, 
whether the export is accelerated by the presence 
of microplastic. To do so, the PAH uptake in M. 
edulis from ingestion of Acartia tonsa fecal pellets 
was quantified. In relation to this, the fecal pellets 
were produced under exposure to different 
combinations of mechanically dispersed crude oil 
and microplastic.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Experimental organisms 
Experiments were conducted with the marine 
bivalve Mytilus edulis, commonly used as a 
bioindicator 
for 
human 
induced 
chemical 
pollutants in marine systems (Serafim, et al. 2008, 
Dailianis 2011). M. edulis were collected from 
Bølgemarken located in an urban harbour 
environment near the centre of Copenhagen, 
Denmark. Approximately 400 mussels with shell 
lengths of 20 to 25 mm were handpicked and 
cultured in a 100-litre plastic bucket with constant 
aeration. The culture bucket contained a mixture of 
filtered seawater (FSW, 0.2 µm, Salinity = 30) and 
harbour water from the collection site (Salinity = 
10) resulting in an initial salinity of 20 that slowly 
stabilized at 30, as water was replaced from feeding 
with Rhodomonas salina. On the bottom of the 
culture bucket were small mosaics for the mussels 
to settle onto. The byssus threads would thus not be 
destroyed when mussels on mosaics were moved to 
test containers. Acartia tonsa, a marine calanoid 
copepod found in most estuarine and coastal waters 
was used for the experiments to accelerate the 
vertical flux of organic matter to M. edulis. Two 
separate laboratory cultures of A. tonsa, were 
established in two 100-litre plastic buckets with 
filtered seawater (Salinity = 30) and constant 
aeration, one containing 90,000 and the other 
containing 80,000 A. tonsa eggs. Mussel and 
copepod cultures were kept in the “Fish lab” at 18 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
± 0.5ºC and were consistently fed with R. salina 
three times a week. R. salina were cultured in two 
15-litre plastic bags containing filtered seawater 
(salinity = 30) enriched with B1 growth medium. 
Cultures were kept in the “Algae lab” at a constant 
temperature of 18ºC. R. salina was exposed to an 
artificial light source and the bags were constantly 
aerated, ensuring exponential growth for a 
continuous supply of R. salina. Experiments were 
conducted at the Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, in the DTU Aqua “Fish lab”. 
Functional response of Mytilus edulis  
Preliminary experiments were conducted to 
determine the final experimental design and 
method choices and to understand the behaviour of 
test organisms in an experimental setting. The first 
experiment was designed to characterize the 
functional response spectra of M. edulis, i.e., the 
clearance and ingestion rate over a wide range of 
R. salina cell concentrations. The functional 
response experiment design was based on the 
setups used by (Jonsson, et al. 2009) and (Kittner 
and Riisgård 2005). M. edulis filtration rates were 
determined from the decrease of suspended R. 
salina in test containers over time. Test containers 
consisted of 8 white polypropylene buckets (D = 21 
cm, h = 19 cm) with a max volume of 6 litres. 
Mixing was driven by aeration generated from 
glass tubes connected to a Marina 200 aquarium 
pump. Test containers were filled with 4 litres of 
room temperature stabilized water mixture (T0 = 
17.6 ± 0.9C, T1 = 17.9 ± 0.8C) consisting of 
filtered seawater and freshwater. A handheld 
refractometer was used to control that the test water 
matched the salinity in the mussel culture bucket. 
Temperature was measured in one control and in 
the test container continuously by a submerged 
HOBO Pendant MX Water Temperature Data 
Logger, to ensure a constant water temperature 
throughout the test period. Temperatures in each of 
the test containers were also measured initially and 
after final samples had been secured. The clearance 
experiment consisted of 10 different R. salina 
concentrations ranging from 500 to 16000 cells ml-
1. Test buckets (1 to 4) contained 1 mussel (L = 
22.75 ± 1.15 mm, n = 47) that had settled on a 
mosaic tile, while bucket (5 to 8) served as controls 
with 1 mosaic tile. Mussels were added 
approximately 2 hours prior to initiation of the 
experiment. Mussels responded by opening and 
were then fed with R. salina at a concentration 
above the mussel detection limit of ~700 cells ml-1 
to avoid a valve-close response due to no detection 
of prey (Riisgård, Lassen and Kittner 2006). By 
doing so, all mussels were fully open and actively 
filtering at experiment start. Conditions in test and 
culture containers were kept the same to bypass the 
necessity of a longer acclimation period. 
        The functional response experiment was 
initiated by the addition of R. salina to containers 
(1 to 8). Mixing from aeration occurred 
immediately after addition of R. salina stock and 
sampling was initiated after one minute. Sampling 
occurred sequentially and in the same order from 
test containers (1 to 4) to control containers (5 to 8) 
and with a sample volume of 20 ml. Initial samples 
(to) for the first measurement were taken for all 
containers (1 to 8). Samples from test containers (1 
to 4) were taken after 10 (t10) and 20 (t20) minutes. 
End samples (t30), for the first measurement 
segment, were taken for all test containers (1 to 8). 
Controls were only sampled during the first 
measurement segment. R. salina concentrations 
were then readjusted to the initial value and the 
sampling procedure was repeated three times for a 
total 
of 
four 
measurement 
segments 
per 
concentration. After the fourth and final segment, 
mussels were removed, and shell lengths were 
measured with an electronic calliper. Water 
samples were analysed during the experiment with 
a Beckman Multisizer 4e Coulter Counter 
providing a count and sizing of particles in the 
sample. Sample volume that had been removed 
from the buckets during the experiments was 
accounted for in the R. salina readjustment 
calculations. 
Functional response data treatment 
The clearance rate, F (l h-1), was calculated 
according to the modified frost equation (Kiørboe, 
Møhlenberg and Nicolajsen 1982) and applied to 
calculations for mussels (Jonsson, et al. 2009): 
𝐹= 𝑉
𝑁𝑡ln (𝐶1
∗∙𝐶2
𝐶1 ∙𝐶2
∗)
(1) 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
where V is the volume of water in litres cleared of 
R. salina, by N number of mussels, per time unit t, 
in hours.  𝐶1
∗ and 𝐶2
∗ are the R. salina concentration 
in the mussel buckets at t1 and t2, respectively and 
𝐶1 and 𝐶2 are the average initial (t1) and final (t2) 
concentration of all four control buckets, 
respectively. The clearance rates were then 
normalized to a 23 mm mussel to account for 
differences in the clearance rate due to variation in 
experimental mussel sizes (Jonsson, et al. 2009): 
𝐹23𝑚𝑚= ( 23
𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑝
)
𝑏
∙𝐹
(2) 
where 𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑝 is the observed mussel length, F is the 
clearance rate calculated from eq. (1) and b is a 
fixed value experimentally determined from the 
relationship between clearance rate and shell length 
(Kiørboe and Møhlenberg 1981). The ingestion 
rate (I, cells ind.-1 h-1) was then calculated 
(Kiørboe, Møhlenberg and Nicolajsen 1982): 
𝐼= 𝐶∙𝐹
(3) 
where C is the average R. salina concentration 
(cells l-1) for one measurement segment and F the 
corresponding clearance rate (l h-1) calculated for 
that segment. Standard deviation (SD) and standard 
error (SE) were then calculated for the normalized 
clearance and ingestion rates. Holling functional 
response models were then fitted to the normalized 
clearance rates (Fnorm, l ind.−1 h−1, type III) and 
ingestion rates (I, cells ind.−1 h−1, type II) of M. 
edulis at test concentrations of R. salina (C, Cells 
ml-1) below the threshold value for pseudofeces 
production (Almeda, Gréve and Kiørboe 2018):  
Holling type III functional response: 
𝐹= (𝛼𝛽
𝐶)𝑒1−𝛼
𝐶
(4) 
𝐼= 𝛼𝛽𝑒1−𝛼
𝐶
(5) 
 
Where β is the observed maximum clearance rate 
(l ind.-1 h-1) and α is the R. salina cell concentration 
at maximum clearance rate. 
 
Mytilus edulis copepod fecal pellet ingestion 
The M. edulis fecal pellet ingestion test sought to 
determine if test mussels with lengths of 20 to 25 
mm were able to ingest A. tonsa fecal pellets. 
Additionally, the sedimentation rate of fecal pellets 
could also be determined from the controls and the 
results were further supported by supplementary 
sedimentation tests. Preparation for the test 
consisted of collecting a high quantity of fecal 
pellets from A. tonsa. Fecal pellet productions ran 
for a duration of 24 hours, followed by immediate 
concentrating of fecal pellet water. The fecal pellet 
production was based on a previous iteration of the 
final fecal pellet production procedure for controls 
described in the M. Edulis exposure experiment 
methodology section. The test design consisted of 
six plastic containers (D = 21 cm, h = 19 cm), that 
were filled with 4 litres of filtered seawater. 
Aeration and mixing of water in the test containers 
were ensured with two glass tubes connected to a 
Marina 200 aquarium pump. Three of the 
experimental containers (1 to 3) contained 1 mussel 
on a mosaic tile each, while containers (4 to 6) 
served as controls. The experiment was initiated 
when 16 ml aliquots containing 5565 ± 331 fecal 
pellets (Appendix A, A1) and R. salina were added 
to each of the experimental containers (1 to 6) 
resulting in a concentration of 1.39 ± 0.08 fecal 
pellets ml-1 and ~1000 R. salina cells ml-1. R. salina 
and fecal pellets were added at a concentration that 
ensured maximum filtration while staying below 
the pseudofeces threshold limit of 7000 R. salina 
cells ml-1 observed during the functional response 
experiment. The volume of one fecal pellet was 
~11221 µm3 (Appendix A, A2) and is equivalent to 
~163 R. salina cells (69 µm3) resulting in a 
concentration corresponding to 1227 R. salina cells 
ml-1. Two water samples of 10 ml were taken with 
a pipette from the middle of the container, 5 cm 
above the bottom, initially, and after 1 and 2 hours. 
After 3 hours, water from the buckets was 
concentrated with a 20 µm sieve and two 2 ml 
samples of concentrate were taken. These water 
samples were analysed for fecal pellet content 
under a microscope. The concentration of R. salina 
was also measured with the coulter counter after 2 
hours, to ensure that the mussels had been feeding. 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
Mytilus edulis PAH exposure and depuration 
experiment 
Cultures of A. tonsa were established under four 
different conditions to produce fecal pellets for the 
subsequent M. edulis PAH uptake and elimination 
experiments. The conditions in the four fecal pellet 
production containers aimed to test different 
marine scenarios involving crude oil and 
microplastic. Experiment conditions reflected 
environments with; 1) an absence of human 
induced stressors, i.e., controls; 2) microplastic 
(single stressor); 3) crude oil (single stressor); and 
4) crude oil plus microplastic (multi-stressor).  
        Exposure 
concentrations 
in 
production 
containers with crude oil were 1 µl l-1, a 
concentration that is representative to water 
concentrations observed after an oil spill (Almeda, 
Baca, 
et 
al. 
2014). 
Clear 
polyethylene 
microspheres (3-16 µm, Density = 0.96g cm3) were 
used for microplastic treatments. Microplastic test 
concentrations were 52.8 ± 4.4 particles ml-1, a 
concentration that exceeds most observed surface 
water concentrations, e.g. 0.21 ± 0.15 (< 5 mm), 
27.2 ± 52.5 (< 5 mm) and 1.08 ± 0.22 (< 3 mm) 
particles m-3 in the Baltic sea,  southern North Sea 
and Kattegat, respectively (Beer, et al. 2018,  
Lorenz, et al. 2019, Lassen, et al. 2015). 
Environmentally 
non-realistic 
microplastic 
concentrations were used to examine the potential 
vector properties and not the ecological effects of 
microplastic, where realistic concentrations are 
favoured (Lenz, Enders and Nielsen 2016). Based 
on observations from the M. edulis fecal pellet 
ingestion test, R. salina concentrations in test 
containers decreased by 63.8 ± 14.6 % in a 24-hour 
period, corresponding to an expected microplastic 
ingestion rate of 2.62 ± 0.67 particles ind-1 h-1 under 
the assumption of non-selective grazing and well-
mixed conditions for A. tonsa. A high microplastic 
concentration was used to ensure that a significant 
grazing on microplastic occurred when R. salina 
cell densities were very high (44,430 ± 9201 cells 
ml-1). Concentrations above 35,000 cells ml-1 
exceeded the food satiation level of >1 μg carbon 
ml−1 in terms of carbon biomass available to A. 
tonsa (Almeda, Connelly and Buskey 2016). 
Limitations in fecal pellet production due to a lack 
of prey were thus not an issue.  
        A microplastic suspension was prepared 
according to the methodology of (Rodríguez-
Torres, et al. 2020) and mechanically dispersed 
crude oil emulsions to that of  (Almeda, Connelly 
and Buskey 2016). Exposure media bottles (glass, 
610 ml) were prepared four days in advance for 
each daily fecal pellet production. The exposure 
media bottles were filled with; 1) autoclaved FSW 
(“Control”); 2) autoclaved FSW and microplastic 
suspension (“MPs”); 3) autoclaved FSW and crude 
oil emulsion (“OIL”); and 4) autoclaved FSW and 
crude oil emulsion plus MPs suspension (“OIL + 
MPs”). Microplastic suspension was added to 
bottles labelled with “MPs” and “OIL+MPs” (6.53 
ml, 61,250 microspheres ml-1), and crude oil 
emulsion to “OIL” and “OIL+MPs” (12.2 ml, 1 µl 
l-1). All bottles were then filled up with autoclaved 
FSW, covered with aluminum foil and stored on a 
plankton wheel (~3 RPM) for four days at 20ºC. 
Four days were enough to achieve a sorption 
equilibrium between PAHs and microplastics in the 
exposure media bottes (Wang and Wang 2017). 
Duplicate treatment bottles were made on day 1, 4 
and 7. After being on the plankton wheel duplicate 
exposure media bottles were acidified for storage 
at 3ºC. Treatments were administered by emptying 
the contents of the premade exposure media bottles 
into the respective fecal pellet production bucket. 
Bottles were afterwards thoroughly rinsed with 200 
ml filtered seawater, to ensure all the content got 
into the production buckets.  
Fig. 1. Sideview of fecal pellet production setup 
consisting of four large stainless steel buckets (D = 
26.5 cm, h = 27 cm) with lids and aeration. The 
setup had no polymer components. Crude oil 
treatments were placed in a fumehood. 
The fecal pellet production setup (Fig. 1.) was 
originally planned to have a 20-litre production 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
volume, however, due to an error, it was changed 
to 12.2 litres, leading to higher exposure 
concentrations of microplastic from 32.6 to 52.8 
microspheres ml-1. The setup strictly avoided 
polymer components to ensure that crude oil and 
microplastic remained bioavailable in the water 
column rather than fixed on component surfaces.  
        A. tonsa were carefully collected from the 
now 11-week old cultures with a 150 μm mesh 
sieve and concentrated in a 1 litre glass beaker. 
Two samples of 5 ml were counted, and the initial 
population was determined at 29,600 individuals 
(adults and copepodites) in the glass beaker. They 
were then distributed into 4 beakers sequentially 
and in several partitions, to ensure a similar number 
of copepods in each of the fecal pellet productions. 
Sampling of A. tonsa required stirring, immediately 
followed by drawing of the sample to counter an 
inhomogeneous distribution, due to the natural 
escape responses that are triggered by changes in 
light or from hydrodynamic disturbances (Buskey, 
Lenz and Hartline 2012). The initial temperature in 
production containers were 14.4 ± 0.7°C. Fecal 
pellet production was initiated when R. salina 
stock, exposure media and A. tonsa were added to 
production buckets. After 21.3 ± 1.42 hours A. 
tonsa were filtered out from the fecal pellet water 
with a 200 μm mesh sieve and stored for the next 
production. Fecal pellet water was collected in 
plastic buckets and concentrated with a 20 μm 
mesh sieve in glass beakers. A final filtration with 
a 150 μm mesh sieve removed copepods that got 
into the fecal pellet concentrates. Filtered seawater 
was added for a total of 100 ml fecal pellet 
concentrate. For each treatment five 18 ml aliquots 
and one 10 ml aliquot were prepared in 20 ml glass 
vials. The 10 ml aliquots were fixed with lugol’s 
iodine (1%) and stored at 3°C for fecal pellet 
volume and size distribution photo analysis. A 
single 18 ml blank sample with filtered seawater 
and one 18 ml aliquot for each treatment were 
filtered onto pre-combusted GF/F filters (450°C, 4 
h, DW = 36.4 ± 0.4 mg) and stored in acid rinsed 
glass vials at -80ºC. Water from production 
containers were sampled into acid rinsed glass 
bottles (610 ml) on day 1 and 7 of fecal pellet 
production. The fecal pellet concentrate in the 
remaining four 18 ml aliquots for each of the four 
treatments were distributed to corresponding M. 
edulis exposure buckets. 
 
Fig. 2. Sideview of the M. edulis exposure setup 
consisting of 10-litre stainless steel buckets (D = 22 
cm, h = 28 cm) with lids and aeration. No polymer 
components were used, and a barrier was 
constructed to shield non-oil test containers from 
oil treatments. 
        The M. edulis exposure setup (Fig. 2.) 
consisted of 16 aerated stainless steel buckets that 
were filled with 8 litres of filtered seawater before 
the experiment. All 16 buckets contained 8 mussels 
each and shell lengths were measured initially (LINI 
= 23.14 ± 1.14 mm). An additional 4 x 4 mussels 
were randomly selected from the culture to get a 
measure of the background PAH concentrations. 
Mussels were measured (length) and then 
dissected, weighed (WW, wet weight), and stored 
at -80ºC (L = 22.7 ± 0.9 mm, WW = 653 ± 39 mg). 
Water temperature was during the experiment 
monitored continuously with a HOBO Pendant MX 
Data Logger, that was set to log the temperature 
every second minute. Each of the four treatment 
types of fecal pellets were administered to a mussel 
group consisting of 4 biological replicates. 
        The 7-day exposure experiment was initiated 
by adding an 18 ml fecal pellet aliquot to each of 
the 16 buckets. An aliquot contained on average 
20,642 fecal pellets resulting in a concentration of 
2.58 fecal pellets ml-1 in each of the exposure 
buckets. Mussels were then fed with R. salina at a 
concentration of 1000 cells ml-1, enough to 
maintain maximum mussel filtration and far from 
exceeding 
the 
threshold 
for 
pseudofeces 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
production that was observed in this study at 
~7000, and in literature at ~13,000 R. salina cells 
ml-1 (Riisgård, Egede and Saavedra 2011). Test 
containers were stirred with a glass stirrer in the 
morning and evening to resuspend sedimented 
fecal pellets. Production of fecal pellets and 
feeding of mussels with aliquots and R. salina were 
repeated for each day of the 7-day exposure period. 
After 7 days all mussels were moved to new 
containers filled with clean filtered seawater and 
kept there for 4 hours to ensure that their guts were 
cleared of crude oil. Exposure buckets were then 
cleaned and filled with filtered seawater and 4 of 
the 8 mussels were moved back to the buckets they 
came from for the final depuration phase. The 
remaining 4 x 16 mussels were rinsed with a 
pressure sprayer with autoclaved filtered seawater, 
and shell lengths were measured. They were then 
dissected, weighed, and preserved at -80ºC. In total 
16 tissue samples were taken, each containing 
tissue from 4 mussels (L = 23 ± 0.9 mm, sample 
WW = 553 ± 79 mg, n = 64). Water from each of 
the 16 mussel exposure buckets were sampled in 
acid rinsed glass bottles (610 ml) on day 1 and 7 of 
exposure. A. tonsa had gotten into the exposure 
buckets on day 1, so the water was replaced with 
new filtered seawater (11ºC) on day 2 to avoid any 
unaccounted exposure pathways. All glass bottles 
that were used for storing water samples had been 
acid rinsed prior to sampling. All water samples 
were preserved with acidification (1.2 ml 37% 
HCL l sample-1) and stored at 3 ºC.  
        The depuration setup consisted of the same 16 
buckets with aeration, that had been cleaned. Each 
bucket contained 4 mussels that had been feeding 
on one of four FP treatments for 7 days. They were 
fed daily with R. salina (4000 cells ml-1) during a 
7-day depuration period. After 7 days, mussels 
were moved to new containers with clean filtered 
seawater for 4 hours. After depuration, 16 tissue 
samples were collected, each containing the tissue 
of 4 mussels from the depuration buckets (L = 23.5 
± 1.2 mm, sample WW = 664 ± 58 mg, n = 64). 
There was no observed mortality of dissected 
mussels after exposure and depuration as all 
mussels started actively filtering or moved around 
in the container, during the gut emptying phases. 
        A detailed workflow diagram of the exposure 
and depuration experiment for one arbitrary 
treatment out of four, can be seen in appendix B. 
Mytilus edulis exposure quantification and data 
treatment 
Quantification of PAHs in fecal pellets (GF/F 
filters), water, and mussel tissue samples, took 
place at the Cedre facility in France. Cedre’s 
analytical methodology applied alkaline digestion 
combined with stir bar sorptive extraction–thermal 
desorption–gas 
chromatography–tandem 
mass 
spectrometry (SBSE–GC–MS/MS) to quantify 21 
different PAHs in water or mussel tissue samples. 
The limits of quantification (LOQ) for PAH 
compounds were 0.5 to 10 μg kg-1 (WW) for 1 g of 
mussel tissue and 1 ng l-1 in a 100 ml water sample 
(Lacroix, et al. 2014). 
        Two images of fecal pellets were captured 
from each fecal pellet concentrate sample (lugol 
samples for 4 treatments x 7 days) with a Leica 
Microsystems camera attached to a microscope. 
Images were overlayed with a grid in ImageJ and 
the length and width of 15 fecal pellets were 
measured for each image. Fecal pellets were 
assumed ellipsoid in shape and the volume (μm3) 
was calculated from the following equation 
(Almeda, Connelly and Buskey 2016): 
𝑉= 4
3 𝜋(𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ
2
) ∙(𝑊𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ
2
)
2
(6) 
        One control sample from the fecal pellet PAH 
content analysis revealed an unexpectedly high 
concentration, so with consultation from the Cedre 
laboratory we decided to disregard this sample 
from the dataset. 
        PAH discovery frequencies were calculated as 
the number of times a PAH had been detected 
above the quantification limit in mussel samples 
divided with the total number of samples for the 
respective treatment. Chemical and physical 
properties for bioaccumulation of PAHs were 
determined with the EPIWEB 4.1 software. 
Statistical analyses 
The concentration of 21 different PAH compounds 
were quantified in the mussel tissue samples and 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
were pooled as the total PAH (TPAH) for statistical 
analysis. The PAH concentration of some 
compounds were in many samples reported as 
being below the limit of detection (LOD) or limit 
of quantification (LOQ). LOD and LOQ were set 
to 0. Limits of detection and quantification for 
PAHs in mussels can be seen in appendix C. Two 
mussel samples (Exposure: Control D, TPAH = 
2532 ng/g WW and depuration: Crude oil plus MPs 
D, TPAH = 481 ng/g WW) had extremely high 
levels of TPAH and were after consultation with 
the Cedre laboratory, who analysed these samples, 
disregarded. These two outlier samples originate 
from measurement errors during the SBSE–GC–
MS/MS analysis process. 
        The data was checked for normality and 
homogeneity of variances (homoscedasticity) prior 
to statistical analysis, to make sure that the 
assumptions for applying parametric statistical 
methods were met.  The dependent variable TPAH 
for the exposure and depuration experiment was 
first checked for normality with a Shapiro-Wilk 
test (𝑝= 1.25 ∙10−8 ) and inferential statistic plots 
(Appendix D), and the equality of variance was 
checked with a Levene’s test (𝑝= 0.061). These 
tests showed that the data had a non-normal 
distribution with homogenous variances for both 
the exposure and depuration group. The TPAH data 
was heavily right skewed (Skewness = 3.11, 
kurtosis = 10.08) so a log transformation was 
tested, to see if normality could be achieved. A 
constant (c = 1) had to be added to all TPAH 
values, to account for log(0), however, after TPAH 
had been log transformed on the y-axis the 
assumption of normality was still not fulfilled 
(Skewness = 0.51, kurtosis = -0.87 , Shapiro-wilk 
𝑝= 0.0068) 
and 
the 
variance 
was 
now 
heterogeneous (Levene 𝑝= 0.0056) and thus a 
non-parametric analysis had to be performed. A 
significance level of α = 0.05, was used for 
statistical testing of hypotheses.  
        An unpaired two-sample Wilcoxon test was 
performed, to statistically determine if the 
depurated mussel group had a significantly higher 
mean TPAH than the exposure group. A Kruskal-
Wallis one-way analysis of variance were then 
performed to look for significant differences in the 
average TPAH concentrations of treatments in the 
exposure group and depuration group. The 
Kruskal-Wallis test was followed up with a Dunn’s 
multiple comparison post hoc test with Bonferroni–
Holm adjusted p-values for pairwise comparison of 
treatment groups in the exposure experiment.  
RESULTS 
Functional response of Mytilus edulis 
The functional response of M. edulis was 
established from clearance experiments at several 
concentrations of R. salina. 
Fig. 3. Measured and model estimated clearance 
rate and ingestion of M. edulis as a function of R. 
salina concentration. 
The clearance rate of R. salina by M. edulis 
increased rapidly followed by a slow decline 
corresponding to a Holling type III response at 
concentrations of 500 to 7000 cells ml-1 (Fig. 3.). A 
maximum clearance rate of 2.04 l ind-1 h-1 was 
observed at a cell concentration of 1000 R. salina 
ml-1. Pseudofeces production occurred when M. 
edulis was overloaded with R. salina at 
concentrations exceeding 7000 cells ml-1. The 
observed M. edulis ingestion rate of R. salina 
increased in a natural logarithmic pattern fitting 
that of the Holling type III model up until the 
concentration where pseudofeces production was 
initiated. At concentrations above the threshold, 
both clearance and ingestion remained constant 
without signs of a mussel closing response. A 
summary of the fitting parameters used in the 
Holling model can be seen in table 1. 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
Table 1. Summary of M. edulis Holling type III 
fitting parameters for the normalized clearance and 
ingestion rate. α is the R. salina cell concentration 
at the maximum clearance rate, β, with standard 
error (SE). r2 is the coefficient of determination 
used to show the variability between observations 
and the applied model. 
 
Sedimentation rate of Acartia tonsa fecal pellets 
The loss of fecal pellets to sedimentation in the 
plastic bucket setup was measured to be 0.4 ± 0.1 
FP ml-1 h-1, at an initial nominal concentration of 
11.7 ± 0.9 FP ml-1. For a glass cylinder setup, a 
sedimentation rate of 0.6 ± 0.1 FP ml-1 h-1 was 
observed at a nominal concentration of 15 ± 0.7 FP 
ml-1. The sedimentation rate test was originally 
performed to decide on test containers for the main 
exposure experiment, However, a third type of 
container made of stainless-steel, were available 
and was used instead. To ensure perfect mixing 
conditions and to minimize the FP sedimentation 
loss in the exposure setup, two aeration tubes with 
a moderate airflow were used in the stainless-steel 
containers and they were stirred twice a day to 
resuspend sedimented fecal pellets. Sampling 
strategy and data for ingestion and sedimentation 
can be seen in appendix E and F, respectively. 
Mytilus edulis clearance and ingestion rate of 
Acartia tonsa fecal pellets 
Aliquots containing fecal pellets were added to all 
plastic buckets for an initial nominal concentration 
of 1.5 ± 0.1 FP ml-1. The observed concentration 
was 1.5 ± 0.5 FP ml-1. The control buckets showed 
a loss of 0.13 ± 0.1 FP ml-1 h-1, while the buckets 
with mussels lost 0.2 ± 0.3 FP ml-1 h-1. An unpaired 
two-sample t-test revealed no significant difference 
in means between the control and mussel groups 
resulting in concerns about the ability of mussels to 
remove fecal pellets from the water column (t-test, 
𝑝= 0.11). However, the R. salina concentration 
was also measured and a t-test showed that the 
mussels did actively filter and ingest prey in the 
water column, as the mean loss of R. salina (ΔR. 
Salina h-1) was significantly lower for the controls 
(t-test, 𝑝= 0.0026).  
 
Fig. 4. M. edulis fecal matter produced during the 
FP ingestion test. A) Undigested fecal pellets 
incapsulated in R. salina cells after 1 hour, and B) 
A. tonsa eggs after 3 hours. 
        A photograph was taken of M. edulis fecal 
matter, to collect extra evidence on the ingestion of 
A. tonsa fecal pellets. Fig. 4.A. shows that the 
mussels ingest the fecal pellets, but that they are not 
digested properly when the R. salina concentration 
is close to 1000 cells ml-1. The R. salina 
concentration declined, and the colour of M. edulis 
fecal matter changed from green to brown (Fig. 
4.B.), indicating that the mussels were ingesting 
low nutritious food that slowed down the gut 
passage and allowed fecal pellets to be digested. A. 
tonsa eggs were able to pass the mussel digestive 
system without being digested. 
Mytilus edulis uptake of PAH from ingestion of 
Acartia tonsa fecal pellets contaminated with 
PAH and microplastic 
The PAH in the A. tonsa fecal pellet production 
buckets and resulting fecal pellets were quantified. 
The nominal TPAH concentration in the A. tonsa 
fecal pellet production buckets were estimated at 
1.9 ng l-1 (control, n = 2), 4.4 ng l-1 (MPs, n = 3), 
715 ng l-1 (crude oil, n = 3) and 711 ng l-1 (crude oil 
plus MPs, n = 2) from the content analysis of 
replicate exposure treatment bottles for day 1, 4 
and 7 (data in appendix G).  The TPAH 
concentration in the production bucket water was 
sampled and measured for production day 1 and 7. 
The TPAH concentration was 0.07 µg l-1 (control, 
n = 2), 0.14 µg l-1 (MPs, n = 2), 0.59 µg l-1 ( crude 
oil, n = 2) and 0.63 µg l-1 (crude oil plus MPs, n = 
1), where the aim for the oil treatments were 1 µl 
crude oil l-1 (data in appendix H). 
   Response 
α ± SE 
β ± SE 
    r2   
Clearance rate 
1,166 ± 84 
2.31 ± 0.11 
0.80 
Ingestion rate 
1,622 ± 231 1.81 ± 0.17 
0.97 
A
B
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
 
Fig. 5. Nominal and measured concentrations of 
PAH compounds in A. tonsa fecal pellet production 
buckets. The nominal concentration is calculated 
from the exposure media bottle analysis results 
(data available in appendix I). 
In Fig. 5. PAHs were quantified, showing that the 
crude oil consisted mainly of naphthalene and 
biphenyl (2-rings), phenanthrene and fluorene (3-
rings) and pyrene (4-rings). Heavy PAHs with four 
or more aromatic rings constituted a minor 
percentage of the TPAH in the production buckets. 
The observed PAH concentrations were in 
agreement with the nominal concentrations.  
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Mean TPAH in A. tonsa fecal pellets for 
each treatment type. 
Blank filter samples were present to determine the 
background contamination in the fecal pellets. 
Blank and control samples had similar TPAH 
contents of 0.16 and 0.17 µg g WW-1, respectively. 
Fecal pellets with microplastic (0.33 µg g WW-1) 
contained more TPAH than fecal pellets from the 
crude oil treatment (0.24 µg g WW-1) and less than 
the crude oil plus MPs treatment (0.40 µg g WW-1) 
(Fig. 6.). No significant difference in TPAH were 
found between treatments (Kruskal-Wallis, p = 
0.41). TPAH concentrations in treatments for each 
daily FP production can be seen in appendix J. 
Table 2 shows that the 7-day cumulative number of 
fecal pellets and fecal pellet volume produced 
under conditions with oil, were slightly higher than 
non-oil treatments. The mean weight of fecal 
pellets in aliquots, were not consistent amongst 
treatments. Aliquots from the control treatment had 
the highest mean biomass weight of all treatments. 
Aliquots from the microplastic treatment had a 
negative mean biomass weight after being filtered 
on a GF/F filter. The discrepancy in aliquot 
biomasses and the low amount of ingested TPAH 
from fecal pellets will be addressed in the 
discussion.  
0
50
100 150 200 250
   Naphthalene
   Biphenyl
   Phenanthrene
   Fluorene
   Pyrene
   Dibenzothiophene
   Acenaphtene
   Fluoranthene
   Chrysene
   Perylene
   Benzo[b+k]fluoranthene
   Anthracene
   Benzo[e]pyrene
   Benzo[a]anthracene
   Benzo[a]pyrene
   Benzo(b)thiophene
   Acenaphtylene
   Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene
   Dibenz(a,h)anthracene
   Benzo(g,h,i)perylene
Concentration (ng / l)
Measured concentration
Nominal concentration
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
TPAH (µg g WW-1)
Treatment type 
Fecal 
pellets 
(total #) 
Volume FP-1  
± SE (um3) 
7-day FP 
volume 
(mm3) 
Aliquot FP weight 
± SE 
(g WW) 
Ingested 
TPAH 
ind-1 
(ng) 
  
  
Control 
135396 
11221 ± 3451 
1.43 
0.018 ± 0.024 
2.8 
  
  
MPs 
137160 
11166 ± 3703 
1.47 
-0.003 ± 0.011* 
0* 
  
  
Crude oil 
153504 
11053 ± 2194 
1.61 
0.013 ± 0.021 
2.7 
  
  
Crude oil + MPs 
151920 
11979 ± 1761 
1.81 
0.011 ± 0.020 
3.9 
  
Table 2. Properties and quantification of oil in A. tonsa fecal pellets added to M. edulis in 
test containers during the 7-day exposure experiment. * value was heavily affected by weight 
imbalances from filter process (see the discussion section for more information). 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
 
Fig. 7. PAH compounds observed in exposed 
mussels for treatment types that had quantifiable 
concentrations (TPAH > 0). The average 
compound concentration for each treatment is 
shown on the x-axis. 
From figure 7, chrysene had the highest 
concentration of all quantified PAHs in mussel 
tissue 
samples. 
Elevated 
concentrations 
of 
benzo(e)pyrene, 
benzo(a)anthracene, 
benzo(a)pyrene, and benzo(b+k)fluoranthene were 
also observed.  These PAH compounds were 
primarily discovered in mussels from the crude oil 
plus MPs treatment and were generally “low” when 
considering the measurement unit.  Furthermore, 1- 
and 2-methylnaphthalene was observed. However, 
they were not quantified in the production bucket 
water samples (Figure 5) from the content analysis, 
so the exposure concentration in the production 
buckets are unknown.  
        Significant differences were found between 
treatments for the exposed mussel group (Kruskal-
Wallis, 
𝑝_𝑒𝑥𝑝= 0.01). 
A 
Dunn’s 
multiple 
comparison post hoc test revealed that the uptake 
of PAHs in the crude oil with microplastic group 
were significantly higher than the control and 
microplastic 
groups 
(𝑝_𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙:𝐶𝑂+𝑀𝑃=
0.022 , 𝑝_𝑀𝑃:𝐶𝑂+𝑀𝑃= 0.019), and the remaining 
pairwise comparisons were non-significant (𝑝>
0.05). Meaning that the TPAH uptake in mussels 
from crude oil with microplastic group is 
statistically different from the control and 
microplastic group, but not statistically different 
when compared with the crude oil group signifying 
no vector effects in the presence of microplastic 
and that fecal pellets from the crude oil group is 
inefficient at transferring PAHs to mussels from 
exposure. 
Effect of depuration on the elimination of PAHs 
in Mytilus edulis 
The unpaired two-sample Wilcoxon test revealed 
that the mean TPAH concentration in the depurated 
mussel group were now significantly higher than 
what was found in the exposure group (𝑝=
0.0014). A Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of 
variance further determined that there were no 
significant differences in TPAH concentrations 
between any of the depuration groups (𝑝_𝑒𝑥𝑝=
0.42). The depurated mussels had accumulated 
even more PAHs during the depuration test and 
showed no significant differences between any of 
the four treatment types.  
Discovery 
frequency 
and 
accumulation 
properties of PAHs 
The bioaccumulation classification of a compound 
is based on the log Kow and bioconcentration factor 
(BCF) 
to 
predict 
which 
compounds 
will 
accumulate. 
Non-bioaccumulative 
and 
high 
concentration PAH (Naphthalene) in the fecal 
pellet production bucket (Fig. 5.) was quantified in 
exposed mussels at a low discovery frequency 
(appendix J). Results in appendix J show that a 
positive correlation between the compound 
concentration in the fecal pellet production buckets 
and the uptake of PAHs in mussels is not always 
the case, i.e. a high concentration of a compound 
does not always imply a high uptake from fecal 
pellets. The low discovery frequency of non-
bioaccumulative naphthalene means that non-
bioaccumulative classified compounds can still be 
discovered in the mussel tissue given that they are 
present at a high concentration in the production 
buckets. The bioaccumulative benzo(a)anthracene 
and 
especially 
2-methylnaphthalene 
were 
discovered in mussels from both crude oil and 
0
20
40
60
chrysene
benzo(e)pyrene
benzo(a)anthracene
benzo(a)pyrene
benzo(b+k)fluoranthene
2-methylfluoranthene
2-methylnaphtalene
1-methylnaphtalene
naphthalene
biphenyl
phenanthrene
Compound concentration (ng g WW-1)
Oil + MP
Oil
Background
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
microplastic and crude oil treatments signifying a 
notable uptake. Other bioaccumulative and 
potentially bioaccumulative PAH compounds were 
quantified in mussels but with a weak presence in 
only one of the two crude oil treatments. 
Phenanthrene, which had a high observed 
concentration in the fecal pellet production buckets 
and is classified as bioaccumulative was not 
discovered in mussels after exposure. It is therefore 
difficult to assess if the discovery of a PAH 
compound in a mussel is due to background PAHs 
(bioconcentration) or uptake from fecal pallets, 
except when discovered in both the oil and oil plus 
MPs treatment groups.  
DISCUSSION 
This study demonstrated that A. tonsa fecal pellets 
produced in conditions with and without crude oil 
can 
contain, 
but 
not 
efficiently 
transfer 
bioaccumulative PAHs to mussels. Furthermore, 
background contamination is a factor that severely 
affects the PAH quantification, when test 
concentrations 
are 
environmentally 
realistic, 
making interpretation of findings a difficult task. 
No significant evidence of a microplastic vector 
effect in mussels (when crude oil had been 
adsorbed to microplastic) were observed, on the 
contrary, microplastic seemed to lower the uptake. 
It was experienced that the biomass of fecal pellets 
in the aliquots was not sufficient for the SBSE–
GC–MS/MS crude oil quantification method. 
Unexpectedly, high TPAH levels were observed in 
mussel tissue sample 105B and 106C. However, 
removal was not justified and would not change the 
key 
results 
significantly. 
The 
depuration 
experiment showed no elimination of PAHs, 
instead there was an uptake of PAHs, revealing 
flaws in the analysis method or experimental setup. 
Sample biomass and limit of quantification 
Quantifiable PAHs were typically close to the limit 
of quantification. Cedre laboratory used the SBSE–
GC–MS/MS quantification method, which enables 
analytes to be quantified below the restrictive limit 
of 10 ng/g WW for mussels established by the 
European Commission (Lacroix, et al. 2014). 
Additionally, (Lacroix, et al. 2014) determined that 
the LOQ in a mussel tissue sample (weight, 1 g 
WW) was 1 to 10 ng / g WW and that mussel 
samples with  less than 1 g of mass increased the 
individual LOQ for PAH compounds. Thus, the 
LOQs were higher for test mussel tissue samples 
that contained tissue from four mussels with an 
average sample weight of 0.52 g. The mussel 
weight was not critical for this analysis. However, 
1 g WW of sample would have been optimal to 
lower the LOQ. The LOQs for GF/F filtered fecal 
pellets ranged from 55.6 to 555.6 ng / g WW, 
except for phenanthrene, which was 5.6 ng / g WW 
and had observable values above the LOQ in 
almost all samples. This observation indicates that 
the quantification method was unfit for PAH 
analysis of fecal pellet samples, when the biomass 
contained in one sample (0.177 g WW, n = 35) was 
much lower than 1 g. The consequence of this is 
that the limit of quantification is too high to 
properly quantify the PAH content in fecal pellets 
except for phenanthrene. So, to counter the issue 
with the analysis method, more fecal pellet matter 
must be produced to get measurements above the 
LOQ. A higher fecal pellet production would also 
be ideal for the mussel filtration experiment, which 
should have had a much higher nominal 
concentration of fecal pellets per bucket to lower 
the variability within samples. 
        An issue was observed with the quantity of 
biomass for some aliquots after they had been 
filtered onto a GF/F filter. This resulted in negative 
weight for some aliquots and it was not possible to 
determine the ingested TPAH per mussel for the 
microplastic mussel group. An inconsistency in 
operation time of the suction pump during the 
filtration of aliquots onto GF/F filters is likely to 
have caused an imbalance in the amount of water 
in blanks and treatment aliquots when the weight 
of water was accounted for by subtracting the 
weight of the blanks to find the fecal pellet weight. 
This problem can be avoided if a countdown 
protocol for when the sample has been sucked out 
of the pump sample glass tube is introduced. 
        Data for the concentrations of 1- and 2-
methylnapthalene in water samples from the 
production buckets were for unknown reasons 
excluded from the content analysis. The exposure 
concentrations for these two compounds are 
therefore unknown, which is unfortunate as these 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
compounds 
were 
of 
investigative 
interest, 
especially 
2-methylnapthalene 
with 
a 
high 
discovery frequency (Appendix J) and an expected 
bioaccumulation in organisms (BAF = 665.9). 
Zooplankton fecal pellets as a pathway to 
mussels 
Exposure experiments designed to test the role of 
zooplankton fecal pellets in the transfer of PAHs to 
mussels have to the author’s knowledge never been 
performed before, making comparison to other 
studies difficult. Instead, it was documented that 
the concentration of TPAH in fecal pellets was not 
affected by treatment type and that aliquot blanks 
showed similar TPAH levels, possibly from the 
low LOQ of phenanthrene and unavoidable low 
background PAHs. The exposure experiment 
results demonstrated that fecal pellets do not 
constitute a significant biotransfer pathway for 
PAHs to mussels.  In nature, fecal pellets may only 
constitute a minor proportion of the sedimentary 
flux to the benthos according to (Turner 2002).  
Effect of microplastic on biotransfer of PAH to 
mussels 
It is well documented that PAHs can accumulate on 
the surface of microplastic through adsorption 
(Wang and Wang 2017, Giacomo, Stefania and 
Francesco 2017) and that zooplankton are able to 
ingest 
microplastics 
(Cole, 
et 
al. 
2013). 
Furthermore, (Almeda, et al. 2021) documented 
that high microplastic concentrations in co-
exposure with PAHs could trigger behavioral stress 
responses in form of feeding supression in arctic 
copepod species. Fecal pellet quantity in aliquots 
was constant across treatments, signifying that A. 
tonsa did not react with feeding supression 
responses in the production buckets.  
        It was determined that mussels can ingest 
contaminated zooplankton fecal pellets (Length = 
56 ± 6 μm, Width = 19 ± 2 μm) (Figure 4. A) and 
experimental results demonstrated that fecal pellets 
were degraded to some extent in the mussel gut 
system when R. salina concentrations decreased 
(Figure 4. B). No significant differences in uptake 
of PAHs for mussels that had ingested fecal pellets 
contaminated with crude oil and crude oil with 
microplastic in co-exposure were documented. 
This potentially demonstrated that PAHs have too 
high affinity for microplastic, which prevents the 
release of PAHs. M. edulis possess a ciliary sorting 
mechanism in the stomach, which sorts ingested 
material (Owen 1974). Rejected material goes to 
the intestines, while accepted material continues to 
the diverticula. The diverticula functions as organs 
of intracellular digestion and absorption, while the 
intestines perform extracellular digestion, possibly 
on rejected (low nutritious) food (Owen 1974). 
Having 
microplastic 
with 
adsorbed 
PAHs 
incapsulated in fecal pellets adds another obstacle 
to the uptake of PAHs in mussels. Microplastic 
must first be released from fecal pellets by 
extracellular or intracellular digestion. Internal 
conditions must facilitate the desorption of PAHs 
from microplastic followed by passive diffusion 
across the epithelium leading to absorption in the 
adipose tissue. In terms of desorption, (Bakir, 
Rowland and Thompson 2014) demonstrated that 
the desorption of PAHs from microplastic 
increases with higher temperature and lower pH. 
M. edulis has an acidic gut with a typical pH of 5.5 
(Wang, 
Fisher 
and 
Luoma 
1995), 
which 
encourages the desorption of PAHs from 
microplastic. On the contrary, M. edulis is 
exotherm with a body temperature similar to the 
surrounding environment and the desorption rate 
may therefore be seasonally dependant on 
temperature 
(Zippay 
and 
Helmuth 
2012). 
However, the present findings suggest that the 
microplastic vector effect, and consequently the 
desorption rate of PAHs from microplastic in the 
digestive system of M. edulis, will be low. 
        In the experimental setup, adsorption of PAHs 
to microplastic occurred in autoclaved filtered 
seawater in the treatment exposure bottles, i.e. an 
environment consisting of three compartments. 
(Gouin, et al. 2011) mention the importance of the 
partitioning of PAHs in air, water, organic carbon 
and microplastic compartments of the environment 
signifying a large difference in interactions, when 
the mass of the microplastic partition is orders of 
magnitudes lower than that of other particulate 
compartments, such as organic matter and 
sediment particles. This means that PAHs are more 
likely to adsorb to non-microplastic particles due to 
a 
lower 
microplastic 
encounter 
chance. 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
Furthermore, the formation of biofilm on the 
surface of microplastic does not occur in most 
laboratory experiments, but could potentially 
support the adsorption of PAHs to microplastic as 
suggested by (Phuong, et al. 2016) and (Koelmans, 
et 
al. 
2016). 
Spatiotemporal 
hotspots 
of 
microplastic do occur. However, microplastic test 
concentrations in this study still far exceeded 
environmental concentrations observed even at 
microplastic hotspots (Moore, et al. 2001, Fok and 
Cheung 2015, Norén 2007). With that in mind, the 
uptake of PAHs in mussels is mostly a consequence 
of other and more significant exposure pathways, 
i.e. uptake from external exposure to PAH in the 
water phase (bioconcentration), uptake of PAH 
from ingestion of key prey containing PAHs in the 
tissue (biomagnification), and to some extent 
ingestion of PAH aggregates (particulate organic 
matter 
and 
not 
indigestible 
sediment 
or 
microplastic particles) as suggested by (Gouin, et 
al. 2011, Bakir, et al. 2016, and  Koelmans, et al. 
2016). All in all, the role of microplastic in the 
biotransfer of PAHs has been found to be 
negligible in comparison to natural exposure 
pathways, when microplastic mass is low 
compared to the mass of other compartments 
(Ziccardi, et al. 2016). 
        The probability of interaction between 
microplastic and PAH in the water column with 
high particulate organic matter, plankton, detritus, 
and sediment particles was discussed to emphasize 
some of the key differences between a simplified 
experimental environment and a real natural 
environment. Microplastic is present at a much 
lower ratio to other particles in the water column of 
natural ecosystems, potentially resulting in a 
negligible adsorption to microplastic   (Herzke, et 
al. 2016) and a low probability of microplastic 
particles being ingested by zooplankton (Rist, et al. 
2020). With that in mind, PAHs are more likely to 
transfer via other uptake routes to M. edulis (Paul-
Pont, et al. 2016). In natural ecosystems, 
particulate organic matter with adsorbed PAHs, 
will be ingested and digested in the gut of the 
opportunistic and omnivorous A. tonsa and may be 
stored in the copepod tissue instead of being 
egested with the fecal pellets (Kleppel 1993) 
(Berrojalbiz, et al. 2009). Furthermore, (Jonsson, et 
al. 2009) showed that M. edulis can eat prey 
competitors such as A. tonsa, which may move 
PAHs to another uptake route, i.e. the ingestion of 
PAH contaminated zooplankton by M. edulis. This 
emphasizes that all potential pathways must be 
included and quantified, so that no pathways are 
disregarded in the PAH balance equation, without 
conclusive evidence. 
        In terms of a microplastic vector effect, many 
different 
results 
have 
been 
found 
from 
experimental and in-situ observations. In vivo 
experiments like the ones in this study, where 
contaminants are adsorbed to the microplastic prior 
to exposure to biota, have in some studies 
demonstrated 
that 
adsorption 
lowers 
the 
bioavailability and therefore the uptake of PAHs 
(Chua, et al. 2014, Kleinteich, et al. 2018), while 
other studies show the opposite (Oliverira, et al. 
2013, Rochman, et al. 2013, Avio, et al. 2015, and 
Besseling, et al. 2017). It is believed that these 
contradictions stem from countless factors that 
inevitably varies among studies. For instance, 
exposing test organisms to a single PAH vs 
exposure to a mixture of PAHs (crude oil) have 
significantly different outcomes. 
Example: Acartia tonsa fecal pellet transfer of 
PAHs to Mytilus edulis in Mariager Fjord, 
Denmark 
The Danish eutrophic fjord, Mariager Fjord, was 
used as a worst-case scenario to assess the 
significance of a zooplankton fecal pellet pathway 
in the transfer of PAHs to mussels, and to highlight 
dissimilarities between an experimental setup 
(controlled) 
and 
natural 
environment 
(uncontrolled) with necessary assumptions. PAH 
quantification results for fecal pellets produced at 
1) controlled conditions; 2) 52.8 MP particles ml-1; 
3) 1 µl l-1 crude oil; and 4) 1 µl l-1 crude oil plus 
52.8 MP particles ml-1 were used. PAHs were 
assumed to have been adsorbed to microplastic at 
equilibrium point (incubation) and that the crude 
oil source is not depleted, i.e. the concentration is 
constant in the water column. It was also assumed, 
that all fecal pellets sink to the bottom and are 
ingested by M. edulis. The maximum value for 
fecal pellet weights were used, as these were 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
difficult to quantify and affect the ingested TPAH 
drastically (worst-case).  
        Mariager Fjord is a hyper-eutrophic temperate 
estuary and during a phytoplankton bloom, the 
abundance of A. tonsa was estimated at values 
ranging from 27,500 to 93,300 ind. m-2 consisting 
of individuals from all life stages by (Tiselius, et al. 
2008). A maximum fecal pellet production rate of 
4.2 pellets copepod-1 h-1 for A. tonsa grazing on  
Thalassiosira weissfloggii, was experimentally 
determined by (Butler and Dam 1994). In Mariager 
Fjord, M. edulis beds cover the bottom at depths 
from 1 to 10 m with abundances of 1000 to 8000 
ind. m-2 with shell lengths of 20 to 40 mm (Sømod 
2001). With results from this study, a crude oil spill 
with a duration of one week in Mariager Fjord will 
lead to a PAH ingestion for each treatment of 25 ng 
ind.-1 (control), 50 ng ind.-1 (microplastic), 42 ng 
ind.-1 (crude oil) and 52 ng PAH ind.-1 (crude oil 
plus microplastic). The discovery of PAH in 
control and microplastic groups is attributed to 
background pollution or measurement errors, as no 
crude oil was added to these treatments. No 
significant differences between treatments were 
found and therefore, even in a worst-case scenario 
with perfect biotransfer conditions, these results 
suggest, that an A. tonsa fecal pellet PAH pathway 
will be negligible compared to other pathways 
during a crude oil spill. The mussel PAH uptake 
efficiency from ingestion of fecal pellets was 
estimated at 0% (control and microplastic), 26% 
(crude oil) and 17% (crude oil and microplastic). If 
sample 104A and 105B is kept, then the uptake 
efficiency 
will 
be 
298% 
(crude 
oil 
and 
microplastic), which is impossible with a 
quantified ingestion of 3.9 ng TPAH ind.-1 (crude 
oil plus microplastic). However, in Mariager Fjord 
the expected TPAH in one mussel would be 0 ng g 
WW-1 (control and microplastic), 11 ng g WW-1 
(crude oil) and 9 ng g WW-1 (crude oil plus 
microplastic) based upon the uptake efficiency, 
hinting that microplastic may have a slight 
inhibitive effect on the uptake of PAH in mussels. 
Thus, even in a worst-case scenario, the PAH 
uptake in mussels would be close to the limits of 
quantification for each individual compound. 
 
CONCLUSION 
An experimental setup was designed and 
implemented to investigate the biotransfer of PAHs 
from pelagic (via fecal pellets) to benthic 
suspension feeding organisms.  
        PAH 
concentrations 
in 
samples 
were 
generally close to the limit of detection, especially 
for fecal pellet samples. There were no significant 
differences in TPAH concentrations between fecal 
pellets from control and experimental treatments. 
Statistical multiple comparison showed that only 
mussels from the crude oil plus microplastics co-
exposure 
treatment 
group 
had 
significant 
differences in TPAH when compared with control 
and microplastics treatments. These results suggest 
that the ingestion of fecal pellets contaminated with 
crude oil droplets is not a significant contributor to 
the uptake of PAHs in mussels at environmentally 
relevant concentrations of crude oil. Additionally, 
microplastics had no significant effect on the 
uptake of PAHs in mussels. A microplastic vector 
effect was therefore negligible. Mussels from the 
depuration experiment showed a significantly 
higher accumulation of PAHs than non-depurated 
mussels. Thus, the elimination test did not provide 
any conclusive results on the elimination of PAHs 
in mussels.  
Uncertainties in the PAH analysis may have 
affected the study results. Therefore, it is 
recommended that the mussel exposure experiment 
is repeated with an upscaled production of 
contaminated fecal pellets to achieve a higher 
exposure. This suggestion should lead to a proper 
quantification of PAHs in the fecal pellet samples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
A massive thanks to the author’s supervisors, T. G. 
Nielsen, and R. Almeda for their commitment, 
interest, and invaluable guidance during this study. 
The author would also like to thank L. L. Zeuthen 
and G. Kuddithamby for their time spend in the 
laboratory, as the practical parts of this study could 
not have been carried out without their help. 
Thanks to J. Melbye, who helped in the laboratory 
when something broke or was missing and for 
taking care of the mussels and zooplankton. Thanks 
to R. R. Torres, for crucial guidance on how to 
prepare and work with microplastic and for being 
helpful when help was needed. The work was 
supported by a grant from Direktør J.P.A. Espersen 
og hustru, fru Dagny Espersens Fond, to Torkel 
Gissel Nielsen. 
 
REFERENCES 
Almeda, R., H.V.S. Gréve, and T. Kiørboe. 2018. 
“Prey perception mechanism determines 
maximum clearance rates of planktonic 
copepods.” Limnology and Oceanography 
63 (6): 2695-2707. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/lno.10969. 
Almeda, R., R.R. Torres, S. Rist, M.H.S. Winding, P. 
Stief, B.H. Hansen, and T.G. Nielsen. 
2021. “Microplastics do not increase 
bioaccumulation of petroleum 
hydrocarbons in Arctic zooplankton but 
trigger feeding suppression under co-
exposure conditions.” Science of The 
Total Environment 751: pp. 141264. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2
020.141264. 
Almeda, R., S. Baca, C. Hyatt, and E.J. Buskey. 
2014. “Ingestion and sublethal effects of 
physically and chemically dispersed crude 
oil on marine planktonic copepods.” 
Ecotoxicology 23 (6): 988-1003. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-014-
1242-6. 
Almeda, R., T.L. Connelly, and E.J. Buskey. 2016. 
“How much crude oil can zooplankton 
ingest? Estimating the quantity of 
dispersed crude oil defecated by 
planktonic copepods.” Environmental 
Pollution (Elsevier Ltd) 208 (Part B): 645-
654. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
5.10.041. 
Avio, C.G., S. Gorbi, M. Milan, M. Benedetti, D. 
Fattorini, G. d'Errico, M. Pauletto, L. 
Bargelloni, and F. Regoli. 2015. 
“Pollutants bioavailability and 
toxicological risk from microplastics to 
marine mussels.” Environmental Pollution 
198: 211-222. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
4.12.021. 
Bakir, A., I.A. O'connor, S.J. Rowland, Hendriks 
A.J., and R.C. Thompson. 2016. “Relative 
importance of microplastics as a pathway 
for the transfer of hydrophobic organic 
chemicals to marine life.” Environmental 
Pollution 219: 56-65. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
6.09.046. 
Bakir, A., S.J. Rowland, and R.C. Thompson. 2014. 
“Enhanced desorption of persistent 
organic pollutants from microplastics 
under simulated physiological 
conditions.” Environmental Pollution 16-
23. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
3.10.007. 
Beer, S., A. Garm, B. Huwer, J. Dierking, and T.G. 
Nielsen. 2018. “No increase in marine 
microplastic concentration over the last 
three decades – A case study from the 
Baltic Sea.” Science of The Total 
Environment 621: 1272-1279. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2
017.10.101. 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Berrojalbiz, N., S. Lacorte, A. Calbet, E. Saiz, C. 
Barata, and J. Dachs. 2009. 
“Accumulation and cycling of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons in zooplankton.” 
Environmental Science and Technology 43 
(7): 2295-2301. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1021/es8018226. 
Besseling, E., E.M. Foekema, M.J. Van Den 
Heuvel-Greve, and A.A. Koelmans. 2017. 
“The Effect of Microplastic on the Uptake 
of Chemicals by the Lugworm Arenicola 
marina (L.) under Environmentally 
Relevant Exposure Conditions.” 
Environmental Science and Technology 
8795-8804. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b022
86. 
Broman, D., C. Näuf, I. Lundbergh, and Y. Zebühr. 
1990. “An in situ study on the 
distribution, biotransformation and flux 
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(pahs) in an aquatic food chain (seston‐
Mytilus edulis L.‐Somateria mollissima L.) 
from the baltic: An ecotoxicological 
perspective.” Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry 9 (4): 429-442. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620090
404. 
Buesseler, K.O., C.H. Lamborg, P.W. Boyd, P.J. 
Lam, T.W. Trull, R.R. Bidigare, J.K.B. 
Bishop, K.L. Casciotti, F. Dehairs, og M. 
Elskens. 2007. »Revisiting carbon flux 
through the ocean's twilight zone.« 
Science 316 (5824): 567-570. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1137
959. 
Buskey, E.J., P.H. Lenz, and D.K. Hartline. 2012. 
“Sensory perception, neurobiology, and 
behavioral adaptations for predator 
avoidance in planktonic copepods.” 
Adaptive Behavior (SAGE PUBLICATIONS 
LTD) 20 (1): 57-66. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712311
426801. 
Butler, M., and H.G. Dam. 1994. “PRODUCTION-
RATES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF FECAL 
PELLETS OF THE COPEPOD ACARTIA-
TONSA UNDER SIMULATED 
PHYTOPLANKTON BLOOM CONDITIONS - 
IMPLICATIONS FOR VERTICAL FLUXES.” 
Marine Ecology Progress Series 114 (1-2): 
81-91. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.3354/meps114081. 
Chua, E.M., J. Shimeta, D. Nugegoda, P.D. 
Morrison, and B.O. Clarke. 2014. 
“Assimilation of Polybrominated Diphenyl 
Ethers from Microplastics by the Marine 
Amphipod, Allorchestes Compressa.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 48 
(14): 8127-8134. doi:https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1021/es40571
7z. 
Clark, R.B., C. Frid, and M. Attrill. 1989. Marine 
Pollution. Vol. 4. Oxford: Clarendon press. 
Cole, M., P. Lindeque, E. Fileman, C. Halsband, R. 
Goodhead, J. Moger, og T.S. Galloway. 
2013. »Microplastic ingestion by 
zooplankton.« Environmental Science and 
Technology 47 (12): 6646-6655. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1021/es400663f. 
Coleman, J.C. 2003. Oil in the sea : inputs, fates, 
and effects / Committee on Oil in the Sea: 
Inputs, Fates, and Effects, Ocean Studies 
Board and Marine Board, Divisions of 
Earth and Life Studies and Transportation 
Research Board, National Research 
Council of the National A. National 
Academies Press. 
Cózar, A., F. Echevarría, J.I González-Gordillo, X. 
Irigoien, B. Úbeda, S. Hernández-León, 
Á.T. Palma, et al. 2014. “Plastic debris in 
the open ocean.” Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111 (28): 10239-10244. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.131470
5111. 
Dailianis, S. 2011. “Environmental impact of 
anthropogenic activities: The use of 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
mussels as a reliable tool for monitoring 
marine pollution.” In Mussels: Anatomy, 
Habitat and Environmental Impact, by L. 
E. McGevin, 43-72. Patras: Nova Science 
Publishers, Inc. 
Dutta, T.K., and S. Harayama. 2000. “Fate of 
Crude Oil by the Combination of 
Photooxidation and Biodegradation.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 
(AMER CHEMICAL SOC) 34 (8): 1500-
1505. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1021/es991063o. 
Enders, K., R. Lenz, C.A. Stedmon, and T.G. 
Nielsen. 2015. “Abundance, size and 
polymer composition of marine 
microplastics ≥ 10 μm in the Atlantic 
Ocean and their modelled vertical 
distribution.” Marine Pollution Bulletin 
100 (1): 70-81. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2015.09.027. 
Fok, L., and P.K. Cheung. 2015. “Hong Kong at the 
Pearl River Estuary: A hotspot of 
microplastic pollution.” Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 99 (1-2): 112-118. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.
2015.07.050. 
Giacomo, A.C., G. Stefania, and R. Francesco. 
2017. “Plastics and microplastics in the 
oceans: From emerging pollutants to 
emerged threat.” Marine Environmental 
Research 128: 2-11. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.
2016.05.012. 
Gili, J-M., and R. Coma. 1998. “Benthic 
suspension feeders: Their paramount role 
in littoral marine food webs.” Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution (Elsevier Ltd) 13 (8): 
316-321. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-
5347(98)01365-2. 
Gouin, T., N. Roche, R. Lohmann, og G. Hodges. 
2011. »A Thermodynamic Approach for 
Assessing the Environmental Exposure of 
Chemicals Absorbed to Microplastic.« 
Environmental Science and Technology 45 
(4): 1466-1472. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1021/es1032025. 
Halpern, B.S., S. Walbridge, K.A. Selkoe, C.V. 
Kappel, F. D'Agrosa, C. Micheli, J.F. Bruno, 
K.S. Casey, et al. 2008. “A Global Map of 
Human Impact on Marine Ecosystems.” 
Science 319 (5865): 948-952. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1149
345. 
Hartmann, N.B., S. Rist, J. Bodin, L.H.S. Jensen, 
S.S. Nørgaard, P. Mayer, A. Meibom, and 
A. Baun. 2017. “Microplastics as Vectors 
for Environmental Contaminants : 
Exploring Sorption, Desorption, and 
Transfer to Biota : Microplastics as 
Contaminant Vectors: Exploring the 
Processes.” Integrated Environmental 
Assessment and Management (Wiley-
Blackwell) 13 (3): 488-493. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.1904. 
Herzke, D., T. Anker-Nilssen, T.H. Nøst, A. Götsch, 
S. Christensen-Dalgaard, M. Langset, K. 
Fangel, and A.A. Koelmans. 2016. 
“Negligible Impact of Ingested 
Microplastics on Tissue Concentrations of 
Persistent Organic Pollutants in Northern 
Fulmars off Coastal Norway.” 
Environmental Science & Technology 50 
(4): 1924–1933. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b04
663. 
IEA. 2020. International Energy Agency. 13. 
October. Senest hentet eller vist den 28. 
February 2021. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2020. 
Jónasdóttir, S.H., A.W. Visser, K. Richardson, og 
M.R. Heath. 2015. »Seasonal copepod 
lipid pump promotes carbon 
sequestration in the deep North 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
Atlantic.« Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 112 (39): 12122-12126. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.151211
0112. 
Jones, K.R., C.J. Klein, B.S. Halpern, O. Venter, H. 
Grantham, C.D. Kuempel, N. Shumway, 
A.M. Friedlander, H.P. Possingham, and 
J.E.M Watson. 2018. “The Location and 
Protection Status of Earth’s Diminishing 
Marine Wilderness.” Current Biology 28 
(15): 2506-2512. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.0
6.010. 
Jonsson, A., T.G. Nielsen, I. Hrubenja, M. Maar, 
and J.K. Petersen. 2009. “Eating your 
competitor: Functional triangle between 
turbulence, copepod escape behavior 
and predation from mussels.” Marine 
Ecology Progress Series (Inter-Research) 
376: 143-152. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3354/meps07817. 
Kennish, M.J. 1997. Practical handbook of 
estuarine and marine pollution. 1. Årg. 
10. Boca Raton: CRC press. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203742
488. 
Kirso, U., and N. Irha. 1998. “Role of Algae in Fate 
of Carcinogenic Polycyclic Aromatic 
Hydrocarbons in the Aquatic 
Environment.” Ecotoxicology and 
Environmental Safety 41 (1): 83-89. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/eesa.1998.1
671. 
Kittner, C., and H.U. Riisgård. 2005. “Effect of 
temperature on filtration rate in the 
mussel Mytilus edulis: No evidence for 
temperature compensation.” Marine 
Ecology Progress series (INTER-
RESEARCH) 305: 147-152. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3354/meps305147
. 
Kiørboe, T., and F. Møhlenberg. 1981. “Particle 
selection in suspension-feeding bivalves.” 
Marine Ecology - Progress Series (INTER-
RESEARCH) 5 (3): 291-296. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3354/meps005291
. 
Kiørboe, T., F. Møhlenberg, and H. Nicolajsen. 
1982. “Ingestion rate and gut clearance in 
the planktonic.” Ophelia 21 (2): 181-194. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/00785326.19
82.10426586. 
Kleinteich, J., S. Seidensticker, N. Marggrander, 
and C. Zarf. 2018. “Microplastics reduce 
short-term effects of environmental 
contaminants. part II: Polyethylene 
particles decrease the effect of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons on 
microorganisms.” International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public 
Health 15 (2): 287. 
Kleppel, G.S. 1993. “ON THE DIETS OF CALANOID 
COPEPODS.” Marine Ecology Progress 
Series (Marine Ecology Progress Series) 
99 (1-2): 183-195. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.3354/meps099183. 
Koelmans, A.A., A. Bakir, G.A. Burton, og C.R. 
Janssen. 2016. »Microplastic as a Vector 
for Chemicals in the Aquatic 
Environment: Critical Review and Model-
Supported Reinterpretation of Empirical 
Studies.« Environmental Science and 
Technology 50 (7): 3315-3326. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b060
69. 
Koski, M., J. Søndergaard, A.M. Christensen, and 
T.G. Nielsen. 2021. “Effect of 
environmentally relevant concentrations 
of potentially toxic microplastic on 
coastal copepods.” Aquatic Toxicology 
230. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.20
20.105713. 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
Lacroix, C., N.L. Cuff, J. Receveur, D. Moraga, M. 
Auffret, and J. Guyomarch. 2014. 
“Development of an innovative and 
“green” stir bar sorptive.” Journal of 
Chromatography A 1349: 1-10. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.201
4.04.094. 
Lassen, C., F.H. Hansen, K. Magnusson, N.B, 
Jensen, P.R. Hartmann, T.G. Nielsen, and 
A. Brinch. 2015. Microplastics: 
Occurrence, effects and sources of 
releases to the environment in Denmark. 
Copenhagen K: Danish Environmental 
Protection Agency, 206. 
Lenz, R., K. Enders, and T.G. Nielsen. 2016. 
“Microplastic exposure studies should be 
environmentally realistic.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 113 
(29): E4121-E4122. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.160661
5113. 
Loh, A., R. Shankar, S.Y. An, J.G. Ha, og U.H. Yim. 
2020. »Stability of mechanically and 
chemically dispersed oil: Effect of particle 
types on oil dispersion.« Science of the 
Total Environment 716. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2
019.135343. 
Lorenz, C., L. Roscher, Meyer M.S., L. Hildebrandt, 
J. Prume, M.G.J. Löder, S. Primpke, and G. 
Gerdts. 2019. “Spatial distribution of 
microplastics in sediments and surface 
waters of the southern North Sea.” 
Environmental Pollution 252: 1719-1729. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
9.06.093. 
Moore, C.J., S.L. Moore, M.K. Leecaster, and S.B. 
Weisberg. 2001. “A Comparison of Plastic 
and Plankton in the North Pacific Central 
Gyre.” Marine Pollution Bulletin 42 (12): 
1297-1300. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-
326X(01)00114-X. 
Neff, J.M. 2002. Bioaccumulation in Marine 
Organisms : Effect of contaminants from 
oil well produced water. Elsevier. 
Nfon, E., I.T. Cousins, and D. Broman. 2008. 
“Biomagnification of organic pollutants in 
benthic and pelagic marine food chains 
from the Baltic Sea.” Science of the Total 
Environment (Elsevier) 397 (1-3): 190-
204. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2
008.02.029. 
Nielsen, T.G., and M. Maar. 2007. “Effects of a 
blue mussel Mytilus edulis bed on vertical 
distribution and composition of the 
pelagic food web.” Marine Ecology 
Progress Series 339: 185-198. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.3354/meps339185. 
Norén, F. 2007. Small plastic particles in coastal 
Swedish waters. KIMO Sweden. 
http://www.n-
research.se/pdf/Small%20plastic%20parti
cles%20in%20Swedish%20West%20Coast
%20Waters.pdf. 
Oliverira, M., A. Ribeiro, K. Hylland, and L. 
Guilhermino. 2013. “Single and combined 
effects of microplastics and pyrene on 
juveniles (0+ group) of the common goby 
Pomatoschistus microps (Teleostei, 
Gobiidae).” Ecological Indicators 34: 641-
647. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2013
.06.019. 
Owen, G. 1974. “Feeding and Digestion in the 
Bivalvia.” Advances in Comparative 
Physiology and Biochemistry 5: 1-35. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
011505-1.50007-4. 
Paul-Pont, I., C. Lacroix, C.G. Fernández, H. 
Hégaret, C. Lambert, N.L. Goïc, L. Frère, 
et al. 2016. “Exposure of marine mussels 
Mytilus spp. to polystyrene microplastics: 
Toxicity and influence on fluoranthene 
bioaccumulation.” Environmental 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
Pollution 216: 724-737. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.201
6.06.039. 
Phuong, N.N., A. Zalouk-Vergnoux, L. Poirier, A. 
Kamari, A. Châtel, C. Mouneyrac, and F. 
Lagarde. 2016. “Is there any consistency 
between the microplastics found in the 
field and those used in laboratory 
experiments?” Environmental Pollution 
211: 111-123. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2015
.12.035. 
Riisgård, H.U., J. Lassen, and C. Kittner. 2006. 
“Valve-gape response times in mussels 
(Mytilus edulis) - Effects of laboratory 
preceding-feeding conditions and in situ 
tidally induced variation in phytoplankton 
biomass.” Journal of Shellfish Research 
(National Shellfisheries Association) 25 
(3): 901-911. doi:https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.2983/0730-
8000(2006)25[901:VRTIMM]2.0.CO;2. 
Riisgård, H.U., P.P. Egede, and I.B. Saavedra. 
2011. “Feeding Behaviour of the Mussel, 
Mytilus edulis: New Observations, with a 
Minireview of Current Knowledge.” 
Journal of Marine Biology 2011: 1-13. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/31245
9. 
Rist, S., A. Vianello, M.H.S. Winding, T.G. Nielsen, 
R. Almeda, R.R. Torres, and J. Vollertsen. 
2020. “Quantification of plankton-sized 
microplastics in a productive coastal 
Arctic marine ecosystem.” Environmental 
Pollution 266 (1). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.202
0.115248. 
Rochman, C.M., E. Hoh, T. Kurobe, and S.J. Teh. 
2013. “Ingested plastic transfers 
hazardous chemicals to fish and induces 
hepatic stress.” Scientific Reports 3 (1): 
3263. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/srep03263. 
Rodríguez-Torres, R., R. Almeda, M. Kristiansen, 
S. Rist, M.S. Winding, og T.G. Nielsen. 
2020. »Ingestion and impact of 
microplastics on arctic Calanus 
copepods.« Aquatic Toxicology 228: 
Article 105631. doi:https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1016/j.aquatox
.2020.105631. 
Selley, R.C. 1986. Elements of Petroleum Geology. 
MACMILLAN MAGAZINES LTD. 
Serafim, A., B. Lopes, R. Company, A.M. Ferreira, 
and M.J. Bebianno. 2008. “Comparative 
petroleum hydrocarbons levels and 
biochemical responses in mussels from 
hydrothermal vents (Bathymodiolus 
azoricus) and coastal environments 
(Mytilus galloprovincialis).” Marine 
pollution bulletin 57 (6-12): 529-537. 
Singh, N., M. Granberg, F. Collard, M. Caruso, Z. 
Lu, T. Kögel, and G.W. Gabrielsen. 2021. 
“Microplastics in the realm of Svalbard: 
current knowledge and future 
perspective (MIRES).” In SESS report 
2020, by Hagen JO, Hübner C, Lihavainen 
H, Zaborska A Moreno-Ibáñez M, 118-
141. Longyearbyen. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4293
836. 
Sømod, B. 2001. Mariager Fjord - Fjordbundens 
dyreliv - Status for miljøtilstanden 2000. 
Technical report, Århus Amt & 
Nordjyllands Amt. 
Tiselius, P., C.M.A., Hansen, B.W. Borg, P.J. 
Hansen, T.G. Nielsen, og B. Vismann. 
2008. »High reproduction, but low 
biomass: Mortality estimates of the 
copepod Acartia tonsa in a hyper-
eutrophic estuary.« Aquatic Biology 2 (1): 
93-103. doi:doi.org/10.3354/ab00043. 
Turner, J.T. 2004. “The importance of small 
planktonic copepods and their roles in 
pelagic marine food webs.” Zoological 
Studies 43 (2): 255-266. 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Turner, J.T. 2002. “Zooplankton fecal pellets, 
marine snow and sinking phytoplankton 
blooms.” Aquatic Microbial Ecology 27 
(1): 57-102. 
doi:doi.org/10.3354/ame027057. 
Wang, W., and J. Wang. 2017. “Comparative 
evaluation of sorption kinetics and 
isotherms of pyrene onto microplastics.” 
Chemosphere 193: 567-573. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphe
re.2017.11.078. 
Wang, W.X., N.S. Fisher, and S.N. Luoma. 1995. 
“Assimilation of trace elements ingested 
by the mussel Mytilus edulis: Effects of 
algal food abundance.” Marine Ecology 
Progress Series 129 (1-3): 165-176. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.3354/meps129165. 
Ziccardi, L.M., A. Edgington, K. Hentz, K.J. Kulacki, 
and S. Kane Driscoll. 2016. “Microplastics 
as vectors for bioaccumulation of 
hydrophobic organic chemicals in the 
marine environment: A state-of-the-
science review.” Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry 35 (7): 1667-
1676. doi:doi.org/10.1002/etc.3461. 
Zippay, M.L., and B. Helmuth. 2012. “Effects of 
temperature change on mussel, Mytilus.” 
Integrative Zoology 7 (3): 312-327. 
doi:http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
4877.2012.00310.x. 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A: Quantification of fecal pellets in aliquots and mussel exposure buckets. 
Table A1: Number of FP aliquot per aliquot (16 ml). 
  
Production day 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
  
  
Control 
7704 
16272 
19080 
22464 
21204 
25992 
22680 
  
  
Microplastic 
7380 
12960 
20520 
21708 
21564 
28836 
24192 
  
  
Crude oil 
3960 
19836 
21492 
29448 
24480 
26784 
27504 
  
  Crude oil + microplastic 
9828 
15264 
25452 
22644 
18432 
33048 
27252 
  
 
Table A2: Fecal pellet volume data (um3 fecal pellet-1). 
  
Production day 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
  
  
Control 
18112 
9345 
9334 
10801 
8524 
9043 
13384 
  
  
Microplastic 
18723 
7450 
10019 
9868 
9074 
12879 
10147 
  
  
Crude oil 
15558 
9706 
9699 
9269 
11076 
10097 
11967 
  
  Crude oil + microplastic 
13999 
11050 
8684 
12502 
11815 
13535 
12264 
  
 
Table A3: Daily addition of fecal pellets (mm3 fecal pellets bucket-1). 
  
Exposure day 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
  
  
Control 
0.1395 
0.1521 
0.1781 
0.2426 
0.1807 
0.2351 
0.3036 
  
  
Microplastic 
0.1382 
0.0966 
0.2056 
0.2142 
0.1957 
0.3714 
0.2455 
  
  
Crude oil 
0.0616 
0.1925 
0.2085 
0.2730 
0.2711 
0.2704 
0.3291 
  
  Crude oil + microplastic 
0.1376 
0.1687 
0.2210 
0.2831 
0.2178 
0.4473 
0.3342 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
Appendix B:  Workflow diagram of the exposure and depuration experiment for a generic treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
Appendix C: Limits of detection and quantification for mussel tissue samples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limits (ng per bar) 
Limits (ng/g wet weight)      
for 0,5g of tissue 
  
Analytes 
LOD (ng per 
bar) 
LOQ (ng per 
bar) 
LOD (ng/g 
wet weight) 
LOQ (ng/g 
wet weight) 
Observations 
naphthalene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
2-methylnaphtalene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
1-methylnaphtalene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
benzothiophene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
biphenyl  
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
acenaphthylene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
acenaphthene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
fluorene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
dibenzothiophene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
phenanthrene  
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
anthracene 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
1.0 
  
fluoranthene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
2-methylfluoranthene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
pyrene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
benzo(a)anthracene 
0.3 
1.0 
0.7 
2.0 
  
chrysene 
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
benzo(b+k)fluoranthene 
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
benzo(e)pyrene 
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
benzo(a)pyrene 
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
perylene 
1.7 
5.0 
3.3 
10.0 
  
indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene 
nq 
nq 
nq 
nq 
Compounds not 
quantified because the 
responses are too low 
(lack of sensitivity of 
the apparatus) 
dibenzo(a,h)anthracene 
nq 
nq 
nq 
nq 
benzo(g,h,i)perylene 
nq 
nq 
nq 
nq 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
Appendix D: Inferential statistic plots 
 
 
Fig. D1: Histogram showing counts and distribution of measured TPAH for analysed samples. The “Dep_” 
prefix means that the count belongs to a depurated mussel group. 
 
 
 
Fig. D2: Boxplot of the TPAH measurements for each treatment group. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
Appendix E: Sedimentation experiment sampling strategy for a glass cylinder and plastic 
container. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
9 
11 
7 
8 
10 
6 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
Appendix F: Water sample FP counts from the ingestion and sedimentation experiments. 
Table F1: Ingestion experiment FP counts. Initial nominal concentration was 1.30 FP ml-1. 
    
Fecal pellets ml-1 ± SE 
  
  
Control 
Mussel 
  
  
  
  Time (h) 
A 
B 
C 
  
D 
E 
F 
  
  
0 
1.4 ± 0 
1.5 ± 0 
1.5 ± 0.4 
 
1.8 ± 1.1 
1.5 ± 0.3 
1.1 ± 0.2 
  
  
1 
1.3 ± 0.6 
1.6 ± 0.8 
0.9 ± 0.1 
 
1.3 ± 0.6 
0.5 ± 0.1 
0.8 ± 0.1 
  
  
2 
0.9 ± 0.2 
0.6 ± 0.2 
1.8 ± 0.5 
 
0.5 ± 0.1 
0.6 ± 0.2 
0.3 ± 0.1 
  
  
3 
1.1 ± 0.1 
1.2 ± 0.1 
1    ± 0 
  1    ± 0.1 
0.6 ± 0 
0.7 ± 0.1 
  
 
Table F2:  R. salina concentrations in test containers during the ingestion experiment. 
    
R. salina cells ml-1 
  
  
Control containers 
Mussel containers 
  
  
  
  Time (h) 
A 
B 
C 
  
D 
E 
F 
  
  
0 
1185 
1223 
1272 
 
878 
904 
1056 
  
  
3 
1026 
1029 
1046 
  
424 
286 
471 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table F3:  Sedimentation of FP in a plastic container setup. Initial nominal concentration was 11.7 FP ml-1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table F4: Sedimentation of FP in a glass cylinder setup. Initial nominal concentration was 15 FP ml-1. 
  
Fecal pellets ml-1 ± SE 
  
  
Top 
Middle 
Bottom 
  
  
  
  
Time 
(h) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
  
  
0 
10 
16 
11.2 
10.4 
12.2   
12.6 
  14.8 
18.8 
12 
11.2 
14 
  
  
1 
11 
11 
12.4 
12.6 
8.8 
12 
13.8 
11 
10.6 
12.8 
9 
  
  
2 
8.8 
8.8 
6.8 
13 
8.6 
15.4 
14.2 
12 
9.8 
10.8 
10 
  
  
24 
3.6 
1 
0.8 
1.4 
3.2 
  
1.2 
  
1 
11.2 
3.8 
1 
2.6 
  
  
Fecal pellets ml-1 ± SE 
  
  
Top 
Middle 
Bottom 
  
  
  
  
Time 
(h) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
  
  
0 
11.2 
15.6 
13.6 
15.8 
16 
  
13.6 
  24.2 
20.2 
19.4 
15.0 
18.8   
  
1 
14 
16.6 
13.6 
15.6 
16.8 
14.8 
16.2 
15.6 
13.2 
16.4 
15.4   
  
2 
11.8 
11.6 
14.6 
13.8 
15 
12.2 
12 
16.8 
13.8 
13.2 
16.6   
  
24 
0.4 
0.8 
1.2 
1.8 
3.8 
  
3.6 
  
3.6 
1.8 
1.8 
1.2 
4.8 
  
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
Appendix G: PAH analysis of exposure treatment bottles (ng l-1) 
Exposure solution Day 1, 4 and 7 
Control Control Control Microplastic Microplastic Microplastic 
Crude 
Oil 
Crude 
Oil 
Crude 
Oil 
Microplastic 
+ Crude Oil 
Microplastic 
+ Crude Oil 
Microplastic 
+ Crude Oil 
   Benzo(b)thiophene 
Lost sample 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
96.4 
67.8 
0.0 
Broken bottle 
183.6 
134.3 
   Naphtalene 
11.8 
9.0 
18.9 
6.0 
0.0 
3,241.6 3,655.0 3,324.4 
3,354.8 
2,974.6 
   Biphenyl 
3.0 
2.4 
0.0 
1.1 
0.0 
1,013.7 1,462.0 1,550.6 
1,362.8 
1,574.6 
   Acenaphtylene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
69.4 
99.4 
135.4 
94.6 
124.1 
   Acenaphtene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
39.1 
48.8 
62.9 
52.9 
45.7 
   Fluorene 
2.0 
2.6 
2.8 
1.1 
0.0 
663.1 
977.6 
1,281.7 
728.6 
905.1 
   Phenanthrene 
0.0 
3.5 
2.2 
2.7 
0.0 
1,572.3 1,660.3 2,169.6 
1,425.4 
2,071.3 
   Anthracene 
0.0 
0.3 
1.6 
0.0 
0.0 
34.5 
28.7 
40.1 
45.9 
40.8 
   Dibenzothiophene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.3 
0.0 
207.2 
178.9 
266.7 
168.8 
359.9 
   Fluoranthene 
0.5 
1.3 
6.7 
7.5 
0.8 
31.0 
12.7 
21.4 
17.5 
51.3 
   Pyrene 
1.7 
2.9 
40.5 
55.3 
1.0 
55.7 
45.8 
87.8 
63.5 
93.5 
   Benzo[a]anthracene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
77.5 
72.7 
105.1 
73.5 
120.0 
   Chrysene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
262.4 
276.3 
423.4 
239.7 
478.5 
   Benzo[b+k]fluoranthene 
2.1 
2.8 
0.0 
0.0 
1.3 
3.0 
7.5 
15.9 
5.5 
0.0 
   Benzo[e]pyrene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.0 
0.0 
0.8 
1.9 
67.3 
   Benzo[a]pyrene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
16.1 
0.0 
24.9 
16.2 
35.3 
   Perylene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
81.3 
88.4 
132.4 
77.3 
12.8 
   Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
   Dibenz(a,h)anthracene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.8 
0.0 
0.0 
5.7 
4.0 
16.3 
5.7 
15.3 
   Benzo(g,h,i)perylene 
0.0 
0.0 
7.4 
0.0 
0.0 
15.2 
16.0 
26.8 
17.7 
25.8 
TOTAL (ng/L) 
  
21.2 
24.9 
80.9 
75.0 
3.1 
7486.4 
8701.9 
9686.2 
  
7936.1 
9130.1 
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
Appendix H. PAH analysis of day 1 and 7 water samples from the A. tonsa fecal pellet production buckets (ng l-1) 
  
Initial sample 
End sample 
  
Control 
Microplastic 
Crude Oil 
Crude oil + 
MPs 
(removed) 
Control 
Microplastic 
Crude Oil 
Crude Oil + 
MPs 
   Benzo(b)thiophene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
   Naphtalene 
10.6 
6.4 
171.1 
307.1 
8.6 
14.0 
368.0 
301.5 
   Biphenyl 
1.0 
1.4 
53.1 
121.2 
2.6 
2.3 
130.5 
98.6 
   Acenaphtylene 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
   Acenaphtene 
4.5 
0.0 
0.0 
21.1 
0.0 
0.0 
5.1 
5.8 
   Fluorene 
2.3 
1.5 
29.2 
97.5 
2.0 
3.4 
102.9 
60.9 
   Phenanthrene 
27.0 
9.5 
101.6 
739.7 
11.2 
31.1 
124.6 
87.3 
   Anthracene 
1.6 
0.8 
5.3 
183.2 
1.1 
3.1 
1.7 
1.9 
   Dibenzothiophene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
19.6 
1.7 
9.8 
0.0 
12.8 
   Fluoranthene 
3.5 
7.7 
2.2 
561.4 
7.6 
20.3 
2.0 
7.5 
   Pyrene 
14.6 
27.7 
52.8 
306.9 
31.5 
69.1 
6.2 
27.0 
   Benzo[a]anthracene 
3.1 
0.0 
2.1 
17.3 
0.0 
8.7 
1.0 
1.9 
   Chrysene 
0.0 
0.0 
1.7 
20.7 
0.0 
7.0 
0.0 
7.9 
   Benzo[b+k]fluoranthene 
1.9 
1.2 
4.6 
7.3 
0.0 
9.2 
1.6 
4.4 
   Benzo[e]pyrene 
0.6 
1.0 
2.3 
1.7 
0.0 
10.1 
0.3 
3.2 
   Benzo[a]pyrene 
1.5 
1.3 
3.0 
0.9 
0.0 
8.4 
0.3 
0.9 
   Perylene 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.3 
0.0 
1.6 
2.5 
5.1 
   Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
12.2 
0.0 
0.0 
   Dibenz(a,h)anthracene 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
   Benzo(g,h,i)perylene 
2.5 
12.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.9 
0.0 
0.0 
TOTAL (ng/L) 
75.6 
70.8 
429.0 
2407.0 
66.3 
215.0 
746.7 
626.7 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
Appendix I:  PAHs in treatment exposure bottles. Exposure bottles had a volume of 610 ml, and the FP 
production buckets had a total water volume of 12.2 l. 
  
Compound name 
Exposure bottles 
  
Fecal pellet production buckets 
  
  
Nominal concentration (ng l-1)   First measurement (ng l-1) 
Second measurement (ng l-1)   
  
Naphthalene 
3310 
171 
335 
  
  
Phenanthrene 
1780 
102 
106 
  
  
Biphenyl 
1393 
53 
115 
  
  
Fluorene 
911 
29 
82 
  
  
Chrysene 
336 
2 
4 
  
  
Dibenzothiophene 
236 
0 
6 
  
  
Acenaphthylene 
105 
0 
0 
  
  
Benzo[b]thiophene 
96 
0 
0 
  
  
Benzo[a]anthracene 
90 
2 
1 
  
  
Perylene 
78 
0 
4 
  
  
Pyrene 
69 
53 
17 
  
  
Acenaphthene 
50 
0 
5 
  
  
Anthracene 
38 
5 
2 
  
  
Fluoranthene 
27 
2 
5 
  
  
Benzo[ghi]perylene 
20 
0 
0 
  
  
Benzo[a]pyrene 
19 
3 
1 
  
  
Benzo[e]pyrene 
14 
2 
2 
  
  
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene 
9 
0 
0 
  
  Benzo[b+k]fluoranthene 
6 
5 
3 
  
  Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene 
0 
  
0 
0 
  
 
Total PAH 
8587 
 
429 
688 
 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
Appendix J: Classification criteras: No bioaccumulation (Log Kow < 4 & BCF < 500); potentially bioaccumulative: (Log Kow ≥ 4); and 
bioaccumulative: (Log Kow ≥ 4 & BCF ≥ 500). The “potentially bioaccumulative” classification accounts for a potential metabolic transformation of 
the compound by the organism. *KOWWIN v1.69 estimated log Kow. 
PAH 
Mussel discovery frequency (%) 
Chemical and physical properties 
Control MPs Crude oil 
Crude 
oil 
 + MPs 
Rings 
Log 
Kow 
(25°) 
Bioconcentration  
factor 
(BCF) 
Bioaccumulation  
factor 
(BAF) 
Bioaccumulation  
classification 
(REACH / CLP) 
Predicted  
biodegradability 
Biodegradation 
half-life 
(days) 
Biotransformation 
half-life 
(days) 
benzothiophene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
3.12 
86.45 
86.45 
No bioaccumulation 
Not readily biodegradable 
18.59 
0.55 
naphthalene 
0 
0 
0.25 
0 
2 
3.3 
177.2 
177.4 
No bioaccumulation 
Not readily biodegradable 
5.56 
4.53 
2-methylnaphtalene 
0 
0 
0.25 
0.75 
2 
3.86 
646.3 
665.9 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
8.89 
3.28 
1-methylnaphtalene 
0 
0 
0 
0.25 
2 
3.87 
498.2 
500.2 
No bioaccumulation 
Not readily biodegradable 
8.89 
3.31 
acenaphthene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3.92 
94.95 
94.95 
No bioaccumulation 
Not readily biodegradable 
18.77 
0.25 
acenaphthylene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3.94 
549 
551.5 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
30.7 
3.73 
biphenyl  
0 
0 
0.25 
0 
2 
4.01 
425.8 
426.4 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
31 
1.68 
fluorene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
4.18 
893.6 
909.2 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
15.14 
1.38 
dibenzothiophene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
4.38 
1298 
1360 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
27.65 
0.9 
anthracene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
4.45 
1121 
1151 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
123 
2.54 
phenanthrene  
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
4.46 
1203 
1242 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
14.97 
2.55 
pyrene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
4.88 
771.9 
784.9 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
283.38 
0.56 
fluoranthene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
5.16 
385.6 
388.4 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
191.38 
2.57 
benzo(b+(k))fluoranthene 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
5 
5.79 
961.6 
1165 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
284.74 
2.67 
chrysene 
0 
0 
0 
0.25 
4 
5.81 
1364 
1993 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
343.76 
3.14 
benzo(k)fluoranthene 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.11 
286.2 
300.5 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
284.74 
3.37 
benzo(a)pyrene 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
5 
6.13 
364.2 
395.6 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
421.61 
0.9 
perylene 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
6.25 
267.7 
286.4 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
421.61 
0.98 
benzo(e)pyrene 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
5 
6.44 
298.7 
350.6 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
421.61 
1.13 
2-methylfluoranthene 
0 
0 
0 
0.25 
4 
5.48* 
756.2 
801.9 
Bioaccumulative 
Not readily biodegradable 
73.46 
1.98 
benzo(a)anthracene 
0 
0 
0.25 
0.25 
4 
5.81* 
269.2 
274.1 
Potentially 
bioaccumulative  
Not readily biodegradable 
- 
0.72 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
Appendix K: Quantification of PAH in fecal pellets from aliquot samples, for each day. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Blank
MP
Oil + MP
Control
Oil
Blank
MP
Oil + MP
Control
Oil
Blank
MP
Oil + MP
Control
Oil
Blank
MP
Oil + MP
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Fecal pellet PAH concentration (µg/g)
