==PAGE:1==
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural
network approach
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Institute of mathematics and computer science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
Master Thesis
April, 2021
By
Andrei Nicolae Calugar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Institute of mathematics and computer science, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
This thesis deals with the implementation of artificial neural networks for intrusion detec­
tion.
Andrei Nicolae Calugar ­ s190298
Signature
April 21, 2021
Date
ii
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent years, due to the development of complex communication paradigms and the
rise in the number of digital network devices, there has been an increased concern about
cybersecurity. Intruders continuously develop novel attack types; thus, to avoid these at­
tacks, they must first be correctly detected. Intrusion detection systems are critical com­
ponents of an organization’s network protection since they serve as the first line of defense
against cyber attacks and are responsible for successfully detecting possible malicious
activity. The current literature has not seen much evolution in this field and lacks compre­
hensive intrusion detection frameworks.
In this project, supervised deep learning models based on deep neural networks (DNN),
convolutional neural networks (CNN), and recurrent neural networks (RNN) were pro­
posed. Numerous malware datasets are freely accessible for further study by the cyber­
security community. Thus the models are applied to other datasets such as KDDCup 99,
UNSW­NB15, CICIDS 2017, and CSECICIDS2018 to conduct the benchmark.
The artificial neural network models work by transferring data across numerous hidden
layers; the models learn the abstract and high­dimensional attribute representation of the
data. The ideal parameters and typologies for the neural network models are detected
using hyper­parameter selection approaches in conjunction with the datasets. This pro­
cess stands as the foundation for creating a framework for hyper­parameter optimization.
Through rigorous experimental testing and validation, it is confirmed that the framework
leads to high model performance when compared to other classical machine learning
classifiers.
Finally, the proposed detection method results proved to be capable of detecting attacks
and achieving promising results on multi­class classification with an average accuracy
greater than 91% across the overall models, with specific models reaching as high as
99%. The results show that neural networks perform well on all four datasets across
all metrics. This project demonstrates the effectiveness of the deep learning methods for
intrusion detection and provides reproducible empirical results that can be used for further
research.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Weizhi Meng, Assistant Professor, Institut for Matematik og Computer Science.
To my friend and family for their care and support.
iv
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives and delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Software requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Concepts and background
5
2.1
Intrusion detection systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Supervised learning in intrusion detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Neural Network types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Related works
23
4
Supervised Intrusion Detection
29
4.1
Data processing and representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Network topologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Compiling the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Model fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.5
Evaluating the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Analyzing the results
41
5.1
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Hyperparameters optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
Overfitting and underfitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Comparison with other ML algorithms
51
6.1
Machine learning algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Conclusion
55
8
Future work
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendices
65
A.1 Data visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
AI: Artificial Intelligence
ANN: Artificial Neural Network
AWS: Amazon Web Service
CIC: Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity
CNN: Artificial Neural Network
CSE: Communications Security Establishment
DBN: Deep Belief Network
DL: Deep Learning
DNN: Deep Neural Network
DNS: Domain Name System
DoS: Denial of Service
DDoS: Distributed Denial of Service
FN: False Negative
FP: False Positive
FPR: False Positive Rate
FTP: File Transfer Protocol
HIDS: Host­based Intrusion Detection System
HTTP: Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTS: Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
IDS: Intrusion Detection System
IP: Internet Protocol
IPS: Intrusion Prevention System
KDD: Knowledge Discovery and Data mining
KNN: K­Nearest Neighbors
LAN: Local Area Network
ML: Machine Learning
MLP: MultiLayer Perceptron
MSE: Mean Squared Error
NIDS: Network­based Intrusion Detection System
NLP: Natural Language Processing
OS: Operating System
OSI: Open Systems Interconnection
RAM: Random­Access Memory
vi
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:9==
RBM: Restricted Boltzmann Machine
ReLU: Rectifier Linear Unit
RNN: Reccurent Neural Network
SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over­sampling Technique
SOM: Self­Organizing Map
SSH: Secure Shell
SVM: Support Vector Machine
TCP: Support Vector Machine
TN: True Negative
TP: True Positive
TPR: True Positive Rate
UNSW: University of New South Wales
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
For the past decade, there has been a significant expansion in computer networks and
increased networked digital devices. Preserving the security of information and commu­
nication has been a critical issue for cybersecurity. Furthermore, the number of attacks
has increased as malicious intruders become more versatile in their methods and attacks.
This could lead to being very costly and dangerous for businesses and governments as
sensitive information risks to be leaked, and infrastructure could be sabotaged. According
to a 2020 cyber incidents report published by the Center for Strategic International Studies
(CSIS) [1] that tracks cyber attacks on government institutions and high tech companies,
the financial losses that have been reported lie in the millions of dollars. As figure 1.1
shows, over 490 major cybercrime incidents have been monitored over the last decade.
Figure 1.1: Cyber Attacks Incidents with $1M in Reported Losses [2]
A well­designed security framework and antivirus and firewall protection are no longer suf­
ficient to safeguard a business network. Multiple layers of security should be put in place
to create a secure and reliable system. An intrusion detection system is one of the most
critical layers since it could be deployed to protect its target from any possible threat by
continuously monitoring the system. IDSs in use today are classified into two broad cate­
gories: signature­based detection and anomaly detection. For signature­based tracking,
the intrusion detection technique works by compares the data it monitors to known attack
patterns. While this approach is potent and accurate and has been widely popularized by
tools such as Suricata [3] and Snort [4], it has a significant drawback: it can detect only
documented attacks that have been described in the system.
On the other hand, anomaly detection creates a model of the system’s normal behav­
ior and then examines the network data to sport any deviations from it. Thus, although
this technique can detect unknown threats, it also produces several false alarms. Most
literature has been conducted over the last two decades on anomaly­based intrusion de­
tection. Evidently, their ability to track unknown threats is critical in an era of increasing
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
1
==PAGE:12==
attack volume and diversity. With the rise of artificial intelligence, numerous machine
learning methods have been suggested for tackling this task. These strategies focus on
algorithms that can learn from data without having to be specifically programmed to do
so. This is particularly convenient given the high amount of data produced by a network
and the diversity in its flow. Despite these benefits, anomaly intrusion detection algo­
rithms are scarcely used, and misuse detection continues to dominate. The issue of high
false­positive rate is cited in papers such as [5] as the primary explanation for the failure of
widespread acceptance of anomaly­based intrusion detection. With the current advances
in artificial neural networks, there is a great potential for improvements in developing this
technique. However, existing approaches to intrusion detection centered on ANNs lack
a well­defined methodology for parameter optimization, which may lead to the improved
performance of current detection models.
This thesis project proposes a solution that enhances the precision and accuracy of neural
network detection. The techniques are organized into a well­defined framework used for
hyper­parameter optimization. The proposed ANN models are trained and validated on
large datasets that simulate network behavior. Finally, these models are compared with
other traditional machine learning algorithms that have been widely used in this field’s
study.
1.1
Objectives and delimitations
As stated in the introduction, the project’s main aim is to develop an efficient technique
for intrusion detection based on artificial neural networks. Furthermore, considering the
project’s purpose and the time spawn allocated for developing it, some delimitations are
also defined to stand as boundaries for the thesis. To achieve the task, the following
objectives will be set:
• Datasets will be screened against the current literature, and a total of four candidates
will be chosen to be included in the project.
• Datasets will be analyzed using a variety of visualization techniques in order to as­
certain which processing operations they require.
• A variety of different models of artificial neural networks will be reviewed in order to
determine the ones are suitable for the project.
• Three distinct types of neural networks are chosen for which three types of distinct
model variations are suggested.
• Methods or methods are introduced for optimizing the model’s success while mini­
mizing the risk of having a detrimental effect on performance.
• The models’ outputs are analyzed and compared to the outputs of five other classical
machine learning models.
1.2
Contributions
The contributions with regards to this project are:
• A review of various published articles was conducted to determine the state of the
art in intrusion detection strategies using artificial neural networks.
• Introduced a performance study done on four network traffic datasets, namely: KD­
DCUP’99, UNSW­NB15,CIC­IDS­2017 and CSE­CIC­ISD108 in their entirety.
2
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:13==
• The design and implementation of an intrusion detection system focused on deep
artificial neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and recurrent neural net­
works were presented, along with a comprehensive review of the models’ results
using multiclass classification.
• Devised a comprehensive framework for finding the optimal parameters and a suc­
cessful evaluation of the models
• Composed an effective validation method for the proposed framework.
• Compared the overall accuracy of the models , with other machine learning algo­
rithms such as :Naive Bayes, Random Forest, Decision tree, Logistic regression,
and AdaBoost.
1.3
Software requirements
The code for this project was written exclusively in Python programming language, more­
over Jupyter Notebook the open source interactive web tool was used as a platform for
developing the project. Python is the most popular programming language for projects in
the field of data science. It offers excellent flexibilities and features witch in turn increases
code quality. Furthermore, for this project, some extensive libraries have been used to
accomplish our goals, such as :
• TensorFlow created by Google AI, is a fast, scalable, and flexible open­source
machine learning library. It works by allowing users to build data­flow graphs and
structures to describe how data flows through a graph by taking inputs as a multidi­
mensional array called Tensor. It allows a flowchart of operations to be constructed,
operations that can be used on the inputs. Tensorflow is one of the best libraries
because of the ease of incorporating different APIs to build at scale deep learning
architecture and also the considerable popularity on Github compared to other deep
learning frameworks.
• Keras is an open­source library that offers a Python interface for artificial neural
networks, which is able to run on top of TensorFlow. Some of its main advantages
are that it is modular, user­friendly, and easy to extend. The Machine Learning
community has broadly adopted it because of its comprehensive library components
such as objectives, activation functions, and optimizers.
• Scikit­Learn is a handy and robust library for machine learning. It also supports
several algorithms such as classification, regression, clustering, and dimensionality
reduction. Scikit­Learn library was used extensively throughout this project, mainly
for data modeling, report classification metrics, and validate results.
• Matplotlib is used data visualization and graphical plotting library.
Its structure
makes it easy to generate visual data plots using just a few lines of code. It contains
a comprehensive set of plotting tools from charts to 2D and 3D diagrams, graphs,
and many visualization tools that allows detailed data analysis..
• NumPy serves as the library for multi­dimensional array and matrice manipulation
using high­level mathematical functions. NumPy also benefits from the large pro­
gramming community’s support because of its high performance and robust com­
puting capabilities.
• Pandas provide another tool for data analysis and manipulation that is built on
top of NumPy. One of the main features that helped develop this project was the
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
3
==PAGE:14==
DataFrame, a two­dimensional labeled data structure used for dataset visualization.
Furthermore, Pandas helped filter the large datasets and reshaped them as needed.
The implemented code together with the datasets are available at the GitHub link: https://
github.com/AndreiNC05/Intrusion_detection_based_on_artificial-_neural_network_approach.ff
1.4
Thesis organization
The remainder of the thesis is organized in the following chapters:
Chapter 2 introduces essential concepts from the field of intrusion detection. It explains
what an intrusion detection system is and how are they classified. Next, machine learning
concepts are detailed, emphasizing artificial neural networks, which this project explores.
Furthermore, a theoretical presentation of the neural networks used and the datasets that
the results are based is presented. Finally, the chosen performance metrics are defined.
Chapter 3 is presenting existing work­related into intrusion detection using artificial neural
networks. Besides this, this section is used to show a comprehensive overview of com­
monly used intrusion datasets. Different models and their effects on these datasets are
detailed. Finally, this chapter’s insights serve as the design foundation for the intrusion
detection approach in the following chapters.
Chapter 4 presents the solutions proposed using artificial neural networks to classify the
chosen datasets’ attacks. It also includes sections dedicated to showing how processing
and balancing the datasets was done. The models are detailed, and the training process
is presented.
Chapter 5 serves as the section where results are analyzed, and ways of optimizing those
results to obtain better ones are proposed.
Chapter 6 is used to have a comparison between the result for the project’s approach and
classical machine learning algorithm
Chapter 7 prepares a statement for summarizing the dissertation thesis main points.
Chapter 8 concludes the thesis with ideas on how the current project could be further
developed and what other techniques and tools could be used.
4
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:15==
2
Concepts and background
This section is dedicated to explaining the main tools and concepts that are used through­
out this project.
2.1
Intrusion detection systems
An intrusion detection system (IDS) comes as an essential tool that removes threads,
prevents unauthorized access, and reports potential attacks. The rising complexity of net­
works makes them more vulnerable to attacks from hackers. Although protection measure
exists, there are no impenetrable systems. Furthermore, attack types are in continuous
development to beat those systems. Hence the need o a reliable ISD as a detection
mechanism and provider of a security solution. Figure 2.1 shows the main component of
such a system:
• Firstly, these systems rely on a large amount of data to be collected from the network
• Then this data needs to be processed and used to identify the features of the network
• Finally, after these steps are satisfied, machine learning is used to classify the dif­
ferent types of behavior
Figure 2.1: Main components on a Intrusion Detection System.
They can be classified concerning several different criteria as shown in 2.2. The first
criteria are according to the location. As the paper [6] states, there are two types of
intrusion detection systems based on two primary principles. The first one is anomaly
detection, and the second one is signature detection.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Types of Intrusion Detection System [7].
Signature­based intrusion detection relies on flagging all the unusual behavior that it is
happening in the network, matching the input data with a set of known attack patterns.
The problem with this approach is that it fails to detect unseen new attacks. The other
method works by flagging deviation from expected behavior. Hence an issue would be
that it would not necessarily find attacks and sport just undesirable behavior, which leads
to a high false alarm rate.
Anomaly­based intrusion detection typically works detecting patterns of unusual behavior
in the network relative to a baseline of normal traffic. The advantage of such a method is
that they work well in detecting new types of attacks. It has the downsides that several
false positives can appear in some instances and that when there are very few instances
of an attack, it might not be detected.
The second criteria for classifying given by paper [8] states that based on the techniques.
A malicious attacker could send attacks on the web server, ssh server, or FTP server.
Although some existing protection methods, such as firewall, cryptography, and authen­
tication, do not address various issues that those methods cannot solve.
A host­based intrusion detection system (HIDS) could be deployed to handle this type of
issue. HIDS work by using information collected from the computer system application
files, system calls, and operating systems. This type of IDS analyzes with a high level
of detail the activity on a particular machine. It works because it establishes a record of
files and their attributes in a known state to be used as a reference for monitoring any
disruption in the system behavior. They mainly gather information from two sources [9]:
operation system audit trail generated at the kernel level and is well protected and detailed
data and system logs that are way easier to comprehend smaller size. This type of system
can usually be found in anti­malware products. The disadvantages of such a system are
that it needs to store some of its data on a remote server so an attacker cannot access
it, it cannot prevent Denial of Service attacks, and consumes a lot of storage, memory,
processing time, and other resources on the host where the system operates.
On the other side, a Network­based intrusion detection system (NIDS) monitors the traffic
from a whole network and looks for anomalies through the captured network packets.
This way, NIDS can detect malicious behavior at an early stage [10]. Because of the
high volume of data available from an entire network, the only way this type of system
6
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:17==
would be efficient is by employing different kinds of machine learning techniques. Current
solutions suffer from a high rate of false positives, meaning that alerts will be sent when
there are no attacks or a high false­negative rate, meaning that the system fails to detect
more frequent attacks. Given these reasons, the commercial use of NIDS is still in an
early stage.
Considering what the above paragraphs have presented, this project proposes a solution
that contributes to developing a Network­based intrusion detection system that monitors
anomalies and suspicious behavior and categorizing different types of attacks using arti­
ficial neural networks.
2.2
Machine learning
Machine learning (ML) is the practice of using algorithms to analyze data, learn from that
data and then make determinations or predictions about new data. In contrast with a
typical algorithm, a machine learning algorithm focuses on the learning part. Given large
amounts of data to a machine­learning algorithm to be trained will result in that task being
performed to a certain degree without explicitly defining how the algorithm should do so.
Depending on the way that the machine learns ML algorithms can be classified as shown
in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Main categories of machine learning [11].
When using Supervised learning techniques, the data given to the model is ”labeled”
[12]. This way, the algorithm learns from labeled training data and is able to predict the
outcomes for unforeseen data. The two types of supervised learning techniques are re­
gression and classification. The main challenge of this approach is that when irrelevant
input data is present in the training dataset, inaccurate results could be obtained. The
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
7
==PAGE:18==
following method is unsupervised learning [13] which is used when the model does not
need any supervision. Instead, the model works on its own and discovers information
that was undetected previously. Unsupervised learning is used to perform more complex
tasks and can identify unknown patterns in data. Clustering and dimensionality reduction
are the two types of learning from this category. One of its most significant drawbacks is
that unsupervised learning can not get exact information regarding data sorting. The last
method is called reinforcement learning that is part of deep learning methods and uses
neural network learning to archive complex objectives or have some specific dimensions
maximized over many steps [14]. One of the noteworthy characteristics of this method
is that it is based on environment interaction and does not have any supervision. The
significant challenges of using reinforcement learning are the need for wast amount of
data to solve a problem and that parameters could influence learning speed.
Figure 2.4: Diagram of a training loop [15].
The main goal of machine learning is to train a model on a particular set of data comprised
of several features to improve its accuracy. The way that a machine learning training loop
looks is shown in figure 2.4. Firstly, the input data is getting feed into the model, which is
represented as the architecture in its functional form. Next, some results are computed
in the form of predictions. The training process involves initializing some random values
for the parameters in an attempt to predict the desired output. The labels and predictions
are used to compute the loss. Loss is regarded as how well the model solves the problem
and the way to measure the performance. The purpose of training a model is to improve
its ability to make better predictions incrementally.
This key concepts will be used throughout the project when trying to solve the intrusion
detection problem.
2.3
Supervised learning in intrusion detection
The supervised learning approach is used in this project. As the datasets that that model
is trained are labeled, they are used to classify attacks and predict their type. Artificial
neural networks are considered to be one of the most popular methods of supervised
learning. This section will discuss the particularities of this method.
2.3.1
Artificial Neural Network basics
Artificial neural networks are one of the most widely used machine learning techniques for
intrusion detection and has been shown to yield successful results in detection of different
malicious attacks.
To give a simple definition of what an artificial neural network is, Dr. Robert Hecht­Nielsen
defined it as ”...a computing system made up of a number of simple, highly interconnected
processing elements, which process information by their dynamic state response to ex­
8
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:19==
ternal inputs” in article [16]. The inspiration for neural networks comes from the structure
of the mammalian cerebral cortex but with lesser complexity.
The processing elements of a neural network are called neurons and the way they work
can be observed in fig.fig. 2.5. The input vector x of elements x1, x2, ..., xn, have their
corresponding weights w1, w2, ..., wn. The weighted sum is performed and then a bias b
and the activation function f is applied to obtain the output.
Figure 2.5: Schematic of a neuron [17].
The neurons are typically organized in layers that, when put together, form the architecture
of the neural network. The data is feed to the network via the input layer, which doesn’t
do any computation but feeds one or more hidden layers where the actual calculation is
done using a system of weighted connections [18]. Lastly, the results are given in the
output layer. The way that the weights are modified uses a learning rule that comes as
an algorithm, provided input to the network, would construct a favored output.
2.3.2
Hyperparameters
The properties that govern the whole training process are called model hyperparameters.
They have a high impact on the performance of our training model because they control
the behaviour of the training algorithm. For this project emphasis was put on configuring
the hyperparameters in order to get the best possible results. The list of some of the
variables that were configures are :
• Learning rate ­ how quickly a network updates the parameters
• Number of Epochs ­ the number of through the whole training data
• Batch size ­ the number of samples given to the network
• Dropout ­ regularization technique that approximates training and helps avoid over­
fitting
• Hidden Layers ­ the layers between input and output layer
• Hidden Layers ­ number of nodes comprising a hidden layer
• Activation function ­ introduces nonlinearity to models
2.3.3
Activation Functions
The purpose of the activation function is as a decision making body at the output of a neu­
ron given a set of inputs. Figure 2.6 displays some of the most used activation functions
:
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
9
==PAGE:20==
• Sigmoid that maps the input to a value between 0 and 1
• ReLu transforms the input to the maximum of either 0 or the input itself
• Tanh that maps the value between ­1 and 1
• Softmax normalizes the outputs in each class between 0 and 1, and divides by their
sum
Figure 2.6: Activation functions commonly applied to neural networks.
2.3.4
Loss Functions
One way that we can measure the performance of the model’s prediction is with the loss
function. The loss function is what the optimizer is trying to minimize by continuously
updating the model during training. During the training process at the end of each epoch,
the loss will be calculated based on the model’s predictions.
For classification problems, Binary Cross­Entropy Loss is the most common Loss function
used. As it can be observed in eq. eq. (2.1) yi represents the actual class, and log(p(yi)
represents the probability of that class. As the predicted probability converges to the
actual value, the cross­entropy loss also decreases.
L = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
yi · log(p(yi)) + (1 −yi) · log(1 + p(yi))
(2.1)
For regression problems, Mean Square Error (MSE) is highly popular and it is defined
as the average of squared differences between the actual and the predicted value as
eq.eq. (2.2) shows.
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −xi)2
(2.2)
2.3.5
Backpropagation
Backpropagation or the generalized delta rule [19]is the core learning algorithm used to
train a neural network. The input data is getting forwarded through the network with
weights and biases of an activation function [20] until it reaches the moment of decision.
Then the error information it’s back­propagates in reverse through the network resulting
in a change of the parameters.
The figure 2.7 shows how the training of a network is done using back­propagation:
• First some random values are given to the weights
• Using those values an output is computed as a response to the input pattern
10
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:21==
• The output is then compared to the desired output and an error number is calculated
• The weights and biases are updated accordingly depending on the error value
• For the case of a network with more then one hidden layer this process is repeated
iteratively
Figure 2.7: Back­propagation training algorithm of a neural network [20].
2.3.6
Gradient descent
Gradient descent is what makes our artificial neural network learn. It works as an optimiza­
tion algorithm; the gradient computes how much the weights and biases should update
to so the coast gets to 0.Multiple small steps are taken in order to reach the desired goal.
Partial derivatives are used to calculate the gradient, and the equation used to correct
these weights and biases is labeled as the learning equation.
2.4
Neural Network types
There has been a broad adaptation of neural networks within the scientific community as
their development has progressed. The following subsection is focused on describing the
variants used in this project: deep neural network, recurrent neural network, convolutional
neural network.
2.4.1
Deep Neural Network (DNN)
Paper [21] defines deep neural networks as artificial neural networks with multiple hidden
layers between the input and the output. Given the architecture of a deep learning neural
network presented in figure 2.8, it can be stated that they have a higher level of complexity
and are more computationally demanding then a simple neural network. This is not given
only by higher number of neurons but also the fact that this neurons may influence the
computation by triggering different actions.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Architecture of a simple neural network and a deep neural network [22]
Mathematically the neural network can be defined as
O : Rm × Rn
with m being the size of the input vector x = x1, x2, ..., xm and n being the size of the
output vector y = y1, y2, ..., yn. We can define the computation of all the hidden layers hi
as:
hi(x) = f(wT
i x + bi)
where :
hi : Rdi−1 →Rdi
f : R →R
wi ∈Rd×di−1
b ∈Rdi,
and di denotes the size of the input, f the nonlinear activation function which is either
sigmoid or softmax. From the assumptions stated above the formula for multi­layer neural
network is defined as follows:
H(x) = Hi(Hi−1(Hi−2(...(H1(x)))))
(2.3)
2.4.2
Convolutional Neural Network(CNN)
Convolutional neural networks are another typical deep learning method extending tradi­
tional feed­forward neural networks. They are typically used as a model to process data
with a grid pattern such as an image. This type of neural network has seen substan­
tial success in image recognition and classification, speech processing application, and
self­driving cars and robotics applications [23].
In traditional convolutional neural network problems a three­dimensional input ( x rows ,
y columns , z depths) is required [24]. For example an image that has x width , y height
and z channels. Despite that , in this project, we study the one­dimensional input data as
a three­dimensional picture that has one channel and the height is also one. Specifically,
we convert the datasets into the input format of one­dimensional convolution architecture.
12
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:23==
The architecture of a CNN is comprised of several building blocks as in the example from
figure 2.11 such as: convolution layer ,pooling layers and fully connected layers.
After our input is converted into a three­dimensional form, it will be feed to the convolution
layer. This layer is a fundamental component of the CNN architecture that is in charge of
feature extraction. A combination of linear and nonlinear operations is carried out, namely
convolution operation and activation function [25]. The way that the convolution operation
is performed is shown in figure 2.9. A small matrix of numbers, also named a kernel,is
applied across the input, which would be an array of specifically a tensor. We get the
result as ’Activation map ’or ’Convolved Feature,’ but the name is named ’Featured Map’
for this project. The feature map is created by executing the sum of the product between
each element from the kernel and the input tensor is. The two extra parameters that the
convolutional model will contain are the size and number of kernels.
Figure 2.9: Convolution operation [25].
The convolution output is transferred through a nonlinear activation function. The most
common one being used in current scientific research is the rectified linear unit or ReLU (
figure 2.6). Next, a pooling layer is used for the down­sampling operation. The advantage
of using this operation is that it reduces the dimensionality of the feature map without losing
important information. In practice, max­pooling has shown to be the most commonly used
technique. Figure 2.10 shows how such an operation is performed with a filter size of 2
x 2 that extracts 2 x 2 patches from the input tensor. Low values are discarded, and the
maximum value is extracted, resulting in a down­sampling by a factor of two.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.10: Example of max pooling operation [25].
The final layer is the fully connected layer witch is in charge of classification. The other
layers’ output is flattened into a one­dimensional array of numbers connected to one or
multiple fully connected layers, also called dense layers. As the figure 2.11 shows, every
node in this layer is connected to the output nodes. The output layers have one node for
each class in the classification task. Each fully connected layer has a nonlinear function
such as ReLU, and the output layer has a Softmax activation function used for multiclass
classification.
Combining all the above mentioned layers constructs our Convolutional Neural Network
architecture.
Figure 2.11: Different layers in a Convolutional Neural Network [26].
2.4.3
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
A recurrent neural network is a type of neural network that looks at the current input and
considers the past state information to determine its output [27]. The schematic 2.12
14
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:25==
shows a representation of such a recurrent neural network. Each one of the green blocks
represents a simple feed­forward neural network. Considering x of elements x1, x2, ..., xt
as an input that maps them to hidden and output elements h of elements h1, h2, ..., ht. For
each time step, an input x0 goes into the network and produces an output h0. In the next
step, the input x1 is taken into block A and additional input from the previous block. This
way, the neural network considers the context of the previous input to determine the next
results.
Figure 2.12: A recurrent neural network [27].
Taking a more detailed look at a RNN unit shown in Figure 2.13 , the equations 2.4 and
2.5 are governing it’s computation at any time t , with the activation function g() , X input
, H output , b the bias and W the weight matrix.
At = g · (Wax · Xt + Waa · At−1 + ba)
(2.4)
Ht = g · (Wya · At + by)
(2.5)
Figure 2.13: A recurrent neural network unit [27].
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
15
==PAGE:26==
2.5
Datasets
With quite a number of intrusion detection datasets available publicly, some have been
used to train and evaluate the models in this project. This section contains a summary of
the datasets that were used.
2.5.1
KDD CUP 99
KDD CUP ’99 is one of the most known and widely used datasets for intrusion detection
applications. As the paper [28] states, KDD CUP ’99 is a collection of data transferred
from a virtual environment to be used for the Third Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
Competition on computer network intrusion detection. Besides that, it’s also a subset of
the 1998 DARPA dataset that was a collection of multiple attacks on a typical US Air Force
Local Area Network(LAN) that were classified in four categories given in the figure2.14.
Figure 2.14: Categories of attacks for KDD CUP ’99 dataset [28].
Furthermore, it contains close to five million single connection records that each have a
number of 41 features labeled normal or attacks. These features can be classified into
four categories:
• basic features obtained from the pocket header
• content features obtained from the content of the TCP packet
• time features derived from the duration of the connection of a source IP to its target
IP addresses
• traffic features which relay to the window that has an interval of a given number of
connections
Although the discussed dataset presents some shortcomings, such as the high complexity
of the training and testing sets, several duplicates might impact the efficiency of machine
learning algorithms and have a higher instance of attacks concerning the number of cases
of regular traffic. This number of disadvantages could be overcome by eliminating redun­
dant records in the training set that would lead the classifier to be unbiased towards more
frequent records and by filtering some attack instances to achieve proportionality.
The KDD CUP ’99 is a widely used dataset as a reference for researching Intrusion De­
tection Systems and developing new attack protection tools.
2.5.2
UNSW­NB15
The UNSW­NB15 dataset is composed of regular and malicious network traffic data in a
packet­based format. For 31 hours, the data was gathered, and with the help of the IXIA
Perfect Storm tool, the UNSW­NB15 dataset was composed [29]. The tool captured a
large amount of raw network traffic data, and after processing that data, 49 features were
extracted, and a number of 257,673 records were stored.
16
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:27==
A total of nine attack types are present in the dataset, namely: fuzzers, analysis, backdoor,
DoS, exploit, generic, reconnaissance, shellcode, worm.
The paper[30] presents the features of the dataset which can be classified into five groups:
• flow features which include the identifier attributes between hosts(e.g.,client­to­server
or server to client)
• basic features which represent the protocols connections
• content features that encapsulate the attributes of the TCP/IP and HTTP services
• time features contain the time attributes (e.g.,client­to­server or server to client)
• additional generated features that are comprised of general­purpose features
2.5.3
Comparison of datasets
The table 2.16shows a comparative analysis among the KDD CUP ’99 and UNSW­NB15
datasets.
Figure 2.15: Comparison of KDD CUP ’99 and UNSW­NB15[31]
2.5.4
CICIDS2017
CICIDS2017 [32] is a dataset that contains up­to­date common network attacks com­
bined with a sample of normal network behavior, and it’s used for Intrusion Detection
Systems(IDSs) and Intrusion Prevention Systems(IPSs). The Canadian Institute has de­
signed the dataset for Cybersecurity. According to its authors [33] it comes as a response
to the lack of a comprehensive, reliable, and publicly available dataset that could be used
for IDS evaluation.
The data capturing period spammed a total of 5 days, as can be seen in table 2.16. It can
be observed that on Monday, only benign traffic data was recorded while the following
days have 14 types of attacks. Table 2.17 shows all the different instances present for
each attack. These attacks can be divided into brute­force, denial of service, Hearthbleed,
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
17
==PAGE:28==
network infiltration attacks, port scanning, distributed denial of service, botnet, and web
attacks.
Figure 2.16: Description of files containing CICIDS2017 dataset[34]
In order to be able to use this dataset for the project on the designed models, all the eight
files presented in Table 2.16 were merged into a single file comprised of 3119345 records
with a total of 83 features. The dataset was proven to be a good candidate for the current
project because it fulfills the comprehensive framework presented in [35] which is used to
identify a proper intrusion detection dataset.
The features that define the framework are: complete network configuration that mimics a
real one to be able to capture the actual effects of the attacks, labeled dataset, full traffic by
using a profile agent real attacks towards a twelve victim network, complete interaction
from within or between internal LANs, complete capturing of all traffic, attack diversity
given by eight major category groups, protocol availability provided by having the most
common protocols such as HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, SSH, anonymity meaning that no IP or
payload is available, heterogeneity related to the different sources that are used to create
the dataset, extensive feature set with more than 80 features present, and metadata that
gives a detailed explanation of the dataset including time, attacks, flows and labels in the
published paper.
18
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.17: Class wise instance occurrence of CICIDs2017 dataset [34]
The dataset also comes with a few shortcomings such as:
• a scattered presence across eight files
• a vast volume of data after combining the files that could give higher cost in terms
of times and memory when loading and processing the dataset
• a number of missing values with instances having missing class labels
• a high class imbalance that could lead to our model being biased towards the ma­
jority class
In the later section of the project, these shortcomings will be addressed to understand the
dataset and get a more consistent and accurate performance when applying the models
.
2.5.5
CICIDS2018
The Communication Security Establishment (CSE) [36] joined with the Canadian Institute
of Cybersecurity (CIC) to continue the work on the CICIDS2017 and provided an updated
version of the dataset. In the following year they released CSE­CIC­IDS2018 witch was
the latest iteration of the intrusion detection dataset.
The resulting dataset has a similar structure and class imbalance with the CICIDC2017.
However, CSE­CIC­IDS2018 provides 10 days of traffic as shown in Figure 2.18, from
Wednesday, February 18, 2018 to Friday, March 2, 2018.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.18: Attack types in CSE­CIC­IDS2018 dataset .[37]
The attack scenarios that are present in the dataset are also quite similar with CICIDS2017
: Denial of Service, brute­force, infiltration , botnet, Distributed denial of Service , Hearth­
bleed, port scanning and web attacks. The major difference comes from the size of the
network from witch the data was collected. As observed in Figure 2.19 the network topol­
ogy is comprised of 50 machines that belong to the attacker while other 420 machines
and 30 servers are used by the victim. The resulting dataset contains approximately 15
million instances of network traffic with nine files that have 79 features and one file with
83 features. Although CSE­CIC­IDS2018 is one of the most recent intrusion detection
dataset that is big data , has an extensive range of attacks and it’s publicly available it still
suffers from some of the drawbacks of CICIDS2017 discussed at 2.5.4.
20
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.19: Network Topology [36]
2.6
Performance metrics
There are four possible primary outcomes of detection. The number of positive samples
in the test dataset is denoted by TP, and the model classification is also denoted by TP.
FP denotes the number of samples in the survey dataset that are potentially negative but
are counted as positive. The number of negative samples measured in the test dataset
is denoted by TN, and the model is often known as negative samples. FN denotes the
number of test samples that are currently positive but are counted as negative samples
by the model. Given this, the following metrics can be calculated to quantify our model’s
performance and efficiency:
• Accuracy is defined as the proportion between correctly predicted observations and
the total number of observations.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(2.6)
• The precision of a prediction is defined as the ratio of correctly predicted positive
observations to all predicted positive observations.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2.7)
• The recall ratio is the number of correctly estimated positive observations divided
by the total number of observations in the actual class.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.8)
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
21
==PAGE:32==
• The F1­Score is calculated by averaging Precision and Recall.
Recall = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.9)
22
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:33==
3
Related works
In this section, a taxonomy and a survey of the literature of the most used techniques for
intrusion detection.
Computer security is one of the most critical elements in todays and future industries.
Nowadays, computers are ubiquitous, starting from our home to places like businesses,
large organizations, and government entities, where they are all linked through networks.
As a result, there are a variety of risks posed for protecting the data. In the works of [38]
some of the threads are discussed and categorized in four types of attacks: interception,
interruption, modification, and fabrication. Furthermore, paper[39] also analyzes a se­
ries of current network threads involving all levels of the OSI [40] layered communicating
model and classifies them depending on which layers of the OSI model they operate.
The survey of paper [41] concentrates on understanding the vulnerabilities and threats
found in emerging technologies such as cloud computing, social media, and IoT tech­
nology. It discusses the characteristics of each emerging technology and the different
methods by which malware[42] and malicious attacks could affect them.
Encryption has been used to enhance confidentiality and integrity when communicating
over unreliable networks. Paper [43] does show how cryptography employs a variety of
algorithms to secure the network. Similarly, firewalls have been used to safeguard internal
infrastructure from external threats. Article [44] discusses the rise in complexity of firewalls
and how their capabilities are continuously evolving. However, owing to the continuing
progression of threats, employing just these types of methods is not enough to ensure a
system’s security.
An intrusion detection system gathers information about a network system to make a di­
agnosis and discover security breaches. As paper [45] first proposes the idea of tracking
user behavior through logs and computer records in 1980. Its purpose was to prevent
unauthorized external or internal users from accessing information and protect informa­
tion. Since then, the concept has been researched and developed in order to keep up
with the rise of internet technology.
The industry’s demand for intrusion detection technology in the following years was proved
to be the foundation for developing such systems. In the works of paper, [46] a review
of five different intrusion detection systems was conducted to assess their performance
in a production environment. A series of qualitative tests were performed on each of the
systems to examine their performance capabilities. Although some performed relatively
poorly, some architectures and capabilities could contribute to enhancing the security
strategy as more development will be done in the field.
The intrusion detection technology is divided into two main methods that distinguish one
model from another: anomaly­based ISD and signature­based ISD. Though the primary
goal of both approaches is to detect intrusion, they have different detection mechanisms
[47]. Anomaly­based IDS is capable of detecting activities that are perceived as normal
behavior. This set of standard user habits have been predefined and modeled into the
system, and the system would flag any abnormal activity. In the case of signature­based
ISD, all incoming traffic that does not satisfy the predefined rules will be flagged. Article
[48] has examined the differences between these two techniques and concluded that each
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
23
==PAGE:34==
approach has its limitations in identifying all types of intrusion. The current work stands to
solve some of those limitations and address the challenges posed by previous methods.
To check the effectiveness of an anomalies­based network intrusion detection system,
large amounts of labeled data are needed for training and evaluation. The paper [45]
conducts a focused review of the literature on data sets for network­based intrusion de­
tection and discusses in depth the underlying packet and flow­based network data. The
paper describes fifteen district properties that can be used to determine the suitability of
individual data sets for particular assessment scenarios. These properties encompass a
broad spectrum of requirements. They are classified into five groups, such as general
information, nature of the data, data volume, recording environment, and evaluation, to
provide systematic search. It also follows with a detailed analysis of current datasets
based on these properties.
Next article [49] provides an objective assessment of datasets from intrusion detection.
The author discusses seven datasets from a variety of sources, identifies their shortcom­
ings, and proposes strategies for developing more practical datasets.
An exhausted review is provided by [50]. The most significant achievement is a novel
framework for creating intrusion detection datasets. Additionally, the paper also com­
pares eleven publicly accessible datasets with the respected eleven proposed framework
criteria.
Several other papers have been reviewed. They have been extensively used in intru­
sion detection field applications, and some are considered benchmark datasets. DARPA
dataset was created in 1999 by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT. The article [51] managed
to identify its shortcomings. It does not represent real­world network traffic, including in­
accuracies such as the lack of false positives an out of date for evaluating IDSs effectively
on modern network attacks. During the last decades, KDDCUP’99 has become the most
commonly used data set for evaluating these systems.
Paper [52] conducts statistical analysis on it, and although it suffers from some issues,
it could still be used as a good benchmark dataset after applying some processing tech­
niques. The majority of CAIDA’s [53]datasets are highly tailored to unique incidents or at­
tacks and anonymized in terms of payload, protocol information, and destination. Given to
several drawbacks that come from not satisfying the requrements of [50], these datasets
are ineffective as a benchmarking dataset. The Kyoto [54] was generated using honey­
pots, eliminating the need for manual tagging and anonymization. Nevertheless, it pro­
vides a narrow view of network traffic since only attacks aimed at the honeypots may be
detected because of the lack of normal traffic data. Hence there are no false positives
which are essential because they help reduce the number of alerts. ADFA includes stan­
dard training and validation data and ten attacks per vector [55]. Along with a shortage
of attack diversity and variation, the behavior of specific attacks in this dataset is not well
distinguished from regular behavior.
As it’s pointed out by [56] ,one major hurdle that researchers that work on intrusion detec­
tion face is a lack of good high ­quality recent datasets that could be used for evaluation
their methods. Publicly accessible datasets are often out of date in terms of both anomaly
forms and legitimate Internet traffic. Second, many of these datasets contain undesired
data as a result of their synthetic production, which can greatly impair their usability.
Considering the points mentioned in the above paragraphs, this project uses two classical
legacy datasets in KDDCUP’99 [52] and UNSW­15 [31] but due to the constant increase
in network attacks and threats, more recent and up do data datasets are needed. Hence,
24
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:35==
the project aims to use CIC­IDS­2017 [34], which recently launched and features several
traffic records, meets the requrements of real­world network traffic, and was created to
address some of the shortcomings of current datasets. Furthermore, the updated version
of the above­mentioned dataset CSE­CIC­IDS­2018 [57]. CIC­IDS­2017 and CSE­CIC­
IDS­2018 both meet the requirements specified in paper [35] of an accurate and com­
prehensive dataset. On the basis of these four datasets, artificial neural network models
were developed to classify network traffic.
For over two decades, researchers have studied machine learning techniques for intru­
sion detection. Due to the vast number of network telemetry and other forms of security
data, machine learning techniques can be used to solve the intrusion detection challenge.
The article [58] discusses intrusion prevention and audit trail minimization. It focuses on
defining methods for detecting intrusion and reducing audit data with the help of support
vector machines and neural networks. It uses KDDCUP’99 as a benchmark dataset, but
the downside of this approach is that only 13 of the 41 features are included in the analysis,
leaving out most of the features.
One of the earlier surveys [59] points out the lack of research articles examining and
comprehending the latest state of machine learning methods for solving intrusion detec­
tion. Thus the paper summarizes 55 studies published between 2000 and 2007. Com­
parisons are made between related studies based on the nature of their classifiers, the
dataset used, and other setups. The current state of the art and shortcoming of machine
learning­based intrusion detection methods are presented. Due to the fact that this is an
older survey, it does not represent the advances in intrusion detection analysis over the
last decade, but it serves as an indicator of the potential of these methods.
In [60], a technique called AdaBoost was introduced. The algorithm uses decision stumps
as weak classifiers. Their method outperformed previously published findings due to a
lower false alarm rate, a higher detection rate, and a computationally more efficient algo­
rithm. However, one disadvantage is that it did not use an incremental learning strategy.
Although the support vector machine(SVM) is one of the most popular classification al­
gorithms in data mining, its lengthy training time precludes its broader use. Paper [61]
suggests a novel method for optimizing the SVM training process when faced with mas­
sive training datasets, based on a hybrid of SVM and clustering analysis. However, such
a method has some shortcomings when dealing with massive datasets.
Bayesian networks are highly effective mechanisms for decision­making and logic in the
face of uncertainty. The aim of the article [62] is to conduct an experimental investigation
into the use of naive Bayes in intrusion detection. The experiment demonstrates that
despite their simplicity, naive Bayes produces satisfactory results.
The paper [63] also developed a model for intrusion detection using random forest clas­
sifier. Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble classifier that outperforms most conventional
classifiers to classify attacks effectively. The experiments were done on the NSL­KDD
dataset to assess the mode’s performance. The empirical evidence indicates that the
proposed model is efficient, with a low rate of false alarms and a high detection rate.
Another detection framework is proposed in article [64] that uses a decision tree­based
classification model for high­speed environments. A decision­making tree is a tree graph
representation of decision advocate structure. Decision tree learning employs it as a
statistical model for observing an object (represented by the branches) to determine the
item’s target value (represented by the leaves). The target variable aids in classifying
the tree models; the tree structure includes leaves and branches that correspond to class
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
25
==PAGE:36==
labels and junctions. The model performs well on the KDDCUP’99 dataset using just nine
of its features.
Numerous market­leading cyber analytics tools incorporate machine learning­based algo­
rithms into their identification approach, such as Cisco’s Stealthwatch [65] and Microsoft’s
Azure Sentinel [66].
Among other machine learning techniques, neural networks are a common alternative. It
is now the most widely used technique for anomaly­based intrusion detection along with
support vector machines and clustering algorithms. It should be stressed that computer
vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition are by far the most active
areas of study in neural networks. Considering all this, it does not mean that their use can
not yield great results in the anomaly detection field.
Article [67] mentions a significant advantage of using artificial neural networks (ANNs)
can generate highly nonlinear models with complex relationships between input data and
classification labels when one or more hidden layers are used. With the introduction of
several variants such as recurrent and convolutional neural networks, ANNs have de­
veloped into highly effective methods for various classification tasks, including intrusion
detection.
Using NSL­KDD and UNSW­NB15 datasets, paper [68] analyzes the output of four deep
learning models such as feed­forward artificial neural network (ANN), restricted Boltz­
mann machine (RBM), sparse autoencoders(SAE), and multi­layer perceptron (MLP) with
feature embeddings. However, the study excludes some common ones, such as recurrent
neural networks, and no evaluation of newer intrusion datasets is conducted. Addition­
ally, the authors report only accuracy, precision, and recall of the tests leading to a lack
of detail in the review.
Another interesting approach is taken by paper [69] that introduces DeepCoin, a novel
deep learning and blockchain­based energy system for smart grids. The DeepCoin plat­
form makes use of two schemes: one based on blockchain technology and another on
deep learning. To safeguard against smart grid attacks, the authors proposed architecture
generates blocks of short signatures and hash functions. The proposed deep learning­
based scheme is an intrusion detection method that makes use of a recurrent neural net­
work to identify network attacks and fraudulent transactions in a blockchain­based energy
network.
In the works of [70] Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) and deep belief, networks are
used to approach the intrusion detection problem. Their proposed architecture performs
well in regards to detection speed and accuracy, having a 97.9% detection rate. Again,
the downside is that the authors use a ten % sample size of the KDDCUP’99 dataset.
This type of model would be too slow to be used on larger samples of data.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are referred to in [71] to categorize the several attack
types, and the results appear to be promising. However, the training dataset used is
not the full NSL­KDD dataset; instead, the authors used a subset of the training dataset,
which biases the output. Additionally, they focused on attribute grouping rather than at­
tack classification. Deep neural networks are used in [72] to isolate in­depth features
and multiclass attack classification. The findings seem to be positive and significantly su­
perior to conventional methods, although, given the proposed models, it comes with the
drawback of long training time.
Due to the fact that CNN was mostly used in image processing, few related works using
26
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:37==
CNN for the creation of IDS were discovered. In the paper, [73] a method of converting the
dataset values into images. The numerical features are standardized using the min­max
method and then assigned different binary values to the various features of the dataset.To
train and evaluate the CNN , the assigned binary values are translated into an image.
This method transforms the whole set of features to an image format. Despite the highly
organized pre­processing, the accuracy obtained was not adequate, and the discussion
of multiclass classification failed, prompting a further search for this approach. Another
study on CNN­based IDS was reported in [74], which used 10 % of the KDDCUP’99
dataset. Despite achieving higher accuracy, further development is needed for applying
the method to larger datasets.
Convolutional Neural Networks are a prevalent class of neural networks for image and
video recognition. Although CNN is a widely used solution for this topic, it is not that
popular for intrusion detection. Indeed, CNN is uncommon in this area and does not
perform as well with IDSs as they do with image recognition. This is also true for other
forms of neural networks such as Recurrent Neural Networks, Deep Belief Networks,
Deep Residual Networks, et cetera. The most frequently used are Self­organizing maps,
Deep neural networks, and Autoencoders witch are often used in pre­training stages of
deep neural networks, but not on their own. This project aims to address some of the
shortcomings discussed above and use CNNs, RNNs, and DNNs to solve the intrusion
detection problem.
The knowledge gained from this chapter’s analysis of state of the art is used to design
our models to obtain high accuracy in intrusion detection in the following chapter. The
optimization of the neural network model’s parameters is a critical issue, as it can signifi­
cantly increase detection efficiency. Another area that should be improved is the quality
of the datasets and the pre­processing techniques. These matters will be addressed in
the following chapters.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:39==
4
Supervised Intrusion Detection
This chapter discusses the supervised learning approach to intrusion detection.When ap­
plied to the KDDCUP’99, UNSW­15, CIC­IDS­2017, and CSE­CIC­IDS­2018 datasets, it
constantly improves classification accuracy compared to prior techniques. Section 4.1
will provide an overview of the processing of the mentioned datasets. Section 4.2 will
analyze the neural networks topologies. Section 4.3 shows how to compile the models
using Keras, and the last two sections 4.4 and 4.5 are used to fit and evaluate the model.
The schematic representation of the steps that must be addressed when construction an
ANN model for intrusion detection is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Proposed artificial neural network model for intrusion detection.
Following this representation in the next sections the steps shown above will be detailed.
4.1
Data processing and representation
Data for running intrusion detection models can be obtained in two ways: by creating a
simulation network and collect relevant data or by using previously collected datasets,The
advantage of using established datasets is that the findings of the experiments can be
compared to those previously published.
Before training a neural network, a dataset should be processed to obtain better results
when applying the models. The following subsections will study each dataset that is used
in this project following some steps that relate to processing and representation, such as:
• Data loading
• Data cleaning
• Preliminary data analysis
• Data visualisation
• Data balancing
• Data preparation
4.1.1
Data loading and cleaning
The task of loading the datasets was straightforward for the KDDCUP’99 and UNSW­15
datasets because after downloading them from their respective resource websites for the
CIC­IDS­2017 and CSE­CIC­IDS­2018 datasets, the process was different. As mentioned
in section 2.5 the content of these datasets is divided between multiple files, each named
after the day that the network traffic data was gathered. First step was read all the files
into dataframes and then create a list with all the dataframes. After we establish that the
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
29
==PAGE:40==
number of feature columns are the same in each instance then finally combining all the
dataframes into one dataset.
CIC­IDS­2017
The CICIDS2017 dataset [75] includes the most up­to­date examples of typical attacks
combined with standard traffic data, which closely resembles real­world data. The first
step was to download the dataset that comprises eight files, each named after the day
that the traffic data was captured. Next, the number of columns from each file is checked,
and since they all have the same number of columns, all files can be combined into one.
Finally, we can check the shape of our dataset, and it has 2451998 records with 79 fea­
tures. Further examination reveals that the dataset holds 15 labels. The labels denoted
with BENIGN represent the regular network traffic, and the rest are the names of each
specific attack, and their value representation can be seen in 4.2. According to the dis­
tribution plot above, some attacks are significantly underrepresented. It can be said that
the types are ”unbalanced.” By classifying the non­benign data as ”malicious,” however,
the dataset becomes balanced. The classes’ equally distributed values ensured that the
model would not be biased towards a particular class.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of network activity in CIC­IDS­2017.
What followed next was the data cleaning part. After checking for any NULL values in
the dataset, the column FlowBytes/s was found that contains 334 values. Considering
that it only comprises 0.01% of the entire dataset, all the rows containing those values
are removed. The same procedure is applied for non­finite values. Here the columns
FlowBytes/s and FlowPackets/s are found to contain non­finite valuers in a number of
1132. The final shape or the CICIDS2017 has 2425727 record and 79 features.
30
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:41==
CSE­CIC­IDS­2018
The CSE­CIC­IDS­2018 dataset is considered to be the updated variant of CICIDS2017.
Some of the processing techniques that were applied on CICIDS2017 were also used on
this dataset. Firstly, all the ten files that comprise the dataset were imported. Several
columns that contain redundant data were removed, and then all the files were combined
into one. The resulting dataset contains a substantial number sample 15717349 and con­
sists of 78 features. Similarly, with its preceding counterpart, the traffic type labels are
denoted with BENIGN for the regular traffic and a number of 14 other attacks. Figure
4.3 shows the network activity in the dataset after balancing, subsequent sections will
explaing the dataset balancing procedure.
Figure 4.3: Distribution of network activity in CSE­CIC­IDS­2018.
Next , all the NULL and non­finite are cleared from the dataset and the final shape of
CSE­CIC­IDS­2018 has 15624123 and 78 features.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.4 and figure 4.5 show the distribution of the attack types after loading and clean­
ing the datasets.
KDDCUP’99
Figure 4.4: Distribution of network activity in KDDCUP’99.
UNSW­15
Figure 4.5: Distribution of network activity in UNSW­15(”0”for benign,”1” for attack)
32
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:43==
Dataset overview
Table 4.2 show the characteristics of each of of the datasets after loading them.
Dataset
Records number
Features number
Output label number
UNSW­15
257673
45
2
KDDCUP’99
4898431
40
23
CIC­IDS­2017
2425727
79
15
CSE­CIC­IDS­2018
15717349
78
15
Table 4.1: Dataset characteristics
4.1.2
Data Visualisation and analysis
Exploratory data analysis requires the use of correlation matrices. Correlation heatmaps
present the same data in a more visually appealing format. Furthermore, they show us
at a glance the variables are linked, to what extent, and in which direction, and possible
multicollinearity issues. This project uses Seaborn library to create a basic correlation
heatmap. The heatmaps for each dataset are shown in section A. The following phase is
to try to visualize the dataset in feature space. The project approaches this by reducing
the dimensionality with principal component analysis (PCA), then passing the significantly
lower dataset to t­SNE (t ­ Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Entities) for visual represen­
tation in 2D space.
In the following phase, the project aims to visualize the dataset in feature space. The
project approaches this by reducing the dimensionality with principal component analy­
sis (PCA)[76] . Principal Component Analysis is a method for extracting linear features.
It performs a linear transformation of the data to a lower­dimensional space intending
to maximize the variance of the data in the two­dimensional representation. In simpler
terms, PCA blends the input functions so that the least useful functionality can be ex­
cluded while preserving the most valuable components of each feature. Furthermore, the
lower dataset to t −SNE (t ­ Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Entities) is a non­linear
method for dimensionality reduction that performs well on visualizing large datasets.
1
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
2
from sklearn.manifold import TSNE
3
4
# Performing principal component analysis
5
pca = PCA(n_components=19)
6
pca_res = pca.fit_transform(data_subset)
7
8
# Computing t-SNE.
9
tsne = TSNE(n_components=2, verbose=0, perplexity=40, n_iter=1000)
10
tsne_res = tsne.fit_transform(data_subset)
Listing 4.1: Data visualization with PCA and t­SNE
As listing 4.1 show PCA is done by first providing the number of components to the method
and then a subset of the whole dataset to the fit_transform method.The results are
shown in section A.
4.1.3
Data Balancing
Data imbalance is a fairly common problem in machine learning, and it occurs in datasets
with a disproportionate number of samples in each class. Following this, our model’s
accuracy is no longer a reliable measure of performance, making training much more
difficult.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
33
==PAGE:44==
The project deals with this problem by using the resample library from Scikit−Learn.Depending
on the dataset, one of two approaches will be used: undersampling( deleting records from
the majority class) and oversampling (duplicating examples from the minority class).
1
# Separate majority and minority classes
2
df_majority = df[df.balance==0]
3
df_minority = df[df.balance==1]
4
5
# Upsample minority class
6
df_minority_upsampled = resample(df_minority ,
7
replace=True,
# sample with replacement
8
n_samples ,
# to match majority class
9
random_state=123) # reproducible results
10
11
# Combine majority class with upsampled minority class
12
df_upsampled = pd.concat([df_majority , df_minority_upsampled])
Listing 4.2: Resampling technique
Table 4.2 show the characteristics of each of of the datasets after data balancing is applied.
Dataset
Records number
Features number
Output label number
UNSW­15
329346
44
2
KDDCUP’99
1945562
40
20
CIC­IDS­2017
780444
79
15
CSE­CIC­IDS­2018
4524858
78
15
Table 4.2: Dataset characteristics
Listing 4.2 show how upsampling the minority class works [77] . First, class division is
performed on the dataset. The minority class would then be resampled using n_samples
as the number that matches the majority class. Finally, the original majority class would
be combined with the up­sampled minority class to result in the new dataset. Similarly,
the downsampling procedure would work the same way by providing the df_majority and
n_samples needed to the resample method.
4.1.4
Data Preparation
Numerous machine learning algorithms work well or converge more quickly when the fea­
tures are of a similar size or are identical to ordinarily distributed.Scaling and standard­
ization will aid in the delivery of functionality in a digestible format for these algorithms.
RobustScallar if used to reduce the effects of the outliers. Based on the documenta­
tion provided by sklearn [78] this scaler works to eliminates the median and rescales the
data to the quantile range . The interquartile range (IQR) is the distance between the
first quartile (25th quantile) and the third quartile (75th quantile).Centering and scaling
are performed separately on each attribute by calculating the required statistics on the
dataset samples. The median and interquartile range are then saved for further use of
the transform method.Out datasets contain some columns that have text or categorical
values. These values need to be converted to numerical values by substituting integers
beginning with 0. The label encoding library is used to achieve this.
Figure 4.6 shows how the data is split intro into training, testing, and validation sets is
the final phase of data preparation. There is already a sklearn feature that does all of the
slicings for us, namely the train_test_split method. This move is critical in order to obtain
representative data to analyze our model.
34
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Splitting data into training ,validation, and test set. [79]
When applying a machine learning algorithm, a training set is employed to train a network,
with forwarding propagation used to measure loss values and backpropagation used to
update the learnable parameters. Following this, the validation dataset is used to test the
model during the training phase, fine­tune hyperparameters, and pick the model. A test
set is used to assess the consistency of the final model that was fine­tuned and chosen
during the testing phase using training and validation sets.
4.2
Network topologies
In this section, the proposed network topologies will be discussed. The project takes the
approach of representing each type of neural network with three different models. For
each model, the number of hidden layers is increased. Each input layer has a variable
number of neurons depending on the dataset’s number of features. Subsequently, each
output layer contains one neuron for Binary classifications and multiple neurons depend­
ing on the number of attacks for the multi­class classification.
Keras library [80] provides an easy way to represent the actual neural network model
through the use of Sequential API. The fundamental concept of Sequential API is to ar­
range the Keras layers one after another; this way, the data flows from one layer to the
next before it hits the output layer.
4.2.1
Deep neural network model
The component that composes our deep neural network is shown in 4.3. In this example,
a fully connected network structure with three layers is used. The Dense class is used to
describe fully connected layers. The layer’s number of neurons or nodes can be specified
as the first argument, the activation function can be specified as the second argument, and
the last argument refers to the number of input features. Regularization is also applied
between each layer through the use of Dropout . Dropout helps avoid overfitting and
accelerates the training of the DNN model by removing neurons and their connections
randomly. Without regularization, DNNs trained on a large number of samples could easily
overfit and require a high training time. The last layer represents the output layer and uses
softmax activation function for multi­class classification.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
35
==PAGE:46==
1
...
2
#Create Sequential model with Dense layers , using the add method
3
dnn3= Sequential()
4
5
dnn3.add(Dense(512,activation='relu', input_shape=(features_train.shape[1],)))
6
dnn3.add(Dropout(0.1))
7
dnn3.add(Dense(256, activation='relu'))
8
dnn3.add(Dropout(0.1))
9
dnn3.add(Dense(128, activation='relu'))
10
dnn3.add(Dropout(0.1))
11
dnn3.add(Dense(15, activation = 'softmax'))
12
...
Listing 4.3: Example of DNN with three hidden layers
4.2.2
Convolutional neural network model
Keras’s deep learning library comes with a set of convolutional layers. By examining the
example from Listing 4.5, we will better understand the convolution process.The project
makes use of a 1D Convolutional Layer, which anticipates a three­dimensional input. The
first dimension is regarded as the number of samples in the input; in this example, there
is just one sample. The second dimension is the length of each sample representing the
number of features, which is 44 in this case. The third dimension represents the number
of channels present in each sample; there is only one channel in this case. Therefore the
model will expect an input sample to have the shape [44, 1] together with a filter or kernel
size of size 3 and an additional ReLU activation function. Spatial pooling, also known
as subsampling or downsampling, decreases the dimension of each function map while
retaining the most critical detail. In our case a 2X2 window of MaxPooling1D is used.
Finally, the input is flattened, and again a fully connected layer is used to bind every
neuron in the preceding layer to all neurons from the subsequent layer. The output of
the convolution and pooling layers represents the input image’s high­level characteristics.
The fully connected layer makes use of these features to identify the input image according
to the training dataset.
1
...
2
# define input data
3
data = data.reshape(1, 44, 1)
4
5
# create model
6
cnn3 = Sequential()
7
8
cnn3.add(Conv1D(64, 8, activation='relu', input_shape=(44, 1)))
9
cnn3.add(MaxPooling1D((2, 2)))
10
cnn3.add(Dropout(0.3))
11
12
cnn3.add(Conv1D(32, 8, activation='relu'))
13
cnn3.add(MaxPooling1D((2, 2)))
14
cnn3.add(Dropout(0.4))
15
16
cnn3.add(Conv1D(32, 8),activation='relu')
17
cnn3.add(Dropout(0.4))
18
19
cnn3.add(Flatten())
20
cnn3.add(Dense(64,activation='relu'))
21
22
cnn3.add(Dense(5, activation='softmax'))
23
...
Listing 4.4: Example of CNN with three hidden layers
36
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:47==
Paper [81] provides a visual representation of a convolutional neural network model.
Figure 4.7: Example of Convolutional Neural Networks Model.
4.2.3
Recurrent neural network model
Keras RNN API is designed to focus on ease of use with the built­in SimpleRNN layers
that help quickly build recurrent models without making difficult configuration choices and
ease of customization that allows defining RNN cell layer with custom behavior.
La listing 4.5 show the architecture of an RNN with two SimpleRNN layers. As provided
from the Keras documentation [82], some of the parameters used in the SimpleRNN are
the number of units representing the dimensionality of the output space, the activation
function together with the input shape, and the return sequence. In our case shape of
the input 77, the number of features, the activation function is ReLU, with 32 units and
return sequence set to true.Dropout is used after each SimpleRNN layer for regulariza­
tion purposes, followed by flattening the output and adding additional dense layers with
LeakyReLU as the activation function a version of ReLU that allows a smaller gradient
when the unit is not active and speeds up training. Finally, the same as in the other exam­
ples last layer represents the output layer with softmax activation function for multi­class
classification.
1
...
2
# create model
3
rnn3 = Sequential()
4
5
# Adding the first RNN layer and some Dropout regularisation
6
rnn3.add(SimpleRNN(units = 32,activation='relu', return_sequences = True,
input_shape = (77,1)))
7
rnn3.add(Dropout(0.1))
8
9
# Adding a second RNN layer and some Dropout regularisation
10
rnn3.add(SimpleRNN(units = 32,activation='relu', return_sequences = True))
11
rnn3.add(Dropout(0.1))
12
13
# Adding the Flatten layer
14
rnn3.add(Flatten())
15
rnn3.add(Dense(32, input_dim=77))
16
rnn3.add(LeakyReLU(alpha=0.1))
17
rnn3.add(Dense(16))
18
rnn3.add(LeakyReLU(alpha=0.1))
19
20
# Adding the output layer
21
rnn3.add(Dense(units = 15, activation='softmax'))
22
...
Listing 4.5: Example of RNN with two hidden layers
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.8 contains basic information and configuration data about the Recurrent neural
network architecture model presented in listing 4.5.
Figure 4.8: Configuration of a Recurrent Neural Network Model.
4.3
Compiling the model
The next step after the models are defined to compile them. When compiling, some addi­
tional properties that are used in network training have to be defined. First, the appropriate
loss function has to be identified to determine the set of weights; then, the optimizer is
used to scan through different weights, and finally, because it is a classification problem,
we use accuracy as the primary metric.
Listing 4.6 shows the simplicity provided by Keras for compiling a model.
1
...
2
model.compile(loss='sparse_categorical_crossentropy', optimizer='adam',
metrics=['accuracy'])
3
...
Listing 4.6: How to compile a Keras Model
As the problem this project tries to solve is a classification problem. After reviewing [83]
the loss function option are chosen between the following:
• binary_crossentropy is the default loss function for binary classification
• categorical_crossentropyt is used in multi­class classification problems
• sparse_categorical_crossentropyt works the same as categorical cross­entropy,but
without needing the target variable to be one hot encoded before the training
38
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: Line plots of cross entropy loss and classification accuracy over training
epochs on KDDCUP’99 for DNN with 2 hidden layers
Acording to paper [84] Adam optimizer has been developed for large datasets. Adam
combines the advantages of AdaGrade to deal with space gradients and the ability of
RMSProp to deal with non­stationary objectives. It does very well in comparison with the
other optimizers mentioned in the paper. Adam appears to be a good fit for the problem
that the project tries to solve.
4.4
Model fitting
After the model is defined it’s ready for computation 4.7. The main components of the fit
function are :
• input dataset divided intro features and labels
• batch size that specifies the number of samples to process before modifying the
model’s internal parameters
• number of epochs that specifies how many times the learning algorithm can traverse
the training dataset
1
...
2
model.fit(features_train ,
3
labels_train ,
4
epochs=50,
5
batch_size=512,
6
validation_data=(features_val ,labels_val))
7
...
Listing 4.7: How to fit a Keras Model
This configurations can be determined empirically by trial and error. We want to train the
model enough that it develops a sufficient mapping between rows of input data and output
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
39
==PAGE:50==
classification. Although the model will still contain some error, the magnitude of the error
will eventually stabilize for a given model configuration. This is referred to as paradigm
convergence.
4.5
Evaluating the model
To assess the model on the training set, a report() function was written that encapsulates
the evaluation metrics for each different type of attack and also the metrics for the dataset
on a particular model. Listing 4.8, shows how this function works. Simply by calling the
function with the actual labels and the predicted labels the function then passes those
values to some built­in functions for analyzing the performance of models from Skikit −
learn.
1
...
2
# this function has evaluation metrics
3
def report(predicted_labes , labels_test):
4
print('
----------Classification Report Of Classes -------------')
5
print(classification_report(y_true,prediction))
6
print('\n
----------Validation Data------------------')
7
print('Accuarcy:',accuracy_score(y_true , prediction)* 100)
8
print('Precision: {:,.4f} %'.
9
format(precision_score(y_true, prediction , average='weighted') * 100))
10
print('Recall -score: {:,.4f}'.
11
format(recall_score(y_true, prediction , average='weighted') * 100))
12
print('F1-score: {:,.4f}'.
13
format(f1_score(y_true, prediction , average='weighted') * 100))
14
...
Listing 4.8: How to evaluate a model
Figure 4.10 shows a classification report example taken from the experimental analysis on
CICIDS2017. On the lest side the encoded attacks are labeled zero to fourteen, following
with the metrics that are tracked and the last columns represents the number of attacks
for each class. Finally ,the validation data for the entire model is displayed.
Figure 4.10: Classification report for CNN model with 3 hidden layers on CICIDS2017.
40
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:51==
5
Analyzing the results
This section will is dedicated to analyzing the results of the model’s prediction. Further­
more, techniques for validating those results will be discussed. Also, hyperparameter
tuning will be displayed here and different methods on how the project approached over­
fitting and underfitting.
5.1
Model validation
In order to confirm the legitimacy of the results obtained validation methods have to be
employed. After studying paper [85] it was concluded that k­fold cross­validation is a re­
sampling procedure that is a widely used technique for estimating a machine learning
algorithm’s output on a given dataset. The method takes a single parameter, k, which
specifies the number of groups into which a given dataset should be divided. The project
uses this approach since it is straightforward to grasp and produces a less biased predic­
tion than the other methods. Since splitting the dataset into training, testing, and validation
is also used, the k­folds cross­validation technique will provide essential insights into the
model’s estimations. Figure 5.1 shows an example for the cross­validation when the value
of k is 5.
Figure 5.1: 5­Fold Cross Validation. [86]
The works of [87] states that the k­fold cross validation procedure has the following steps:
1. Randomly shuffle the dataset
2. Divide the dataset into k distinct classes
3. For each distinctive group:
• One of the folds is kept out as a test dataset
• The remaining group is taken together as a training dataset
• On the training set, fit a model and evaluate it on the test set.
• Keep the test score and throw away the model
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
41
==PAGE:52==
4. Summarize the evaluation scores to determine the average performance of the
model
Listing 5.1 shows an example of how the implementation of a 5­fold cross validation would
work.
1
from keras.wrappers.scikit_learn import KerasClassifier
2
from sklearn.model_selection import StratifiedKFold
3
from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
4
5
# Function used to create the model needed for KerasClassifier
6
def create_model():
7
# Compile model
8
dnn1= Sequential()
9
dnn1.add(Dense(64,input_dim=78 ,activation='relu'))
10
dnn1.add(Dropout(0.01))
11
dnn1.add(Dense(15, activation='softmax'))
12
13
# Compile model
14
dnn1.compile(loss='categorical_crossentropy', optimizer='adam', metrics=['
accuracy'])
15
return dnn1
16
17
# fix random seed for reproducibility
18
seed = 7
19
np.random.seed(seed)
20
# create model
21
model = KerasClassifier( build_fn=create_model , epochs= 30, batch_size=64,
verbose=0)
22
# 5-fold cross validation
23
# StratifiedKFold is a variation of Kfold that first shuffles the data with a
given random state
24
kfold = StratifiedKFold(n_splits= 5, shuffle=True, random_state=seed)
25
# Printing the mean accuracy value for the 5 folds
26
results = cross_val_score(model, features , labels , cv=kfold,scoring='accuracy'
, error_score="raise")
27
print(results)
28
print(results.mean())
29
# output : 0.9107578882308431
30
# output : array([0.91085982, 0.91071141, 0.91109256, 0.91063084, 0.9104948 ])
Listing 5.1: Implementation of 5­fold cross validation
The first step is to compute the create_model function that contains the code for the neural
network model that the k­fold algorithm will be applied. In the next step, the function result
is passed to the KerasClassifier class by the build_fn argument. Extra arguments such
as the number of epochs and the batch size are needed as well. These are immediately
packed and transferred to the fit() module, which the KerasClassifier class calls inter­
nally. The project example demonstrates how to do 5­fold stratified cross­validation using
StratifiedKFold. This resampling technique is used to obtain a reliable approximation
of a machine learning model’s output on unseen data.
Finally, the results are then given by the cross_val_score() function that takes the model,
the features and labels of the dataset, and some random seed. Listing 5.1 shows the
output is an array with five values, each corresponding to each of the folds. A mean
function is applied to obtain the average accuracy over the whole sample of data for the
given model.
42
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Hyperparameters optimization
When developing a machine learning algorithm, the choice of the model’s architecture
is not the best from the beginning, thus exploring various possibilities. Ideally, this task
should be automatically by an algorithm in order to search for the optimal model architec­
ture. Hyperparameters are the parameters that characterize the model architecture, and
hence the method of finding the optimal model architecture is referred to as hyperparam­
eter tuning.
The types of parameters present in a machine learning model can be divided into trainable
parameters that the algorithm learns through testing. The weights of a neural network, for
example, are trainable parameters and hyperparameters that must be set before initiating
the learning process. Some examples could be the learning rate, the number of hidden
layers, and the number of nodes in a dense layer.
Figure 5.2: Hyperparameter tuning process
1
cnn_dense_layers =[ 1, 2, 3,]
2
cnn_conv_layers = [ 1 , 2 ,3 ]
3
cnn_layer_sizes
= [64, 128 ]
4
# Build model for each possible value
5
for cnn_dense_layer in cnn_dense_layers:
6
for cnn_layer_size in cnn_layer_sizes :
7
for cnn_conv_layer in cnn_conv_layers :
8
model = Sequential()
9
model.add(Conv1D(cnn_layer_size ,3,input_shape=(78, 1)))
10
cnn3.add(MaxPooling1D((2, 2)))
11
model.add(LeakyReLU(alpha=0.1))
12
model.add(Dropout(0.4))
13
for l in range(cnn_conv_layer - 1):
14
model.add(Conv1D(cnn_layer_size ,3))
15
cnn3.add(MaxPooling1D((2, 2)))
16
model.add(LeakyReLU(alpha=0.1))
17
model.add(Dropout(0.4))
18
model.add(Flatten())
19
for l in range(cnn_dense_layer):
20
model.add(Dense(cnn_layer_size , input_dim=78)
21
model.add(LeakyReLU(alpha=0.1))
22
23
model.add(Dense(15, activation='softmax'))
24
model.compile(loss ='categorical_crossentropy', optimizer= 'adam',
metrics = ['accuracy'])
25
model.fit(features_train ,labels_train ,epochs=25,batch_size = 1000)
26
# Print model
27
print(NAME ="Number of conv layers -{}-Number of nodes -{}-number of
dense layers -{}.".format(cnn_conv_layer , cnn_layer_size ,
cnn_dense_layer))
28
# Evaluating model accuracy.
29
model.evaluate(features_test , labels_test)
Listing 5.2: Grid search tuning method
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.2 shows the steps of the tuning process. It can be observed that that tuner
search loop runs each time with a different hyperparameter choice. The training is done
with some set parameters on each iteration, after which some evaluation metrics are
computed. Finally, after all, possible combinations have been computed, the models with
the best results can be chosen. This process is further detailed in listing 5.2, and it is
qualified as a grid search. In this example, three hyperparameters have been chosen for
a convolutional neural network model: number of dense layers, number of convolutional
layers, and size of the layers. The process is straightforward, the accuracy of the trained
model is determined after each run, and the optimal combination of parameters is kept
after the run it is finished.
TensorBoard
TensorBoard [88] is a powerful optimization tool that also serves as a user interface for vi­
sualizing graphs and accessing additional resources to understand and debug models. It
is a method that calculates and visualizes machine learning workflows. It enables tracking
metrics such as loss and precision, the analysis of concept graphs, and the embedding of
projects in lower­dimensional spaces, among other things. TensorBoard is an excellent
platform for visualizing metrics such a loss and accuracy that could point out possible
problems in training the model. A helpful feature of TensorBoard is that it updates metrics
constantly. This way, the time required for training a model that seems to require adjust­
ments is shortened.To run TensorBoard can be started using a command­line interpreter.
After accessing its dashboard as seen in figure 5.3, the Scalars feature shows how the
loss and accuracy vary with each epoch. Additionally, it can be used to trace training
speed, learning rate, and other scalar values.
Figure 5.3: Comparing model runs in TensorBoard.
44
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:55==
As listing 5.3 shows; to enable TensorBoard first the library needs to be imported from
tensorflow.keras.callbacks. The next step is to create and compile a model. After this is
done, the next things needed are the initialization of a log_dir variable with the location
where the logs are saved and a time stamp followed by a tensorboard_callback variable
that takes the log_dir and histogram_freq set to one (allows histogram computation per
one epoch). Finally, we pass this to Keras’s Model.fit() together with the rest of the
parameters. Running tensorboard −−logdirlogs/fit in the command line will display the
results at the URL: http : //localhost : 6006.
1
from tensorflow.keras.callbacks import TensorBoard
2
model = create_model()
3
model.compile(optimizer='adam',
4
loss='sparse_categorical_crossentropy',
5
metrics=['accuracy'])
6
7
log_dir = "logs/fit/" + datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%Y%m%d-%H%M%S")
8
tensorboard_callback = tf.keras.callbacks.TensorBoard(log_dir=log_dir ,
histogram_freq=1)
9
10
model.fit(features_train ,
11
labels_train ,
12
epochs=30,
13
validation_data=(features_validation , labels_validation),
14
callbacks=[tensorboard_callback])
Listing 5.3: Using TensorBoard
5.3
Overfitting and underfitting
Overfitting is shown in figure 5.4 occurs when a model memorizes statistical regularities
unique to the training set, memorizes the unrelated noise rather than the signal. Under­
fitting happens when the model fails to perform well on both the training and validation
sets.Although the more extended a network is trained, the better it does on the training
collection, the network eventually becomes too closely coupled to the training data and
cannot generalize.
Figure 5.4: Monitoring loss to recognize overfitting and underfitting.[79]
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
45
==PAGE:56==
This is a significant challenge in machine learning, as an overfitted model is incapable
of generalizing to previously unseen results. Monitoring the loss and accuracy on the
training and validation sets is a routine check for detecting overfitting to the training results
as shown in figure 5.4. If the model outperforms the validation set on the training set, the
model has most likely been overfit to the training data.
Numerous approaches have been suggested to eliminate overfitting. The most effective
strategy for mitigating overfitting is to acquire additional training data. In general, a model
that is trained on a broader sample is better at generalizing. Other methods include data
regularization through dropout, data balancing, and lowering the architecture complexity.
Considering that the architectures employed in the project are moderately straightforward
and the models run on large dataset samples that have been balanced and processed,
the following approach that the project takes to avoid overfitting is dropout regularisation.
Dropout
Dropout technique is represented in figure 5.5 and is a relatively new regularization strat­
egy in which randomly chosen activation’s are set to zero during training to make the
model less resilient to specific network weights [89].
Due to the fact that neural networks involve many hidden layer, they are highly expressive
models capable to learn extremely complex interactions between their inputs and outputs.
However, all of these complex relationships would be the product of sampling noise, im­
plying that they will appear in the training set but not in the actual test data, even though
they are derived from the same dataset. This results in overfitting, and dropout is one of
several techniques that have been developed to mitigate it.
Figure 5.5: Standard neural network before and after applying dropout. [90]
One of the ways to regularize a fixed­sized model is by averaging the estimates of all
possible parameter settings and weighting each dataset by its posterior likelihood given
the training results. However, when dealing with deep neural networks, the concept of
averaging the outputs of many individually trained models is prohibitively costly. Combin­
ing several models is more beneficial when the individual models are distinct. Training
several architectures is challenging since determining the optimum hyperparameters for
each architecture is a daunting task, and training each extensive network involves a sig­
nificant amount of computation. Even if one could train a vast number of different large
networks, using them simultaneously would be impractical in systems that require rapid
response.
46
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:57==
Dropout is a technique that is designed to resolve all of these concerns. It avoids overfit­
ting and enables the effective combination of a large number of different neural network
architectures. The expression ”dropout” refers to nodes in a neural network that is no
longer active. Dropping a node from the network gets disconnected from all of its incom­
ing and outgoing links, as shown in figure 5.5. The units to be dropped are chosen at
random. In each case, a unit has a fixed probability p irrespective of other units.
Early stopping
Another method that the project uses to avoid underfitting and overfitting is early stop­
ping. The neural network is trained over several epochs. Excessive epochs may result
in overfitting the training, while insufficient epochs will result in an underfit sample. Early
stopping is a technique that enables to specify of an arbitrarily large number of training
epochs and then terminate training when the model’s output on the validation dataset
stops improving.
Figure 5.6: Point of overfitting and early stopping. [91]
Figure 5.6 shows how this would occur. Examining the loss value of the accuracy over
time in relation to the training and validation dataset becomes obvious. Both training and
validation loss decrease initially as the network gains knowledge about the data, but after
a while, validation loss increases while training loss continues to decrease. In the case
of studying accuracy, the opposite can be observed, as validation accuracy would begin
to deteriorate or cease to improve while training accuracy continues to improve.
1
...
2
from tensorflow.keras.callbacks import EarlyStopping
3
eary_stop_callback = EarlyStopping(monitor='loss',
4
patience=10,
5
restore_best_weights=True)
6
model.fit(features_train ,labels_train ,
7
epochs=50,batch_size=128,
8
validation_data=(features_test ,labels_test),
9
callbacks=[tensorboard_callback , eary_stop_callback])
10
...
Listing 5.4: Early stop implementation with Keras
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
47
==PAGE:58==
Using early stopping halts training as the validation loss begins to deviate from the training
loss. Keras accomplishes this by keras.callbacks.EarlyStopping as shown in listing 5.4.
The options that need to be set are monitor to which we pass loss as a performance
measure to finish the training, patience, the number of epochs with no improvements,
and restore_best_weights that will restore the weights to the best ones before overfitting
started.
5.4
Results
Hyper­parameter values recorded in the intrusion detection literature serve as a reference
for defining the random search’s value ranges. These values serve as a baseline for the
first models. Thus, the final set of hyper­parameters for each model on each dataset were
found after applying the techniques discussed in this chapter at section 5.3 and 5.2. Table
5.1 final hyperparameter configurations were chosen based on the configurations with the
highest accuracy score on the validation set.
Model
DNN
CNN
RNN
Number of layers
1,2,3
1,2,3
1,2,3
Number of nodes
256,128,64
64,64,64
32,32,32
Layer activations
ReLU
LeakyReLU
ReLU
Output layer actvation
softmax/sigmoid
softmax/sigmoid
softmax/sigmoid
Loss function
cross­entropy
cross­entropy
cross­entropy
Layer dropout rates
0.1
0.3
0.1 ­ 0.4
Batch size
64 ­ 128
256 or 512
512 ­ 1024
Number of epochs
25 ­ 30
25 ­ 30
25 ­ 30
Optimizer
Adam
Adam
Adam
Table 5.1: Hyper­parameter configurations/ranges used in the tuning process.
Remarks
The neural networks model performed very well for KDDCUP’99 and UNSW­15 with an
average accuracy around 99% ,as shown in 5.2 and 5.3 respectively, when compared to
results published in the related literature. Paper [92] shows how the models applied to KD­
DCUP’99 obtained an accuracy that ranges between 90­95% for multi­class classification
and slightly lower accuracy between 75­80% for UNSW­15 dataset.
It must be noted that direct comparison is often difficult as many papers do not provide
adequate details on the pre­processing steps performed on datasets .
Model
Accuarcy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
DNN1
99.9588
99.9570
99.9589
99.9577
DNN2
99.9547
99.9527
99.9548
99.9527
DNN3
99.9614
99.9595
99.9615
99.9598
CNN1
99.9406
99.9355
99.9406
99.9322
CNN2
99.9609
99.9583
99.9609
99.9586
CNN3
99.9059
99.9063
99.9059
99.9036
RNN1
99.9812
99.9799
99.9812
99.9805
RNN2
99.9755
99.9746
99.9756
99.9746
RNN3
99.9843
99.9838
99.9843
99.9840
Table 5.2: Neural networks results results for dataset KDDCUP’99.
48
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:59==
Model
Accuarcy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
DNN1
99.6052
99.6080
99.6053
99.6053
DNN2
98.8279
98.8546
98.8280
98.8279
DNN3
98.9433
98.9650
98.9434
98.9433
CNN1
99.6660
99.6677
99.6660
99.6660
CNN2
99.6644
99.6662
99.6645
99.6645
CNN3
99.9423
99.9424
99.9423
99.9423
RNN1
96.9120
97.0920
96.9121
96.9093
RNN2
99.9954
99.9954
99.9954
99.9954
RNN3
99.0860
99.1009
99.0861
99.0860
Table 5.3: Neural networks results results for dataset UNSW15.
Table 5.4 shows the accuracy and training time of the neural network models on the CIC­
IDS­2017 dataset. Here is can be remarked that compared to the DNN and CNN models
the recurrent neural network models have a higher accuracy of over 99%. Overall all
models perform quite well with the lowest accuracy being 93%.
Model
Accuarcy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
DNN1
95.8991
95.9557
95.8991
95.4269
DNN2
93.3076
93.7944
93.3077
92.7291
DNN3
93.7170
94.1924
93.7170
93.1555
CNN1
96.7281
96.6678
96.7281
96.5661
CNN2
96.9331
96.8102
96.9332
96.4291
CNN3
98.4399
98.3506
98.4400
98.3589
RNN1
99.6700
99.6603
99.6701
99.6329
RNN2
99.6386
99.5815
99.6387
99.6037
RNN3
99.6437
99.6594
99.6438
99.6032
Table 5.4: Neural networks results results for dataset ISD2017.
The performances of the deep learning approaches on CSE­CIC­IDS2018 from table 6.4
perform slightly worse than the same models applied on CIC­IDS­2017. One of the rea­
sons for this could be that the training and validation data is in the order of millions, and
in some cases, it is harder for the model to classify correctly. Despite this, a correlation
between the results of the datasets can be observed. Again the RNN model’s perfor­
mance is the best, followed by the CNN models and then the DNN models. Considering
the complexity of the dataset and many features, our models perform well overall with an
accuracy higher than 91%.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
49
==PAGE:60==
Model
Accuarcy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
DNN1
90.4057
90.9670
90.4058
88.8832
DNN2
89.6870
90.4469
89.6871
87.9723
DNN3
92.8383
92.8970
92.8383
92.0008
CNN1
81.6705
75.6440
81.6706
77.3512
CNN2
92.1221
90.4862
92.1222
90.3389
CNN3
95.2052
94.5229
95.2053
94.0680
RNN1
88.5359
89.6032
88.5360
86.5132
RNN2
96.2413
95.8368
96.2413
95.4874
RNN3
96.2692
95.5717
96.2693
95.2236
Table 5.5: Neural networks results results for dataset ISD2018.
50
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:61==
6
Comparison with other ML algorithms
For a long time, intrusion detection has relied on traditional machine learning techniques
such as logistic regression, Naïve Bayes, decision tree, random forest, and AdaBoost
classifier. This section will cover those approaches and the results obtained from applying
each technique on each dataset.
6.1
Machine learning algorithms
Logistic Regression
It is a categorical response variable classification algorithm used in situations where the
response variable is categorical. Logistic Regression aims to establish a relationship
between a set of features and the likelihood of obtaining a particular outcome. One of its
advantages is that it is efficient and straightforward, but it cannot handle large amounts
of data and categorical features on the other side.
Naïve Bayes
A Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical representation of variables and their re­
lationships. Nodes represent discrete or continuous random variables, while directed
edges represent the relationships between them, forming a directed acyclic graph. The
child nodes have a dependency linked to their parents. Each node stores the random
variable’s current state and the conditional probability type.Naive Bayes does not perform
well because the distribution of training data differs significantly from the distribution of
testing data, and the Naive Bayes model cannot learn this difference.
AdaBoost
Boosting is a machine learning technique built on merging several comparatively ineffec­
tive and inaccurate prediction rules to create a highly accurate prediction rule. AdaBoost
algorithm [93] was the first practical boosting algorithm and continues to be one of the
most commonly used and studied, with implementations in a wide variety of fields. Since
boosting technique learns progressively, it is critical to have quality data. One of the
shortcomings of AdaBoost is the vulnerability to noise data or outliers.
Decision Tree
Decision tree (DT) is an algorithm for supervised machine learning that gradually divides
large datasets into smaller groups based on a defining feature until the sets become small
enough to represent a label. A decision tree has three fundamental elements. The first
part is a decision node that is used to determine the existence of a test attribute. The
second kind is a branch, where each branch represents a potential judgment dependent
on the test attribute’s value. The third is a leaf that contains the instance’s class. They
need labeled data and attempt to mark new data based on that information and are perfect
for solving classification problems.
Random Forest
Random Forest is defined as a is a tree­based machine learning algorithm that combines
the strength of several decision trees to create a precise and stable prediction model for
enhanced overall performance. The subsequent forecast can be determined either by
majority vote or by weighted vote. The process of how Random forest algorithm works is
shown in 6.1.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.1: Random forest. [94]
Random Forests [95] have many advantages: they need a small number of control and
model parameters; they are resistant to overfitting; and they do not need feature filtering
because they can use an unlimited range of possible attributes. One significant benefit
of Random Forest is that as the number of trees in the forest increases, the variance
of the model reduces while the bias remains constant. Random Forests still have some
drawbacks, including poor model interpretability, output degradation due to associated
variables, and reliance on the implementation’s random generator.
6.2
Results
A number of machine learning algorithms have been selected to test their performance
of on KDDCUPP’99 table 6.1, UNSW­15 table 6.2, CIC­IDS­2017 table 6.3 and CSE­
CIC­IDS­2018 in table 6.4. The results of these various ML models vary significantly.
Overall the neural network models performed better than the mentioned algorithms with
some exceptions. As it can be seen in table 6.3 and table 6.4 , logistic regression, Naive
Bayes, and AdaBoost performance are barely better than a random guess, even worse
than that in some cases for the CSE­CIC­IDS­2018. The only algorithms that have a good
performance overall are decision trees and random forest because, at their core, this type
of algorithm is design to accomplish great results in classification tasks.
Model
Accuracy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
LogisticRegression
97.7959
96.17
97.80
96.97
GaussianNB
66.3425
93.04
66.34
74.81
AdaBoost
97.5141
95.78
97.51
96.64
DecisionTree
99.9736
99.98
99.97
99.97
RandomForest
99.9769
99.97
99.98
99.97
Table 6.1: ML results for KDDCUP’99.
52
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:63==
Model
Accuracy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
LogisticRegression
81.1143
81.2304
81.1143
81.0980
GaussianNB
67.7364
74.3741
67.7365
65.4026
AdaBoost
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
DecisionTree
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
RandomForest
100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
Table 6.2: ML results for UNSW15.
Model
Accuracy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
LogisticRegression
48.9044
62.5791
48.9045
52.2685
GaussianNB
4.3526
58.0589
4.3526
4.4437
AdaBoost
70.2264
51.3274
70.2265
59.2771
DecisionTree
99.7381
99.7381
99.7382
99.7378
RandomForest
99.7821
99.7742
99.7822
99.7755
Table 6.3: ML results for IDS2017.
Model
Accuracy
Precision %
Recall­score
F1­score
LogisticRegression
33.3678
43.0026
33.3679
33.6359
GaussianNB
20.1042
59.3035
20.1043
11.1904
AdaBoost
50.0060
25.0078
50.0060
96.64
DecisionTree
95.7993
95.5143
95.7994
33.3410
RandomForest
96.4750
95.8783
96.4750
96.0632
Table 6.4: ML results for IDS2018.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
As computer network attacks become more prevalent, intrusion detection tools and tech­
niques have an increasing role in identifying such threats. As the development of machine
learning and neural networks increases, they become more capable of detecting malicious
attacks, thus leading to more secure systems.
The primary goal of this project was to present a working solution with high accuracy that
is capable of detecting network attacks effectively.
As stated in section 2, the project focused on network­based intrusion detection that fo­
cuses on monitoring the attacks from an entire network. Considering that real­time access
to a network is quite complex, the project employed some benchmark datasets for run­
ning the experiments. At first, several datasets were surveys from the literature. Although
the field lacks many comprehensive datasets for intrusion detection, four strong candi­
dates were chosen. The KDDCup’99 and UNSW­15 were chosen based on the criteria
of widespread use in intrusion detection, and the other two datasets, CIC­IDS­2017, and
CSE­CIC­IDS­2018, were chosen because of their qualities of being complete datasets
based on the evaluation framework from [35]. Next, the basic principles of machine learn­
ing were studied, and better understand how to develop the best models capable of exe­
cuting the task at hand. Lastly, this section also explained how neural networks work and
the chosen deep learning models that will be used to create the models for the intrusion
detection task.
To be able to reach the goal, a comprehensive state­of­the­art review of existent neural
network classifiers and the intrusion detection field was conducted. Section 3 was used
for that purpose. The main points researched here were how network attacks had become
an increasing problem in today’s context—followed by a look at the types of intrusion de­
tection systems with their particularities and how they aim to solve them. A large sample
of datasets was assessed in order to determine the proper picks for the project. Further­
more, machine learning techniques that were previously deployed to tackle the intrusion
detection tasks were studied. By carefully examining their downsides, it further strength­
ened the idea of novel approaches needed in this field. Lastly, many types of neural
networks from the current and past literature were also presented. It was highlighted how
these methods provide meaningful results that serve for future development on the topic.
Section 4 comprises the core of the proposed neural network framework used to develop
the models for intrusion detection. This section details the steps in processing the datasets
in order to be prepared for training and testing. This is followed by a presentation of
the neural network architectures and their particularities. The project shows the design
with different deep neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and recurrent neural
networks. After everything is put in place, the training process can start, and the first set
of results were obtained.
Section 5 is dedicated to analyzing the results obtained so far and applying some pro­
posed methods for improving those results. Hyper­parameter tuning was a crucial step
in developing the models, as problems such as overfitting and underfitting arose, differ­
ent methods were used in order to solve this. The effectiveness of these methods is
then proven by the increase in accuracy for the final results.Lastly the 6 provides a brief
description of other machine learning classifier and their performance on the datasets.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
55
==PAGE:66==
The above points from each section provide a review of the key points that were worked
throughout the thesis and stand as strong pillars for reaching the proposed goals. With
an average accuracy across all datasets of 96% for DNN and CNN models and 97% for
the RNN models, these results stand to provide further validation for the effectiveness of
neural networks in the intrusion detection field.
In conclusion, the work on the thesis project was based on the promising results obtained
by neural networks in recent years. It is adding valuable results to the current intrusion
detection literature. As a takeaway for the reader, the project will be wind up with the
following statement. Artificial neural networks are well­suited to assisting researchers
in solving complex problems in real­world scenarios. They can learn and model non­
linear and complex interactions between inputs and outputs; make generalizations and
inferences, uncover hidden relationships, patterns, and prediction, and model extremely
unpredictable data variances needed for unusual event prediction. As a consequence,
artificial neural networks can help enhance a variety of domains, one of which being in­
trusion detection.
56
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:67==
8
Future work
The project thesis has had some limitations given the objectives proposed to be achieved
in it’s development time spawn. Nonetheless, future work could be done to enhance the
current approach.
To begin, the contribution of supervised learning to intrusion detection continues to be
limited due to a lack of labeled data. Machine learning strategies namely generative
adversarial networks GANS can be used to produce labeled traffic containing fictitious
attacks. These models will take standard network traffic as input and output traffic with
realistically added attacks. After training on a series of named datasets, these machine
learning algorithms will learn how to inject the same attacks into regular traffic. In an ideal
world, a model will be trained for each attack or form of attack to ensure proper learning
and the ability to adjust the attack ratios in generated traffic.
Regarding the use of datasets, development can be done in the area of feature selection.
When designing a predictive model, feature selection is the method of reducing the num­
ber of input variables. Although this can sometimes lead to better performance models,
the trained data does not mimic a real network environment anymore. Besides this, other
methods that contribute to better data processing can be considered.
There are many other variants of artificial neural networks that could be employed for this
task. One example could be the case when the data is not labeled. Autoencoders can
be trained on unlabeled data in a semi­supervised learning mechanism. This process of
unsupervised training is intended to catch data­driven function transformations. Following
that, the training set’s labeled data is transformed using an autoencoder, and the output
of the final encoding layer is used to train a deep neural network.
Other approaches can be considered with regards to different network topologies. A Re­
curring Gated Unit For the purpose of detecting anomalies, a Generalized Recurrent Neu­
ral Network (GRU­RNN) is suggested. The GRU­RNN is a highly effective technique for
representing the relationship between current and past occurrences and for increasing
the rate of anomaly detection. Furthermore Long­short term memory networks (LTSM)
work efficiently with sequential data which would make recurrent neural networks such as
LSTMs good options for network intrusion detection problem.
Besides the grid search method used in the project for finding the best hyper­parameters,
different methods performed quite well. One such method is employing the random search
technique. The difference between random search and grid search is that we no longer
have a discrete set of values to explore for each hyperparameter; instead, we provide a
statistical distribution for each hyperparameter from which values can be randomly sam­
pled. Another method could be bayesian optimization is a form of sequential model­based
optimization (SMBO) algorithm that enables one to use the results of a previous iteration
to refine the sampling system used in the subsequent experiment.
Overall, performance can be increased further by training more complex neural network
architecture. This would require more advanced hardware with a higher computational
power, as increasing the number of nodes would lead to the high computational expense
associated with the complexity of the network’s architecture.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Significant Cyber Incidents. [Online]. Available: https://www.csis.org/programs/
strategic-technologies-program/significant-cyber-incidents.
[2]
42 Cyber Attack Statistics by Year: A Look at the Last Decade. [Online]. Available:
https://sectigostore.com/blog/42-cyber-attack-statistics-by-year-a-look-at-the-last-
decade/.
[3]
W. J. S. F. T. M. J. N., “Quantitative analysis of intrusion detection systems: Snort
and suricata,” Proceedings of Spie ­ the International Society for Optical Engineer­
ing, vol. 8757, p. 875 704, 2013, ISSN: 1996756x and 0277786x. DOI: 10.1117/12.
2015616.
[4]
M. Roesch, “Snort ­ Lightweight Intrusion Detection for Networks,” LISA ’99: Pro­
ceedings of the 13th USENIX conference on System administration, vol. November
1999, pp. 229–238, 1999, ISSN: 1880446251.
[5]
A. Stefan, “The Base­Rate Fallacy and the Difficulty of Intrusion Detection,” Acm
Transactions on Information and System Security, vol. 3, Issue 3, pp. 186–205,
2000, ISSN: 15577406 and 10949224. DOI: 10.1145/357830.357849.
[6]
S. Axelsson, “Intrusion Detection Systems: A Survey and Taxonomy),” 2000.
[7]
IDS vs. IPS: What’s the Difference? [Online]. Available: https://www.dnsstuff.com/
ids-vs-ips.
[8]
A. V. S. Vinayakumar R; Alazab Mamoun; Soman K. ; Poornachandran Prabaharan;
Al­Nemrat, “Deep Learning Approach for Intelligent Intrusion Detection System),”
Ieee Access, vol. 7, p. 6 287 639, 2019, ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2019.2895334.
[9]
ThomasPorterMichaelGough, How to Cheat at VoIP Security. 2007, pp. 185–206,
ISBN: 9789896540821. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9781597491693500086.
[10]
K. A. G. I. V. P. K. Joarder, “Survey of intrusion detection systems: techniques,
datasets and challenges),” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, p. 20, 2019, ISSN: 25233246 and
20964862. DOI: 10.1186/s42400-019-0038-7.
[11]
A Beginner’s Guide to Machine Learning. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/
@randylaosat/a-beginners-guide-to-machine-learning-dfadc19f6caf.
[12]
Supervised Machine Learning: What is, Algorithms, Example. [Online]. Available:
https://www.guru99.com/supervised-machine-learning.html.
[13]
Unsupervised Machine Learning: What is, Algorithms, Example. [Online]. Available:
https://www.guru99.com/unsupervised-machine-learning.html.
[14]
Reinforcement Learning: What is, Algorithms, Applications, Example. [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.guru99.com/reinforcement-learning-tutorial.html.
[15]
Deep Learning for Coders with fastai and PyTorch by Jeremy Howard, Sylvain
Gugger. [Online]. Available: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/deep-learning-
for/9781492045519/ch01.html.
[16]
M. Caudill, “Neural networks primer, part I,” Ieee Access, 1987.
[17]
Understanding Feedforward Neural Networks. [Online]. Available: https://learnopencv.
com/understanding-feedforward-neural-networks/.
[18]
A Basic Introduction To Neural Networks. [Online]. Available: http://pages.cs.wisc.
edu/~bolo/shipyard/neural/local.html.
[19]
R. J. W. David E. Rumelhart Geoffrey E. Hintont, “Learning representations by back­
propagating errors ),” Nature, vol. 323, 1986.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
59
==PAGE:70==
[20]
U. K. P. M. K. Md. Ali Hossain Md. Mijanur Rahman, “Implementation Of Back­
Propagation Neural Network For Isolated Bangla Speech Recognition),” Interna­
tional Journal of Information Sciences and Techniques (IJIST), vol. Vol.3, No.4,
2013.
[21]
S. K. Sarvepalli, “Deep Learning in Neural Networks: The science behind an Artificial
Brain),” 2015. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.22512.71682.
[22]
MIT Deep learning basics course. [Online]. Available: https://deeplearning.mit.edu/.
[23]
R. P. Adrian Groza, Mining Intelligence and Knowledge Exploration. 2018, pp. 225–
238. [Online]. Available: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/content/pdf/
10.10072F978-3-030-05918-7.pdf.
[24]
Y. D. Yalei Ding, “Intrusion Detection System for NSL­KDD Dataset Using Convo­
lutional Neural Networks ),” 2nd International Conference on Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, pp. 81–85, 2018, ISSN: 9781450366069. DOI:
10.1145/3297156.3297230.
[25]
Y. R. N. M. D. R. K. G. T. Kaori, “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and
application in radiology),” Insights Into Imaging, vol. 9, pp. 611–629, 2018, ISSN:
18694101. DOI: 10.1007/s13244-018-0639-9.
[26]
A Comprehensive Guide to Convolutional Neural Networks. [Online]. Available: https:
//towardsdatascience.com/a-comprehensive-guide-to-convolutional-neural-networks-
the-eli5-way-3bd2b1164a53.
[27]
Understanding Recurrent Neural Networks in 6 Minutes. [Online]. Available: https:
//medium.com/x8-the-ai-community/understanding-recurrent-neural-networks-in-6-
minutes-967ab51b94fe.
[28]
D. D. Protić, REVIEW OF KDD CUP ‘99, NSL­KDD AND KYOTO 2006+ DATASETS.
[Online]. Available: http://scindeks-clanci.ceon.rs/data/pdf/0042-8469/2018/0042-
84691803580P.pdf.
[29]
D. S. D. L. Markus Ring Sarah Wunderlich and A. Hotho, “A Survey of Network­
based Intrusion Detection Data Sets,” 2019.
[30]
J. S. Nour Moustafa, “The evaluation of Network Anomaly Detection Systems: Sta­
tistical analysis of the UNSW­NB15 data set and the comparison with the KDD99
data set,” Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, pp. 18–31, 2016.
[31]
——, “UNSW­NB15: a comprehensive data set for network intrusion detection sys­
tems (UNSW­NB15 network data set),” p. 7 348 942, 2015, ISSN: 9781467370080
and 9781467370073. DOI: 10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
[32]
Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset (CIC­IDS2017). [Online]. Available: https:
//www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html.
[33]
S. I. L. A. H. G. Ali, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and in­
trusion traffic characterization),” Icissp 2018 ­ Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, vol. 2018, pp. 108–116,
2018, ISSN: 9789897582820. DOI: 10.5220/0006639801080116.
[34]
S. B. Ranjit Panigrahi, “A detailed analysis of CICIDS2017 dataset for designing
Intrusion Detection Systems),” International Journal of Engineering Technology,
pp. 479–482, 2018.
[35]
G. A. S. I. L. A. H. G. Ali, “An Evaluation Framework for Intrusion Detection Dataset),”
Iciss 2016 ­ 2016 International Conference on Information Science and Security,
vol. 2016, p. 7 885 840, 2016, ISSN: 9781509054930. DOI: 10.1109/ICISSEC.2016.
7885840.
[36]
CSE­CIC­IDS2018 on AWS. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/
ids-2018.html.
60
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:71==
[37]
F. M. A. M. L. M. S. J. Helge, “Deep learning for cyber security intrusion detection:
Approaches, datasets, and comparative study),” Journal of Information Security and
Applications, vol. 50, 2019, ISSN: 22142134 and 22142126. DOI: 10.1016/j.jisa.
2019.102419.
[38]
C. Sridevi, “A Survey on Network Security ),” Global Journal of Computer Science
and Technology: E Network, Web Security, vol. 17 Issue 5, 2017, ISSN: 0975­4172.
[39]
D. P. S. B. Chopra, “A Survey on Different aspects of Network Security in Wired
and Wireless Networks),” International Journal of Latest Trends in Engineering and
Technology (IJLTET), 2014.
[40]
J. Day, “The OSI reference model),” Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 1334 –1340,
1984. DOI: 10.1109/PROC.1983.12775.
[41]
J.­J. J. N. Surya, “A survey of emerging threats in cybersecurity),” Journal of Com­
puter and System Sciences, vol. 80, Issue 5, pp. 973–993, 2014, ISSN: 10902724
and 00220000. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcss.2014.02.005.
[42]
M. T. Z. Tranos, “Malware analysis and detection in enterprise systems),” Proceed­
ings ­ 15th Ieee International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing
With Applications and 16th Ieee International Conference on Ubiquitous Comput­
ing and Communications, Ispa/iucc 2017, pp. 1304–1310, 2017, ISSN: 21589208
and 21589178. DOI: 10.1109/ISPA/IUCC.2017.00199.
[43]
D. D. K. R. D. Sujatha .K, “A REVIEW PAPER ON CRYPTOGRAPHY AND NET­
WORK SECURITY),” International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 119
No. 17, pp. 1279–1284, 2018, ISSN: 1314­3395.
[44]
H. Abie, “An overview of firewall technologies),” Telektronikk, vol. 96, Issue 3, pp. 47–
52, 2000, ISSN: 18918220 and 00857130.
[45]
M. A. B. I. N. B. S. Bharanidharan, “A brief introduction to intrusion detection sys­
tem),” Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 330, pp. 263–
271, 2012, ISSN: 18650929 and 18650937. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-35197-6_29.
[46]
K Richards, “Network based intrusion detection: A review of technologies),” Com­
puters and Security, vol. 18, Issue 8, pp. 671–682, 1999, ISSN: 18726208 and
01674048. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-4048(99)80131-X.
[47]
K. P. G. Ali, “Research on intrusion detection and response: A survey),” International
Journal of Network Security, vol. 1, Issue 2, pp. 84–102, 2005, ISSN: 18163548 and
1816353x.
[48]
B. E. C. E. V. L. M., “A comparison of intrusion detection systems),” Computers and
Security, vol. 20, Issue 8, pp. 676–683, 2001, ISSN: 18726208 and 01674048. DOI:
10.1016/S0167-4048(01)00806-9.
[49]
J. O. Nehinbe, “A critical evaluation of datasets for investigating IDSs and IPSs
researches),” Proceedings of 2011, 10th Ieee International Conference on Cyber­
netic Intelligent Systems, Cis 2011, p. 6 169 141, 2011, ISSN: 9781467306874 and
9781467306881. DOI: 10.1109/CIS.2011.6169141.
[50]
A. H. L. A. A. G. Iman Sharafaldin Amirhossein Gharib, “Towards a Reliable Intru­
sion Detection Benchmark Dataset),” Software Networking, vol. 2017, pp. 177–200,
2017. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13052/jsn2445-9739.2017.009.
[51]
M. John, “A Critique of the 1998 and 1999 DARPA Intrusion Detection System Eval­
uations as Performed by Lincoln Laboratory),” Acm Transactions on Information
and System Security, vol. 3, Issue 4, pp. 262–294, 2000, ISSN: 15577406 and
10949224. DOI: 10.1145/382912.382923.
[52]
T. M. B. E. L. W. G. A. A., “A detailed analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set),”
Ieee Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Appli­
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
61
==PAGE:72==
cations, Cisda 2009, vol. 2009, p. 5 356 528, 2009, ISSN: 9781424437641 and
9781424437634. DOI: 10.1109/CISDA.2009.5356528.
[53]
L. G. Y. A. M. S. P. Joseph, “Measuring the variability of CAIDA internet traffic
traces),” 19th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology,
Iccit 2016, vol. 2016, p. 7 860 158, 2016, ISSN: 9781509040696 , 9781509040902
and 9781509040896. DOI: 10.1109/ICCITECHN.2016.7860158.
[54]
S. J. T. H. O. Y. E. M. I. D. N. Koji, “Statistical analysis of honeypot data and building
of Kyoto 2006+ dataset for NIDS evaluation),” Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on
Building Analysis Datasets and Gathering Experience Returns for Security, Badgers
2011, vol. 2011, pp. 29–36, 2011, ISSN: 9781450307680. DOI: 10.1145/1978672.
1978676.
[55]
X. M. H. Jiankun, “Evaluating host­based anomaly detection systems: A prelimi­
nary analysis of ADFA­LD),” Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Building Analy­
sis Datasets and Gathering Experience Returns for Security, Badgers 2011, vol. 3,
p. 6 743 952, 2013, ISSN: 9781479927630 and 9781479927647. DOI: 10.1109/
CISP.2013.6743952.
[56]
M. M. Marek Małowidzki Przemysław Bereziński, “Network Intrusion Detection: Half
a Kingdom for a Good Dataset ),” IST­108: Cyber Defence Situational Awareness,
2015.
[57]
F. R. I. M. A. T. H. N. Flaih, “Performance analysis of flow­based attacks detection
on CSE­CIC­IDS2018 dataset using deep learning,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 20, Issue 3, pp. 1413–1418, 2020, ISSN:
25024760 and 25024752. DOI: 10.11591/ijeecs.v20.i3.pp1413-1418.
[58]
M. S. J. G. S. A, “Intrusion detection using neural networks and support vector
machines),” Ieee International Conference on Neural Networks (icnn), vol. 2002,
pp. 1702–1707, 2002, ISSN: 10987576.
[59]
T. C. F. H. Y. F. L. C. Y. L. W. Yang, “Intrusion detection by machine learning: A
review,” Expert Systems With Applications, vol. 36, Issue 10, pp. 11 994–12 000,
2009, ISSN: 09574174 and 18736793. DOI: 10.1016/j.eswa.2009.05.029.
[60]
H. W. H. W. M. Steve, “AdaBoost­based algorithm for network intrusion detec­
tion,” Ieee Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics,
vol. 2008, pp. 577–583, 2008, ISSN: 19410492 and 10834419. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
TSMCB.2007.914695.
[61]
K. L. A. M. T. Bhavani, “A new intrusion detection system using support vector ma­
chines and hierarchical clustering,” Vldb Journal, vol. Volume 16, Issue 4, pp. 507–
521, 2007, ISSN: 0949877x and 10668888. DOI: 10.1007/s00778-006-0002-5.
[62]
A. N. B. B. S. E. Z, “Naive Bayesian networks and decision trees in intrusion de­
tection systems,” Technique Et Science Informatiques, vol. Volume 25, Issue 2,
pp. 167–95, 2006, ISSN: 21165920 and 07524072. DOI: 10.3166/tsi.25.167-196.
[63]
F. N. J. M. A., “Random Forest Modeling for Network Intrusion Detection System,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 89, pp. 213–217, 2016, ISSN: 18770509. DOI:
10.1016/j.procs.2016.06.047.
[64]
R. M. M. S. F. R. A. P. A. D. Alfred, “Intrusion Detection using Decision Tree Model in
High­Speed Environment,” Icsns 2018 ­ Proceedings of Ieee International Confer­
ence on Soft­computing and Network Security, vol. 2008, p. 8 573 631, 2018, ISSN:
26394308. DOI: 10.1109/ICSNS.2018.8573631.
[65]
Cisco Security Analytics White Paper. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisco.com/
c/en/us/products/collateral/security/stealthwatch/white-paper-c11-740605.html.
[66]
Azure Sentinel. [Online]. Available: https://azure.microsoft.com/en- ca/services/
azure-sentinel/.
62
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:73==
[67]
P. V. J. K. Ansam Khraisat Iqbal Gondal, “Survey of intrusion detection systems:
techniques, datasets and challenges),” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, p. 20, 2019, ISSN:
25233246 and 20964862. DOI: 10.1186/s42400-019-0038-7.
[68]
Y. J. J. D. L. C. W. L. Ping, “A Comparative Study of Off­Line Deep Learning Based
Network Intrusion Detection,” International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future
Networks, Icufn, vol. 2018, p. 8 436 774, 2018, ISSN: 21658536 and 21658528.
DOI: 10.1109/ICUFN.2018.8436774.
[69]
L. Ferrag Mohamed Amine1; Maglaras, “DeepCoin: A Novel Deep Learning and
Blockchain­Based Energy Exchange Framework for Smart Grids,” Ieee Transac­
tions on Engineering Management, vol. 67, Issue 4, p. 8 758 147, 2020, ISSN: 15580040.
DOI: 10.1109/TEM.2019.2922936.
[70]
A. K. P. Carla, “Toward an online anomaly intrusion detection system based on
deep learning,” Proceedings ­ 2016 15th Ieee International Conference on Ma­
chine Learning and Applications, Icmla 2016, vol. 2016, p. 7 838 144, 2016, ISSN:
9781509061662 and 9781509061679. DOI: 10.1109/ICMLA.2016.167.
[71]
S. M. J. Z. F. Ali, “Intrusion detection using reduced­size RNN based on feature
grouping,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 21, Issue 6, pp. 1185–1190,
2012, ISSN: 14333058 and 09410643. DOI: 10.1007/s00521-010-0487-0.
[72]
P. S. D. Christian, “Deep Feature Extraction for multi­Class Intrusion Detection in
Industrial Control Systems,” International Journal of Computer Theory and Engi­
neering, vol. 9, Issue 5, pp. 374–9, 2017, ISSN: 17938201. DOI: 10.7763/IJCTE.
2017.V9.1169.
[73]
L. Z. Q. Z. H. K. Y. X. Y. Shuxiong, “Intrusion detection using convolutional neural
networks for representation learning,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (includ­
ing Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioin­
formatics, vol. 10638, pp. 858–866, 2017, ISSN: 16113349 and 03029743. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-70139-4_87.
[74]
V. R. S. K. P. P. Prabaharan, “Applying convolutional neural network for network in­
trusion detection,” 2017 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Com­
munications and Informatics, Icacci 2017, vol. 2017, pp. 1222–1228, 2017, ISSN:
9781509063673 and 9781509063666. DOI: 10.1109/ICACCI.2017.8126009.
[75]
Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset (CIC­IDS2017). [Online]. Available: https:
//www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html.
[76]
Introduction to t­SNE. [Online]. Available: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / an -
introduction-to-t-sne-with-python-example-5a3a293108d1.
[77]
How to Handle Imbalanced Classes in Machine Learning. [Online]. Available: https:
//elitedatascience.com/imbalanced-classes.
[78]
RobustScaler. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.preprocessing.RobustScaler.html.
[79]
Y. R. N. M. D. R. K. G. T. Kaori, “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and
application in radiology,” Insights Into Imaging, vol. Volume 32, Issue 3, pp. 611–
629, 2018, ISSN: 18694101. DOI: 10.1007/s13244-018-0639-9.
[80]
The Sequential model. [Online]. Available: https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras/
sequential_model.
[81]
D. Y. Z. Yuqing, “Intrusion detection system for NSL­KDD dataset using convolu­
tional neural networks,” Acm International Conference Proceeding Series, vol. 2018,
pp. 81–85, 2018, ISSN: 9781450366069. DOI: 10.1145/3297156.3297230.
[82]
Simple RNN. [Online]. Available: https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/
keras/layers/SimpleRNN.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
63
==PAGE:74==
[83]
J. K. C. W. Marian, “On loss functions for deep neural networks in classification,”
Schedae Informaticae, vol. 25, pp. 49–59, 2016, ISSN: 20838476 , 17323916 and
08600295. DOI: 10.4467/20838476SI.16.004.6185.
[84]
K. D. P. B. J. Lei, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 3rd International
Conference on Learning Representations, Iclr 2015 ­ Conference Track Proceed­
ings, vol. 2015, 2015.
[85]
R. J. D. P. A. L. J. Antonio, “Sensitivity Analysis of k­Fold Cross Validation in Pre­
diction Error Estimation,” Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel­
ligence, vol. Volume 32, Issue 3, pp. 569–575, 2010, ISSN: 19393539 , 01628828
and 21609292. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2009.187.
[86]
Cross­validation: evaluating estimator performance. [Online]. Available: https://
scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/cross_validation.html.
[87]
K­fold Cross­Validation. [Online]. Available: https://machinelearningmastery.com/k-
fold-cross-validation/.
[88]
How to Use TensorBoard? [Online]. Available: https : / / itnext . io / how - to - use -
tensorboard-5d82f8654496.
[89]
S. N. H. G. K. A. S. I. S. Ruslan, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, pp. 1929–1958,
2014, ISSN: 15337928 and 15324435.
[90]
Dropout Neural Network Layer In Keras Explained. [Online]. Available: https://
towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-part-20-dropout-keras-layers-explained-
8c9f6dc4c9ab.
[91]
Artificial Neural Networks. [Online]. Available: https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~nuric/
teaching/imperial-college-machine-learning-neural-networks.html.
[92]
V. R. A. M. S. K. P. P. P. A.­N. A. V. Sitalakshmi, “Deep Learning Approach for
Intelligent Intrusion Detection System,” Ieee Access, vol. 7, Issue 99, p. 6 287 639,
2019, ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2895334.
[93]
F. Y. S. R. E., “A Decision­Theoretic Generalization of On­Line Learning and an
Application to Boosting,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 55, Issue
1, pp. 119–139, 1997, ISSN: 10902724 and 00220000. DOI: 10.1006/jcss.1997.1504.
[94]
Decision Tree vs. Random Forest – Which Algorithm Should you Use? [Online].
Available: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/05/decision-tree-vs-random-
forest-algorithm/.
[95]
B. A. L. G. Erhan, “A Survey of Data Mining and Machine Learning Methods for
Cyber Security Intrusion Detection,” Ieee Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
vol. 18, Issue 2, p. 7 307 098, 2016, ISSN: 1553877x and 2373745x. DOI: 10.1109/
COMST.2015.2494502.
64
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendices
A.1
Data visualization
Figure A.1: KDDCUP’99 data visualisation in 2D space.
Figure A.2: UNSW­15 data visualisation in 2D space.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.3: KDDCUP’99 heat­map based on correlation matrix.
Figure A.4: UNSW­15 heat­map based on correlation matrix.
66
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.5: CICIDS2017 data visualisation in 2D space.
Figure A.6: CICIDS2018 data visualisation in 2D space.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.7: CICIDS2017 heat­map based on correlation matrix.
68
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.8: CICIDS2018 heat­map based on correlation matrix.
Intrusion detection based on artificial neural network approach
69
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
