==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Low-power Neuron Processor for
Spiking Neural Networks
A Master Thesis
Jacob Hebsgaard Jessen (s153427)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Artificial Neural Networks have for many years dominated the space of Artificial In-
telligence, when it comes to cognitive tasks such as speech recognition and object
detection. However, high complexity of these networks demand high power consump-
tion and long execution time, which restricts the use of artificial neural networks in
smaller applications and devices. The introduction of Spiking Neural Networks has
the potential to eliminate those restrictions by reducing the complexity and amount
of information that is shared in the network. This has given rise to implementing
spiking neural networks in highly power-constrained devices, such as hearing aids.
This Master’s thesis presents the design of a neuron processor, which is imple-
mented in a neuromorphic accelerator, intended for running inference in spiking
neural networks.
The focus of the design is on very low-power applications, and
utilizes and discusses a number of power reduction techniques for the purpose of
assessing whether such a low-power neuron processor would be feasible for highly
power-constrained devices. The presented processor is the second iteration design,
and has successfully performed significant dynamic power reduction in comparison to
the previous iteration for implementation on the Genesys 2 Kintex-7 FPGA board.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, May 9, 2021
Jacob Hebsgaard Jessen (s153427)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jens Sparsø and Zuzana Jelcicova for providing
excellent guidance and clarity, asking the right questions and giving me the hard
truths to help me move forward in my work through this Master’s project. I would
also like to thank Anthon Vincent Riber for providing the foundation that my thesis
is built on, and for helping with any questions I might have had along the way. Lastly,
I would like to thank my wife, Natalie Lomax Jessen, for being a power-house of a
woman, balancing work and parenting, while being the most supportive and uplifting
wife through this long and sometimes trialing time.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Terminology List
1. Spiking Neuron Network Terminology
• Spike - Neurons in a spiking neural network communicate with each other
using spikes, which are binary events. A spike carries an address ID for
the data that that the spike represents.
• Neuron - Neurons model membrane potential. When a neuron’s mem-
brane potential exceeds a specific threshold, it will generate a spike.
• Synapse - A connection between two neurons in a spiking neural network
propagating spikes.
• Time-step - Spiking neuron networks are evaluated in discrete time-steps.
Spiking neural networks can evaluate non-finite input spike trains. The
duration of a time-step must allow the state of the network to be fully
evaluated.
• Spike Train - a series of spikes, usually on the input of a spiking neural
network. Sensory data must be encoded into spikes before being processed
by the network.
2. Acronyms
• AER - Address Event Representation
• ANN - Artificial Neural Network
• BRAM - Block RAM
• Chisel - Constructing Hardware In a Scala Embedded Language
• CLB - Configurable Logic Block
• CNN - Convolutional Neural Network
• FPGA - Field Programmable Gate Array
• FCNN - Fully Connected Neural Network
• FSM - Finite State Machine
==PAGE:10==
viii
Terminology List
• FMSD - FSM with Data-path
• IoT - Internet of Things
• LIF - Leaky Integrate and Fire
• LSB - Least Significant Bit
• LUT - Look-Up Table
• MAC - Multiply And Accumulate
• ML - Machine Learning
• MMCM - Mixed-Mode Clock Manager
• MNIST - Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database
• MSB - Most Significant Bit
• NEU - Neuron Evaluation Unit
• NoC - Network-on-Chip
• NVRAM - Non-Volatile RAM
• OCC - Off-Chip Communication
• RAM - Random-Access Memory
• RNN - Recurrent Neural Network
• SAIF - Switching Activity Interchange Format
• SNN - Spiking Neural Network
• UART - Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter
• VCD - Value Change Dump
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Terminology List
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Artificial Neural Networks
2
1.1.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
3
1.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
4
1.2
Advantages & Disadantages
5
1.2.1
Second Generation ANNs
5
1.2.2
Third Generation ANNs
5
1.3
Thesis Subject
6
2
Theory & Background
9
2.1
Overview of Spiking Neural Networks
10
2.1.1
Signal Processing in the brain
10
2.1.2
Spiking Neural Networks
11
2.1.3
Applications
14
2.2
Network Overview
15
2.2.1
Network Models
15
2.2.2
Neuromorphic Crossbar
16
2.2.3
Neuromorphic Accelerator Design Structure
18
2.2.4
Neuron Core
18
2.3
FPGAs & ASICs
22
2.3.1
Overview of FPGAs and ASICs
23
2.3.2
Comparison
23
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3
Design
25
3.1
Design Objective
26
3.2
Neuron Block
26
3.2.1
Neuron Evaluation Unit
26
3.2.2
Evaluation Memory
28
3.2.3
Control Unit
28
3.3
Configuration Parameters
32
4
Implementation
33
4.1
Chisel
34
4.2
Parameterized Design
34
4.3
Network Configuration
35
4.3.1
Memories
35
4.4
Mixing Chisel & VHDL
36
4.4.1
Converting Chisel to VHDL
36
4.4.2
Black Box
38
4.5
Debugging & Testing
39
4.5.1
Simulation Setup
40
4.5.2
Simulating Mixed Language Designs
41
4.6
User Guide
44
4.6.1
Windows 10
45
4.6.2
Cloning GitHub Repository
45
4.6.3
Installing software and dependencies
46
4.6.4
NeuronProcessor setup
46
4.6.5
Vivado setup
47
4.6.6
NeuronProcessor Simulation
47
4.6.7
Testing with FPGA
47
5
Results
49
5.1
Reference network
50
5.1.1
Resource Consumption
50
5.1.2
Power Consumption
50
5.2
Design w/ Clock Gating
52
5.2.1
Resource Consumption
52
5.2.2
Power Consumption
53
6
Analysis
57
6.1
Dynamic Power Reduction
58
6.1.1
Clock Gating
58
6.1.2
Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling
61
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
6.2
Static Power Reduction
61
6.2.1
Power Gating
62
6.3
Gap Between FPGAs & ASICs
63
7
Discussion
65
7.1
ASIC Power Estimations
66
7.2
Future Work
67
7.2.1
Asynchronous Design
67
7.2.2
Gated Clock
67
7.2.3
Network-on-Chip
67
7.2.4
Memory Configuration
68
7.3
Project Evaluation
68
7.3.1
Mixing Chisel & VHDL
68
7.3.2
Results
69
7.3.3
Analysis & Discussion
69
8
Conclusion
71
A Hardware Development
73
A.1 Neuron Block Related
73
A.1.1
Top-level
73
A.1.2
Control Unit
84
A.1.3
Neuron Evaluation Unit
92
A.1.4
Evaluation Memory
95
A.1.5
Constants & Records Package
97
A.1.6
Neurons (Scala)
99
A.2 Blackbox Test-files
100
A.2.1
neuroTop (Verilog)
100
A.2.2
testbench
102
Bibliography
107
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Phones today can perform billions of operations per second and is vastly superior at
performing arithmetic to the human brain. The brain excels at processing a contin-
uous stream of information from our surroundings. It was not designed to do fast
arithmetic, so it does it rather badly.
In the last decades, performing arithmetic
has been the focus of modern day computing, and each generation of artificial neural
networks (ANNs), inspired by the neurons in the brain, has improved tremendously.
Second generation ANNs make up the back-bone of today’s machine learning (ML) ap-
plications. The third generation, called spiking neural networks (SNNs), more closely
models the biological neurons’ activity and shows potential for processing continuous
data streams similar to the brain. However, these are still in their early development
and not yet widely used in real life applications.
This chapter starts with a brief overview of ANNs and some key advantages and dis-
advantages of the second and third generation, as well as a motivation for employing
the third generation, SNNs. Lastly, a short introduction into the foundational work,
on which this master’s project is based.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Artificial Neural Networks
Within the second generation ANNs there are many types of networks, each tailored to
doing certain tasks well. A generic structure of a second generation ANN is illustrated
in figure 1.1.
This is called a fully connected feed-forward ANN, or FCNN, and
consists of an input and an output layer with one or more hidden layers in-between.
Figure 1.1: Simple illustration of the structure of a fully connected feed-forward
artificial neuron network (FCNN).
The neurons in the input layer receive encoded data directly from the environment
surrounding it, which could be image data, speech, or other recognition or classifica-
tion data. A neuron (illustrated by a circle) in one layer is connected to all neurons
in the next layer via synapses (illustrated by arrows). The list below provides an
overview of the symbols and definitions used in figure 1.1:
• A neuron output is the activation (a) of a weighted sum of inputs to that neuron
[1].
• Each neuron also has a unique bias (b), which is a type of threshold. The higher
the value of the bias the easier it is for the neuron to output its value to the
next layer.
• Synapses have unique weights (w). The higher the value of the weight the more
emphasis on that synapse input to the neuron in the next layer.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Artificial Neural Networks
3
al
m = σ
(n−1
∑
i=0
wnmal−1
n
+ bl
m
)
(1.1)
Equation 1.1 [2] shows the relation between the activation of the mth neuron in the
lth layer and the activations in the (l −1)th layer. The activation function (σ) is the
sum of all the neurons in the (l−1)th layer and the weights of the synapses connecting
neuron in the lth layer and all the neurons in the (l −1)th layer. Finally, the bias of
the mth neuron in the lth layer is added to the sum. The activation function adds
non-linearity to the network. There are several commonly used functions such as
ReLU, Softmax, tanH and Sigmoid [3].
Furthermore, for a network to generate accurate results it must be trained. For
instance, a network used to classify digits may be trained on tens of thousands of im-
ages containing handwritten digits (0 to 9), most commonly using the MNIST dataset.
The network is initialized with arbitrary weight and bias values, and the known in-
put is used as a reference on the output, with which the algorithm determines a loss
function (also known as cost function). This is simply a function comparing the out-
put value to the reference value, informing the algorithm of the margin of error. The
derivatives of this function can be used to compute the gradient of the loss. Imagine a
valley, the learning algorithm performs backpropagation, similar to gradient descent,
which adjusts the weights and biases in the ”opposite direction” of the gradient of the
valley, until the gradient ideally is flat (∇C ≈0). This minimizes the loss function
through repetition [4] [2]. After having trained the network, it will be able to perform
inference on handwritten digits that were not included in the training set.
There are a number of different types of second generation networks, which vary in
their structures, but they share the same fundamentals and are developed from the
principals of the FCNN in figure 1.1 and equation 1.1. In order to get a slightly better
understanding of the second generation neural networks, I will briefly describe the
main features of the two most widely known, which are used for completely different
purposes, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) [1].
1.1.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
The main difference between CNNs and RNNs is their ability to process temporal
data that comes in sequences. CNNs are used in computer vision to recognize objects
or patterns in images. They employ filters, similar to weights, within one or more
convolutional layers to transform the data by extracting various features from the
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture [5]
input image resulting in a feature map. The pooling layer decreases the size of the
convolved feature map to reduce computational costs.
These layers make up the
feature extraction of the CNN followed by the classification stage, which is similar to
the FCNN. This is illustrated in figure 1.2.
1.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent networks are designed to interpret temporal or sequential information, such
as time series data, text or audio data. RNNs use other data points in the sequence
to make better predictions. This is done by reusing the activations from previous
neurons as well as later neurons. Figure 1.3 illustrates the architecture of the RNN
in which x and h are the input and the output layer, respectively. A is the activations
of the neurons in the hidden layers, which has a feedback loop.
Certain RNNs exist that are capable of learning long-term dependencies, rather than
just short term. These are called Long Short Term Memory Networks (LSTMs) [6].
Figure 1.3: Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture. x and h are the input
and output layer, respectively. A is the activations of the neurons in the hidden layers,
which has a feedback loop [7].
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Advantages & Disadantages
5
1.2
Advantages & Disadantages
1.2.1
Second Generation ANNs
The benefits and drawbacks of second generation ANNs are not based on any spe-
cific networks. The list below includes the most relevant features that are generally
associated with second generation ANNs.
+ Much research has already been done within second generation neural networks.
This means that the various types of networks use mature and well-defined
architectures.
+ Several platforms exist, which provide easy accessibility to an ecosystem of tools,
libraries and community resources [8] [9].
+ Second generation ANNs perform better than any other type of ANNs within
their respective fields, and they use relatively simple neuron models [10] [11].
−Complex challenges lead to very large networks with up to a 100 hidden layers
[12].
−Large networks need longer training before they can perform inference in actual
applications. Even then it may take a long time for the network to produce a
result, as some networks perform billions of operations per tasks.
−Power consumption, which is a big factor for large complex memory heavy
networks, is maybe the most significant disadvantage. Much research has been
done to lower the power consumption [13] [14] [15].
−Other drawbacks such as difficulty with real-time execution, which has its own
set of requirements [13], and large memories containing all the parameter values
are also relevant.
1.2.2
Third Generation ANNs
From this point on, third generation ANNs will only be referred to as SNNs. SNNs are
more closely inspired by the brain than second gen. ANNs, and since the brain is the
most power efficient at processing real-world sensory data, compared to ANNs, this
provides great prospects for developing power efficient SNNs [16]. SNNs are similar
to RNNs in the sense that both are optimized on tasks such as making decisions
based on continuous input streams, while SNNs have more potential for real-time
and real-world applications.
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
+ A major advantage of SNNs is that a neuron propagates a spike, which is a
binary value, rather than real values in the network. This reduces the power
requirements and has potential in low-power applications.
+ Performing arithmetic operations is less complex than for second generation
ANNs.
+ SNNs are ideal for real-time applications processing spatio-temporal event-based
information from neuromorphic sensors. Therefore, spiking activity will poten-
tially be quite sparse as one spike carries significant information, which results
in less switching activity and opens up possibilities of power reduction. This
will be explored more throughout the thesis [17].
+ Spikes begin to propagate immediately to higher layers as soon as the lower
layer provides sufficient activity.
It is not necessary to wait for a complete
input sequence to finish.
−One of the biggest drawbacks is that the accuracy of SNNs is still not on par
with second gen. ANNs for object classification such as MNIST [16].
−SNNs do not have the array of platforms, tools and architectures established as
the second gen. networks do. SNNs are still at a research stage.
−SNNs have complex neuron models compared to second gen. networks and are
best run on neuromorphic hardware.
1.3
Thesis Subject
The disadvantages of second gen. ANNs seem more difficult to improve than those
of SNNs, since the drawbacks of SNNs are due to a less mature ecosystem, which we
can assume will only improve with time. Many of second gen. ANNs’ challenges are
among the advantages of SNNs, so by investing in SNNs we may be able to eliminate
many drawbacks of the second generation as well as overcome the current drawbacks
of the third generation networks. This is largely thanks to the way spikes carry infor-
mation, which creates beneficial ripple effects throughout the network.
A first iteration of a neuromorphic accelerator design capable of running SNNs for low-
power applications has already been presented in the Master Thesis Power-efficient
Hardware Platform for Spiking Neural Networks [18]. The main focus was to design
a functional SNN with minimal accuracy loss and less focus on low-power design.
This thesis presents a second iteration of the neuron block within the existing design,
which is converted from the hardware description language Chisel to VHDL in order to
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Thesis Subject
7
implement low-power optimizations more easily into the network, as well as analyzing
optimization steps moving forward.
The thesis is divided into the following chapters:
• In chapter 2, the theory on SNNs is explained in more depth along with the
background work regarding the first iteration design. This is followed by the
necessary theory regarding low-power optimizations.
• The design of the second iteration of the neuron block, including the design
objective, as well as clock gating analysis are presented in chapter 3.
• Chapter 4 presents the implementation of the design, including the consider-
ations when mixing Chisel and VHDL, and the challenges of debugging and
testing.
• Chapter 5 presents the results of the implementation and compares them to
results achieved in previous work.
• Analysis of the power reduction technique utilized in the neuron processor is
presented in chapter 6, along with other optimizations that could be relevant.
Lastly, an analysis of FPGAs and ASICs and comparisons between the two has
been described.
• Chapter 7 discusses potential power estimations for ASICs based on the results
presented, followed by future work, and lastly evaluating the project.
• The conclusion is presented in chapter 8.
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Theory & Background
This chapter provides the necessary theory on spiking neural networks, along with
an overall understanding of the neuromorphic accelerator designed in previous work,
which are both needed in order to follow along with the design of the presented neuron
processor. Theory on FPGAs and ASICs is also presented, which lays the foundation
for the power analysis and discussion later in the thesis.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Theory & Background
2.1
Overview of Spiking Neural Networks
The brain consists of 80 billion neurons interconnected, directly or indirectly, through
100 trillion synapses, adding up to a vastly complex spatial structure forming a huge
recurrent neural network (using ANN terminology), which has evolved over time.
Considering that computers have existed for less than a century, it would seem that
we have still only scratched the surface of what is to come in the future of computing.
Therefore, principals from the brain provide great inspiration for neural networks as
the brain is the ultimate information processing machine.
SNNs and the deep learning algorithms for these networks have been inspired by the
structure, organisation and aspects of deep learning and deep knowledge representa-
tion in the human brain.
The intention is not to model the brain’s precise structural and functional com-
plexity but to (1) borrow spatio-temporal information processing principles for brain-
inspired SNN, and (2) to understand data in the brain, when modeled with SNN, for
a more accurate analysis and understanding of the processes that generated that data
in the brain.
2.1.1
Signal Processing in the brain
Figure 2.1 illustrates the overall structure of a neuron in the brain and its connection
to other neurons. A neuron uses axons to connect with and talk to other neurons.
These carry information, in the form of electrical impulses called membrane potentials,
to axon terminals. Between an axon terminal and a dendrite is a gap, which is the
synapse. Neurotransmitters receive the information at the axon terminal, cross the
synapse and bind themselves to receptors connected to the other neuron. Depending
on the neurotransmitter, it either stimulates the other neuron or inhibits it, making
it more or less likely to propagate information itself [19].
The brain utilizes redundancy in the sense that every information is stored, transmit-
ted and processed by a redundant number of neurons and synapses, which prevents
loss of information in case of neural damage, due to aging for instance. Therefore,
the performance of the brain does not drop drastically but instead slowly over time.
ANNs may also use this principle so that loss of neurons and synapses degrades non-
linearly and provides robustness to the network so that it will still perform well.
Furthermore, the brain is able to associate a certain smell with a specific object
and/or memory. This is due to the fact that information is represented by place in the
brain as a result of its anatomical framework. For instance, hearing the word ”apple”
is associated through synaptic weights with the representation in other cortexes, such
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Overview of Spiking Neural Networks
11
Figure 2.1: Structure of neurons with axons, synapses and dendrites
as the image representation of an apple (parietal cortex), the neural representation of
the smell (olfactory cortex), memories of picking apples, and facts about them. This
is a result of learning, creating long term memory in the synaptic weights. Short term
memory is associated with the neuronal membrane potential.
Finally, neurons in the cerebral cortex oscillate, in a synchronized fashion, with fre-
quencies of around 40Hz during sensory stimulation. This synchronization occurs
between different areas in the cortex, between the cortex and the thalamus, and even
between the left and right hemisphere of the brain.
Neurons are thereby able to
discharge (spike) with the same frequency and phase across great distances, which
results in a distributed pattern of simultaneously firing neurons in space and time [20,
Ch. 3] [21].
2.1.2
Spiking Neural Networks
The spiking neural network is a preferred computational paradigm for modelling tem-
poral and spatio-temporal data and for building brain-inspired artifial intelligence
(AI). Figure 2.2 illustrates a simple SNN structure. The overall structure is similar
to second gen. ANNs (figure 1.1). However, SNN consists of layers of neurons con-
nected by synapses similar to the brain (figure 2.1). As mentioned, SNN processes
information as spikes, which are binary values. The input has to be converted to a
spike train, using a model called spike encoding, used as input over time. This makes
it ideal for real-time applications. The spikes are processed in the neurons using a
neuron model. The next subsections provide background information of SNNs and
how the principles (models) from the brain are to be considered. The synaptic model
is quite simple and will be discussed in later sections [20, Ch. 4].
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Theory & Background
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the structure of a spiking neural network, which consists
of the three components: (1) encoding model, (2) neuron model, (3) and synapses
model [18]
2.1.2.1
Spike Encoding
The brain encodes information into electrical spikes, which compacts the information
representation, enables fast sensory detection useful for real-time modelling, provides
simple and fast processing, and processes information in parallel as well as being en-
ergy efficient. The spike encoding in SNN is therefore a crucial first step, to which
there are two main categories of neuronal information encoding schemes that result
in different spike characteristics in the way that information is represented in the
network. The two schemes are illustrated in figure 2.3. Many encoding algorithms
have been developed based on these two schemes, which will not be explored in this
thesis.
Rate-based Encoding
In SNN, a sequence of spikes (spike train) consists of the encoded input channel, which
is injected into the network. The values that have been encoded are represented in
the network as the rate at which the spikes occur in the spike train within a specified
time window. Within rate-based encoding there are a few different methods, which
each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Nevertheless, rate encoding is still
practical in modelling spike activities in many brain areas. It is also simpler to com-
prehend and execute than time-based encoding.
Time-based encoding
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Overview of Spiking Neural Networks
13
Time-based encoding is based on the exact timing of spikes in a given time period. The
earlier the spike occurs, within a time interval, the higher the value representation.
The advantage is fewer spikes, meaning less switching activity.
However, it is a
more complex implementation than rate-based encoding, and it requires smaller time
intervals and more work incorporating it into the neuron models.
Figure 2.3: Rate-based and time-based encoding schemes. (1) Rate of spikes is pro-
portional to the value representation. (2) The time at which the spike occurs, within
a time period, represents the given value.
2.1.2.2
Neuron Models
All SNN neurons model the neuron’s membrane potential, which is a representation of
how excited a neuron is. When a neuron receives a spike on the input the membrane
potential increases based on the value representation of that spike (or spike train).
Every neuron has a unique potential threshold, and if the membrane potential exceeds
that threshold, the neuron will output (fire) a spike carrying the representation of a
specific value. All the neurons that share a synapse with this particular neuron will
receive the spike, and the membrane potential of that particular neuron is reset to a
specific value.
Many SNN neurons also model a potential decay. This is an important addition for
achieving more brain-inspired SNNs. The decay causes the membrane potential to
decrease over time. Without it the value of the membrane potential could rest just
under the threshold value indefinitely until an arbitrary spike causes the neuron to
exceed the threshold and fire. However, with the potential decay this would not be
possible, as the membrane potential would drop. This prevents random spikes, it
enhances connections between high-activity neurons, and diminish the connections
between low-activity neurons. Introducing decay thereby lowers switching activity
and strengthens more important connections, just like it would be the case in the
brain.
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Theory & Background
A refractory period is another parameter that can be implemented in SNN. This is a
period of time, after the neuron has fired, where the membrane potential is kept at its
reset value. This prevents the spike activity from being too active, so to speak, which
lowers the sensitivity of input stimuli. This, like decay, reduces switching activity
and therefore power consumption [22].
Figure 2.4: (top) Input spike stimulus into the neuron, (bottom) membrane potential
increasing until it exceeds the threshold and enters refractory period, (middle) neuron
emitting an output spike [20, Ch. 4]
Many spiking neuron models exist, some more biologically driven [23] - others more
computationally driven [24]. This thesis focuses on one of these, namely the Leaky
Integrate & Fire Model (LIF/LIFM). LIFM views the neuron as a leaky integrator,
and has similar features to the general model described above. It is modelled as a
resistor and capacitor in parallel, where the voltage over the two is the membrane
potential, and the current pulses are the spikes. The LIFM is viewed as the best
known spiking neuron model due to its simple nature and low computational cost.
Figure 2.4 illustrates the input spike stimulus into the neuron (top), the response in
the membrane potential increasing until it exceeds the threshold and enters refractory
period (bottom), and the neuron emits an output spike (middle).
2.1.3
Applications
SNNs are being explored for efficient learning systems, especially for energy and
memory-constrained embedded applications. IBM’s TrueNorth [25] and Intel’s Loihi
[26] application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) designs are the most prominent
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Network Overview
15
SNNs implemented in neuromorphic hardware. This is specialized hardware that is
designed to take full advantage of the architecture of SNN.
Neuromorphic computing aims to use more flexible systems that emulate human cog-
nition. There are already many improvements within voice command and gesture
recognition, image retrieval, search functions, and autonomous adaptation. For logis-
tics and travel scheduling applications, for example, these neuromorphic chips could
reduce power requirements and improve computing efficiency. The Loihi chip has also
been tested on drone performance by Rutgers and TU Delft, which lead to an overall
75% power efficiency improvement. The cost of these chips, however, will likely keep
SNN applications at the edge or used in non-cost-sensitive systems for some time still
[27].
2.2
Network Overview
As mentioned, this Master’s project is based on another thesis [18].
This section
focuses on the overall design decisions that were considered for the previous neuro-
morphic accelerator, from before this thesis.
This accelerator is targeted highly power-constrained devices, such as hearing aids
and IoT devices. However, the accelerator maintains functionality in applications
outside of its primary purpose as well.
2.2.1
Network Models
The network in [18] is trained with Poisson encoding, which is an extended version
of rate-based spike encoding. The characteristics of Poisson encoding is that spikes
are not distributed evenly, instead the period between the spikes of a spike train is a
Poisson distribution. Still, the average period of spikes is the same as for rate-based
encoding. Poisson encoding creates stochastic noise, which makes for better general-
ization when training networks.
Regarding neuron models, the LIF model is used in the network and extended with
a bias. The bias is a unique value for every neuron that is added to its membrane
potential in every time-step. A set of three equations can describe the LIF model in
the discrete domain, which are:
eval_V ml
j(t) = V ml
j(t −1) · λ +
∑
i
wijxl−1
i
(t −1) + bl
j
(2.1)
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Theory & Background
refractoryl
j =







refractoryl
j −1
if refractoryl
j ̸= 0
refractory_setl
j
else if eval_V ml
j(t) ≥thres_V ml
j
0
else if eval_V ml
j(t) < thres_V ml
j
(2.2)
V ml
j(t) =







reset_V ml
j,
xl
j(t) = 0
if refractoryl
j ̸= 0
reset_V ml
j,
xl
j(t) = 1
else if eval_V ml
j(t) ≥thres_V ml
j
eval_V ml
j(t), xl
j(t) = 0
else if eval_V ml
j(t) < thres_V ml
j
(2.3)
Similar to equation 1.1, equation 2.1 determines the evaluated membrane potential
eval_V ml
j(t) of neuron j in layer l, in a given time period. It is a result of (1) the
membrane potential of that neuron in the previous time period, multiplied with (2)
the potential decay (λ), added with (3) the sum of the synaptic weight (w) multiplied
by either 1 or 0 (x) if neuron i in layer l −1 fired a spike in time-step t −1 or not,
respectively, added with (4) the bias of neuron j in layer l. λ is a real value between
0 and 1. If no spikes occurred in t −1, the sum equals 0 and only the potential in
t −1, decay and bias determine the new potential.
This equation also shows that the only synaptic parameter that is considered in
the design is synaptic weight.
Equation 2.2 describes the conditions of the refractory counter. Assuming that the
neuron has not yet fired, the refractory counter would be 0 while the membrane
potential is less than the threshold. When the potential reaches the threshold, the
refractory counter is set to a specific value. As long as the refractory counter is non-
zero the counter is decremented. Only when it has reached 0 will it remain there
until the potential has once again reached the threshold.
Equation 2.3 describes the conditions of the membrane potential. As long as the
refractory counter is 0 and the potential is less than the threshold, the membrane
potential will be assigned a new value eval_V ml
j(t) from equation 2.1 in each time
period.
When a spike occurs the potential will be assigned a unique reset value
reset_V ml
j, which will remain unchanged while the refractory counter is non-zero.
2.2.2
Neuromorphic Crossbar
Neuromorphic accelerators consist of a number of cores communicating through a
communication fabric. Unique to neuromorphic accelerators, the cores contain large
on-chip memories, which each stores parameter data relevant to that particular core.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Network Overview
17
This makes reading and writing to memory much more efficient and avoids any bottle-
necking with the expense of larger area [28]. Only spikes are communicated between
the cores using the Address Event Representation (AER) protocol, which only carries
the global address of the neuron that generated the spike [29].
Figure 2.5: Neuromorphic crossbar abstraction illustrating how spikes are forwarded
to the neurons in next layer and processed in a fully connected network [18].
[18] utilizes a neuromorphic crossbar abstraction view of the core design, which is a
well established model used by TrueNorth [30] and Loihi [26]. It models the types of
components, overall structure, and data-flow of the specific neuromorphic core in a
fully connected layer of a SNN. Figure 2.5 illustrates the design consisting of neuron
evaluation units (triangles), axons (rectangles), a network interface, and the cross-
bar connecting the evaluation units and axons. Neuron evaluation units represents
neurons in that core. The network interface receives the spikes from the previous
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Theory & Background
layer, which are forwarded to the axons corresponding to the spiking neurons in the
previous layer. Each junction in the crossbar represents a unique synaptic weight,
which is multiplied with the axon spike and forwarded to a specific neuron.
The
number of axons is the same as the number of neurons in the previous layer. Each
axon represents a specific neuron. The synapses, connecting the spiking neuron in
the previous layer with all neurons in the current layer, are represented by a row. In
that way, one axon is connected to all the neurons via the crossbar.
2.2.3
Neuromorphic Accelerator Design Structure
This subsection provides an overview of the design in [18] as a whole, how the net-
work works, and the next subsection goes into more details on areas more relevant to
understanding the work in this thesis. [18] provides a more thorough understanding
of the entire network outside of what is relevant for this thesis.
Figure 2.6 illustrates the topmost view of the neuromorphic accelerator. It utilizes
a multi-core approach with I input cores, O output cores, and Z neuron cores. The
input and output cores are connected to an off-chip communication (OCC) block,
which communicates with the environment. The input cores receives stimuli, from
the off-chip communication block, in the form of input spike trains. The output cores
consume spikes from output neurons and pass them to the off-chip communication
block and from there to the surrounding environment.
The neuron cores has a crossbar structure. Each core is responsible for evaluating
a P neurons. Because of the small scale of the network, [18] uses a data-bus with
arbitration as the communication fabric. The cores request access to the bus, which
is granted by the bus arbiter one cycle at a time. The cores subscribe to certain AER
spike packages depending on the layer they represent. Each core has a bus interface
for transmitting and receiving data to and from the bus. It uses a valid/ready protocol
between itself and the bus. However, the interface is always ready to receive data.
Neurons in a core are assigned a local core address/ID from 0 to P −1. When a
neuron spikes, an AER package must be transmitted onto the data-bus with a global
address. This address is composed of the core ID concatenated with the local neuron
ID.
2.2.4
Neuron Core
The neuron core is responsible for most of the computations in the system.
The
tasks that the neuron core performs are: receiving and processing spikes from the
bus, evaluating the state of the neurons, and sending spikes to the bus. As illustrated
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Network Overview
19
Figure 2.6: Top view of the neuromorphic accelerator.
in figure 2.7 the neuron core consists of a number of components. As mentioned, the
bus interface is the gateway between the core and the communication fabric, and is re-
sponsible for the spikes flowing in and out of the core. The axon system is responsible
for facilitating efficient use of the incoming spikes for neuron evaluation. It stores the
spikes in a local memory to be used for neuron evaluation in the following time-step.
The neuron block is responsible for performing the neuron evaluation itself. It consists
of a number of components, namely a control unit and P number of identical neuron
evaluation units (NEUs) and P evaluation memories. The memory blocks contain
all the information required in order for neuron evaluation except for the incoming
spikes, which are provided by the axon system. The control unit is responsible for
all data flowing into and out of the neuron block, as well as controlling the data-flow
in the NEUs. The spike transmission system is responsible for communicating to the
bus interface when a spike is ready to be sent.
When a spike enters the core, it goes through the bus interface to the axon system.
In the next time step, the spike is fed to the neuron block. The control unit ensures
that all the steps are taken to complete the neuron evaluation. A spike may be gener-
ated, passing through the control unit, to the spike transmission block, through the
bus interface and onto the data-bus.
2.2.4.1
Axon System
The axon system plays an important part for potential low-power applications. As
mentioned, it stores the incoming spikes in its memory in one time-step, and then in
the next time-step forwards those spikes to the neuron block to be evaluated. As soon
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Theory & Background
Figure 2.7: Top view of a Neuron Core
as the next time-step starts, the axon system forwards the spikes in order to finish as
fast as possible within the time-step. This provides the opportunity to clock-gate the
neuron logic as early in the interval as possible, when all spikes have been delivered.
Axon ID is used as the least-significant-bits (LSBs) of an evaluation memory address
for the synaptic weights, which corresponds to the synapse that the incoming spike
traveled across. The axon system has two memories, so that incoming spikes are
written to one memory, while the spikes from the previous time-step are read from
the other memory by the neuron block. The memories then alternate between read
and write functionality every time-step. The neuron block sends an inOut signal to
the axon system, which alternates between 1 and 0 every time-step and controls the
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Network Overview
21
memories’ read/write functionality. The axon system uses a spike counter, which
increments with every incoming spike and also functions as the address for the local
memory. The final spike count value is forwarded to the neuron block in the next
time-step, so that the control unit knows how many spikes to process in a given time-
step. This is also part of the strategy for fast execution in the core.
2.2.4.2
Neuron Block
The neuron block is the the brain of the neuron core. It evaluates the neurons that are
mapped to that core. The state of a neuron is described by the three equations 2.1,
2.2 and 2.3. Computing these equations for any neuron leads to updated membrane
potential and refractory counter, and potentially a generated spike. The neuron block
consists of three components: P number of NEUs, P number of evaluation memories,
and a control unit. The overall functions of each of these components are explained
below. More detailed explanation is performed in chapter 3.
Evaluation Unit
One NEU is connected to one evaluation memory, and all parameters for n neurons
are stored in those memories, except incoming spikes. NEUs contain the data-paths
for neuron evaluation. Each NEU is responsible for evaluating n neurons through time
multiplexing. The number of neurons associated with a core is therefore N = P · n.
Because of this, all the NEUs have the necessary arithmetic circuitry to compute
equations 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, which is the sole purpose of the NEU.
Evaluation Memory
The evaluation memory contains all data needed for evaluation of n neurons and A
axons in a core, as illustrated in figure 2.5. How the data is organized in the memo-
ries is illustrated in table 2.1 All the data, except refractory counter and membrane
potential, are network specific, and the memories must be initialized with these values
when mapping the network to the system in order for the accelerator to run. Only
the weights are dependent on the axons, the rest are dependent on the neuron alone.
Control Unit
The control unit is in charge of the data-flow within the neuron block, as well as the
communication from the axon system and communication to the spike transmission
system. It is a finite state machine with data-path (FSMD), which ensures that the
arithmetic operations are performed correctly for each neuron evaluation in the eval-
uation unit.
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Theory & Background
Data segments
Address range
Offsets
Refractory counter
0
-
n-1
0
Membrane potential
n
-
2n-1
n
Weights
2n
-
2n+nA-1
2n
Biases
2n+nA
-
3n+nA-1
2n+nA
Decays
3n+nA
-
4n+nA-1
3n+nA
Threshold
4n+nA
-
5n+nA-1
4n+nA
Refractory sets
5n+nA
-
6n+nA-1
5n+nA
Potential sets
6n+nA
-
7n+nA-1
6n+nA
Table 2.1: Evaluation memory organization containing data for n neurons used for
evaluation in one NEU.
As illustrated in figure 2.2, all neurons associated with a neuron core must be in the
same layer, which ensures that neurons in a core share the same input connectivity.
However, a fully connected layer may still be spread out over multiple cores. By
this logic, all NEUs can be controlled by the same FSM. This, however, means that
neurons evaluated by the same core must all process the same number of spikes, and
therefore the same number of algorithmic operations are required across all neurons.
2.2.4.3
Spike Transmission System
When an NEU has generated a spike, the spike transmission system is informed and
generates an AER message containing the global address of the spiking neuron. It then
sends a request to the communication fabric to send the package. The neuron block
contains P number of NEUs, which all work in parallel. This means that spikes could
occur from multiple NEUs in the same clock cycle. The communication fabric allows
only one transmission per cycle, and the transmission system is therefore designed to
be able to buffer one spike per NEU. The transmission system uses masking to keep
it fair between the buffered spikes, so that it is arbitrary which spike is served first.
If a spike buffer is occupied and the same neuron spikes again, the second spike is
dropped. However, this is very unlikely due to sparse activity in the network.
2.3
FPGAs & ASICs
The design in [18] has been implemented on a Kintex-7 FPGA (Field Programmable
Gate Array). This section provides an overview of FPGAs and ASICs (Application
Specific Integrated Circuits), in what circumstances one may be preferred over the
other, including some general benefits and drawbacks. This is relevant as the neuro-
==PAGE:37==
2.3 FPGAs & ASICs
23
morphic accelerator may be implemented in either technology in the future in order
to achieve higher power efficiency.
2.3.1
Overview of FPGAs and ASICs
An FPGA is essentially a chip that is re-programmable at any given time. It is com-
prised of thousands of units called configurable logic blocks (CLBs), which linked
together by routing resources are able to perform complex logic functions, implement
memory functions, and synchronize code.
This makes it possible to create gates,
look-up tables, flip-flops etc. The code makes real physical routing/connections with
wires to perform the function needed. It is essentially a re-programmable version of
an ASIC. Both FPGAs and ASICs are very good at performing a large number of
parallel operations. They are used in high-speed, high-performance tasks like image
processing, telecommunication, digital signal processing (DSP), etc.
ASICs are, as the name implies, application specific. They are designed as custom
circuits for one sole purpose and they function the same their whole operating life. Its
digital circuitry is made up of permanently connected gates and flip-flops in silicon,
and so the logic function cannot be changed. ASICs are for instance used as CPUs
in laptops or smartphones.
2.3.2
Comparison
FPGAs are not suited for high-volume mass production, resulting in one FPGA cost-
ing several times one ASIC. The focus of FPGA architecture is to allow an arbitrary
digital design to be implemented on them. They cater mostly to prototyping and
functional verification before production on a chip. ASICs are mass produced on
wafer that fit thousands of ASICs. So the manufacturing cost is high, but the indi-
vidual cost per ASIC is low. This also means that the time to market is much less
for FPGAs, as the non-recurring engineering costs for ASICs are much higher.
FPGAs are less power efficient, while ASICs’ power consumption is controlled and
optimized before production. This is due to the fact that ASICs are optimized for its
specific function.
FPGAs are highly suited for applications where current design may need to be
upgraded to use better algorithm or design, such as radars, cell phone base stations,
etc. In such applications the high cost of FPGAs is not the deciding factor, rather
the programmability. Upgradability is not applicable to ASICs [31].
Neuromorphic chips are being researched and developed for both FPGAs and
ASICs, as they require specific architecture to operate optimally. A number of power
reduction techniques for both FPGAs and ASICs will be analysed in chapter 6.
==PAGE:38==
24
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Design
The foundational work leading up to this design, including the surrounding environ-
ment of the neuron processor, has already been established thoroughly. The reader
will at this time have a good understanding of the overall structure of the network.
This chapter describes the design of the neuron processor that has been developed in
this Master’s project.
Firstly, the goals of the design for the neuron processor have been outlined before
introducing the neuron block. The functions of each component within the neuron
block are explained along with the details of the design. Design decisions for a power
reduction method is introduced in this chapter as well and is explored further in
later chapters. Finally, the chapter is concluded with a short section on configuration
parameters.
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Design
3.1
Design Objective
Spiking neural network is an exciting new field for both neuroscience and computer
science, in which the worlds collide in a search to find understanding and exploit
neural principles for furthering the technologies within deep learning, respectively.
Understanding this new generation of neural networks and utilizing the promising
capabilities that it brings is an interesting challenge with a wide range of potential
applications.
SNN carries the potential of high accuracy at low power consumption.
Previous
work has already been done in designing a functioning neuromorphic accelerator for
low-power applications. However, this work did not achieve the intended power levels.
The objective of this project is to design a neuron processor that is optimized for
low-power applications. This design has to be compatible with the previous work, and
acts as a second iteration of a low-power neuron processor for a neuromorphic acceler-
ator. The target group for this accelerator is comprised of highly power-constrained
devices, such as hearing aids and IoT devices.
The network models supported by the accelerator have already been presented, and
the following section dives straight into the design of the low-power neuron processor.
3.2
Neuron Block
As stated in section 2.2 the neuron block is the brain of the neuron core, in which all
incoming spikes are evaluated and new spikes are generated by the neuron evaluation
units. The neuron block notifies the spike transmission system of the generated spike,
which transmits the spike as a global ID to the communication fabric. This section
provides a thorough explanation of the details within each component making up the
neuron block.
3.2.1
Neuron Evaluation Unit
The circuit of the neuron evaluation unit is illustrated in figure 3.1.
It performs
arithmetic operations associated with computing equations 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3. NEU has
three input ports: dataIn, which inputs the data read from the dedicated evaluation
memory, evalEnable and controlSels from the control unit. It also has three output
ports: dataOut, which outputs data to be written to the memory, spikeIndi and
refracIndi to the control unit. The NEU receives all the necessary parameters for the
arithmetic operations from the memory through dataIn. The input port, controlSels,
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Neuron Block
27
Spike
   Refrac
  Pot
refracIndi
0
>>7
>>6
>>5
>>4
>>3
>>2
>>1
decaySel
+
potSel
<
writeDataSel
refracSel
=0
-1
data out
spikeIndi
data in
evalEnable
controlSels
refracSet / potSet
threshold
decay
weight / bias
potential
refracSet / potSet
refrac. counter
0 1
1
0
spikeSel
1
1
0
0
</>
(-)c
17
/
/
3
18
/
18
/
/
/
17
17
/
sign
ext.
sign
ext.
17
/
18
/
17
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the design of the neuron evaluation unit (NEU)
is actually multiple inputs used as selector signals during different states. All the
multiplexer selector signals sharing the name -Sel are connected to this input port.
The controlSels are by default set to keep the register content between clock cycles.
The input dataIn branches off within the NEU block, as shown in the figure, each
having their own label.
The control unit controls what data is passed from the
memory to the NEU. The labels indicate which data is used for that specific branch.
Most branches are connected as inputs to multiplexers, decay is used as a multiplexer
selector. This multiplexer approximates the multiplication of the decay (equation 2.1)
by right-shifting the membrane potential (register Pot) 0 to 7 times, depending on the
decay factor, and subtracting it from the membrane potential itself. Table 3.1 shows
the relationship between the number of shifts and the decay factor. For instance,
by right-shifting 4 times the output of the multiplexer has a value of approximately
6.25% of the membrane potential, which is subtracted from the current membrane
potential to obtain the desired multiplication of 0.875. Both the membrane potential
and decay are signed 17-bit signals, so both need to be sign extended before the
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Design
subtraction (same with weight/bias, which is not shown). This is because the sum of
the two values may add up to an 18-bit wide value.
Apart from the summation, the rest of the circuit signals are 17-bit. So after the
summation, sum needs to be saturated down to 17-bit (sumSat). Figure 3.1 shows a
simplified idea of how this is done. If sum < −c then sumSat = −c, if sum > c −1
then sumSat = c −1, otherwise sumSat has the same value as sum.
The evalEnable input is the enable signal for the three registers, which should
ensure that there is no switching while the block is idle, determined by the control
unit. This creates a clock enable signal, which is a type of clock gating.
The outputs spikeIndi and refracIndi inform the control unit whether a neuron
has spiked, and whether a neuron is in refractory state or not, respectively. Lastly,
dataOut sends updated data to the memory. Depending on the state, the multiplexer
can forward a number of values; setting the refractory or membrane potential default
value from dataIn, or updating the refractory counter or the membrane potential.
Right-shift
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Decay factor
0
0.5
0.75
0.875
0.938
0.969
0.985
0.992
Approx. percentage
0%
50%
25%
12.5%
6.25%
3%
1.5%
0.75%
Table 3.1: Decay factors and corresponding number of right-shifts, along with the
approximate percentages that decay.
3.2.2
Evaluation Memory
The evaluation memory is organized the same as in table 2.1. The memory is con-
trolled by the control unit, which is connected to the memory with three input signals.
The control unit sets an enable signal in the memory, which is ’1’ when the neuron
block leaves the idle state and allows the memory to either read or write data to
the NEU. The control unit also forwards the address value for the memory address
necessary to perform the appropriate operation in the NEU. Lastly, it sends a write
signal to the memory, when the NEU sends updated data. This way all the control
signals come directly from the control unit, and the data is shared directly between
the memory and NEU.
3.2.3
Control Unit
As mentioned, the control unit is designed as a finite state machine with a data-
path (FSMD). The control signals (controlSels), introduced in figure 3.1, ensure that
steps to evaluate equations 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 are carried out. The memory address is
determined by adding an offset (shown in table 2.1) combined with an address. The
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Neuron Block
29
address value is produced by a neuron counter n or a combination of the n and axon
ID from the axon system. The algorithmic state machine (ASM), illustrated in figure
3.2, shows the data-flow of the FSMD.
INIT
false
n := 0
a := 0
evalEnable := 0
cycleCnt := cycleCnt - 1 
true
cycleCnt 
== 0
inOut := ! inOut             
spikeCnt := spikeCnt_in
true
false
n << P
>= nrNeu
r/w := r
addr := offset_refrac + n
reset spike indicator
r/w := r
addr := offset_poten + n
latch refractory counter 
r/w := r
addr := offset_decay + n
a := a + 1
latch membrane potential
false
true
spikeCnt 
== 0
r/w := r
addr := offset_weight +
     (n * A) + axonID
a := a + 1
if refractory = 0
     subtract decay from
     membrane potential
false
true
spikeCnt 
== 1
false
r/w := r
addr := offset_weight + 
     (n * A) + axonID
a := a + 1
if refractory = 0
     add weight to
     membrane potential
r/w := r
addr := offset_bias + n
if spikeCnt = 0
    if refractory = 0
        subtract decay from
        membrane potential
else
    if refractory = 0
        add weight to
        membrane potential
true
a - 1 ==
spikeCnt
r/w := r
addr := offset_thres + n
if refractory = 0
    add bias to 
    membrane potential
r/w := r
addr := offset_refrSet + n
set spike check
r/w := w
addr := offset_refrac + n
write refractory counter.
spikePulse sampling for
transmission systems
r/w := r
addr := offset_potSet + n
r/w := w
addr := offset_poten + n
n := n + 1
a := 0
write membrane potential
idle
rRefrac
rPot
rDecay
rWeight1
rWeight2
rBias
rThres
rRefracSet
wRefrac
rPotSet
wPot
Figure 3.2: ASM chart of the Control Unit FSMD
The ASM chart is initialized in the idle state, and the FSM only returns to the
idle state once all the neurons in a core have been evaluated. It then remains in the
idle state for the rest of the time-step.
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Design
The P NEUs evaluate neurons in parallel.
An NEU evaluates n neurons through
time-multiplexing (recall figure 2.5 and 2.7). N = P · n is the maximum number of
neurons that can be mapped to a single core. The neurons are given an ID (lid) from
0 to N −1, and the NEUs each have a local ID (evid) from 0 to P −1. Neurons are
assigned to NEUs where lid modulus evid = 0, meaning that the LSBs of the lid is
equal to evid of the NEU that it is assigned to. Furthermore, the control unit has
a neuron counter (n) that counts from 0 to n −1, which can then be used as the
MSBs of a neuron’s local ID. As mentioned, a global ID of a neuron is the core ID
concatenated (#) with a neuron ID, which means that the global ID can be writ-
ten as coreID#n#evid. The control unit also has an axon counter (a) used as the
address signal for memories in the axon system to read the corresponding axon IDs
from the spikes received in the previous time-step. The enable and read signals from
the control unit to the axon system are always set to high.
Each state in the state machine and data-flow is explained in detail below. The name
of each state signifies the memory data accessed in that state and whether it is a read
or write operation. As mentioned, the FSM is initialized in the idle state on reset.
1. idle: In the idle state, the counters n and a are reset, and evalEnable is set
to low, to prevent switching in the NEUs. In all other states evalEnable is set
to high (not shown in the ASM). Furthermore, a time-step counter (cycleCnt)
is set to be equal the number of clock cycles in a time-step. It decrements by
1 until cycleCnt = 0, before resetting. When cycleCnt = 0 it transitions to
the next state. At this time the inOut signal, which is connected to the axon
system, is inverted, informing the axon system that the neuron block is ready
to receive the spikes from the previous time-step. The axon system also sends
a spike count signal to spikeCnt in the control unit. This signal contains the
number of spikes that came into the axon system during the previous time-step.
The control unit uses this to know how many spikes to process in the current
time-step.
2. rRefrac: In this state the control unit sends a read signal to all P NEUs along
with the memory address containing the refractory counter for neuron n in each
NEU. Now that it is a new time-step, the controlSels are set to reset the spike
indicator register in the NEUs.
3. rPot: The control unit broadcasts a read signal along with the membrane po-
tential address, which had been evaluated and updated in the last time-step, to
all NEUs. The refractory counter is now available on dataIn, and the controlSels
refracSel are therefore set to sample this value in the register. The control unit
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Neuron Block
31
is informed by the NEUs (with the refracIndi output ports), whether the refrac-
tory counter in each NEU has a non-zero value. If it is non-zero, the control
unit will set the controlSels to their default values, which will prevent the mem-
brane potential from updating. This is done for all currently evaluated neurons
with non-zero refractory counters across the NEUs for the remainder of the
time-step.
4. rDecay: In this state the signal for reading the decay factor selector is set, and
the membrane potentials coming from the memories to the NEUs via dataIn
are sampled in the potential register in the NEUs.
a, which represents the
axon ID, is incremented by 1. If no spikes were received in the last time-step,
represented by spikeCnt = 0, then the FSM will transition to rBias, otherwise
the next state is rWeight1.
5. rWeight1: Since a was incremented in the last state, it is now available in
this state. The weight of the first axon is signaled to be read from memory.
The address consists of the weight offset added with n concatenated with the
axonID, provided by the axon system. a is incremented again in case more
spikes were received, and the controlSels are set to subtract the decay from the
membrane potential. If no other spikes were received (spikeCnt = 1) then the
system enters the rBias state, otherwise it transitions to state rWeight2.
6. rWeight2: The weight of the next axon is read, and the control signals potSel
are set to add the weight of the last axon to the membrane potential register. a
is once again incremented in case more spikes were received. If all spikes have
been considered, then the next state is rBias, otherwise it stays in this state.
7. rBias: Signals for reading the bias values are set. If spikeCnt = 0 then the
previous state was rDecay and the controlSels are therefore set to subtract decay
from membrane potential. if spikeCnt ̸= 0 then the previous state was either of
the rWeight states, in which case the controlSels must be set to add the weight
to the potential.
8. rThres: The signals for reading the neuron threshold values are set, and the
controlSels potSel are set to add the bias to the membrane potential.
9. rRefracSet: The signals for reading the neuron refractory set values are set,
which contains the initial value of the refractory counter in case of a spike.
controlSels spikeSel are set to update the spikeIndi register. If the membrane
potential exceeds the threshold value available from the memory on dataIn then
the register is set to 1, indicating a spike, otherwise 0.
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Design
10. wRefrac: The signals for the write address of the refractory counters are set.
controlSels writeDataSel are set for the NEUs to output the value to the mem-
ories via the dataOut port. If the refractory register holds non-zero, then the
neuron is already in its refractory period, and the refractory value subtracted
by 1 is written to memory. If the refractory register holds 0 and the neuron has
spiked, the refracSet value is written to the memory, otherwise the current re-
fractory value, 0, is written to the memory. The control unit receives the value
from all spike indicators in the NEUs, which informs the control unit if any
currently evaluated neurons have spiked. From this the control unit generates
pulses to the transmission system containing which NEUs have spiked.
11. rPotSet: The signals for reading membrane potential set values are set, which
contains the initial value of the membrane potential after a spike.
12. wPot: The signals for writing membrane potentials in the memory are set.
The controlSels writeDataSel are set to outputting the membrane potentials for
dataOut. If the spike register contains 1, then the membrane potential set value
is written to that memory address, otherwise the current membrane potential
value is written to memory.
Also in this state, a is reset to 0, while n is
incremented by 1. Lastly, a register (nrNeuMapped) in the control unit holds
the number of neurons mapped to a core. If all neurons in the core have been
evaluated then the next state is idle until the time-step is over, otherwise the
system enters the rRefrac state to evaluate the next P neurons.
3.3
Configuration Parameters
The design of the low-power neuron processor along with the necessary surrounding
theory have been described. The processor together with the network are designed
in a parameterized fashion. However, these parameters assume certain relations to
each other, which need to be complied with for the system to function. The details
regarding what parameters can be specified is covered in section 4.2.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
This chapter contains the implementation specific details of the neuron processor
presented in this thesis. Firstly, Chisel is introduced followed by the parameterized
design. An explanation of the network configuration is presented before moving on to
the considerations of mixing Chisel and VHDL. Next, the debugging and testing of
time implementation is presented. The processor is implemented in a Kintex-7 FPGA.
The system is synthesized and implemented in the FPGA through the Vivado Design
Edition, and memory content is initialized during synthesis.
Lastly, a user guide
explains how to implement the neuron processor on any machine.
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Implementation
4.1
Chisel
Chisel is an open-source project created at the University of California, Berkeley [32]
[33]. It is described as a hardware construction language that supports advanced
hardware design using parameterized generators and layered domain-specific hard-
ware languages. The Chisel project is embedded into the Scala programming lan-
guage, which combines object-oriented and functional programming in one concise,
high-level language and provides an ecosystem of libraries [34].
Chisel generates a synthesizable Verilog code for implementation of digital circuits
in ASICs or FPGAs. Due to the nature of Chisel and the Scala environment, it is
possible to describe complex circuits in very few lines compared to VHDL/Verilog.
One of the contributing factors is that it abstracts clock and reset away. A simple
example of this, taken from [35], is the implementation of a counter, which can be
described in two lines in Chisel, shown in listing 4.1.
1
val cntReg = RegInit (0.U(8.W))
2
cntReg := Mux(cntReg === 9.U, 0.U, cntReg + 1.U)
Listing 4.1: Counter example
4.2
Parameterized Design
The network in [18] provides a parameterized design, and all the parameters are
centrally defined in a constants Scala file. This file can be found in his GitHub
repository, found in [18]. The constants that are relevant to the neuron block are used
in this implementation, which are therefore included in constants_record_pkg.vhd
in appendix A.1.5. The list below summarizes details of these parameters, which are
necessary in the implementation.
• The clock frequency is set by the constant FREQ, which is constrained by the
fact that the maximum number of potential incoming spikes must be evaluated
within a time-step. The number of N neurons and A axons in a core make up
the constraint variables.
• The constant TIMESTEP sets the duration of a time-step. It is also constrained by
N and A. The number of clock cycles per time-step (CYCLESPRSTEP) is derived
from the frequency and time-step.
• The word length of the parameters is set by the constant NEUDATAWIDTH. All
the arithmetic units in the NEUs follow this parameter.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Network Configuration
35
• The number of axons connected to a core (A) is set by the constant AXONNR. The
number of axons ought to be equal to the neurons to the power of 2, A = n2.
However, in the next section we will see why this is not the case.
• The number of neurons per NEU is set by TMNEURONS, which must be a power
of 2. The number of NEUs per core (N) is the binary logarithm of TMNEURONS.
• The package also contains all the Offsets, which the control unit uses to read
to/write from the correct memory addresses in the core.
4.3
Network Configuration
The neuromorphic accelerator is meant to be implemented on a Digilent Genesys 2
board with the Kintex-7 FPGA [36]. It features 51.000 logic slices, each with four
6-input LUTs and 8 flip-flops. It also features close to 16 Mbits of fast block RAM,
which is important for the design, since it is quite memory heavy because of the local
core memories.
The implementation is configured with 2 input cores (0 and 1), 2 neuron cores (2
and 3), and an output core (4). The network is configured with a 80MHz frequency,
1ms time-steps, P = 8, n = 32, which results in N = 256, and wordlength of 17-bit.
However, A = n2 = 1024, but the BRAMs in the Kintex-7 are not large enough to
implement this. Recall table 2.1, the weights have a range of A·n = 32768 entries, and
the rest of the address space require 7·n = 224 entries, which is 32768+224 = 32992.
The BRAMs are 32K ×1-bit, so the address space is 215 = 32768 entries of 1-bit
data. Therefore double the number of BRAMs would be required. Not all axons are
being used after all, since the input image is 22 × 22 pixels = 484, and the current
network utilizes 200 neurons in a core, rather than 256. However, the address space
in a memory is still implemented for 32 neurons, as this is a power of 2. Therefore,
the axons addresses in the memory have also been rounded up to 512 from the input
core added with 256 (rounded up) to the other neuron core. A is therefore 768, and
each memory in core therefore has (768 · 32) + (7 · 32) = 24800 entries. Since the
memories contain 1-bit data, 17 BRAMs are required for each memory.
4.3.1
Memories
How these memories have been initialized is explained in section 4.4.2.
How the
memories have been generated is outside the scope of this thesis.
However, this
can be found in [18]. The network has been trained already with initial parameters
of membrane potential, refractory period, and membrane potential threshold.
The
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Implementation
memories in this thesis are therefore trained and contain optimized parameters for
each neuron, which are unknown.
4.4
Mixing Chisel & VHDL
This master’s project is written in VHDL. However, the network in [18] is written in
Chisel. In order to incorporate VHDL/Verilog code into the Chisel environment, it
is necessary to use a Chisel function called BlackBox, which provides the Chisel code
with an interface for the circuit designed in VHDL. This makes the code at the Chisel
level able to interact through the port of the module. First, however, an overview
of some necessary considerations when converting Chisel code to VHDL code, before
I will introduce BlackBox and how the design has been integrated into the network
with this function.
4.4.1
Converting Chisel to VHDL
As mentioned, Chisel, being a higher level hardware language than VHDL, has a
number of advantages that VHDL does not, such as object orientation, parameter-
ized types, and type inference. This subsection provides an overview of some of the
considerations that have been made during the conversion from Chisel to VHDL.
4.4.1.1
Parameters & Generics
Similar to object-oriented programming languages, such as C/C++, Chisel also uses
classes and class parameters, an example shown in listing 4.2. The way VHDL uses
parameterization is through generics, which allows the designer to parameterize the
entity during the component instantiation. How to convert the class parameter in
Chisel to generic in VHDL is explained in subsection 4.4.2.
1
class EvaluationMemory(coreID: Int, evalID: Int) extends Module {
Listing 4.2: Class Parameters
4.4.1.2
Memory Initialization
Another example of parameterization among other things, is when declaring the mem-
ories and loading the memory files during initialization. Listings 4.3 and 4.5 illustrate
some of the differences between Chisel and VHDL. Chisel uses the class parameters
for both the naming of the memory block and also for naming of the memory file that
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Mixing Chisel & VHDL
37
needs to be loaded into the memory. In order to obtain the directory, listing 4.3 also
makes use of a Python script for the generated Verilog, which is declared as in listing
4.4. This may initially seem like more work than the VHDL code, however, once the
Python script is written, the number of memories can be adjusted by just changing
for i in range(x) to the desired value.
1
eMem.suggestName("eMem"+coreID.toString+"e"+ evalID.toString)
2
3
//Hardcoded mapping for showcase network
4
loadMemoryFromFile(eMem, "mapping/evaldatac"+coreID.toString+"e"+ evalID.
toString+".mem") //Only initializes for simulation.
Listing 4.3: Chisel Memory Declaration
1
reg [16:0] eMem2e0 [0:24799];
2
initial begin
3
$readmemb("Y:/home/jacob/myDrive/master/NeuromorphicProcessor/mapping/
evaldatac2e0.mem", eMem2e0);
4
end
Listing 4.4: Chisel Generated Verilog
In VHDL, each memory requires its own generate statement in the top-level module,
so the more memories the designer needs the more statements are required.
Fur-
thermore, the filename cannot be initialized within the memory either, because of
integer'image(i) in the string. Therefore, the entire directory must be declared in
the top module as well, as illustrated in listing 4.5.
1
eMem0 : if (i = 0) generate
2
begin
3
eMem0 : EvaluationMemory
4
generic map(
5
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(io_coreID
) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
6
port map(
7
io_clk
=> clock,
8
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
9
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
10
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
11
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
12
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
13
);
14
end generate eMem0;
Listing 4.5: VHDL Memory Declaration
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Implementation
4.4.1.3
Sign Extension
Lastly, listings 4.6 and 4.7 contains signals sumIn1, sumIn2 and sum, which are 18-bit
wide, whereas the rest are 17-bit wide. All the signals are signed. Chisel does the
sign extension implicitly, whereas VHDL requires the designer to be explicit. This
is the same thing the other way around, where VHDL requires the designer to state
which bits to pass to sumSat.
1
sumIn1
:= membPotReg
2
sumIn2
:= Mux(io.cntrSels.decaySel, -potDecay, io.dataIn)
3
sum
:= sumIn1 + sumIn2
4
5
sumSat
:= sum
Listing 4.6: Chisel Sign Extension
1
sumIn1
<= resize(membPotReg,sumIn1'length);
2
if (io_cntrSels.decaySel = true) then
3
sumIn2
<= resize(-potDecay,sumIn2'length);
4
else
5
sumIn2
<= resize(signed(io_dataIn),sumIn2'length);
6
end if;
7
sum
<= sumIn1 + sumIn2;
8
9
sumSat
<= sum(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
Listing 4.7: VHDL Sign Extension
4.4.2
Black Box
Chisel black boxes are used to instantiate externally defined modules. The modules
defined as a BlackBox will be instantiated along with the rest of the Chisel code in the
generated Verilog. However, The behavior of the black box is not defined in Chisel
or in the generated Verilog, but is only described in the original code for the circuit
(VHDL/Verilog). This is the reason for the name BlackBox, as the generated Verilog
cannot see inside the black box but only the signals going in and out of it. Unlike
a Chisel module, BlackBox does not have an implicit clock and reset, and must be
explicitly declared. Furthermore, ports declared in the IO Bundle will be generated
in Verilog with the io_ extension. [37].
1
class neuron_top(coreID : Int) extends BlackBox(Map("io_coreID" -> coreID)
) { {
2
val io = IO(new Bundle() {
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Debugging & Testing
39
3
//Clock and Reset Ports must be explicitly declared
4
val clock
= Input(Clock())
5
val reset
= Input(Reset())
6
//For axon system
7
val io_inOut
= Output(Bool())
8
val io_spikeCnt = Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
9
val io_aAddr
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
10
val io_aEna
= Output(Bool())
11
val io_aData
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
12
//For spike transmission system
13
val io_n
= Output(UInt(N.W))
14
val io_spikes_0 = Output(Bool())
15
val io_spikes_1 = Output(Bool())
16
val io_spikes_2 = Output(Bool())
17
val io_spikes_3 = Output(Bool())
18
val io_spikes_4 = Output(Bool())
19
val io_spikes_5 = Output(Bool())
20
val io_spikes_6 = Output(Bool())
21
val io_spikes_7 = Output(Bool())
22
})
23
}
Listing 4.8: Black Box Module
Listing 4.8 illustrates the black box module.
The name of the black box module
needs to be the same as the VHDL module, the same for the port names. The listing
also shows how to map the parameters to the VHDL module.
io_coreID is the
name of the generic port in VHDL, which is associated with the coreID parameter in
neuron_top. The BlackBox is then declared under the top module in Chisel and the
signal connections are assigned. Since the entity in VHDL and the generated Verilog
have the same name (neuron_top), the synthesis tool will associate the VHDL file
with that entity.
The file Neurons.scala containing the BlackBox is attached in Appendix A.1.6.
4.5
Debugging & Testing
This section presents the tools used for debugging and testing the implementation.
Vivado’s simulation tool has been used for this purpose. Firstly, the simulation setup
is introduced, followed by the simulation and debugging of the mixed language design,
which includes a method for working around the BlackBox.
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Implementation
4.5.1
Simulation Setup
During simulation, the off-chip communication system does not input any stimuli,
since it is not connected to the board via the UART. Therefore, there are two things
that are required to achieve a known output from the network simulation.
The first thing is a known input. Fortunately, the repository found in [18] includes
memory files for the input cores, which can be used for simulation purposes.
Combined, these memory files contain the spike trains for the digital representa-
tion of the handwritten digit illustrated in figure 4.1. This representation depicts the
digit 2 in handwriting. The conversion from the representation in the figure to the
spike trains in the memory files is outside the scope of this thesis.
Figure 4.1: Representation of a handwritten digit
In order to initialize the input cores with the memory files, it is necessary to add a
few lines in the generated Verilog file, which is illustrated in listing 4.9. rateMemXX
already exist in the Verilog-file, and there are two memories in each core, namely
rateMem00 and rateMem01 for core 0, and 2 ×rateMem1 for core 1. Two are initial-
ized with the memory file in0mem.mem, shown in the listing, and the other two are
initialized with in1mem.mem. Combined, these files represent a full image. Since the
images used in the network are 22 × 22 = 484 pixels, the first 256 pixels are mapped
to input core 0 and the next 228 pixels are mapped to input core 1. The reason
behind two memories in each core is so that it is possible to write a new image, while
sending the other into the network.
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Debugging & Testing
41
1
reg [8:0] rateMem00 [0:255]; // @[InputCore.scala 63:29]
2
initial begin
3
$readmemb("<file directory >/NeuromorphicProcessor/mapping/in0mem.mem",
rateMem00);
4
end
5
6
...
7
8
reg [8:0] rateMem1 [0:255]; // @[InputCore.scala 81:29]
9
initial begin
10
$readmemb("<file directory >/NeuromorphicProcessor/mapping/in0mem.mem",
rateMem1);
11
end
Listing 4.9: Input Memory Initialization
readmemb is a Verilog construct. Vivado can interpret a readmemb function call from
a Verilog file and compile memory initialization content into the bit-file for program-
ming an FPGA. readmemb must be written in the same Verilog module as the declara-
tion of the RAM, and the memory files must also be imported into the Vivado project.
The second thing is a reference, which can be used to observe if the simulated net-
work is working correctly.
For this purpose I have used the network in [18], and
initialized it with the same input memories as described above. Note that simulating
his network requires post synthesis simulation for reasons unknown. This, however,
makes simulating and debugging more tedious, as the post-synth simulation is much
slower than the RTL simulation. This will be referred to as the reference network /
reference simulation.
4.5.2
Simulating Mixed Language Designs
When generating Verilog from Chisel containing a BlackBox, only the I/O port decla-
rations are included in the file. This means, that when running a simulation, only the
input and output signals going into and out of the black box are visible as waveforms.
This makes debugging very difficult if the issues lie within the black box, which is
assumed, since the reference simulation functions, and no components in the network
has been altered apart from the neuron block.
Some debugging has been performed through observing the schematics of the net-
work, both at RTL and post-synth level. However, though some bugs were discovered
through this method, this is a very tedious process. The neuron block components in
the black box are visible in the schematics, but the structure and wiring may have
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Implementation
changed due to the mixing of languages.
Finally, a method has been discovered, which makes it possible to simulate the Black-
Box independently of the network, while still inputting the same data to the BlackBox
as if it was still in the network. This method requires some initial work. However,
once this is done, it is possible to observe all the signals and waveforms within the
BlackBox.
4.5.2.1
Logging Simulation Data
The data coming into the neuron block is different from the data in the input core
memories. Therefore, the data to the neuron block has to be logged and exported to
a file, which can then be used for a test-bench specifically targeted at the BlackBox.
A VCD (Value Change Dump) file can be generated in Vivado using the tcl-
console. This logs when the value of a desired signal changes during simulation and
exports it along with a time-stamp in a VCD-file. The steps for doing this are:
1. Run the simulation.
2. When the xsim simulation window appears, enter the following commands in
the tcl console:
a) open_vcd. If the command is not followed with a file name, it will create
a file named dump.vcd.
b) log_vcd [get_object /<toplevel_testbench/uut/*>]. If the object is
not declared and left as *, then all objects within the unit are logged.
c) run *ns.
d) close_vcd. The default directory is the xsim directory of the simulation.
Listing 4.10 shows an excerpt from the vcd-file containing the values of io_aData,
which is the signal from the axon system to the neuron block. Line 15 describes the
variable captured. The fourth field is an ASCII character (!), which is the character
that represents the variable io_aData throughout the list. The lines starting with #
are the time-stamps, and the line below a time-stamp is the value at that time. b
means that the values are in binary with leading zeros suppressed.
1
$date
2
Tue Mar 30 22:49:28 2021
3
$end
4
$version
5
2020.2
6
$end
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Debugging & Testing
43
7
$timescale
8
1ps
9
$end
10
$scope module NeuroProcGenesysTb $end
11
$scope module insNeuroTop $end
12
$scope module np $end
13
$scope module neuCores_0 $end
14
$scope module neurons $end
15
$var wire 10 ! io_aData [9:0] $end
16
$upscope $end
17
$upscope $end
18
$upscope $end
19
$upscope $end
20
$upscope $end
21
$enddefinitions $end
22
#0
23
$dumpvars
24
b0 !
25
$end
26
#2000207600
27
b0 !
28
#3000220100
29
b0 !
30
#4000232600
31
b0 !
32
#5000245100
33
b0 !
34
#6000257600
35
b0 !
36
#7000270100
37
b0 !
38
#8000282600
39
b0 !
40
#9000295100
41
b0 !
42
#9000545100
43
b0 !
44
#10000307600
45
b100001110 !
46
#10000357600
47
b100001101 !
Listing 4.10: VCD-file
[38] introduces a C program to format the vcd-file for his needs. However, in my case
this has been done manually to fit the format of a VHDL testbench file, which also in-
cludes the input io_spikeCnt. A section of this testbench file is illustrated in appendix
A.2.2. The file, in its entirety, is included in the GitHub repository. [39] states that
it may be advantageous to generate a SAIF (Switching Activity Interchange Format)
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Implementation
file rather than VCD, since it is a leaner format than VCD.
4.5.2.2
Simulating BlackBox Independently
In order for the simulation to work, the top-level module neuroTop, which normally
inputs and outputs the UART data and assigns the system clock with the neuromor-
phic processor, needs to be changed to the inputs and outputs of the BlackBox and
re-assign the system clock to this module. This Verilog code is included in appendix
A.2.1. Once this is done, the simulation can be run and debugging can be performed.
The reference simulation is still used as reference.
After debugging, the BlackBox can be re-implemented into the network, and unless
other bugs exist, the output of the BlackBox will be the same as for the independent
simulation. Figure 4.2 shows a section of the UART output (tx), where switching
occurs due to spikes that have been passed through the network. This is a comparison
of tx between the reference simulation and the simulation performed with the black
box.
4.6
User Guide
All code developed in this thesis, or otherwise used for the implementation of the net-
work, can be found in the GitHub repository: https://github.com/JacobJessen/
NeuronProcessor containing the hardware code. This repository can be used for
implementation but not for showcasing the network in the FPGA. For information
(a) Reference Simulation
(b) Mixed Language Simulation
Figure 4.2: Simulation Comparison
==PAGE:59==
4.6 User Guide
45
regarding how to do this, please refer to [18], which contains all necessary resources
and a guide.
This section contains the instructions on how to setup the tools required to run
the neuron processor implementation in Vivado. The following software has been
used during this process:
• Ubuntu 20.04 LTS on Windows 10
• Python 3.8.5
• pip 20.0.2
• Vivado Design Edition 2020.2
4.6.1
Windows 10
Ubuntu is available for download through the Microsoft Store. Python 3 is included
in the base system installation. Following the installation, use the following command
in the Ubuntu terminal to easily navigate to the Ubuntu home directory in Windows
Explorer.
1
$ explorer.exe .
Navigate to the wsl$ folder in the address bar, right click on the folder Ubuntu-XX.XX,
select Map network drive... and choose whichever name. This enables Vivado to
run the script from the Ubuntu directory, which would otherwise be too long of a
directory for Vivado.
4.6.2
Cloning GitHub Repository
The following command can be used to clone the repository into the desired work
folder.
1
$ git clone https://github.com/JacobJessen/NeuronProcessor
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Implementation
4.6.3
Installing software and dependencies
The following commands are used to install pip, Java 8, SBT and Verilator. pip is
a package-management system used to install and manage software packages. Java 8,
SBT and Verilator are used to generate Verilog from Chisel.
1
$ sudo apt update
2
$ sudo apt install python3-pip
3
4
$ sudo apt update
5
$ sudo apt install openjdk -8-jdk openjdk -8-jre
6
7
$ sudo update-alternatives --config java #Choose java 8
8
$ sudo update-alternatives --config javac #Ch0ose javac8
9
10
$ echo "deb https://dl.bintray.com/sbt/debian /" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/
sources.list.d/sbt.list
11
$ curl -sL "https://keyserver.ubuntu.com/pks/lookup?op=get&search=0
x2EE0EA64E40A89B84B2DF73499E82A75642AC823" | sudo apt-key add
12
$ sudo apt-get update
13
$ sudo apt-get install sbt
14
15
$ sudo apt-get install verilator
4.6.4
NeuronProcessor setup
Navigate to the NeuronProcessor top folder and run the following make command,
which generates the Verilog file and a tcl script for generating the Vivado project
with the necessary modules. After generating the Verilog file, if used for simulation,
initialize the input core memories before running the tcl script. This procedure is
described in section 4.5.
1
$ make kintexDemo
Before running the tcl script in Vivado, if you are using Windows and have mapped
the network drive, open the script vivadoBuild.tcl, and add the drive to the project
path at the top.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 User Guide
47
4.6.5
Vivado setup
The demo works for the Digilent Genesys 2 board, which requires Vivado Design
Edition and a license key. There is also a 30 day trial option. The Genesys 2 board
file can be downloaded in a number of ways. One is by going through the menu
Create Project, under Default Part click Install/Update Boards. Depending
on which version of Vivado you are running, this option may not be there. Another
method is to download and add the board, which will most likely be located in the
directory:
C:\Users\<user>\AppData\Roaming\Xilinx\Vivado\2020.2\xhub\board_store\
xilinx_board_store\XilinxBoardStore\Vivado\2020.2\boards.
4.6.6
NeuronProcessor Simulation
All the required modules for Vivado synthesis and implementation are included in
vivadoBuild.tcl. However, for simulation, the testbench file NeuroProcGenesysTb.vhd,
which is located in the VivadoGenesysSim folder, needs to be added to the project.
4.6.7
Testing with FPGA
The guide and tools needed to test the showcase network with the Genesys 2 Kintex-7
FPGA board can be found in [18].
==PAGE:62==
48
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This presents the results gathered from the implementation of the Neuron Processor in
the existing network. The chapter is divided into three sections; the reference network
from [18] for comparing the results of the network presented in this thesis, both
without power optimization and with power optimization of the neuron processor.
The results include resource consumption of the accelerator implemented on a Genesys
2 Kintex-7 FPGA board, and a power report. The results will be discussed further
in chapter 7.
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Results
5.1
Reference network
5.1.1
Resource Consumption
Table 5.1 illustrates the resource consumption of the reference implementation [18],
reported by Vivado post synthesis. The data shown in the synthesis report is more
raw than for the implementation report, as the resources in this step will have been
optimized during implementation, spreading the resources across the components.
The results shown in the table are not identical to the corresponding results in [18],
which may be due to the fact that the synthesis has not been optimized for power in
this thesis. The main difference between the two results is the resource distribution for
the input cores. In [18] these use 90 LUTs and 15 register slices more than the results
in table 5.1, as well as multiplexers. The reference results shown below instead utilizes
BRAM tiles for the input core memories containing 256 entries with 9-bit wordlength,
which add up to 4.6Kb for the two input cores combined, which is only 28% of the
capacity of a BRAM tile (16Kb).
Name
Slice LUTs
Slice Registers
BRAM Tile
DSPs
Count
%
Count
%
Top Module
10
0.3
72
5.6
0
0
Clock gen.
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0
Neuron Processor
3743
99.7
1222
94.4
276
2
Bus Arbiter
24
0.6
7
0.5
0
0
Input Core 0
246
6.6
114
8.8
1
0
Input Core 1
245
6.5
114
8.8
1
0
Neuron Core 0
1565
41.7
422
32.6
137
1
Neuron Core 1
1563
41.6
417
32.2
137
1
Off-Chip Comm.
76
2.0
115
8.9
0
0
Output Core
24
0.6
33
2.6
0
0
Total
3753
100.0
1294
100.0
276
2
Available on Kintex-7
203800
1.8
407600
0.3
445
840
Table 5.1: Resource utilization for the full reference network
The resource consumption inside the neuron core, illustrated in table 5.2, shows that
the resource consumption remains the same between the reference implementation
and [18].
5.1.2
Power Consumption
This section presents the power report that has been generated by Vivado.
This
report is generated post implementation with power optimization. In order to reflect
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Reference network
51
Name
Slice LUTs
Slice Registers
BRAM Tile
DSPs
Count
%
Count
%
Neuron Core
1565
100.0
422
100.0
137
1
Axon System
18
1.2
11
2.6
1
0
Bus Interface
2
0.1
5
1.2
0
0
Control Unit
478
30.5
56
13.3
0
1
Evaluation Units
424
27.1
280
66.4
0
0
Evaluation Mems
560
35.8
0
0.0
136
0
Spike Transmission
40
2.6
55
13.0
0
0
Table 5.2: Resource utilization for Neuron Core 0
the power consumption accurately, a Switching Activity Interchange Format (SAIF)
file has been generated during a 50ms simulation of an input image depicting the
digit 2 (see figure 4.1). Compared to the corresponding figure in [18], which has also
been simulated for 50ms, this reference power report in figure 5.1 is almost identical,
and will be used as the reference when presenting the results of this thesis in the
next sections. The SAIF file contains the average switching rate for every net system
based on the simulation.
Figure 5.1: Reference power consumption of the FPGA implementation from [18]. It
is based on SAIF-file obtained from post implementation simulation running for 50ms.
The total power consumption is 978mW.
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Results
5.2
Design w/ Clock Gating
5.2.1
Resource Consumption
Table 5.3 lists the resource consumption of the network, which incorporates clock
gating in the neuron processor. The table shows that only a small percentage of the
available LUTs and registers have been utilized, which is to be expected, since the
implementation is very RAM heavy, due to the large neuron memories. Combined,
the neuron cores utilize 61.6% of the available BRAM tiles. As explained in section
4.3, the address space of the memories is not a power of 2, which is not ideal for
FPGA or ASIC implementations, and solutions should be explored.
The neuron
cores each utilizes 80 LUT slices and a several register slices less than the reference
implementation. However, looking into a neuron core, as in table 5.4, shows that
there is a discrepancy between the LUT count for the whole core and the sum of
the component LUT slices. The three components in the neuron block, control unit,
evaluation units, and evaluation memories, utilize much different numbers of LUT
slices than the reference table 5.2. This will have to be investigated further.
Name
Slice LUTs
Slice Registers
Mux
BRAM Tile
DSPs
Count
%
Count
%
Top Module
10
0.3
72
5.6
0
0
Clock gen.
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0
Neuron Processor
3579
99.7
1200
94.4
276
4
Bus Arbiter
24
0.6
7
0.5
0
0
Input Core 0
246
6.6
114
8.8
1
0
Input Core 1
245
6.5
114
8.8
1
0
Neuron Core 0
1483
41.7
409
32.6
137
2
Neuron Core 1
1481
41.6
406
32.2
137
2
Off-Chip Comm.
76
2.0
115
8.9
0
0
Output Core
24
0.6
35
2.6
0
0
Total
3589
100.0
1294
100.0
276
4
Available on Kintex-7
203800
1.8
407600
0.3
445
840
Table 5.3: Resource utilization for the full reference network
The floor planning of the neuron core alone as well as the full implementation are
illustrated in figures 5.2 and 5.3. Both illustrations are color-coded for each individual
component, and provide a visual illustration of the resources available in the FPGA
and how much is being occupied by the implementation. The very small percentage
of utilized resources provides a high degree of freedom for the tools to optimize the
resource placement for better performance and power consumption.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Design w/ Clock Gating
53
Name
Slice LUTs
Slice Registers
BRAM Tile
DSPs
Count
%
Count
%
Neuron Core
1483
100.0
409
100.0
137
2
Axon System
18
1.2
11
2.7
1
0
Bus Interface
2
0.1
3
0.7
0
0
Control Unit
301
20.3
60
14.7
0
2
Evaluation Units
784
52.9
280
68.5
0
0
Evaluation Mems
416
28.1
0
0.0
136
0
Spike Transmission
40
2.7
55
13.4
0
0
Table 5.4: Resource utilization for Neuron Core 0
Figure 5.2: Floor plan of a Neuron core.
Evaluation Memories (peach), Neuron
Evaluation Units (teal), Control Unit (green), Axon System (pink), Transmission
System (blue). The rest is not a part of the Neuron core (dark teal).
5.2.2
Power Consumption
Achieving low-power is one of the main concerns in the design of this neuron processor.
As for the reference power report, the power report illustrated in figure 5.4 has also
been generated using a SAIF-file. The implementation consumes a total of 579mW
power, of which 138mW is dynamic power and 441mW is static power. Compared
to the reference power report in figure 5.1, the dynamic power consumed by BRAM
has drastically been reduced. This is due to the now functioning clock enable, which
has been introduced in section 3.2 and will be explained further in chapter 7. This
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Results
Figure 5.3: Floor plan of the implementation.
Bus arbiter (pink), Input core 0
(yellow), Input core 1 (green), Neuron core 2 (peach), Neuron core 3 (teal), Output
core 4 (red), Off-chip communication (blue).
results in a dynamic power reduction of 73.9%.
Now, The highest contributor to the dynamic power is the Mixed-Mode Clock
Manager (MMCM) including the clock tree branching out throughout the network.
Some dynamic power optimizations can be implemented to reduce this, which are
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Design w/ Clock Gating
55
analyzed and discussed in chapters 6 and 7.
The static power makes up the majority of the total power consumption. Research
has been done in static power reduction in FPGAs, which is analyzed in chapter 6.
Implementing the processor in an ASIC would reduce the static power dramatically.
This is discussed further in chapter 7.
Figure 5.4: Power consumption of the FPGA implementation with clock enable. It is
based on SAIF-file obtained from post implementation simulation running for 50ms.
The total power consumption is 579mW.
Table 5.5 shows the dynamic power consumption distributed over ther individual
components. Vivado reports in milliWatt resolution, and components which have less
than 1mW impact on the system are rounded down.
==PAGE:70==
56
5 Results
Name
Dyn. Power
BRAM
MMCM
I/O
[mW]
[%]
[mW]
[mW]
[mW]
Clock gen.
131
22.6
0
123
4
Neuron Processor
7
1.2
6
0
<1
Bus Arbiter
<1
0
0
0
0
Input Core 0
1
0.2
1
0
0
Input Core 1
1
0.2
1
0
0
Neuron Core 0
2
0.3
2
0
0
Axon System
1
0.2
1
0
0
Bus Interface
<1
0
<1
0
0
Control Unit
<1
0
<1
0
0
Evaluation Units
<1
0
<1
0
0
Evaluation Mems
<1
0
<1
0
0
Spike Transmission
<1
0
<1
0
0
Neuron Core 1
2
0.3
2
0
0
Off-Chip Comm.
<1
0
0
0
0
Output Core
<1
0
0
0
0
Total
138
23.8
123
123
4
Table 5.5: Dynamic power consumption for the full system. Utilization is in percent-
age of the total power, including static power consumption.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Analysis
Compared to ASICs or full-custom design, FPGAs offer many advantages including
reduced non-recurring engineering costs and shorter time to market. The advantages,
however, come at the cost of increased silicon area, decreased performance, and in-
creased power consumption when designs are implemented in FPGAs compared to
ASICs.
The focus of this thesis is for a low-power neuron processor.
Therefore,
this chapter will initially be focusing on this topic, which consists of various design
methodologies and techniques to reduce dynamic and static power consumption.
Throughout this chapter, techniques suited for both ASICs and/or FPGAs will be
analyzed. This includes dynamic and static power reduction methods that can be
implemented in the current neuron processor, as well as methods for implementation
in ASICs for large scale production. Lastly, it presents some experimental measure-
ments of the differences between FPGAs and ASICs in terms of logic-density, speed,
and power consumption.
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Analysis
6.1
Dynamic Power Reduction
Dynamic power, or switching power, is the power dissipated as a result of logic tran-
sitions when gate outputs toggle. It is defined by the equation:
Pdynamic = S · CL · Vdd2 · fclk
(6.1)
where:
CL = Gate parasitic capacitance
S = Average number of transitions across the entire circuit per clock cycle
fclk = Clock frequency
Vdd = Supply voltage
When the output changes from logic 0 to 1 this capacitance must be charged, and
discharged during logic 1 to 0 transitions. This switching significantly increases the
parasitic capacitance on the wire segments, and charging and discharging this para-
sitic capacitance consumes dynamic power. For large IC designs, dynamic power may
constitute as much as 80% of the total power, the rest being static power. Figure
6.1 illustrates a number of design techniques, at different levels of abstraction, for
reducing power, both dynamic and static. The higher the level of abstraction is, the
greater potential for power savings.
This section focuses mainly on clock gating techniques that could be implemented
in the neuron processor in this thesis, but also analyzes other methods that could
reduce the power consumption.
6.1.1
Clock Gating
In many designs, data may be loaded into registers quite infrequently. However, the
clock signal continues to toggle at every clock cycle. The clock often drives a large
capacitive load, which is a major source of dynamic power dissipation. Clock gat-
ing reduces dynamic power dissipation by shutting off gated registers in idle period.
Therefore, it directly affects the gate parasitic capacitance (CL) and the average num-
ber of transitions across the entire circuit per clock cycle (S).
There are a number of gating techniques. Figure 6.2 shows a gated clock, which turns
a clock signal on and off with an enable signal that controls some gating circuitry.
When a clock is turned off, the corresponding clock domain is shut down and becomes
functionally inactive. Gated clocks can be a powerful technique to reduce power con-
sumption. Both the gated clock network and the registers in the gated clock tree stop
toggling, eliminating their contribution to the power consumption. The drawback is
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Dynamic Power Reduction
59
Figure 6.1: Levels of design abstraction for power saving [40].
Figure 6.2: Gated clock [40].
that gated clocks are not part of a synchronous scheme and they contribute to clock
skew and are sensitive to glitches.
However, this could still be a valid approach for the neuron processor in the FPGA,
by gating all the neuron evaluation units in a neuron block with one clock gate and
the io_evalEnable signal controlled by the control unit. This would be feasible, since
the Genesys 2 board contains ten clock management tiles (CMTs) with phase-locked
loop (PLL) [36]. Such tiles serve as frequency synthesizers for a wide range of frequen-
cies, serve as jitter filters for either external or internal clocks, and de-skew clocks,
which would eliminate some of the potentially critical drawbacks [41].
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Analysis
A clock domain can, however, be turned off in a purely synchronous manner with
a synchronous clock enable. The drawbacks of a synchronous clock enable are that
the clock tree keeps toggling and the circuitry within each flip-flop remains active,
although the output does not change. The synchronous clock enable scheme is illus-
trated in figure 6.3. This scheme does not reduce power consumption as much as the
gated clock, since the clock tree keeps toggling. However, it performs the same func-
tion by disabling the flip-flops. This is the scheme, which is currently being employed
in the neuron processor developed in this thesis.
Figure 6.3: Synchronous clock enable [40].
The clock tree in a design constitutes almost 50% of the whole chip power. Therefore,
as a general rule, it is always better, in regards to reducing power consumption, to
gate the clock at the root so that the entire clock tree can be shut down, rather than
implementing the gating along the leaves of the clock tree.
6.1.1.1
Possibilities Outside of the Neuron Block
The focus of this thesis is the neuron block and analyzing how low-power techniques
can be applied to this. However, it is still relevant to look at the big picture and
consider what possibilities there are of reducing power in the network outside of the
neuron block.
Recall figures 2.6 and 2.7, and the overall network structure. The input core receives
stimuli from the off-chip communication system every time-step, which is 1ms. So this
component would not be the most important to clock gate. The bus arbiter handles
all the requests coming from the input and neuron cores, which is also executing tasks
on a per time-step basis. The output core, axon system, or spike transmission would
be more ideal choices, even though they only add up to five components compared
to a neuron block’s eight NEUs, each representing 32 neurons. The operations in
those five components are not as comprehensive either. With an up-scaled network,
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Static Power Reduction
61
however, with multiples of each type of core, it may start to make more sense.
Another consideration, which would avoid the need for clocks and clock gating alto-
gether, is implementing an asynchronous design. As mentioned, the clock network
accounts for at least half of the power consumption, and due to the sparse spiking
activity the network may be ideal for such a design. This would also be a good tran-
sition for a Network-on-Chip implementation for better scalability. These two areas
will be discussed further in chapter 7.
6.1.2
Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling
Power consumption is proportional to the supply voltage with a quadratic relation-
ship between power and supply voltage, shown in equation 6.1. This means that
reducing the supply voltage would result in a quarter of the dynamic power consump-
tion. However, this has a negative effect on the performance.
Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) is widely used to match system
power consumption with required performance. A processor’s power efficiency can be
improved by running at lower voltages, while still being kept high enough to provide
adequate performance for the current workload. Dynamic voltage scaling (DVS) can
be used to adapt supply voltage to the FPGA as the temperature changes, in order to
minimize power consumption. 4-54% power reduction has been achieved for various
arithmetic circuits [42].
Typically, applications only require high performance for a fraction of the time, while
a low-performance, low-power processor would suffice for the rest of the time. Most
processors are designed with a voltage-dependent operating frequency, which means
that when the frequency is reduced, the supply voltage can also be reduced. DVFS
can thereby provide large energy savings. One thing to keep in mind, is that most
DVFS algorithms cannot be applied directly to real-time embedded systems, which
the neuron processor in this thesis aims to be in the future. Changing the operating
frequency affects, and may violate, execution time of the tasks, and so a scheduler
and task manager are necessary [40, Ch. 5].
6.2
Static Power Reduction
Standby current refers to the current drawn by an application when the system is in
standby mode. Standby power is heavily dependent on the electrical characteristics
of a component. This is also referred to as static power. Static power also includes
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Analysis
leakage current in the transistors of the circuit. The total power dissipation of a
system is therefore defined as:
Ptotal = Pdynamic + Pstatic
(6.2)
FPGAs are more power-hungry than ASICs. They are made up of a large number
of configurable logic blocks and a configurable routing fabric, which implement the
logic of digital circuits and the connections between the logic blocks, respectively.
Embedded fixed memories and arithmetic logic units are typically aligned with the
logic tiles and arranged in rows and columns.
The logic blocks are implemented using lookup-tables (LUTs), which consist of
far more transistors than the logic gates in ASICs. The same is the case for routing
resources, which in FPGAs use significantly more transistors than in ASICs, due to
the large number of multiplexers needed to make the routing flexible [42].
6.2.1
Power Gating
Power gating is a technique used in IC designs to reduce power consumption by
shutting off the current to blocks in the circuit that are not in use. It is one of the most
effective techniques to reduce leakage power dissipation that increases exponentially
with device scaling.
The time during shutdown is also called low power mode or
inactive mode, while the operational time is called active mode. Switching these two
modes at an appropriate time and manner will minimize power consumption while
also minimizing the impact on the performance.
Power gating affects the architecture more than clock gating, due to the increased
time delays as the power gated blocks safely enters and exits the inactive mode. Im-
plementing power gating requires either driver software for scheduling or hardware
timers for power-down operations. Furthermore, if not done cautiously for small in-
tervals of time, power gating can cause larger short circuit currents.
The power gate size must be selected to handle the amount of switching current at
any given time. It must be big enough so that there is no measurable voltage drop
due to the gate. A rule of thumb is to use 3× the switching capacitance for the gate
size. Dynamic power analysis tools can be used to predict the size of the gate.
Another important consideration is simultaneous switching capacitance.
This
refers to the amount of a circuit that can be switched simultaneously without af-
fecting the integrity of the power network. The circuit must be switched in stages to
avoid rush current, which can compromise the network integrity [43] [44].
Research has been done in FPGAs with power gated switch-blocks [45], and in Xilinx’
Ultrascale(+) architecture unused block RAMs are power gated. Xilinx 7-series 28nm
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Gap Between FPGAs & ASICs
63
devices also make it possible to power gate unused blocks (transceivers, PLLs, DCMs),
as well as added power gating of unused block RAM. While it is still most common in
ASICs, more FPGAs can utilize some form of power gating while still not as effective.
6.3
Gap Between FPGAs & ASICs
The goal of the neuron processor is to optimize it for low-power applications, which
will most likely be implemented in ASICs in the future. For this reason, it would be
beneficial to have an idea of the difference in power consumption between FPGAs
and ASICs.
This section summarizes the work that has been done by Ian Kuon
and Jonathan Rose in [46]. This work was done in 2007 and uses a 90nm CMOS
SRAM-programmable FPGA (Altera Stratix II) and a 90nm CMOS standard-cell
ASIC. These have been chosen because of their similarities and availability of device
data, and the approach only considers the resources used. FPGAs, unlike ASICs, are
not available in arbitrary sizes, which is the reason for only focusing on the cost of
the programmable fabric itself.
Three parameters have been measured; area, delay and power consumption. The
gaps are reported as the factor by which each of these parameters of the FPGA im-
plementations are larger than the ASIC implementations. A number of benchmark
circuits have been used to obtain the measurements. These benchmarks are divided
into the categories logic only, logic and DSP, logic and memory, and logic, memory
and DSP.
Area
First, only the circuits that use basic logic are considered. The average area required
to implement these circuits is on average a factor of 35× larger in the FPGA than
the ASIC, with a range between 17-54×.
The fundamental reason for this large
gap is because the FPGA requires additional circuitry to perform programmable
connections between the LUTs and flip-flops. Adding more logic, such as multiply-
and-accumulators (MACs) and memories decrease this gap to an average of 18×.
A more utilized FPGA device leads to a smaller gap because of less routing over-
head, among other things. The density of the larger ASIC designs may decrease in
order to maintain speed and signal integrity, whereas the FPGA is already designed
to handle larger designs, and would not require the same area overhead. Other con-
siderations, such as avoiding global routing over placed and routed blocks in ASICs,
could also lead to a smaller gap in larger designs.
Delay
For circuits with logic only, the average FPGA circuit is 3.4× slower than the ASIC
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Analysis
implementation. Circuits with hard DSP multiply-and-accumulator blocks were on
average 3.5× slower, and hard blocks in general resulted in slower FPGA circuits.
Memory blocks and DSP blocks narrow the gap slightly, but the primary benefits lie
in the improved area efficiency.
Dynamic Power Consumption
On average, FPGAs consume 14× more dynamic power than ASICs for logic only
circuits. When including hard blocks (DSP, RAM), this gap is roughly unchanged
for either multipliers or memories. Combined, however, the gap decreases to 7.1×.
This implies that a smaller area difference leads to less interconnect and fewer excess
transistors, resulting in less capacitive load, and finally reduced power consumption.
Static Power Consumption
At an operating temperature of 25 °C, the static power is 87× the power in the ASIC.
However, this changes drastically down to 5.4× at the worst-case operating temper-
ature of 85 °C. This proves that the static power consumption gap is difficult to
measure. However, the static power gap and area gap are related in some sense. The
transistor width is generally proportional to the static power consumption, and the
area gap somewhat reflects the difference in total transistor width between an FPGA
and ASIC. The multipliers and memories also reduce static power consumption.
Conclusion
Hard multipliers and dedicated memories enable substantial reduction in area and
power consumption, while having little impact on the delay gap between FPGAs
and ASICs. In general, the gap for each parameter is still a number of times larger
than that of ASICs, and there is still performance gains in all areas by implementing
a design in an ASIC rather than FPGA. In the end it comes down to costs and
applications.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
While a functioning accelerator with a neuron processor has been implemented using
SNN, including some power optimizations, work is still required in order to consider
its feasibility in very power-constrained devices, such as hearing aids, which demands
less than 5mW of power. This chapter discusses the work that has been done in this
thesis, as well as future considerations and optimization strategies that could assist in
the accelerator meeting the demands for ultra low-power devices. Lastly, the project
is evaluated.
==PAGE:80==
66
7 Discussion
7.1
ASIC Power Estimations
IBM’s TrueNorth processor consumes a mere 70mW with a capability of 46 billion
synaptic operations per second/Watt, which translates to 46 million operations per
second/milliWatt [47]. Approaching the same performance ratio for the presented
accelerator in the future would make it a great candidate for ultra-low power devices.
This section attempts to make some power estimations based on the analysis in
section 6.3 for silicon implementation.
As discovered, FPGAs are not best suited for low-power applications unless all the
resources in the FPGA are utilized. Even then, the designer still has to deal with
the high static power. Following the results presented in section 5.2, it would be
interesting to discuss how much of a power reduction the accelerator could achieve
further, by implementing it in an ASIC. As mentioned, tools exist to predict the
estimated power in an ASIC. Here I will merely attempt to make some rational
assumptions to get an idea of the scale.
The paper, referred to in section 6.3, reports that the static power may be reduced
by anything between 5.4-87× depending on the operating temperature. Firstly, let
us assume that the operating temperature of a hearing aid, for instance, would be 37
°C, because it is most pleasant for the user if it is the same temperature, as well as
the temperature being affected by its environment, which is 37 °C. Secondly, static
power increases exponentially with operating temperature. However, in this example
we assume a linear increase. These two parameters let us estimate the power gap
with the equation 7.1.
87× −87× −5.4×
85◦C −25◦C · (37◦C −25◦C) ≈70×
(7.1)
In an ASIC we assume the clock to be driven by crystal at the system frequency
rather than an MMCM. This means that we can subtract this from the dynamic
power.
Other dynamic power reductions will not be estimated, as the results in
section 5.2 have already been reduced significantly. The total power estimate of a
ASIC implementation is calculated in equation 7.2.
(138mW −123mW) + 441mW
70×
= 21.3mW
(7.2)
Regardless of the accuracy of these estimations, this is a very promising result, which
illustrates that there may be a foundation for implementing the presented neuro-
morphic accelerator in an ASIC in the future. Furthermore, the dynamic power in
equation 7.2 is 15mW, which is 75% of the total estimated power. Further dynamic
power optimizations in memories, signals or I/Os may reduce this yet a number of
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Future Work
67
times. For proper estimations and predictions, tools such as Synopsis Design Vision
can synthesize a design for silicon implementation.
7.2
Future Work
This section discusses the presented results, chapter 5, and considerations that were
made in the analysis, chapter 6. Other considerations for future improvements of the
neuron processor will also be discussed.
7.2.1
Asynchronous Design
In order to reduce the dynamic power consumption of the clock manager (MMCM),
which currently accounts for 89% of the dynamic power, it may be worth considering
an asynchronous design. Neuromorphic systems are generally well-suited for such
an implementation [48] [49]. This would eliminate the clock completely and instead
introduce handshaking protocols between the components, which are independent of
the global network. Switching only occurs during a handshake, and since the activ-
ity in the implementation is very sparse, it would result in minimal dynamic power.
Asynchronous circuits generally require more transistors than in a synchronous archi-
tecture, due to the fact that handshaking circuitry forwards tokens from one hand-
shake latch to the next. However, even with the increased transistors it would still
achieve a dynamic power reduction.
7.2.2
Gated Clock
If an asynchronous design is not desirable, it may be beneficial to implement gated
clocks rather than clock enable signals. As explained in chapter 6, this would eliminate
activity of the clock leaves and logic in the gated network. Work should be done in
researching the most optimal clock gating placements in the accelerator in order to
gate as much of the clock tree as possible.
7.2.3
Network-on-Chip
Network-on-Chip (NoC) is a network architecture that replaces the bus or crossbar,
illustrated in figures 2.6 and 2.5, with a grid of NoC interconnects. It provides great
scalability opportunities as the cores are distributed across the network grid, and it
also reduces challenges such as wire routing congestion. This network architecture
works great in conjunction with an asynchronous design.
==PAGE:82==
68
7 Discussion
The current accelerator already implements handshaking, in the form of a valid-
ready protocol, between the cores and the communication fabric. This makes tran-
sitioning to a NoC much easier, and could be relevant if the core count increases in
order to perform better recognition for real-time applications.
7.2.4
Memory Configuration
The BRAMs in the Kintex-7 FPGA are configured at size 32K ×1-bit. This geometry
is not ideal for the current implementation, as the number of axons have had to be
reduced to a number, which is not the power of 2, by down-scaling the input image
to 22×22 pixels. Furthermore, the presented network uses an evaluation wordlength
of 17-bit, which means that 17 BRAM tiles are used to implement one evaluation
memory by assembling 1 bit from each memory when reading an address.
This
calls for either a different BRAM geometry and/or utilizing a different type of RAM.
Conventional RAM types are volatile, meaning they cannot retain the stored data
when the system is powered off. However, non-volatile RAM (NVRAM) could be
beneficial to implement in battery-powered neuromorphic processors for low-power
devices. However, these are neither very common nor cheap RAM types.
Another consideration would be to reduce the evaluation wordlength to decrease
the number of BRAMs required to store the evaluation memories.
However, the
showcase network in the previous work [18] requires 17-bit due to the training of the
network. Reducing the wordlength and observing the affect on accuracy would be a
relevant focus in future work.
7.3
Project Evaluation
This section discusses the success of the presented neuron processor.
Firstly, the
experience with combining Chisel and VHDL, including the challenges that were
faced and the skills and knowledge that were acquired.
Next, the quality of the
results will be discussed, and lastly, a short evaluation on the analysis and discussion
chapters.
7.3.1
Mixing Chisel & VHDL
The process of acquiring the skills to implement a system described in two different
languages, such as Chisel and VHDL, cannot be recommended. The implementation
step of the project ended up taking most of the duration of the project. However,
with the knowledge that I have acquired during this time, as well as a few extra
useful tools, mixing these languages and performing debugging would significantly
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Project Evaluation
69
improve the work efficiency. During this time I have acquired a general knowledge
about Chisel, how to incorporate a BlackBox, and become better at utilizing the tools
available in Vivado.
Discovering that a VCD file could be generated in Vivado and used for debugging
made the whole implementation possible. For the purpose of using the data in the
VCD file as testbench input, it would have been beneficial to create a program that
could have extracted the data from the VCD file and organized it in a more suitable
format. However, this only makes sense to do if the designer knows that the logged
data is correct, so it requires an existing implementation.
This thesis successfully conveys some of the challenges in converting Chisel to
VHDL, as well as how to overcome certain obstacles during debugging when imple-
menting a BlackBox.
7.3.2
Results
The results of the low-power neuron processor show the benefits of having imple-
mented the processor in VHDL, which uses an explicit clock, making it easier to
implement clock gating. This does not require specific synthesis tools or an intimate
understanding of a BlackBox as is the case in Chisel.
From the results it is clear that SNNs are ideal candidates for real-time, low-
activity and low-power applications, as the clock enable achieved better than expected
results, while there are still a number of power reduction techniques that need to be
investigated. For a complete success, the neuron processor accuracy would have had
to be tested in the showcase network, in the previous work done in [18], to observe if
the accelerator still performs the same. Unfortunately, this was not possible due to
the earlier complications during debugging, which led to a significant time pressure.
7.3.3
Analysis & Discussion
The inclusion of the analysis and discussion chapters provide a great transition from
results of the clock-enabled neuron processor to further, more in-depth, understanding
and considerations as well as future power optimizations that ought to be researched
for the next low-power neuron processor iterations.
==PAGE:84==
70
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This Master’s thesis presented the design, implementation and evaluation of a neuron
processor for executing spiking neural networks within a neuromorphic accelerator.
The objective was to build a low-power processor for systems that may be used for
highly power-constrained devices, such as hearing aids.
Spiking neural networks experience sparse switching activity because of the nature
of the neuron, which requires consistent spiking activity to propagate a spike forward
in the network. This can be exploited for power-constrained devices.
A neuromorphic accelerator developed in previous work provided the foundation for
optimizing the neuron processor within it for low power. This was done by converting
the description language from Chisel to VHDL, which provided the opportunity to
take advantage of the explicit clock to implement a clock-enable in the processor,
which prevents switching activity in the neurons and the connected memories, which
constitute the majority of the dynamic power consumption in the accelerator.
The resource and power consumption were measured, and it was found that the
low-power neuron processor uses 73.9% less dynamic power than the neuromorphic ac-
celerator from the previous work, with a dynamic power consumption of 138mW. Fur-
ther analysis on the results and the neuron processor were presented, while other opti-
mization techniques were discussed for future work in an effort to achieve a power con-
sumption that would make it feasible for implementation in ultra power-constrained
devices, which consumes around 5mW power.
An estimation of power consumption if implemented in an ASIC was found to be
around 21mW.
In conclusion, this Master’s project is a successful second step in eventually achieving
the goal of implementing a neuromorphic accelerator in low-power devices for real-
time applications.
==PAGE:86==
72
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Hardware
Development
A.1
Neuron Block Related
This section includes all the code-files created or altered for functional implementa-
tion.
A.1.1
Top-level
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use IEEE.numeric_std.all;
4 use IEEE.math_real.all;
5
6 use work.constants_record_pkg.all;
7
8 entity neuron_top is
9
generic (
10
io_coreID
: integer
11
);
12
port (
13
clock
: in std_logic;
14
reset
: in std_logic;
15
-- axon system
16
io_aData
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0); --unsigned
17
io_spikeCnt
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0); --unsigned
18
io_aAddr
: out unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0); --unsigned
19
io_aEna
: out boolean;
20
io_inOut
: out boolean;
21
-- spike transmission
22
io_n
: out unsigned(integer(N)-1 downto 0); --unsigned
23
io_spikes_0
: out boolean;
24
io_spikes_1
: out boolean;
25
io_spikes_2
: out boolean;
==PAGE:88==
74
A Hardware Development
26
io_spikes_3
: out boolean;
27
io_spikes_4
: out boolean;
28
io_spikes_5
: out boolean;
29
io_spikes_6
: out boolean;
30
io_spikes_7
: out boolean
31
);
32 end entity neuron_top;
33
34 architecture struct of neuron_top is
35
36 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
37 -- Control Unit component
38 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
39
component ControlUnit is
40
generic (
41
coreID
: integer
42
);
43
port (
44
io_clk
: in std_logic;
45
io_reset
: in std_logic;
46
-- evaluation memories
47
io_addr
: out unsigned(integer(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
48
io_wr
: out boolean; -- false: read, true: write
49
io_ena
: out boolean;
50
-- neuron evaluators
51
io_spikeIndi
: in bool_array;
52
io_refracIndi : in bool_array;
53
io_cntrSels
: out nbool_array;
54
io_evalEnable
: out boolean;
55
-- axon system
56
io_inOut
: out boolean;
57
io_spikeCnt
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
58
io_aAddr
: out unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
59
io_aEna
: out boolean;
60
io_aData
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
61
-- spike transmission
62
io_n
: out unsigned(integer(N)-1 downto 0);
63
io_spikes
: out bool_array
64
);
65
end component ControlUnit;
66
67 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
68 -- Neuron Evaluator component
==PAGE:89==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
75
69 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
70
component NeuronEvaluator is
71
port (
72
io_clk
: in std_logic;
73
io_reset
: in std_logic;
74
-- control unit
75
io_cntrSels
: in t_EvalCntrSigs;
76
io_evalEnable : in boolean;
77
io_spikeIndi
: out boolean;
78
io_refracIndi : out boolean;
79
-- evaluation memory
80
io_dataIn
: in std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0); --signed
81
io_dataOut
: out std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0) --signed
82
);
83
end component NeuronEvaluator;
84
85 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
86 -- Evaluation Memory component
87 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
88
component EvaluationMemory is
89
generic(
90
filename
: string
91
);
92
port(
93
io_clk
: in std_logic;
94
-- control unit
95
io_wr
: in boolean; -- false: read, true: write
96
io_ena
: in boolean;
97
io_addr
: in unsigned(integer(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH)-1 downto 0); --
unsigned
98
-- neuron evaluators
99
io_writeData
: in std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
--
signed
100
io_readData
: out std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0)
--
signed
101
);
102
end component EvaluationMemory;
103
104
105
type ena_bool_array is array(2 to 3) of boolean;
106
type data_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of std_logic_vector(
NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
107
type potSel_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of unsigned(1 downto 0);
108
type spikeSel_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of unsigned(1 downto 0);
==PAGE:90==
76
A Hardware Development
109
type refracSel_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of unsigned(0 downto 0);
110
type decaySel_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of boolean;
111
type writeDataSel_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of unsigned(1 downto 0)
;
112
113
--ControlUnit & EvalMem
114
signal addr_evalMem
: unsigned(integer(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
--unsigned
115
signal wr_evalMem
: boolean;
116
signal ena_evalMem
: boolean;
117
118
--EvalUnit & EvalMem
119
signal readData_evalMem
: data_array;
120
signal writeData_evalMem
: data_array;
121
122
--ControlUnit & EvalUnit
123
signal spikeIndi_evalUnit
: bool_array;
124
signal refracIndi_evalUnit
: bool_array;
125
signal cntrSels_potSel
: potSel_array;
126
signal cntrSels_spikeSel
: spikeSel_array;
127
signal cntrSels_refracSel
: refracSel_array;
128
signal cntrSels_decaySel
: decaySel_array;
129
signal cntrSels_writeDataSel: writeDataSel_array;
130
signal evalEnable_evalUnit
: ena_bool_array;
131
132
constant fileDirectory
: string := "Y:/home/jacob/myDrive/
test_postSynth/NeuromorphicProcessor/mapping/";
133
134 begin
135
136 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
137 -- Control Unit
138 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
139
cntrUnit : ControlUnit
140
generic map(
141
coreID
=> io_coreID
142
)
143
port map (
144
--to Top
145
io_clk
=> clock,
146
io_reset
=> reset,
147
io_inOut
=> io_inOut,
148
io_spikeCnt
=> io_spikeCnt ,
149
io_aAddr
=> io_aAddr,
150
io_aEna
=> io_aEna,
151
io_aData
=> io_aData,
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
77
152
io_n
=> io_n,
153
io_spikes(0)
=> io_spikes_0 ,
154
io_spikes(1)
=> io_spikes_1 ,
155
io_spikes(2)
=> io_spikes_2 ,
156
io_spikes(3)
=> io_spikes_3 ,
157
io_spikes(4)
=> io_spikes_4 ,
158
io_spikes(5)
=> io_spikes_5 ,
159
io_spikes(6)
=> io_spikes_6 ,
160
io_spikes(7)
=> io_spikes_7 ,
161
162
--to EvalMems
163
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
164
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
165
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
166
167
--to EvalUnits
168
io_spikeIndi(0)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(0),
169
io_spikeIndi(1)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(1),
170
io_spikeIndi(2)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(2),
171
io_spikeIndi(3)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(3),
172
io_spikeIndi(4)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(4),
173
io_spikeIndi(5)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(5),
174
io_spikeIndi(6)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(6),
175
io_spikeIndi(7)
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(7),
176
io_refracIndi(0)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(0),
177
io_refracIndi(1)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(1),
178
io_refracIndi(2)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(2),
179
io_refracIndi(3)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(3),
180
io_refracIndi(4)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(4),
181
io_refracIndi(5)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(5),
182
io_refracIndi(6)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(6),
183
io_refracIndi(7)
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(7),
184
io_cntrSels(0).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(0),
185
io_cntrSels(1).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(1),
186
io_cntrSels(2).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(2),
187
io_cntrSels(3).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(3),
188
io_cntrSels(4).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(4),
189
io_cntrSels(5).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(5),
190
io_cntrSels(6).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(6),
191
io_cntrSels(7).potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(7),
192
io_cntrSels(0).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(0),
193
io_cntrSels(1).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(1),
194
io_cntrSels(2).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(2),
195
io_cntrSels(3).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(3),
196
io_cntrSels(4).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(4),
197
io_cntrSels(5).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(5),
198
io_cntrSels(6).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(6),
199
io_cntrSels(7).spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(7),
200
io_cntrSels(0).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(0),
201
io_cntrSels(1).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(1),
==PAGE:92==
78
A Hardware Development
202
io_cntrSels(2).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(2),
203
io_cntrSels(3).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(3),
204
io_cntrSels(4).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(4),
205
io_cntrSels(5).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(5),
206
io_cntrSels(6).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(6),
207
io_cntrSels(7).refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(7),
208
io_cntrSels(0).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(0),
209
io_cntrSels(1).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(1),
210
io_cntrSels(2).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(2),
211
io_cntrSels(3).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(3),
212
io_cntrSels(4).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(4),
213
io_cntrSels(5).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(5),
214
io_cntrSels(6).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(6),
215
io_cntrSels(7).decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(7),
216
io_cntrSels(0).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(0),
217
io_cntrSels(1).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(1),
218
io_cntrSels(2).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(2),
219
io_cntrSels(3).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(3),
220
io_cntrSels(4).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(4),
221
io_cntrSels(5).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(5),
222
io_cntrSels(6).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(6),
223
io_cntrSels(7).writeDataSel => cntrSels_writeDataSel(7),
224
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID)
225
);
226
227 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
228 -- Neuron Evaluator
229 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
230
NEU_gen : for i in 0 to 7 generate
231
begin
232
neu0 : if (i = 0) generate
233
begin
234
neu0 : NeuronEvaluator
235
port map (
236
io_clk
=> clock,
237
io_reset
=> reset,
238
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
239
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
240
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
241
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
242
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
243
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
244
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
245
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
246
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
247
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
79
248
);
249
end generate neu0;
250
251
neu1 : if (i = 1) generate
252
begin
253
neu1 : NeuronEvaluator
254
port map (
255
io_clk
=> clock,
256
io_reset
=> reset,
257
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
258
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
259
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
260
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
261
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
262
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
263
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
264
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
265
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
266
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
267
);
268
end generate neu1;
269
270
neu2 : if (i = 2) generate
271
begin
272
neu2 : NeuronEvaluator
273
port map (
274
io_clk
=> clock,
275
io_reset
=> reset,
276
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
277
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
278
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
279
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
280
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
281
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
282
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
283
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
284
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
285
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
286
);
287
end generate neu2;
288
289
neu3 : if (i = 3) generate
290
begin
291
neu3 : NeuronEvaluator
292
port map (
293
io_clk
=> clock,
294
io_reset
=> reset,
295
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
296
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
297
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
==PAGE:94==
80
A Hardware Development
298
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
299
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
300
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
301
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
302
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
303
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
304
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
305
);
306
end generate neu3;
307
308
neu4 : if (i = 4) generate
309
begin
310
neu4 : NeuronEvaluator
311
port map (
312
io_clk
=> clock,
313
io_reset
=> reset,
314
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(4),
315
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(4),
316
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(4),
317
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(4),
318
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(4),
319
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
320
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(4),
321
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(4),
322
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(4),
323
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(4)
324
);
325
end generate neu4;
326
327
neu5 : if (i = 5) generate
328
begin
329
neu5 : NeuronEvaluator
330
port map (
331
io_clk
=> clock,
332
io_reset
=> reset,
333
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
334
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
335
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
336
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
337
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
338
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
339
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
340
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
341
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
342
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
343
);
344
end generate neu5;
345
346
neu6 : if (i = 6) generate
347
begin
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
81
348
neu6 : NeuronEvaluator
349
port map (
350
io_clk
=> clock,
351
io_reset
=> reset,
352
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
353
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
354
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
355
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
356
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
357
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
358
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
359
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
360
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
361
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
362
);
363
end generate neu6;
364
365
neu7 : if (i = 7) generate
366
begin
367
neu7 : NeuronEvaluator
368
port map (
369
io_clk
=> clock,
370
io_reset
=> reset,
371
io_cntrSels.potSel
=> cntrSels_potSel(i),
372
io_cntrSels.spikeSel
=> cntrSels_spikeSel(i),
373
io_cntrSels.refracSel
=> cntrSels_refracSel(i),
374
io_cntrSels.decaySel
=> cntrSels_decaySel(i),
375
io_cntrSels.writeDataSel
=> cntrSels_writeDataSel(i),
376
io_evalEnable
=> evalEnable_evalUnit(io_coreID),
377
io_dataIn
=> readData_evalMem(i),
378
io_dataOut
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
379
io_spikeIndi
=> spikeIndi_evalUnit(i),
380
io_refracIndi
=> refracIndi_evalUnit(i)
381
);
382
end generate neu7;
383
end generate NEU_gen;
384
385 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
386 -- Evaluation Memory
387 --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
388
evalMem_gen : for i in 0 to 7 generate
389
begin
390
eMem0 : if (i = 0) generate
391
begin
392
eMem0 : EvaluationMemory
393
generic map(
==PAGE:96==
82
A Hardware Development
394
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
395
port map(
396
io_clk
=> clock,
397
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
398
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
399
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
400
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
401
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
402
);
403
end generate eMem0;
404
405
eMem1 : if (i = 1) generate
406
begin
407
eMem1 : EvaluationMemory
408
generic map(
409
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
410
port map(
411
io_clk
=> clock,
412
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
413
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
414
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
415
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
416
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
417
);
418
end generate eMem1;
419
420
eMem2 : if (i = 2) generate
421
begin
422
eMem2 : EvaluationMemory
423
generic map(
424
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
425
port map(
426
io_clk
=> clock,
427
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
428
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
429
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
430
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
431
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
432
);
433
end generate eMem2;
434
435
eMem3 : if (i = 3) generate
436
begin
437
eMem3 : EvaluationMemory
438
generic map(
439
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
==PAGE:97==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
83
440
port map(
441
io_clk
=> clock,
442
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
443
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
444
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
445
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
446
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
447
);
448
end generate eMem3;
449
450
eMem4 : if (i = 4) generate
451
begin
452
eMem4 : EvaluationMemory
453
generic map(
454
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
455
port map(
456
io_clk
=> clock,
457
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
458
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
459
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
460
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
461
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
462
);
463
end generate eMem4;
464
eMem5 : if (i = 5) generate
465
begin
466
eMem5 : EvaluationMemory
467
generic map(
468
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
469
port map(
470
io_clk
=> clock,
471
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
472
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
473
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
474
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
475
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
476
);
477
end generate eMem5;
478
479
eMem6 : if (i = 6) generate
480
begin
481
eMem6 : EvaluationMemory
482
generic map(
483
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
484
port map(
485
io_clk
=> clock,
486
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
==PAGE:98==
84
A Hardware Development
487
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
488
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
489
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
490
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
491
);
492
end generate eMem6;
493
494
eMem7 : if (i = 7) generate
495
begin
496
eMem7 : EvaluationMemory
497
generic map(
498
filename
=> fileDirectory & "evaldatac" & integer'image(
io_coreID) & "e" & integer'image(i) & ".mem")
499
port map(
500
io_clk
=> clock,
501
io_wr
=> wr_evalMem,
502
io_ena
=> ena_evalMem ,
503
io_addr
=> addr_evalMem ,
504
io_writeData
=> writeData_evalMem(i),
505
io_readData
=> readData_evalMem(i)
506
);
507
end generate eMem7;
508
end generate evalMem_gen;
509
510 end architecture struct;
code/top.vhd
A.1.2
Control Unit
1 library ieee;
2 use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use ieee.numeric_std.all;
4 use ieee.math_real.all;
5
6 use work.constants_record_pkg.all;
7
8 entity ControlUnit is
9
generic (
10
coreID
: integer
11
);
12
port (
13
io_clk
: in std_logic;
14
io_reset
: in std_logic;
15
-- evaluation memories
16
io_addr
: out unsigned(integer(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
17
io_wr
: out boolean; -- false: read, true: write
18
io_ena
: out boolean;
==PAGE:99==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
85
19
-- neuron evaluators
20
io_spikeIndi
: in bool_array;
21
io_refracIndi : in bool_array;
22
io_cntrSels
: out nbool_array;
23
io_evalEnable
: out boolean;
24
-- axon system
25
io_inOut
: out boolean;
26
io_spikeCnt
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
27
io_aAddr
: out unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
28
io_aEna
: out boolean;
29
io_aData
: in unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
30
-- spike transmission
31
io_n
: out unsigned(integer(N)-1 downto 0);
32
io_spikes
: out bool_array
33
);
34 end entity ControlUnit;
35
36 architecture behaviour of ControlUnit is
37
type SM_Main is (idle, rRefrac, rPot, rDecay, rWeight1, rWeight2, rBias,
rThresh, rRefracSet, wRefrac, rPotSet, wPot);
38
signal stateReg, stateNext
: SM_Main;
39
40
-- delivers spike pulses to transmission
41
signal spikePulse
: bool_array := (others => false);
42
-- counts time step cycle down to 0
43
signal tsCycleCnt
: unsigned(16 downto 0);
44
-- time-division multiplexing evaluation counter
45
signal n
: unsigned(8 downto 0);
46
-- axon system addr counter
47
signal a
: unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
48
-- register that stores sample of axon's incoming spike counter
49
signal spikeCnt
: unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0) := (others
=> '0');
50
-- informs spike system of new time step
51
signal sigInOut
: boolean := false;
52
-- decides if an evaluation unit has evaluated all mapped neurons
53
signal evalUnitActive
: bool_array := (others => false);
54
-- cntrSels used to decide memory address to read or write from
55
signal localCntrSels
: nbool_array;
56
-- total number of neurons in the core
57
constant nrNeuMapped
: unsigned(8 downto 0) := neuronsInCore(coreID);
58
59
signal spikePulseNext
: bool_array;
60
signal tsCycleCntNext
: unsigned(16 downto 0);
61
signal nNext
: unsigned(8 downto 0);
62
signal aNext
: unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
63
signal spikeCntNext
: unsigned(integer(AXONIDWIDTH)-1 downto 0);
64
signal sigInOutNext
: boolean;
65
signal evalUnitActiveNext
: bool_array;
66
==PAGE:100==
86
A Hardware Development
67 begin
68
69
process(all) begin
70
--default assignments
71
stateNext
<= stateReg;
72
tsCycleCntNext
<= tsCycleCnt;
73
spikeCntNext
<= spikeCnt;
74
sigInOutNext
<= sigInOut;
75
nNext
<= n;
76
aNext
<= a;
77
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
78
spikePulseNext(i)
<= spikePulse(i);
79
evalUnitActiveNext(i) <= evalUnitActive(i);
80
end loop;
81
82
io_addr
<= (others => '0');
83
io_wr
<= false;
84
io_ena
<= false;
85
io_evalEnable <= true;
86
io_inOut
<= sigInOut;
87
io_aAddr
<= a;
88
io_aEna
<= false;
89
io_n
<= n(4 downto 0);
90
91
92
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
93
spikePulseNext(i)
<= false;
94
localCntrSels(i).potSel
<= "10";
95
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel
<= "10";
96
localCntrSels(i).refracSel
<= "1";
97
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel
<= "00";
98
localCntrSels(i).decaySel
<= false;
99
100
if (evalUnitActive(i) = true) then -- ensures that eval unit
cntrSels don't reset until all neurons have been updated
101
io_cntrSels(i).potSel
<= localCntrSels(i).potSel;
102
io_cntrSels(i).spikeSel
<= localCntrSels(i).spikeSel;
103
io_cntrSels(i).refracSel
<= localCntrSels(i).refracSel;
104
io_cntrSels(i).writeDataSel <= localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel;
105
io_cntrSels(i).decaySel
<= localCntrSels(i).decaySel;
106
else
107
io_cntrSels(i).potSel
<= "10";
108
io_cntrSels(i).spikeSel
<= "10";
109
io_cntrSels(i).refracSel
<= "1";
110
io_cntrSels(i).writeDataSel <= "00";
111
io_cntrSels(i).decaySel
<= false;
112
end if;
113
io_spikes(i)
<= spikePulse(i);
114
end loop;
115
==PAGE:101==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
87
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
-- time step cycle counter
124
tsCycleCntNext <= tsCycleCnt - 1;
125
if (tsCycleCnt = 0) then
126
tsCycleCntNext <= to_unsigned(CYCLESPRSTEP ,tsCycleCnt'length);
127
else
128
null;
129
end if;
130
131
-- sets evaluation units' active state while neurons are being updated
132
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
133
if (nrNeuMapped > (shift_left(n, 3) + i))
then
134
evalUnitActiveNext(i) <= true;
135
else
136
evalUnitActiveNext(i) <= false;
137
end if;
138
end loop;
139
140
141
-- fsm runs through all states of a neuron (n) in all NEUs before
incrementing n
142
case (stateReg) is
143
when idle =>
-- wait until new time-step
144
nNext
<= (others => '0');
-- reset # of neurons evaluated
145
aNext
<= (others => '0');
-- reset # of axons evaluated
146
io_evalEnable <= false;
-- enable signal for NEUs
147
if (tsCycleCnt = 0) then
148
spikeCntNext
<= io_spikeCnt;
-- receive # of spikes from axon
system
149
sigInOutNext
<= not sigInOut; -- inform axon system of new time-
step
150
stateNext
<= rRefrac;
151
else
152
null;
153
end if;
154
155
when rRefrac =>
-- read refractory counter from memory
156
io_ena
<= true; -- enable read/write in memory
157
io_wr
<= false; -- read from memory
158
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSREFRAC,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
159
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to reset spike indicator in
NEUs
160
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel <= "01";
161
end loop;
==PAGE:102==
88
A Hardware Development
162
stateNext
<= rPot;
163
164
when rPot =>
-- read the neuron membrane potential from memory
165
io_ena
<= true;
166
io_wr
<= false;
167
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSPOTENTIAL ,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto
0);
168
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to sample dataIn in refrac
register in NEUs
169
localCntrSels(i).refracSel <= "0";
170
end loop;
171
stateNext
<= rDecay;
172
173
when rDecay =>
-- read decay factor selector from memory
174
io_ena
<= true;
175
io_wr
<= false;
176
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSDECAY,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
177
aNext
<= a + 1; -- next axonID will be ready for weight2
178
io_aEna
<= true;
179
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to sample dataIn in the
potential register in NEUs
180
localCntrSels(i).potSel <= "00";
181
end loop;
182
if (spikeCnt = 0) then -- no spikes to evaluate
183
stateNext
<= rBias;
184
else
185
stateNext <= rWeight1;
186
end if;
187
188
when rWeight1 =>
-- read weight of axon from memory
189
io_ena
<= true;
190
io_wr
<= false;
191
if (MEMCHEAT = true) then -- 'true' is for modified network size
192
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSWEIGHT,io_addr'length) + (to_unsigned((
to_integer(n) * (3 * 256)) + to_integer(unsigned(io_aData)),
io_addr'length));
193
else
194
io_addr <= to_unsigned(OSWEIGHT,io_addr'length) + (n(4 downto 0) &
unsigned(io_aData));
195
end if;
196
io_aEna
<= true;
197
aNext
<= a + 1;
198
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to subtract decay value from
membrane potential
199
if (io_refracIndi(i) = true) then
200
localCntrSels(i).potSel
<= "01";
201
localCntrSels(i).decaySel <= true;
202
else
203
null;
204
end if;
==PAGE:103==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
89
205
end loop;
206
if (spikeCnt = a) then -- 1 spike to evaluate
207
stateNext
<= rBias;
208
else
209
stateNext <= rWeight2;
210
end if;
211
212
when rWeight2 =>
-- read weight of more axons from memory
213
io_ena
<= true;
214
io_wr
<= false;
215
if (MEMCHEAT = true) then
216
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSWEIGHT,io_addr'length) + (to_unsigned((
to_integer(n) * (3 * 256)) + to_integer(unsigned(io_aData)),
io_addr'length));
217
else
218
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSWEIGHT,io_addr'length) + (n(4 downto 0)
& unsigned(io_aData));
219
end if;
220
io_aEna
<= true;
221
aNext
<= a + 1;
222
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to add weight to membrane
potential
223
if (io_refracIndi(i) = true) then
224
localCntrSels(i).potSel <= "01";
225
else
226
null;
227
end if;
228
end loop;
229
if (spikeCnt = a - 1) then -- 2 or more spikes to evaluate
230
stateNext
<= rBias;
231
else
232
stateNext <= rWeight2;
233
end if;
234
235
when rBias =>
-- read bias from memory
236
io_ena
<= true;
237
io_wr
<= false;
238
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSBIAS,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
239
if (spikeCnt = 0) then -- no spikes to evaluate, so subtract decay
from potential
240
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
241
if (io_refracIndi(i) = true) then
242
localCntrSels(i).potSel
<= "01";
243
localCntrSels(i).decaySel <= true;
244
else
245
null;
246
end if;
247
end loop;
248
else
-- 1 or more spikes to evaluate, so add weight to
potential
==PAGE:104==
90
A Hardware Development
249
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
250
if (io_refracIndi(i) = true) then
251
localCntrSels(i).potSel <= "01";
252
else
253
null;
254
end if;
255
end loop;
256
end if;
257
stateNext
<= rThresh;
258
259
when rThresh =>
-- read the membrane threshold from memory
260
io_ena
<= true;
261
io_wr
<= false;
262
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSTHRESH,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
263
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to add bias to potential
264
if (io_refracIndi(i) = true) then
265
localCntrSels(i).potSel <= "01";
266
else
267
null;
268
end if;
269
end loop;
270
stateNext
<= rRefracSet;
271
272
when rRefracSet =>
-- read default refractory value from memory
273
io_ena
<= true;
274
io_wr
<= false;
275
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSREFRACSET ,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto
0);
276
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to update spike indicator
register
277
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel <= "00";
278
end loop;
279
stateNext
<= wRefrac;
280
281
when wRefrac =>
-- write updated refractory counter to memory
282
io_ena
<= true;
283
io_wr
<= true; -- write to memory
284
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSREFRAC,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
285
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
-- set to write refractory value to
memory
286
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel
<= "10";
287
spikePulseNext(i)
<= io_spikeIndi(i);
288
end loop;
289
stateNext
<= rPotSet;
290
291
when rPotSet =>
-- read default membrane potential from memory
292
io_ena
<= true;
293
io_wr
<= false;
294
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSPOTSET,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto 0);
295
stateNext
<= wPot;
==PAGE:105==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
91
296
297
when wPot =>
-- write updated membrane potential to memory
298
io_ena
<= true;
299
io_wr
<= true; -- write to memory
300
io_addr
<= to_unsigned(OSPOTENTIAL ,io_addr'length) + n(4 downto
0);
301
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop -- set to write membrane potential to
memory
302
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel
<= "01";
303
end loop;
304
aNext
<= (others => '0');
305
nNext
<= n + 1; -- increment neuron by 1
306
if (shift_left(nNext,3) >= nrNeuMapped) then -- all neurons in core
evaluated?
307
stateNext
<= idle;
308
else
309
stateNext
<= rRefrac;
310
end if;
311
end case;
312
313
314
end process;
315
316
317
318
p_clocking
: process(io_clk) begin
319
if rising_edge(io_clk) then
320
if (io_reset = '1') then
321
stateReg
<= idle;
322
tsCycleCnt
<= to_unsigned(CYCLESPRSTEP ,tsCycleCnt 'length);
323
spikeCnt
<= (others => '0');
324
sigInOut
<= false;
325
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
326
spikePulse(i)
<= false;
327
evalUnitActive(i)
<= false;
328
end loop;
329
330
else
331
stateReg
<= stateNext;
332
tsCycleCnt
<= tsCycleCntNext;
333
n
<= nNext;
334
a
<= aNext;
335
spikeCnt
<= spikeCntNext;
336
sigInOut
<= sigInOutNext;
337
for i in 0 to EVALUNITS -1 loop
338
spikePulse(i)
<= spikePulseNext(i);
339
evalUnitActive(i)
<= evalUnitActiveNext(i);
340
end loop;
341
342
end if;
==PAGE:106==
92
A Hardware Development
343
end if;
344
end process p_clocking;
345
346 end architecture behaviour;
code/ControlUnit.vhd
A.1.3
Neuron Evaluation Unit
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use IEEE.numeric_std.all;
4 use IEEE.math_real.all;
5
6 use work.constants_record_pkg.all;
7
8 entity NeuronEvaluator is
9
port (
10
io_clk
: in std_logic;
11
io_reset
: in std_logic;
12
-- control unit
13
io_cntrSels
: in t_EvalCntrSigs;
14
io_evalEnable : in boolean;
15
io_spikeIndi
: out boolean;
16
io_refracIndi : out boolean;
17
-- evaluation memory
18
io_dataIn
: in std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0); --signed
19
io_dataOut
: out std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0) --signed
20
21
);
22 end entity NeuronEvaluator;
23
24 architecture behaviour of NeuronEvaluator is
25
signal sum
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH downto 0);
26
signal sumSat
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
27
signal sumIn1
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH downto 0);
28
signal sumIn2
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH downto 0);
29
signal potDecay
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
30
signal membPotReg
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0) := (others => '0')
;
31
signal refracCntReg
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
32
signal spikeIndiReg
: boolean
:= false;
33
34
signal membPotRegNext : signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
35
signal refracRegNext
: signed(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
36
signal spikeIndiRegNext : boolean;
37
38
==PAGE:107==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
93
39 begin
40
41
process(all) begin
42
--default assignment
43
io_dataOut
<= io_dataIn;
44
45
membPotRegNext
<= membPotReg;
46
refracRegNext
<= refracCntReg;
47
spikeIndiRegNext
<= spikeIndiReg;
48
49
50
sumIn1
<= resize(membPotReg,sumIn1'length);
51
if (io_cntrSels.decaySel = true) then
52
sumIn2 <= resize(-potDecay,sumIn2'length);
53
else
54
sumIn2 <= resize(signed(io_dataIn),sumIn2'length);
55
end if;
56
sum <= sumIn1 + sumIn2;
57
58
-- saturating sum to fit
59
sumSat <= sum(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
60
if (sum
< signed(0 - shift_left(to_unsigned(1,sum'length),NEUDATAWIDTH
-1))) then
61
sumSat
<= signed(0 - shift_left(to_unsigned(1,sumSat'length),
NEUDATAWIDTH -1));
62
elsif (sum
> signed(shift_left(to_unsigned(1,sum'length),NEUDATAWIDTH
-1) - 1)) then
63
sumSat
<= signed(shift_left(to_unsigned(1,sumSat'length),NEUDATAWIDTH
-1) - 1);
64
else
65
null;
66
end if;
67
68
case (io_cntrSels.potSel) is -- set membrane potential depending on
state
69
when "00" =>
70
membPotRegNext
<= signed(io_dataIn);
-- from memory
71
when "01" =>
72
membPotRegNext
<= sumSat;
-- result of addition/subtraction
73
when "10" =>
74
membPotRegNext
<= membPotReg;
-- unchanged
75
when others =>
76
null;
77
end case;
78
79
potDecay <= membPotReg;
80
81
case (io_dataIn(2 downto 0)) is -- set decay factor for membrane
potential
82
when "001" =>
==PAGE:108==
94
A Hardware Development
83
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,1);
-- 50%
84
when "010" =>
85
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,2);
-- 25%
86
when "011" =>
87
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,3);
-- 12.5%
88
when "100" =>
89
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,4);
-- 6.25%
90
when "101" =>
91
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,5);
-- 3.125%
92
when "110" =>
93
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,6);
-- 1.563%
94
when "111" =>
95
potDecay <= shift_right(membPotReg ,7);
-- 0.781%
96
when others =>
97
null;
98
end case;
99
100
if (io_cntrSels.refracSel = "0") then -- set refractory value depending
on state
101
refracRegNext <= signed(io_dataIn);
-- from memory
102
else
103
refracRegNext <= refracCntReg;
-- unchanged
104
end if;
105
106
case (io_cntrSels.spikeSel) is -- set spike indicator depending on state
107
when "00" =>
108
if (membPotReg > signed(io_dataIn)) then -- if spike
109
spikeIndiRegNext <= true;
110
else
111
spikeIndiRegNext <= false;
112
end if;
113
when "01" =>
114
spikeIndiRegNext <= false;
-- reset spike indicator
115
when others =>
116
null;
-- unchanged
117
end case;
118
119
case (io_cntrSels.writeDataSel) is -- set write data depending on state
120
when "00" =>
121
io_dataOut
<= io_dataIn;
-- default refrac or potential
122
when "01" =>
123
if (spikeIndiReg = false) then
-- depending on the spike
indicator
124
io_dataOut
<= std_logic_vector(membPotReg);
125
else
126
io_dataOut
<= io_dataIn;
127
end if;
128
when "10" =>
129
if (io_refracIndi = true) then
-- depending on the refractory
indicator
==PAGE:109==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
95
130
if (spikeIndiReg = true) then
131
io_dataOut
<= io_dataIn;
132
else
133
io_dataOut
<= std_logic_vector(refracCntReg);
134
end if;
135
else
136
io_dataOut
<= std_logic_vector(refracCntReg - 1);
137
end if;
138
when others =>
139
null;
140
end case;
141
142
if (refracRegNext = 0) then
143
io_refracIndi <= true;
144
else
145
io_refracIndi <= false;
146
end if;
147
148
io_spikeIndi
<= spikeIndiReg;
149
end process;
150
151
p_clocking
: process(io_clk) begin
152
if rising_edge(io_clk) then
153
if (io_reset = '1') then
154
membPotReg
<= (others => '0');
155
spikeIndiReg
<= false;
156
else
157
if (io_evalEnable = true) then
158
refracCntReg
<= refracRegNext;
159
membPotReg
<= membPotRegNext;
160
spikeIndiReg
<= spikeIndiRegNext;
161
else
162
null;
163
end if;
164
end if;
165
end if;
166
end process p_clocking;
167 end architecture behaviour;
code/NeuronEvaluator.vhd
A.1.4
Evaluation Memory
1 library ieee;
2 library std;
3 use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
4 use ieee.numeric_std.all;
5 use std.textio.all;
==PAGE:110==
96
A Hardware Development
6
7 use work.constants_record_pkg.all;
8
9 entity EvaluationMemory is
10
generic(
11
filename
: string -- initializing Block RAM from external data
file
12
);
13
port(
14
io_clk
: in std_logic;
15
-- control unit
16
io_wr
: in boolean; -- false: read, true: write
17
io_ena
: in boolean;
18
io_addr
: in unsigned(integer(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH)-1 downto 0); --
unsigned
19
-- neuron evaluators
20
io_writeData
: in std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
--
signed
21
io_readData
: out std_logic_vector(NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0)
--
signed
22
);
23 end EvaluationMemory;
24
25 architecture syn of EvaluationMemory is
26
type RamType is array (0 to EVALMEMSIZE -1) of std_logic_vector(
NEUDATAWIDTH -1 downto 0);
27
28
impure function initRamFromFile return RamType is
29
file RamFile : text open read_mode is filename;
30
variable RamFileLine : line;
31
variable RAM : RamType;
32
begin
33
for I in RamType'range loop
34
readline(RamFile, RamFileLine);
35
bread(RamFileLine , RAM(I));
36
end loop;
37
return RAM;
38
end function;
39
40
signal RAM : RamType := InitRamFromFile;
41
42 begin
43
process(io_clk)
44
begin
45
if rising_edge(io_clk) then
46
if (io_ena = true) then
47
if (io_wr = true) then
48
RAM(to_integer(io_addr)) <= io_writeData;
49
else
50
io_readData <= RAM(to_integer(io_addr));
==PAGE:111==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
97
51
end if;
52
end if;
53
end if;
54
end process;
55 end syn;
code/EvaluationMemory.vhd
A.1.5
Constants & Records Package
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.all;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.all;
4 use IEEE.math_real.all;
5
6 package constants_record_pkg is
7
8
function sel(Cond: BOOLEAN; If_True, If_False: integer) return integer;
9
10
constant FREQ
: integer := 80000000;
-- in Hz
11
constant BAUDRATE
: integer := 115200;
12
constant TIMESTEP
: real
:= 0.001;
-- in seconds
13
constant CYCLESPRSTEP : integer
:= integer(real(FREQ) * TIMESTEP);
14
constant MEMCHEAT
: boolean := true;
-- make memories smaller to fit
Kintex -7
15
constant NEUDATAWIDTH : integer := 17;
16
constant AXONNR
: integer := 1024;
17
constant AXONNRCHEAT
: integer := 256 * 3;
18
constant AXONIDWIDTH
: real
:= round(log2(real(AXONNR)));
19
constant TMNEURONS
: integer := 32;
20
constant N
: real
:= round(log2(real(TMNEURONS)));
21
constant EVALUNITS
: integer := 8;
22
constant EVALMEMSIZE
: integer;
23
constant EVALMEMADDRWIDTH:
real;
24
25
-- offsets
26
constant OSREFRAC
: integer := 0;
27
constant OSPOTENTIAL
: integer
:= TMNEURONS;
28
constant OSWEIGHT
: integer
:= 2 * TMNEURONS;
29
constant OSBIAS
: integer;
30
constant OSDECAY
: integer;
31
constant OSTHRESH
: integer;
32
constant OSREFRACSET
: integer;
33
constant OSPOTSET
: integer;
34
35
type bool_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of boolean;
36
37
type t_EvalCntrSigs is record
==PAGE:112==
98
A Hardware Development
38
potSel
: unsigned(1 downto 0); -- 0: dataIn, 1: sum, 2: potReg
39
spikeSel
: unsigned(1 downto 0); -- 0: >thres, 1: reset, 2-3: keep
40
refracSel : unsigned(0 downto 0); -- 0: dataIn, 1: refracReg
41
decaySel
: boolean;
-- 1: subtract decay, 0: otherwise
42
writeDataSel: unsigned(1 downto 0); -- 0: dataIn, 1: potential, 2:
refracCount
43
end record t_EvalCntrSigs;
44
45
type nbool_array is array(0 to EVALUNITS -1) of t_EvalCntrSigs;
46
47
constant c_EvalCntrSigs_init
: t_EvalCntrSigs := (potSel
=> "10",
48
spikeSel
=> "10",
49
refracSel
=> "1",
50
writeDataSel
=> "00",
51
decaySel
=> false);
52
53
type neuron_array is array(0 to 4) of unsigned(8 downto 0);
54
-- Neurons mapped to each core, in/outcores don't matter as they are used
for controlunit in neuron core
55
constant neuronsInCore
: neuron_array := ("100000000", "011100100", "
011001000", "011001000", "011001000");
56
57 end package constants_record_pkg;
58
59 package body constants_record_pkg is
60
61
function sel(Cond: BOOLEAN; If_True, If_False: integer) return integer
is
62
begin
63
if (Cond = TRUE) then
64
return(If_True);
65
else
66
return(If_False);
67
end if;
68
end function sel;
69
70
constant EVALMEMSIZE
: integer := sel(MEMCHEAT, (7 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * 768), (7 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
71
constant EVALMEMADDRWIDTH:
real
:= round(log2(real(EVALMEMSIZE)));
72
constant OSBIAS
: integer
:= sel(MEMCHEAT, (2 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * AXONNRCHEAT), (2 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
73
constant OSDECAY
: integer
:= sel(MEMCHEAT, (3 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * AXONNRCHEAT), (3 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
74
constant OSTHRESH
: integer
:= sel(MEMCHEAT, (4 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * AXONNRCHEAT), (4 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
75
constant OSREFRACSET
: integer
:= sel(MEMCHEAT, (5 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * AXONNRCHEAT), (5 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
76
constant OSPOTSET
: integer
:= sel(MEMCHEAT, (6 * TMNEURONS +
TMNEURONS * AXONNRCHEAT), (6 * TMNEURONS + TMNEURONS * AXONNR));
77
==PAGE:113==
A.1 Neuron Block Related
99
78 end package body constants_record_pkg;
code/constants_record_pkg.vhd
A.1.6
Neurons (Scala)
1 import chisel3._
2 import chisel3.util._
3 import Constants._
4 import spray.json._
5 import chisel3.util.experimental.loadMemoryFromFile
6 import firrtl.annotations.MemoryLoadFileType
7
8
9
10
11 class neuron_top(coreID : Int) extends BlackBox(Map("io_coreID" -> coreID))
{ {
12
val io = IO(new Bundle() {
13
//Clock and Reset Ports must be explicitly declared
14
val clock
= Input(Clock())
15
val reset
= Input(Reset())
16
//For axon system
17
val io_inOut
= Output(Bool())
18
val io_spikeCnt = Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
19
val io_aAddr
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
20
val io_aEna
= Output(Bool())
21
val io_aData
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
22
//For spike transmission system
23
val io_n
= Output(UInt(N.W))
24
val io_spikes_0 = Output(Bool())
25
val io_spikes_1 = Output(Bool())
26
val io_spikes_2 = Output(Bool())
27
val io_spikes_3 = Output(Bool())
28
val io_spikes_4 = Output(Bool())
29
val io_spikes_5 = Output(Bool())
30
val io_spikes_6 = Output(Bool())
31
val io_spikes_7 = Output(Bool())
32
})
33 }
34
35 class Neurons(coreID: Int) extends Module {
36
val io = IO(new Bundle {
37
//For axon system
38
val inOut
= Output(Bool())
39
val spikeCnt = Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
40
val aAddr
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
41
val aEna
= Output(Bool())
==PAGE:114==
100
A Hardware Development
42
val aData
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
43
//For spike transmission system
44
val n
= Output(UInt(N.W))
45
val spikes
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS, Bool()))
46
})
47
48
val newBlock = Module(new neuron_top(coreID))
49
newBlock.io.clock
:= clock
50
// newBlock.io.reset
:= reset
51
io.inOut
:= newBlock.io.io_inOut
52
newBlock.io.io_spikeCnt := io.spikeCnt
53
io.aAddr
:= newBlock.io.io_aAddr
54
io.aEna
:= newBlock.io.io_aEna
55
newBlock.io.io_aData
:= io.aData
56
57
io.n
:= newBlock.io.io_n
58
io.spikes(0) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_0
59
io.spikes(1) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_1
60
io.spikes(2) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_2
61
io.spikes(3) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_3
62
io.spikes(4) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_4
63
io.spikes(5) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_5
64
io.spikes(6) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_6
65
io.spikes(7) := newBlock.io.io_spikes_7
66
67 }
code/Neurons.scala
A.2
Blackbox Test-files
A.2.1
neuroTop (Verilog)
1 module neuroTop(
2
input sysclk_n,
3
input sysclk_p,
4
input reset,
5
output io_inOut,
6
input [9:0] io_spikeCnt ,
7
output [9:0] io_aAddr,
8
output io_aEna,
9
input [9:0] io_aData,
10
output [4:0] io_n,
11
output io_spikes_0 ,
12
output io_spikes_1 ,
13
output io_spikes_2 ,
14
output io_spikes_3 ,
==PAGE:115==
A.2 Blackbox Test-files
101
15
output io_spikes_4 ,
16
output io_spikes_5 ,
17
output io_spikes_6 ,
18
output io_spikes_7
19
);
20
21
wire clk_n;
22
wire clk_p;
23
wire clk;
24
wire np_reset;
25
wire np_io_inOut;
26
wire [9:0] np_io_spikeCnt;
27
wire [9:0] np_io_aAddr;
28
wire np_io_aEna;
29
wire [9:0] np_io_aData;
30
wire [4:0] np_io_n;
31
wire np_io_spikes_0;
32
wire np_io_spikes_1;
33
wire np_io_spikes_2;
34
wire np_io_spikes_3;
35
wire np_io_spikes_4;
36
wire np_io_spikes_5;
37
wire np_io_spikes_6;
38
wire np_io_spikes_7;
39
40
41
clk_wiz_0 clkGen(
42
.clk_out1(clk),
43
.reset(np_reset),
44
.clk_in1_p(clk_p),
45
.clk_in1_n(clk_n)
46
);
47
48
neuron_top np(
49
.clock(clk),
50
.reset(np_reset),
51
.io_inOut(np_io_inOut),
52
.io_spikeCnt(np_io_spikeCnt),
53
.io_aAddr(np_io_aAddr),
54
.io_aEna(np_io_aEna),
55
.io_aData(np_io_aData),
56
.io_n(np_io_n),
57
.io_spikes_0(np_io_spikes_0),
58
.io_spikes_1(np_io_spikes_1),
59
.io_spikes_2(np_io_spikes_2),
60
.io_spikes_3(np_io_spikes_3),
61
.io_spikes_4(np_io_spikes_4),
62
.io_spikes_5(np_io_spikes_5),
63
.io_spikes_6(np_io_spikes_6),
64
.io_spikes_7(np_io_spikes_7)
==PAGE:116==
102
A Hardware Development
65
);
66
67
assign np_reset = reset;
68
assign np_io_inOut = io_inOut;
69
assign np_io_spikeCnt = io_spikeCnt;
70
assign np_io_aAddr = io_aAddr;
71
assign np_io_aEna = io_aEna;
72
assign np_io_aData = io_aData;
73
assign np_io_n = io_n;
74
assign np_io_spikes_0 = io_spikes_0;
75
assign np_io_spikes_1 = io_spikes_1;
76
assign np_io_spikes_2 = io_spikes_2;
77
assign np_io_spikes_3 = io_spikes_3;
78
assign np_io_spikes_4 = io_spikes_4;
79
assign np_io_spikes_5 = io_spikes_5;
80
assign np_io_spikes_6 = io_spikes_6;
81
assign np_io_spikes_7 = io_spikes_7;
82
assign clk_n = sysclk_n;
83
assign clk_p = sysclk_p;
84
85 endmodule
code/neuroTop.v
A.2.2
testbench
The testbench is not included here as it is 14000 lines. Instead a small section of
the file is included to give the reader an idea of the structure. The full testbench is
included in the GitHub repository.
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use IEEE.numeric_std.all;
4 use IEEE.math_real.all;
5 use std.textio.all;
6
7 use work.constants_record_pkg.all;
8
9 entity top_tb is
10 end entity top_tb;
11
12 architecture tb of top_tb is
13
constant clock_period : time := 5 ns;
14
constant sys_clk_per
: time := 12.5 ns;
15
constant clk_offset
: time := 0.1 ns;
16
--signal
TbSimEnded
: std_logic := '0';
17
18
signal clk_p
: std_logic := '0';
==PAGE:117==
A.2 Blackbox Test-files
103
19
signal clk_n
: std_logic := '1';
20
signal rst
: std_logic := '1';
21
signal sigInOut
: boolean;
22
signal spikeCnt
: unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
23
signal aAddr
: unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
24
signal aEna
: boolean;
25
signal aData
: unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
26
signal n
: unsigned(5-1 downto 0); --unsigned
27
signal spikes
: bool_array;
28
29
component neuroTop is
30
port (
31
sysclk_n
: in std_logic;
32
sysclk_p
: in std_logic;
33
reset
: in std_logic;
34
io_inOut
: out boolean;
35
io_spikeCnt
: in unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
36
io_aAddr
: out unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
37
io_aEna
: out boolean;
38
io_aData
: in unsigned(10-1 downto 0); --unsigned
39
io_n
: out unsigned(5-1 downto 0); --unsigned
40
io_spikes_0
: out boolean;
41
io_spikes_1
: out boolean;
42
io_spikes_2
: out boolean;
43
io_spikes_3
: out boolean;
44
io_spikes_4
: out boolean;
45
io_spikes_5
: out boolean;
46
io_spikes_6
: out boolean;
47
io_spikes_7
: out boolean
48
);
49
end component neuroTop;
50
51
52 begin
53
uut : neuroTop
54
port map(
55
sysclk_n
=> clk_p,
56
sysclk_p
=> clk_n,
57
reset
=> rst,
58
io_inOut
=> sigInOut,
59
io_spikeCnt => spikeCnt,
60
io_aAddr
=> aAddr,
61
io_aEna
=> aEna,
62
io_aData
=> aData,
63
io_n
=> n,
64
io_spikes_0 => spikes(0),
65
io_spikes_1 => spikes(1),
66
io_spikes_2 => spikes(2),
67
io_spikes_3 => spikes(3),
68
io_spikes_4 => spikes(4),
==PAGE:118==
104
A Hardware Development
69
io_spikes_5 => spikes(5),
70
io_spikes_6 => spikes(6),
71
io_spikes_7 => spikes(7)
72
);
73
74
Stimuli : process begin
75
-- EDIT Adapt initialization as needed
76
spikeCnt
<= "0000000000";
77
aData
<= "0000000000";
78
79
wait for sys_clk_per*80000;
80
81 -- #09000295100
82 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 640042.6 *
sys_clk_per;
83 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * clk_offset;
84 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000001"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
85 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000010"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
86 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000011"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
87 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000100"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
88 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000101"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
89 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000110"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
90 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000111"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
91 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001000"; wait for 8 * sys_clk_per;
92 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001001"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
93 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001010"; wait for 3 * sys_clk_per;
94 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001011"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
95 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001100"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
96 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001101"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
97 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001110"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
98 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000001111"; wait for 9 * sys_clk_per;
99 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010000"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
100 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010001"; wait for 3 * sys_clk_per;
101 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010010"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
102 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010011"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
103 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010100"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
104 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010101"; wait for 12 * sys_clk_per;
105 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010110"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
106 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000010111"; wait for 19 * sys_clk_per;
107 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011000"; wait for 110 * sys_clk_per;
108 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011001"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
109 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011010"; wait for 16 * sys_clk_per;
110 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011011"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
111 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011100"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
112 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011101"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
113 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011110"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
114 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000011111"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
115 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100000"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
116 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100001"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
117 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100010"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
==PAGE:119==
A.2 Blackbox Test-files
105
118 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100011"; wait for 3 * sys_clk_per;
119 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100100"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
120 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100101"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
121 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100110"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
122 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000100111"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
123 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000101000"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
124 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000101001"; wait for 3 * sys_clk_per;
125 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000101010"; wait for 2 * sys_clk_per;
126 -- #09000545100
127 aData <= "0000000000"; spikeCnt <= "0000101011"; wait for 79732 *
sys_clk_per;
128 -- #10000307600
129 aData <= "0100001110"; spikeCnt <= "0000101011"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
130 aData <= "0100001110"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 3 * sys_clk_per;
131 -- #10000357600
132 aData <= "0100001101"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
133 -- #10000370100
134 aData <= "0100010010"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
135 -- #10000382600
136 aData <= "0100010001"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
137 -- #10000395100
138 aData <= "0100010000"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
139 -- #10000407600
140 aData <= "0100001111"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
141 -- #10000420100
142 aData <= "0100010100"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
143 -- #10000432600
144 aData <= "0100010011"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
145 -- #10000445100
146 aData <= "0100100100"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
147 -- #10000457600
148 aData <= "0100100011"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
149 -- #10000470100
150 aData <= "0100100111"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
151 -- #10000482600
152 aData <= "0100100110"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
153 -- #10000495100
154 aData <= "0100100101"; spikeCnt <= "0000000000"; wait for 1 * sys_clk_per;
155
156 -------------------------------------------------------------------------
157 ------------------
------------------
158 ----------------
LINES REMOVED FROM 1ms-20ms
----------------
159 ------------------
------------------
160 -------------------------------------------------------------------------
161
wait;
162
end process;
163
164
--clock process
165
process
166
begin
==PAGE:120==
106
A Hardware Development
167
wait for clock_period/2;
168
clk_p <= not clk_p;
169
clk_n <= not clk_n;
170
171
end process;
172
173
174
--reset process
175
process
176
begin
177
rst <= '1';
178
wait for clock_period*5;
179
rst <= '0';
180
wait;
181
end process;
182
183 end architecture tb;
code/tb_example.vhd
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1]
Aravind Pai. ANN vs CNN vs RNN - Analyzing 3 Types of Neural Networks in
Deep Learning. 2020. url: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/
02/cnn-vs-rnn-vs-mlp-analyzing-3-types-of-neural-networks-in-
deep-learning/.
[2]
Michael Nielsen. How the backpropagation algorithm works. 2019. url: http:
//neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap2.html.
[3]
Sagar Sharma. Activation Functions in Neural Networks. 2017. url: https:
//towardsdatascience.com/activation- functions- neural- networks-
1cbd9f8d91d6.
[4]
Michael Nielsen. Using neural nets to recognize handwritten digits. 2019. url:
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap1.html.
[5]
MK Gurucharan. Basic CNN Architecture: Explaining 5 Layers of Convolutional
Neural Network | upGrad blog. 2020. url: https://www.upgrad.com/blog/
basic-cnn-architecture/#1_Convolutional_Layer.
[6]
Understanding LSTM Networks – colah’s blog. 2015. url: https://colah.
github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[7]
Limarc Ambalina. What is the Difference Between CNN and RNN? | Lionbridge
AI. 2020. url: https://lionbridge.ai/articles/difference-between-
cnn-and-rnn/.
[8]
TensorFlow. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/.
[9]
PyTorch. url: https://pytorch.org/.
[10]
Adam Byerly, Tatiana Kalganova, and Ian Dear. “A Branching and Merging
Convolutional Network with Homogeneous Filter Capsules”. In: (2021), page 13.
[11]
Timothy B. Lee. How computers got shockingly good at recognizing images |
Ars Technica. 2018. url: https://arstechnica.com/science/2018/12/how-
computers-got-shockingly-good-at-recognizing-images/.
[12]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLOv3: An incremental improvement. 2018.
==PAGE:122==
108
Bibliography
[13]
Eriko Nurvitadhi et al. “Can FPGAs beat GPUs in accelerating next-generation
deep neural networks?” In: Fpga 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 Acm/sigda
International Symposium on Field-programmable Gate Arrays (2017), pages 5–
14. doi: 10.1145/3020078.3021740.
[14]
Indranil Chakraborty et al. “Efficient Hybrid Network Architectures for Ex-
tremely Quantized Neural Networks Enabling Intelligence at the Edge”. In:
(2019), page 6.
[15]
Soheil Hashemi et al. “Understanding the impact of precision quantization on
the accuracy and energy of neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 De-
sign, Automation and Test in Europe, Date 2017 (2017), page 7927224. issn:
15581101, 19429401, 15301591. doi: 10.23919/DATE.2017.7927224.
[16]
Michael Pfeiffer and Thomas Pfeil. “Deep Learning With Spiking Neurons: Op-
portunities and Challenges”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12 (2018), page 774. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00774. url: www.frontiersin.
org.
[17]
Hesham Mostafa. “Supervised learning based on temporal coding in spiking
neural networks”. In: Ieee Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-
tems 29.7 (2018), pages 3227–3235. issn: 21622388, 2162237x, 10459227. doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2017.2726060.
[18]
Anthon Vincent Riber. “Power-efficient Hardware Platform for Spiking Neural
Networks”. PhD thesis. 2020.
[19]
Mike Ludwig. How Your Brain Cells Talk to Each Other—Whispered Secrets
and Public Announcements · Frontiers for Young Minds. 2017. url: https:
//kids.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frym.2017.00039.
[20]
Kasabov. Time-Space, Spiking Neural Networks and Brain-Inspired Artificial
Intelligence. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2019. isbn: 3662577151, 3662577135,
9783662577134, 9783662577158.
[21]
Brain Neurons & Synapses | Action Potentials & Neurotransmission. 2020. url:
https://human-memory.net/brain-neurons-synapses/.
[22]
Refractory Period - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/refractory-period.
[23]
Hodgkin-Huxley Model | Neuronal Dynamics online book. url: https://neuronaldynamics.
epfl.ch/online/Ch2.S2.html.
[24]
Integrate-And-Fire Models | Neuronal Dynamics online book. url: https://
neuronaldynamics.epfl.ch/online/Ch1.S3.html.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
109
[25]
Filipp Akopyan et al. “TrueNorth: Design and Tool Flow of a 65 mW 1 Million
Neuron Programmable Neurosynaptic Chip”. In: Ieee Transactions on Computer-
aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 34.10 (2015), page 7229264.
issn: 19374151, 02780070. doi: 10.1109/TCAD.2015.2474396.
[26]
Mike Davies et al. “Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip
Learning”. In: Ieee Micro 38.1 (2018), pages 82–99. issn: 19374143, 02721732.
doi: 10.1109/MM.2018.112130359.
[27]
Charlie Osborne. Intel, partners make new strides in Loihi neuromorphic com-
puting chip development. 2020. url: https://www.zdnet.com/article/intel-
releases-new-benchmarks-progress-on-loihi-neuromorphic-computing-
chip/.
[28]
Devin Soni. Spiking Neural Networks, the Next Generation of Machine Learning.
2018. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/spiking-neural-networks-
the-next-generation-of-machine-learning-84e167f4eb2b.
[29]
“Extended Address Event Representation Draft Standard v0.4”. In: (2002). url:
https://web.stanford.edu/group/brainsinsilicon/documents/methAER.
pdf.
[30]
Jun Sawada et al. “TrueNorth Ecosystem for Brain-Inspired Computing: Scal-
able Systems, Software, and Applications”. In: International Conference for
High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, Sc 0 (2016),
page 7877010. issn: 21674329, 21674337. doi: 10.1109/SC.2016.11.
[31]
Rohit Singh. FPGA vs ASIC: Differences between them and which one to
use? | Numato Lab Help Center. 2018. url: https://numato.com/blog/
differences-between-fpga-and-asics/.
[32]
UC Berkeley. Chisel/FIRRTL: Home. url: https://www.chisel-lang.org/.
[33]
Jonathan Bachrach et al. Chisel: Constructing Hardware in a Scala Embedded
Language. 2012. isbn: 9781450311991.
[34]
The Scala Programming Language. url: https://www.scala-lang.org/.
[35]
Martin Schoeberl. Digital Design with Chisel. Kindle Direct Publishing, 2019.
isbn: 9781689336031.
[36]
Genesys 2 Reference Manual - Digilent Reference. url: https://reference.
digilentinc.com/reference/programmable-logic/genesys-2/reference-
manual.
[37]
Chisel/FIRRTL: Blackboxes. url: https://www.chisel-lang.org/chisel3/
docs/explanations/blackboxes.html.
==PAGE:124==
110
Bibliography
[38]
Whelm. Exporting simulation via a VCD file. 2014. url: https://forums.
xilinx.com/t5/Simulation-and-Verification/Exporting-simulation-
via-a-VCD-file/td-p/810130.
[39]
Loading a VCD Simulation File. url: https://www.xilinx.com/support/
documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx11/xpa_p_loading_vcd.htm.
[40]
Mohit Arora. The art of hardware architecture: Design methods and techniques
for digital circuits. Springer New York, 2012, pages 1–221. isbn: 9781461403975,
9781461403968, 1461403960, 1461403979, 1283352184, 9786613352187, 9781283352185.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0397-5.
[41]
Amara Amara, Frédéric Amiel, and Thomas Ea. “FPGA vs. ASIC for low power
applications”. In: Microelectronics Journal 37.8 (2006), pages 669–677. issn:
18792391, 00262692. doi: 10.1016/j.mejo.2005.11.003.
[42]
Julien Lamoureux and Wayne Luk. “An Overview of Low-Power Techniques for
Field-Programmable Gate Arrays”. In: (2012).
[43]
Kimiyoshi Usami and Takayasu Sakurai. “Methodologies for Power Gating”. In:
Leakage in Nanometer CMOS Technologies. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2006,
pages 77–104. isbn: 978-0-387-28133-9. doi: 10.1007/0-387-28133-9{\_}4.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-28133-9_4.
[44]
Power Gating in VLSI physical design. 2016. url: http://mantravlsi.blogspot.
com/2016/03/power-gating-in-vlsi-physical-design.html.
[45]
Assem A M Bsoul and Steven J E Wilton. “An FPGA with power-gated switch
blocks”. In: Fpt 2012 - 2012 International Conference on Field-programmable
Technology (2012), page 6412117. doi: 10.1109/FPT.2012.6412117.
[46]
Ian Kuon and Jonathan Rose. “Measuring the gap between FPGAs and ASICs”.
In: Ieee Transactions on Computer-aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Sys-
tems 26.2 (2007), pages 203–215. issn: 19374151, 02780070. doi: 10.1109/TCAD.
2006.884574.
[47]
Dharmendra S. Modha. IBM Research: Brain-inspired Chip. url: https://
www.research.ibm.com/articles/brain-chip.shtml.
[48]
Aaron R Young et al. “A Review of spiking neuromorphic hardware communi-
cation systems”. In: Ieee Access 7 (2019), page 8843969. issn: 21693536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2941772.
[49]
Maxence Bouvier et al. “Spiking neural networks hardware implementations and
challenges: A survey”. In: Acm Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing
Systems 15.2 (2019), page 22. issn: 15504840, 15504832. doi: 10.1145/3304103.
