==PAGE:1==
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for
Face Presentation Attack Detection
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detec-
tion
Master Thesis
May, 2021
By
Peter Skov Bornerup
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, building 348,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Electrical Engineering,
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Peter Skov Bornerup - s153056
Signature
Date
ii
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Rapid development in the field of face recognition and computer science has made the
deployment of biometrics viable on on increasingly greater scale. Several threats to these
systems are emerging, and Deep Learning based security systems have proven vulnerable
to attack presentations, which are easily carried out by non-authorized subjects. Face Pre-
sentation Attack Detection (PAD) is essential for securing biometric security systems and
existing techniques have reported high detection rates when evaluated on known Presen-
tation Attack Instruments (PAI). When presented for more challenging scenarios existing
techniques have proven to not generalize well when unknown PAI species are presented
and/or changes in the capture process is introduced. In this work, the feasibility of em-
ploying Fisher Vectors (FV) in combination with deep features extracted from multiple
pre-trained networks is investigated. Three different methods of incorporating deep fea-
tures are proposed. Extensive testing has been carried out, initially with focus on model
optimizations, and a general performance degradation was observed. For evaluation on
known PAIs an average D-EER of 4.40% is reported. For cross-database testing D-EER
of 22.5% and 22.82% is reported for a single test, and an average D-EER of 36.85% is
reported for the full cross-database testing. The proposed methods showed no improve-
ment in generalizations capabilities overall and it is shown that networks tailored for face
recognition is less suitable than networks trained for object recognition.
iii
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Peter Skov Bornerup, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Christoph Busch, Prof. Dr., Biometrics and Internet Security Research Group, Hochschule
Darmstadt, Germany
Christian Damsgaard Jensen, PhD, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, Technical University of Denmark
Lázaro J. González-Soler, [PhD Student], Biometrics and Internet Security Research
Group, Hochschule Darmstadt, Germany
I would like to express a special thank you to my supervisor Lázaro J. González-Soler for
providing invaluable feedback, helping me sort through my ideas, providing technical help
when needing, taking time to respond to email sent at obscure times (Sunday morning
emails are apparently a thing), and for having a genuine interest in the project from the
very beginning to the very end.
It is hard to ask for more.
iv
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Hardware Based Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Software Based Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
8
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks for Face Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Fisher Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Presentation Attack Detection
13
4.1
Extraction of Raw Weights From Convolutional Layers . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Quantization of Layer Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Activations as Dense Image Descriptors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Experimental Evaluation
20
5.1
Experimental Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Experimental results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Evalution on OULU-NPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Performance Over Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Overall performance analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Conclusion
36
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Bibliography
38
A List of Attack Types
43
v
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In the field of biometrics, face recognition is gaining a lot of attention due to its high
security, eﬀiciency, and user convenience.
The rapid developments in the field of face
recognition and computer science have made it possible to deploy biometric systems on
a far greater scale. Authentication using facial features has become more accessible with
mobile authentication systems bundled in popular smartphone models [1] and laptops [2]
and in more classical scenarios such as surveillance, forensics, and border access [3]. Facial
authentication has proven to generalize well and remarkable progress has been made in
the field with near perfect face recognition (FR) performance. In spite of their advantages,
FR systems have proven to be extremely vulnerable to different external attacks.
Figure 1.1 illustrates a generic face recognition (FR) pipeline. Each number in the figure
represent an attack point over a face recognition system. Whereas most attack points
require specific knowledge of the system, attacks against the capture device figure 1.1( ),
known as Attack Presentation (AP), fall under their own category, since they involve a
physical attack (and purely biometric). AP can be launched by any subject without having
intricate knowledge of the system as opposed to the remaining vulnerabilities which can
be prevented by securing the infrastructure and communication channels.
Face Detection and
Alignment
Preprocessing
Feature Extraction
Classification
DB
Sensor
Output
Indirect
attacks
Face recognition system
Presentation
attacks
1
2
4
3
5
6
7
8
Figure 1.1: Typical face recognition pipeline with eight different attack vectors. 1) Attack
Presentation. 2) Replay of old data. 3) Overriding the feature extractor. 4) Synthe-
sized feature vector. 5) Overriding the comparator. 6) Interception of database link. 7)
Modifying DB template. 8) Override decision.
Face recognition is the second most deployed biometric in terms of market quota after
fingerprint recognition [3].
Gaining access to personal systems has gotten easier with
the increasing amount of personal images freely available on social media, since finding
high quality videos and/or images has become an almost trivial task. Various studies have
shown just how easy common face recognition systems are bypassed. Therefore the field of
presentation attack detection (PAD) has recently received more attention. In [4], different
systems haveen classified in terms of their vulnerability and results show that 95-100% of
the attacks falsely get accepted as the genuine identity. Finally, its noted that modern
CNN based face recognition systems are even more error prone, often accepting 100% of
the attacks.
The generalization capabilities of facial recognition systems (FR systems) are both their
strength and its weakness. Generalization is achieved by training the system to handle
variability such as scale, orientation, illumination, facial expression etc., but that same
generalization leads to incorrectly classify Presentation Attack Instruments (PAIs) as the
1
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:8==
genuine identity. One way to overcome this problem is the introduction of a PAD module
in the verification process.
In this context, several PAD approaches have been proposed - both software based and
hardware based. Hardware based techniques, as the name suggest, integrate additional
sensors to the capture device in order to detect living characteristics of the human body.
This could for instance be 3D capturing devices, spectral cameras capable of capturing
information outside the visible spectrum. On the other hand, there exists software-based
methods which are the focus of this thesis as they are more viable for deployment as hard-
ware upgrades are not required. This results in reduced cost and opens up for upgrading
existing systems.
1.0.1
Problem Statement
Existing PAD approaches have achieved a good detection performance when evaluated on
known presentation attack instruments (PAIs) and few environmental variations. A reoc-
curring challenge is the lack of generalization capabilities across datasets, environmental
variance, and unknown PAIs. Even variations between capturing devices can have large
impact on system performance. Several public available datasets are emerging, but in
general the amount of samples available is still lacking. Constructing large datasets are
not viable due to the high cost associated with it and due to the fact that new PAIs keep
emerging.
In the field of face recognition and computer vision, the general trend is that features
learned by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by far outperforms hand-crafted fea-
tures. However, due to the restrictions on the data capturing, those CNN-based methods
have not yet proven to achieve good generalization capabilities with respect to classifi-
cation on unknown datasets or PAI species. In this project the feasibility of extracting
features from pretrained CNNs used for face recognition and general object detection is
to be investigated. The general idea is to close the gap between handcrafted features and
self learned features by extracting features of existing high performance CNNs and using
these in a more classical sense.
1.0.2
Project Objectives
The aim of this project is to develop a face PAD system that improves the generalization
capabilities of PAD system by overcoming the problem of sample size and vulnerability
to unknown PAIs, by combining Fisher Vector (FV) representation[5] with deep features.
The system should be developed with performance in mind, but first and foremost the
focus will be on generalization capabilities. The generalization will be tested using strict
protocols defining various of challenges such as environmental variation and the finally the
system will be evaluated across databases as this emulates the most realistic real life use
cases. Finally, the system should be evaluated against state-of-the-art systems.
The project objectives can be summarized as such:
• Propose various ways to incorporate potentially more discriminating features ex-
tracted form existing CNNs.
• Show the feasibility of deep features in combination with FV for facial PAD.
• Evaluate each approach against public databases and available protocols (e.g., known
attacks, unknown attacks, and cross-database), and establish a benchmark with the
state-of-the-art.
• Characterize different network in terms of performance.
2
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:9==
2
Related Work
Attack Presentation is defined in ISO/IEC 30107-3[6] as the act of presenting an artefact
or human characteristics to biometric capture subsystem in a fashion intended to interfere
with subsystem policy. Presentation Attack Detection covers techniques that enables the
automated detection of attack presentation. The PAD task is to determine whether a
sample stems from a live subject (i.e.,bona fide presentation) or from an artificial replica
(i.e., attack presentation).
To illustrate the idea of a PAD subsystem, two different integrations are included as figure
2.1. In figure 2.1a a parallel integration is used. Both sub systems runs in parallel and the
final score is based on a fusion of the two scores. In figure 2.1b, the series implementation
is illustrated, where the PAD subsystem is evaluated before the facial recognition system.
In this case the facial recognition is only carried out if the PAD system classifies the sample
as a bona fide presentation.
In this section an overview of the current trends in the field of PAD will be provided.
The selection of articles is aimed to be a diverse and representative set of the current
state-of-the-art approaches, and in turn lay will the foundation of the ideas and method
proposed in the subsequent chapters in this thesis.
In the field of PAD it’s common to distinguish between hardware based and software
based methods[7]. Even though it’s clear that software based method is a natural research
direction for the topic proposed, some hardware based method will still be introduced to
provide a reference for the reader.
2.1
Hardware Based Methods
Hardware based methods are characterized by having additional information available
other than the common RGB channel which we consider in the software based methods.
The capturing device is somehow augmented and additional channels are available for
feature extraction.
In Wang et al. [8] samples are captured with narrow spectral bandwidth and the authors
have analyzed samples in specific bands. The reflection in narrow bands turns out to be
much higher for AP samples than for the bona fide samples. The features are sampled in a
dense grid over the whole image and a two-class linear SVM is employed for classification.
The thermal properties of the face is explored by Kowalski[9] where a biometric database
was constructed using both a high-end thermal camera and a low cost1 mobile thermal
camera. The samples are classified using various state-of-the-art Deep Learning based
classifiers. In general the proposed setup is able to classify most attacks with a low error
rate. Specifically, 3D-printed masks and 2D attacks (printed mask etc.) had a low error
rate. Latex mask proved to be harder to detect due to the natural heat transfer from the
skin to the mask.
Finally, Kose et al. [10] utilizes both 2D and 3D images and reflectance analysis is employed
in the feature extraction with great success. In general the hardware-based results performs
well during the development, but performance has been showed to degrade drastically for
unknown PAIs[7]. Finally, the added cost of specialized sensors further limits the use-cases.
1Oﬀicial price listed is 500USD during the writing of this thesis.
3
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:10==
Face recognition
system
DB
Sensor
Output
PAD system
Score 
fusion
(a) Parallel integration of PAD subsystem
Face recognition
system
DB
Sensor
Output
PAD system
Reject?
(b) Serial integration of PAD subsystem
Figure 2.1: PAD system integration
2.2
Software Based Methods
Software based methods is a wide definition covering quite a lot of approaches to face
PAD, ranging from handcrafted texture based features to temporal features in long short
term memory (LSTM) CNN as proposed in[11].
2.2.1
Handcrafted Features
Although face PAD has only recently has gained more attention, several methods have
been proposed through the years. Back in 2007 Pan et al.[12] proposed to use the invol-
untary eye blink to create a real-time liveness detection which achieved good performance
for printed attacks. However, this method was easily fooled by either cutouts or replay
attacks. Similarly, face motion detection was used as a feature to overcome the problem
of replay attacks in 2009 [13]. In addition, optical flow was employed to track individual
features of the face image and a liveness score is obtained by comparing the motion of
the tracked areas. Even though the temporal features has proven to be highly effective in
some cases, it is vulnerable to replay attacks (see appendix A for a list of attack types)
and its hard to guarantee that enough consecutive frames suitable for face recognition has
been captured[7].
Local Binary Patterns (LBP)[14]–[16], initially used on gray-level images only and later
extended to use the full color spectrum[4], has been used with success. Boulkenafet et al.
[17] converted the RGB image to different color spaces. For each channel uniform LBP
histograms are computed and the coeﬀicients are concatenated to form a feature vector
representing the cropped face region. These features can then in turn be classified directly
with a support vector machine (SVM). The use of the alternative color-space results in an
algorithm that outperforms corresponding approaches using only gray-scale information,
and furthermore it also generalizes better[4].
Later features includes image quality measures (IQM) [18] computed on gray level images
and later a complementary set of image distortion analysis features (IDA)[19] were intro-
duced. While these methods generalized better between datasets, the IDA features has
many limitations. A broad set of the IDA features has a focus on specularity in the input
image, but only a subset of AP will have specular regions present.
2.2.2
End-to-End Systems Utilizing CNN
Deep learning methods has been widely successful in face recognition task with tremendous
generalization capabilities and near perfect performance[20]. Generally, in computer vision
tasks, deep learning-based methods are considered state-of-the-art and new network types
are still emerging. One of the first attempts to use these techniques in the field of face
PAD is presented in[21] where a the architecture from a object recognition network is
4
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:11==
modified to be used in the face PAD task. Features are extracted from a fully connected
layer and a SVM is used for classification.
The performance seen in [21] wasn’t revolutionary but since then more modern network
have been used for the task. In Lucena et al. [22] results comparable to state-of-the-art
was achieved with a CNN based on the VGG-16 network architecture. The network has
16 convolutional layers, originally designed for object detection and trained on ImageNet
database[23]. Due to the lack of data, a pretrained network was employed and weights for
the first layers were frozen. During training only a part of the network is retrained saving
computational time. By doing this, the network can be seen as a general purpose feature
extractor.
In Xu et al. [11] face PAD is treated as a video classification problem and a Long Short-term
Memory (LSTM) layer is added to the CNN structure in order to extract temporal features
over different frames. The LSTM nodes are able to store an internal state and thereby
allowing the network to learn patterns in time[24]. Compared to Lucena et al. [22] the
convolutional part of the network is relatively simple and contains only two convolutional
layers.
The idea of a binary supervision for CNN during the training phase is replaced with
auxiliary supervision in Liu et al.[25]. CNN has not been able to generalize well, and the
learned features with binary supervision might be too arbitrary (e.g. bezels of a screen)
causing this limiting factor. To overcome this issue, an auxiliary supervision, where the
network get cues on how to train, is proposed.
Instead of finding arbitrary features,
the network is trained to create depth map and extract remote photo-plethysmography
(rPPG) signal from the input sequence.
Different network structures are analyzed in [26]. Three networks are considered and each
are tested with different learning rates, amount of trainable layers and initial weights. The
highest accuracy is achieved with ResNet152 initialized with weights from ImageNet, and
only the fully connected layers are trained.
Patel et al. [27] proposed a deep learning approach fused with temporal features.
A
pretrained model is used to initialize the weight of the CNN utilized by the proposed
method. Initially, the network was trained for object recognition, and the authors first
tune the network using the WebFace database. Afterwards, this is finetuned for the PAD
task using a smaller PAD database. It is argued that not only features in the face region
should be considered for PAD since distortions in the background can be introduced when
performing the attack. To enable the model to capture these features too, two networks
are trained; one where cropped images are employed. for training and one where the whole
image is used during training. Eye-blink detection is fused with the deep features where
a small performance benefit is observed. Each feature type (global and more local) are
tested both separately and integrated, and it was observed that the features generated by
the two network showed great complementarity as the performance improved significantly
with the integration.
2.2.3
One-Class Approaches for Face PAD
One Class Classifiers (OCCs) have shown to be outperformed in scenarios involving known
attacks by a standard binary classifier since the binary classifier is able to leverage more
information from the features, but ideally the PAD can be viewed as an outlier detection
problem. Poor generalization performance for binary classifiers is observed in [28] where
generalization performance across PAIs and databases is assessed. OCCs are hypothe-
sized to generalize better since it can learn the representation of the bona fide face and
5
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:12==
Testing
Classification
Feature extraction
CNN
Input
Embedding
One-class
GMM
Training
CNN loss function
Feature extraction
CNN
Input
Embedding
One-Class
Contrastive Loss
Figure 2.3: MCCNN method overview
potentially treat all PAs as outliers.
George et al. [29] proposed a framework for PAD using a one-class classifier (MCCNN),
where the feature representation is based on embeddings learned by a CNN pipeline. The
main focus is the maximization of generalization performance to unknown PAIs and the
algorithm is evaluated on both 2D and 3D presentation attacks.
The goal is to learn
a feature representation optimized with information from the known attacks [29]. The
network structure is proposed in [30] and in this article a novel loss function is proposed.
The network is based on a pretrained face recognition network images (LightCNN [31]).
The loss function is visualized in figure 2.2, where it’s evident that the method is trained
such that the bona fide samples are clustered and AP samples are moved from the cluster
center.
When CNN training has converged, the weights are fixed and all the bona fide samples are
propagated through the network. By doing this the bona fide embeddings can be modelled
as a one class GMM. For testing the GMM is directly employed. A method overview is in
included as figure 2.3.
Figure 2.2: Proposed loss function for feature space optimization [29]
2.2.4
Domain Adoptation
Wang et al.[32] proposed an unsupervised adversarial domain adaptation specifically de-
signed for improving cross-database PAD. To that end, a target encoder is learned to create
an embedding optimized to discriminize between attack presentation and bona fide sam-
ples. Initially, a source encoder is trained with both center loss and triplet loss to create
6
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:13==
disentangled embedding suitable for classifying samples from the labeled source domain.
A second network, UDA-net (Unsupervised Domain Adoptation Net), aims to reduce the
difference between the data distribution between the source domain and unlabeled target
domain. The UDA-net includes a network designed for learning a Disentangled Represen-
tation designed to limit the problems associated with the unlabeled target domain data.
For testing, a target encoder based on ResNet-18 is extracted from the different network
utilized for training. The target encoder takes images from the unknown target domain
and creates an embedding which is classified with a knn-classifier.
While this common feature space shows potential in cross database challenges, it should be
noted that intra database testing on known attacks resulted in relatively high D-EER of
3.2% and 6.0% for CASIA Face Anti-spoofing[33] and MSU-MFSD[34] respectively. Cross
database results are reported in Half Total Error Rate (HTER) ranging from 9% to 39.8%
showing that the generalization capabilities still lacks.
7
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:14==
3
Theory
In this chapter, various methods employed will be introduced and some in depth review
will be performed on relevant algorithms such as Fisher Vectors (FV) representation and
a thorough look on the CNN architectures used. The proposed pipelines are presented in
section 4.
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks for Face Recognition
3.1.1
Facial Recognition Review
While face recognition has only recently begun to be widely used for authentication, with
performance surpassing human abilities, the study of face recognition has been a research
topic for several decades [35].
In 1991 one of the first major breakthroughs were presented with the introduction of Eigen-
faces [36]. In this approach a low dimensional representation was derived using Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) usually employed for decorrelation and feature dimensionality
reduction. A database of facial images was decomposed to its principal components and
the principal components was used for feature extraction (in [36] the first 40 components
was used). For recognition the unknown probe image was projected on to the principal
components and resulting feature vector could was classified with a distance metric such as
the L2 norm. Through the 1990s and 2000s the holistic approach to derive low dimensional
face representation was the dominant approach[20].
In 2002 a local feature based algorithm based on gabor filters were introduced[37] and
in 2006 Ahonen et al.[38] used Local Binary Patters as local feature descriptors. Local
descriptors are extracted over a grid of the image and binned in local histograms used
for classification. Furthermore, features at different scales was computed to provide both
localized and more global features.
In Cao et al.[39] some of the first learning based features were introduced. Instead of using
handcrafted features, local filters are learned for distinctiveness, as opposed to predefined
local descriptors. Four years later in 2014 the Fisher Vector was introduced in Simonyan
et al.[40], where a generative model is constructed and a kernel is derived from this model.
Finally, the features obtained by the fisher kernel is projected in a supervised fashion. By
doing this, the algorithm learns the most discriminate features, and as illustrated in[40].
The proposed method learned to focus on prominent facial features such as the mouth
region and discarded features spatially located in the background region. The self learned
features matches those of [41] where various facial landmarks were detected and multiscale
LBP were extracted around the landmarks.
Earlier methods can be described as holistic methods where the low dimensional feature
vector is directly derived from the facial images where as later methods is characterized
by less shallow. Learned feature representations outperforms the handcrafted methods,
but the methods still failed to generalize well and is not invariant to real-world changes
[20].
3.1.2
Deep Convolutional Network
The introduction of AlexNet[42] in 2012 started a fundamental change in the field of
computer vision, as the methods moved from shallow methods too deep CNN networks.
8
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:15==
Without handcrafted features, the network was able to beat any existing methods and in
2014 DeepFace achieved state of the art performance for face recognition, with accuracy
approaching human performance on unconstrained datasets[20].
AlexNet[42] consist of five convolutional layers and three fully connected layers as depicted
in figure 3.1a. By moderns standards this is a relatively shallow network, limiting the
flexibility with respect to learning nonlinear mappings.
In 2014, VGGNet proposed a
standard network architecture using small 3×3 size kernels with a network depth of 16-19
convolutional layers as illustrated in figure 3.1b[43]. Following the trend of increasing the
number of layers, He et al.[44] proposed to make layers learn a residual mapping with the
use of residual blocks. Training the network with residual blocks is easier as the ’shortcuts’
helps with the gradient vanishing as it propagates through several layers, and networks
consisting of over 100 convolutional layers could now be successfully trained. As a curiosity
the authors trained a network with more than 1000 layers with decent performance[44].
(a) AlexNet network ar-
chitecture
(b) VGGNet16 network architecture
Figure 3.1: MSU MFSD dataset samples
3.1.3
Feature Visualization in Convolutional Neural Networks
Features learned in CNN are not directly interpretable by humans and direct inspection of
the learned filters is only useful for the first convolutional layers. Zeiler et al.[45] proposed
a novel deconvolutional network to give insight of the function of the intermediate layers.
In figure 3.3 activation patterns and examples of patches that correspond to that pattern
are shown for each convolutional layer in a pre-trained model.
The first convolutional layer activates on edges and blobs of colors, where the edges have
different rotations and frequencies. These features are local and limited to small patches
and in general we refer to these features as low-level. As we moves to deeper layers of the
network the activation patters becomes much more complex, and a result of the pooling
layer features are working on larger patches and are more high level.
Already in the
second layer of a generic network we can start to identify specific features such as the eyes
of humans and various animals.
A similar visualization for a face recognition system is included in figure 3.4. Each layer
Figure 3.2: Residual block
9
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Left hand side represent patterns that activates the feature map and right
hand side are patches in the testing data that led to the largest activations[45]
continuously integrate low-level features from the previous layer into higher level features
(facial attributes). The pooling layer expands the area of interest and by eventually feeding
the output from the convolutional layer to one or more fully connected layers a compressed
representation of the face is achieved.
3.1.4
CNN Models Considered for Evaluation
For evaluation four different pretrained CNN models are considered. During the literature
review it was observed that both models trained for object recognition[4], [21] and face
recognition[32] has been employed in the PAD task. Two network structures are evaluated,
namely VGG16 based networks and ResNet-50 based networks, which both have achieved
excellent performance in face recognition tasks and object recognition tasks [20].
It is noted that both VGGNet and ResNet based models has previously been used for
face PAD in [4], [32]. Finally, with this selection of networks we can obtain pre-trained
models that has been trained both on the VGGFace2 database[46] and on the ImageNet
database[47]. This allow us to directly compare the performance across network architec-
ture and model objective.
VGGFace2 Based
The models trained on VGGFace2 will be referred to as FACE-VGG and FACE-RES for
the VGGNet-16 and ResNet-50 based models respectively. Pre-trained model are available
on several github pages1,2.
1https://github.com/WeidiXie/Keras-VGGFace2-ResNet50
2https://github.com/rcmalli/keras-vggface
10
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: Caption
ImageNet Based
Models trained on the ImageNet database will be referred to as IN-VGG and IN-RES for
the VGGNet-16 and ResNet-50 based models respectively. The ImageNet based models
are downloaded from the Keras Application API3.
3.2
Fisher Encoding
Traditionally for image classification task a set of local image descriptors such as BSIF[48],
LBP[17] and SURF[49] are computed and encoded into an image representation. Encod-
ing based on a visual vocabulary (i.e. codebook) is done by clustering descriptors from
the training set into K cluster using either K-mean or a Gaussian-Mixture Model (GMM).
Each cluster represent an entry (”codeword”) in the codebook, and thus the visual vocab-
ulary is defined by the totality of clusters.
The most simple approach for computing an image representation is done by assigning
each local image descriptor to the nearest cluster in the visual vocabulary. The frequency
of each assignment in the vocabulary is computed resulting in a sparse K dimensional
feature vector, often referred to as ’bag-of-visual-words”(BoW)[50].
The quantization introduced by assigning each image descriptor to a single codeword
results in a significant information loss, as descriptor placed between multiple codewords
can have comparable distances. Furthermore, descriptors can be assigned to a codeword
even though the relative distance is large. To overcome the effect of quantization several
soft assignment version have been proposed[51]. One way is to encode the descriptors with
respect to the parameters of the GMM, where the probablity of the descriptor belonging
to a cluster is encoded instead.
3https://keras.io/api/applications/
11
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:18==
The Fisher Vector(FV) is an exstension of the BoW with soft assignment where an image is
characterized by a gradient vector derived from a probabilistic model (GMM). Specifically,
the Fisher Vector is a concatenation of normalized gradients with respect to the parameters
(i.e., mean and standard deviation for GMM) of a generative model.
Let X be a set of N image descriptors, X = {xn, xn ∈Rd, n = 1...N} and λ = {ωi, µi, Σi, i =
0...K} be the set of parameter, where ω, µ and Σ denote the weight, mean vector and co-
variance matrix of a the i’th Gaussian respectively and K denotes the number of Gaussians.
The probability that an image descriptor, xn, is assigned to the i’th Gaussian is given by
γi(xt) =
ωipi(xt|λ)
∑K
j=1 ωjpj(xt|λ)
(3.1)
which is derived using Bayes’ formula.
Using this the normalized gradients, Γµi and Γσi, with respect to mean, µi, and variance,
σi, respectively, are given by[52]
Γµi =
1
N√ωi
N
∑
n=1
γi(xn)
(xn −µi
σi
)
Γσi =
1
N
√
2ωi
N
∑
n=1
γi(xn)
((xn −µi)2
(σi)2
−1
)
(3.2)
Finally, the FV representation, ΓG, that encodes the input images is obtained by stacking
the gradients
ΓG = [Γµ1, Γσ1, ..., ΓµK, ΓσK]
(3.3)
resulting in a 2 · d · K dimensional feature vector.
The fisher vector encodes rich information suitable for subsequent linear classification[51].
12
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:19==
4
Presentation Attack Detection
For face recognition learned features has proven to be vastly superior to all attempts
with handcrafted features, and the field of PAD research is moving towards learned fea-
tures. But as previously demonstrated, the learned features are only an option if suﬀicient
amount of data exist for training and fine tuning. For PAD there is a limited amount
of samples available and creating an algorithm that generalizes well is now the focus for
researchers. Achieving near perfect performance when evaluating on with known PAIs
within the same dataset is common, but when using different datasets for testing, perfor-
mance drops significantly.
One way to overcome the lack of training samples is to employ transfer learning as done
in [21], where the initial weights are initialized with weight from a network originally
trained for object recognition.
The model is adapted, e.g.
by changing the last fully
connected layer to only have two outputs, and the model is fine-tuned with data form
the new domain. In [32] a subtype of transfer learning is employed (adverserial domain
adoptation) to create embeddings suitable for PAD. As a basis, a ResNet-18 model trained
for face recognition was used to initialize the network, and inspired by the advances in
deep features in face recognition triplet loss was used in the training.
In this thesis different methods of integrating deep features will be proposed and their
performance will be evaluated in sec 5.2. The work of González‐Soler et al. [53] will be
used as a baseline for the algorithm. By doing this, the feasibility of using deep features can
directly be assessed by comparing the experimental performance to the baseline algorithm.
In the following section the general dataflow and algorithm will be presented, and the
following sections give an in depth review of the proposed methods.
4.0.1
Baseline Algorithm
The overall algorithm structure is included in figure 4.1 and figure 4.2 which shows the
overall training pipeline and testing pipeline respectively.
For training a set of image
descriptors are extracted densely over the image and Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
is employed immediately after to decorrelate the extracted image descriptors.
In the
reference implementation the first 64 principal components are used as they are able to
explain 95% of the variance.
As the total number of image descriptors is rather large, a random subset is extracted
and a generative model is fitted - in this case a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with a
variable number of cluster. The features are encoded using Fisher Vector and finally a
linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) is trained on the projected features.
In the following sections different approaches to the feature extraction step will be pro-
posed. As we wish to investigate the potential of deep features the overall pipeline and
algorithmic flow is maintained and the main focus will be on the extraction of image de-
scriptors. The feature extraction of the baseline algorithm is reviewed in the subsequent
section.
4.0.2
Dense Binarized Statistical Imange Features (BSIF)
BSIF is a method for constructing local image descriptors based on set of pre-trained
filters.
The set of filters are generated by maximizing the statistical independence of
the filters responses computed over a set of natural images, and the image descriptors
13
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:20==
Training
GMM Semantic grouping
Classifier optimization
Feature extraction
Prope images
Fisher
encoding
Figure 4.1: Overall pipeline in the training phase.
Testing
Prope images
Feature extraction
Fisher Projection
Classification
Figure 4.2: Overall pipeline for evaluation.
computed with BSIF has proven to be robust[48]. For each pixel, a binary code based on
the filter response is constructed, and subsequently the binary codes are interpreted as
decimal values. The general algorithm is outlined below.
Given an image X ∈Ri×j, where i and j is the image height and image width respectively,
a set of filtered images, M ∈Rn×i×j, is computed by convolving with a set of filters
W = {W1, W2...Wn}. The elements, Mn,i,j, in M are binarized by thresholding, that is
Mn,i,j =
{
1,
if Mn,i,j > 0
0,
otherwise
.
Finally, for each pixel we assign a BSIF descriptor, S ∈Ri×j, where each element is
computed by Si,j = ∑
n Mn,i,j · 2n.
Spacial histograms are computed over a dense grid on S with a fixed stride at multiple
scales. By computing over different scales both local textures and larger structural image
features are captured. The histograms has been found to be sparse and an average pooling
is employed to reduce the feature dimensionality of a factor 128 without significant loss
of information[54]. The resulting feature extraction is thus a set of multiscale histograms
sampled over a dense grid on the BSIF matrix S.
This feature extraction is illustrated in figure 4.3, where the ICA filters are represented
as a filterbank. The feature extraction can be tuned in terms of the number of filters in
the filterbank, the size of the filters, the sampling grid and dimensions of the multiscale
sampling.
14
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:21==
Feature extraction
Multiscale sampling and binning
Set of filters
Filterbank
Quantize and binarize reponse
Set of histograms
Figure 4.3: Feature extraction used in the baseline algorithm. Filtered images are binarized
and stacked to form a bitstring for each pixel. The bitstring is interpreted as a decimal
number and a set of histograms are computed over a dense grid at multiple scales.
4.1
Extraction of Raw Weights From Convolutional Layers
As illustrated earlier, the first convolutional layers of CNNs are optimized to extract low-
level features, potentially similar to ICA Texture filters utilized in the BSIF algorithm[48].
In contrast to the filters learned in with ICA on natural images, the filters learned in the
CNNs are optimized with respect to face recognition and the first approach to incorporat-
ing deep features into the existing framework is to extract the optimized raw layer weight
from models trained on face recognition.
Weights from the FACE-VGG and FACE-RES networks are considered, and specifically
only weights from the first four convolutional blocks in FACE-VGG and weights from the
initial convolutional layer and from the first residual block in FACE-RES are extracted.
Deeper layers are tailored for a specific task and are not expected to result in meaning-
ful features. Finally, the BSIF descriptors are computed with fixed in the baseline, and
similar filters are expected to be dominant in the first layers.
In FACE-RES the ini-
tial convolutional layer consist of 64 filters for each channel with a dimension given by,
dim (conv17x 7/s2) = [7 × 7 × 3 × 64] = [7 × 7 × 192]. Similarly, for conv2_1_3x3 it is
observed that 4096 filters can be extracted since dim (conv2_1_3x3) = [3 × 3 × 64 × 64].
The dimension and number of filters for each convolutional layer considered are listed in
table 4.1.
Testing all combinations of filter is not realistic - assuming 10 filters per grouping we
can, from just the first layer in VGGNet16, create K =
192!
(192−10)!·10! ≈1.5 × 1016 different
unordered sets. To overcome this issue, each filter was given a pseudo rank based on the
variance of the filtered image. During development it was observed that several filters
did not provide a useful response since all parts of the filtered image would result in only
strictly positive or only strictly negative components. During the quantization step all
information is lost and the filter would not contribute to the feature extraction.
15
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:22==
Table 4.1: Filter dimensions for each convolutional layer. The two first dimensions are the
actual filter kernel size.
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
VGGNet16
3 × 3 × 3 × 64
3 × 3 × 64 × 64
3 × 3 × 64 × 128
3 × 3 × 128 × 128
ResNet-50
7 × 7 × 3 × 64
3 × 3 × 64 × 64
-
-
Total
384
8192
8192
16384
The pseudo rank was computed by convolving a set of test images followed by a quantiza-
tion. The variance of the resulting image was then used as a guideline for filter selection,
as images with low variance are associated with the filters that did not result in useful
features.
In figure 4.4 this process is illustrated for the first convolutional block in FACE-RES,
where the filters have been plotted in for each channel.
VGG16
7x7x3x64 conv 
3x3 max pool
1x1 conv 64
3x3 conv 64
1x1 conv 256
add
RESNET-50
RESNET
conv1/7x7_s2 CH1
RESNET
conv1/7x7_s2 CH2
RESNET
conv1/7x7_s2 CH3
Figure 4.4: Visualization of the filters extracted from a RESNET-50 model optimized for
face recognition.
4.2
Quantization of Layer Activation
Instead of extracting filters from existing network features are extracted directly from
the activation internal to the CNN. This is building upon the approach introduced in the
previous section, as the quantization still plays a central role. Activation layers are stacked
in groups and encoded as done with BSIF features. By doing this the non-linear behavior
of the network is not circumvented, and it is hypothesized that these features will prove to
be more robust. In figure 4.5 the activations generated by propagating an image through
the network is illustrated, and the dimension of the activations used for feature extraction
is included in table 4.2.
The proposed method is illustrated in figure 4.6 where examples of the generated BSIF
descriptors are included. As it can be seen in table 4.2 the third dimension of the generated
activation greatly exceeds the number of bits that can eﬀiciently be encoded with a single
16
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:23==
Table 4.2: Dimension of the activation used for feature extraction.
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
Layer 5
...
VGGNet16
224 × 224 × 64
224 × 224 × 64
112 × 112 × 64
112 × 112 × 128
112 × 112 × 128
...
ResNet-50
112 × 112 × 64
55 × 55 × 64
55 × 55 × 256
55 × 55 × 64
55 × 55 × 256
...
Figure 4.5: Activation for a given input for VGGNet-16
numeric value (i.e.
for 64 layers we need to store 264 ≈1.8 × 1019 different values).
To overcome this limitation, the number of bits is limited to 10 and several compact
representations are generated, i.e. 6 resulting compact representations for 64 layers in the
given activation.
Histograms are again computed over a dense grid at multiple scale and used as the feature
vector, as done in [54].
17
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:24==
Conv_i
Featuremapi
Group and Quantize
Compact representation
Feature vectors
Multi-scale sampling
Histograms
x1
x2
xn
...
Figure 4.6: Quantization of the internal activations.
224
224
64
Conv_1
n
n
k
Featuremapi
k
1
...
n2
...
Feature vectors
Figure 4.7: Extracting local image descriptors directly from the activation of the con-
volutional layers. Each convolutional layer produces N × N K dimensional local image
descriptors.
18
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Activations as Dense Image Descriptors
Inspired by the method proposed by Wimmer et al. [55] the activations are used directly
as dense image descriptors. The authors successfully encoded activation layers from a VG-
GNet and proved that a pretrained model generalized well as a general feature extractor.
Each activation of a convolutional layer consist of K different N × N feature maps, where
K is the number of filter kernels in the convolutional layer and N ×N is the size of the filter
response for each kernel. The feature maps are interpreted as N × N K dimensional local
image descriptors. The local image descriptors are pooled to form N2 image descriptors
for each image that is passed through the network. The dimension of each layer is included
in figure 4.2.
With this approach more data is encoded in the feature vector at the expense of increasing
the feature dimensionality. The pipeline for the feature extraction is illustrated in figure
4.7.
19
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:26==
5
Experimental Evaluation
In this chapter the proposed algorithms will undergo thorough evaluation. The chapter
structure is organized as follows - in section 5.1 the experimental protocol will be intro-
duced. In this section the relevant evaluation metrics and standards will be reviewed and
the datasets employed are introduced. Finally, the different testing protocols are defined.
In section 5.2 evaluation results for each protocol will be presented followed by a discussion
on the performance achieved.
The aim of the experimental evaluation is to characterize the proposed methods and
investigate the feasibility of incorporating deep features in the existing algorithm. The
impact of the network structure and model type will be investigated together with various
parameters relevant to the algorithm, and finally the impact of the layer depth will be
characterized.
5.1
Experimental Protocol
For experimental evaluation we define three overall evaluation schemes in order to assess
the performance of the proposed methods. i) a baseline is constructed on known attacks
where the model parameters are tuned, ii) the tuned models evaluation focuses on un-
known PAIs and finally iii) evaluation across databases is carried out. The scenarios are
outlined below:
1. Known attack. PAI species in the testing set are also present in the training set
as seen in the CASIA-MFSD database [33]. This scenario is used to fine tune the
model parameters such as the number of semantic groups in the GMM and activation
layer used for feature extraction. Finally, the performance across different model
structures and layers will be evaluated here.
2. Unknown PAI species. PAI species are left out in a leave-one-out, such as we can
evaluate the generalization capabilities for previously unseen PAIs.
3. Cross database. A single database is used for training and testing is performed on
the remaining databases. For consistency no unknown PAIs are introduced in the
testing set to ensure that the observed performance degradation is not due to the
introduction of unknown PAIs.
5.1.1
Evaluation Metrics
All results are reported in compliance with the metrics defined in the international stan-
dard ISO/IEC 30107-3[6]. The standard defines the following for biometric PAD algorithm
evaluation:
• Bona Fide Presentation Classification Error Rate (BPCER), defined as the propor-
tion of bona fide presentations incorrectly classified as attack presentations in a
specific scenario
• Attack Presentation Classification Error Rate, defined as the proportion of attack
presentations using the same PAI species incorrectly classified as bona fide presen-
tatins in a specific scenario
For evaluation the following metrics are also reported:
20
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:27==
1. Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) curves between APCER and BPCER are reported.
DET curves provides a precise description of the of the relationship between BPCER
and APCER for different threshold, allowing better comparisons between different
methods [56].
2. the Detection Equal Error Rate (D-EER) which is the error rate at the threshold
where APCER = BPCER
Due to the lack of proper quantitative analysis of performance in compliance with the
ISO/IEC 30107-3 standard on biometric PAD, some results will additionally be reported
in terms of non-compliant performance metrics. The Receiver Operator Characteristic
(ROC) is the plot of False Positive Rate (FPR, i.e. APCER) versus the False Negative
Rate (FNR, i.e. BPCER) for different values of the threshold. The Area Under ROC
Curve (AUC) will be used when the D-EER isn’t reported[57].
5.1.2
Dataset
Several datasets have been employed to evaluate the algorithms proposed in this thesis.
The datasets are constructed specifically for the task of PAD evaluation and are all avail-
able for public usage. The datasets used to developed and evaluate the proposed algorithm
will be briefly summarized in this section.
CASIA FASD
The CASIA-FASD (CASIA) database[33] consist of 600 videos captured for 50 subjects.
For each subject three samples of genuine presentations and 9 samples of attack attempts
has been collected. The database aim to address the small variability found in publicly
available databases where only a single type of attack is considered. Furthermore, the
quality of the recorded images and videos are consistent within the databases, allowing
algorithm using high frequency information to perform well. Image quality is not guar-
anteed in real world use cases and the authors addresses the lack of variance within the
databases by providing samples of each PA with three different different video qualities.
Finally, three different PAI species are presented in the dataset.
1. Warped Photo Attack: 1920x1080 pixel images are captured for each subject. The
image is printed on high quality cobber paper, and during the PA the attacker warps
the image in order to simulate facial motion.
2. Cut Photo Attack: Eye regions of the images used in the Warped Photo Attack
are cut out and the attacker exhibit blinking through the holes during the attack.
Samples of a second implementation is included, where an identical image is placed
behind and moved around in order to simulate the blinking and eye motion. This
attack is challenging for algorithms relying on temporal features such as blinks and
eye motion.
3. Video Attack: Genuine 1280x720 videos are displayed using an iPad in a classical
video replay attack.
Examples of the different qualities are included in figure 5.1.
21
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.1: Samples from CASIA FASD with different image qualities. From the left: Low
quality, medium quality and high quality.
REPLAY-MOBILE
Motivated by the continuous development of mobile devices the authors of [58] has pub-
lished the REPLAY-MOBILE (REPLAY) database. The updated database aims to re-
flect more recent technologies - both in terms of PAI and capturing equipment - where
high quality cameras and displays pose a greater challenge over older databases.
The
REPLAY-MOBILE database consist of 1.200 short videos of photo and video attack at-
tempts To create a database that reflect real use cases samples are collected under various
lighting condition and three guiding principles are established for the capturing process,
i) sequences are captured using representative mobile devices using the frontal camera
ii) during capturing clients hold the device as they would in a real scenario iii) attacks
are performed using a matte screen and high-quality prints on matte paper to suppress
specular reflections.
The authors report baseline performance following the ISO/IEC 30107-3 standard[6] for
two different methods.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 5.2: REPLAY-MOBILE samples. Images are cropped to the face region as used for
evaluation. The first three images in the top row are samples of bona fide access attempt
(a-c). Images (d-h) are examples of attack presentations.
22
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:29==
MSU-MFSD
The MSU Mobile Face Spoofing Database (MSU) [34] was created with the intention
of emulating real life access scenarios with respect to image quality.
The authors has
identified issues with existing databases as the capturing equipment either consist of low
quality samples, e.g. captured with low resolution integrated web-cameras or high quality
samples captured with high resolution dedicated digital cameras. When the dataset was
published no public-domain datasets captured with mobile cameras existed, and thus the
authors created a dataset intended to use in the public domain captured with, for that
time, state-of-art mobile front facing cameras.
The database consist of 440 video clips of different presentation attacks with a minimum
duration of 9 seconds and an average duration of 12 seconds with a framerate of 30fps.
The samples were captured using the front facing camera of a Google Nexus 5 Android
phone and the integrated camera of a MacBook Air. Both systems regarded state of the
art at the time of capture. The database contains genuine samples and samples from two
different PAIs.
Note that the Wen et al.[34] uses Google Nexus 5 and iPhone 5S interchangeably to
reference the mobile phone used as the capturing device. From the naming convention in
the dataset and the overall description it seems most likely that only the Google Nexus 5
was used in creation of the dataset.
1. Video Replay: Videos of the subject’s faces are recorded using a Canon 550D SLR
camera and an iPhone 5s main back-facing camera. Videos captured on the Canon
SLR digital camera are replayed on an iPad Air (HD quality) and videos captured
on the iPhone are replayed on the same iPhone (HD quality). Spoof attacks are
replayed at 20cm and 10cm respectively.
2. Printed Photo: The Canon 550D digital camera is used to capture high resolution
pictures (5184x3456) of the subject’s face, then printed on an A3 paper.
Spoof
attacks are performed with a standoff of 40cm. Images printed have better quality
compared to other datasets due to the larger print format and high quality printer.
In table 5.1 a summary of the database is included and samples from the database can be
seen in figure 5.3.
(a) Bona fide sample
captured using the mo-
bile phone
(b) Mobile camera - re-
play attack
(c) Laptop camera - re-
play attack
(d) Laptop camera -
print attack
Figure 5.3: MSU MFSD dataset samples
OULU-NPU
The OULU-NPU PA database is constructed with focus on evaluation the generalization
capabilities of system under realistic conditions such as environmental changes and eval-
uation on previously unseen PAIs[59]. The team behind the dataset has defined several
protocols and corresponding dataset splits, that allows direct comparison of performance
between groups. In all evaluations, this predefined split will be used.
23
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:30==
Table 5.1: MSU MFSD dataset
Users
Real access
Print attacks
Total
Training
15
60
180
240
Test
20
80
240
320
Table 5.2: OULU-NPU database splits
Users
Real access
Print attacks
Video attacks
Total
Training
20
360
720
720
1800
Development
15
270
540
540
1350
Test
20
320
720
720
1800
The database consist of a total 4950 video samples of bona fide access attempts and
attack attempts.
The samples has been recorded using six different capturing devices
(front facing cameras of mainstream mobile phones) in three different sessions each with
different illumination conditions and different backgrounds.
Figure 5.4 contains samples of the dataset entries. The samples has been cropped to the
relevant face region used for PAD.
(a) Bona fide sample
(b) PA sample
(c) PA sample
(d) PA sample
Figure 5.4: OULU-NPU dataset samples
The OULU-NPU dataset has been summarized in table 5.2
5.2
Experimental results and discussion
In this section results and evaluation for each protocol are presented. Initially, the algo-
rithm is tuned and evaluated in section 5.2.1. In section 5.2.2 the methods are evaluated
with unknown PAIs in the testing set and evaluation across databases are presented in
in section 5.2.3. Finally, the performance as a function of layer depth is characterized in
section 5.4.
5.2.1
Evaluation on known attack
For evaluation on known attacks the CASIA FASD (CASIA)[33], REPLAY-MOBILE (RE-
PLAY)[58] and MSU FASD (MSU)[34] databases will be used for the bulk testing. These
datasets will be the databases used for parameter tuning as the OULU-NPU (OULU)[59]
requires too many resources for large scale testing due to its size.
24
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:31==
Table 5.3: Evaluation on known attacks for the RAW method. Results reported in D-EER
and the best results in each row is highlighted in bold.
Network
Database\Clusters(K)
128
256
512
1024
FACE-RES
CASIA - FASD
7.78%
39.63%
7.78%
9.26%
REPLAY - MOBILE
2.50%
2.92%
3.33%
3.33%
MSU - MFSD
2.93%
2.93%
3.38%
3.38%
Avg.
4.40%
15.16%
4.83%
5.32%
FACE-VGG16
CASIA - FASD
8.89%
7.78%
7.96%
7.96%
REPLAY - MOBILE
3.33%
5.00%
2.92%
5.00%
MSU - MFSD
3.38%
3.38%
3.38%
3.90%
Avg.
5.20%
5.39%
4.75%
5.62%
Three different approaches to incorporate deep features are to be investigated. In section
4.1 raw weights are extracted and used for BSIF computation and will be referred to
as (RAW). In section 4.2 activation of the convolutional layers was quantized and bina-
rized and from this point it will be referred to as (QUAN). Finally, a direct encoding of
activations were proposed in section 4.3 (D-ENC).
Effects of the number of semantics groups
The algorithm has a large amount of tuneable parameters including the number of cluster
in the GMM (K), the number of filters used (specific for the first approach) (RAW), the
base CNN model and the layer used for feature extraction. Testing all possible config-
uration is both not realistic in terms of the computational complexity, and finally, for
evaluation on unknown attacks the most realistic scenario only includes models selected
in evaluation on known attacks.
For each method proposed the following test have been run:
1. Varying the number of clusters (K) with K ∈{128, 256, 512, 1024}. In general, a
lower number of cluster will result in a faster PAD system, but performance has
proven to increase with the number of clusters used. For general image classification
the effect of the number of clusters in the GMM was investigated in[5] and for face
PAD performance has been observed to benefit from larger number of clusters[53].
2. Using different layers from four different pretrained CNN models. The performance
evaluation of this is included in section 5.4.
RAW Weights used for BSIF
Initially, results on known attacks are reported for the first proposed method, section
4.1. Test for each database has been run using 311 different filter configuration, with 103
sets and 208 sets based on FACE-RES and FACE-VGG16 respectively. For all cluster
configuration over the three databases used for model tuning the model results for the
best performing filter configuration is reported in table 5.3.
Based on the results in [54] and initial testing 64 Principle Components were used in the
dimensionality and decorrelation step. In [54] it was found that 64 components was needed
in order to retain 95% of the variance. It is observed that for the ResNet based model a
lower number of clusters result in lower D-EER scores, but in general the performance is
relatively independent of the number of clusters in the generative model. The best score
for the ResNet based model was achieved with K = 128 cluster with a D-EER = 4.40%.
A single outlier, D-EER = 39.63%, for test performed on the CASIA database with 256
25
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:32==
0.1
1
5
20
40
APCER (in %)
0.1
1
5
20
40
BPCER (in %)
DET
casia
msu
replay
Figure 5.5: DET curves for the RAW method. The DET curvers correspond to the best
performing models.
clusters is detected.
As this score is so inconsistent with the remaining results, it is
attributed to an error introduced when running the test.
For the VGGNet based model 512 clusters resulted in the best D-EER of 4.75% and again
it is observed that the number of cluster does not seem to be a significant factor in terms
of performance.
The best performing layers for the ResNet based model includes both the initial con-
volutional layer (conv1_7x7) with 8 filters in the filterbank) and from the second layer
(block1_conv1_3x3) with 8 filters in the filterbank).
It is observed that the variance
based filter-score was able to select meaningful filters, as the best score was achieved with
filters ranked in the top 5%. For the VGGNet based models filters from conv_2 has proven
to have the best performance.
While an average D-EER of 4.75% looks promising at first glance it should be noted that
i) the testing set only includes known PAI species ii) the baseline algorithm[53] achieved
an average D-EER of 0.45% with 1024 clusters.
The CASIA database consistently performs the worst and it is hypothesized this is caused
by the varying image quality in the dataset. In González‐Soler et al.[53] the effects of image
quality was investigated and poor generalization was observed across varying image quality.
Varying results was observed when testing in Zhang et al.[33] which uses a quality based
feature extraction, where high quality prints and video APs was proven to be significantly
harder to detect. The DET curve is included as figure 5.5, in which can be noted that the
approach reports a BPCER = 0.0% for any APCER ≥10.0% over MSU and REPLAY.
Quantization of Activation Layers
In table 5.4 the results of running experiments over several model configurations can be
seen. The D-EER is presented for each network type and cluster configuration for the
three datasets. For each model the best performing network layer is included in the table,
and results from the remaining layers are not considered as the performance is inferior to
the reported performance.
26
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:33==
Table 5.4: Evaluation on known attacks for the second method proposed (QUAN). The
activations are quantized and represented in a compact form. Results reported in D-EER
and the best results in each row is highlighted in bold.
Network
Database\Clusters(K)
128
256
512
1024
IN-RES
CASIA - FASD
14.44%
13.33%
13.33%
13.52%
MSU - MFSD
7.50%
7.50%
7.50%
7.50%
REPLAY - MOBILE
5.59%
5.33%
5.33%
5.85%
Avg.
9.18%
8.72%
8.72%
8.96%
IN-VGG16
CASIA - FASD
11.30%
11.11%
11.11%
10.00%
MSU - MFSD
5.83%
5.42%
5.42%
5.00%
REPLAY - MOBILE
4.36%
3.90%
4.36%
4.88%
Avg.
7.16%
6.81%
6.96%
6.63%
FACE-RES
CASIA - FASD
14.44%
14.44%
14.63%
15.56%
MSU - MFSD
7.50%
7.50%
5.42%
5.42%
REPLAY - MOBILE
4.62%
4.36%
4.36%
4.36%
Avg.
8.85%
8.77%
8.13 %
8.44%
FACE-VGG16
CASIA - FASD
14.44%
14.44%
13.33%
12.59%
MSU - MFSD
7.92%
5.83%
5.83%
5.00%
REPLAY - MOBILE
4.62%
5.33%
5.33%
5.33%
Avg.
8.99%
8.54%
8.17%
7.64%
Both 32 and 64 Principle Components were used in the test and it was found that 32
principle components consistently either outperformed or tied with the 64 component
variation. In Sánchez et al.[5] different PCA configurations were evaluated where it was
found that an increasing number of components resulted in higher performance (for 16-
64 components), but performance was saturated with more than 64 components (64-
128) components. The computational complexity is directly proportional with the feature
dimension and 32 components is only considered from this point as i) performance is
believed to be saturated at this point ii) the decrease of computational is highly desired.
The two best performing models are for K = 1024 clusters in the GMM with an average D-
EER of 6.63% and 7.64% for IN-VGG16 and FACE-VGG16 respectively. We can observe
that the VGGNet based models are the best performing networks for this method with
D-EER consistenly lower than the models based on the ResNet architecture trained on
the same database.
As with the previous model the CASIA database has a significant higher D-EER through-
out across all configurations and the lowest D-EER achieved for this database is 10.0%
It was believed that this method would prove to perform better as the non-linear feature
extraction from the network theoretically is able to extract more robust features. Instead
of using the learned filters directly we get the activation from the composite convolution,
i.e. W1((W2(I)), where I is the input image and Wi represent the convolution and non-
linear rectification of layer i. As the filters are optimized with respect to the composite
convolution and the non-linear activation it was hypothesized that features extracted form
the inner layers, as opposed to using the filters from inner layers without the composite
convolution, would produce more meaningful features.
27
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:34==
0.1
1
5
20
40
APCER (in %)
0.1
1
5
20
40
BPCER (in %)
DET
casia
msu
replay
Figure 5.6: DET curves for the QUAN method. For each database the best performing
model has been selected.
The performance reduction is most likely due to the lack of ranking that was introduced
for the first method. Instead all activations within a given layer are utilized in the feature
extraction which can produce more sparse image descriptors. Finally, each image produce
a significantly larger amount of features as the activation layers are grouped in sets of 10
layers and the BSIF computation is repeated for each group. This hypothesis is backed
by several observations i) output of the first layer is directly related to the first layer since
only one convolution is employed and the subsequent rectification not leads to information
loss as the quantization is employed directly after ii) performance for the first layer is
consistently lower even though the features generated are highly related.
The results
shows that performance can be improved if only a subset of activations are used.
In general it is observed that features from deeper layers had a better performance. For
IN-RES layer two through layer four were generally best and for FACE-RES layer two and
layer three produced the best features. For the VGGNet based model features from layer
one through layer three proved to be optimal for this method. For subsequent evaluation
the second and third convolutional layer in IN-VGG will be used as they had the overall
best performance.
DET curves for the best performing configurations are included as figure 5.6. It is seen
that BPCER≤5% for all APCER ≤5% over MSU and REPLAY.
Convolutional Activations as Dense Image Descriptors
For the D-ENC method it is observed that the overall best performing model is based on
the VGG16 model trained for object detection, with K = 128. The features are extracted
from the third and fourth convolution layer, specifically the Conv-2-1 and Conv-2-2 model
layer respectively. In Wimmer et al.[55] best performance is also achieved when extracting
low level features from the first 5 convolutional layers. In general, we can observe that
object classification networks almost consistently performs better than the face recognition
networks for each cluster configuration.
While the overall best cluster configuration is with K = 128 we see that K = 256 is more
suitable for for the remaining networks. The feature extraction is inspired by [55] where
28
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:35==
Table 5.5: Evaluation on known attacks for the third method proposed (D-ENC). The
activations are directly employed as local image descriptors. Results reported in D-EER
and the best results in each row is highlighted in bold.
Network
Database\Clusters(K)
128
256
512
1024
IN-RES
CASIA - FASD
12.22%
11.30%
12.22%
13.3%
MSU - MFSD
7.50%
7.50%
10.00%
10.8%
REPLAY - MOBILE
3.90%
4.36%
4.88%
6.31%
Avg.
7.87%
7.72%
9.03%
10.2%
IN-VGG16
CASIA - FASD
7.78%
7.04%
6.67%
7.04%
MSU - MFSD
2.92%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
REPLAY - MOBILE
3.38%
3.90%
4.36%
4.36%
Avg.
4.69%
5.31%
5.34%
5.47%
FACE-RES
CASIA - FASD
13.70%
12.41%
13.52%
13.33%
MSU - MFSD
7.92%
7.50%
10.00%
8.33%
REPLAY - MOBILE
4.36%
4.36%
4.36%
4.36%
Avg.
8.66%
8.09%
9.29%
8.67%
FACE-VGG16
CASIA - FASD
14.44%
14.44%
13.33%
15.56%
MSU - MFSD
8.33%
7.50%
8.33%
7.92%
REPLAY - MOBILE
7.02%
5.59%
7.02%
8.00%
Avg.
9.93%
9.18%
9.56%
10.49%
the authors empirically found that 16 cluster was suﬀicient for their task, hinting that this
approach can be appropriate if performance (in terms of computational effort) is a high
priority.
The best average D-EER is found to be 4.69% using only 128 clusters which is similar
to the RAW method. This approach however, is significantly faster since i) the number
of cluster employed is significantly smaller ii) the number of PCA components is reduced
to 32 iii) the feature generation (i.e.
propagating the image through the network) is
optimized and can run in parallel.
DET curves for the best performing model for each network is included in figure 5.7, in
which can be noted that the approach reports a BPCER = 0.0% for any APCER ≥5.0%
over MSU and a BPCER < 5% for any APCER ≥4% over REPLAY.
5.2.2
Evaluation on Unknown Attacks
Based on the evaluations reported in the previous section, we can now select the best
performing configurations and proceed with evaluation on unknown PAIs. This test is
designed to mimic real-life scenarios, where it is fair to assume that the PAI species are
unknown. For unknown attacks a leave-one-protocol is adopted, and performance for each
unknown PAI is reported per dataset together with performance from state-of-the-art
approaches. AUC is reported to allow comparison with external approaches and D-EER
is reported in compliance with the ISO/IEC 30107-3 for the proposed methods.
The
evaluation results are included as table 5.7. The tested model configurations are listed in
table 5.6.
The most consistent performance for all proposed methods were all with layers based on
29
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:36==
0.1
1
5
20
40
APCER (in %)
0.1
1
5
20
40
BPCER (in %)
DET
casia
msu
replay
Figure 5.7: DET curves for the D-ENC method.
Table 5.6: Model configurations selected for testing with unknown PAIs.
Method
PCA
Clusters
Model
Convolutional Layer Depth
RAW
64
512
IN-RES
1
QUAN
32
1024
IN-VGG
2
D-ENC
32
128
IN-VGG
3
30
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:37==
Table 5.7: Evaluation on unknown attacks. The performance for the baseline algorithms
are given in AUC. The best result per PAI species is highlighted in bold. Performance in
terms of D-EET and AUC are reported for the proposed methods.
Database
MSU
CASIA
REPLAY
PAI
Printed
HQ Video
Mobile Video
Cut
Warped
Video
Digital
Printed
Video
OC-SVM_RGB+BSIF[60]
64.80%
87.40%
74.70%
60.70%
95.90%
70.70%
-
-
-
NN+LBP[61]
50.60%
99.90%
93.50%
88.40%
79.90%
94.20%
-
-
-
DTN[62]
81.60%
99.90%
97.50%
97.30%
97.50%
90.00%
-
-
-
CDCN [63]
70.92%
100.0%
99.99%
99.90%
99.80%
98.48%
-
-
-
BSIF+FV[53]
99.32%
100.0%
100.0%
99.60%
97.90%
99.90%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
RAW
AUC
66.46%
84.04%
92.04%
93.00%
93.33%
79.64%
96.76%
99.27%
97.27%
D-EER
42.68%
25.36%
17.32%
14.44%
11.73%
30.17%
4.36%
1.95%
6.79%
QUAN
AUC
71.93%
100.0%
71.93%
87.43%
89.99%
86.19%
98.35%
94.21%
94.81%
D-EER
40.00%
0.00%
5.36%
16.67%
17.78%
24.44%
4.81%
15.02%
12.61%
D-ENC
AUC
73.20%
98.7%
99.00%
93.63%
93.06%
87.32%
98.2%
94.40%
94.90%
D-EER
30.70%
2.68%
3.39%
14.44%
16.67%
23.33%
4.36%
13.60%
12.60%
model trained on the ImageNET database and we the cluster configuration is different for
each proposed method. The RAW and QUAN method has the highest correlation since
the feature extraction is based on a similar method, but against expectations the optimal
PCA configuration and backbone layer differs.
Table 5.7 lists D-EER for each unknown PAI for each database evaluated with a fixed
model setting. In general the generalization capabilities does not reach state-of-the-art
performance for all evaluated methods except for a single case where a D-EER of 0.00%
was achieved (MSU - HQ Video). The main reference will be the BSIF-FV[53] method
as the proposed methods are developed with this as a base, and it is obvious that the
baseline method outperforms the proposed methods in all cases.
For MSU D-ENC has a significant lower average D-EER compared to the remaining two
methods proposed, for CASIA the average D-EER of all methods are within a 1.5% interval
and finally for REPLAY it is observed that the average RAW D-EER is significantly lower,
and thus no method is consistently better. The feasibility of incorporating learned features
for PAD is proving to not provide generalization capabilities and specifically for the RAW
method it was expected that a similar performance could be achieved due to its already
proven robustness.
5.2.3
Cross Database Evaluation
The final evaluation carried out is generally considered one of the most challenging in
the field of PAD. Even though PAIs are known, the capture device and environment is
fundamentally different. Already in the evaluation of known PAIs the CASIA database
proved to be more challenging and it was hypothesized that the influence of varying image
quality (different capturing devices) caused this.
The methods are evaluated with the same configurations listed in table 5.6. In table 5.8 the
results on testing across databases is included. As the employed dataset for the REPLAY is
different than the one most commonly used (REPLAY-ATTACK vs REPLAY-MOBILE)
the basis for comparison is somewhat small.
For the models trained on MSU we observe that the achieved D-EER is ≈4 times higher
than the best performing method when evaluating on CASIA. The baseline algorithm
(evaluate with a fixed model as done with the proposed models) has a comparable D-EER
of 31.56%. For evaluation on REPLAY two of the proposed models managed to perform
worse than random (D-EER> 50%). For the models trained on CASIA it is observed
that the lowest D-EER is ≈2.5 times higher that than the best performing method from
31
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.8: Cross database evaluation - the algorithm trained on a single database and
performance reported in D-EER. The best scores are highlighted in bold for each testing
set.
Train
MSU
CASIA
REPLAY
Avg
Test
CASIA
REPLAY
MSU
REPLAY
MSU
CASIA
Color Texture[17]
46.00%
-
24.40%
-
-
-
35.20%
Texture Fusion [64]
29.20%
-
19.90%
-
-
-
29.55%
DupGAN[65]
27.10%
-
33.40%
-
-
-
30.25%
KSA[66]
9.10%
-
15.10%
-
-
12.10%
ADA[67]
17.70%
-
9.30%
-
-
13.50%
DR-UDA[32]
16.80%
-
9.00%
-
-
12.90%
BSIF+FV[53]
31.56%
-
33.10%
-
-
-
32.33%
RAW
35.56%
32.51%
42.50%
30.36%
50.00%
30,19%
36.85%
QUAN
46.67%
67.23%
22.50%
22.82%
75.00%
36.67%
45.15%
D-ENC
34.44%
56.31%
23.33%
26.46%
60.00%
35.56%
39.35%
literature. Compared to the baseline, two of the proposed models performed better with
a D-EER of 22.5% and 23.33% respectively as opposed to the baseline D-EER of 33.10%.
The varying quality of images in the training set of CASIA could have had a positive
impact and stimulated learning of more robust features. It should however be noted that
the same methods did not provide any meaningful classification with a D-EER higher than
50% when trained on MSU. Finally, for training on the REPLAY database we notice a
failure generalizing when testing on MSU (D-EER greater or equal to 50% for all methods)
and a D-EER of 30.19% with evaluation on CASIA.
Overall the MSU-REPLAY (and vice versa) train-test combination proved particular diﬀi-
cult. The fact that the generalization both fails both ways hints that the features extracted
are database specific and not suitable for generalization.
The average D-EER is for all methods higher than the baseline algorithm and the proposed
methods have not proven capable to generalize. Finally, DET curves for each method is
in figs. 5.8 to 5.10 for the RAW, QUAN and D-ENC method respectively. For the RAW
method the performance is more independent of the training set as the curves for each
test has a high similarity. In figure 5.9 a larger variance is observed. For the CASIA-MSU
(train-test) pair it is observed that a BPCER= 5% for all APCER≥40%. In figure 5.10
a BPCER= 5% for all APCER≥40% over MSU and REPLAY when training on CASIA.
5.3
Evalution on OULU-NPU
Finally, evaluation has been performed using the OULU-NPU dataset, where the four
protocols specified in the dataset is used[59] (see section 5.1.2).
The D-EER for each
protocol and method is reported in table 5.9. The baseline results reported in the original
paper is included as a reference, though it should be noted that several images are used
for classification unlike the proposed method. The results correspond well with what has
been reported for the test performed on CASIA, MSU and REPLAY: The RAW method
has the best performing for known PAIs and the D-ENC method is has the lowes D-EER
for the most challenging protocol where generalization is tested across unknown capturing
device, PAIs and illumintaion.
32
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:39==
1
5
20
40
65
85
APCER (in %)
1
5
20
40
65
85
BPCER (in %)
DET
CASIA - MSU
CASIA - REPLAY
MSU - CASIA
MSU - REPLAY
REPLAY - CASIA
REPLAY - MSU
Figure 5.8: DET curve for cross database results with extracted weights used directly in
the computation of BSIF descriptors (RAW). The labels should be interpreted as [Training
set]-[Test set]
1
5
20
40
65
85
APCER (in %)
1
5
20
40
65
85
BPCER (in %)
DET
CASIA - MSU
CASIA - REPLAY
MSU - CASIA
MSU - REPLAY
REPLAY - CASIA
REPLAY - MSU
Figure 5.9: DET curve for cross database evaluation with quantization of activation layers.
The labels should be interpreted as [Training set]-[Test set]
Table 5.9: Evaluation on OULU-NPU database. Results are reported in terms of D-EER
and the LBP method proposed in Boulkenafet et al.[59] is included as a reference. The
lowest D-EER per column is highlighted in bold.
Protocol 1
Protocol 2
Protocol 3
Protocol 4
OULU[59]
3.8%
4.6%
4.9 ± 0.4%
5.2 ± 0.6
RAW
7.81%
8.33%
5.83 ± 2.45%
32.71 ± 10.20%
QUAN
15.10%
11.67%
9.48 ± 0.74%
20.21 ± 8.96%
D-ENC
10.83%
8.40%
8.75 ± 5.12%
11.67 ± 7.53%
33
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:40==
1
5
20
40
65
85
APCER (in %)
1
5
20
40
65
85
BPCER (in %)
DET
CASIA - MSU
CASIA - REPLAY
MSU - CASIA
MSU - REPLAY
REPLAY - CASIA
REPLAY - MSU
Figure 5.10: DET curve for cross database results where convolution activation are directly
encoded. The labels should be interpreted as [Training set]-[Test set]
5.4
Performance Over Layers
As a curiosity, D-EER as a function of layers has been investigated. For the best cluster
configuration D-EER has been extracted as a function of layer depth for some of the
networks employed. For QUAN and D-EER the results are included as figure 5.11. For
QUAN a low D-EER is only achieved in a narrow band (i.e. for a small set of layers)
and the higher D-EER of FACE-VGG network is clear to identify in figure 5.11a. For
the D-ENC method it is observed that the D-EER is stable over a larger set of bands,
especially for the VGG based networks.
(a) QUAN
(b) D-ENC
Figure 5.11: D-EER as a function of layer-depth for RAW and D-ENC methods.
5.5
Overall performance analysis
Several aspects are attributed to the performance degradation. If we initially focus on
the RAW method, which can be related directly to the baseline algorithm, it is hypothe-
sized that the baseline BSIF based algorithm relies heavily on texture based features. In
section 3.1.3 it was demonstrated that the features causing the highest activation of the
convolutional layers are more high-level and high-frequency information used in texture
based methods[33] is lost. For intra-database testing it was observed that the D-EER for
34
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:41==
evaluation on the CASIA consistently was higher and the performance degradation was
attributed to the varying image quality. Finally, it was observed that the optimal filters
was not tied to a specific convolutional layer, but different layers were in fact used across
cluster configuration and database.
The proposed QUAN and D-ENC methods relies more on the features generated by the
utilized networks. Specifically the VGGFace2 based network exhibited a higher perfor-
mance degradation and the generalization capabilities of the network might have had a
contributing factor, as the network is specifically trained to overcome changes in pose, en-
vironment, illumination and facial expressions. While these generalization parameters are
highly desired for PAD they do not seem to translate well with the proposed method. One
could speculate that high-frequency features are filtered out as they only provide minimal
information for face recognition. For the QUAN method a higher D-EER was observed
compared to the RAW method when looking at the initial convolutional layer. As the
methods are essentially identical at this convolutional layer it is possible to narrow the
performance degradation down to two points i) an active selection of filters was employed
in RAW ii) QUAN utilizes all layers and the amount of features is significantly larger.
Finally, the non-linearities and specialized filters might have limited the spatial resolution
limiting the effects of the multi scale sampling. In Wimmer et al.[55] features from mul-
tiple layers were considered simultaneously resulting in a performance improvement and
a similar approach could potentially enable to method to capture information at multiple
scales. As illustrated in section 5.4 the D-ENC has a more stable D-EER across layers and
high-level features could with relative ease be fused with low-level features to create multi-
scale features and in Patel et al.[27] global and local features were found to complement
each other.
35
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:42==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis the feasibility of combining Fisher Vectors with deep features was investi-
gated. Three different approaches were proposed i) BSIF features generated with filters
extracted form pre-trained CNNs (RAW), ii) BSIF features computed directly on the
convolution activations (QUAN) and iii) convolution activations as dense image descrip-
tors (D-ENC). The methods are derived from González‐Soler et al.[53] used as a baseline
method which allows a direct performance comparison.
Two network architectures were considered in the work. Each trained on two databases -
one specifically constructed for face recognition task and the other for object recognition.
This allows for a direct comparison over network architectures and network types. Initially
the model parameters were tuned on three datasets (CASIA, MSU-MFSD and REPLAY-
MOBILE) over a known attack scenario, where the best performing layers across each
of the four model were identified together with the optimal number of clusters in the
Gaussian Mixture Model used for the Fisher Vector. On known attacks a D-EER of 4.40%,
6.63% and 4.36% was achieved for the three methods respectively, which is a performance
degradation from the baseline method.
With optimal parameters found in the known attack scenario the methods were subse-
quently evaluated over an unknown attack scenario in which a one PAI species was left
out of the training set. It was observed that the proposed methods failed to generalize for
most cases. In a single isolated case a D-EER of 0.00% was achieved, but this result is
not representative for the actual performance. In summary, the performance varied from
0.00% −42.68% with no clear correlation between method and performance.
Testing across databases resulted in an average D-EER of 36.85% for the best performing
method. When using CASIA as the training set a significantly better generalization was
achieved with D-EER in the 22.5% −26.46% for two of the methods (QUAN and D-
ENC). Furthermore, this was done with model-parameters resulting in significant less
computational power. It was hypothesized that the varying image image quality (3 distinct
qualities) helped to learn more general features.
Results on the OULU-NPU dataset was reported with D-EER of 10.83%, 8.40%, 8.75%
and 11.67% for protocol 1,2,3 and 4 respectively.
Networks trained on the VGGFace2 database proved to consistently be outperformed by
networks trained on the ImageNET database. It is theorized that the desired generalization
capabilities did not translate well for the VGGFace2 based networks.
A filter selection method was proposed and evidence based on performance between two
similar methods suggest that it successfully selected usable filters. Finally, D-EER as a
function of layer depth was visualized where two distinct graphs were produced for the last
two methods. The second method (QUAN) was only able to utilize features from a small
subset of layers in contrast to the third proposed method (D-ENC) was able to capture
features at large subset of layers. This potentially opens up for combining high-level and
low-level features that has proven to improve classification performance in literature.
Overall the feasibility of combining learned features and Fisher Vectors is questionable. In
a single cross database test some promising results were achieved, but overall performance
degraded by the introduction of features from the CNNs. It is believed that performance
36
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:43==
can be improved with a dedicated feature selection and for the last method it is suggested
that features from different layers can be fused to provide multi scale features.
6.1
Future work
It is evident that more research can be carried out with the ideas introduced in this thesis.
Some research directions could include:
• Analysis of the third method together with results from literature suggests that
multi-scale features can be investigated.
• Improvement in feature selection should be investigated. A simple variance based
filter scoring method was tested and it proved to be able to select filters that led to
better performance.
• Investigate how face alignment affects the performance as better alignment has
proven to help in the field of face recognition. No corresponding studies has been
found for the task of PAD, but it has been observed that authors are using different
approaches.
• Fusion of scores from multiple layer and/or methods could be investigated.
37
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
L. Guo and H. Zhang, “A white-box impersonation attack on the faceid system in
the real world,” eng, Journal of Physics: Conf. Series, vol. 1651, no. 1, p. 012 037,
2020, issn: 17426588, 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1651/1/012037.
[2]
“Windows 10 says hello to finger and face biometrics,” eng, Biometric Technology
Today, vol. 2015, no. 8, p. 12, 2015, issn: 18731880, 09694765. doi: 10.1016/S0969-
4765(15)30140-5.
[3]
J. Hernandez-Ortega, J. Fierrez, A. Morales, and J. Galbally, “Introduction to face
presentation attack detection,” eng, Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, S. Marcel, M. S. Nixon, J. Fierrez, and N. Evans, Eds., pp. 187–206,
2019, issn: 21916594, 21916586. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92627-8\_9.
[4]
S. Bhattacharjee, A. Mohammadi, A. Anjos, and S. Marcel, “Recent advances in
face presentation attack detection,” eng, Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 207–228, 2019, issn: 21916594, 21916586. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
92627-8\_10.
[5]
J. Sánchez, F. Perronnin, T. Mensink, and J. Verbeek, “Image classification with the
fisher vector: Theory and practice,” eng, Intl. Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 105,
no. 3, pp. 222–245, 2013, issn: 15731405, 09205691. doi: 10.1007/s11263-013-0636-x.
[6]
“Information technology – biometric presentation attack detection – part 3: Testing
and reporting,” eng, Standard, 2017.
[7]
J. Galbally, S. Marcel, and J. Fierrez, “Biometric antispoofing methods: A survey
in face recognition,” eng, Ieee Access, vol. 2, pp. 1530–1552, 2014, issn: 21693536.
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2014.2381273.
[8]
Y. Wang, X. Hao, Y. Hou, and C. Guo, “A new multispectral method for face liveness
detection,” eng, Procs. - 2nd Iapr Asian Conf. on Pattern Recognition, Acpr 2013,
p. 6 778 465, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ACPR.2013.169.
[9]
M. Kowalski, “A study on presentation attack detection in thermal infrared,” eng,
Sensors (switzerland), vol. 20, no. 14, p. 3988, 2020, issn: 14248220, 14243210. doi:
10.3390/s20143988.
[10]
N. Kose and J. L. Dugelay, “Reflectance analysis based countermeasure technique to
detect face mask attacks,” eng, 2013 18th Intl. Conf. on Digital Signal Processing,
Dsp 2013, p. 6 622 704, 2013, issn: 21653577, 15461874. doi: 10.1109/ICDSP.2013.
6622704.
[11]
Z. Xu, S. Li, and W. Deng, “Learning temporal features using lstm-cnn architecture
for face anti-spoofing,” eng, Procs. - 3rd Iapr Asian Conf. on Pattern Recognition,
Acpr 2015, p. 7 486 482, 2015, issn: 23270985. doi: 10.1109/ACPR.2015.7486482.
[12]
G. Pan, L. Sun, Z. Wu, and S. Lao, “Eyeblink-based anti-spoofing in face recognition
from a generic webcamera,” eng, Procs. of the Ieee Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision,
p. 4 409 068, 2007, issn: 23807504, 15505499. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2007.4409068.
[13]
K. Kollreider, H. Fronthaler, and J. Bigun, “Non-intrusive liveness detection by face
images,” eng, Image and Vision Computing, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 233–244, 2009, issn:
18728138, 02628856. doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2007.05.004.
[14]
L. Qin, L. B. Zhang, F. Peng, and M. Long, “Content-independent face presenta-
tion attack detection with directional local binary pattern,” eng, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 10568, pp. 118–126, 2017, issn: 16113349,
03029743.
38
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:45==
[15]
T. Dhawanpatil and B. Joglekar, “Face spoofing detection using multiscale local
binary pattern approach,” eng, 2017 Intl. Conf. on Computing, Communication,
Control and Automation, Iccubea 2017, p. 8 463 735, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICCUBEA.
2017.8463735.
[16]
X. Liu, R. Lu, and W. Liu, “Face liveness detection based on enhanced local binary
patterns,” eng, Procs. - 2017 Chinese Automation Congress, Cac 2017, vol. 2017-,
pp. 6301–6305, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CAC.2017.8243913.
[17]
Z. Boulkenafet, J. Komulainen, and A. Hadid, “Face spoofing detection using colour
texture analysis,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11,
no. 8, p. 7 454 730, 2016, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2016.2555286.
[18]
J. Galbally, S. Marcel, and J. Fierrez, “Image quality assessment for fake biometric
detection: Application to iris, fingerprint, and face recognition,” eng, Ieee Trans. on
Image Processing, vol. 23, no. 2, p. 6 671 991, 2014, issn: 19410042, 10577149. doi:
10.1109/TIP.2013.2292332.
[19]
D. Wen, H. Han, and A. K. Jain, “Face spoof detection with image distortion
analysis,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 10, no. 4,
p. 7 031 384, 2015, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2015.2400395.
[20]
M. Wang and W. Deng, “Deep face recognition: A survey,” eng, Neurocomputing,
vol. 429, pp. 215–244, 2021, issn: 18728286, 09252312. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2020.
10.081.
[21]
J. Yang, Z. Lei, and S. Z. Li, “Learn convolutional neural network for face anti-
spoofing,” CoRR, vol. abs/1408.5601, 2014. arXiv: 1408.5601. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5601.
[22]
O. Lucena, A. Junior, V. Moia, R. Souza, E. Valle, and R. Lotufo, “Transfer learn-
ing using convolutional neural networks for face anti-spoofing,” eng, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 10317, F. Karray, A. Campilho, and F.
Cheriet, Eds., pp. 27–34, 2017, issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
59876-5_4.
[23]
O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpa-
thy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei, “Imagenet large scale vi-
sual recognition challenge,” eng, Intl. Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 115, no. 3,
pp. 211–252, 2015, issn: 15731405, 09205691. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
[24]
P. Sambrekar and S. Chickerur, “Movie frame prediction using convolutional long
short term memory,” eng, 2019 2nd Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Computing, Instru-
mentation and Control Technologies, Icicict 2019, vol. 1, p. 8 993 289, 2019. doi:
10.1109/ICICICT46008.2019.8993289.
[25]
Y. Liu, A. Jourabloo, and X. Liu, “Learning deep models for face anti-spoofing:
Binary or auxiliary supervision,” CoRR, vol. abs/1803.11097, 2018. arXiv: 1803.
11097. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11097.
[26]
C. Nagpal and S. R. Dubey, “A performance evaluation of convolutional neural
networks for face anti spoofing,” eng, 2019 Intl. Joint Conf. on Neural Networks
(ijcnn). Procs., 8 pp. 2019. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8852422.
[27]
K. Patel, H. Han, and A. K. Jain, “Cross-database face antispoofing with robust
feature representation,” eng, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
vol. 9967, pp. 611–619, 2016, issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
46654-5_67.
[28]
O. Nikisins, A. Mohammadi, A. Anjos, and S. Marcel, “On effectiveness of anomaly
detection approaches against unseen presentation attacks in face anti-spoofing,” eng,
39
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:46==
Procs. - 2018 Intl. Conf. on Biometrics, Icb 2018, pp. 75–81, 2018, issn: 23764201.
doi: 10.1109/ICB2018.2018.00022.
[29]
A. George and S. Marcel, “Learning one class representations for face presentation
attack detection using multi-channel convolutional neural networks,” eng, Ieee Trans.
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, p. 9 153 044, 2021, issn: 15566021,
15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2020.3013214.
[30]
A. George, Z. Mostaani, D. Geissenbuhler, O. Nikisins, A. Anjos, and S. Marcel,
“Biometric face presentation attack detection with multi-channel convolutional neu-
ral network,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, no. 1,
p. 8 714 076, 2020, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2019.2916652.
[31]
X. Wu, R. He, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “A light cnn for deep face representation with
noisy labels,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 11,
pp. 2884–2896, 2018, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2018.2833032.
[32]
G. Wang, H. Han, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Unsupervised adversarial domain adap-
tation for cross-domain face presentation attack detection,” eng, Ieee Trans. on In-
formation Forensics and Security, vol. 16, no. 99, p. 9 116 802, 2021, issn: 15566021,
15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2020.3002390.
[33]
Z. Zhang, J. Yan, S. Liu, Z. Lei, D. Yi, and S. Z. Li, “A face antispoofing database
with diverse attacks,” eng, Procs. - 2012 5th Iapr Intl. Conf. on Biometrics, Icb
2012, p. 6 199 754, 2012. doi: 10.1109/ICB.2012.6199754.
[34]
D. Wen, H. Han, and A. K. Jain, “Face spoof detection with image distortion
analysis,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 10, no. 4,
p. 7 031 384, 2015, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2015.2400395.
[35]
A. Naït-Ali and D. Cherifi, “Introduction to 2d face recognition,” eng, Signal and
Image Processing for Biometrics, pp. 15–37, 2013. doi: 10.1002/9781118561911.ch2.
[36]
M. Turk and A. Pentland, “Eigenfaces for recognition,” eng, Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 71–86, 1991, issn: 0898929x, 15308898. doi: 10.1162/
jocn.1991.3.1.71.
[37]
C. Liu and H. Wechsler, “Gabor feature based classification using the enhanced
fisher linear discriminant model for face recognition,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Image
Processing, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 467–476, 2002, issn: 19410042, 10577149. doi: 10.
1109/TIP.2002.999679.
[38]
T. Ahonen, A. Hadid, and M. Pietikäinen, “Face description with local binary pat-
terns: Application to face recognition,” eng, Ieee Trans. on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2037–2041, 2006, issn: 19393539, 01628828,
21609292. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2006.244.
[39]
Z. Cao, Q. Yin, X. Tang, and J. Sun, “Face recognition with learning-based de-
scriptor,” eng, Procs. of the Ieee Computer Society Conf. on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, p. 5 539 992, 2010, issn: 2332564x, 10636919. doi: 10.1109/
CVPR.2010.5539992.
[40]
K. Simonyan, O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Fisher vector faces in
the wild,” eng, Bmvc 2013 - Electronic Procs. of the British Machine Vision Conf.
2013, 2013. doi: 10.5244/C.27.8.
[41]
D. Chen, X. Cao, F. Wen, and J. Sun, “Blessing of dimensionality: High-dimensional
feature and its eﬀicient compression for face verification,” eng, 2013.
[42]
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks,” eng, 2013.
[43]
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition,” und, 2015.
40
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:47==
[44]
K. He, X. Z., S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,”
eng, Procs. of the Ieee Computer Society Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, vol. 2016-, p. 7 780 459, 2016, issn: 2332564x, 10636919. doi: 10.1109/
CVPR.2016.90.
[45]
M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,”
eng, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 8689, no. 1, D. Fleet,
T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and T. Tuytelaars, Eds., pp. 818–833, 2014, issn: 16113349,
03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_53.
[46]
Q. Cao, L. Shen, W. Xie, O. M. Parkhi, and A. Zisserman, “Vggface2: A dataset for
recognising faces across pose and age,” und, 2018.
[47]
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-j. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-fei, “Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database,” eng, 2010.
[48]
J. Kannala and E. Rahtu, “Bsif: Binarized statistical image features,” eng, 2012 21st
Intl. Conf. on Pattern Recognition (icpr 2012), pp. 1363–6, 2012.
[49]
H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, and L. Van Gool, “Surf: Speeded up robust features,” eng,
2009.
[50]
G. Csurka, C. R. Dance, L. Fan, J. Willamowski, and C. Bray, “Visual categorization
with bags of keypoints,” eng, 2008.
[51]
H. Chougrad, H. Zouaki, and O. Alheyane, “Soft assignment vs hard assignment
coding for bag of visual words,” eng, 2015 10th Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Systems:
Theories and Applications, Sita 2015, p. 7 358 422, 2015. doi: 10.1109/SITA.2015.
7358422.
[52]
G. Csurka and F. Perronnin, “Fisher vectors: Beyond bag-of-visual-words image
representations,” vol. 229, Jan. 2011, pp. 28–42, isbn: 978-3-642-25381-2. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-642-25382-9_2.
[53]
L. J. González‐Soler, M. Gomez‐Barrero, and C. Busch, “On the generalisation capa-
bilities of fisher vector‐based face presentation attack detection,” eng, Iet Biometrics,
2021, issn: 20474946, 20474938. doi: 10.1049/bme2.12041.
[54]
L. J. Gonzalez-Soler, M. Gomez-Barrero, and C. Busch, “Fisher vector encoding of
dense-bsif features for unknown face presentation attack detection,” eng, Biosig 2020
- Procs. of the 19th Intl. Conf. of the Biometrics Special Interest Group, A. Bromme,
A. Dantcheva, C. Rathgeb, C. Busch, K. Raja, and A. Uhl, Eds., p. 9 211 040, 2020,
issn: 16175468.
[55]
G. Wimmer, A. Vécsei, M. Häfner, and A. Uhl, “Fisher encoding of convolutional
neural network features for endoscopic image classification,” eng, Journal of Medical
Imaging, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 23 390 118, 2018, issn: 23294310, 23294302. doi: 10.1117/
1.JMI.5.3.034504.
[56]
A. Martin, G. Doddington, T. Kamm, M. Ordowski, and M. Przybocki, “The det
curve in assessment of detection task performance,” eng, 2009.
[57]
I. Chingovska, A. Mohammadi, A. Anjos, and S. Marcel, “Evaluation methodologies
for biometric presentation attack detection,” eng, Advances in Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, S. Marcel, M. S. Nixon, J. Fierrez, and N. Evans, Eds., pp. 457–
480, 2019, issn: 21916594, 21916586. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92627-8_20.
[58]
A. Costa-Pazo, S. Bhattacharjee, E. Vazquez-Fernandez, and S. Marcel, “The replay-
mobile face presentation-attack database,” eng, Lecture Notes in Informatics (lni),
Procs. - Series of the Gesellschaft Fur Informatik (gi), vol. P-260, A. Bromme, C.
Busch, C. Rathgeb, and A. Uhl, Eds., 7 pp. 2016, issn: 16175468. doi: 10.1109/
BIOSIG.2016.7736936.
41
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:48==
[59]
Z. Boulkenafet, J. Komulainen, L. Li, X. Feng, and A. Hadid, “OULU-NPU: A
mobile face presentation attack database with real-world variations,” May 2017.
[60]
S. R. Arashloo, J. Kittler, and W. Christmas, “An anomaly detection approach
to face spoofing detection: A new formulation and evaluation protocol,” eng, Ieee
Access, vol. 5, p. 7 984 788, 2017, issn: 21693536. doi: 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2017 .
2729161.
[61]
F. Xiong and W. AbdAlmageed, “Unknown presentation attack detection with face
rgb images,” eng, 2018 Ieee 9th Intl. Conf. on Biometrics Theory, Applications and
Systems (btas), 2018, issn: 24749680.
[62]
Y. Liu, J. Stehouwer, A. Jourabloo, and X. Liu, “Deep tree learning for zero-shot face
anti-spoofing,” eng, Procs. of the Ieee Computer Society Conf. on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2019-, p. 8 953 776, 2019, issn: 2332564x, 10636919,
25757075. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00481.
[63]
Z. Yu, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Qin, Z. Su, X. Li, F. Zhou, and G. Zhao, “Searching
central difference convolutional networks for face anti-spoofing,” und, 2020.
[64]
Z. Boulkenafet, J. Komulainen, and A. Hadid, “On the generalization of color texture-
based face anti-spoofing,” eng, Image and Vision Computing, vol. 77, pp. 1–9, 2018,
issn: 18728138, 02628856. doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2018.04.007.
[65]
L. Hu, M. Kan, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Duplex generative adversarial network for
unsupervised domain adaptation,” eng, Proc. of the Ieee Computer Society Conf.
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, p. 8 578 260, 2018, issn: 25757075,
2332564x, 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00162.
[66]
H. Li, W. Li, H. Cao, S. Wang, F. Huang, and A. C. Kot, “Unsupervised domain
adaptation for face anti-spoofing,” eng, Ieee Transactions on Information Forensics
and Security, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1794–1809, 2018, issn: 15566021, 15566013. doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2018.2801312.
[67]
M. Singh, M. Chawla, R. Singh, M. Vatsa, and R. Chellappa, “Disguised faces in
the wild 2019,” eng, Procs. - 2019 Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision Workshop, Iccvw
2019, p. 9 022 096, 2019, issn: 24739944, 24739936. doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00067.
42
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:49==
A
List of Attack Types
Attack type
Photo/Print attack
High quality images are captured of a subject. The
attacker presents the photo in front the his/her own
face. See figure A.1
Cut attack
Similar to Print Attacks. Eyes are cut out to allow
attackers to blink and eye movements to be detected
through the image.
Warped photo
A high quality photo is printed and (and eyes poten-
tially cut). The attacker ’warps’ the image to simulate
facial movement. See figure A.1
Replay attack
High quality video or images are captured of a subject.
The attacker presents the captured video/image using
a high quality screen.
Figure A.1: Example of photo attack (warped).[33]
43
Fisher Vector Encoding of Deep features for Face Presentation Attack Detection
==PAGE:50==
:)
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
