==PAGE:1==
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field
fundus images
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Maria Bråthen Pettersen and Helena Nygaard Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Rish­
card Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Maria Bråthen Pettersen and Helena Nygaard Jensen ­ s165736 and s165704
ii
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Diabetes is a global problem which, in 2014, resulted in 8.5% of adults above 18 being
diagnosed, and that number is rising [1]. Greenland is no exception, and the prevalence
of type 2 diabetes has dramatically increased in the past 25 years [2]. A common compli­
cation to diabetes is diabetic retinopathy (DR) which can lead to blindness if not treated
[3]. Diabetes patients are regularly screened for DR, and in Greenland it is done using
Optos wide­field imaging. The fundus images are analysed by experts at Steno Diabetes
Center Copenhagen. However, with an increase in the number of people diagnosed with
diabetes, new methods for screening patients are needed. In this study, we have looked
into which methods can be used for detecting and grading of DR. We have compared
different preprocessing techniques and the two networks ResNet50 and VGG­16 when
building our model. Our best model used the ResNet50 network and could distinguish
between proliferative diabetic retinopathy and no diabetic retinopathy. When using only
the classes No DR and PDR we achieved an AUC of 0.9552, an Accuracy of 90.0%, a
Sensitivity of 84.0%, and a Specificity of 96.0%. Lastly, from looking into literature about
socio­technical challenges, we have identified barriers which will need attention before an
AI model can be implemented in the healthcare system in Greenland.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Vedrana Andersen Dahl, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science Visual Computing, DTU
We would first like to thank our thesis adviser Vedrana, who always steered us in the right
direction. If we ran into any problems with this thesis, she was always available, and we
felt encouraged and cheerful after a guidance meeting.
Stine Byberg, Postdoc, Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Region Hovedstaden
Secondly, we would like to thank our primary contact from the team of SDCC. Stine was
always supporting and excited on our behalf and would always answer our queries re­
garding the ophthalmology background.
Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen (SDCC)
We would also like to thank all the experts that were involved in our project from Steno
Diabetes Center Copenhagen. A special thanks go to Dorthe Vistisen, Trine Jul Larsen
Marit Eika Jørgensen, Marianne Valerius and Ellen Juul. It has been a great collaboration,
and we have felt that SDCC has been rooting for us the entire project.
Tariq Osman Andersen, Tenure Track Assistant Professor, Department of Computer
Science, University of Copenhagen
Lastly, we would also like to thank Tariq, who helped us with identifying the socio­technical
challenges. Tariq gave us valuable input on what literature to include and how we could
structure our paper.
iv
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Image analysis used in ophthalmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Results with conventional fundus images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Results with UWF images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Summarising findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Socio­technical challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Summarising findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Ophthalmologic Background
12
3.1
Diabetes mellitus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Diabetes complications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Screening for diabetic retinopathy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Optos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Anatomy of the eye . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
Diabetic findings in the retina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Image Analysis Theory
22
4.1
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Forward model and backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Convolutional neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
K­fold cross validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Method
29
5.1
Data collection and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Deep Learning Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Results
34
6.1
No DR vs. PDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
No DR vs. Mild + Moderate vs. Severe + PDR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.3
All grades compared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Discussion
41
7.1
5 Fold cross­validation and final model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Socio­technical challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.3
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
8
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
50
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
57
A.1 Contribution matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Fundus images with Grade 1­4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.3 Fundus images ­ Excluded
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.4 Confusion Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.5 Matlab Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
vi
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Diabetes is an endocrinological disease where the blood glucose level is too high accord­
ing to certain cut­off values [4], and 8.5% of adults above 18 years were diagnosed with
it in 2014 [1]. One of the most common complications of diabetes is diabetic retinopathy
(DR). It is, among working­age adults, the leading cause of blindness. A Danish study
followed patients with type 1 diabetes for several years, and 97% of the patients had de­
veloped retinopathy within 25 years of being diagnosed with diabetes. In addition, every
tenth patient was registered as blind [5, 6]. In another Danish study following patients with
type 2 diabetes, 31.2% of the patients who had been diagnosed with diabetes for at least
ten years had developed retinopathy [7]. In general, diabetes is a global problem, and
the World Health Organisation reports that patients with diabetes rose from 108 million in
1980 to 422 million in 2014, and the number is still rising [1]. As the number of patients
with diabetes is rising, so is the number of patients with retinopathy, and it is predicted
that the condition will affect 700 million people worldwide within the next two decades [8].
In Greenland, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes has dramatically increased in the past 25
years [2]. Furthermore, studies show that due to the traditional food, individuals in Green­
land have a genetic variant that increases the risk of type 2 diabetes and influences the
types of diabetes [2, 9].
In Greenland, diabetic treatment is well­organised and patients are screened for diabetic
eye disease in multiple cities using Optos ultra wide­field (UWF) imaging. The camera
Optos is easy to operate and can be operated by any health professionals after only a
few days of training. The retina images taken in Greenland are uploaded to a database
accessed by the health professionals at Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen (SDCC)
where the diagnosis and grading are noted in the health journal system Cosmic. Patients
with retinopathy will often be examined in Greenland by an ophthalmologist and treated in
Nuuk. The distances in Greenland are so significant that it requires travelling by aeroplane
or helicopter for some people to get their eyes examined. Thus, less than 50% of diabetes
patients show up to their yearly check­up. There is a need to develop new methods which
can enhance access to eye screening for all patients with diabetes no matter where they
live and better identify the people who need treatment [10].
Deep learning, a process of AI, has shown promising results in ophthalmology, where it
has been used for data analysis, segmentation, and automated diagnosis [11]. However,
the images normally used in ophthalmology image analysis are captured using conven­
tional fundus imaging which only provides a 20 to 50­degree field of view of the retina.
The camera used in Greenland, Optos, provides a 200­degree field of view of the retina
in a simple and non­invasive manner. Since conventional fundus imaging has a rich and
long history [12], the automatic grading algorithms for these images have had data sets
including millions of annotated image samples. In this study, we will use 681 samples of
Optos UWF images. The fundus images are from Danish patients referred to SDCC and
they are labelled by nurses specialised in ophthalmology.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Research Question
The aim of this thesis is to explore what methods have already been used to build deep
learning models capable of detecting diabetic retinopathy, and to use this knowledge to
build our own model using Optos Ultra wide­field images received from SDCC. Our thesis
will also highlight some of the known challenges which can arise from implementing AI
in healthcare based on related work in this field, and we will discuss and highlight the
obstacles which we find applicable to our project.
To help us form a better view of the methods used for automatic detection of DR, we
first look into existing literature to determine what similar studies have been made. Fur­
thermore, we explore and highlight some of the most common socio­technical challenges
that arise from implementing AI in healthcare. Our findings from the existing literature
are described in the section Related Work. To fully understand the disease we want our
model to correctly classify, we will describe diabetic retinopathy and the grading of this
complication in the section Ophthalmologic Background. Furthermore, we will describe
the theory behind machine learning and convolutional neural networks in the section Im­
age Analysis Theory. From our literature study, we decided to use transfer learning with
two different networks, and our procedure is described in the section Method after we
have presented and described our data. The results we have achieved are presented in
the section Results. Afterwards, the choices we made for our method are discussed in
the section Discussion, followed by a discussion of what socio­technical challenges we
think will be applicable in the Greenlandic healthcare system. Lastly, our findings are
summarised in the section Conclusion.
2
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
Our literature search focused on understanding what methods had already been used
and gave us good results to determine which methods and tools we wanted to use and
understand how to best work with our data. Furthermore, we wanted to explore what
socio­technical challenges could arise from implementing new technology in the existing
healthcare setting. Our related work section is divided into two parts. The first part deals
with literature on automatic detection of retinopathy, looking into the state of the art meth­
ods for deep learning. The second part deals with socio­technical challenges arising from
the implementation of new technology in healthcare.
2.1
Image analysis used in ophthalmology
We used two different methods to explore the literature that already exists on the use of
machine learning to detect retinopathy. Firstly, we created two search models which we
used to search in PubMed and Google Scholar. We wanted to know what models and
analyses had been used to automatically detect diabetic retinopathy by using medical
image analysis on retinal images with our search model. In our first search model we
looked for reviews to get an overview of the state of the art methods in this field. In our
second search model we wanted to know what methods had been explicitly used on data
from UWF fundus cameras. Our two search models can be seen in table 2.1 below. The
columns are connected with AND, and the rows are connected with OR.
Table 2.1: Search model
Reviews
Classification
Retinopathy
Computer
Science
Retinal
Review
Grading
Diabetic
retinopathy
Medical image
analysis
Machine
learning
Deep Learning
Ultra wide­field images
Classification
Retinopathy
Computer
Science
Retinal
Ultra Wide­Field
Grading
Diabetic
retinopathy
Medical image
analysis
UWF
Machine
learning
Optos
Deep learning
Looking at the titles and reading the abstract, we choose to read the articles that fit our
search. To explore the related work more in­depth, we used the method chain search.
From the articles we found interesting, we looked into the articles they were referring to
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
3
==PAGE:12==
as well as using the functionality “similar articles” in PubMed which is listed at the end
of an article. This led us to even more interesting articles that could further expand our
knowledge and give us the background to choose a method. We divided our findings into
two groups, the first using conventional fundus images, and by this, we mean images that
provide a 20 to 50­degree field of view of the retina by using e.g. Topcon apparatus. The
second uses UWF images, providing a 200­degree field of view of the retina. The different
images and their advantages are described in a later section.
2.1.1
Lim et al. (2020)
Lim et al. (2020) present a review that provides an overview of the significant published
works and implementations involving deep learning techniques for diabetic retinopathy
[12]. The review highlights papers with datasets that consist of conventional fundus imag­
ing, UWF imaging, and smartphone­based photography, and highlights challenges when
working with these fundus images [12]. One of the biggest challenges is the relatively
small amount of medical images being available. This can lead to overfitting or difficulties
with training some of the more advanced models [12]. One way to meet this challenge
is to use transfer learning. Using previously trained networks such as AlexNet, VGG16,
ResNet, and others which have been published in recent years have shown to be helpful
for this, especially the VGG16 with its simpler architecture [12]. Furthermore, computing
requirements should be taken into account when choosing the model architectures, which
is also one of the limitations when using deep learning techniques [12]. Even if it is pos­
sible to gather a large dataset and train and validate the model on the dataset, the data
might not be representative of the potential variability of the fundus images it will meet in
a clinical setting [12].
Another common obstacle when training deep learning models is the lack of annotated
data since it is usually not required in the clinical screening workflows [12]. The authors
also highlight that there is a statistically significant difference between the gradings made
by human experts. The decision of which grading is correct is usually resolved with dis­
cussions between the experts or with a majority decision [12].
Lastly, explainability is highlighted as an obstacle when using deep learning for detect­
ing diabetic retinopathy [12]. The challenge is that humans cannot examine the reason­
ing of the classifier which was easier with earlier methods [12]. To meet this challenge,
heat mapping, which can mark the contribution of each image pixel to the classification,
has been developed [12]. Heat mapping has also proven useful for guidance for human
graders, which led to a significant improvement in accuracy of diagnosing compared to
graders without the guidance [12].
The review is divided into sections based on the imaging technique, and we focused on
the part concerning UWF imaging. One of the articles they highlighted was Nagasawa
et al. (2019) [13], who managed to get a sensitivity of 95% and AUC 0.97 by using the
VGG­16 network on less than 400 images [12].
2.1.2
Randive et al. (2018)
Randive et al. (2018) present a review that discusses the various methods for detection
and classification of retinopathy based on the severity level [14]. The review covers liter­
ature published from 2006 to 2016 and found that more and more literature on automatic
detection of retinopathy was published [14]. In 2010, most of the literature used methods
such as neural networks to detect microaneurysms and haemorrhages. However, the use
of feature extraction techniques such as morphology and edge detection had also shown
promising results [14]. Until 2016, a lot of literature using neural networks continued being
published but other methods were also developed and published [14]. In general, all the
4
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:13==
methods mentioned in the review are tested on conventional fundus images, e.g. images
from Topcon cameras and not UWF.
Some of the challenges the authors point out are noisy and non­uniformly images due to
bad focus of light, making it hard to detect minor abnormalities such as microaneurysms
[14]. They also mention risks for overfitting neural networks since there often is a skewed
distribution of the different stages of DR in large datasets [14].
2.1.3
Moraru et al. (2020)
Moraru et al. (2020) present a review that explores the benefits and limitations of AI
in the field of retinal diseases [11]. When focusing on deep learning to detect diabetic
retinopathy, the authors found that the goal for many studies is to develop software that
can increase the effectiveness of retinopathy screening [11]. The authors found that tools
from machine learning such as neural networks can detect DR and even get results com­
parable to the results of an expert grading the images [11].
One of the challenges which they pointed out is that the use of AI in clinical practice can
lead to a potential risk due to false negatives and improper interpretation of false­positive
results [11]. In addition, they mention that there is a risk of the doctors becoming too
dependent on technology and losing their ability to diagnose the patients themselves [11].
Lastly, the authors stress that further research is vital to understand how deep learning
fits in the pathway of screening [11].
2.1.4
Ting et al. (2019)
Ting et al. (2019) present a review where they address clinical and technical aspects
when DL systems are built to meet the global eye disease burden. Furthermore, they
discuss potential challenges when adopting these systems in clinical settings [15].
The authors describe transfer learning and some common network architectures such
as VGG16, ResNet, and InceptionNet [15]. They point out that these networks have
shown promising results, and especially VGG16 have been used and consistently shown
good results in image analysis [15]. They recommend transfer learning with pretrained
weights on small datasets [15]. Regarding preprocessing, the authors mention contrast
adjustment and auto­cropping of the image borders as good tools to help optimise training
and test of the model [15].
The authors also point out that there are two options when developing a system for au­
tomatic detection of DR. It can either be a standalone system that detects the disease
stage, which needs a high sensitivity. However, it is also essential to be aware not to
compromise the specification [15]. Another opportunity is to have a system that detects
if the images are referable or not­referable and then have experts manually grade the
referable images which would still reduce the workload for the graders [15].
Some of the authors’ challenges were that before an automatic system to detect DR can
be implemented, clinical trials are crucial to evaluate the actual safety and efficiency of
the system [15]. If automated DR detection is implemented, this will increase the demand
for treatment and follow­up [15]. Furthermore, the instant feedback from a system might
affect how clinicians usually talk to patients about how they manage their disease, how
important follow­up visits are, and the planning of these visits before the patient leaves
the room [15].
We found several interesting articles listed in Table 2.2 below with the methods used,
data, and results from the reviews above. The table is divided into two sections. The
first section lists the articles that have used conventional fundus images, and the second
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
5
==PAGE:14==
section lists the articles that have used UWF images. The articles are described and
explored more in­depth after the table.
Table 2.2: Results from literature review
Traditional Fundus images
Authors
Method
Dataset
Results
Gulshan et al.
Inception­V4 network
1983 &
3779 images
AUC: 0.963­0.98
Sensitivity: 88.9­92.2%
Specificity: 92.2­95.2%
Pratumgul et al.
Feature extraction
& MLP
600 images
Sensisitivty: 99.25%
Specificity: 97.77%
Abbas et al.
DVF & multilayer
deep learning
algorithm
750 images
AUC: 0.924
Sensitivity: 92.18%
Specificity: 94.50%
Krause et al.
CNN
1958 images
AUC: 0.986
Sensitivity: 97.1%
Specificity: 92.3%
Optos Images
Authors
Method
Dataset
Results
Wang et al.
EyeArt Software
754 images
AUC: 0.851
Sensitivity: 90.3%
Specificity: 53.6%
Nagasawe et al.
VGG16,
CNN, transfer learning
378 images
AUC: 0.969
Sensitivity: 94.7%
Specificity: 97.2%
Oh et al.
ResNet34,
CNN, transfer learning
8383 images
AUC: 0.9150
Sensitivity: 83.38%
Specificity: 83.41%
2.2
Results with conventional fundus images
Gulshan et al. (2019) tested a deep learning model on diabetes patients in India [16]. The
model was based on Inception­V4 neural network architecture and detected moderate DR,
worse DR, and referable diabetic macular oedema on two datasets from different clinics in
India with 1983 images in one dataset and 3779 images in the other dataset [16]. Using
the first dataset, they achieved an AUC of 0.97, sensitivity of 88.9%, and specificity of
92.2% [16]. Using the second dataset, they achieved an AUC of 0.980, sensitivity of
92.1% and specificity of 95.2% [16].
Pratumgul et al. (2019) tested a mHealth system in Thailand and achieved a sensitivity
of 99.25% and a specificity of 97.77% when detecting blood vessels, microaneurysm and
exudates [17]. Their dataset consists of 600 images, and they achieved the results by
using feature extraction and the deep learning approach MLP [17].
6
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:15==
Abbas et al. (2017) present a semi­supervised multilayer deep learning algorithm that
can detect the different stages of diabetic retinopathy through the learning of deep visual
features [18]. They tested the algorithm on 750 images from both public sources and a
hospital in Spain with 150 in each category of DR, and they achieved an AUC of 0.924, a
sensitivity of 92.18%, and a specificity of 94.50% [18].
Krause et al. (2018) tested an algorithm for automatic detection of the different stages
of DR in 1958 images from both hospitals in India and a public available dataset and
achieved an AUC of 0.986, a sensitivity of 97.1%, and a specificity of 92.3% [19]. The
algorithm was a convolutional neural network based on the architecture from Gulshan et
al. (2016) [19].
2.3
Results with UWF images
Wang et al. (2018) examined the sensitivity and specificity of detection of DR by the
EyeArt software in UWF [20]. Their dataset consisted of 754 eyes from clinics in India,
and they achieved 90.3% sensitivity, 53.6% specificity, and AUC at 0.851 on eye level [20].
The EyeArt software (Eyenuk, Los Angeles, CA, USA) uses a general approach to image
analysis, and the software could determine if the image was referable or non­referable
[20].
Nagasawa et al. (2019) investigated if detection of PDR in UWF images could be possible
using machine learning technology [13]. Their dataset consisted of 378 UWF images
where 132 images were PDR and 246 were normal, and their deep learning algorithm
showed a sensitivity of 94.7%, specificity of 97.2%, and AUC at 0.969 [13]. The authors
achieved these excellent results by using transfer learning with a VGG16 network [13].
In addition, they used k­fold validation and data augmentation, which increased the data
used for learning by 18 times [13].
Oh et al. (2021) present a deep learning system for diabetic retinopathy detection on
UWF images from hospitals in South Korea [21]. Since conventional fundus images only
capture a 7­standard field (7SF), they limited their region of interest to the 7SF when
testing and validating their DR detection system [21]. The system used the ResNet34
model and resulted in 83.38% sensitivity, 83.41% specificity, and an AUC at 0.9150 [21].
2.4
Summarising findings
From our literature review, we found that a challenge when working with medical images
is the small amount of data being available and one way to meet this challenge is to use
transfer learning [12]. The division of the data is often skewed which can lead to overfitting,
and it does not represent the potential variability it will meet in clinical settings [12, 14, 15].
A study mentions contrast adjustment and auto­cropping of the image borders as good
tools for preprocessing [15]. Another obstacle is that the data is often only labelled and
not annotated since this is usually not required in the screening workflow. Additionally,
there is a considerable diversity in how experts grade the same images [12]. From our
literature, we also found that it is essential to examine how the system can be a part of the
workflow for screening [11, 15]. It is pointed out that the system can either standalone and
grade the eyes, but the system can also divide the images into referable and non­referable
and then have graders manually grade the referable images [15].
From our search, we found several studies which achieved good results. On conventional
fundus images, the sensitivity ranged from 88.2% to 99.25%, the specificity ranged from
92.2% to 97.77%, and the AUC ranged from 0.92 to 0.986. When looking at studies using
UWF images, the sensitivity ranged from 83.38% to 94.7%, the specificity ranged from
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
7
==PAGE:16==
53.6% to 97.2%, and the AUC ranged from 0.851 to 0.969. The one that achieved the
best results with UWF and a small amount of data used transfer learning on a VGG­16
network and used data augmentation to increase the amount of data used to train their
model.
2.5
Socio­technical challenges
The promise of AI technology within the health sector has been a highly trending topic
during the last decade [22]. We have already looked at how the technology is able to
make predictions with accuracy often close to 100%. However, despite the tremendous
interest in developing AI technologies, there has been less focus on implementing, adopt­
ing, and actual use of the AI technology in a real clinical setting [23]. Therefore, we would
like to include what types of socio­technical barriers could affect a possible successful
implementation of an AI­ detector of retinopathy.
We had a meeting with an expert on this area who recommended useful literature for us.
From the literature, we found several interesting topics which we will present below.
2.5.1
Cabitza et al. (2020)
Cabitza, Associate Professor in Human­Computer Interaction at the University of Milano­
Bicocca, has identified emerging gaps between the development of AI and the actual
use of AI in clinical use [23]. He calls it the last mile of AI implementation in healthcare
and consists of two hiatuses accumulated in the passage of data collection and during
usage of the predicted outcome [23]. The hiatus or gap between a practitioner using
the advice from the AI are highly dependent on trust. The lack of trust in AI prediction
among practitioners is so common that the expression ”prejudice against the machine”
has become a relatively common saying [23].
This trust is often connected to how easy and transparent the AI assistant is. The trust
is also connected to how well the AI predicts a result, compared to a practitioner’s own
accuracy [23]. The other hiatus or gap Cabitza presents occurs before any predictions
are made, namely how the AI is designed and built. Cabitza points out the assumptions
developers may have towards the data that are used to build the AI. These assumptions
are that the data is truthful, reliable, and representative. Seldom, these assumptions are
correct and have a negative impact on final accuracy in a clinical setting [23].
Socio­technical factors highly influence both gaps that Cabitza presents. If we look at the
factors that affect the practitioner directly when using an AI, education and standardisation
are most prominent [23]. Suppose health professionals have not been educated to be able
to fully understand how to interpret the AI prediction or how to communicate the results to
a patient. In that case, it may result in a lack of adoption of the technology. A prediction
made by an AI is often black­boxed, meaning what goes on behind the scenes, from when
the input is ”inserted” to the results ”pops out”, is unknown for the end­users. Therefore,
practitioners often trust their own judgment more because they cannot answer how the
machine reached its conclusions.
Regarding standardisation, there is often disagreement between physicians on how to
classify or diagnose different cases. Most often, there are natural guidelines and better
practices. Despite this, there is often an observer variable in play. Typically, the observer
variable factors in on how liberal or conservative a physician may be [23]. This variable
translates into the use of an AI, and the advice or prediction made by an AI will be inter­
preted differently depending on what physician you come across. The observer variable
will also affect what input the model is built on. Commonly, there is a lack of standardi­
8
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:17==
sation of workflows on how to collect data. Tools for collecting data vary and may affect
how well the AI prediction will work [23].
2.5.2
Baxter et al. (2020)
Moving along to a more practical example of implementing AI in healthcare. In a case
study by Baxter et al. (2020), they examine how a healthcare organisation adopts an
”off­the­shelf” AI program [22]. The AI is meant to be used to predict risk scores of un­
planned readmissions. The health organisation had already implemented and used a
similar AI­predictor (LACE+). This model had a lower accuracy rate compared with the
new ”off­the­shelf” AI. The implementation of the new AI model was not successful, and
stakeholders within the organisation were interviewed and asked what the reason could
be for the failed adoption [22]. Since some of the health professionals interviewed al­
ready had experienced use of an AI assistant, they were very wary of accepting a new
one based on their previous experience with long hours of educating staff and using re­
sources that could be used elsewhere [22]. Furthermore, health professionals were not
always happy with the AI prediction due to its lack of weighing other socioeconomic fac­
tors in the computed prediction. Therefore, health professionals could often make more
accurate predictions of risk because they had a better understanding of the patient cycle
of care over a duration of time [22].
When implementing the new AI model, there was a lack of engagement from the end­
users. Baxter et al. point to the lack of solving a problem that does not exist as a possi­
ble explanation to the lack of engagement; ”Start informatics innovations by identifying a
problem, not the data” [22].
There were also found a lack of trust in the new model towards the accuracy of the pre­
diction, due to the ”black­box” predictions. Another trust issue health professionals ex­
perienced was based on the previous experience with an AI model that did not have
interoperability with health professionals other systems used daily [22]. This resulted in a
more difficult workflow to handle than life without an AI and made it more complicated to
learn because it did not look similar to the systems they were already familiar with [22].
2.5.3
Benda et al. (2020)
Another researcher who has investigated the use of AI for predicting patients risks is
Benda et al. in their case study, Barriers to Implementing an Artificial Intelligence Model
for Unplanned Readmissions [24]. This is a qualitative study on the pre­implementation
of AI in healthcare. In the case study, the objective is to identify what challenges and
facilitators factor in the integration of AI use within a healthcare organisation [24]. To an­
swer the questions regarding pre­implementation, multiple stakeholders were interviewed
and asked what their concerns were on the issue of the matter when implementing an AI
prediction tool [24].
One of these concerns from the stakeholders was whether or not it would be intuitive
enough to interpret the AI prediction. As a health professional, it was important that you
could not misunderstand the result and that the predictions were clear on what the rec­
ommended action should be [24]. Whether or not the hospital could actually perform the
recommended action was another concern due to a lack of resources [24]. Benda also
recorded a need from the stakeholder group regarding integration with their systems. The
concept of successfully implementing an AI with full interoperability with their system was
not viewed as a big concern but rather something that would need attention early in an
implementation project [24]. With complete integration, it would also be easier to mimic
already established workflows. Integration with the established workflow was also a con­
cern raised by the stakeholder group. If the AI did not translate into their established
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
9
==PAGE:18==
workflow, they thought the transition of using the AI would be harder than necessary [24].
”Prejudice in the machine” could also apply to Benda’s findings. There were multiple
concerns about whether or not you could trust the AI prediction. The lack of transparency
could be a problem concerning practitioners and patients who must interpret or accept
the results without any intermediate results [24]. Benda’s findings also show that there
would be room for creating trust issues towards the AI if not all socioeconomic factors are
accounted for in the result [24]. The stakeholders were concerned that an AI prediction
will only give a snapshot of the patient’s history and not include their entire care cycle
when predicting the risk [24].
2.5.4
Cai et al. (2020)
The previous examples of AI implementation are based on many detailed factors of the
patients’ life and cycle of care [25]. If we turn to a study where AI is used for detecting
prostate cancer, it uses images as input to the AI, similar to the detection of retinopathy.
In the study Hello AI­Uncovering onboarding needs, Cai et al. identify what needs the
physicians wish for when introduced to an AI assistant [25]. The authors interviewed 21
pathologists before, during and after implementation of the AI assistant.
The interviews showed once again that the medical personnel wanted to understand what
lies behind the code of prediction. In this study, the main concern of transparency was
not based on trust, but rather the pathologist wanted to know what strengths and weak­
nesses the AI model had so that they could utilise it in the best manner [25]. A need for
understanding of how an AI model is built, what parameters and data is used is necessary
for the pathologist to get the best use of the artificial assistant in a clinical setting [25]. A
physician’s perspective, the observer variable, will also affect how the pathologist inter­
prets the AI advice. A visualisation or an explanation of how the AI predicted its result
could possibly minimise the variations of interpretations [25].
The pathologist also pointed out the need for different considerations, such as legal liabil­
ity, cost of use and workflow analysis prior to the adoption [25]. In the previous examples
of usage of AI, the health professionals regard the AI as just another computer system
they have to ”wrestle” with. The pathologist in Cai et al. study views the possible use of AI
as an extra human­like assistant [25]. When asked about the considerations on how the
AI could alter their existing practices, they answer as if they would get a new colleague.
Some of the pathologists point out that they would probably down­ or up­scale the result
of an AI, in the same manner, compared to a colleague [25]. Pointing out that if you know
someone tends to grade higher than ”normal”, you will use that knowledge when com­
paring results. The same human­like approach was applied to the possible use of an AI
strength and weaknesses. One pathologist points out, just like humans, an AI would have
a different skill set and should be partnered up with colleagues who have the opposite skill
set, so together, they could have a solid accuracy [25].
By understanding the AI capabilities, intended use and utility in existing practices, the AI
has a better chance of being adopted by the physicians and joining the team as a ”second
set of eyes”.
2.5.5
Beede et al. (2020)
In the following study, a team from Google Health study the use of an AI to detect and
grade retinopathy in Thailand [26]. The study investigates how a deep learning system
will work in a clinical setting, by interviewing health professionals and observational stud­
ies across eleven clinics in Thailand. The study took place both before and after the
implementation of the AI tool.
10
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:19==
Prior to the implementation, the nurses looked forward to improving their ability to grade
diabetic retinopathy with better accuracy themselves [26]. Practices before AI was highly
dependent on specialists and doctors grading the images. The nurses also saw an oppor­
tunity to be backed up by the AI results. They often experienced that the doctors did not
hear their opinion regarding the image classification, and they hoped that an AI having the
same conclusion as themself would give more weight to their readings [26]. The nurses
were also concerned about implementing an AI assistant. The workload was already a
burden, and in multiple of the smaller clinics they had fewer resources available com­
pared to the bigger clinics, resulting in nurses with multiple roles. Therefore, the nurses
were concerned about how using an AI, uploading images, and interpreting results would
increase the workload even further [26].
After the AI­assistant was implemented, the nurses found that the risk of getting a diag­
nosis on the spot, compared to weeks later, meant that they would have to be referred
and travel to a specialist soon after the first reading [26]. The travel time to a bigger clinic
would often take over an hour’s drive, and many patients did not have cars or an easy
way to transport themselves. Getting a ”safe” answer from a doctor weeks later seemed
to be more important than getting the result immediately, because of the risk of having to
travel far for a possible false positive [26]. Beede et al. also found that multiple clinics
experienced problems with gradability. The AI­assistant was very sensitive to what qual­
ity the images needed to have. It frustrated the nurses if the AI could not read an image
that they felt were human­readable. More rejections from the AI resulted in more work
for the nurses they did not experience if they had not used an AI [26]. Gradeability had
an immense impact on the AI­model performance and also on the patient experience. A
more minor but essential inconvenience was that some clinics had slow and not so reli­
able internet connections, causing the whole process to take a longer time to proceed,
and all in all degrading the experience patients and nurses had with the AI assistant.
2.6
Summarising findings
From looking at literature about socio­technical challenges arising from the implemen­
tation of AI technology within healthcare, we found that there is an emerging gap when
developing AI technology and another emerging gap in the actual usage of AI in clinical
settings [23]. There is a lack of trust in the AI predictions due to the lack of transparency,
making the system a ”black box” that gives predictions but does not explain the predic­
tions [23, 22, 24]. Pathologists mentioned that they would like to have more transparency
to know the strengths and weaknesses of the system [25]. When looking at the first gap
mentioned by Cabitza et al., it concerns the data and that it is often not representative of
what the system will meet in the clinic [23]. It is mentioned that physicians often disagree
on the classification of different cases [23]. In other studies, it is pointed out that there is
a lack of weighing socioeconomic factors and a lack of understanding of the patient cycle
of care in the computed prediction [22, 24]. Lastly, with implementing a DR prediction
system in Thailand, they found that the patients would rather have a safe answer from
a doctor weeks later than instant results and travel far for what might be a false positive
[26].
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Ophthalmologic Background
This section will describe the medical background for diabetes and the complication of
retinopathy. Diabetic retinopathy is diagnosed by grading fundus images which are taken
at regular screenings. How these images are taken and what abnormalities the experts
are looking for in the retinal is also described and visualised in this section. We will also
look at how challenging it can be, to identify the features used to classify the grades of
DR.
In our project, we collaborated with SDCC. As mentioned earlier, they specialise in dia­
betes and are anchored in the Capital Region of Denmark. All patients in this region who
are newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes are referred to SDCC where they are offered
treatment, screening, and courses in diabetes [27]. Patients with type 2 diabetes can
also be referred to SDCC where they are offered optimisation of treatment, screening for
complications, and courses and activities. After 9 months, their time with SDCC will ter­
minate, and they will go back to have a check­up with a general practitioner unless there
are complications [27]. SDCC also offers specialised treatment for young people aged 16
to 23 years old and patients with insulin pumps [27]. In 2019, they treated 9000 patients
with diabetes [27].
3.1
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is a condition characterised by metabolic and endocrinological abnor­
malities [3]. There are different kinds of diabetes, type 1 and type 2 are the most known
in Denmark [3], and we will focus on these two. Type 1 diabetes is a condition where
the patient needs insulin to survive [4]. Type 1 diabetes is mainly due to an auto­immune
degradation of the insulin­producing beta cells in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas
[4]. The symptoms for diabetes type 1 will show relatively quickly compared to type 2 di­
abetes. Type 2 diabetes is a condition where the patient is in a hyperglycaemic state and
does not need insulin treatment to survive [4]. Hyperglycemia is when the blood glucose
level is too high (higher than 12­15mmol/l). The diagnosis is made from increased blood
glucose levels for both diseases according to certain cut­off values [4]. The condition can
be diagnosed by either a venous fasting plasma glucose level equal to or higher than 7.0
mmol/L and­/or a venous fasting plasma glucose level two hours after an intake of 75 g
glucose similar to or more significant than 11.1 mmol/L. In addition, HbA1c levels above
6.5% are also used to diagnose diabetes type 2 [4]. The advantage of using HbA1c is that
it shows the blood glucose level for the past eight to ten weeks, and the blood sample can
be taken any time of the day.
The treatment for type 1 diabetes is injections of insulin. The insulin injection can be
done either with a pen or continuous infusion via an insulin pump [4]. Most patients are
treated with two types of insulin, long term and short term working insulin. The long term
working insulin is injected once or twice a day to cover the primary use of insulin. The short
term working insulin is injected before meals to cover meal insulin requirements [4]. The
treatment for type 2 diabetes focuses on hyperglycemia which is done by exercising, diet,
and medicine to lower the cholesterol level and repress the renin­angiotensin system [4].
Furthermore, treatment for associated states such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia
can be needed [4].
12
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Diabetes complications
For both types of diabetes, there is an increased risk for microvascular complications; dia­
betic nephropathy, diabetic neuropathy, and diabetic retinopathy [4]. Diabetic nephropa­
thy is a complication that affects the kidney. It is defined by an increased urinary albumin
excretion (> 300 mg/day) in a diabetes patient who does not have known kidney disease
[3]. Diabetic neuropathy is a complication that attacks both the peripheral and autonomic
nervous system [3]. The most common manifestation of this complication is the neuro­
pathic foot ulcer [3]. Due to reduced sense of touch and misalignments, wounds occur,
and if not treated, infections can occur, spread to tendons and bones and in the worst­
case, amputation is needed [3]. Diabetic retinopathy is defined as specific vascular le­
sions in the retina in patients with diabetes [3]. Diabetic retinopathy is usually classified
according to the International Classification of Diabetic Retinopathy (ICDR). The scale
ranges from zero to four where zero is no diabetic retinopathy and four is proliferative
diabetic retinopathy (PDR) [28]. The disease is often without symptoms, so diabetes pa­
tients should attend the frequent screening to detect the beginning of the disease [3]. If
retinopathy is not treated, it can lead to blindness, and it is the most frequent reason for
acquired blindness in the western world [3]. Treatment for complications consists of laser
therapy, anti­VEGF injections, optimised metabolic control, and effective antihypertensive
treatment [3].
3.3
Screening for diabetic retinopathy
It is recommended for all diabetes patients to have a yearly retinopathy screening in Den­
mark and Greenland unless otherwise indicated [29]. This is usually done at private oph­
thalmological practices or at the hospital [28]. Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen is a
diabetes hospital anchored in the Capital Region of Denmark [27]. They are specialised
in the treatment, research, and prevention of diabetes, and they are in charge of grad­
ing all the images from Greenland and the Danish patients assigned to them [27]. When
patients are screened for DR, it starts with a nurse taking the fundus images, several dif­
ferent cameras can be used for this, but at SDCC and in Greenland, they use Optos. After
the images are taken, they are uploaded to a database where experts and ophthalmolo­
gists can access them and grade them. The results are reported to the danish qualitative
database, Diabase, and in the patient’s health record [28]. It is recommended that experts
also look at the patient’s glycaemic control and blood pressure since this has an influence
on the treatment and screening intervals [30].If the patient is well­regulated, the glycaemic
levels should show a HbA1c equal or lower than 53 mmol/mol and a blood pressure equal
or lower than 130/80 mmHg [30]. The screening methods are costly and time­consuming
due to the high costs of the equipment and the need for specially trained personnel. The
screening is free of charge in Denmark but is still only 76% of diabetes patients who attend
the planned screening, and according to the Danish National Diabetes registry, 20,000
patients are diagnosed with diabetes but not recorded in the Diabase [31]. A recent study
suggests that not attending screening is multifaceted. Some of the barriers are accessibil­
ity to the clinic, waiting time and having to go to several clinics for diabetes complications
[32].
As mentioned earlier, diabetic retinopathy is usually classified according to the ICDR
scale, where a grade of 0 means there are no diabetic lesions in the retina, therefore,
no diabetic retinopathy [28]. Mild non­proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) or ICDR
grade 1 indicates one or a few microaneurysms present in the retina [28]. To be classified
as an ICDR 2, also called moderate NPDR, several microaneurysms and haemorrhages
are seen in the eye, but it is not as widespread as ICDR 3. To be classified as ICDR 3, also
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
13
==PAGE:22==
called severe NPDR, increased ischemia is found in the retinal quadrants following the
”4­2­1 rule”. As shown in Table 3.1, the patient must either have several microaneurysms
and haemorrhages in all four quadrants, venous beading in at least two quadrants or
moderate intraretinal microvascular abnormalities (IRMA) in at least one quadrant [33].
Lastly, ICDR 4, also called proliferative diabetic retinopathy, is classified by the appear­
ance of neovascularisation and diabetes­related vitreous haemorrhage [33, 28]. It is not
only the number of different changes that influence the degree of ICDR. If the alterations
are placed in the retina’s peripherals or closer to the macula and fovea, symptoms often
worsen [33]. A table with the stages of retinopathy and the corresponding abnormalities
are listed below.
Table 3.1: Stages of DR and the findings in ophthalmology
Retinopathy stage
Findings in ophthalmoscopy
Stage 0 ­ no DR
No abnormalities
Stage 1 ­ mild NPDR
Microaneurysms only
Stage 2 ­ moderate NPDR
More than just a few microaneurysms and
hemorrhages, but less abnormalities than stage 3
Stage 3 ­ severe NPDR
Any of the following:
­ Several microaneurysms and hemorrhages in all
of the four quadrants
­ Venous beading in at least two quadrants
­ Moderate IRMA in at least one quadrant
Stage 4 ­ PDR
Any of the following:
­ Neovascularization
­ Vitreous hemorrhages
To diagnose diabetic retinopathy, images of the eye are taken, an expert analyses both
eyes, and the eye with the highest ICDR is the patient’s diagnosis. If the patient is diag­
nosed with stage 0, the patient will have a follow­up session 12­48 months after the last
eye examination, depending on how well the diabetes is regulated [28]. The follow up
for stage 1 and 2 differ between 6­24 months and 3­6 months, depending on whether or
not macular oedema is present and depending on how well diabetes is regulated [28]. If
diagnosed with stage 3, severe NPDR, the follow­up eye examination should be within
3­4 weeks [28]. Stage 4 ­ PDR are, not surprisingly, most urgent, and the patient with this
diagnosis would most often need treatment as soon as possible due to the risk of vision
loss [28]. If a patient is diagnosed with ICDR 4, the patient will stay with this diagnosis
even if the eyes improve after treatment, e.g., laser therapy. This only applies to ICDR 4,
where the other degrees of ICDR show the actual state of the patient’s eyes.
3.4
Optos
The data we are working with in this project is retina fundus images. The data is retrieved
with an Optos fundus camera (Optos PLC, Dunfermline, Scotland) which uses scanning
laser ophthalmoscopy to provide UWF images [34]. Conventional fundus cameras cover
a 20 to 50­degree field of view and take the images from the posterior pole capturing the
macula and optic nerve [35]. In comparison, Optos images provide a 200­degree field
of view, covering 82% of the retinal surface [35]. The UWF imaging makes it possible
14
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:23==
to find retinal lesions in the far periphery, which is impossible with conventional fundus
images. Using this camera may make it possible to detect and treat the alterations in
the eye earlier, which is essential to avoid or postpone blindness [34]. One of the most
significant differences between conventional fundus imaging and Optos UWF imaging is
that mydriasis is not needed to capture good images [34]. This can save time during
the eye examination, as waiting time for the eye drops to work is eliminated, and less
discomfort for the patient as the eye drops sting and can lead to blurred vision up to several
hours following the examination. Optos UWF consists of two channels of information: a
red and a green channel that visualises different retina parts [36]. In addition, conventional
fundus imaging requires several images per eye and good patient fixation, which requires
trained personnel to be able to get a good result [34]. Optos has fast imaging speed and
is easy to operate with little training required, making it easier to get good results [34].
3.5
Anatomy of the eye
We will briefly describe the anatomy of the eye as it is seen on the Optos Ultra wide­
field images since these terms are used to determine the stage of diabetic retinopathy.
Firstly, we see the blood vessels; they spread across the whole retina from the middle of
the image. They consist of both veins and arteries, which is a part of the body’s blood
circulation system, carrying blood towards or from the heart [36]. A little left from the
centre of the image, a dark area appears. This is called macula [36]. In the centre of the
macula is the fovea, in charge of sharp central vision [36]. On the right side of the macula,
a bright area occurs behind the blood vessels, which is called the optic disc, which is also
where the optic nerve head connects [36]. The eye is also divided in quadrants with fovea
as the center, the top of the eye is called superior, the bottom of the eye is called inferior,
and the left, nasal, and the right side of the eye is called temporal. Lastly, eyelashes and
the eyelid can be seen at the borders of the retina. Blood vessels, optic disc, macula, and
fovea are pointed out in Figure 3.1 below.
Figure 3.1: Optos fundus image with notation of macula, fovea, vessels, and optic disc
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
15
==PAGE:24==
3.6
Diabetic findings in the retina
The different stages of retinopathy are classified by the appearance of small abnormalities
such as microaneurysm, haemorrhages, and hard exudates in the retina. When looking
at fundus images, these can be hard to find at first glance on which is illustrated in Figure
3.2 below. On the left is an image with no abnormalities, which gives an ICDR grade 0,
on the right is another image that has PDR. What is hard to see without zooming in, is
that there are several microaneurysms, haemorrhages, and hard exudates close to the
macula and neovascularization on the left of the macula. To understand what the model
needs to be able to detect to predict the stage of retinopathy, the different abnormalities
which we have seen in our data are explained and illustrated in the sections below.
Figure 3.2: On the left is an eye with No DR, and the eye on the right has NPDR.
3.6.1
Microaneurysms
The retinal capillary microaneurysms are usually the first visible sign of diabetic retinopa­
thy [33]. Microaneurysm is described as small focal dilatations of the venous end of retinal
capillaries [36]. In the Optos UWF images, microaneurysm appears as small, dark red,
circular spots and are located across the entire retinal spectre. It is unknown what type of
mechanisms trigger the formation of microaneurysms. Some qualified guesses suggest
that the formation occurs due to increased intraluminal pressure, weakness of the capil­
lary wall, or the release of a vasoproliferative factor [33]. The microaneurysms are shown
in Figure 3.3. It is hard to detect microaneurysms due to their size and because they have
a similar size and shape with grains of dust that is often on the camera lens. The grains
of dust in images can be seen in Figure 3.11 further below.
16
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Examples of microaneurysms. Patches of approx. 160x160 pixels taken from
a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.2
Hemorrhages
Retinal haemorrhages are blood deposits found on the retina [37]. They are usually larger
than microaneurysms and vary in shape. In the Ultra wide­field fundus colour images,
haemorrhages have the same dark red colour as microaneurysms. Haemorrhages occur
due to the breaking of microaneurysms or a blood vessel wall. It can be hard to differen­
tiate between microaneurysms and haemorrhages due to their similarities. In fluorescein
angiograms, microaneurysms and haemorrhages exhibit bright light and block the light,
resulting in white and black spots [33]. When a fluorescein angiogram is not available,
the easiest way to differentiate is to compare the shape and size of the possible haemor­
rhages. Examples of haemorrhages can be seen in Figure 3.4 below.
Figure 3.4: Examples of hemorrhages.The two images on the left are patches of ap­
prox.160x160 pixels and the image on the right is a patch of approx. 350x350 pixels. All
taken from a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.3
Hard exudates
Hard exudates are white or light yellow areas containing either clusters or individual spots,
and they are often arranged as many spots, forming a circle. Hard exudates are composed
of lipids or protein fluids that leak from damaged capillaries [36]. Hard exudates often
appear as shiny or waxy and form the circular pattern as if the vessel leak were in their
centre [38]. The exudates are located in the outer layers of the retina and are most often
found in the retinal macular region. In severe cases, the exudates extend to the fovea,
which results in vision impairment [39, 40]. It is sometimes tricky distinguishing between
the yellow­white retinal findings. Hard exudates look a lot like drusen, cotton wool spots, or
“light­pixels” that are described further below. Figure 3.5 shows hard exudates, annotated
by an expert.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: Examles of hard exudates. The two images on the left are patches of ap­
prox.350x350 pixels and the image on the right is a patch of approx. 160x160 pixels. All
taken from a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.4
Cotton wool spots
Cotton wool spots are seen in both UWF Optos images and conventional fundus imaging
as yellow­white oval spots with soft edges. Cotton wool spots appear as a consequence of
small ischemic events in the retina, which leads to vessel obstruction. These obstructions
lead to small patches in the retina that lose blood supply, leading to cotton wool spots [36,
37]. Unless the cotton wool spots are large or situated near the fovea, they do not impair
vision [38]. They often appear next to the major vessels and can be accompanied by
microaneurysms [37]. It can be hard to distinguish between cotton wool spots associated
with DR, with retinal drusen, which are not associated with DR. Drusen is described further
below. Figure 3.6 below demonstrates examples of cotton wool spots.
Figure 3.6: Examples of cotton wool spots. Patches of approx. 160x160 pixels taken
from a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.5
Venous Beading
Venous beading is a nodular irregularity pattern in the retinal venous blood vessel walls
[36]. When we talked with experts, they often referred to venous beading as sausage­
veins due to its thick and bulge appearance. Venous beading is commonly associated with
poorly controlled diabetes. The beaded appearance is caused by periods with a deficiency
in the amount of oxygen reaching the tissue and increasing and decreasing the lumen due
to the local blood flow regulation [41]. The venous beading is not dangerous in itself but
functions as a good predictor of progression to PDR [41]. Examples of venous beading
are shown in Figure 3.7.
18
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.7: Examples of venous beading. Patches of approx. 350x350 pixels taken from
a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.6
Neovascularization
Neovascularization is defined as the abnormal formation of new blood vessels [36]. Neo­
vascularization is seen as the hallmark of PDR and occurs after an ischemic retinal in­
cidence. The ischaemia results in regions with blood loss, resulting in an upregulation
of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). VEGF stimulates the formation of new
blood vessels [42]. Neovascularization is seen in Optos images as a small net of curly
blood vessels and is often found in or under the retina or on the iris surface [36]. When
neovascularization is found, the grade of retinopathy is diagnosed to PDR without any
further findings. It is most common that other findings are present, but from talking to
ophthalmologist specialists, they will not necessarily grade these due to their urgent mat­
ter of treatment. If PDR is present, the patient must be referred to treatment fast due
to the possible risk of vision loss [38]. Neovascularization is demonstrated in Figure 3.8
below.
Figure 3.8: Examples of neovascularization. Patches of approx. 160x160 pixels taken
from a 4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.7
Intraretinal Microvascular Abnormalities (IRMA)
Intraretinal microvascular abnormalities (IRMA) can be found in capillary non­perfusion
areas in the retina [42]. Retina receives blood from tissue perfusion, and capillary nonper­
fusion occurs when the retina does not get the needed blood [43]. In these non­perfusion
areas, tortuous vessels develop. These can either be existing dilated capillaries or new
abnormal blood vessels together with tiny aneurysms and are referred to as IRMAs [33,
36]. As seen in Figure 3.9, it is challenging to locate IRMA in images. They appear as
small clusters with microaneurysms or as clusters of newly formed hypercellular vessels
[36].
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.9: Examples of IRMA. The image in the middle is a patch of approx.160x160
pixels and the two other images are patches of approx. 350x350 pixels. All taken from a
4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.8
Drusen
Drusen can be hard to distinguish from hard exudates since they also appear as yellow­
white spots [37]. It is not associated with diabetic retinopathy but is a degeneration of the
macula and can be either a dry or wet form, where the dry form is the most common [38].
They are often seen diffusely scattered or near the centre of the macula [37]. Usually,
drusen will have a fainted pigment border, and it often has a round shape compared to
hard exudates, which often have an irregular shape [37]. Drusen are shown in Figure
3.10.
Figure 3.10: Examples of drusen.
Patches of approx.
350x350 pixels taken from a
4000x4000 pixels image.
3.6.9
Other things seen in the images
In addition to the abnormalities mentioned above, a few others can be seen on the Optos
UWF images, but these are not dangerous. From conversations with experts, a common
thing is dust specks on the lens of the camera. The dust appears as small dark dots
located anywhere in the image and could easily be confused with microaneurysms. Figure
3.11 show examples of dark dust from the lens. What is essential to notice is that they
are black, where microaneurysms often appear as dark red and that the dust will appear
at the same place in all the images taken with this specific camera.
20
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:29==
In Figure 3.11, light yellow­green pixels are captured, and it is also something that often
occurs in the image. These light pixels are often situated at the edge of the image but
can also appear in the centre of an image. These are due to reflection and other fluff from
the mirror used during an eye examination and are similar to other yellow­white findings,
such as Hard Exudates or Drusen.
Figure 3.11: Examples of dust and reflection from fluff from the lens of the camera. The
image on the left is a patch of approx.160x160 pixels and the other images are patches
of approx. 350x350 pixels. All taken from a 4000x4000 pixels image.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Image Analysis Theory
Based on our literature review, we decided to use deep learning as the framework for
our model. Our model is based on transfer learning with the two convolutional neural
networks ResNet50 and VGG16. The theory behind our method and these two networks
are described in this section.
4.1
Deep learning
Deep learning (DL) is a subset of machine learning which is an approach to artificial intel­
ligence [44]. Specifically, is DL a technique that allows systems to improve based on the
experience with the input data [44]. A deep graph represents deep learning with many
layers, hence the name [44]. DL can solve complicated concepts and does this by build­
ing them out of more straightforward concepts [44]. A classic example of a deep learning
model is the multilayer perceptron (MLP), which is a mathematical function which maps
some of the input values to the output values [44]. Is it made by simple functions building
on top of each other to compose a more complex function [44]. These simple functions
can be thought of as a new representation of the input through every layer [44]. MLPs
are often also called deep feedforward networks or feedforward neural networks, they are
called so because there are no feedback connections where outputs are fed back into the
model, instead, the model takes an input, it is processed through the layers and it gives
an output [45]. The framework for classic machine learning is based on hand­designed
features, it takes an input, uses the hand­designed features and maps the features before
it gives an output [44]. Mapping the features is the part that learns from the input [44].
Regarding deep learning, the framework is a bit different, it also starts with an input, but
the first part concerns simple features. Hereafter there are additional layers concerning
more abstract features [44]. Lastly, the system maps the features, and then it gives an
output. All parts of the system are learned from the input data and improve the more data
it receives [44].
It is easiest to describe deep learning with an example, so we will look at an example
where a deep learning model will detect if the object in an image is a person, an animal,
or a car and the input is an image of a woman. The deep learning model is illustrated
in Figure 4.1 below. To approach this challenge, the deep learning model breaks it into
smaller and more simple challenges, which are represented by all the layers in the graph
[44]. The first layer is a visible layer and is called visible since it contains the variables
we can observe, and it is in this layer we are presented for our input [44]. From this, our
input will go through several hidden layers, they are called so because the data’s values
are not given, and to explain the relationship in the data, the model must decide which
concepts to use [44]. The first hidden layer in our DL model will determine edges in the
input and can easily do this by looking at the different intensity in the neighbouring pixels
[44]. The next hidden layer is determining corners and contours, which is done with the
information about the edges from the formerly hidden layer [44]. The last hidden layer
in the DL model is concerned with object parts and will also use the information from the
former layer to determine parts of specific objects [44]. Lastly, we have our output layer,
which will tell the object’s identity, and from the information for the former layer, the model
will tell us that there is a person on the image [44].
22
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: An illustration of a DL model [44]
When describing deep learning models, the depth and width of the model are often men­
tioned. The depth of a model can be measured in two ways [44]. One primary way to
measure depth is by looking at the sequential instructions that need to be executed to
be able to evaluate the architecture of the model [44]. This can also be visualized as the
longest path in a flow chart which describes how to compute the different outputs that the
model has, depending on its input [44]. Another way to determine the depth of a model is
to look at the depth of the graph, which describes how the concepts are related to each
other [44]. With these two ways to measure the depth of a model, different results can
occur for the same model, and because of this, there is no golden standard for how much
depth a model should have to be classified as a ”deep” model [44]. The width of the model
is determined by the dimensionality of the hidden layers [45].
4.2
Forward model and backpropagation
When building a neural network, there are some main variables: input, hidden layers, and
output. These variables change according to what problem the model will solve. When
working with image analysis, the input is often an image that consists of pixel values, and
these are transformed into a long vector which then goes through the hidden layers of the
model. The output also depends on what problem to be solved. Classification problems
are common for deep learning, and the output will then be a vector with the different class
probabilities [46]. When building a model there are steps that need to be followed, and
choices to be made. These steps include making a decision of how many layers deep the
model should be, how many nodes should be in the hidden layers and decisions about
the hyperparameters, whose value controls the training process [46].
Nodes are a part of the hidden layers and the value of the nodes are calculated by sev­
eral things; the weighted linear combination of the nodes, edge weights and the activation
function, Rectified Linear Units (ReLU) [46]. ReLU is a linear function which outputs the
input if it is a positive number, otherwise, it outputs a zero. ReLU is in many neural net­
works since it makes it easier to train the models and it improves the performance [47]. We
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
23
==PAGE:32==
then want to decide what type of output the model should give us. As earlier mentioned,
in a classification problem, we would like to have probabilities for the different classes as
output. This is possible by using a softmax function, we can transform the output values
into positive values summing to 1 [46].
After the initial input and the layers and nodes are decided, the next step is to look at how
the weights should be adjusted, so after the training of the network, the model can reach
the desired output. To make sure that the training actually (and hopefully) improves, a
loss function is defined. The loss function compares the predicted output up against the
desired output and measures the difference using target values [46]. Then a backprop­
agation algorithm is used to compute the gradient of the loss function to each weight,
followed by a chosen optimisation method, to decrease the loss function during training
[46]. A common optimisation method is Stochastic Gradient Descent, a method that ran­
domly chooses some of the data points to scale the learning rate. Another optimisation
method that is a bit more ”trendy” nowadays is the Adam, which uses a squared gradient
to scale the learning rate [48].
When updating the weights of the model, the loss function of a mini­batch is used. A
minibatch is a smaller sample of the training data, and by using the loss function from this
sample, the computational load is reduced. Each iteration contains a minibatch, while
one epoch contains every iteration of the mini­batches, i.e. all of the training data.
The main goal of the backpropagation is to optimise and update all of the model’s weights,
so the network can learn how to correctly map its input and output. To do this, the back­
propagation algorithm follows a chain rule that decides the specific order of how the weight
should be updated. To update each weight of the network, the intermediate quantity is
calculated for every node in every layer, this is also called the error. The output is the
gradient of the cost function, which is given by the partial derivatives [10]. Using the
backpropagation algorithm means that it can compute all the partial derivatives during
one forward­ and one backward pass, reducing the computational cost even further [10].
After an iteration of the weights are updated, they need to be evaluated against how the
output changes [46]. The network’s output is updated by multiple forward and backward
passes, resulting in a decreased error loss that will result in a more accurate classification
model.
4.3
Convolutional neural network
Convolutional neural network (CNN) is a network architecture for deep learning. It is a
feed­forward neural network that specializes in processing data, e.g., digital images that
have a known grid­like topology [49]. A feed forward network describe how the infor­
mation, e.g., pixel values of an image ”flow” through the function as input while being
evaluated by x and forms the output y [45].
24
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.2: An illustration of a Convolutional neural network [50]
In a traditional neural network, each neuron in the input layer is connected to each neuron
in the hidden layers. In a CNN, the convolution operation uses local receptive fields,
where only a small region of the input layer neurons are connected to the neurons inside
the hidden layers, following the grid­like topology. In the convolution layer, the dot product
is being calculated between the receptive fields and a kernel. The output of the kernel
creates a feature map to the neurons in the hidden layers [51].
Figure 4.3: Illustration of information flow, in the left side in traditional network and in CNN
on the right side [50]
4.3.1
Why use convolutional neural network?
Three important ideas: sparse connectivity, shared weights, and equivalent representa­
tion, gives the convolution an advantage compared to other deep learning network ar­
chitectures. As mentioned before, every input unit interacts with every output unit in a
traditional network [50]. CNN, on the other hand, uses sparse connectivity. Working with
2D digital images, the visual data is represented by a series of pixel values that decide
what colour or how bright each pixel is [51]. By using a smaller kernel than the input,
the kernel ”decides” what information is important enough to hold on to further down the
processing road. It is then possible to, for example, use an image with many thousands
of pixels, but when using the kernel, it filters out the most important pixels, reducing the
input parameters down to the hundreds [49]. This practice uses much smaller amounts
of data in parameters, resulting in reduced computational load.
By using CNN, we can also benefit from the Parameter sharing within the network of
nodes. Each node in the weight matrix is used in a traditional neural network once and
never revised [49]. When sharing the parameters, the weight in the matrix is tied because
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
25
==PAGE:34==
the value of one weight is shared with the value of a weight to the other nodes in the
network. This means that when learning new parameters, using shared parameters, the
network only has to look at one set of parameters, because that one set has weights
of value from all the nodes [49]. This process reduces the storage requirements of the
model, meaning you will need less computational power and storage to train the model.
A model that needs less storage translates to a model that ”normal” people can benefit
from because it is actually possible to train a network on a single GPU.
When using both CNN and parameter sharing, this creates a property called equivariance
to translation [49]. When a function is equivariant, this means that if the input changes,
the output changes in the same way. When using the convolutional layer, the layer maps
out where the features appear in the image. If the input image slightly changes, the
feature map followed by the output must change accordingly, which is possible by using
an equivariance function [49]
4.3.2
Activation stage
As seen in Figure 4.2, each convolutional layer consists of three stages. The convolution
operation, an activation stage and a pooling stage. The creation of the feature map or
activation map happens in the activation stage. In this step, an activation function ap­
plies a transformation to the output from the kernel used in the convolution operation. As
mentioned earlier, a common activation function is ReLU [51]. It computes the output of
a neuron and maps it to the highest possible value, using the function f(k) = max (0, k).
If the output is negative, the function maps it to 0. ReLU is a reliable and fast activation
method compared to other functions like Sigmoid or Tahn [51], but ReLU can also be a
bit fragile during the training process. To make sure that every neuron gets updated in a
correct way, we can use a fitting learning rate to control the function [51].
4.3.3
Pooling stage
After the activation stage, we arrive at the pooling stage. In the pooling stage, the function
uses the output from the activation stage and reduces the dimensional size of a region
consisting of multiple neurons into a single output, using summary statistic operations [49].
The operation within pooling, uses the different pixel value, along with their neighbouring
pixels, to calculate the output [49]. The outputs are then calculated using e.g., the average
of a rectangular region, weighted average, based on the length from a central pixel, or
by using the maximum value from the rectangular neighbourhood. This lastly mentioned
method, using the max value, is appropriately called Max pooling, and is maybe the most
commonly used pooling function [51]. A visualisation of the max pooling function is seen
in Figure 4.4.
26
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: Illustration of Max Pooling [51]
Either way, which pooling function is used, it creates some translation invariance, meaning
a feature in the input image is recognisable, regardless of where the feature may be
located.
4.3.4
Classification stage
To be able to use the highly processed data from the multiple convolutional layers, we must
transform the rectangular shapes into a 1­dimensional linear vector. This can be achieved
by using a flattening function on the convolutional layers to transform the processed data
into a single, long feature 1­ dimensional array [52].
After flattening the input, it can be connected to a fully connected layer. The fully con­
nected layer uses all the inputs and connects them to the final layer to classify and create
the final output. Backpropagation is the essence of training a network, and is the prac­
tice of fine­tuning weights based on the loss obtained in the last iteration [53]. This can
increase the model’s generalisation, making it more reliable and establishing lower error
rates [53]. The name backpropagation is because the loss is fed backwards to fine­tune
the weights [53].
Lastly, a softmax operation is used on the output from the fully connected layer. This
operation works as a post­processing step to obtain a vector ŷ of normalised probabilities
over the output [49]. Basically, the softmax function is a form of logistic regression which
normalises a value into a vector. The values in the vector follow a probability distribution,
and the total sums up to one [54]. It is commonly used to calculate the losses which occur
when training on data [54].
4.4
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a method that uses a model’s pretrained features that have been
trained in another setting. It is then possible to reuse the pretrained features in a new
setting, learning new features [55]. If there is significantly more data in the first setting
where the model is trained, the model will easily generalise from just a few examples in
the second setting [55]. Training of a CNN from scratch requires tens of thousands of
labelled images and computational resources, transfer learning is a good tool when using
a small dataset, since it does not need the same resources, but solves the problem by
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
27
==PAGE:36==
using the knowledge from solving another similar problem [50].
VGG16 is an example of a pretrained convolutional neural network consisting of 16 layers
and it has earlier been tested on images from ImageNet in the ILSVRC­2014 competition
where it outperformed the models from earlier years [56]. The input should have a size of
224 x 224 and RGB channels, and is first going through two stacks with two convolutional
layers and then three stacks with three convolutional layers [56, 57]. Every stack with
convolutional layers has a max­pooling layer as the last one [57]. After the 5 stacks with
layers, the input goes through the last stacks which contain three fully connected layers
and is followed by a softmax layer [57]. The convolutional layers and softmax layers use
ReLu [56].
ResNet is another pretrained network that can be used for transfer learning. The version
of the network we will use has 50 layers, hence the name ResNet50. The network is a
DAG network, which means it can have a more complex architecture where the layers take
input from several other layers and give the output to several layers [58]. The network
uses skip connection, which means that every stack of layers gets the input from the
previous tacks, but is additionally getting the original input [59]. Since stacking a lot of
layers does not improve the network, but increases the training error, the skip connection
is very important [60]. The input for this network needs to have a size of 224 x 224 and
RGB channels as well and has 48 convolutional layers, 1 max­pooling layer and 1 average
pooling layer [59, 60].
4.5
K­fold cross validation
As previously mentioned, often when training new networks, the input should consist of
many thousands of data samples. So what if you do not have an enormous dataset?
When training a model, it is common to use a fraction of the entire dataset as validation
data. In short terms, this means that the validation data is not a part of the low­level
training of the model, but is used to tune the hyperparameters and validate the training
data. When having a small dataset, the validation set is even smaller. A small validation
set creates a statistically uncertain estimated test error of the model [61]. To increase the
validation set of the model, it is possible to use K­fold cross validation.
By using K­fold cross validation, all of the training and validation data is used, by splitting
the data into K non­overlapping subsets [61]. The most common is to have a K between
5 or 10 [62]. Afterwards, the model is trained with K­1 fold and then validated with the
Kth fold. This is repeated until all the data has functioned as both training and validation
[62]. After all the folds are trained, it is possible to estimate the mean test error, which
is the average from each fold [61]. By training a model e.g., 5 folds, this will increase
the computational cost of the model, because it is similar to training a “normal” model five
times consequently. One must therefore decide, whether or not it is worth it. If the dataset
is big, this will take days to train, which might not be a good idea when experimenting with
fine­tuning the model. However, if the data is small enough, the computational cost will
not be as expensive. By using the cross­validation, the model’s predictive estimate will
be less biased and can reassure that the loss and accuracy of a model trained on a small
validation set, is unbiased if the two models are the same.
28
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:37==
5
Method
5.1
Data collection and description
Our dataset should initially originate from the Greenlandic population. However, we found
out a couple of weeks into our project that we would not be able to retrieve enough data
from the Greenlandic population, so we went with our plan B and used data from the
Danish population.
The data from the Danish population is from a 10­year follow­up study made by SDCC,
where all participants gave their informed consent, and the National Committee on Health
Research Ethics approved the study, journal no. H­19044875. SDCC has been providing
us access to the Optos database. We also got access to the images’ respective gradings,
performed by two specialised ophthalmologic nurses at SDCC. We then used the ID to
the images that had different gradings and downloaded them from the database to an
encrypted server. The images did not withhold any additional information on them, so we
had to manually download and label the images by their gradings (0­4) one by one. Once
we manually labelled the images, the images were anonymised.
The data were gathered in two rounds. Firstly we got access to around 20­50 images from
each retinopathy grading class. We wanted to use this dataset to analyse the images
and their features and do initial experiments with different deep learning methods. In the
second round of gathering data, we gathered in total 681 images. 78­130 images of each
class, with the exception of grade 0, in which we gathered 254 images. The final number
of images per class are shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Dataset
Grade
Sample images
0 (No DR)
254
1 (Mild NPDR)
78
2 (Moderate NPDR)
130
3 (Severe NPDR)
95
4 (PDR)
124
Total
681
Every image was colour images and had a pixel range of 4000 x 4000. The classes were
divided into folders with their corresponding grading. Images of the different gradings are
shown in Figure 5.1 and 5.2. The images are in increasing order, starting with Mild NPDR
on the left side, Grade Moderate NPDR on the right side in Figure 5.1. Severe NPDR is
on the left side, and PDR on the right side in Figure 5.2. All images are shown in a bigger
scale in Appendix A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Fundus images graded, Mild and Moderate NPDR
Figure 5.2: Fundus images graded, Severe NPDR and PDR
We excluded images in the downloading process if they were either ungradable or if they
had had laser treatment. Laser treatments were common with images that had PDR. An
example of an image with laser treatment is shown on Figure 5.3 to the left. An example of
an image that were ungradeable, is on the right side of Figure 5.3. The excluded images
are shown in a bigger scale in Appendix A.5, and A.6.
Figure 5.3: Fundus images exluded
The images were divided into three sets. In the first set, we used only images with grad­
ings PDR (124 images) compared to images with No DR detected (125 images). Sec­
ondly, we divided the grades into three groups. We combined the grading Severe DR and
PDR (total 219 images), and combined Mild DR and Moderate DR (total 208 images), and
used the total images from No DR (total 254 images). In our third analysis, we used every
30
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:39==
image sample from the different classes, excluding the class No DR, where we only used
125 images.
5.2
Deep Learning Model
To build our model, we use Matlab 2020b and use mainly Matlab’s own Deep Learning
Toolbox, which provides multiple functions to design and implement a deep learning model
[63]. We also use Parallel Computing Toolbox from Matlab, together with ThinLinc Client
and a server from DTU HPC, to be able to run our model on a GPU.
First, we use the imageDatastore function to load and store our images and their corre­
sponding labels into a datastore. We use a datastore to avoid concerns about if the data is
too large to fit in memory. We then split the images into the labelling groups and visualize
a random sample of images with their labels to be sure the loading is completed.
We then load the pretrained network using the function net from the deep learning toolbox.
To use a specific network, we also have to download the support packages for ResNet50­
and VGG16­network. Both ResNet50 and VGG16 are pretrained networks with over a
million images from the ImageNet database, and can already classify images into 1000
classes [64, 65]. Both networks have a similar architecture, with convolutional layers,
pooling layers and a fully connected layer, that classifies the images based on their label.
The depth of the two networks differs, where the ResNet50 network is 50 layers deep,
while VGG16 is 16 layers deep.
We use k fold cross­validation, with a K = 5, when we build our model. The data is
divided into 5 groups. K­1 is used as training data, while one group is used as validation.
Our model repeated this process until all the groups have had a chance of being used
as validation. As mentioned previously in this paper, we use the k fold cross­validation
because we have a small dataset, and by using the entire dataset as both training and
validation, we can decrease the potential bias of a test error. In our final model, we hold
out 20% of our data to create a test set. Thus we use 80% of the remaining data as a
training set and 20% as validation data.
Both ResNet50 and VGG16 use the same image input layer, 224 x 224, with 3 colour
channels. Therefore, we must resize our images with a 4000 x 4000 size, down to the
same image input layer as the architecture in use. Since we want to transfer the network
onto our own images, we must replace the final layers of each network. When we are
using VGG16, we use the function layerGraph(net.Layers) because it has a series network
structure. When we are using Resnet50 we use the function layerGraph(net), because of
its structure as a DAG­network.
To find what layers we need to replace in the VGG16­network, we use the supporting
function findLayersToReplace. This function uses the layers defined in the applied net, to
find the single last learnable layer and the classification layer in the pretrained network.
We use this function to replace the last layer with our learnable weights, the fully connected
layer, with our new features from the images. We replace the classification layer with our
classes defined by the labels of our images as the new classes for the new classification
layer. We do not manually replace the softmax layer between the fully connected and
classification layer, but make sure it is still there after replacing the layers by analyzing
the new network architecture. When building the model for ResNet50, we use somewhat
the same process, but in this case, we extract every layer of the architecture, except
the last three. We then replace and define the new last three layers with a new fully
connected layer, a softmax layer and a classification layer, based on our new images
and labels. In both ResNet50 and VGG16, we set the fully connected layer to have a
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
31
==PAGE:40==
WeightLearnRateFactor and the BiasLearnRateFactor to 20. This learn rate factor will
later be multiplied with the global learning rate, decided in the training options [66].
In the next step, we use one of our three preprocessing functions to preprocess the im­
ages. Our first preprocessing function reads the image, checks if it is a colour image,
and transforms it to a greyscale image by using the function rgb2gray. The image is
then concatenated to create the 3 colour channels that the network requires. The second
preprocessing function we use, transform the image into a greyscale image, followed by
cropping the image to reduce the black space surrounding the image. When cropped,
the image was resized from 4000 x 4000 to 2473 x 2980. After the image is cropped,
we adjust the brightness and contrast of the image using the function imadjust, followed
by concatenating the arrays to match the 3 colour channels. In the last preprocessing
function we use, we start with extracting only the green channel of the image. We use
the green channel because all the features we are looking for are most prominent in the
green channel [36]. After extracting the green channel, we crop the image and adjust the
brightness and contrast level, followed by the same concatenate function to match the
network’s channels. Figure 5.4 shows a comparison between the original image and the
three preprocessing functions when zoomed in on the feature IRMA.
Figure 5.4: On the left, the original image, in the middle greyscale and green channel and
adjusted on the right
Next, we use data augmentation to resize every image to both networks size, 224 x
224, and to create more images by applying random rotation, reflection and sheer to the
dataset. This step is the same for both ResNet50 and VGG16. We then choose the mod­
els’ training options. We changed trainingOptions multiple times during the fine­tuning
of the model. To compare the ResNet50 network with the VGG16 network, we used the
same training options. In the K­fold cross­validation model and in our final model, we
used a stochastic gradient descent method (sgdm) when using the VGG16 network, with
an initial learning rate of 0.0001. When using ResNet50, we used an Adam optimizing
algorithm, with an initial learning rate of 0.0001. We chose a mini­batch size of 16. Max
Epochs was set to 50, and in our final model, this parameter was set to 100, for the sake
of creating a longer training time. In our final model, we choose the validation frequency
accordingly to correspond to validate the training data after each iteration. Lastly, we use
netTransfer to train our network.
5.2.1
Performance measures
To visualize and describe the performance of our 5­fold cross­validation models, we use
a confusion matrix, which is a way of measuring the performance of our classification
model, where the output can exist of two or more classes. We model the confusion ma­
trix of our labels, comparing the predicted labels from the model with the actual labels.
The confusion matrix gives us multiple metrics, such as the classes true positive (TP),
32
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:41==
false positive (FP), true negative (TN) and false negative (FN). From these values, we
can calculate the Sensitivity: TP/(TP+FN), Specificity: TN/(FP+TN) and the Accuracy
(TP+TN)/(TP+TN+FP+FN) [67]. The Accuracy gives a good predictor of how well the
model predicts, since it is a fraction of all the samples that are correctly classified. The
sensitivity measures how many of the positive images that are classified correctly by the
model. The specificity measures how many of the negative images that are correctly
predicted as negative by the model. When we use the confusion matrix on our 5 fold
cross­validation, we use the average of the validation set used in all the folds. When we
use it in our final model, we use the predicted labels of unseen test images, along with
their actual labels.
Besides measuring the performance with a confusion matrix, we also calculate the Area
Under the Curve (AUC). The AUC is calculated from the Receiver Operator Characteris­
tic (ROC) curve, which is constructed by plotting the true positive rate against the false
positive rate [68]. The ROC curve illustrates the trade­off between sensitivity and speci­
ficity, and a curve that is closer to the top­left corner indicates better performance and vice
versa [68]. Different classifiers can be compared by comparing the curves, but another
way to compare them is to compare them with a single measure, the AUC. It is equal to
the probability of a random positive example is higher than a random negative example
[68]. In practice, the AUC illustrates well the predictive accuracy [68].
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
33
==PAGE:42==
6
Results
6.1
No DR vs. PDR
In our first analysis, we used a 5 fold cross­validation deep convolutional neural network,
with transfer learning from the pretrained network VGG16 and ResNet50. We use 124
images with the label PDR and 125 images with the label No DR. The groups have been
labelled according to their diabetic retinopathy grade which means PDR is denoted G4
for ICDR grade of 4 in the table, and No DR is denoted G0 in the table. Table 6.1 shows
the AUC, accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of the different models used. When using
transfer learning with the network VGG16 and extracting the green channel in the prepro­
cessing function, we get an AUC of 0.9084, an accuracy of 83.1%, a sensitivity of 87.2%
and a specificity of 79.0%. When we used the same preprocessing function, but changed
the pretrained network for ResNet50, we get an AUC of 0.9289, an accuracy of 85.9%,
a sensitivity of 87.2% and a specificity of 84.7%. Table 6.1 also shows the AUC, accu­
racy, sensitivity and specificity of using our other preprocessing functions. By extracting
the green channel in the preprocessing step, we get significantly better overall results
compared to using the two other preprocessing functions. The accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity is measured from the representative confusion matrix shown in Appendix A.7,
A.8, A.9, and A.10.
Table 6.1: Performance of classification of No DR and PDR
AUC
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
VGG16
GreyScale
0.7884
74.3%
75.2%
73.4%
GreyScale + Crop + Brig. Con
0.8536
78.3%
77.6%
79.0%
Green Channel + Crop + Brig. Con
0.9084
83.1%
87.2%
79.0%
ResNet50
GreyScale
0.8917
82.7%
83.2%
82.3%
GreyScale + Crop + Brig. Con
0.9076
82.7%
86.4%
79.0%
Green Channel + Crop + Brig. Con
0.9289
85.9%
87.2%
84.7%
34
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:43==
After the results from the first 5­fold cross validation, we decided to use crop and green
channel extraction for preprocessing in our following models. When we do not use 5­fold
cross validation, we call this our final model. The results of the final transfer learning model
using both networks, ResNet50 and VGG16 separately, are shown in Table 6.2. We still
use 124 images classified as PDR, and 125 images classified as No DR. Our prediction
metrics are based on unseen test data, consisting of 25 images classified PDR, and 25
images classified as No DR. When using ResNet50 as the pretrained network, we get an
AUC of 0.9552, an accuracy of 90.0%, a sensitivity of 84.4% and a specificity of 96.0%.
Compared with VGG16 used as the pretrained network in the transfer learning, we get an
AUC, accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 0.9504, 86.0%, 84.0% and 88.0%.
Table 6.2: Performance of classification of No DR and PDR
Final model
No DR vs. PDR
AUC
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
ResNet50
0.9552
90.0%
84.0%
96.0%
VGG16
0.9504
86.0%
84.0%
88.0%
Figure 6.1 visualises the training of the final model using the ResNet50 network. The
training runs 100 epochs, with 9 iterations in each epoch, in total 900 iterations. Validation
has a frequency of 9 iterations, meaning after each epoch, the model validates on unseen
validation data. When looking at the accuracy curve, the training data (blue line) reaches
close to 100% after 10 epoch. The validation line (black dotted line), starts off at 50%, but
quickly rises to 80%. For the many next iterations, the validation line lays between 75­
92%, finishing at 90% accuracy. The loss function for the training data (red line), does not
have a very steep fall, but still starts at 0.8, and falls to ca. 0.2 after 100 iterations. After
100 iterations it is quite stable, with some peaks along the curve. The validation curve for
the loss function is not as stable as the training set, and alternate between 0.3­1.3 and
finalises at 0.62.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.1: Training of No DR vs. PDR, ResNet50 Transfer learning
6.2
No DR vs. Mild + Moderate vs. Severe + PDR
In our second analysis, we wanted to test how the model performed when similar grades
were grouped together. To minimize the data being skewed, we now used more images
from the class No DR. The total number of images in this group were 254 images. We
group the classes Mild NPDR and Moderate NPDR together, creating a class with 208
images. The last group consists of Severe NPDR and PDR. The last group consisted of
219 images. We only used the preprocessing method, where we cropped and extracted
the green channel, but we still wanted to compare networks, so our models are trained
on both ResNet50 and VGG16 separately. When comparing these three groups, we will
get separate AUC, sensitivity and specificity scores. All the scores from the 5 fold cross­
validation and the final models are shown in Table 6.3. The confusion matrices from the
following classification models with grouped classes is shown in Appendix A.11, A.12,
A.13, and A.14.
36
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:45==
Table 6.3: Performance of classification of No DR, Mild + Moderate NPDR, Severe NPDR
+ PDR
AUC
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
5 fold cross validation
ResNet50
G0 :0.8262
G1+G2: 0.6891
G3+G4: 0.8386
61.7%
G0 : 70.9%
G1+G2: 39.9%
G3+G4: 71.7%
G0: 79.6%
G1+G2: 82.2%
G3+G4: 80.5%
VGG16
G0 : 0.7780
G1+G2: 0.6410
G3+G4: 0.7968
52.9%
G0: 58.3%
G1+G2: 37.5%
G3+G4: 61.2%
G0 : 74.0%
G1+G2: 74.2%
G3+G4: 80.9%
Final model
ResNet50
G0: 0.7859
G1+G2: 0.7837
G3+G4: 0.8240
62.2%
G0: 47.1%
G1+G2: 64.3%
G3+G4: 77.3%
G0: 89.5%
G1+G2: 82.1%
G3+G4: 48.0%
VGG16
G0: 0.8081
G1+G2: 0.6960
G3+G4:0.8082
58.4%
G0: 62.7%
G1+G2: 35.7%
G3+G4: 75.0%
G0: 81.4%
G1+G2: 81.1%
G3+G4: 75.3%
When using 5 fold cross­validation on this dataset, we get an overall accuracy of 59.6%
when using ResNet50. AUC ranges from 0.6891­0.8386. The sensitivity ranges from
44.7­66.5% and the specificity ranges from 76.1­82.2%. When using VGG16 as the pre­
trained network, we get similar, but slightly lower results. In general, the group that has
the lowest scores are the images classified as Mild + Moderate with an AUC of 0.6891
using ResNet50 and 0.6410 using VGG16. While the group of No DR, show a general
best performance across the scores and network. When we train our final model, we use
the same dataset, consisting of 681 images in total. The data is split into 80% training set
and a 20% validation set. 20% of the total images are held back, as a test set of unseen
image samples. Our results from the final model, are based on measuring performance
on the model when using unseen images, the test set.
The AUC of the final model when using ResNet50 ranges from 0.7837­0.8240, depending
on what group performance is measured. When using VGG16, the AUC ranges between
0.6960­0.8082. The accuracy of the two models are 62.2% and 58.4%, and the sensitivity
and specificity range from 47.1­77.3% and 48.0­89.5%, when ResNet50 is used. When
using VGG16, the sensitivity and specificity range from 35.7­75.0% and 75.3­81.4%.
Figure 6.2 visualises the training of the final model, using transfer learning with ResNet50
as the network. The data used for training­, validation­ and test­set are from the grouped
classes. The training runs over 100 epoch, with a total of 2700 iterations. The validation
frequency is set at 27 to validate the training after each epoch. The training data are
represented with a blue line for accuracy, and a red line for the loss. The training accu­
racy alternates between 90­100% after 400 iterations, and stays stable between these
measures throughout the training. The validation line (black dotted line) for the accuracy
alternates approximately 45­65% after 400 iterations, finalizing at 63.30%. The loss for
the training set starts with 1.5 and decreases to approximately 0.5 after the first 400 iter­
ations. The loss for the validation data increases slowly during the entire training of the
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
37
==PAGE:46==
model while alternating between ca. 1.5­3.0, finalizing with a loss of 2.0.
Figure 6.2: Training of grouped classes, ResNet50 Transfer learning
6.3
All grades compared
In our third and final analysis, we used the same model as in the previous examples to
train our network. We used the green channel preprocessing technique and used transfer
learning with both ResNet50 and VGG16 as the pretrained network. In this analysis,
we used all grades and trained the model to classify each grade. For No DR, we used
125 image samples as input data. From Mild NPDR, denoted G1 in the table below, we
used 78 images, from Moderate NPDR, denoted G2 in the table below, we used 130
images. We used 95 images from Severe NPDR, denoted G3 in the table below and 124
images from PDR. We choose to not include all images from the class No DR, to have a
more similar amount of data in each group. All prediction measurements from the third
analysis are represented in Table 6.4. The prediction measurements are calculated from
the models’ confusion matrices found in Appendix A.15, A.16, A.17, and A.18.
38
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:47==
Table 6.4: Performance of classification of all classes
AUC
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
5 fold cross validation
ResNet50
G0 = 0.7965
G1 = 0.6872
G2 = 0.7196
G3 = 0.6515
G4 = 0.7871
43.6%
G0 = 51.6%
G1 = 26.9%
G2 = 50.8%
G3 = 26.3%
G4 = 51.6%
G0 = 84.5%
G1 = 90.9%
G2 = 80.0%
G3 = 86.0%
G4 = 87.4%
VGG16
G0 = 0.8037
G1 = 0.6698
G2 = 0.6888
G3 = 0.6251
G4 = 0.7649
41.0%
G0 = 55.6%
G1 = 26.9%
G2 = 34.6%
G3 = 29.5%
G4 = 50.8%
G0 = 84.5%
G1 = 90.9%
G2 = 80.2%
G3 = 82.7%
G4 = 84.5%
Final model
ResNet50
G0 = 0.7530
G1 = 0.7066
G2 = 0.6973
G3 = 0.5795
G4 = 0.7144
42.3%
G0 = 52.0%
G1 = 18.8%
G2 = 65.4%
G3 = 31.6%
G4 = 32.0%
G0 = 88.4%
G1 = 94.9%
G2 = 71.8%
G3 = 85.9%
G4 = 86.0%
VGG16
G0 = 0.7651
G1 = 0.6447
G2 = 0.5181
G3 = 0.7408
G4 = 0.7237
34.2%
G0: 40.0%
G1: 12.5%
G2: 15.4%
G3: 57.9%
G4: 44.0%
G0: 83.7%
G1: 88.4%
G2: 77.6%
G3: 79.3%
G4: 88.4%
By using ResNet50 in our 5 fold cross­validation, the model has an accuracy of 43.6%.
The AUC ranges from 0.6515­0.7965, while the sensitivity ranges from 26.9­51.6% and
the specificity ranges from 80.0­90.9%. When using VGG16 we get an accuracy of 41.0%.
The AUC ranges from 0.6251­0.7649, the sensitivity and specificity range from 26.9­
55.6% and 80.2­90.9%. In our final models, we test our model’s predictions by using
the test set of unseen data. The test set contains 20% of the entire dataset. The AUC
ranges from 0.5795­0.7530, the accuracy is at 42.3%, and the sensitivity and specificity
range from 18.8­65.4% and 71.8­94.9% when using ResNet50 as the pretrained network.
When we use VGG16, we get an AUC of 0.5181­0.7651, an accuracy of 34.2% and a
sensitivity and specificity ranging from 12.5­57.9% and 77.6­88.4%.
Figure 6.3, visualize the training of the final model when all grades are included. The
model illustrates training with transfer learning with the network ResNet50. It is trained
over 100 epochs, with 22 iterations in each epoch, resulting in 2200 total iterations. The
validation frequency is set to 22 iterations, which result in validating the model after each
epoch. The accuracy of the training data (blue line), has a steep increase during the first
250 iterations, followed by a semi­stable graph alternating between 90­100%, with a few
drops to 80% over the entire training period. The accuracy for the validation set starts at
around 20%, and alternate between ca. 40­50% finalising at 48.86%. The loss function
of the training set reaches close to 0.4 after 10 epochs (220 iterations) and stays stable
across the training period. The loss function for the validation data starts off around 2, but
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
39
==PAGE:48==
increases slowly after approximately 10 epochs, finalising at approximately 2.9.
Figure 6.3: Training of all classes, ResNet50 Transfer learning
40
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
In this study, we have looked into different deep learning methods efficiency of detect­
ing and grading diabetic retinopathy. When building a deep learning model, we have
compared the different preprocessing techniques and compared different pretrained net­
works ResNet50 and VGG16. We have also used socio­technical challenges found in
our section related work to guide what method to choose and be aware of how a possible
implementation of an AI assistant can be affected by socio­technical factors. We want to
use the identified socio­technical barriers to evaluate our model, evaluate our results and
bring light to areas that also need attention when implementing an AI assistant.
7.1
5 Fold cross­validation and final model
7.1.1
No DR vs PDR
Our first deep learning model was inspired by Nagasawa et al. (2019), where we only
use images with No DR compared to PDR. We found that this was a good starting point,
since the images in the two groups differed the most. In our 5 fold cross­validation, we
managed to get a sensitivity of 87.2%, specificity of 79.0%, accuracy of 83.1% and AUC
of 0.908 using the pretrained network of VGG16. When using the pretrained network
ResNet50 during our 5 fold cross­validation, we get a sensitivity of 87.2%, specificity
of 84.7%, accuracy of 85.9% and AUC of 0.929. In our final model, using ResNet50
and green­channel preprocessing technique, we get an AUC, accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity of 0.955, 90.0%, 84.0% and 96.0%. By using the 5­fold cross validation before
the final model, we can be more certain of the result of the final model. As described
earlier, we use the 5­fold cross validation to ensure the model’s performance is statistically
certain. In our test­set, used to measure the performance of the final model, only consisted
of 50 sample images. However, the performances are similar to the 5­fold cross validation,
therefore, we can be more certain that the performances measured in the final model are
not biased due to the size of the test­set.
Nagasawa et al. (2019) managed to get an overall better score when classifying No DR
and PDR [13]. Where his and our DCNN model differ the most is the size of the initial
learning rate and whether or not to normalise the input images. We experimented with
different initial learning rates and found that using 0.001 made the learning rate too low,
resulting in a loss function that did not improve. We found the optimal learning rate for
our model, using 0.0001 as the initial learning rate. Our loss function had a steep drop
when using this learning rate, followed by a stable graph, without any divergence [69]. If
the learning rate were too high, we found that the loss function would diverge after the
drop. Normalising input images is often what is recommended while using CNN, since
it ensures each pixel has a similar distribution, which makes the convergence of training
the network faster [70]. However, we found that if we used the normalisation function
in our preprocessing step, the model performance got reduced significantly. A possible
explanation of why we got better performance could be that our two groups of images
are too similar, so we lose the small features that differ between the two groups when
normalising the input data.
In our first 5 fold cross­validation, classifying No DR and PDR, we also wanted to test dif­
ferent preprocessing functions. First, we tested our model by only transforming the colour
image to greyscale. Another preprocessing technique we tried, was that we cropped the
greyscale image, followed by adjusting the brightness and contrast of the image. Lastly,
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
41
==PAGE:50==
we extracted the green channel of the image, cropped it and adjusted for brightness and
contrast. All images were concatenated into three channels to fit the pretrained networks
architecture. When only using the green channel, we were worried the other information
in the images red channel could get lost. Despite this, we captured the highest accuracy
in both networks when using the green channel preprocessing function. Using only the
green channel in our case works, because of all the features that the model and we are
categorising the images by, e.g., the microaneurysms, hard exudates or IRMA, are more
visible in the green channel. The green channel in Optos images allows the visualisation
of the sensory retina and pigment epithelium [36]. We also confirmed this by analysing
every feature used in the classification of NPDR and PDR when only looking at the green
channel. There are some features, such as Choroidal Nevus, which is not associated with
diabetes, that only appear in the red channel [36]. In this study, we have only focused on
the features used to grade NPDR and PDR, and for that practice, we found that extracting
the green channel gives better results compared to greyscale. However, there may be
a need to use both red and green channels for extracting features from Optos images in
future work.
7.1.2
All grades classified
We used the same model to analyse the three groups of diabetic retinopathy grades, as
well as analyse each grade separately. Analysing these groups, we only used the prepro­
cessing function where we extracted the green channel, cropped and adjusted contrast
and brightness in the image since this had the best results from our first test of 5 fold
cross­validation. We still wanted to compare the networks ResNet50 and VGG16 for the
following results.
When combining the grades into No DR, Mild NPDR + Moderate NPDR, and Severe NPDr
+ PDR, we get a lower performance of our models with AUC ranging from 0.786­0.824 and
an accuracy of 61.7%. Resnet50 outperform VGG16, in all performance metrics. When
we apply the same model to all classes of diabetic retinopathy, we get a significantly
lower accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and AUC. This is present in both the 5­fold cross­
validation, as well as in the final model. When using transfer learning with the pretrained
network ResNet50, it still shows slightly better results than using the same procedure with
the network VGG16. When we get results lower than 50%, which we do when classifying
all classes separately, the prediction becomes as useless as flipping a coin. It can be
difficult to determine what the cause of the predicting results are, is it because of how the
model is built or is it caused by bad data.
Our images all have a size of 4000 x 4000 pixels. We have used a cropping function in
most of our results, resizing the image to 2473 x 2980 pixels, removing the black space
that is around the retinal image. Since we use transfer learning, we must transform the
images to fit into the pretrained network, resulting in resizing all the images to a size of 224
x 224. When using this simple image resizing, it is most likely that the image loses a lot of
valuable information. This problem is significant, because our features are so small and
are even hard to detect when the images are in full size. When resized, if the feature is
small enough, it may disappear. This could possibly explain why the model finds it difficult
to predict the classes of mild and moderate NPDR.
The retinal images cannot easily be divided into separate patches and be fed into the
network as input because the features found in each image are dependent on the whole
image to get the right classification. For example, to classify an image to Grade 3, retinal
specialists follow the 4­2­1 rule. This means that the features found depend on other
features found in the same image and what quadrant, meaning where in the image, the
42
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:51==
feature is located. This makes dividing the image or using only parts of the image as input
much more complicated compared with object classification that does not depend on other
objects. A maybe naive but different way of solving this problem could be to use deep
learning on the entire dataset before any classification model, only focusing on creating
a high­resolution image from the resized image [71]. It is possible to recreate a low­
resolution image into a high­resolution image using transfer learning and deep learning
[71]. By applying a similar method to our entire dataset, we could possibly reduce the loss
of information due to image resizing.
When we see how the accuracy and loss function is performing during the training phase
of the classification of all grades, we can see that our training set performs well in both
the accuracy measurement as well as the loss function. However, our validation set and
our unseen test set perform significantly poorer. This might be explained by our model
needing additional revising, adding even more layers and hidden layers, or by fine­tuning
the model’s hyperparameter to this classification model specifically. We did try to modify
our hyperparameters in our final model when comparing No DR with Mild + Moderate
NPDR and Severe NPDR + PDR. We tried to change the weighted layers and changed
the initial learning rate to 0.001. This created a slight change in the problem of overfitting
but did not improve the accuracy of the model.
Since we have gotten better results when only comparing No DR with PDR, another ex­
planation of why classifying all grades results in poor results, could be the quality and the
lack of data. The data might be too noisy or be too similar to each other. As described in
the ophthalmologic background, the feature that separates an image from being classi­
fied from No DR to Mild NPDR is a single microaneurysm. A single microaneurysm with
a size of a grain of dust, which bears similarities to actual dust. Despite the difficulties
of distinguishing between classes, previous examples, such as Krause et al. (2018) and
Abbas et al. (2019), have shown great results when classifying every class of retinopathy.
When experimenting with building our model, we also tried training classification on a pub­
lic dataset with conventional fundus images. This dataset was significantly bigger (3662
samples) and was smaller in size (244x244). When classifying all grades separately, we
got an overall accuracy of 79.9% from these experiments but found that the accuracy per
grade was higher, depending on how many sample images it was in that specific class.
Let us look apart from the fact that Optos UWF images have a much higher image reso­
lution, which creates information loss. We wonder if we would have more images in each
class, without any skewed classes, could help the model distinguish between the images,
and perform with better accuracy.
Often, when testing and validation sets perform much worse than the training set, the
model is overfitting, meaning that the model ”memorizes” the noise in the image instead
of finding the correct image features. Since we already use K­fold cross­validation and
tried changing the hyperparameters to prevent overfitting, the most effective solution to
this problem would be to gather more data [72].
7.1.3
Sensitivity and Specificity
When we measure the model’s sensitivity, we measure the model’s ability to predict cor­
rectly how many patients who actually have the condition [73]. If we look at the model
when classifying No DR and PDR, we get a sensitivity of 87.2% This means that there
is an 87.2% chance of the model predicting a patient having PDR when the patient truly
has PDR. A model with high sensitivity, when measuring the performance of detecting the
condition, is a reliable test for the samples that turn out negative, since the model does
not misdiagnose positive samples.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
43
==PAGE:52==
If we look at the specificity, this measurement tells how the model is able to predict cor­
rectly patients who do not have the condition [73]. If we look at our second analysis, the
model classifies the group Mild + Moderate NPDR, with a specificity of 82.1%. This tells
us that the model can accurately predict 82.1% of the samples which do not have mild +
moderate NPDR. Usually, this means that the model rarely would give a positive result
when tested on samples from healthy patients. In our case, when we measure specificity
in the model where we classify grades that are grouped, the specificity tells us that there
is a 82.1% chance of correctly classifying the patients who do not have mild + moderate
NPDR. However, this does not mean that the patients are healthy because they can still
be in the class Severe NPDR + PDR. Therefore, a high specificity in the models where
multiple classes are classified requires us to be careful not to think of the specificity of
a number that rules out condition completely but instead rules out the specific group of
conditions.
When we use ResNet50 as the pretrained network for transfer learning, it outperforms
VGG16 in all of our models. The networks ResNet50 and VGG16 are quite similar, in the
sense that they are both trained on the same millions of images from ImageNet, have a
similar architecture consisting of convolutional layers, pooling layers and a fully connected
layer, and are commonly used in medical image analysis. The most significant difference
between the two networks is the depth of the layers. ResNet50 are, as previously men­
tioned, 50 layers deep, while VGG16 only has a depth of 16 layers. The ResNet network
also incorporates residual layers to help guide the model to achieve convergence [74],
meaning the residual layers within the ResNet50 model we used may have guided the
small image features, resulting in overall better results compared to VGG16. ResNet50
has outperformed VGG16 in similar studies [74, 75], and in a study comparing the two
networks, the authors point out that the depth of the network is a crucial factor, when
extracting features from large­scale images, similar to the Optos images [75, 76]. The
depth of the network, together with the guidance of the ResNet residual layer, may be the
reason why ResNet50 outperforms VGG16, in all of our models.
7.2
Socio­technical challenges
We want to use the recommendations for handling socio­technical barriers found in the
section related work. We will apply some of the same barriers, both when building the
model and when the model is being implemented in the healthcare system in Greenland.
In the next section, we want to highlight and discuss the socio­technical barriers which
we believe applies to our project.
7.2.1
Feeding the machine
When looking at the development and implementation of a system to detect retinopa­
thy, we have, like Cabitza et al. (2020), identified two gaps; one in building the machine
learning device and one in building human trust [23]. Cabitza pointed out that when build­
ing the AI, there may be some assumptions towards whether or not the data is truthful,
representative and reliable.
Representative data
When working with building and training a deep learning model, there is usually a need
for tens of thousands of images to get a representative dataset and make an accurate
diagnosis. The number of retinal images taken with an UWF angle camera is limited. Our
study uses a maximum of 681 images, where each grade of diabetic retinopathy consists
of around 80­130 images. We can, therefore, not be sure if the data we are working with
are representative. As we described previously, the data used in this study was from
a screening study on the danish population diagnosed with type 2 diabetes living in the
44
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:53==
Capital Region of Denmark. In the study where our data originate from, there were only
76% of the diagnosed type 2 patients who wanted to be a part of the screening study.
SDCC is the biggest diabetes clinic in Scandinavia [27], and it is difficult to imagine how
tens of thousands of UWF images can be collected and graded if we only use images from
patients from Denmark, possibly combined with UWF Optos images from Greenland. A
similar study has found that to get a performance accuracy close to 100%; there must
be tens of thousands of images with abnormal cases. The performance may actually
gain from increasing the diversity of the training data, say combining data from different
nationalities and clinics [77].
To further create a well representative dataset, we should include other factors that can
affect the diagnosis and treatment. A drawback of our study is that we did not include
detection of diabetic maculopathy. Diabetic maculopathy is also related to diabetes and
can cause vision disturbance if not treated. We did not manually exclude the detection
of diabetic maculopathy, but we did not have any examples of images graded by retinal
specialists. Another challenge, whether or not the data is representative, is based on
what other factors that can affect a possible diabetic retinopathy diagnosis. Our model
is only based on images and their features, and for now, the model does not take other
factors into account. From informal conversations with the experts at SDCC, we were told
that the first thing they do is check the patient’s blood pressure and how well they treat
their diabetes before they start grading the images; these factors influence the screening
interval as well.
Reliable data
When looking at the data being reliable, we must look at the differences of images used as
input in the DCNN compared to images taken in a clinical setting. Cabitza points out that
AI systems are often trained on images that are better than the ones which it will grade
in reality [23]. In the study by Beede et al., they found that it was very frustrating for the
nurses since they would find some of the images easy enough to analyse themselves, but
the software would not accept them [26]. Some nurses would take several images from
different angles so shadows, light or other obstacles would appear in a different part of the
images, which would make it possible to grade the images by comparing them. This was
not possible for the software since it could only take one image as an input [26]. Suppose
a system for automated DR detection is developed and implemented in the Greenlandic
healthcare system. In that case, the same barriers could occur since the system would
need a certain quality of the fundus images to be able to grade them. This can lead to
frustration for the nurses since the image can look well enough for them for grading but
not for the system, or the system will not be able to, or the system will not keep up the high
accuracy and sensitivity due to these images of worse quality. This will require more time
from the nurse to take more patient images to achieve a quality that the system can grade.
If that is not possible, the images will have to be sent to an expert for grading, which will
result in more waiting time for the patient and not the instant diagnosis and optimisation
as wanted.
In our study, we excluded images that we thought were hard to grade. There may be
some ophthalmologist specialist that still could grade the excluded images. Despite this,
building a model on highly damaged and different images could result in poorer model
performance. Using only the “good” images could make the model unreliable when meet­
ing images in a real clinical setting, assuming that some images may be of more inferior
quality than what we have used. However, this is something that can be adjusted af­
ter building the first model. By designing what order the training images are fed into the
deep learning model, it is possible to force the model to first learn from the images which
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
45
==PAGE:54==
are “easy”, followed by the more “difficult” examples [78]. Easy examples in our study
could possibly be those images that have multiple features visible. When only focusing
on PDR, it was common that when a patient was diagnosed with PDR, the retinal images
also showed close to a hundred microaneurysms, multiple haemorrhages and, of course,
neovascularisation. This would be classified as an “easy” image to classify since it dif­
ferentiates so much from the rest of the images. A more difficult example would be an
image classified as mild NPDR, with maybe only a few microaneurysms present, but still
with a lot of noise, such as dust and reflections of light. This would be classified as a more
difficult image to classify, which we also see in our results when comparing all the grades
combined. For future development of the deep learning model, it would maybe increase
the performance of the model if the feeding order of the model is fixed and follow Kumar
et al. example of feeding it with the easy images first [78].
Truthful data
If we look at the final assumption, the assumption that the data is truthful, we must draw
attention to how the images are labelled. As previously mentioned in the description of
our data, the retinal images in our study are graded by two nurses specialised in ophthal­
mology at SDCC. The nurses have separately graded a batch of images each, meaning
one expert per grading. This means that our model is learning from the same mistake if
there should be any mistakes in the grades. For future development of our algorithm, it
could be a strength to have several graders analyse each image and discuss the results
to have more accurate labels. Unfortunately, this was not possible in the scope of this the­
sis. In general, there is a disagreement between experts when grading retinal images for
retinopathy [12]. There have also been several examples where the same expert graded
an image differently when shown the same image twice [12, 23]. The difficulties of grading
an image with diabetic retinopathy can be resolved by multiple experts grading the same
image and making the decision based on the majority of the experts’ gradings [12, 14, 23].
A similar study found that gradings of the training data might not play a significant role in
the overall performance of a deep learning model. If multiple experts are utilised to grade
one image, this power should be used on the clinical validation data for best performance
accuracy [77].
7.2.2
Trusting the machine
The subsequent hiatus identified by Cabitza is the gap between the person using the ma­
chine and trusting the advice from the machine [23]. We have built an automatic detection
of diabetic retinopathy and its grade. It manages to get quite a significant accuracy when
comparing No DR to PDR. When the grades are compared in three classes, No DR, Mild
+ Moderate NPDR and Severe NPDR + PDR and when comparing all classes in the same
model, the accuracy drops. Either way, what accuracy our model manages to produce,
we have not shown in our study how the model makes its decisions.
This leads to the next obstacle, which several authors also mentioned, trust issues and
the AI’s black box [23, 22, 24, 25]. In general, the trust issue arises due to a lack of
transparency behind the predictions. This black box which can predict a diagnosis but
does not tell or show how it came to that diagnosis, makes both health professionals and
patients mistrust the system. Some health professionals want to know the strengths and
weaknesses in the system to be able to compensate for them with their own strengths
and weaknesses. If a system is implemented in the Greenlandic healthcare system, the
same challenge could arise. One solution that could help the transparency could be the
use of heat mapping. By using this, the output will be marked with the areas the diagnosis
is based off. This can maybe help make it clearer why the system predicted as it did, but
it might not still be enough.
46
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:55==
Benda et al. (2020) and Baxter et al. (2020) point out that the health professionals have
trust issues with these automated models due to the lack of taking socioeconomic factors
into account. Stakeholders were also concerned that the model would only get a snapshot
of the patient’s state and not include the whole cycle of care. It will be hard to develop a
model that will include socioeconomic factors and a patient’s cycle of care, but it needs
to be thought into the model or the workflow somehow, so it will still count in the final
decision.
If the system is implemented in the healthcare system in Greenland, it is important to ex­
plain the black box and make the system as transparent as possible so that the healthcare
professionals will trust it, so they can get the best out of it and so they can explain it to the
patients.
7.3
Future Research
In this study, we have built a model based on Optos UWF images from the danish popu­
lation, with an overall goal to use the same model on images from the Greenlandic pop­
ulation in future studies. The vision of this project is to build an AI model to detect and
grade diabetic retinopathy and to implement it in a clinical setting in Greenland. However,
our study has shown that there is still much work to be done before any AI model can be
introduced to a clinical setting. When looking at all the grades combined, there is a need
for improving the accuracy of the AI model so that it can have similar accuracy as one
or multiple ophthalmologists. Socio­technical factors have also made us aware of possi­
ble barriers when implementing an AI assistant. The question we ask ourselves next is,
therefore, would it all be worth it?
As we introduce in the very beginning of this paper, the procedure of screening and di­
agnosing diabetic retinopathy in Greenland is highly dependent on the patients travelling
to one of the clinics to perform the screening. The procedure of photographing the retinal
images is flexible since the Optos UWF camera is easy to transport and can be managed
after a short amount of training. In the current workflow, the images are graded by danish
nurses specialised in this at SDCC. The following feedback to the patients and possible
treatment is situated in the capital Nuuk. This workflow created a massive workload on the
ophthalmologist who needs to diagnose every patient, and makes it difficult for patients to
be screened. In most cases, the images will not have any retinal changes, which will re­
sult in a second screening 24 months after the first screening. The second most common
result of the screening is that the patient has either mild or moderate NPDR, which does
not need any further treatment than what is already recommended when having diabetes.
Therefore, using an AI assistant to detect and grade DR in Greenland would eliminate the
need for healthcare professionals to wait for an answer from the ophthalmologist before
referring the patient for further examination. This could also result in more people being
screened because it does not necessarily require a long travel distance to Nuuk as the
second part of the screening.
As a rule of thumb in developing and implementing new technological solutions in health­
care; a problem must first be identified before a solution is developed. We believe that
there is a problem with how DR is screening in Greenland, a problem that will grow pro­
portionally with the growth of diabetic cases. A solution to this problem could be by im­
plementing an AI assistant, possibly built by training a deep convolutional neural network,
as we have done in our study. However, when building a deep learning model, it needs
to fulfil some data requirements before building the model. Requirements that the data is
truthful, representative and reliable. Meaning, to improve the model’s accuracy, there is a
need for many (close to thousands) of images in each stage of DR. The images must be
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
47
==PAGE:56==
graded by multiple ophthalmologists, at least the data that will be used for validation (20%
of total). There must also be a similar good quality in every image. One problem that we
have not found a solution for, is how to resize the image to a size that fits a pretrained net­
work, without losing essential information about the image features. Based on our project,
we think these are the challenges that are most important to solve when developing an AI
model for Greenland, but more challenges can arise, and a more in­depth analysis of the
current workflow is required to have a complete picture how socio­technical factors may
affect a possible implementation of an AI assistant.
48
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:57==
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we wanted to investigate what methods can be used to develop a model for
automatic diabetic retinopathy detection in Optos wide­field images and highlight some
of the socio­technical challenges that can arise from implementing AI in healthcare. By
reviewing what have allready been published in similar studies, we decided to use transfer
learning with DCNN since this was recommended for limited datasets. We have built
and compared models using the two networks ResNet50 and VGG16. In addition, we
have compared different preprocessing techniques. From our tests, we achieved the
best results when using cropping, green channel extraction, and brightness and contrast
for preprocessing when both using VGG16 and ResNet50. This preprocessing method
was used in our following models. We had a total of 681 images from SDCC. The classes
had a skewed distribution of image samples that we corrected when using images from
the group No DR, but we did not correct the distribution of the other classes, because
we wanted to use as much of the data as possible. First, we divided and compared our
data into two groups, PDR and no DR and when using ResNet50 we achieved an AUC
of 0.9552, an Accuracy of 90.0%, a Sensitivity of 84.0%, and a Specificity of 96.0%.
Secondly, we divided the data into three groups and compared No DR with Mild + Moder­
ate NPDR and Severe NPDR + PDR, and when using ResNet50, which gave us the best
results, we managed to get an AUC of 0.784­0.808, an accuracy of 62.2%, a sensitivity
of 47.1.9­77.3%, and a specificity of 48.0­89.5%. Lastly, we tested our models on every
stage of DR which gave us an AUC of 0.579­0.753, an accuracy of 42.3%, a sensitivity of
18.8­65.4%, and a specificity of 71.8­94.9%, when using ResNet50. Furthermore, based
on related work on socio­technical challenges, we think that there should be a focus on
collecting more data and an equal amount of images from the different stages of DR, to
avoid the distribution of the data being skewed. We also think it is essential that the data
is representative of what the model will meet in a clinical setting. If the data was annotated
and not only labelled, this could open up to more methods that could be used, and we
think the project could benefit from this. There is often a difference in how experts grade
the images, and it would be an advantage to have several experts grade each image, to
avoid mistakes when developing the model. Future development of an AI is important to
increase the accuracy of detecting all classes. However, additional development should
be considered, since it would be necessary also to be able to include other factors such as
blood pressure, glycaemic levels and the patient’s cycle of care when diagnosing them.
Lastly, it is essential to make the predictions from the model transparent, so it is clear
why it computed its conclusions, and for the health professionals to know its strengths
and weaknesses. Based on our project, we have highlighted some of the obstacles we
think are important to focus on when developing and implementing an AI model in the
healthcare system in Greenland, but more research is still needed.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
49
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
WHO. Diabetes. URL: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/diabetes.
(accessed: 21.03.2021).
[2]
Ida Moltke et al. “A common Greenlandic TBC1D4 variant confers muscle insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes”. In: Nature 512.7513 (2014), pp. 190–193. ISSN:
1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature13425. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13425.
[3]
“Endokrine sygdomme”. In: Basisbog i medicin og kirurgi. Ed. by Torben m. fl. Schroeder.
5. udgave. Munksgaard, 2012. Chap. 13, pp. 353–362.
[4]
“Endokrine sygdomme”. In: Sygdomslære for ikke­klinikere. Ed. by Else Marie Blad­
bjerg, Annelli Sandbæk, and Bente Merete Stallknecht. 1. udgave. Munksgaard,
2012. Chap. 6, pp. 188–207. ISBN: 9788762810051.
[5]
J. Grauslund, A. Green, and A. K. Sjølie. “Prevalence and 25 year incidence of
proliferative retinopathy among Danish type 1 diabetic patients”. In: Diabetologia
52.9 (2009), pp. 1829–1835. ISSN: 0012186X. DOI: 10.1007/s00125-009-1450-4.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-009-1450-4.
[6]
Jakob Grauslund, Anders Green, and Anne Katrin Sjølie. “Blindness in a 25­Year
Follow­up of a Population­Based Cohort of Danish Type 1 Diabetic Patients”. In:
Ophthalmology 116.11 (2009), pp. 2170–2174. ISSN: 0161­6420. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2009.04.043. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0161642009004710.
[7]
Marianne N. Hove et al. “The prevalence of retinopathy in an unselected population
of type 2 diabetes patients from Århus County, Denmark”. In: Acta Ophthalmologica
Scandinavica 82.4 (2004), pp. 443–448. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
0420.2004.00270.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1600-
0420.2004.00270.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1600-
0420.2004.00270.x.
[8]
Scot E Moss, Ronald Klein, and Barbara E.K Klein. “The 14­year incidence of vi­
sual loss in a diabetic population11The authors have no proprietary interests in any
materials mentioned in this study.” In: Ophthalmology 105.6 (1998), pp. 998–1003.
ISSN: 0161­6420. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0161- 6420(98)96025- 0. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0161642098960250.
[9]
Ninna Senftleber et al. “Genetic study of the Arctic CPT1A variant suggests that
its effect on fatty acid levels is modulated by traditional Inuit diet”. In: European
Journal of Human Genetics 28.11 (2020), pp. 1592–1601. ISSN: 1476­5438. DOI:
10.1038/s41431-020-0674-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-0674-0.
[10]
Tushar Gupta. Deep Learning: Back Propagation. 2017. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/back-propagation-414ec0043d7#.tje3h7wi0. (accessed: 26.05.2021).
[11]
Andreea Dana Moraru et al. “Artificial intelligence and deep learning in ophthalmol­
ogy ­ present and future (Review)”. eng. In: Experimental and therapeutic medicine
20.4 (Oct. 2020), pp. 3469–3473. ISSN: 1792­0981. DOI: 10.3892/etm.2020.9118.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32905155%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC7465350/.
[12]
Gilbert Lim et al. “Different fundus imaging modalities and technical factors in AI
screening for diabetic retinopathy: a review”. eng. In: Eye and vision (London, Eng­
land) 7 (Apr. 2020), p. 21. ISSN: 2326­0254. DOI: 10.1186/s40662-020-00182-7.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32313813%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC7155252/.
50
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:59==
[13]
Toshihiko Nagasawa et al. “Accuracy of ultrawide­field fundus ophthalmoscopy­
assisted deep learning for detecting treatment­naïve proliferative diabetic retinopa­
thy”. In: International Ophthalmology 39.10 (2019), pp. 2153–2159. ISSN: 1573­
2630. DOI: 10.1007/s10792-019-01074-z. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-019-
01074-z.
[14]
Santosh Nagnath Randive, Ranjan K. Senapati, and Amol D. Rahulkar. “A review on
computer­aided recent developments for automatic detection of diabetic retinopa­
thy”. In: Journal of Medical Engineering & Technology 43.2 (2019). PMID: 31198073,
pp. 87–99. DOI: 10.1080/03091902.2019.1576790. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
03091902.2019.1576790. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/03091902.2019.1576790.
[15]
Daniel S.W. Ting et al. “Deep learning in ophthalmology: The technical and clinical
considerations”. In: Progress in Retinal and Eye Research 72 (2019), p. 100759.
ISSN: 1350­9462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2019.04.003. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1350946218300909.
[16]
Varun Gulshan et al. “Performance of a Deep­Learning Algorithm vs Manual Grad­
ing for Detecting Diabetic Retinopathy in India”. eng. In: JAMA ophthalmology 137.9
(Sept. 2019), pp. 987–993. ISSN: 2168­6173. DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2019.
2004. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31194246%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6567842/.
[17]
Weeagul Pratumgul and Worawat Sa­ngiamvibool. “The Prototype of Computer­
Assisted for Screening and Identifying Severity of Diabetic Retinopathy Automat­
ically from Color Fundus Images for mHealth System in Thailand”. In: Procedia
Computer Science 86 (2016). 2016 International Electrical Engineering Congress,
iEECON2016, 2­4 March 2016, Chiang Mai, Thailand, pp. 457–460. ISSN: 1877­
0509. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.080. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050916304161.
[18]
Qaisar Abbas et al. “Automatic recognition of severity level for diagnosis of dia­
betic retinopathy using deep visual features”. In: Medical & Biological Engineering
& Computing 55.11 (2017), pp. 1959–1974. ISSN: 1741­0444. DOI: 10.1007/s11517-
017-1638-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11517-017-1638-6.
[19]
Jonathan Krause et al. “Grader Variability and the Importance of Reference Stan­
dards for Evaluating Machine Learning Models for Diabetic Retinopathy”. In: Oph­
thalmology 125.8 (2018), pp. 1264–1272. ISSN: 0161­6420. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.01.034. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0161642017326982.
[20]
Kang Wang et al. “Automated detection of diabetic retinopathy lesions on ultraw­
idefield pseudocolour images”. In: Acta Ophthalmologica 96.2 (2018), e168–e173.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.13528. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/aos.13528.
[21]
Kangrok Oh et al. “Early detection of diabetic retinopathy based on deep learn­
ing and ultra­wide­field fundus images”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (2021), p. 1897.
ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-81539-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-81539-3.
[22]
Sally L. Baxter, Jeremy S. Bass, and Amy M. Sitapati. “Barriers to Implementing
an Artificial Intelligence Model for Unplanned Readmissions”. In: ACI Open 04.02
(July 2020), e108–e113. ISSN: 2566­9346. DOI: 10.1055/s- 0040- 1716748. URL:
http://www.thieme-connect.de/DOI/DOI?10.1055/s-0040-1716748.
[23]
Federico Cabitza, Andrea Campagner, and Clara Balsano. “Bridging the “last mile”
gap between AI implementation and operation: “data awareness” that matters”. In:
Annals of Translational Medicine 8.7 (Apr. 2020), pp. 501–501. ISSN: 23055839.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
51
==PAGE:60==
DOI: 10.21037/atm.2020.03.63. URL: http://atm.amegroups.com/article/view/
39228/html.
[24]
Natalie C Benda et al. ““How did you get to this number?” Stakeholder needs for
implementing predictive analytics: a pre­implementation qualitative study”. In: Jour­
nal of the American Medical Informatics Association 27.5 (Mar. 2020), pp. 709–716.
ISSN: 1527­974X. DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa021. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
jamia/article-pdf/27/5/709/34152712/ocaa021.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
jamia/ocaa021.
[25]
Carrie J. Cai et al. “”Hello AI”: Uncovering the Onboarding Needs of Medical Practi­
tioners for Human­AI Collaborative Decision­Making”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
on Human­Computer Interaction 3.CSCW (Nov. 2019), pp. 1–24. ISSN: 2573­0142.
DOI: 10.1145/3359206. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3359206.
[26]
Emma Beede et al. “A Human­Centered Evaluation of a Deep Learning System
Deployed in Clinics for the Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy”. In: Proceedings
of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’20.
Honolulu, HI, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 1–12. ISBN:
9781450367080. DOI: 10.1145/3313831.3376718. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3313831.3376718.
[27]
Steno Diabetes Centre Copenhagen. Steno Diabetes Centre Copenhagen. URL:
https://sdcc.dk. (accessed: 21.03.2021).
[28]
Nis Andersen et al. National retningslinje for screening for diabetisk retinopati. An
optional note. The organization. Sept. 2018. URL: http://www.dansk-oftalmologisk-
selskab.dk/wp- content/uploads/2018/09/National- retningslinje- for- screening- af-
diabetisk-retinopati.pdf.
[29]
S. Sparholt et al. Kliniske retningslinjer for diabetisk øjensygdom – retningslinier
for screening, forebyggelse og behandling. URL: http://www.endocrinology.dk/
Kliniske%5C%20retningslinier%5C%20-%5C%20diabetisk%5C%20oejensygdom.pdf.
(accessed: 21.03.2021).
[30]
Jakob Grauslund et al. “Evidence­based Danish guidelines for screening of diabetic
retinopathy”. In: Acta Ophthalmologica 96.8 (2018), pp. 763–769. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1111/aos.13936. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/aos.
13936. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/aos.13936.
[31]
Peter Lambert. Dansk Diabetes Database, National årsrapport 2016/2017. Tech.
rep. Afdeling for Klinisk Koordination, Regionernes Kliniske Kvalitetsudviklingspro­
gram, 2017. URL: http://www.dansk-oftalmologisk-selskab.dk/wp-content/uploads/
2017/08/%5C%C3%5C%85rsrapport_Diabetes_ukommenteretVersion1_2_tilAudit_
3105_2017.pdf. (accessed: 21.03.2021).
[32]
J G Lawrenson et al. What works to increase attendance for diabetic retinopathy
screening? An evidence synthesis and economic analysis. 2018. DOI: 10.3310/
hta22290. URL: https://doi.org/10.3310/hta22290.
[33]
Emily Y. Chew and Frederick L. Ferris. “Chapter 67 ­ Nonproliferative Diabetic
Retinopathy”. In: Retina (Fourth Edition). Ed. by Stephen J. Ryan et al. Fourth
Edition. Edinburgh: Mosby, 2006, pp. 1271–1284. ISBN: 978­0­323­02598­0. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 323- 02598- 0.50073- 2. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323025980500732.
[34]
Stine Byberg et al. “Optos wide￿field imaging versus conventional camera imaging
in Danish patients with type 2 diabetes”. In: Acta Ophthalmologica 97.8 (Dec. 2019),
pp. 815–820. ISSN: 1755­375X. DOI: 10.1111/aos.14118. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/aos.14118.
52
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:61==
[35]
Khalil Ghasemi Falavarjani, Irena Tsui, and Srinivas R. Sadda. “Ultra­wide­field
imaging in diabetic retinopathy”. In: Vision Research 139 (2017). Diabetic Retinopa­
thy ­ an Overview, pp. 187–190. ISSN: 0042­6989. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.visres.2017.02.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0042698917301189.
[36]
Optos Clinical Team. The optomap Diagnostic Atlas: A Retinal Reference Guide.
2018. URL: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5d27fd07ba7f980001d5ceb5/t/
5d4b5513402db300017ef171/1565218079230/Color+Diagnostic+Atlas+Booklet.pdf.
(accessed: 15.05.2021).
[37]
Enrico Grisan. “Automatic Analysis of Retinal Images: Retinopathy Detection and
Grading”. An optional note. PhD thesis. The address of the publisher: Universit‘a di
Padova, Feb. 2006.
[38]
Jonathan D. Trobe. OPHTHALMOSCOPY. 2014. URL: http://kellogg.umich.edu/
theeyeshaveit/opticfundus/index.html. (accessed: 15.04.2021).
[39]
The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. The COMS Grading Scheme:
Graded Features. 2006. URL: https : / / webeye . ophth . uiowa . edu / dept / COMS /
grading/hard-exudates.htm. (accessed: 17.04.2021).
[40]
Glycosmedia. DIABETIC RETINOPATHY – FEATURES OF DIABETES : HARD
EXUDATES. URL: https://www.glycosmedia.com/education/diabetic-retinopathy/
diabetic-retinopathy-features-of-diabetes-hard-exudates/. (accessed: 17.04.2021).
[41]
Leticia Rousso and Joseph Sowka. Recognizing Abnormal Vasculature. 2017. URL:
https://www.reviewofoptometry.com/article/recognizing-abnormal-vasculature. (ac­
cessed: 17.04.2021).
[42]
Sujoy Ghosh and Andrew Collier. “Section 5 ­ Chronic complications”. In: Churchill’s
Pocketbook of Diabetes (Second Edition) (Second Edition). Ed. by Sujoy Ghosh
and Andrew Collier. Second Edition. Oxford: Churchill Livingstone, 2012, pp. 165–
226. ISBN: 978­0­443­10081­9. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 443 -
10081 - 9 . 00012 - 9. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B9780443100819000129.
[43]
Seyed Hossein Rasta, Shima Nikfarjam, and Alireza Javadzadeh. “Detection of reti­
nal capillary nonperfusion in fundus fluorescein angiogram of diabetic retinopathy”.
eng. In: BioImpacts : BI 5.4 (2015), pp. 183–190. ISSN: 2228­5652. DOI: 10.15171/
bi.2015.27. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26929922%20https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4769788/.
[44]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Introduction”. In: Deep Learn­
ing. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 1, pp. 1–11.
[45]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Deep Feedforward Networks”.
In: Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 6,
pp. 166–170.
[46]
Anders Dahl and Vedrana Dahl. Lecture notes in Image analysis with neural net­
works. Feb. 2021.
[47]
Jason Brownlee. A Gentle Introduction to the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU). 2019.
URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/rectified-linear-activation-function-for-
deep-learning-neural-networks/. (accessed: 02.05.2021).
[48]
Vitaly Bushaev. Adam — latest trends in deep learning optimization. 2018. URL:
https://towardsdatascience.com/adam-latest-trends-in-deep-learning-optimization-
6be9a291375c. (accessed: 24.05.2021).
[49]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Convolutional Networks”.
In: Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 9,
pp. 330–350.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
53
==PAGE:62==
[50]
Shyamal Patel and Johanna Pingel. Introduction to Deep Learning: What Are Con­
volutional Neural Networks? 2017. URL: https : / / www . mathworks . com / videos /
introduction-to-deep-learning-what-are-convolutional-neural-networks--1489512765771.
html. (accessed: 15.05.2021).
[51]
Mayank Mishra. Convolutional Neural Networks, Explained. 2020. URL: https://
towardsdatascience.com/convolutional-neural-networks-explained-9cc5188c4939. (ac­
cessed: 17.05.2021).
[52]
Jiwon Jeong. The Most Intuitive and Easiest Guide for Convolutional Neural Net­
work. 2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/the-most-intuitive-and-easiest-
guide-for-convolutional-neural-network-3607be47480. (accessed: 15.05.2021).
[53]
Anas Al­Masri. How Does Back­Propagation in Artificial Neural Networks Work?
2019. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/how-does-back-propagation-in-artificial-
neural-networks-work-c7cad873ea7. (accessed: 10.05.2021).
[54]
Hamza Mahmood. The Softmax Function, Simplified. 2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/softmax-function-simplified-714068bf8156. (accessed: 10.05.2021).
[55]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Representation Learning”.
In: Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 15,
pp. 536–540.
[56]
Muneeb ul Hassan. VGG16 – Convolutional Network for Classification and Detec­
tion. 2018. URL: https://neurohive.io/en/popular- networks/vgg16/. (accessed:
04.05.2021).
[57]
Pawan Saxena. VGG­16 | CNN model. 2020. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/
vgg-16-cnn-model/. (accessed: 01.05.2021).
[58]
MathWorks. DAGNetwork. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/
ref/dagnetwork.html. (accessed: 01.05.2021).
[59]
Priya Dwivedi. Understanding and Coding a ResNet in Keras. 2019. URL: https:
//towardsdatascience.com/understanding-and-coding-a-resnet-in-keras-446d7ff84d33.
(accessed: 10.05.2021).
[60]
Aakash Kaushik. Understanding ResNet50 architecture. URL: https://iq.opengenus.
org/resnet50-architecture/. (accessed: 01.05.2021).
[61]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Machine Learning Basics”.
In: Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 5,
pp. 110–130.
[62]
M. Sanjay. Why and how to Cross Validate a Model? 2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/why-and-how-to-cross-validate-a-model-d6424b45261f. (accessed: 04.05.2021).
[63]
MathWorks. Get Started with Deep Learning Toolbox. URL: https://www.mathworks.
com/help/deeplearning/getting-started-with-deep-learning-toolbox.html. (accessed:
25.05.2021).
[64]
MathWorks. resnet50. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/ref/
resnet50.html. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[65]
MathWorks. vgg16. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/ref/vgg16.
html?searchHighlight=vgg16&s_tid=srchtitle. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[66]
MathWorks. fullyConnectedLayer. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/help/deeplearning/
ref/nnet.cnn.layer.fullyconnectedlayer.html. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[67]
Joydwip Mohajon. Confusion Matrix for Your Multi­Class Machine Learning Model.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/confusion-matrix-for-your-multi-class-machine-
learning-model-ff9aa3bf7826. (accessed: 21.04.2021).
[68]
Carmen Chan. What is a ROC Curve and How to Interpret It. URL: https://www.
displayr.com/what-is-a-roc-curve-how-to-interpret-it/. (accessed: 20.05.2021).
54
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:63==
[69]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Optimization for Training
Deep Models”. In: Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press,
2016. Chap. 8, pp. 274–300.
[70]
Jason Brownlee. 8 Tricks for Configuring Backpropagation to Train Better Neu­
ral Networks. 2019. URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/best- advice- for-
configuring-backpropagation-for-deep-learning-neural-networks/. (accessed: 26.05.2021).
[71]
YiNan Zhang and MingQiang An. “Deep Learning­ and Transfer Learning­Based
Super Resolution Reconstruction from Single Medical Image”. In: Journal of Health­
care Engineering 2017 (2017). Ed. by Shujun Fu, p. 5859727. ISSN: 2040­2295.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/5859727. URL: https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/5859727.
[72]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. “Practical Methodology”. In:
Deep Learning. http : / / www . deeplearningbook . org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. 11,
pp. 436–439.
[73]
D G Altman and J M Bland. “Statistics Notes: Diagnostic tests 1: sensitivity and
specificity”. In: BMJ 308.6943 (1994), p. 1552. ISSN: 0959­8138. DOI: 10.1136/
bmj.308.6943.1552. eprint: https://www.bmj.com/content/308/6943/1552.full.pdf.
URL: https://www.bmj.com/content/308/6943/1552.
[74]
Soheila Gheisari et al. “A combined convolutional and recurrent neural network for
enhanced glaucoma detection”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (2021), p. 1945. ISSN:
2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 021- 81554- 4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-81554-4.
[75]
Supawit Vatathanavaro, Suchat Tungjitnob, and Kitsuchart Pasupa. “White Blood
Cell Classification: A Comparison between VGG­16 and ResNet­50 Models”. In:
Dec. 2018.
[76]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[77]
Varun Gulshan et al. “Development and Validation of a Deep Learning Algorithm for
Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy in Retinal Fundus Photographs”. In: JAMA 316.22
(Dec. 2016), pp. 2402–2410. ISSN: 0098­7484. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2016.17216.
eprint: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/articlepdf/2588763/joi160132.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.17216.
[78]
M. Kumar, Benjamin Packer, and Daphne Koller. “Self­Paced Learning for Latent
Variable Models”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
J. Lafferty et al. Vol. 23. Curran Associates, Inc., 2010. URL: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2010/file/e57c6b956a6521b28495f2886ca0977a-Paper.pdf.
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
A.1
Contribution matrix
Both authors has equally contributed to this thesis. The table below illustrate which part
of the thesis each author has had a main responsibility for.
Table A.1: Contribution Matrix
Chapter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Maria
p.8­11
p.16­21
p.23­28
p.29­33
p.34­40
p.41­44
p.47
p.49
Helena
p.1­2
p.3­7
p.12­15
p.22­24
p.27
p.44­46
p. 49
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
57
==PAGE:66==
A.2
Fundus images with Grade 1­4
Figure A.1: Mild NPDR
58
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.2: Moderate NPDR
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.3: Severe NPDR
60
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.4: PDR
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
61
==PAGE:70==
A.3
Fundus images ­ Excluded
Figure A.5: PDR treated with laser
62
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.6: Ungradeable fundus image
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
63
==PAGE:72==
A.4
Confusion Matrix
A.4.1
No DR vs. PDR
Figure A.7: 5­fold cross validation, ResNet50, NoDR/PDR
64
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.8: 5­fold cross validation, VGG16, NoDR/PDR
Figure A.9: Final Model, ResNet50, NoDR/PDR
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.10: Final Model, VGG16, NoDR/PDR
66
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:75==
A.4.2
No DR vs. Mild­Moderate vs. Severe­PDR
Figure A.11: 5­fold cross validation, ResNet50, Classes Grouped
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.12: 5­fold cross validation, VGG16, Classes Grouped
Figure A.13: Final Model, ResNet50, Classes Grouped
68
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:77==
/
Figure A.14: Final Model, VGG16, Classes Grouped
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
69
==PAGE:78==
A.4.3
All classes
Figure A.15: 5­fold cross validation, ResNet50, All Classes
70
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.16: 5­fold cross validation, VGG16, All Classes
Figure A.17: Final Model, ResNet50, All Classes
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.18: Final Model, VGG16, All Classes
72
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:81==
A.5
Matlab Code
1
%%% Optos dataset - Vgg16 - final model - 2 categories
2
3
%% Final model med VGG16 - Maria & Helena
4
% No DR/PDR, No DR/Mild-Moderate/Severe -PDR, No DR/Mild/Moderate/Severe/PDR
5
6
clear all
7
% Load images
8
datapath = ('/zhome/9e/7/119349/125_0_4');
9
% Image Datastore
10
imds=imageDatastore(datapath , ...
11
'IncludeSubfolders',true, ...
12
'LabelSource','foldername');
13
14
% Determine the split up
15
total_split=countEachLabel(imds);
16
%% Visualize
17
18
% Number of Images
19
num_images=length(imds.Labels);
20
21
% Visualize random images
22
perm=randperm(num_images ,6);
23
figure;
24
for idx=1:length(perm)
25
26
subplot(2,3,idx);
27
imshow(imread(imds.Files{perm(idx)}));
28
title(sprintf('%s',imds.Labels(perm(idx))))
29
30
end
31
32
33
% Split the Training and Testing Dataset
34
train_percent=0.80;
35
[imdsTrain ,imdsTest]=splitEachLabel(imds,train_percent ,'randomize');
36
37
% Split the Training and Validation
38
valid_percent=0.2;
39
[imdsValid ,imdsTrain]=splitEachLabel(imdsTrain ,valid_percent ,'randomize');
40
41
%%
42
% Load network
43
net = vgg16;
44
45
46
inputSize = net.Layers(1).InputSize;
47
48
% Find layers , and replace the last layers
49
isa(net,'SeriesNetwork')
50
lgraph = layerGraph(net.Layers);
51
52
53
[learnableLayer ,classLayer] = findLayersToReplace(lgraph);
54
55
numClasses = numel(categories(imdsTrain.Labels));
56
57
isa(learnableLayer ,'nnet.cnn.layer.FullyConnectedLayer')
58
newLearnableLayer = fullyConnectedLayer(numClasses , ...
59
'Name','new_fc', ...
60
'WeightLearnRateFactor',20, ...
61
'BiasLearnRateFactor',20);
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
73
==PAGE:82==
62
63
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,learnableLayer.Name,newLearnableLayer);
64
65
newClassLayer = classificationLayer('Name','new_classoutput');
66
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,classLayer.Name,newClassLayer);
67
68
69
% Preprocess
70
71
imdsTrain.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
72
imdsValid.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
73
74
75
76
% Data Augumentation
77
augmenter = imageDataAugmenter( ...
78
'RandRotation',[-5 5],'RandXReflection',1,...
79
'RandYReflection',1,'RandXShear',[-0.05 0.05],'RandYShear',[-0.05 0.05]);
80
81
% Resizing all training images to [224 224] for ResNet & VGG16 architecture
82
augimdsTrain = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTrain ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
83
augimdsValid = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsValid ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
84
85
% Training Options
86
87
options = trainingOptions('sgdm', ...
88
'MiniBatchSize',16, ...
89
'MaxEpochs',100, ...
90
'ExecutionEnvironment', 'auto', ...
91
'InitialLearnRate',1e-4, ...
92
'Shuffle','every-epoch', ...
93
'ValidationData',augimdsValid , ...
94
'ValidationFrequency',9, ...
95
'Verbose',false, ...
96
'Plots','training -progress');
97
98
99
100
% Training
101
102
netTransfer = trainNetwork(augimdsTrain ,lgraph ,options);
103
104
%%
105
106
% Preprocess the test cases similar to the training
107
imdsTest.ReadFcn=@(filename)preprocess_retinal_resize(filename);
108
augimdsTest = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTest ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
109
% Predict Test Labels using Classify command
110
% Predict Test Labels
111
[predicted_labels ,posterior] = classify(netTransfer ,augimdsTest);
112
113
% Actual Labels
114
actual_labels = imdsTest.Labels;
115
116
% Confusion Matrix
117
figure
118
plotconfusion(actual_labels ,predicted_labels)
119
title('Confusion Matrix: Vgg16 - Transfer Optos 2 categories , 0.80-0.2');
120
%%
74
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:83==
121
122
test_labels=double(nominal(imdsTest.Labels));
123
124
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario ,
125
% Endre (:,1),1) til hvilken klasse som er target class
126
127
[fp_rate ,tp_rate ,T,AUC]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
128
figure;
129
plot(fp_rate ,tp_rate ,'b-');
130
grid on;
131
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
132
ylabel('Detection Rate');
133
title('VGG16 - 2 Categories');
finalvgg16.m
1
%%% Optos dataset - Resnet50 - final model - 2 categories
2
%
3
4
%% Final model med Resnet50 - Maria & Helena
5
% No DR/PDR, No DR/Mild-Moderate/Severe -PDR, No DR/Mild/Moderate/Severe/PDR
6
7
clear all
8
% Load images
9
datapath = ('/zhome/9e/7/119349/AllData');
10
% Image Datastore
11
imds=imageDatastore(datapath , ...
12
'IncludeSubfolders',true, ...
13
'LabelSource','foldername');
14
15
16
% Determine the split up
17
total_split=countEachLabel(imds);
18
%% Visualize
19
20
% Number of Images
21
num_images=length(imds.Labels);
22
23
% Visualize random images
24
perm=randperm(num_images ,6);
25
figure;
26
for idx=1:length(perm)
27
28
subplot(2,3,idx);
29
imshow(imread(imds.Files{perm(idx)}));
30
title(sprintf('%s',imds.Labels(perm(idx))))
31
32
end
33
34
%%
35
% Split the Training and Testing Dataset
36
train_percent=0.80;
37
[imdsTrain ,imdsTest]=splitEachLabel(imds,train_percent ,'randomize');
38
39
% Split the Training and Validation
40
valid_percent=0.2;
41
[imdsValid ,imdsTrain]=splitEachLabel(imdsTrain ,valid_percent ,'randomize');
42
%%
43
% Load network
44
net=resnet50;
45
lgraph = layerGraph(net);
46
clear net;
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
75
==PAGE:84==
47
48
% Number of categories
49
numClasses = numel(categories(imdsTrain.Labels));
50
51
% New Learnable Layer
52
newLearnableLayer = fullyConnectedLayer(numClasses , ...
53
'Name','new_fc', ...
54
'WeightLearnRateFactor',20, ...
55
'BiasLearnRateFactor',20);
56
57
% Replacing the last layers with new layers
58
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'fc1000',newLearnableLayer);
59
newsoftmaxLayer = softmaxLayer('Name','new_softmax');
60
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'fc1000_softmax',newsoftmaxLayer);
61
newClassLayer = classificationLayer('Name','new_classoutput');
62
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'ClassificationLayer_fc1000',newClassLayer);
63
64
65
% Preprocessing
66
imdsTrain.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
67
imdsValid.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
68
69
70
% Data Augumentation
71
augmenter = imageDataAugmenter( ...
72
'RandRotation',[-5 5],'RandXReflection',1,...
73
'RandYReflection',1,'RandXShear',[-0.05 0.05],'RandYShear',[-0.05 0.05]);
74
75
% Resizing all training images to [224 224] for ResNet architecture
76
augimdsTrain = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTrain ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
77
augimdsValid = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsValid ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
78
79
80
% Training Options , we choose a small mini-batch size due to limited images
81
options = trainingOptions('adam',...
82
'MaxEpochs',100,'MiniBatchSize',16,...
83
'ExecutionEnvironment', 'auto', ...
84
'Shuffle','every-epoch', ...
85
'InitialLearnRate',1e-4, ...
86
'Verbose',false, ...
87
'ValidationData',augimdsValid , ...
88
'ValidationFrequency',22, ...
89
'Plots','training -progress');
90
91
% Training
92
netTransfer = trainNetwork(augimdsTrain ,lgraph ,options);
93
94
95
%%
96
% Preprocess the test cases similar to the training
97
imdsTest.ReadFcn=@(filename)preprocess_retinal_resize(filename);
98
augimdsTest = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTest ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
99
% Predict Test Labels using Classify command
100
% Predict Test Labels
101
[predicted_labels ,posterior] = classify(netTransfer ,augimdsTest);
102
103
% Actual Labels
104
actual_labels = imdsTest.Labels;
105
76
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:85==
106
% Confusion Matrix
107
figure
108
plotconfusion(actual_labels ,predicted_labels)
109
title('Confusion Matrix: Resnet -Transfer Optos 2 categories , 0.80-0.2');
110
%%
111
%Tester accuracy score
112
[YPred,scores] = classify(netTransfer ,augimdsTest);
113
114
YTest = imdsTest.Labels;
115
accuracy = mean(YPred == YTest)
116
117
%%
118
119
test_labels=double(nominal(imdsTest.Labels));
120
121
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
122
[fp_rate ,tp_rate ,T,AUC]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,5),5);
123
figure;
124
plot(fp_rate ,tp_rate ,'b-');
125
grid on;
126
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
127
ylabel('Detection Rate');
128
title('ResNet50 - 2 Categories');
129
130
%%
131
test_labels=double(nominal(imds.Labels));
132
133
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
134
[fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,T,AUC1]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
135
[fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,T,AUC2]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,2),2);
136
[fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,T,AUC3]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,3),3);
137
[fp_rate4 ,tp_rate4 ,T,AUC4]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,4),4);
138
[fp_rate5 ,tp_rate5 ,T,AUC5]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,5),5);
139
140
141
figure;
142
143
plot(fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,'b-');
144
hold on
145
plot(fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,'g-');
146
hold on
147
plot(fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,'r-');
148
hold on
149
plot(fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,'y-');
150
hold on
151
plot(fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,'m-');
152
grid on;
153
legend('No DR','Mild-Moderate' , 'Severe -PDR','Location','Grade 4','Grade 4','
Location','SE');
154
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
155
156
%%
finalresnet.m
1
%%% Optos dataset - Resnet50 - 5fold
2
3
4
%% 5-fold cross validation med ResNet50 - Maria & Helena
5
% No DR/PDR, No DR/Mild-Moderate/Severe -PDR, No DR/Mild/Moderate/Severe/PDR
6
7
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
77
==PAGE:86==
8
datapath = ('/zhome/9e/7/119349/AllData');
9
% Image Datastore
10
imds=imageDatastore(datapath , ...
11
'IncludeSubfolders',true, ...
12
'LabelSource','foldernames');
13
% Determine the split up
14
total_split=countEachLabel(imds);
15
16
17
18
%% Visualize
19
20
% Number of Images
21
num_images=length(imds.Labels);
22
23
% Visualize random images
24
perm=randperm(num_images ,6);
25
figure;
26
for idx=1:length(perm)
27
28
subplot(2,3,idx);
29
imshow(imread(imds.Files{perm(idx)}));
30
title(sprintf('%s',imds.Labels(perm(idx))))
31
32
end
33
34
35
%%
36
37
% Number of folds
38
num_folds=5;
39
40
% Loop for each fold
41
for fold_idx=1:num_folds
42
43
fprintf('Processing %d among %d folds \n',fold_idx ,num_folds);
44
45
% Test Indices for current fold
46
test_idx=fold_idx:num_folds:num_images;
47
48
% Test cases for current fold
49
imdsTest = subset(imds,test_idx);
50
51
% Train indices for current fold
52
train_idx=setdiff(1:length(imds.Files),test_idx);
53
54
% Train cases for current fold
55
imdsTrain = subset(imds,train_idx);
56
57
% ResNet Architecture
58
net=resnet50;
59
lgraph = layerGraph(net);
60
clear net;
61
62
% Number of categories
63
numClasses = numel(categories(imdsTrain.Labels));
64
65
% New Learnable Layer
66
newLearnableLayer = fullyConnectedLayer(numClasses , ...
67
'Name','new_fc', ...
68
'WeightLearnRateFactor',20, ...
69
'BiasLearnRateFactor',20);
78
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:87==
70
71
% Replacing the last layers with new layers
72
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'fc1000',newLearnableLayer);
73
newsoftmaxLayer = softmaxLayer('Name','new_softmax');
74
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'fc1000_softmax',newsoftmaxLayer);
75
newClassLayer = classificationLayer('Name','new_classoutput');
76
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,'ClassificationLayer_fc1000',newClassLayer);
77
78
79
% Preprocessing Technique
80
imdsTrain.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
81
imdsTest.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
82
83
% Training Options , we choose a small mini-batch size due to limited
images
84
options = trainingOptions('adam',...
85
'MaxEpochs',50,'MiniBatchSize',16,...
86
'ExecutionEnvironment', 'auto', ...
87
'Shuffle','every-epoch', ...
88
'InitialLearnRate',1e-4, ...
89
'Verbose',false, ...
90
'Plots','training -progress');
91
92
% Data Augumentation
93
augmenter = imageDataAugmenter( ...
94
'RandRotation',[-5 5],'RandXReflection',1,...
95
'RandYReflection',1,'RandXShear',[-0.05 0.05],'RandYShear',[-0.05
0.05]);
96
97
98
99
% Resizing all training images to [224 224] for ResNet architecture
100
auimds = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTrain ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
101
102
% Training
103
netTransfer = trainNetwork(auimds ,lgraph ,options);
104
105
% Resizing all testing images to [224 224] for ResNet architecture
106
augtestimds = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTest);
107
108
% Testing and their corresponding Labels and Posterior for each Case
109
[predicted_labels(test_idx),posterior(test_idx ,:)] = classify(netTransfer ,
augtestimds);
110
111
% Save the Independent ResNet Architectures obtained for each Fold
112
save(sprintf('ResNet50_new2_Maria%d_among_%d_folds',fold_idx ,num_folds),'
netTransfer','test_idx','train_idx');
113
114
% Clearing unnecessary variables
115
clearvars -except fold_idx num_folds num_images predicted_labels posterior
imds netTransfer;
116
117
end
118
119
120
121
%%
122
actual_labels=imds.Labels;
123
124
% Confusion Matrix
125
figure;
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
79
==PAGE:88==
126
plotconfusion(actual_labels ,predicted_labels ')
127
title('Confusion Matrix: ResNet');
128
129
% Predict Test Labels using Classify command
130
131
132
%%
133
test_labels=double(nominal(imds.Labels));
134
135
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
136
[fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,T,AUC1]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
137
[fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,T,AUC2]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,2),2);
138
[fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,T,AUC3]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,3),3);
139
[fp_rate4 ,tp_rate4 ,T,AUC4]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,4),4);
140
[fp_rate5 ,tp_rate5 ,T,AUC5]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,5),5);
141
figure;
142
143
plot(fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,'b-');
144
hold on
145
plot(fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,'g-');
146
hold on
147
plot(fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,'r-');
148
hold on
149
plot(fp_rate4 ,tp_rate4 ,'y-');
150
hold on
151
plot(fp_rate5 ,tp_rate5 ,'m-');
152
grid on;
153
legend('G0','G1' , 'G2', 'G3', 'G4','Location','SE');
154
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
155
ylabel('Detection Rate');
5foldresnet.m
1
%%% Optos dataset - VGG16 - 5fold
2
3
4
%% 5-fold cross validation med VGG16 - Maria & Helena
5
% No DR/PDR, No DR/Mild-Moderate/Severe -PDR, No DR/Mild/Moderate/Severe/PDR
6
7
clear all
8
% Hente og dele bilder
9
datapath = ('/zhome/9e/7/119349/AllData');
10
% Image Datastore
11
imds=imageDatastore(datapath , ...
12
'IncludeSubfolders',true, ...
13
'LabelSource','foldername');
14
15
% Determine the split up
16
total_split=countEachLabel(imds);
17
%% Visualize
18
19
% Number of Images
20
num_images=length(imds.Labels);
21
22
% Visualize random images
23
perm=randperm(num_images ,6);
24
figure;
25
for idx=1:length(perm)
26
27
subplot(2,3,idx);
28
imshow(imread(imds.Files{perm(idx)}));
29
title(sprintf('%s',imds.Labels(perm(idx))))
80
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:89==
30
31
end
32
33
%%
34
35
36
% Number of folds
37
num_folds=5;
38
39
% Loop for each fold
40
for fold_idx=1:num_folds
41
42
fprintf('Processing %d among %d folds \n',fold_idx ,num_folds);
43
44
% Test Indices for current fold
45
test_idx=fold_idx:num_folds:num_images;
46
47
% Test cases for current fold
48
imdsTest = subset(imds,test_idx);
49
50
% Train indices for current fold
51
train_idx=setdiff(1:length(imds.Files),test_idx);
52
53
% Train cases for current fold
54
imdsTrain = subset(imds,train_idx);
55
56
57
% VGG-16 Architecture
58
net = vgg16;
59
inputSize = net.Layers(1).InputSize;
60
%layersTransfer = net.Layers(1:end-3); gamle versjon
61
62
isa(net,'SeriesNetwork')
63
lgraph = layerGraph(net.Layers);
64
65
% Husk å legg funktionen inn i samme mappe
66
[learnableLayer ,classLayer] = findLayersToReplace(lgraph);
67
68
numClasses = numel(categories(imdsTrain.Labels));
69
70
isa(learnableLayer ,'nnet.cnn.layer.FullyConnectedLayer')
71
newLearnableLayer = fullyConnectedLayer(numClasses , ...
72
'Name','new_fc', ...
73
'WeightLearnRateFactor',20, ...
74
'BiasLearnRateFactor',20);
75
76
77
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,learnableLayer.Name,newLearnableLayer);
78
79
newClassLayer = classificationLayer('Name','new_classoutput');
80
lgraph = replaceLayer(lgraph ,classLayer.Name,newClassLayer);
81
82
83
% Preprocessing Technique
84
imdsTrain.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
85
imdsTest.ReadFcn = @(filename)preprocess_retinal(filename);
86
87
% Training Options , we choose a small mini-batch size due to limited
images
88
options = trainingOptions('sgdm',...
89
'MaxEpochs',50,'MiniBatchSize',16,...
90
'ExecutionEnvironment', 'gpu', ...
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
81
==PAGE:90==
91
'Shuffle','every-epoch', ...
92
'InitialLearnRate',1e-4, ...
93
'Verbose',false, ...
94
'Plots','training -progress');
95
96
% Data Augumentation
97
augmenter = imageDataAugmenter( ...
98
'RandRotation',[-5 5],'RandXReflection',1,...
99
'RandYReflection',1,'RandXShear',[-0.05 0.05],'RandYShear',[-0.05
0.05]);
100
101
% Resizing all training images to [224 224] for ResNet architecture
102
auimds = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTrain ,'DataAugmentation',
augmenter);
103
104
% Training
105
netTransfer = trainNetwork(auimds ,lgraph ,options);
106
107
% Resizing all testing images to [224 224] for ResNet architecture
108
augtestimds = augmentedImageDatastore([224 224],imdsTest);
109
110
% Testing and their corresponding Labels and Posterior for each Case
111
[predicted_labels(test_idx),posterior(test_idx ,:)] = classify(netTransfer ,
augtestimds);
112
113
% Save the Independent ResNet Architectures obtained for each Fold
114
save(sprintf('VGG16 -125_PDRvs0_Categories_%d_among_%d_folds',fold_idx ,
num_folds),'netTransfer','test_idx','train_idx');
115
116
% Clearing unnecessary variables
117
clearvars -except fold_idx num_folds num_images predicted_labels posterior
imds netTransfer;
118
119
end
120
121
122
%%
123
124
125
126
actual_labels=imds.Labels;
127
128
% Confusion Matrix
129
figure;
130
plotconfusion(actual_labels ,predicted_labels ')
131
title('Confusion Matrix: Vgg16, 5 Folds, PreP.Green+ConBrig');
132
133
%%
134
135
test_labels=double(nominal(imds.Labels));
136
137
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
138
[fp_rate ,tp_rate ,T,AUC]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
139
figure;
140
plot(fp_rate ,tp_rate ,'b-');
141
grid on;
142
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
143
ylabel('Detection Rate');
144
145
146
%%
147
test_labels=double(nominal(imds.Labels));
82
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:91==
148
149
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
150
[fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,T,AUC1]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
151
[fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,T,AUC2]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,2),2);
152
[fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,T,AUC3]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,3),3);
153
[fp_rate4 ,tp_rate4 ,T,AUC4]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,4),4);
154
[fp_rate5 ,tp_rate5 ,T,AUC5]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,5),5);
155
figure;
156
157
plot(fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,'b-');
158
hold on
159
plot(fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,'g-');
160
hold on
161
plot(fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,'r-');
162
hold on
163
plot(fp_rate4 ,tp_rate4 ,'y-');
164
hold on
165
plot(fp_rate5 ,tp_rate5 ,'m-');
166
grid on;
167
legend('G0','G1' , 'G2', 'G3', 'G4','Location','SE');
168
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
169
ylabel('Detection Rate');
170
171
172
%%
173
test_labels=double(nominal(imds.Labels));
174
175
% ROC Curve - Our target class is the first class in this scenario
176
[fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,T,AUC1]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,1),1);
177
[fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,T,AUC2]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,2),2);
178
[fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,T,AUC3]=perfcurve(test_labels ,posterior(:,3),3);
179
180
181
figure;
182
183
plot(fp_rate1 ,tp_rate1 ,'b-');
184
hold on
185
plot(fp_rate2 ,tp_rate2 ,'g-');
186
hold on
187
plot(fp_rate3 ,tp_rate3 ,'r-');
188
189
grid on;
190
legend('Mild/Moderate','No DR', 'Severe/PDR','Location','SE');
191
xlabel('False Positive Rate');
192
ylabel('Detection Rate');
5foldvgg16.m
1
function Iout = preprocess_Xray(filename)
2
% This function preprocesses the given image by converting it into
3
% grayscale if required and later converting to 3-channel image to adapt to
4
% existing deep learning architectures
5
%
6
% Author: Barath Narayanan
7
% Date: 3/17/2020
8
9
% Read the Filename
10
I = imread(filename);
11
12
% Some images might be RGB, convert them to Grayscale
13
if ~ismatrix(I)
14
I=rgb2gray(I);
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
83
==PAGE:92==
15
end
16
17
% Replicate the image 3 times to create an RGB image
18
Iout = cat(3,I,I,I);
19
20
end
preprocess_Xray.m
1
function Iout = preprocess_GreyCropped(filename)
2
% This function transform an image to grayscale , followed by a cropping the
3
% image, and adjusting for brightness and contrast
4
5
% Maria B. Pettersen
6
7
I = imread(filename);
8
9
% Some images might be RGB, convert them to Grayscale
10
if ~ismatrix(I)
11
I=rgb2gray(I);
12
end
13
14
[rows, columns , numberOfColorBands] = size(I);
15
% Enlarge figure to full screen.
16
set(gcf, 'units','normalized','outerposition',[0 0 1 1]);
17
% Give a name to the title bar.
18
set(gcf,'name','Demo by ImageAnalyst','numbertitle','off')
19
% Get all rows and columns where the image is nonzero
20
[nonZeroRows , nonZeroColumns] = find(I);
21
% Get the cropping parameters
22
topRow = min(nonZeroRows(:));
23
bottomRow = max(nonZeroRows(:));
24
leftColumn = min(nonZeroColumns(:));
25
rightColumn = max(nonZeroColumns(:));
26
% Extract a cropped image from the original.
27
croppedImage = I(topRow:bottomRow , leftColumn:rightColumn);
28
% Display the original gray scale image.
29
K = imadjust(croppedImage ,[0.1 0.5],[]);
30
31
%Inorm = mat2gray(K);
32
33
Iout = cat(3,K,K,K);
34
35
36
end
preprocess_GreyCropped.m
1
function Iout = preprocess_retinal(filename)
2
% This function extract the image green channel , followed by a cropping the
3
% image, and adjusting for brightness and contrast
4
%
5
% Author: Maria B. Pettersen
6
% Date: 7/4/2021
7
8
% Read the Filename
9
I = imread(filename);
10
11
% Covert to green cchannel
12
GreenC = I(:, :, 2);
13
14
% Crop
84
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
==PAGE:93==
15
verticalProfile = sum(GreenC , 2); % Sum along columns in each row.
16
row1 = find(verticalProfile , 1, 'first');
17
row2 = find(verticalProfile , 1, 'last');
18
horizontalProfile = sum(GreenC , 1); % Sum along rows in each column.
19
column1 = find(horizontalProfile , 1, 'first');
20
column2 = find(horizontalProfile , 1, 'last');
21
croppedImage = GreenC(row1:row2, column1:column2);
22
23
% Contrast and light
24
25
K = imadjust(croppedImage ,[0.1 0.6],[]);
26
27
%Normalizing
28
29
% Replicate the image 3 times to create an RGB image
30
Iout = cat(3,K,K,K);
31
32
end
preprocess_retinal.m
Automatic grading of Optos Ultra wide­field fundus images
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Rishcard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
