==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of a Startup Guideline 
for Creating a Sustainable 
Product/Service-Systems Enabling 
a Circular Economy within the Field 
of Consumer Goods.  
 
A collaboration between MSc. Design and Innovation & MSc. Sustainable Design Engineering 
- Caroline Cloos, Clara Brink Møller & Sarah Sophia Ifaoui 
 
June 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Title Page
Dansk
titel:
Udvikling af en Startup Guideline til Bæredygtige Produkt/Service-Systemer ved
Inkorporering af Cirkulær Økonomi inden for forbrugsvarer.
English title: Development of a Startup Guideline for Creating Sustainable Product/Service-Systems
Enabling a Circular Economy within the Field of Consumer Goods.
Universities: Aalborg University of Copenhagen (AAU) & Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Supervisors: Associate Professor, PhD Daniela Christina Antelmi Pigosso (DTU) & Associate Professor,
PhD Honorary Doctor Michael Søgaard Jørgensen (AAU)
Co-supervisor: Associate Professor, PhD Francesco Rosati (DTU)
A Collaboration between the MSc. Sustainable Design Engineering and Design & Innovation.
The three students have contributed equally to the writing of the thesis.
MSc. Design & Innovation, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Caroline Cloos
Student.no. s153950
Date 04.06-21_________________________________________
MSc. Design & Innovation, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Clara Brink Møller
Student.no. s152696
Date 04.06-21_________________________________________
MSc. Sustainable Design Engineering, Aalborg University of Copenhagen (AAU)
Sarah Sophia Ifaoui
Student.no. 20163577
Date 04.06-21_________________________________________
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Startups are successful drivers for developing innovative product/service-system business models
enabling a circular economy that mitigates the environmental and social challenges in today's society
while sustaining economic growth and meeting user needs. Thus, there is a gap in research on
guidelines gathering methods within the areas of product/service-systems, circular economy, and
sustainability to support the development of a product/service-system startup. This study aims to
investigate, test and evaluate on what process and methods are needed to create a guideline that
supports the development of a sustainable product/service-system business model enabling a circular
economy. Using a design research approach, the guideline was developed, tested and revised. The test
was conducted by applying the proposed methods in the guideline to a case study of developing a
sustainable products/service-system startup targeting the baby equipment and toys market. The
development of the product/service-system startup and hereby the test of the guideline follows a
proposed design framework. A proposal for a guideline gathering methods relevant to the areas of
product/service-systems, circular economy, and sustainability is introduced. The guideline proves to
support the facilitation of the development of a product/service-system startup concept focusing on all
three sustainable dimensions and incorporating circular economy strategies. The project proposes that
future
research
investigates
the
area
of
frameworks
for
supporting
the
development
of
product/service-systems implementing sustainable and circular strategies. Additionally, future studies
should investigate and test the applicability of the guideline to other consumer goods markets and with
practitioners of different backgrounds.
Keywords:
Product/Service-System,
Circular
Economy,
Economic
Sustainability,
Environmental
Sustainability, Social Sustainability, Guideline, Startup
3
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the people contributing to the study.
The authors of this study would like to show the greatest appreciation and thank the two supervisors
Associate Professor, Ph.D. Daniela Christina Antelmi Pigosso and Associate Professor, Ph.D. Honorary
Doctor Michael Søgaard Jørgensen and the co-supervisor Associate Professor, Ph.D. Francesco Rosati.
Thanks to all three for reviewing the work, inspiring through discussions, and providing guidance
throughout each phase of the process at any given time.
Many thanks to the two universities, Aalborg University of Copenhagen (AAU) and Technological
University of Denmark (DTU) for allowing a collaborative master thesis project.
The authors would like to stress their deepest appreciation to the CEO of BabySam, Kenneth
Willenbrack Nørgaard for taking time out of a busy schedule to have a knowledge-sharing workshop
about different experiences from the industry of baby equipment and toys. In addition a huge
appreciation to the CEO of MoonBoon, Marie Grew for sharing her experiences within the baby
equipment and toys industry and contributing with her learnings about creating a startup.
Similarly, the authors would like to thank the Co-founder of the startup Søuld Gunnar Agerskov Madsen,
HR & Communication specialist Sarah Patocska and Customer Support & Communication specialist
Mie Hammerich from the startup Rask Rask for their contributions towards gaining insights around
developing a startup and its potential challenges and opportunities.
Finally, the authors would like to acknowledge the research participants, not least the 15 users
contributing to the workshops throughout the study. Furthermore our deepest gratitude to the 1512
respondents to the different surveys allowing the authors to develop concepts based on a significant
amount of data.
4
==PAGE:5==
Learning objectives
DTU
1.
Identify and summarise knowledge about PSS development within startups
2.
Systematically compare and analyse startups’ approaches for PSS development
3.
Compare and evaluate user needs and existing solutions to find PSS business opportunities
4.
Outline the existing market and illustrate insights through a Value Offering Gallery
5.
Demonstrate how a PSS development process can help develop a PSS startup
6.
Illustrate a minimum viable product (MVP) for the PSS startup
7.
Demonstrate User Experience (UX) guidelines to design the prototype
8.
Analyse the sustainability potential of the PSS startup
9.
Calculate and analyse the economic viability of the PSS startup
10. Summarise the advantages and disadvantages of developing sustainable PSS startups
11. Design a guideline for startups creating sustainable PSSs
12. Evaluate the final guideline using external feedback to improve the guideline
AAU
Knowledge
1.
Has knowledge about and understanding of the latest international research in the fields of
sustainability, design and innovation
2.
Has knowledge about how to critically assess knowledge and identify problems with regards to
sustainability, design and innovation, within the chosen subject
Skills
3.
Can frame a design assignment or a sustainability challenge using professional tools and
methods
4.
Can motivate choices of methods and/or theoretical approach behind the design project
5.
Can select appropriate research-based knowledge for use in the design process and has
awareness regarding their value and limitations
6.
Can argue for a solution with regards to its business potential
7.
Can analyse market conditions (users, technologies, competitors, etc.) and describe how own
solution will perform in this market
8.
Can stage design and innovation processes
9.
Can communicate design and design proposals in a professional manner
Competencies
10. Is able to present the results of the project work in a project report and during an oral
examination and argue for the approach taken and the results
11. Is able to independently manage a project from start to finish and reflect on the processes,
theories, methods and tools used. Type of instruction: Project work with supervision,
supporting seminars and milestones.
5
==PAGE:6==
Table of Content
Title Page
2
Abstract
3
Acknowledgment
4
Learning objectives
5
DTU
5
AAU
5
Introduction
12
Research Question
14
Methodology
15
The Design Research Methodology
15
Research Clarification
17
Descriptive Study I
17
Prescriptive Study
17
Descriptive Study II
18
The Systemic Design Framework
19
Study Process
22
Systematic Literature Review
25
Planning Phase
25
Execution Phase
25
Literature Review
28
Existing Guidelines
29
Existing methods and guidelines
29
Product/Service-Systems
31
The Definition of Product/Service-Systems
31
The Eight Types of Product/Service-Systems
32
Applicability and Feasibility of Product/Service-Systems
33
Circular Economy
33
The Definition of Circular Economy
33
Strategies for Achieving a Circular Economy
35
Product/Service-Systems as Enablers of a Circular Economy
36
Sustainability
37
Sustainability as a Concept
37
Social, Environmental, and Economic Sustainability
37
Returning to ‘Old’ Thoughts of Sustainability
38
The Relation Between Sustainability and Circular Economy in Literature
39
The Relation Between Sustainability and Product/Service-System in the Literature
41
Environmental Sustainability and Product/Service-Systems
41
Rebound Effects
43
The Relationship Between Product/Service-Systems, Circular Economy and Sustainability in Literature
44
6
==PAGE:7==
Development of a Guideline Closing the Gap in Literature
45
Concluding notes on the Research Clarification
46
The Systemic Design Framework
49
Criteria for Developing a Guideline
51
Concluding notes on the Descriptive Study I
54
Online Workshop with Startups
57
Criteria for the Methods Selected to the Guideline
58
Online Methods and Guidelines
60
Guideline 1.0
61
Concluding notes on the Prescriptive Study
63
The Test Process
66
Literature Review on Product/Service-Systems Within the Baby Equipment and Toys Market
69
Pilot Project with Bugaboo
70
PramShare and PramWash
71
Exploring the Existing Market
71
Reflection
71
Selected Methods to be Tested from Guideline 1.0
72
Explore & Reframe
74
Test and Revision of Methods for the Explore & Reframe Phase
76
Learnings from the Explore & Reframe Phase
80
Understanding the Ecosystem of Baby Equipment and Toys
80
Moonboon Baby Studio
81
BabySam
82
Understanding the Users
84
Workshop and Survey Insights Applied to other Methods
89
Insights from Total Cost of Ownership, Rebound Effects and LCA
90
The Ecosystem Map
93
Summarise of the Explore & Reframe Phase
97
Create
98
Test and Revision of Methods for the Create Phase
100
Learnings from the Create Phase
101
Personas
101
Brainstorming Ideas and Concepts
102
Generating ideas with users through Morphology
103
Investigation of the three concepts
105
Storyboards
105
MiniStream
106
PlayCase
106
PaRENT
106
Summarise of the Create Phase
107
Catalyse
108
Test and Revision of Methods for the Catalyse Phase
109
Learnings from the Catalyse Phase
111
Life Cycle Assessment and Ecodesign in One Day
115
7
==PAGE:8==
Survey Analysis - Feedback on the Three Concepts
117
Final Concepts
120
Summarise of the Catalyse Phase
120
Continuing the Journey
121
Test and Revision of Methods for the Continuing the Journey Phase
123
Learnings from the Continuing the Journey Phase
123
Elaborating on MiniPlay and PaRENT
123
Triple Layered Business Model Canvas
127
MiniPlay
130
Economic Sustainability Aspects
130
Type of PSS
130
Environmental Sustainability Aspects
130
CE Strategies Implemented
130
Social Sustainability Aspects
131
PaRENT
131
Economic Sustainability Aspects
131
Type of PSS
131
Environmental Sustainability Aspects
131
CE Strategies Implemented
131
Social Sustainability Aspects
132
Summarise of the Continuing the Journey Phase
132
Presentation of ‘Guideline for Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS Startup’
133
Choosing Methods from each Phase of the Systemic Design Approach
134
1 day for the Guideline
134
3 weeks for the Guideline
135
4 months for the Guideline
135
4+ months for the Guideline
135
Concluding notes on the Descriptive Study II
136
Discussion
138
Summary of Key Findings
139
Interpretations & Implications of the Study
139
Limitations of the Study & Recommendations for Further Work
141
Reflecting on Learning Objectives
142
Conclusion
143
Bibliography
146
8
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
In consumerism, where the living standard is increasing globally year by year, more and more money is
spent on baby equipment and toys. The market is projected to reach US $184.161,00 million in 2021,
resulting in an annual growth rate of 8.32% projected from 2021 to 2025 (Statista, 2021). As a parent,
new to this market, it can be extremely difficult to differentiate between what equipment and toys are
nice-to-have and what are need-to-have as you are introduced to thousands of must-have-lists,
sponsored ads on social media and trendy parents on the street scene. Baby equipment and toys have
become identity shaping elements for the modern parent with huge expectations for the newest and
best high-class products to become ‘the perfect parent’. Meanwhile, a paradox arises as these ‘perfect
parents’ are the same users that aim to be more environmentally sustainable.
The toy and baby equipment industry uses 40 tons of plastic for every $1 million in revenues and is the
most plastic-intensive industry in the world (The World Counts, 2021).1 in 3 parents admit to having
thrown away equipment and toys in working condition. Paradoxically, a study by (Waight, 2013) shows
that parents agree that it makes practical sense to acquire used items if they are good value for money
and fit the purpose as kids grow out of clothes, toys and equipment long before the items reach the end
of life.
As a result, reusable products are thrown out, and valuable resources like plastics are lost (The World
Counts, 2021).
Product/service-system as a concept has been proposed to tackle the environmental challenges by
finding potentials to sustain the economic growth and consumer demand by using fewer resources and
thereby causing less pollution while adding value to the users (O. Mont, 2004).
This
master
thesis project aims to develop a startup guideline for creating a sustainable
product/service-system within the field of consumer goods, that enables a circular economy. The
guideline will be tested through the case study of building a startup within the baby equipment and toys
industry to solve identified challenges of becoming a new parent.
The thesis and the creation of the guideline will follow the Design Research Methodology phases
described in the methodology section (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009). The development of a startup
within the baby equipment and toys market and the guideline test will follow the Systemic Design
Framework, a revised version of the Double Diamond framework for innovation design (Design Council,
2021).
The profit generation and the market success of a product/service-system critically depend on the
decisions made during the initial lifecycle stages covering the conceptualisation, design, and
development of a product/service-system (Sassanelli et al., 2015). Additionally, decisions regarding
environmental and social aspects of a product/service-system business model, that can potentially
increase the competitive advantage on the market, are advantageously taken during the initial stages of
the development. In exploring the plethora of models and methods supporting the development of
startups, it becomes clear that there is no sufficient guideline in the literature supporting sustainable
product/service-system startups enabling a circular economy (Barquet et al., 2016); (Scherer et al.,
2016). Current models and methods are often relevant to large companies and are not necessarily
applicable for developing startups or Small and Medium-sized Enterprises. Furthermore, research
provides no consolidated framework gathering strategies for overcoming sustainability barriers when
developing and implementing sustainable product/service-systems (de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019).
10
==PAGE:11==
Entrepreneurship and startups play a major role in accelerating the transformation of society and
businesses towards sustainable development. A startup is often established by a few people and can
therefore be seen as a small business. Startups can deliver innovative business models and take
advantage of existing market failures (Trautwein, 2021). Thus, startups face challenges, as they have to
deal with limited resources and limited knowledge of markets and at the same time compete with
technologies, products, and services that are continuously evolving. These characteristics influence the
possibilities for startups to assess the sustainable impact of a business idea.
It is seen in the literature that there are hardly any product/service-system development nor
assessment approaches explicitly designed for the needs of startups. Furthermore, the few existing
methods, models, and guides for developing startups within the field of product/service-systems are
often too comprehensive for startups to apply in the initial phases or lack guidance on using the
method (Trautwein, 2021).
To change the current production and consumption patterns of products, a new strategy is needed.
However, decreasing the consumption patterns does not seem an option as the industrialised countries
do not seem willing to lower their consumption (O. K. Mont, 2002).
Traditionally, selling products is turning into an old-fashioned business, and companies have started to
focus on selling experiences and satisfaction as an integrated solution (Tukker & Tischner, 2017).
Today, the notion of product/service-system is well known but still appears under various names such
as shared economy, solution development, and functional sales (Tukker, 2004).
The research area of circular economy needs to be explored, as the guideline aims at developing
product/service-system startups enabling a circular economy. The concept has recently gained
increased popularity amongst scholars and practitioners worldwide, and the Chinese government has
even enforced a law supporting a circular economy adopted in 2008 (Kirchherr et al., 2017; Korhonen et
al., 2018). The theoretical foundation of circular economy originates from the definition of industrial
ecology from the early 1990s. Still, it has achieved rapid growth in peer-reviewed articles on circular
economy in the last ten years, which indicates a divergence in the research field of circular economy
(Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016; Kirchherr et al., 2017). The circular approach replaces the linear
‘take-make-dispose’ pattern that dates back to the industrial revolution. Here businesses see production
and resources as unlimited, and products are sold to users who dispose of them when they are no
longer helpful. Circular economy aims to replace this ‘cradle-to-grave’ approach, where waste is created,
with a ‘cradle-to-cradle’ approach, where materials are kept in a closed loop (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2013). Companies are starting to adapt to a circular economy as their former linear
approach to resource consumption leads to substantial losses along the value chain of products and
increases their exposure to risks like high resource prices (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013).
The research area of sustainability has been explored, as the guideline aims to develop sustainable
product/service-system startups. Over time, sustainability as a concept has been bent, shaped, and
re-interpreted. Famously, scholar (Elkington, 1998) proposes the ‘triple bottom line’ of sustainability
containing social, economic, and environmental aspects which in literature occasionally are referred to
as people, profit, and planet. According to (Holden, 2007), the concept was introduced by (Elkington,
1998), who found that social and economic dimensions needed to be addressed in an integrated
manner to achieve sufficient environmental progress (Holden, 2007).
The thesis investigates and identifies a gap in the literature on guidelines gathering methods within the
areas of product/service-systems, circular economy, and sustainability to support the development of a
product/service-system startup. This study will contribute to closing the identified gap by developing
11
==PAGE:12==
such a guideline. An understanding of the concepts of product/service-systems, circular economy, and
sustainability and their interrelationship, as defined in literature, is gained to support the development of
the guideline. The guideline will be co-developed and tested by creating a product/service-system within
the field of baby equipment and toys and validated through workshops with external actors.
Research Question
The thesis aims to create a guideline that applies to the early phases of business development of
startups intending to develop sustainable product-service systems within consumer goods while
enabling a circular economy. A research question, to be answered to meet the goal of the thesis, is
formulated as follows:
Which process and methods are needed to create a
guideline that supports the development of a
sustainable product/service-system business model
enabling a circular economy?
Three sub-questions (SQ) were formulated to give further insights to the research question;
●
SQ1: Which sustainable product/service-system startup guidelines enabling a circular economy
exist in the literature and online?
●
SQ2: What are the criteria for a guideline for developing a sustainable product/service-system
startup enabling a circular economy?
●
SQ3: How can a guideline through a startup case study be tested and evaluated?
12
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Methodology
The Design Research Methodology
The research in this thesis will be structured around the Design Research Methodology (DRM) proposed
by (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009). The DRM was developed to meet the need for a standard
methodology for conducting design research to develop academic and practical knowledge.
DRM provides a systematic way for design research and seeks to link research questions together
through the four main phases: Research Clarification (RC), Descriptive Study I (DS I), Prescriptive Study
(PS), and Descriptive Study II (DS II). Design in this context is ‘(...) those activities that actually generate
and develop a product from a need, product idea or technology to the full documentation needed to
realise the product and to fulfill the perceived needs of the user and other stakeholders’ (Blessing &
Chakrabarti, 2009). Although DRM is composed of four phases, it is not a linear process but a process
with iterations running back and forth.
The guideline for developing sustainable product/service-system startups enabling a circular economy
developed throughout this project will follow the DRM phases RC, DS I, PS, and DS II. The set guideline
from the RC, DS I, and PS will be tested in the DS II through the Systemic Design Framework, a revised
version of the Double Diamond framework for innovation design by the British Design Council (Design
Council, 2021). The process is shown in Figure 1.
In the following sections, we wish to delve into the specific phases, define the intent, and highlight how
it appears in this particular research context.
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1: DRM phases and activities and the Systemic Design Framework of the guideline through the creation of a product/service-system startup
15
==PAGE:16==
Research Clarification
To identify and verify the research goals of the thesis, a research clarification is performed. A
systematic literature review and a literature review is conducted to investigate different guidelines
proposed in the literature. The research clarification aims to examine and answer the following
questions:
●
What product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability guidelines and methods exist
in the literature, and how do they contribute to the development of a startup?
●
How is the interrelationship between the concepts of product/service-system, circular economy,
and sustainability defined in the literature?
●
What notion of the relationship between product/service-system concepts, circular economy, and
sustainability should be followed throughout the project?
The outcome of the research clarification is a representation of existing literature on guidelines for
developing sustainable product/service-systems functioning as a reference for the master thesis study.
Descriptive Study I
In the descriptive study, the aim is to increase the understanding of the preliminary diagnosed problems
by building on the initial reference from the research clarification. It is achieved through a comparative
analysis of existing guidelines which will be done by comparing the guidelines to the Systemic Design
Framework by (Design Council, 2021) and by examining the guidelines against created criteria to
develop a product/service-system startup closing identified gaps in the literature. The outcome will
highlight the topic’s relevance, illustrate and point towards how to improve the situation (Blessing &
Chakrabarti, 2009). The questions to be answered in the Descriptive Study I are:
●
How do product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability guidelines and methods in
literature contribute to the different phases of the revised double diamond from the Systemic
Design Framework?
●
What are the criteria for developing a guideline for startups and which of these do the guidelines
and methods identified in the literature meet?
Prescriptive Study
The prescriptive study is about building the support that can help improve the design. Elaborating on
the two previous phases, there is now a clear understanding of diagnosed problems and a vision on
how to solve them. In this phase, it is essential to develop explicit support that demonstrates the
concept and desired situation. Therefore, the support builds upon empirical data and the understanding
obtained in both the research clarification and descriptive study. The deliverables for this phase include
a description of the intended design together with an introduction plan. How will the concept take form,
how will it function, and a plan to introduce it, develop and maintain it (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009).
Therefore, the Prescriptive Study will include the final guideline development created from the identified
design criteria. The questions to be answered in the Prescriptive Study are:
●
What criteria should be met by methods and guidelines to be applicable in Guideline 1.0?
●
What methods from literature and online guidelines meet these criteria and contribute to
Guideline 1.0?
16
==PAGE:17==
Descriptive Study II
The second descriptive study is aiming at evaluating the design support. This phase is closely linked
with the previous, meaning that descriptive study II will most likely run parallel with the previous
prescriptive study. The outcome of the phase should be concept improvement goals and a refined and
feasible introduction plan. Here it is essential to evaluate the assumptions behind the contextual layout,
the influential factors, the vision, and the success criteria (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009).
The created guideline from the Prescriptive Study will be tested by creating a product/service-system
startup. The testing will follow guideline 1.0, which follows the Systemic Design Framework (Design
Council, 2021). Furthermore, the final tested guideline will be presented, and a decision tree will be
created to ease the choice between methods when developing a startup. The questions to be answered
in the Descriptive Study II are:
●
How can the methods of the guideline be tested and evaluated through a startup case study and
how can the Systemic Design Framework contribute to it?
17
==PAGE:18==
The Systemic Design Framework
The design framework proposed in the guideline developed throughout the RC, DS I, PS, DSII phase of
the DRM follows the Systemic Design Framework (SDF). This is a revised version of the Double Diamond
framework for innovation design by the British Design Council (Design Council, 2021). The SDF aims to
provide support for a more sustainable and systematic design process by following the six principles
below (Design Council, 2021):
-
People and planet centered
Focusing on the shared benefits of all living things.
-
Zooming in and out
From the micro to macro, from root cause to hopeful vision, from the present to the future,
from personal to more comprehensive.
-
Testing and growing
Making things to test how they work and help more things emerge.
-
Inclusive and welcoming difference
Creating safe, shared spaces and language to bring in multiple and marginalised perspectives.
-
Collaborating and connecting
Seeing a project as one element in the broader movement for change.
-
Circular and regenerative
Focus on existing assets - physical and social - and how we can reuse, nurture and grow these.
The SDF continues to follow a double diamond framework. Therefore, the process similarly involves
divergent and convergent thinking and provides space and confidence to challenge the brief (Design
Council, 2021).
The SDF is visualised in Figure 2 and is applicable by designers and non-designers providing a design
process that recognises the interconnected, complex nature of challenges and prioritises the planet and
its people (Design Council, 2021).
18
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2: The SDF, a revised version of the Double Diamond framework for innovation design by the British Design Council (Design Council, 2021)
19
==PAGE:20==
From the SDF orientation and vision setting, connections and relationships, and leadership and
storytelling are used as guiding stones for developing the guideline.
Orientation and vision setting is used as a starting point of the guideline and developing the startup. It is
crucial to start with a hopeful vision of a clear mission wanting to be achieved (Design Council, 2021).
Leadership and storytelling are used throughout the project, as it is important to self-reflect and learn
throughout the work. Furthermore, it has been necessary to share stories and approaches with others
and work openly (Design Council, 2021). Connections and relationships with stakeholders have been a
core step in the thesis as relationship building happens throughout the design process and is as vital as
the design itself. It builds empathy around the users, stakeholders, and the environment (Design
Council, 2021). Participatory design is incorporated as a mindset for engaging users throughout the
startup development and designing with the users (B.-N.Sanders, 2002). Participatory workshops have
been a core element of conducting empirical data throughout the study. A process of investigating,
understanding, reflecting upon, establishing, developing, and supporting mutual learning between
multiple users in collective ‘reflection-in-action’ has happened throughout the guideline development
and testing (Simonsen & Robertsen, 2013)
The baby equipment and toys product/service-system startup will be developed through the five phases
of the SDF. These are: explore, reframe, create, catalyse, and continuing the journey. A design team can
follow the phases one by one or go back and forth between these through an iterative process (Design
Council, 2021). Below is an outline of the different elements of these phases (Design Council, 2021):
-
Explore Is about exploring the existing system. It is crucial to investigate the root cause of
problems, consider what ideas and resources exist already, and develop a bold and hopeful
vision of how the future could look.
-
Reframe Is about reframing the problem in different ways to act as a springboard for new
ideas. It is done by bringing users together and synthesising insight, and by identifying
opportunities and challenges.
-
Create Moves towards the goal by creating a series of different actions and ideas. It is about
thinking big and adopting a circular mindset.
-
Catalyse Shows users what a new vision looks like and feels tangibly. Here the practitioner
should think about the sustainability aspects and determine the environmental and social
impact of what is being developed. A narrative should be created for others to join in with their
ideas.
-
Continuing the Journey Is about reflecting on the project and considering what needs to
happen next. Work is never done, and other opportunities may arise. Therefore, the outcome
must be open-ended and focus on creating and sharing knowledge for future work (Design
Council, 2021).
The guideline will be tested by applying this framework to the case study of developing a sustainable
product/service-system startup enabling a circular economy within the baby equipment and toys
market. The test is conducted throughout the DS II phase, and the guideline is evaluated and improved
based on the test.
20
==PAGE:21==
Study Process
A guide to understand the study process through the combination of the Design Research Methodology (DRM) and the Systemic Design Framework (SDF) is seen
in Figure 3. The figure explains the study process including overall steps. The model can be used as a guide for reading the report
Figure 3: Study Process
21
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
Research 
Clarification 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
Preface 
In the Research Clarification, a systematic literature review is performed to identify existing research 
related to the research question. A literature review is conducted to understand theories and methods in 
research associated with product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability. Furthermore, the 
literature review identifies existing methods and guidelines related to product/service-system, circular 
economy, and sustainability aspects of a concept development process.We aim to answer these 
questions in the following section: 
 
 
• 
What product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability guidelines and methods exist 
in the literature, and how do they contribute to the development of a startup? 
• 
What is the interrelationship between the concepts of product/service-system, circular economy, 
and sustainability defined in the literature? 
• 
What notion of the relationship between product/service-system, circular economy, and 
sustainability should be followed throughout the project? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Systematic Literature
Review
A systematic literature review was conducted to identify empirical evidence related to the research
question: What process and methods are needed to create a guideline that supports developing a
sustainable product/service-system business model enabling a circular economy?
The review followed three systematic literature review phases proposed by (Biolchini et al., 2005),
covering the phases Planning, Executing, and Analysis. A systematic literature review following these
phases was performed to enable replicability.
Planning Phase
In the Planning phase of the literature study, a list of associated search terms was developed for the
areas of interest of the study. These were related to the area of a guideline, the area of a startup, and the
areas of PSS, circular economy, and sustainability. The identified search terms are presented in Figure 4.
The literature study was conducted using several databases relevant to the area of study. These were
Scopus, DTU Findit, and AUB (Aalborg Library). The following search string was formulated:
("Guideline" OR "Guidance" OR "Framework") AND ("start*up" OR "SME" OR "Small and medium-sized
enterprises") AND ("PSS" OR "Product Service System" OR "Product Service Systems" OR "Product
Service Solutions" OR "Function-oriented business model" OR "Functional Sales") AND ("Circular
Economy" OR "CE" OR "Circularity" OR "Closed loop economy") AND ("Sustainability" OR "Sustainable"
OR "Social sustainab*" OR "Environmental sustainab*" OR "Economic sustainab*" OR "Nested
sustainab*")
Execution Phase
In the execution phase of the literature study, the search string was applied to the chosen databases.
The database search was performed in January 2021, and 5 articles were identified from DTU Findit,
723 articles were identified from AUB, and 432 articles were identified from Scopus.
Exclusion criteria were defined to be able to disqualify irrelevant studies. The exclusion criteria are seen
in Figure 5.
24
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4: Search Blocks
Figure 5: Exclusion criteria
25
==PAGE:26==
As seen in Figure 6, the search string resulted in 1160 articles from the chosen databases. These
articles were then screened through selection procedure 1. The articles that did not meet exclusion
criteria 1 ‘search terms from group A should appear in the title’ were excluded from the literature review.
This
criterion
ensured
that
the
articles identified for further study focus on developing a
guideline/framework. This resulted in 67 identified articles relevant for additional screening. Exclusion
criteria 2 ‘search terms from group C should appear in the title’ was then applied in the screening phase.
This
criterion
ensured
that
the
articles identified for further study focus on developing a
product/service-system. This screening resulted in 8 articles relevant for further investigation. The
abstracts of the 8 identified articles were read through to assess if the eight identified articles were on
the topic of guidelines for developing a sustainable product/service-system enabling a circular
economy. None of the articles passed the abstract test as they lacked proposed sets of methods
related
to
product/service-system,
circular
economy,
and
sustainability
for
developing
a
product/service-system business model targeting all phases of a development process. As a result of
this, a total of 0 articles were identified in research developing a guideline for sustainable
product/service-system startups enabling a circular economy.
Analysis Phase
As no research evidence was found relevant to the research question, the analysis phase proposed by
(Biolchini et al., 2005) was not conducted.
Figure 6: Literature research results at different phases.
26
==PAGE:27==
Literature Review
A literature review was conducted to gain knowledge and summarise on research relevant to the study
e.g. knowledge on theories and methods related to product/service-system, circular economy and
sustainability. The collected articles provided insights to the topics from different authors point of view.
Furthermore, the literature review was conducted to support the identification of a gap in the literature
on guidelines for developing sustainable product/service-systems enabling a circular economy.
The literature review was not systemic in the identification of relevant literature nor in terms of how they
were analysed and summarised.
To identify research relevant to the study, a protocol was developed. Headlines relevant to the study
were defined in order to be able to identify search strings associated with the scope of the project.
These were as followed:
1.
Existing guidelines for developing product/service-system startups in the field of consumer
goods
2.
Strategies for developing a product/service-system
3.
product/service-system, Sustainability, SDG & Rebound Effects
4.
Circular economy  as a concept in relation to product/service-system
5.
Why consumers choose product/service-system / Consumer behavior towards
product/service-system
6.
Existing evaluation/validation methods for product/service-system
7.
Research on baby equipment product/service-system
Associated search terms to each category were identified and a search was performed in the
databases Scopus, Findit, Springerlink, Google Scholar, and AUB resulting in 74 articles potentially
relevant to the study. These can be found in Appendix 1 where the search string, the database, the result
(title), a summary and the format for each identified article is documented. Knowledge and theory from
relevant articles identified were applied throughout the research clarification and more articles were
continuously added as the appliance of relevant research has been an iterative process.
27
==PAGE:28==
Existing Guidelines
Existing methods and guidelines
Through the literature review and sessions with supervisors and co-supervisors, different methods and
guidelines
supporting
the
development
of
product/service-system
startups
were
identified.
Furthermore, methods and guidelines proposed in relevant courses at DTU and AAU were applied to the
overview of Existing Methods and Guidelines. See Table 1. 28 different methods and guidelines were
identified and described with a short description to convey the potential relevance for the
product/service-system startup guideline.
Table 1: Existing Methods and Guidelines
Existing Methods
and Guidelines
Short Description
PSS development arena (McAloone 2011)
Six boundary conditions for a PSS development arena. Worth discussing when designing the
characteristics of a PSS design and can help describe and discuss a PSS
PSS Characteristics Definition (Haase et al.
2017)
11 characteristics of PSS
Framework for analysing PSS (Mont 2004)
Analyze PSS through the elements of actor-networks and infrastructure
Hubka's Transformation Model (Matzen 2009)
Transformation system consisting of a technical process, transforming a certain operand,
based upon influencing effects from different operators
Circular economy Business Model Canvas
(Pieroni et al. 2019)
The Circular Economy Business Model Canvas is used to support the development of a PSS
during the concept development phase. The use of the CE Business Model Canvas can be
effective to summarize the main information regarding the proposed PSSs.
Standard for Social Return on Investment
Analysis (SSROI) (Lingane and Olsen 2004)
Quality standard for social impact assessment based on 10 guidelines. These guidelines are
relevant to any entity on
which SROI analysis is performed (e.g., a business unit, project, or nonprofit organization).
Standards of Evidence for Impact Investing
(Puttick and Ludlow 2012)
Approach to measuring and understanding the impact of early-stage social innovations in three
different social areas based on 5 levels of progress
Sustainability Quick-Check model (SQC)
(Halberstadt and Johnson 2014)
IT-supported tool for the preparation of sustainability assessments and reports
LCA clinic (Judl et al. 2015)
Approach for life cycle assessment and ecodesign in a day
SPI-Framework (Obst 2015)
Framework for identifying, measuring and reporting sustainability performance, using 15 Key
SPIs.
Each Key SPI indicates specific impacts, actions or efforts of an organization that allow
measuring its sustainability performance on the BM level.
Triple-Bottom-Line Impact Analysis Framework
of Fintech Companies (Varga 2018)
Framework for assessing the triple bottom line value creation of start-ups in the fintech
industry based on three levels of progress
Lean Impact Measurement (Horne 2019)
Approach to measuring, comparing and forecasting the sustainability impact of new ventures
at an early stage
Design Thinking and Business Analytics
(Scherer et al. 2016)
A methodology that integrates Design Thinking and Business Analytics in the PSS design to
build a profitable and lasting PSS
PSS lean design methodology (PSSLDM)
(Pezzotta et al. 2018)
A structured methodology developed because of the lack of methodologies enabling the
collaborative design of product and service features in an integrated way along its entire
lifecycle
28
==PAGE:29==
Cambridge Business Model Innovation
Process (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017)
The Cambridge Business Model Innovation Process is a framework developed to guide
organisations'
business model innovation efforts and map the necessary activities and potential challenges.
DesignThinking and Sustainable Business
Model Process (Geissdoerfer et al. 2016)
Bringing together ‘design thinking’ and ‘sustainable business model innovation’ to refine the
creative process of developing sustainable value propositions and improve the overall business
modelling process.
The Triple Layered Business Model Canvas
(Joyce and Paquin 2016)
The Triple Layer Business Model Canvas (TLBMC) provides an integrative approach to support
those seeking to understand existing business models and creatively explore potential
sustainability-oriented business model innovations.
The Sustainable Business Model Pattern
Taxonomy (Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2018)
Ten international experts participated in this process. They classified 45 SBM patterns,
assigned these patterns to 11 groups along ecological, social, and economic dimensions of
sustainability and evaluated their potential to contribute to value creation. The resulting
taxonomy can serve as a basis for more unified and comparable studies of SBMs and for new
business model tools that can be used in various disciplines and industries to analyse and
develop sustainability-oriented business models in a consistent manner.
Sustainable Business Model Archetypes
(Bocken et al. 2014)
Sustainable business model archetypes are introduced to describe groupings of mechanisms
and solutions that may contribute to building up the business model for sustainability. The aim
of these archetypes is to develop a common language that can be used to accelerate the
development of sustainable business models in research and practice. The archetypes are:
Maximise material and energy efficiency; Create value from ‘waste’; Substitute with renewables
and natural processes; Deliver functionality rather than ownership; Adopt a stewardship role;
Encourage sufficiency; Re-purpose the business for society/environment; and Develop scale-up
solutions.
A guide for evaluating the environmental
performance of Product/Service-Systems
(Kjaer et al. 2017)
This guide is intended to support the evaluation of the environmental performance of
Product/Service-Systems through a six-step approach.
The guide can be applied at different stages (pre- or post-implementation of the PSS) and by
different stakeholders, e.g. as assistance during the design stage of a PSS or assisting
decision-makers considering buying or promoting a PSS solution for environmental
reasons.The purpose of the study should be to investigate improvement options from a PSS
provider perspective and/or evaluate from a customer and/or societal perspective whether or
not changing to a PSS will lead -or has led- to environmental improvements.
Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test
New Ideas in Just 5 Days (Knapp et al. 2016)
The sprint is a five-day process for answering critical business questions through design,
prototyping, and testing ideas with customers.
The Doughnut Model (Raworth 2017)
New way of looking at the economy on an institutional level with a focus on social. economic
and environmental sustainability.
The Doughnut Model is a way to think about how to solve environmental and socio-economic
challenges in a coherent and balanced way. It is a statement/communication tool.
SCRUM: The Art of Doing Twice the Work in
Half the Time (Sutherland 2015)
Scrum is a framework used to address complex adaptive problems, while productively and
creatively delivering products of the highest possible value.
The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Human-centered design is about designing for people, generating ideas and creating innovative
new solutions rooted in people’s actual needs.
101 Design Methods (Kumar 2013)
Guidebook for successful innovation through design thinking. Approaches the practice of
creating new products, services and customer experience.
Value Proposition Design (Osterwalder et al.
2014)
Value Proposition design dives into the value creating areas of the business model canvas and
provides many exercises and schematics.
Decision Tree to Navigate Through PSS
Typologies (McAloone and Pigosso 2018)
A decision tree to navigate through the PSS typologies defined by Tukker and Tischner.
Riskiest Assumption Canvas (McAloone and
Pigosso 2020)
Identify assumptions of the PSS implementation planning.
29
==PAGE:30==
The
concepts
of
product/service-system,
circular
economy,
and
sustainability
and
their
interrelationships as defined in the literature will be further investigated in the following section. This is
done to understand the theoretical foundation for the guideline being developed and select a notion to
follow throughout the project.
Product/Service-Systems
The Definition of Product/Service-Systems
Product/Service-Systems (PSS) is an emerging research field and practice in the industry, and through
the past 15 years, the number of public articles on the subject has quadrupled (Haase et al., 2017). PSS
consists of a product and a service that separately is defined as; a physical good (e.g., a computer) or a
non-physical good (e.g., a piece of software) provided to the customer together with a service being an
activity performed on behalf of the customer (Kjaer et al., 2017b).
As visualised by (Baines et al., 2007) in Figure 7, products have traditionally been considered separately
from services, yet in recent years servitisation of products and the productisation of services have
emerged. The convergence of these trends considers a product and a service as a single offering
(Baines et al., 2007).
Figure 7: Evolution of the PSS concept (Baines et al., 2007)
Providing solutions to customers by integrating products and services is the root of a PSS. A PSS can,
according to (Kjaer et al., 2017a) be defined as ‘Product(s) and service(s) combined in a system to
deliver required user functionality’. (O. K. Mont, 2002) explains a PSS as ‘a system of products, services,
supporting networks and infrastructure that is designed to be: competitive, satisfy customer needs and
have a lower environmental impact than traditional business models’. (Goedkoop et al., 1999) defines a
PSS as ‘a marketable set of products and services capable of jointly fulfilling a user’s need’.
30
==PAGE:31==
The Eight Types of Product/Service-Systems
It is essential to differentiate the different types of PSSs to be able to design and operate them. (Tukker
& Tischner, 2017) define PSS in three overall categories encompassing eight types which can be seen in
Figure 8 ((Tukker & Tischner, 2017) .
Figure 8: PSS types identified by (Tukker & Tischner, 2017)
The three types are described below.
●
A product-oriented PSS is promoting/selling the product in a traditional manner and includes
additional product-related services or advice. Examples of product-related services are
after-sales services to guarantee the functionality and durability of the product, e.g.
maintenance, repair, re-use, and recycling. An example of product-related advice could be
co-driving courses offered when buying a car (Tukker & Tischner, 2017). Companies offering
product-oriented PSSs want to minimise costs when using well-functioning and long-lasting
products (Baines et al., 2007).
●
A use-oriented PSS is selling the use or availability of a product that the customer does not own.
Companies offering use-oriented PSSs want to extend the product life by optimising and
prolonging the use of the product (Baines et al., 2007). According to (Tukker & Tischner, 2017)
use-oriented PSSs can be categorised into four types. These are:
○
Leasing where the customer can experience an exclusive use without owning the
actual product;
○
Product sharing or renting when the owner of the product is also the consumer, and
thereby shares the product;
○
Product pooling where several users simultaneously use the product;
○
Pay-per-service unit where the customer pays according to the use.
31
==PAGE:32==
●
Result-oriented PSS is selling a result or capability instead of a product. There are two types of
Result Oriented PSSs. The first type is outsourcing where a part of an activity of the PSS
company is outsourced to a third-party and the third party owns the product and provides a
product-related service. The second type is a functional result where the customer receives a
specific outcome, and the type of product used is subordinate.
Applicability and Feasibility of
Product/Service-Systems
(O. K. Mont, 2002) found three main uncertainties regarding the applicability and feasibility of PSSs. The
first one is the readiness to adopt the PSS into a company’s strategic decisions. The second one is the
readiness to accept the PSS by users. The third one is the environmental implications of PSSs. The main
finding from the study was that a successful PSS requires different societal infrastructures, human
structures, and organisational layouts to function as a sustainable appearance (O. K. Mont, 2002). The
challenge with PSS is developing a system solution where the pieces of the system fit together and a
system solution that leads to people's satisfaction. It should be designed so that it provides a certain
quality of life to the users and at the same time minimises the environmental impacts of the system (O.
K. Mont, 2002).
Circular Economy
The Definition of Circular Economy
As circular economy (CE) as a concept has emerged, numerous definitions of the concept are defined in
the literature. There is a lack of clarity on the meaning of ‘circularity’ in practice (Kirchherr et al., 2017).
The conceptual foundation of CE can be traced back to concepts like biomimicry, cradle-to-cradle, blue
economy, and others (de Pádua Pieroni et al., 2018). The Ellen MacArthur Foundation is in literature
seen as the author of the first prominent CE definition, which is defined as follows: ‘[CE] an industrial
system that is restorative or regenerative by intention and design.’ (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013)
cited in (Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017). The Ellen MacArthur Foundation depicts the
definition in the Butterfly Diagram seen in Figure 9. Here components, products, and materials cycle
through the economic system at their highest value at all times for as long as possible. The diagram
distinguishes between a biological cycle representing products made from biodegradable materials and
a technical cycle in which non-biodegradable materials are cycled. In the technical cycle, the value of
products is preserved by maintaining or reusing products. In the biological cycle, the further value from
materials is created by cascading them (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013).
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 9: The Butterfly Diagram by Ellen MacArthur Foundation (Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2013)
(Blomsma & Brennan, 2017) state that the CE concept can be defined as an umbrella concept which
is a ‘broad concept used loosely to encompass and account for a set of diverse phenomena’ (Hirsch &
Levin, 1999). CE has evolved into an umbrella concept due to the lack of a common theoretical
framework since its emergence in the early 1990s (Hirsch & Levin, 1999). (Murray et al., 2017) argue
that CE is a general term covering activities that embrace reducing, reusing, and recycling strategies
into production, distribution, and consumption processes ((Murray et al., 2017). This definition leads to
the 4R and 3R framework for CE, which were the most widespread definitions of CE before the year
2012. From here and after, the systems perspective on CE became the primary discourse on CE, most
likely due to the definition proposed by Ellen MacArthur Foundation (Kirchherr et al., 2017). The 4R
framework stands for reduce, reuse, recycle, and recover where the 3R framework encompasses
reducing, reusing, and recycling. A more extensive R-framework is the 9Rs framework which is depicted
in Figure 10. The waste hierarchy starts from the top with the strategy with the highest circular benefit
(Potting et al., 2017). Recycling is the most visible and expected component of the R-frameworks both
in literature and by practitioners. Some companies are seen to merely focus on recycling which is a
misunderstanding of being circular. Furthermore, it is seen that practitioners often leave out the ‘reduce’
element when defining CE, most likely because reduction is viewed as hindering consumption and,
thereby, economic growth. However, (Kirchherr et al., 2017) state that this can be prevented by shifting
to a product-as-a-service business model.
33
==PAGE:34==
Figure 10: The 9R Framework (Potting et al. 2017)
Strategies for Achieving a Circular
Economy
The concept of CE was popularised among businesses at the establishment of the Ellen MacArthur
Foundation,
speaking
in
favour
of
reducing
the
global
sustainability
pressure
through
the
implementation of CE business strategies (Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016).
An example of strategies for implementing CE approaches in businesses is proposed by (Nancy M. P.
Bocken et al., 2016). Overall, they present two strategies for keeping resources in a loop; slowing
resource loops and closing resource loops (Figure 11). Here slowing resource loops cover the reuse of
goods while closing resource loops covers the recycling of materials. A third strategy, narrowing
resource flows, urges businesses to adopt resource efficiency measures, e.g., designing products with
less material use without compromising quality. This framework distinguishes between linear
‘cradle-to-grave’ and circular ‘cradle-to-cradle’ material flows (Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016). Based on
this framework, scholars propose product design and business model strategies to close or slow
resource loops for designers and strategic decision-makers to use when moving towards a circular
business, see Appendix 2 (Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016).
34
==PAGE:35==
Figure 11: CE strategies for slowing, closing and narrowing resource flows (Bocken. et al. 2016)
Product/Service-Systems as Enablers of a
Circular Economy
PSS business models establish a CE by applying circular strategies to one or several lifecycle stages of
products and systems, Figure 12, (de Pádua Pieroni et al., 2018). (Tukker, 2015) supported this, who
states that PSS business models are means of establishing lease societies, a CE, or a resource
revolution.
Research conducted by (de Pádua Pieroni et al., 2018) discusses how different PSS business models
contribute
to
the
enabling
of
CE
strategies
considering
both
resource-efficient
approaches
(preventative) and resource-effective approaches (extending products/materials life). A trend for PSS
companies is to combine resource-efficient and resource-effective CE strategies though it is seen to be
competing for strategies in the literature. Result-oriented PSS solutions (especially the functional result
type) are the PSS types with the highest decoupling potential as this PSS type creates the most
significant incentive for companies to implement CE strategies as the resources used to deliver the
result are cost factors for the companies.
The following section covers sustainability in literature to assess how it differs from a CE and how it
contributes to sustainable PSSs. It is interesting to identify how the three concepts relate to each other
in literature to determine any potential gaps in guidelines combining the concepts of PSSs, CE, and
sustainability.
Figure 12: In literature, PSS is seen as an enabler of a CE
35
==PAGE:36==
Sustainability
Sustainability as a Concept
The term sustainability has become prominent among politicians and practitioners in business
development and organisations. Despite its increasing popularity, the notion is subjective, weakly
defined, and often used to express what policies ought to achieve. It is recognised in the literature by
scholars that the main inspiration of sustainability as a concept emerges from The World Commission
on Environment and Development (Barnaby, 1987), commonly referred to as the Brundtland Report. The
report implicated the conflicting aspects of human desires and eagerness in improving living standards
with the limitations imposed by nature due to exploited resources. (Barnaby, 1987) defines four
dimensions of sustainability namely preserving ecological long-term sustainability, fulfilling people’s
essential needs, and advocating equity within and across generations (Holden et al., 2014). Basic
human needs are defined as ‘(...) employment, food, energy, housing, water supply, sanitation, and
healthcare(...)’(Holden et al., 2014). Thus sustainability, according to the Brundtland Report, is about
accommodating the essential needs of all human beings and enabling the opportunity to satisfy the
desires for better life without compromising the long-term ecological sustainability (Barnaby, 1987).
Satisfying the vital needs of a human being is viewed as the primary dimension, and the eagerness for a
better life and meeting individual aspirations is considered a secondary dimension. However, desires
such as striving for continuous economic growth can consequently resolve aspirational attempts
besides what has been perceived as ecologically sustainable and intransigent future generations
(Holden et al., 2014)
Social, Environmental, and Economic Sustainability
The three pillars have been interpreted in various ways but originally, the people dimension is supposed
to reflect the positive and negative impacts on the well-being of humans imposed by an organisation.
Planet concerns the impact on the environment and climate caused by an organisation. The result
considered encompasses both the positive and negative impact as waste removal, restoration of the
impact caused by the people, contributions to reforestation, reduction of carbon footprint, and
assessment of eutrophication based on materials and measuring and governing the use of natural
resources. Profit is about an organisation’s economy and its impact on a local, national and
international level. Most important is the economy’s ability to create wealth, generate and cultivate
innovation, and secure employment (Elkington, 1998; Kraaijenbrink, 2019). The famous ‘triple bottom
line’ argues that sustainability is at the center of all three aspects. Therefore, the focus should rest on
balancing the social, environmental, and economic aspects (Elkington, 1998; Holden, 2007). In line with
this argument, the UN's agenda for Development stated that ‘economic development, social
development, and environmental protection are interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of
sustainable development’ (United Nations, 1997).
The Triple Bottom Line concept resonated with many business people due to Elkington’s presence as an
entrepreneur, and it, therefore, gained success within businesses and among practitioners. What was
meant as a concept for sustainable development turned into a concept of ‘sustainable’ businesses
(Holden, 2007). Thus, the concept in modern days has been criticised by researchers. (Holden, 2007)
argues that a solid economic bottom line is of significance in business. Still, economic growth in itself,
36
==PAGE:37==
as to how the profit aspect of the three pillars is popularly interpreted today, is misleading and not
considered sustainable development (Holden, 2007). (Kuhlman & Farrington, 2010) state that dividing
sustainability into three dimensions contradicts the original intent of environmental safeguarding and
well-being for all human beings. The importance of the environmental aspect could consequently be
jeopardised and down prioritised and finally detach the social part from the economic factors by only
focusing on economic activity rather than welfare. In other words, although (Elkington, 1998) brought
good intentions with the concept, the practitioners who ‘consumed it’ by cherry-picking rather than
making it a balance between the three dimensions transformed the concept into a ‘(...)blanket concept
to assure stakeholders of the policy’s good intentions’ (Kuhlman & Farrington, 2010). The scholar behind
the Triple Bottom Line concept, (Elkington, 1998) himself, agrees to much of the criticism due to
misinterpretations and misuse of the concept. For those reasons, he decided to recall it in the Harvard
Business Review on its 25th anniversary. He proclaimed the Triple Bottom Line was designed to
provoke our capitalistic paradigm and transition into a new tomorrow with disruption and breakthrough
change. According to (Elkington, 2018) the Triple Bottom Line is not an accounting tool, and the
economic dimension is not just financial. Existing sustainable frameworks are only as good as the pace
and scale and what is really needed is ‘(...) to stop us all overshooting our planetary boundaries’
((Elkington, 1998).
Returning to ‘Old’ Thoughts of Sustainability
Instead of applying the misleading interpretations of the Triple Bottom Line framework, scholars
suggest that we should return to the original meaning of sustainability. This covers practicing and
governing sustainable development by meeting the four dimensions defined by the Brundtland Report
in 1987 as ‘(...) safeguarding long-term ecological sustainability, satisfying basic needs, and promoting
intragenerational and intergenerational equity’ ((Barnaby, 1987). According to (Kuhlman & Farrington,
2010) is ‘(...)where sustainability is concerned with the well-being of future generations and in particular
with irreplaceable natural resources—as opposed to the gratification of present needs, which we call
well-being.’ To accomplish such, (Holden et al., 2014) propose to keep the countries responsible for their
actions and have them assessed by a designed assessment tool and in that way keep institutions and
organisations accountable for meeting the four primary dimensions of sustainability (Holden et al.,
2014). The sustainability challenges then remain ‘(...) how to reconcile one goal, ‘development’ with
another ‘sustainability’. The two goals are often in tension’ ((Barnaby, 1987) cited in (Kuhlman &
Farrington, 2010)).
37
==PAGE:38==
(Giddings et al., 2002) argue that the intersection between environment, society, and economy is
conceived of as separate, although connected entities are not unified entities. The environment, society,
and economy are instead interconnected with the economy dependent on society and the environment
while human existence and society are dependent on and within the environment (Giddings et al., 2002).
The Nested Model, Figure 13, rather than the three-ring model, encourages a conceptual outlook
sympathetic to integration (Giddings et al., 2002).
Figure 13: Nested sustainable development - the economy dependent on both societal and environmental sustainability
The Relation Between Sustainability and
Circular Economy in Literature
CE is a way of achieving sustainability and sustainable development in companies and organisations.
However, the definition of sustainability is not clearly described in CE-related literature (Geissdoerfer,
Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017). A holistic view approach to sustainability often lacks in literature,
meaning that one or more of the three sustainability dimensions is often excluded from the definition.
Economic prosperity is the most prominent sustainability dimension in CE, followed by environmental
quality (Elkington, 1998). The impact of CE on social equity is greatly missing in the research field
(Kirchherr et al., 2017); (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015). This tendency found in the literature on the
relation between CE and sustainability is visualised in Figure 14. Here it is seen that CE most often
focuses on the economic and environmental sustainability aspects while the focus on social
sustainability is missing in the literature.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 14: The relation between CE and sustainability in literature
(Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017) have conducted a literature review highlighting CE and
sustainability differences and similarities. Selected main differences are seen in Table 2 (Geissdoerfer,
Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017). An example is the motivation behind CE and sustainability. In contrast,
sustainability aspires to meet the three dimensions of sustainability equally holistically. The primary
motivation of CE depends on the economic stakeholder responsible for the implementation of a CE
system (Elkington, 1998; Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017).
Table 2: Selected differences between sustainability and circular economy (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017)
39
==PAGE:40==
The Relation Between Sustainability and
Product/Service-System in the Literature
Throughout the establishment of PSSs, it was assumed that by shifting from selling products to
offering integrated solutions, PSSs could reduce the environmental impact. At the same time, it
maintains economic competitiveness and contributes to a positive social sustainability development
(de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019). However, it is seen that research within the field of development and
implementation of PSSs often takes for granted that PSSs have the potential to embed all three
sustainability dimensions into PSS business models (Barquet et al., 2016). Additionally, several leading
researchers within the field of sustainable PSSs have recently concluded that PSSs are not necessarily
more environmentally sustainable compared to traditional product offers (Medini & Boucher, 2016;
Pigosso & McAloone, 2016). PSSs can even have a worse environmental impact and only encompass
economic benefits (Barquet et al., 2016; de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019; Tukker, 2015) .
As a response to this discourse, the term sustainable Product/Service-Systems (SPSS) has gained
more interest from scholars (de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019). SPSS is defined as ‘an offer model
providing an integrated mix of products and services...where the economic and competitive interest of the
providers continuously seeks environmentally and socio-ethically beneficial new solutions’ (Bacchetti et
al., 2016). Based on this definition the SPSS business model has the potential to include benefits related
to all sustainability dimensions of the Nested Model sustainability perspective as visualised in Figure 15
(Giddings et al., 2002).
Figure 15: The relation between sustainability and PSSs in literature
Environmental Sustainability and Product/Service-Systems
PSSs are in literature seen as business models that can be more environmentally sustainable than
traditional business models (Tukker & Tischner, 2006). However, the environmental performance
depends on the type of PSS (Tukker, 2004). (Tukker, 2004) has evaluated the environmental potential of
the eight different types of PSSs. They divide the environmental performance of PSSs into three impact
categories; (i) incremental reductions (10-20%), (ii) considerable reductions (up to 50% or factor 2), and
(iii) radical reductions (up to 90% or factor 10). The potential environmental characteristics of each PSS
type are listed in the table below (Table 3).
40
==PAGE:41==
Table 3: Environmental characteristics of sustainability of the eight types of PSS (Tukker 2004)
Product Oriented
Use Oriented
Result oriented
Product-related service
●
It does not lead to change
in the technological
system or change the use
behaviour of customers.
●
Providers do not have an
incentive to optimise the
life cycle costs of
products.
●
Improved maintenance or
established take-back
systems can potentially
lead to incremental impact
reductions.
Product lease
●
The provider is responsible for
maintenance and repair
potentially leading to longer
product life and more efficient
energy use.
●
If the provider produces the
product, the provider may have
an incentive to design the
products for longer product life.
●
There is no economic incentive
for the provider or the user to
minimise the product’s energy
use throughout the use phase.
●
Risk of careless use of products.
Outsourcing
●
In outsourcing PSS, the
product or the service
includes a third party.
●
There might be more
providers, but the result
received remains more or
less the same.
●
Outsourcing products and
services usually lead to
incremental environmental
improvements.
Product related advice
●
Similar to that for
product-related service
●
Advice on optimised use of
products can result in
incremental impact
reductions.
Product sharing/renting
●
Potential for high impact
reductions as products is more
intensively used.
●
This PSS can lead to less-use
situations and the use of more
environmentally friendly
alternatives.
●
Risk of careless use of products.
Functional result
●
PSS has the most
significant potential for a
radical impact reduction as
the provider controls the
means to meet the user
needs. The PSS provider
can choose to develop and
offer systems with low
impact.
Product pooling
●
Similar to that for product
sharing/renting
●
Potential for more impact
reductions if the emissions are
related to the use phase as
products are being used
simultaneously by several users.
Pay-per-service unit
●
Providers of this type of PSS has
a big incentive to optimise the
design and use of the product
throughout the entire product life
cycle (e.g., reuse of
components/products)
●
Users might be prone to use the
product/service more
consciously as they pay per unit
use.
41
==PAGE:42==
The differences in environmental performance are translated into a tentative assessment of the
environmental sustainability potential for each of the eight types of PSSs (Figure 16). The different PSS
types are compared to their reference situation and assessed on a scale from ‘worse’ to ‘radical
reduction (<90%)’ (Tukker, 2004).
Figure 16: Tentative assessment of the environmental sustainability characteristics of the eight types of PSS
Tukker, (2004) concluded that the PSS types product renting and sharing, product pooling, and functional
results are the business models with the highest potential for improving environmental sustainability
compared to the reference situation.
Rebound Effects
When assessing the environmental impact of a PSS, it is essential to address the effects to the system
caused by rebound effects. Rebound effects occur when improved efficiency causes increased
consumption of products and services despite sustainable efforts. Rebound effects can have both a
negative and positive impact on the environment but are mostly seen as unwanted effects on a system
(Kjaer et al., 2019).
Rebound effects occur when scarce resources are released or bound due to the implementation of a
PSS (Bo et al., 2008). Scarce resource factors are:
-
Time: When the PSS is more or less time-consuming than the current technology.
-
Money: When the PSS is more or less costly than the current technology.
-
Space: When the PSS takes up more or less space than the current technology.
-
Technology: When the PSS influences the availability of specific technologies or raw materials.
There are three types of rebound effects that can occur in a PSS. These are direct rebounds, indirect
rebounds, and economy-wide rebounds (Sorrell, 2007). Direct rebound effects arise when a system
implementation aims to improve energy or material efficiency, but the energy or material consumption
is not reduced. Indirect rebound effects occur when users spend economic resources saved due to the
use of PSSs offered on other energy-intensive products and services. Economic-wide rebound effects
occur when resource efficiency results in cheaper goods throughout the economy, leading to increased
use of goods and resources for the economy (Sorrell, 2007).
42
==PAGE:43==
The Relationship Between
Product/Service-Systems, Circular
Economy and Sustainability in Literature
Several gaps in the bridging between these concepts were identified in the literature through the
literature research on the relationships between PSS & sustainability and CE & sustainability.
The exploration of the relationship between PSS and sustainability showed that research within the field
of development and implementation of PSSs often takes for granted that PSSs have the potential to
cover all aspects of sustainability and that there is a lack of focus on the three sustainability aspects as
interconnected as seen in the Nested Model (Barquet et al., 2016; Giddings et al., 2002).
The research in the literature on the relationship between CE and sustainability showed that
sustainability is vaguely defined in CE related literature and that CE in literature often lacks a focus on
the social sustainability aspect (Elkington, 1998; Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015; Geissdoerfer,
Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017; Kirchherr et al., 2017).
Figure 17 visually depicts the understanding mentioned above of the relationships between PSS &
sustainability and between CE & sustainability in the literature in one combined model.
Figure 17: There is a lack of focus on social sustainability in CE and PSSs, covering all aspects of sustainability for granted. This
shows a gap in the literature on research combining the concepts of PSSs, CE, and sustainability
(Blüher et al., 2020) support these statements on missing links between PSS & sustainability and CE &
sustainability. They argue that PSSs are often incorrectly presented as inherently sustainable business
models in practice based on the argument that PSSs are enablers of a CE by implementing CE
characteristics to PSS business models.
Furthermore, they conclude based on an analysis of 62 papers that reported sustainability impacts
caused by the implementation of PSSs are mainly assessed as positive impacts to the system in the
literature. These were particularly ecological benefits and cost-saving benefits, thus positive impacts
related to environmental and economic sustainability. Based on this analysis, they conclude that there is
a lack of focus and assessment of social impacts on the system.
Finally, (Blüher et al., 2020)) conclude that sustainability effects to PSSs should be considered from a
holistic point of view by considering both economic, social, and environmental impacts to the system
when developing a PSS that enables a CE.
43
==PAGE:44==
Development of a Guideline Closing the
Gap in Literature
An investigation on the definitions of the interrelationship between the concepts PSS, CE, and
sustainability in the literature was conducted. Here, one or more aspects of sustainability are often
neglected in the literature on PSSs and CE. There is an apparent lack of a generic definition of the
interrelationship between the three concepts. The definition of the interrelationship between the
concepts PSS, CE, and sustainability followed throughout this project is defined as:
A PSS should enable a CE and be both economic, social, and environmental sustainable -
economic, social, and environmental sustainability should be perceived as co-dependent in
terms of the economic sustainability being a subset of the social sustainability and the
social sustainability being a subset of environmental sustainability.
Figure 18 illustrates the interrelationship between PSS, CE, and sustainability that the guideline being
developed throughout this study should follow. The guideline will close the identified gap in the literature
on lacking guidelines that support the development of a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE.
Figure 18: PSS startups following the guideline will be enablers of a CE and incorporate social, environmental and economic
sustainability practice
44
==PAGE:45==
Concluding notes on the Research
Clarification
●
What product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability guidelines and methods exist
in the literature, and how do they contribute to the development of a startup?
Throughout the research clarification, it was found that a PSS startup’s success in the market and its
competitive advantages are highly dependent on the environmental and social strategies decided on in
the early phases of the startup development (Sassanelli et al., 2015); (Barquet et al., 2016; Scherer et al.,
2016) Despite this, ((Scherer et al., 2016); (Barquet et al., 2016; de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019) argue
that there are few guidelines in the literature gathering methods for developing economic, social, and
environmentally sustainable PSS startups that enable a CE.
A literature search was conducted on existing guidelines and methods in literature contributing to the
development of a sustainable PSS enabling a CE. 28 relevant methods were identified, and the potential
contribution of each method to the topic was formulated.
●
How is the interrelationship between the concepts of product/service-system, circular economy,
and sustainability defined in the literature?
An exploration of the definitions of PSS, CE, and sustainability and their interrelationship in literature
was carried out. This showed that PSSs are clearly defined as means of establishing a CE by applying
circular strategies to PSS life cycle stages of products and systems (de Pádua Pieroni et al., 2018;
Tukker, 2015). Furthermore, it was uncovered that the social sustainability aspect is greatly missing in
the research field of CE (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015; Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, et al., 2017;
Kirchherr et al., 2017). Finally, it showed that PSSs have the potential to reduce impacts across all three
sustainability aspects. Thus, this potential is often taken for granted in research within the field of PSS
development and implementation (Barquet et al., 2016; de Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019).
●
What notion of the relationship between product/service-system concepts, circular economy, and
sustainability should be followed throughout the project?
Based on the research clarification, a definition of the interrelationship between the concepts PSS, CE,
and sustainability followed throughout this project was defined;
A PSS should contribute to enable a CE and be both economic, social, and environmental sustainable -
economic, social, and environmental sustainability should be perceived as co-dependent in terms of the
economic sustainability being a subset of the social sustainability and the social sustainability being a
subset of environmental sustainability.
45
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
Descriptive 
Study I 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
Preface 
A review of the literature was conducted on existing guidelines and methods for developing sustainable 
business models and guidelines and methods for incorporating CE strategies. In the DS I, the aim is to 
increase the understanding of the findings from the research clarification which will be achieved 
through a comparative analysis of existing guidelines.  
 
As written in the methodology section, the startup guideline will be created around the SDF and, more 
specifically, the four phases explore & reframe, create, catalyse, and continuing the journey. The 
comparative analysis will be of the 28 different methods and guidelines identified and reviewed in the 
research clarification. The results of the DS I will be an analysis of each of the methods and guidelines 
assessing how and if they bring value to the SDF phases (Design Council, 2021).  
 
Additionally, the 28 different methods and guidelines will be evaluated against defined criteria for 
developing a guideline. Startups following the guideline should meet the criteria of developing a 
sustainable PSS startup that focuses on all three sustainability dimensions and incorporates several 
CE strategies. To build on research from other scholars, the criteria were used to assess whether the 
28 identified methods and guidelines could potentially contribute to developing a guideline for PSS 
startups. 
 
We aim to answer these questions in the following section: 
 
 
• 
How do PSS, CE, and sustainability guidelines and methods in literature contribute to the different 
phases of the revised double diamond from the Systemic Design Framework? 
• 
What are the criteria for developing a guideline for startups and which of these do the guidelines 
and methods identified in the literature meet? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
The Systemic Design
Framework
Each method and guideline were analysed and each step of a method was described with a short
description and key takeaways and placed within the phase of the SDF of which it served the most
value, see Appendix 3 (Design Council, 2021). The description of the steps of each method is marked
with an ‘x’ to give a quick overview of the phases they contribute to in Table 4. The marked ‘x’ in the
table illustrates that it contributes to a SDF phase but it is not necessarily sufficient enough for the
entire phase.
The two phases Explore & Reframe could be conducted separately but are combined into one phase in
this project to converge and diverge the problem space in an iterative process. As seen in Table 4 , only
a few guidelines from the literature cover all phases of the process of the SDF. Moreover, the ones
covering all phases often lack clear and detailed descriptions of each method guiding the startup
practitioner in applying the method, e.g., no template provided or vaguely defined. For example, it is
seen that methods often state that the practitioner should ‘measure the unsustainable impact of the
project’, but it is not clearly defined how to measure the impact or how the authors define sustainability.
Furthermore, the method or guideline might bring some value to a phase of the SDF but might not be
adequate to meet the aims of the specific phase. Additionally, the identified methods often only focus
on one aspect of the design development process e.g., sustainability, user insights.
This analysis of existing methods and guidelines support that there is a lack of support for developing
sustainable PSSs that enable a CE.
48
==PAGE:49==
Table 4: How the existing methods and guidelines contribute to the SDF phases
Existing methods/guidelines for
developing PSS Startup
Explore &
Reframe
Create
Catalyse
Continuing
the Journey
SDF phases supported by the method/guideline
PSS development arena (McAloone 2011)
x
PSS Characteristics Definition (Haase et al. 2017)
x
Framework for analysing PSS (Mont 2004)
x
Hubka's Transformation Model (Matzen 2009)
x
Circular economy Business Model Canvas (Pieroni et al. 2019)
x
Standard for Social Return on Investment Analysis (SSROI) (Lingane and Olsen
2004)
x
Standards of Evidence for Impact Investing (Puttick and Ludlow 2012)
x
x
x
Sustainability Quick-Check model (SQC) (Halberstadt and Johnson 2014)
x
LCA clinic (Judl et al. 2015)
x
x
x
SPI-Framework (Obst 2015)
x
Triple-Bottom-Line Impact Analysis Framework of Fintech Companies (Varga
2018)
x
Lean Impact Measurement (Horne 2019)
x
Design Thinking and Business Analytics (Scherer et al. 2016)
x
x
x
x
PSS lean design methodology (PSSLDM) (Pezzotta et al. 2018)
x
x
x
x
Cambridge Business Model Innovation Process (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017)
x
x
x
x
DesignThinking and Sustainable Business Model Process (Geissdoerfer et al.
2016)
x
x
x
x
The Triple Layered Business Model Canvas (Joyce and Paquin 2016)
x
The Sustainable Business Model Pattern Taxonomy (Lüdeke-Freund et al. 2018)
x
Sustainable Business Model Archetypes (Bocken et al. 2014)
x
A guide for evaluating the environmental performance of
Product/Service-Systems (Kjaer et al. 2017)
x
x
Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test New Ideas in Just 5 Days (Knapp et
al. 2016)
x
x
x
x
The Doughnut Model (Raworth 2017)
x
SCRUM: The Art of Doing Twice the Work in Half the Time (Sutherland 2015)
x
x
x
x
The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design (IDEO.org 2015)
x
x
x
x
101 Design Methods (Kumar 2013)
x
x
x
x
Value Proposition Design (Osterwalder et al. 2014)
x
x
x
x
Decision Tree to Navigate Through PSS Typologies (McAloone and Pigosso
2018)
x
x
Riskiest Assumption Canvas (McAloone and Pigosso 2020)
x
49
==PAGE:50==
Criteria for Developing a Guideline
Criteria were defined to ensure that practitioners applying the guideline can develop a sustainable PSS
enabling a CE. The guideline criteria ensure that the individual practitioner is not responsible for
navigating between the various methods and guidelines within the field of sustainability, CE, and PSS
development. These are called ‘Criteria for Developing a Guideline’ and were defined as follows:
1)
The guideline should be applicable by startups/SMEs.
2)
The guideline should be applicable by large companies.
3)
The guideline tools should cover the entire process of developing a startup.
4)
The guideline tools should cover the entire process of developing a PSS.
5)
The guideline should support the development of economically sustainable PSSs.
6)
The guideline should support the development of socially sustainable PSSs.
7)
The guideline should support the development of environmentally sustainable PSSs.
8)
The guideline should be a framework for developing PSSs enabling a circular economy.
The methods and guidelines from the ‘Existing Methods and Guidelines’ overview (Appendix 3) were
then evaluated against the Criteria for Developing a Guideline, see Table 5. This was done to support
the statement that there is ‘a clear gap in the literature on a guideline supporting the development of an
economic, social, and environmental sustainable PSS startup that enables a CE’ (Barquet et al., 2016; de
Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019; Scherer et al., 2016) and to support the statement that ‘existing guidelines
for developing a PSS are often relevant to large companies and not applicable by startups/SMEs (de
Jesus Pacheco et al., 2019). If a method/guideline meets the criteria, the cell is marked with an ‘x’.
Table 5: Evaluation of existing methods and guidelines against the criteria for developing a guideline.
Guidelines/methods for
developing PSS Startup
Methods
applicable
for
start-ups/S
ME's
Methods
applicable
for large
companies
Guideline
tool for
developing a
start-up
Guideline
tool for a
developin
g a PSS
Focus on sustainability
Focus
on
circular
econom
y
Economic
Social
Environmen
tal
PSS development arena
(McAloone 2011)
x
x
PSS Characteristics
Definition (Haase et al.
2017)
x
x
x
Framework for analysing
PSS (Mont 2004)
x
x
x
Hubka's Transformation
Model (Matzen 2009)
x
x
Circular economy
Business Model Canvas
(Pieroni et al. 2019)
x
x
x
x
x
Standard for Social
Return on Investment
Analysis (SSROI)
(Lingane and Olsen 2004)
x
x
x
Standards of Evidence for
Impact Investing (Puttick
x
x
x
x
50
==PAGE:51==
and Ludlow 2012)
Sustainability
Quick-Check model (SQC)
(Halberstadt and
Johnson 2014)
x
x
x
x
LCA clinic (Judl et al.
2015)
x
x
x
x
SPI-Framework (Obst
2015)
x
x
x
x
Triple-Bottom-Line
Impact Analysis
Framework of Fintech
Companies (Varga 2018)
x
x
x
Lean Impact
Measurement (Horne
2019)
x
x
x
x
Design Thinking and
Business Analytics
(Scherer et al. 2016)
x
x
x
PSS lean design
methodology (PSSLDM)
(Pezzotta et al. 2018)
x
x
x
x
x
Cambridge Business
Model Innovation
Process (Geissdoerfer et
al. 2017)
x
x
x
DesignThinking and
Sustainable Business
Model Process
(Geissdoerfer et al. 2016)
x
x
x
The Triple Layered
Business Model Canvas
(Joyce and Paquin 2016)
x
x
x
x
x
The Sustainable Business
Model Pattern Taxonomy
(Lüdeke-Freund et al.
2018)
x
x
x
x
x
x
Sustainable Business
Model Archetypes
(Bocken et al. 2014)
x
x
x
x
x
x
A guide for evaluating the
environmental
performance of
Product/Service-Systems
(Kjaer et al. 2017)
x
x
x
x
Sprint: How to Solve Big
Problems and Test New
Ideas in Just 5 Days
(Knapp et al. 2016)
x
x
The Doughnut Model
(Raworth 2017)
x
x
x
x
x
51
==PAGE:52==
SCRUM: The Art of Doing
Twice the Work in Half
the Time (Sutherland
2015)
x
x
The Field Guide to
Human-Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
x
x
x
101 Design Methods
(Kumar 2013)
x
x
Value Proposition Design
(Osterwalder et al. 2014)
x
x
x
x
Decision Tree to Navigate
Through PSS Typologies
(McAloone and Pigosso
2018)
x
x
x
Riskiest Assumption
Canvas (McAloone and
Pigosso 2020)
x
x
x
Only five guidelines meet the criteria of being a guideline tool for developing a startup. Only four
guidelines meet the criteria of being a guideline tool for developing a PSS. The assessment also shows
that most guidelines/methods focus on either social, economic, or environmental sustainability and
therefore only a few guidelines/methods incorporate all three sustainability aspects. Additionally, when
looking into each method and guideline comprising sustainability aspects it is seen that the
sustainability term tends to be vaguely defined. The same tendency is found for the CE term making it
difficult for practitioners with a non-design and/or engineering background to apply sustainability and
CE methods throughout the development of a startup.
Based on this evaluation of the existing methods and guidelines against criteria, it is concluded that
there is a clear need for a guideline for developing sustainable PSS startups enabling a CE as none of
the methods or guidelines meet all criteria.
52
==PAGE:53==
Concluding notes on the Descriptive Study I
●
How do product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability guidelines and methods in
literature contribute to the different phases of the revised double diamond from the Systemic
Design Framework?
A table was made to assess whether the identified methods and guidelines contribute to the different
phases of the SDF (Design Council, 2021). The evaluation clearly showed that few guidelines from the
literature covered all the phases. However, the screening of existing methods and guidelines showed
that there are elements that potentially could add value to each phase of the development process of a
PSS startup. Finally, it was found that although the many existing methods could potentially add value,
it is difficult for practitioners to navigate between these as they are not combined in one framework.
This leaves the practitioner to assess the relevance of methods in the areas of PSS, CE, and
sustainability.
●
What are the criteria for developing a guideline for startups and which of these do the guidelines
and methods identified in the literature meet?
Criteria were formulated to ensure that the guideline developed throughout this project would close the
identified gap in the literature on sustainable PSS startups enabling a CE (Barquet et al., 2016; de Jesus
Pacheco et al., 2019; Scherer et al., 2016). The identified guidelines and methods from the literature
were evaluated against the defined criteria. The evaluation demonstrated the gap in the literature as no
methods or guidelines meet all criteria. Additionally, few methods and guidelines proved to support the
development of a startup and the development of a PSS, and few methods and guidelines focus on
economic, social, and environmental sustainability. Finally, it showed a tendency of the term
sustainability and the term CE being vaguely defined in the methods/guidelines.
53
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
Prescriptive 
Study I 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
Preface 
In the DS I, the identified guidelines from the RC are analysed compared to the Systematic Design 
Framework and evaluated against the defined criteria ensuring that the guideline will contribute to 
creating a PSS startup enabling a CE. This PS elaborates on the two phases as there is now a clear 
understanding of the diagnosed problem (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009).  
 
The PS is about developing a final guideline to be tested in the DS II. Online guidelines have been 
investigated to develop a more extensive guideline 1.0. Criteria ensuring applicability of the selected 
methods were added as criteria identified in the DS I phase. The deliverables for this phase include a 
description of the final guideline 1.0. 
 
We aim to answer these questions in the following section: 
 
 
• 
What criteria should be met by methods and guidelines to be applicable in Guideline 1.0? 
• 
What methods from literature and online guidelines meet these criteria and contribute to Guideline 
1.0? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
Online Workshop with
Startups
The three startups RaskRask, Søuld, and MoonBoon were invited to participate in online workshops, for
the team to gain an understanding of potential PSS, CE, and sustainability opportunities and related
challenges when developing and implementing startups. The workshops were facilitated through a
MiroBoard, see Appendix 4. Some of the methods identified in the RC were tested and assessed with
the startups through the online workshops to clarify if elements of these could bring value to the
developed guideline. These online workshops were essential to develop the guideline by building
relationships, building empathy, and bringing in stakeholders by co-designing and learning from their
skills (Design Council, 2021).
-
RaskRask saw a need to modernise the industries of masseurs, personal trainers, and yoga
teachers. They have interpreted the physical clinics and centers. Instead of having physical
locations, they have developed a platform where selected masseurs, personal trainers, and
yoga teachers are present for users to book a service provided at the user’s home (RaskRask,
2021).
-
Søuld is a provider of acoustic products made of upcycled natural waste eelgrass into new
healthy acoustic products designed for a CE as the products are designed for disassembly.
Furthermore, Søuld is working towards the goal of developing acoustic components that are
recyclable (Søuld, 2021).
-
Moonboon Baby Studio produces equipment for babies and children in organic and
sustainable materials. They are the only ones on the market producing organic sways with
kapok mattresses and sway motors in biodegradable plastics (Moonboon Baby Studio, 2021).
All three startups shared knowledge on their startup process by identifying challenges and
opportunities met through the startup journey. Furthermore, the activities of the startups in the initial
development phases were discussed to understand the timeline of the implementation of different
strategies. In relation to this their sustainability and circular strategies were mapped according to their
journey and the potential of future sustainable and circular strategies were discussed. Insightful
learnings were gained through the discussion around the startups activities, strategies, challenges and
opportunities.
RaskRask, Søuld and Moonboon Baby Studio both implemented an initial concept to their respective
markets and gained direct feedback from users. Through the feedback from users the startups found
strengths and weaknesses in their business strategies. RaskRask focused on the economic aspect
when implementing the business concept to the market and later realised that environmental and social
strategies would have been beneficial to incorporate in the initial phases of the startup development.
This has led to their attempts on being more environmentally sustainable are focused on strategies with
incremental improvements rather than improvements targeting the entire concept of RaskRask.
On the contrary, Søuld focused on implementing environmental sustainability strategies to their product
development in the early phases of the startup development. The intense focus on developing
sustainable product strategies resulted in the startup focusing less on the economically viability
aspects of the business model.
56
==PAGE:57==
Finally, Moonboon Baby Studio focused on the social aspect of sustainability, by understanding the
needs of parents, and in trying to solve their problem of lack of sleep. Additionally, the product itself was
designed for disassembly and with a long product life in the initial phases of the startup journey
(environmental sustainability and CE strategies). This resulted in less energy and resources used for
exploring other economic business model opportunities eg. rental strategies. This has later become a
challenge for Moonboon Baby Studio as competitors are entering the rental market targeting the same
types of products.
The online workshop emphasised the need of a guideline supporting startups in decision making
processes in the initial phases of a startup development.
Criteria for the Methods
Selected to the Guideline
Three different types of criteria for selecting methods for the guideline have been defined to ensure that
it will cover the identified gaps in the literature, see Table 6. The selected methods do not necessarily
need to meet all criteria. For instance some of the methods do not meet the criteria for applicability but
have been selected as they have the potential for the team to develop intuitive templates for further
elaborations.
The first type of criteria are extracted from the SDF that follows the phases Explore & Reframe, Create,
Catalyse and Continuing the Journey. These steps are translated into criteria to make sure that the
guideline fits into the design phases of the SDF.
The second type of criteria are defined to make sure that the guideline closes the gap in literature on
lack of guidelines and methods for developing a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE. These are the
criteria defined in the DS I.
The third and final type of criteria are based on an analysis of existing methods and guidelines earlier
identified in the literature search. Here it was found that the methods and guidelines often lack
descriptions guiding the practitioner and that they were not self-explanatory. Not all methods had
templates and the templates identified seemed to be developed for designers, engineers and/or
anthropologists and not all potential entrepreneurs and practitioners. Therefore, the guideline must
have a sufficient description, providing a template and be applicable for non designers, engineers and/or
anthropologists.
57
==PAGE:58==
Table 6: Criteria for selecting methods to the guideline (some added from Design Council (2021)
58
==PAGE:59==
Online Methods and
Guidelines
Besides methods identified in the RC, methods and guidelines available in online tool kits were identified
and reviewed. There are potentially many more to be explored but these are some of many tool kits that
target PSS, CE and/or sustainability. Identified methods from online tool kits were evaluated against the
criteria and later selected for the guideline if they were identified to bring value to a PSS startup design
process. These can be seen in Table 7.
Table 7: Online Methods and Guidelines
Online Methods
and Guidelines
Area of
knowledge
Short description
Proteus tools - PSS Tool Book Workbook 4
(Finken et al., 2013)
PSS
A catalogue of tried-and-tested tools and methods towards PSS development
A successful product/service-system concept needs to address and incorporate four
fundamental dimensions:
Value Proposition, User Activity Cycle, Offering Life Cycle, Ecosystem
The Market Opportunity Navigator (The Market
Opportunity Navigator, 2020)
Market
Opportunities
The Market Opportunity Navigator helps entrepreneurs and business managers to
systematically discover their best market opportunities
Circular Design Guide, Ellen MacArthur (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, 2018)
CE
The toolkit is designed to guide people through a selection of resources to learn, apply, and
contribute to bringing circular design to life. The toolkit provides a selection of curated
resources to support people in their exploration and application of circular design.
Gartner Marketing Maturity Assessment Tool
(Gartner, 2021)
Market
Opportunities
Assess and evaluate your organisation’s marketing maturity to reveal gaps between where you
are and where you want to go. See how you stack up across nine digital competencies.
Circit Workbook 1 (Kravchenko et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook provides guidance on how to perform a sustainability screening of CE initiatives.
Circit Workbook 2 (M. de P. Pieroni et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook provides an overview of how to plan for changing business models towards CE.
The workbook provides a three-stage process for rethinking and reconfiguring business
models for CE.
Circit Workbook 3 (Shahbazi et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook provides insights into how to integrate CE into product design and development,
supporting decision-making and enhancing the circularity of products, by means of circular
design guidelines and a product circularity assessment tool.
Circit Workbook 4 (Kristoffersen et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook provides insights into which technologies to focus on, depending on the level of
organisational readiness and CE strategies to be adopted.
Circit Workbook 5 (Hildenbrand et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook helps to identify and evaluate options for closing the loop of products and parts
that are already out on the market.
Circit Workbook 6 (Blomsma et al., 2020)
CE
The workbook provides the reader with the means to conduct a three-phase process for the
design and development of circular value chains. The process is aimed at clarifying what
stakeholders to work with, at what time, and in what capacity, in order to create circular value
chains.
Dansk Design Center (Dansk Design Center,
2021)
Design Thinking
Danish Design Center's toolbox. The tools are divided into three categories that help you and
your team to 1) develop new ideas, 2) involve users in your idea development and 3) make the
solutions concrete.
MATChE (MATChE, 2021)
CE
Number of state-of-the-art tools and methods that are helpful to the development of circular
economy businesses and initiatives.
59
==PAGE:60==
Guideline 1.0
The now 28 methods and guidelines uncovered in the RC, and the 11 ones uncovered online - making it
39 all together - were gathered as the foundation for the guideline 1.0. All methods from the guidelines
were reviewed one by one and evaluated against the criteria from Table 6. Doing this we ended up with
the final Guideline 1.0 to be tested in the Descriptive Study II with methods supporting the different
phases of the Systematic Design Framework Table 8, Appendix 5 Guideline 1.
60
==PAGE:61==
Table 8: Guideline 1
Orientation & Vision
Setting
Explore & Reframe
Create
Catalyse
Continuing the Journey
Agree to a long-term goal (Knapp et
al. 2016)
Learn from Nature - Ask
“how might nature solve
this problem? (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation
2018)
TCO Chart (Finken
et al. 2013)
SWOT Matrix
(Pieroni et al.,
2020)
Create Persona
(Kumar 2013)
Product Journey
Mapping (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation
2018)
LCA Clinic - Life
Cycle
Assessment
and Ecodesign
in a Day (Judl et
al. 2015)
Service Blueprinting (Pezzotta et al.
2018)
Define the right challenge (Knapp et
al. 2016)
Workshop with
Stakeholders - Field
Guide to Human
Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Extremes and
Mainstreams -
Field Guide to
Human Centered
Design (IDEO.org
2015)
Cluster analysis
for customer
segmentation
(Scherer et al.
2016)
Brainwriting
(IDEO.org 2015)
Circular
Opportunities
(Ellen MacArthur
Foundation
2018)
Rebound effects
(Kjaer et al.
2017)
Brand Promise (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
Define the right team (Knapp et al.
2016)
Group workshop - Field
Guide to Human
Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Guided Tour - Field
Guide to Human
Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Prioritising
Opportunity
Clusters (MATChE
2021)
Brainstorming
(MATChE 2021)
Learn from
Nature (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation
2018)
Choosing
recirculation
strategy (Pieroni
et al. 2020)
Prototype testing (Wizard of Oz)
(Pezzotta et al. 2018)
Building Teams (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
Expert workshop - Field
Guide to Human
Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Brainstorm - Field
Guide to Human
Centered Design
(IDEO.org 2015)
Stakeholder
Opportunity
Cluster (MATChE
2021)
Circular Strategy
Scanner (MATChE
2021)
Economic, Social
and
Environmental
Layer - 3
business model
canvasses
(Joyce and
Paquin 2016)
Ecosystem
mapping
(Finken et al.
2013)
KPI Modelling (Pezzotta et al. 2018)
Set the time and space to conduct
your sprint (Knapp et al. 2016)
Reach out to experts -
inspired by (Knapp et al.
2016)
MECO Analysis
(MATChE 2021)
Value Mapping
(Scherer et al.
2016)
Sustainable
business model
archetypes (Bocken
et al. 2014)
Decision Tree to
Navigate through
PSS Typologies
(McAloone and
Pigosso 2018)
Attractiveness
Map (The
Market
Opportunity
Navigator 2020)
Imagine New Partnerships (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation 2018)
User Activity Cycle
(Finken et al. 2013)
Material Flow
Analysis (MATChE
2021)
Readiness
workshop toolkit
(MATChE 2021)
PSS Morphology
(Finken et al. 2013)
11
characteristics of
PSS (Haase et al.
2017)
PSS Concept
Evaluator
(Finken et al.
2013)
Create Your Narrative (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
Ecosystem mapping
(Finken et al. 2013)
Insides Out (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
PESTEL analysis
(MATChE 2021)
Circular Economy
Business Model
Pattern Cards
(MATChE 2021)
Circular
Economy
Business Model
Canvas (Pieroni
et al. 2019)
SWOT (Pieroni
et al. 2020)
Riskiest Assumption Canvas (McAloone
and Pigosso 2020)
Service Flip (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation
2018)
Stakeholder Value
Mapping (MATChE
2021)
Customer Profile
(Osterwalder et al.
2014)
PSS development
arena with focus on
6 boundary
conditions
(McAloone 2011)
Checklist of
Sustainability
Qualifying
Criteria (Pieroni
et al. 2020)
Rebound effects (Kjaer
et al. 2017)
Stakeholder
Definition -
inspired by
Cambridge
Business Model
Innovation
Process
(Geissdoerfer et al.
2017)
Inspiration: Digital
Systems (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
Napkin pitch
(Scherer et al.
2016)
Map the product life
cycle (Pieroni et al.
2020)
Trends Matrix -
inspired by (Kumar
2013)
Inspiration: Digital
Systems (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation, 2018)
Identify PSS
solutions capable
of fulfilling
customers' needs
(Pezzotta et al.
2018)
Quick LCA study -
inspired by LCA Clinic
(Judl et al. 2015)
Offering Activity
Culture Map
(Kumar 2013)
Embed Feedback
Mechanisms (Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation 2018)
61
==PAGE:62==
Concluding notes on the
Prescriptive Study
●
What criteria should be met by methods and guidelines to be applicable in Guideline 1.0?
Three different types of criteria were identified to ensure that selected methods would cover the gap in
the literature. The first type of criteria ensured that the methods would contribute to phases of the SDF.
The second type of criteria were extracted from the Criteria for developing a guideline from the DS I
ensuring that the PSS startup will focus on all three sustainability dimensions and incorporate CE
strategies. The third type of criteria were created based on limitations discovered in existing methods
and guidelines from the literature ensuring that the guideline would incorporate descriptions, templates
and be applicable for practitioners with different professional backgrounds.
●
What methods from literature and online guidelines meet these criteria and contribute to
Guideline 1.0?
The 31 identified methods and guidelines from literature and online tool kits were evaluated against the
three different types of criteria to ensure that the methods would cover the gap in the literature. The
evaluation led to the deliverable of  an initial Guideline 1.0 to be tested in the DS II.
62
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
Descriptive 
Study II 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
Preface 
The DS II aims at testing and evaluating the Guideline 1.0 developed in the PS. The test is conducted 
by applying the Guideline 1.0 to a startup case study of developing a PSS startup enabling a CE. The 
development process of the PSS startup follows the phases Explore & Reframe, Create, Catalyse, and 
Continuing the Journey from identifying user needs and problems to creating and exploring final 
concepts.  
The goal is to develop PSS concept(s) that provide sustainable solutions for purchasing baby 
equipment and toys and that contributes to a CE. 
The applicability of the methods of the Guideline 1.0 are evaluated based on an assessment of the 
value of insights to the areas of PSS, CE, and sustainability and attributed a rating in a scale from 1-5. 
Throughout the test of the Guideline 1.0, methods are applied if a lack of insights to the design phase 
is identified. The DS II results in a revised version of the guideline. 
 
We aim to answer these questions in the following section: 
 
 
• 
How can the methods of the guideline be tested and evaluated through a startup case study and 
how can the SDF contribute to it? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
Preface
The DS II aims at testing and evaluating the Guideline 1.0 developed in the PS. The test is conducted by
applying the Guideline 1.0 to a startup case study of developing a PSS startup enabling a CE. The
development process of the PSS startup follows the phases Explore & Reframe, Create, Catalyse, and
Continuing the Journey from identifying user needs and problems to creating and exploring final
concepts.
The goal is to develop PSS concept(s) that provide sustainable solutions for purchasing baby
equipment and toys and that contributes to a CE.
The applicability of the methods of the Guideline 1.0 are evaluated based on an assessment of the
value of insights to the areas of PSS, CE, and sustainability and attributed a rating in a scale from 1-5.
Throughout the test of the Guideline 1.0, methods are applied if a lack of insights to the design phase is
identified. The DS II results in a revised version of the guideline.
We aim to answer these questions in the following section:
●
How can the methods of the guideline be tested and evaluated through a startup case study and
how can the SDF contribute to it?
64
==PAGE:66==
The Test Process
The Guideline 1.0 developed throughout the PS gathers methods from the literature and from guidelines
available online that meets the criteria for developing a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE.
Throughout the DS II phase, the guideline was applied as a framework for developing a sustainable PSS
enabling a CE within the baby equipment and toys market in order to test and evaluate if the selected
methods meet the criteria in practice. The development process of the PSS startup followed the SDF
design process suggested by the (Design Council, 2021) through the phases Explore & Reframe, Create,
Catalyse, and Continuing the Journey.
Participatory design has been a general approach throughout the SDF process in order to build
relationships with and learn from the stakeholders of the ecosystem. During the Explore & Reframe
phase insights to the market were gained through workshops with users, existing startups and
established companies in the market of baby equipment and toys. Furthermore, a survey with 1.093
respondents from Denmark and 150 respondents outside Denmark was conducted to gain knowledge
about users and the market. During the Create phase, users were involved in co-creating the concepts
through brainstorming and eight users helped in creating concepts from the developed morphology.
Finally, users were engaged in evaluating the developed concepts during the Catalyse phase involving
269 respondents on a survey investigating the three developed concepts.
The first step of the DS II phase was to conduct a literature search on existing PSSs within the baby
equipment and toys market to explore researched successful or unsuccessful implementations of PSS
strategies. Hereafter, the PSS startup guideline was developed, reevaluated and updated in the PS
phase and tested in the DS II phase through an iterative process as seen in Figure 19.
65
==PAGE:67==
Figure 19: The iterative process of developing the guideline in the PS and testing the guideline in the DS I
66
==PAGE:68==
Methods were continuously added during the test of the guideline if the identified methods did not fulfill
the aim of each SDF phase and/or did not contribute to adequate knowledge within the areas of PSS,
CE and/or sustainability.
The aims are related to the elements of the different SDF phases described in the methodology section
and are generically described to be applicable by PSS startups targeting different markets. These aims
are as follows:
1.
Explore & Reframe: To analyse the needs and problems of the stakeholders of the existing
market and to get a deep understanding of the interrelationships and flows between
stakeholders in order to identify Design Concept criteria for developing a sustainable PSS
startup enabling a CE.
2.
Create: To ideate and brainstorm on business models within the startup team and through
co-creation with users to narrow down ideas to concepts contributing to a sustainable and
circular development.
3.
Catalyse: To make the PSS concepts tangible by depicting the changes of flows between
stakeholders of each concept to the ecosystem, to determine the sustainability impact of the
concepts and to evaluate concepts against criteria. A final concept may be selected in the
Catalyse phase if the practitioner has enough knowledge and support to select the most
feasible concept.
4.
Continuing the Journey: To define the final concept(s) and to reflect on what needs to be done
through further work as the project is open-ended.
The methods attributed to each SDF phase from Guideline 1.0 are tested throughout the DS II. The
structure of the test is as followed:
1.
Initially, the aim of each method and the area of knowledge of which they contribute to is
presented.
2.
The Guideline 1.0 methods are tested through the startup case study and additional methods
are added if there is a lack of knowledge on PSS, CE, and/or sustainability aspects or if the goal
of the SDF phase is not fully met. This leads to a revised and updated guideline.
3.
After each method has been tested it has been evaluated on a scale from 1-5 based on the
degree of insights to the market (Appendix 6)
4.
Insights from selected methods with a high rating are presented to convey insights to the
startup case study.
5.
Conclusion on the tested methods and on the insights from the test of methods through the
startup case study.
A template can be found for each created method in the Guideline for Developing a Sustainable and
Circular PSS startup (Appendix 7) including an example of the method done through this startup case
study, see Appendix 8.
67
==PAGE:69==
Literature Review on
Product/Service-Systems Within the Baby
Equipment and Toys Market
To support the understanding of the existing market a literature review was conducted to gain
knowledge on existing PSSs and startups within the baby equipment and toys market.
In a study by (O. Mont et al., 2006) it is stated that not many, if any, examples of PSSs could be found in
the area of baby products. Most were found in sharing systems organised by customers themselves.
The initiatives within the PSS field are limited to designing safe and high-quality children products and
focus on reducing health hazards, rather than the environmental improvements to be achieved when
designing products for their impact in the use phase (O. Mont et al., 2006).
In two case studies by (Catulli, 2012; Catulli et al., 2013) parents seemed positive towards the PSS
concept of a lease or rent of baby prams and baby car seats (Catulli, 2012; Catulli et al., 2013).
Mentioned in the case studies are associated benefits such as possible savings as these products are
only used for a short period of time. By only paying for the usage of the products it would lead to
financial savings (Catulli, 2012). Yet some parents liked the expensive strollers like Bugaboo and did not
want to be associated with renters or leasing of a pre-used pram. They wanted to be seen as the ‘best
parents’, who gave their babies the best but at the same time they would feel good about saving money
(Catulli et al., 2013). Prams are seen as fashion items and self-image is a very important satisfaction
factor and therefore the users care about brand images and want to be seen by their peers in the best
light (Catulli et al., 2013). Thus, it is important for a PSS provider to choose a high class and quality
brand name in order to add credibility to a PSS within baby equipment (Catulli, 2012). Today's parents
look at peers in their environment and social networks for advice and information even more than their
own parents. Therefore, these sources could have an influence on how to promote the PSS (Catulli et
al., 2013)..
The used market developed by private users dominates the total market for prams and are in Sweden
estimated to represent 65-75% of total sales. The depreciation of the prams after the first user is
35-50% depending on the model, use and maintenance. This makes the prams very attractive on the
used market. Such a large used market means that the producers only make a profit from the first
customer. Thereafter the private actors make all the consequent payments and by selling prams
privately the transaction costs are entailed to the private sellers. Having such a large used market for
baby and children products shows that parents have a positive attitude towards used products and
shows that producers lose the opportunity to profit from reselling their goods. This implies that there is
a need for a new business model based on selling the function that baby prams provide (O. Mont et al.,
2006).
As a pram company (O. Mont et al., 2006) argue that they could gain control over the used market
through a leasing scheme. The goal of the system would be to re-introduce used products in a ‘like new’
condition. Their study indicated technical and economic potential for leasing prams. For the logistic
costs not to be too high, a possible solution could be to involve retailers, who would remanufacture and
administrate the pram leasing (O. Mont et al., 2006). Figure 20 shows how the new product service
system would look.
68
==PAGE:70==
Figure 20: A new system (Mont et al. 2006)
(Waight, 2013) argues that a parent is responsible for their own and the child's ecological footprint as
they make consumption decisions on behalf of the child. Parents are engaged in sustainable
consumption practices and one in five have acquired a greater number of used items for their child. In
the study by (Waight, 2013), it was found that parents proceed to buy more used items as the child
grows or when they have more children. This was due to:
1.
Financial motivations; often finances had to be shared across a larger family.
2.
Motherly protection; new mothers were more concerned about hygiene and safety but once
they settled into their role and responsibilities, mothers relaxed and became less protective.
3.
The desire for more products; more used products were bought as a part of the process of
preparing to be a mother.
Pilot Project with Bugaboo
A pilot project was conducted by Bugaboo to lease and to refurbish their prams. They had a pilot with
50 customers over three years. Their value proposition said: Customers could change their stroller
according to their changing needs (get 2 for the price of 1) (Bakker, 2018). Many challenges were found,
as Bugaboo is not optimised for acting as a service provider. They had no experience with reverse
logistics, they were new to refurbishment and customer treated leased strollers with less care (Bakker,
2018). It was observed that there was a high demand for swapping Bugaboo accessories and that
strollers
were
highly
damaged
after one use-cycle leading to two unsustainable behaviors;
overconsumption of PSS offering and treating products in PSS carelessly (Bakker, 2018; Gustafsson &
Harild, 2021).
69
==PAGE:71==
PramShare and PramWash
PramShare and PramWash companies founded in Singapore and addressed the challenge of stranded
prams, wasted materials, expensive baby gear, frequent equipment replacement and maintenance.
Furthermore, they wanted to enhance the user experience (Itkin, 2021).
PramShare offers long-term and one-time rentals of high-quality prams, strollers and car seats.
PramWash specialises in the cleaning of prams, strollers, baby carriers, car seats and toys. This is a
PSS business model that provides parents with high-quality prams and mitigates the hassle of buying
new gear and at the same time reduces waste and keeps materials in the value chain for as long as
possible. PramShare applies CE strategies to create value from underused products by reusing and
upcycling used prams to an as-good-as-new condition (Itkin, 2021).
PramShare has grown 15% year-over-year between 2017 and 2018 while PramWash has grown 250%
year-over-year between 2017 and 2018. In 2018, PramShare had 300+ customers while PramWash had
1000+ customers. For subscription customers, they are entitled to a complimentary model swap when
their child outgrows it and cleaning. They are currently working on addressing two key challenges to
further scale-up. The first is parents’ perceptions of rented products as a common perception among
parents is that buying a new pram is cleaner than renting a used one. The second one is sourcing
replacement components since finding spare parts can be difficult (Itkin, 2021).
Exploring the Existing Market
To get an overview of competitors on the market in Denmark, existing PSS solutions were mapped. This
includes a mapping of existing PSSs within the baby equipment and toys market, existing PSSs within
the baby clothes and food markets for inspiration, and existing PSSs within other markets for
inspiration. The method applied to the case study can be found in Appendix 8 under the method
Mapping of Existing PSS's. The mapping shows that there are some but not many existing PSSs
targeting the baby equipment and toys market. Hereby the market is a new market space for PSS
startups.
Furthermore, an investigation of parents’ must-have-lists available online was conducted, to get an
overview of possible market influencers, identify and understand the expense of the frequently
mentioned products and provide a foundation for understanding environmental impact. In total it was
found that a parent is recommended to buy a minimum 44 products when expecting a child, See
Appendix 9 under the method
Reflection
The literature review on existing PSSs within the baby equipment and toys market supports the
assumption that this is a market with great potential for implementing PSSs. The study by (Waight,
2013) and (Itkin, 2021) is interesting to look into as this highlights that PSS startups targeting the baby
equipment and toys market should not necessarily target first time parents as (Waight, 2013) states
that the more children parents have, the more they are prone to buy from used. Furthermore, it shows
that the PSS provider should consider how to mitigate the challenge of changing parents' perception of
hygiene of used products into the PSS business model development.
The literature review exploring existing PSS providers within the baby equipment and toys market
indicates that parents seem positive towards PSS offerings and that there is a great potential for
implementing successful sustainable PSS startups in the market. Thus, insights from the Bugaboo
case study highlights that a PSS startup should consider how to mitigate implementation challenges
throughout the initial phases of the PSS development (Bakker, 2018).
70
==PAGE:72==
The many must-have products show an enormous consumption related to having a child but also
indicate a great potential in circulating products through renting or leasing. Additionally, the mapping of
competitors within the existing baby equipment and toys market indicates that this market has a great
potential for implementing PSS businesses.
Insights from the literature review on existing PSSs within the baby equipment and toys market will be
used in the Explore & Reframe phase.
Selected Methods to be Tested from
Guideline 1.0
The selected methods from the literature and from online guidelines can be found in Guideline 1.0
Appendix 5 Guideline 1.0. The methods are generic and therefore applicable to all types of markets. It is
recommended to follow the guideline from start to finish to ensure that all aspects (CE, PSS,
sustainability) are sufficiently covered. Though, depending on the phase of the journey that the startup
is in, they can also use selected methods to gain insights to areas of which they are lacking knowledge
on.
7 out of 27 methods from the Explore & Reframe phase, 9 out of 19 methods from the Create phase, 4
out of 7 methods from the Catalyse phase and 2 out of 7 methods from the Continuing the Journey
phase were chosen to be tested with the startup case study of developing a PSS startup enabling a CE
within the baby equipment and toys market see Table 9-12 .
The aim of each method is described in Appendix 6 together with the area of knowledge of which each
method contributes to (PSS, CE, and/or sustainability). The reasons for adding each method are defined
in the table. Furthermore, a more detailed description of the aim of the methods can be found in
Appendix 6.
The remaining methods suggested for each phase in Guideline 1.0 were opted out either due to being
less relevant for the analysis of the baby equipment and toys market (but still applicable by other
startups) or due to the methods giving insights similar to the selected methods to be tested - these
would be valuable to apply to the project to support the findings or to give a deeper understanding of
the market, but were not applied due to the scope of the project. These methods can be found under
Suggestions for Further Work in the final proposed guideline, see Appendix 5 Guideline 5.0.
The test and revision of methods will be presented in the following sections.
71
==PAGE:73==
EXPLORE & REFRAME
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights to
7
Methods used in order
to both diverge and
converge in the Explore
& Reframe phase
Full references
will be shown in
the tables below.
The aim of the retrieved methods
is to explore the market, gain
insights to user needs and
problems and later reframe the
exploration in defining criteria for
the following phase.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Table 9: Selected methods to be tested through the Explore & Reframe phase
CREATE
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights to
9
Methods used to
diverge in the Create
phase
Full references will be
shown in the tables
below.
The aim of the retrieved methods
is to diverge the solution space
and create concepts that solve
the identified problems and
accommodate the user's needs.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Table 10: Selected methods to be tested through the Create phase
CATALYSE
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights to
4
Methods used to
converge in the
Catalyse phase
Full references will be
shown in the tables
below.
The aim of the retrieved methods
is to converge the solution space
and assess, elaborate and
evaluate the proposed concepts.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Table 11: Selected methods to be tested through the Catalyse phase
CONTINUING THE JOURNEY
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights to
2
Methods used to
diverge when
Continuing the
Journey
Full references will be
shown in the tables
below.
The aim of the retrieved methods
is to continue the journey and
once more diverge the solution
space and plan how to evolve and
elaborate the proposed concepts.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Table 12: Selected methods to be tested through the Continuing the Journey phase
72
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explore & 
Reframe 
==PAGE:75==
Explore & Reframe
The first phase of developing a PSS startup is called Explore & Reframe and incorporates methods
making it possible for startup teams to go from having no or limited
knowledge of the needs or
problems
of
the
different
stakeholders
to
having a deep understanding of the flows and
interrelationships between stakeholders. Furthermore, empathy for the users in the market is built in the
Explore & Reframe phase. The practitioner will obtain an understanding of what products and services
are attractive to the users to incorporate in potential PSS and CE strategies. Additionally, the practitioner
will understand economic, social, and environmental sustainability challenges seen from a user’s and a
provider's perspective.
The aim of the Explore & Reframe phase is:
To analyse the needs and problems of the stakeholders of the existing market and to get a
deep understanding of the interrelationships and flows between stakeholders in order to
identify Design Concept Criteria for developing a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE
within the market being analysed.
74
==PAGE:76==
Test and Revision of Methods for the Explore & Reframe Phase
The seven methods proposed in this phase were performed to gain insights to the market for baby
equipment and toys. The data was collected through a survey targeting the users and through the
literature search on existing PSS within the market. Additionally, data was collected through workshops
with users and through workshops with product-, service- and PSS-oriented startups and larger
companies.
During testing of the methods it was found that there was a lack of methods to be added to the
guideline in order to diverge the problem space even more and to gain more knowledge on the
stakeholders and their interrelationships. Furthermore, a deeper understanding of the PSS, CE, and
sustainability aspects of the baby equipment and toys market was needed to later develop a concept
meeting all criteria for the PSS startup. This acknowledgement led to new methods being applied to the
guideline resulting in the Guideline 2.0, see Appendix 5 Guideline 2.0. The methods were found in online
guidelines or were inspired by learnings throughout the studies of the team members at the Technical
University of Denmark and at Aalborg University. The aim of each of the new methods applied and the
methods applied to Guideline 1.0 for the Explore & Reframe phase is described in Table 13 together with
the area of knowledge of which each method contributes to (PSS, CE, and/or sustainability). A more
detailed description of the aim of each of the newly added methods can be found in Appendix 6.
10 out of 15 of the new methods added did not meet one or more of the requirements for the methods
added to the guideline being; 1) it should be descriptive/self explanatory, 2) it should have a template,
and 3) it should be applicable by users with different professional backgrounds. Moreover, changes and
improvements were made to the templates of the remaining 11 methods proposed by the authors to
ensure streamlining of the components and design of the templates throughout the guideline. The
templates for all the methods can be found in the final guideline, see Developing a Sustainable and
Circular PSS startup (Appendix 7).
The methods Identified Problems, Identified User Needs, and Defining Criteria were added to the Explore
& Reframe phase as methods supporting the converging of the problem space. In the templates of the
three methods it can be seen that the methods Identified Problems and Identified User Needs should be
understood as methods that are applied to all other methods in the Explore & Reframe phase to identify
problems and needs of the users discovered by applying each of the other methods. The identified
problems and needs within the analysed markets were hereafter translated into final criteria named
Design Concept Criteria. The criteria ensured that the developed PSS startup concepts close the gap
found in literature as the needs and problems are detected through all methods applied and as these
give insights to both the PSS, CE and sustainability aspects of the market.
75
==PAGE:77==
Table 13: Table with applied methods to  the Explore & Reframe phase.
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights
to
Added as it
supports:
Rating
1-5
1
User Activity
Cycle
Finken et al.,
2013
To identify user activities and associated
needs and to identify business
opportunities based on market gaps and
market shares with competitors.
SUS.
all aspects
The
understanding of
user activities and
to identify market
opportunities.
5
2
Ecosystem Map Finken et al.,
2013
To understand the interactions between
important stakeholders of the market you
are looking into by mapping the flows and
interactions between stakeholders, and to
identify missing interrelations between
stakeholders showing potential
improvement areas for the developed PSS.
PSS
The
understanding of
flows and
interactions
between
stakeholders of
the ecosystem
being analysed.
5
3
Service Flip
Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation,
2018
To understand the underlying user needs
of products and think creatively about how
to flip these from products into services.
PSS
The
understanding of
possible services
related to
analysed
products.
4
4
Rebound
Effects
Kjaer et al.,
2017a
To gain insight to the social, economic and
environmental impacts to the system
caused by unwanted user behavior or
caused by the implementation of product,
services, or PSSs within the existing
market.
SUS.
all aspects
The
understanding of
potential or
existing
environmental,
social and
economic impacts
to the system
being analysed.
4
5
Map the
Product Life
Cycle
M. de P.
Pieroni et al.,
2020
To gain insight to the phases of the
product life cycle and hereby to gain
insight to potential environmental effects
and circularity aspects in each stage of the
life cycle.
PSS /
CE
The
understanding of
the product life
cycle of selected
analysed products
within the existing
market being
analysed.
3
6
Quick LCA
Study (inspired
by LCA Clinic)
Judl et al.,
2015
To conduct an LCA or to analyse the
results of an existing LCA study and
hereby evaluate the environmental
performance of a product, a service or an
existing PSS within the market you are
analysing.
SUS.
environme
nt
The knowledge on
environmental
impacts of PSS
strategies
implemented in
the current
market.
5
7
Total Cost of
Ownership
Chart
Finken et al.,
2013
To consider all direct and indirect costs
associated with owning and using a
product throughout the entire product life
cycle taking both the product and the
services into account.
SUS.
economic
The
understanding of
direct and indirect
costs associated
with products in
the market being
5
76
==PAGE:78==
analysed.
Added methods
8
Stakeholder
Exploration
MATChE, 2021 To gain insights to the possibilities and
values of working with or interviewing new
stakeholders within the existing market
being analysed.
PSS
The definition of
relevant
stakeholders and
as it supports the
planning of
stakeholder
workshops.
4
9
Circular Buy-In
Ellen
MacArthur
Foundation,
2018
To identify key stakeholders and to assess
the power and interest of these
stakeholders from the PSS startup
perspective or from an stakeholders
perspective.
PSS
The
understanding of
the power/interest
of stakeholders
seen from an
workshopees
perspective.
3
10
Empathy Map
Gibbons,
2018a
To map user attitudes, feelings and
behavior in order to align on a deeper
understanding of the end users.
SUS.
social
The
understanding of
the users feelings
and behavior
when interacting
with products and
services of the
market being
analysed.
5
11
Experience Map Gibbons,
2018b
To gain an understanding of the user
experience being investigated and to
understand physical and emotional factors
from a users' point of view.
SUS.
social
The
understanding of
the users feelings
and behavior
when interacting
with products and
services of the
market being
analysed.
4
12
Challenges &
Opportunities
Method
template
developed in
this project
To identify challenges and opportunities of
implementing products, services, and/or
PSSs within the existing market being
analysed, seen from a user's, competitor's,
or expert's point of view.
PSS
The
understanding of
challenges and
opportunities
regarding the
implementation of
products,
services, and/or
PSS strategies to
the analysed
market.
5
13
Affinity Diagram Beyer &
Holtzblatt,
1997
To gather ideas, opinions and issues in
relation to the market being investigated.
The Affinity Diagram can be based on
insights from surveys, user comments,
workshops/workshops with relevant users
and stakeholders and from insights from
the literature.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects
The collection and
common
understanding of
the knowledge
gained through
the empirical
study. Not all
knowledge is not
necessarily
anchored in other
methods applied.
5
77
==PAGE:79==
14
Identifying
Strategies
Method
template
developed in
this project
Inspired by
Giddings et al.
2002
To gain insights to potential economic,
social, and environmental sustainability
strategies and circular strategies
incorporable in a PSS business model.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The collection of
knowledge on
potential CE and
sustainability
strategies
incorporable in
future PSS
concepts.
5
15
Mapping of
Existing
Product/Service
-systems
Method
template
developed in
this project
Inspired by
Tukker and
Tischner 2017
To map existing or closed PSS
competitors within the market being
analysed and to map existing
product/service/PSS companies inspiring
the startup development team. The
mapping can function as inspiration for
potential companies to contact and
workshop.
PSS
The
understanding of
the current PSSs
within the market
being analysed.
2
16
Survey Analysis
(Denmark,
Outside of
Denmark &
Cross-analysis)
Method
template
developed in
this project
To get respondents that are engaged in
products and services within your market
in order to gain insights to demographic
characteristics (like age, gender,
employment, income etc), psychographic
characteristics (like values, attitudes,
interests, lifestyles etc) and to behavioral
characteristics (like motivations,
intelligence, emotions etc) of the users
within the market you are analysing.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects
The collection of
empirical data.
5
17
User's
Must-Have Lists
Method
template
developed in
this project
This method lists the number of products
owned by different workshoped users and
confirms what products are popular and
what products are generally bought from
new, from used or received as gifts.
SUS.
economic
The
understanding of
the economic
aspects of
products, services
or PSS offerings in
the market being
analysed.
2
18
Comparing
product prices
Method
template
developed in
this project
To compare prices on existing products on
the market being analysed. The method
can advantageously be used to assess the
differences in price between product types
(e.g. new/used product or high class
brands/cheap brands).
SUS.
economic
The
understanding of
economic aspects
of different types
of products on the
market being
analysed.
5
19
Interviews &
Workshops
Method
template
developed in
this project
To understand the users and the
stakeholders within the existing market
through participatory design in workshops.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The collection of
empirical data
through
participatory
design.
5
20
Identified
Problems
Method
template
developed in
this project
To identify problems faced by the users
when purchasing products and services
within a certain market and to identify
problems faced by providers when
implementing PSS, CE and sustainability
strategies within a certain market.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The analysis of
the knowledge
and data collected
through all other
methods in the
explore & reframe
phase.
5
78
==PAGE:80==
21
Identified User
Needs
Method
template
developed in
this project
To identify user needs regarding
purchasing of products and services within
a certain market and to identify needs of
the providers when implementing PSS, CE
and sustainability strategies within a
certain market.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The analysis of
the knowledge
and data collected
through all other
methods in the
explore & reframe
phase.
5
22
Defining criteria
Method
template
developed in
this project
To create criteria based on problems and
needs identified throughout the methods
applied in the 'Explore & Reframe' phase to
define need-to-have and nice-to-have
criteria for the PSS solution.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The development
of a startup being
sustainable and
enabling a CE
within the specific
market being
analysed as the
criteria are based
on problems and
needs uncovered
in that specific
market.
5
Learnings from the Explore & Reframe Phase
The development of a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE within the baby equipment and toys
market has been the case study for testing the Guideline 1.0. The Guideline 2.0 is based on the
learnings gained through the use of methods from the Explore & Reframe phase.
Understanding the Ecosystem of Baby Equipment and Toys
The large size of the baby equipment and toys market means that there are numerous stakeholders
competing to get a share of the market. These are important stakeholders to identify and understand
when designing a PSS startup to develop an economically feasible business model competitive in the
global marketplace of baby equipment and toys. Methods supporting the mapping and understanding
of the stakeholders and their interrelationships (e.g. the Ecosystem Map) and methods supporting the
collection and analysis of knowledge on the market from these stakeholders (e.g. workshop Guideline
and Survey Analysis) were therefore added to the guideline and tested, see Appendix 8 Explore &
Reframe. By applying the methods Mapping of Existing PSSs and Stakeholder Exploration, several
interesting product-, service- and PSS startups and larger companies within the market were identified.
Two of the identified stakeholders were Moonboon Baby Studio, which is a product oriented startup
selling sways and motors for sways, and BabySam, which is a large reseller of baby equipment and toys
that also rents out equipment. Both companies accepted the invitation to participate in co-creation
online workshops facilitated by the startup team. The goal of the workshops was to understand the
product-, service-, and PSS strategies and to understand the sustainability and CE strategies of the two
companies. Furthermore, the goal was to gain an understanding of the stakeholders of the ecosystem
and the flows of products, services, money and information between these.
The workshops were facilitated with the use of interactive Miro boards allowing the workshops to
co-create on the analysis of the market and on the analysis of the stakeholder interrelationships. The
workshops were structured around the Interviews & Workshops template and selected methods from
the Explore & Reframe phase were applied to the workshop Miro boards, see Appendix 10. The CEO of
Moonboon Baby Studio, Marie Grew, contributed with valuable insights through the methods’ Identifying
Strategies’, ’Challenges & Opportunities’, and ‘Service Flip’ and the CEO of BabySam, Kenneth Willenbrack
79
==PAGE:81==
Nørgaard, contributed with insights through the methods ‘Identifying Strategies’, ‘Challenges &
Opportunities’, ‘Map the Product Life Cycle’, ‘Circular Buy-in’, and ‘Total Cost of Ownership Chart’.
Selected needs and problems identified through an analysis of the insights gained through the above
mentioned methods are highlighted to convey important user and market insights.
Moonboon Baby Studio
One of the methods conducted with the Moonboon Baby Studio was the method Identifying Strategies
applied to get an understanding of possible circular strategies to incorporate in the business model of a
PSS startup. The needs related to circular strategies of the MoonBoon Baby Studio were mapped to
understand MoonBoon Baby Studio’s requirements to the products to run an environmental and
economic sustainable business. The identified needs were possible criteria for the PSS startup
business model later to be developed and would furthermore function as inspiration for possible
circular strategies, see Figure 21 or Appendix 8 Identifying Strategies.
An example of a need depicted was the need of designing products for ease of maintenance and repair.
Moonboon Baby Studio meets this need by designing products for easy disassembly and hereby for
ease of maintenance and repair. Additionally, Moonboon Baby Studio has its own production site in
Denmark making it possible to provide a fast maintenance and repair service of products to the users.
This identified need was translated into the criterion the solution should accommodate products
designed for disassembly to the extent possible.
Another example of a need of the Moonboon Baby Studio users was the need for extending the product
value. Moonboon Baby Studio meets this need by exploiting residual value of products by
remanufacturing parts of the motors. Furthermore, Marie Grew pointed out that Moonboon Baby Studio
has a vision for selling defective but functional products cheaper in the near future. As of now, 30 out of
1000 produced sways are defective but functional. This is a circular business model strategy that slows
the material loop of products and that enables economic and social benefits for the provider and the
user. This need was translated into the criterion products that are defective/damaged should be
downgraded or repurposed.
Finally, the team, together with Marie Grew, identified several problems related to the implementation of
circular strategies to the business model of Moonboon Baby Studio. The first sway motor designed and
produced by the Moonboon Baby Studio was made of biodegradable plastics with the intention of
developing products made of environmentally friendly materials. Thus, the products were sent back by
the users as the motors had become deform due to exposure to high temperatures. The batch of
motors of this material was therefore discarded leading to unexpected negative economic and
environmental impacts. This identified problem was translated into the criteria that the solution should
accommodate products of materials as environmentally sustainable as possible and the solution should
accommodate products designed for durability and longevity.
80
==PAGE:82==
Figure 21: The Identified Strategies method conducted with Marie Grew from Moonboon Baby Studio
.BabySam
One of the methods conducted with Kenneth Willenbrack Nørgaard was the method Challenges &
Opportunities which is a method developed in this project applied to get an understanding of potential
challenges & opportunities occurring when implementing PSS strategies. The opportunities (needs) are
depicted in the inner circle while the challenges (problems) are depicted in the outer circle as seen in
Figure 22. An example of a problem identified by Kenneth is that users say that they want to rent
products and that the sustainability intentions of the users are good, but that the willingness to pay for
using products without owning them is low in reality due to lack of added value through services in
current solutions for the user. Furthermore, he stated that products within the baby equipment and toys
market are under a high price pressure as new competitors are constantly entering the market. The
criterion the solution should compete with competitors prices on intangible values (services) is therefore
formulated to overcome these identified problems. The services provided to the user would replace the
need for owning the products. Furthermore, the criterion would ensure that the added value through
services would compensate for the higher price on rented products compared to low-price products on
the market.
An example of a need that K. Nørgaard identified, is the demand for more focus on environmental and
social sustainability for purchasing solutions of baby equipment and toys. This is a need that is
characteristic for the core users of BabySam’s products which are young females in the age 27-32.
Furthermore, he stated that there is a huge potential in rental business model strategies of baby
equipment of high quality as he stated that:
“It is more profitable for us to rent out high quality products than to sell products. For
example BabySam earns 200 DKK per rental period of a breast pump that can be rented out
200-300 times”
Thus, BabySam has not implemented large-scale rental purchasing solutions for users due to several
challenges faced by BabySam. One challenge identified by Kenneth is that it is costly and resource
consuming to transition from being mainly a pure product oriented company to being a PSS oriented
company. Furthermore, BabySam is branded as a product selling reseller and finally, BabySam do not
wish to be the first movers of implementing large-scale rental strategies as users need more education
on prices of sustainability and quality of products and as users should be more familiar with PSS rental
solutions.
81
==PAGE:83==
Figure 22: The Challenges & Opportunities method conducted with Kenneth Nørgaard from BabySam
Through the workshops, the team gained a deep understanding of the market by getting direct inputs to
the methods from companies that deliver both products, services and PSSs. Insights to the market
from the workshop with Marie Grew and Kenneth Willenbrack Nørgaard led to the team being able to
understand who the most important stakeholders are when developing a startup competing in the baby
equipment and toys market. These stakeholders were mapped in an Ecosystem Map, see Figure 23,
Appendix 11 Ecosystem Map 1.0.
82
==PAGE:84==
Figure 23: Mapping of the important stakeholders within the baby equipment and toys market
A deeper understanding of the user stakeholders were needed to understand the relationships and
flows between stakeholders from the PSS startup’s point of view before mapping flows and
interrelationships in the ecosystem map.
Understanding the Users
To gather quantitative and qualitative data on users, a survey was developed exploring the purchasing
patterns of users and the feelings and concerns related to buying baby equipment and toys. A target
plan of places to share the survey online was defined to be sure that the team would reach all possible
users within the baby equipment and toys market. The survey was sent out to users through Facebook
groups for parents, through Instagram via accounts with a large number of followers, and via friends
and family of the team members. The survey attracted 1.093 Danish respondents and 150 foreign
respondents. The respondents contributed with additional comments throughout the surveys. The
Danish survey results can be found in Appendix 12 Survey Results Denmark and the foreign survey
results can be found in Appendix 12 Survey Results Foreign. The large number of respondents show
that there is a great interest in the project from the users which further indicates that there is a lack of
sustainable purchasing solutions for baby equipment and toys. The surveys gave valuable insights to
demographic characteristics, like age, gender, employment, and income, psychographic characteristics
for instance values, attitudes, interests, and lifestyles, and to behavioral characteristics such as
motivations and emotions. These insights were analysed through a Google Analyse analysis and
through a cross-analysis of the survey data.
83
==PAGE:85==
Amongst other areas of insights, the team was interested in knowing more about the users incentives
for renting recirculated products or buying used baby equipment and toys. Moreover, the team was
interested in exploring the users behavior around circulated and used products.
Through the initial analysis of the survey data it was found that a large percentage - 35,4% - of the 1.093
respondents stated that they would rent/lease baby equipment and toys products in order to be more
environmentally friendly (Figure 24, Appendix 8 Conducting a Survey). Hereby a need for more
sustainable purchasing solutions, like rental models, is seen amongst the users. This trend discovered
in the empirical data was supported by the CEO of BabySam, K. Nørgaard, who said:
‘there is a new green generation on its way who is more focused on environmental
sustainability - I predict that the generation Z will be the front runners of choosing more
sustainable purchasing solutions for baby equipment and toys’
The need for more sustainable purchasing solutions through the implementation of PSS business
models was also supported by the literature stating that:
‘PSS providers should target environmentally friendly users as studies show that a
large group of users choose PSSs due to its lower impact on the environment’ - (Akbar
& Hoffmann, 2018)
In the survey analysis it is also seen that a large number of users - 42,8% - respond that
they would rent/lease baby equipment and toys to save money (Figure 24). This supports
the statement by K. Nørgaard, CEO of BabySam, that users want to be more sustainable,
but do not necessarily want to pay more money for it. The survey data therefore further
support that the implementation of services providing intangible values to rented/leased
products are important to incorporate in the PSS business model.
Figure 24: User incentives for renting/leasing baby equipment and toys
In Figure 25 it is seen that the products that users are prone to rent are types of products that are
already available for rental on the market. These are the baby sway motor, that 33.1% could be
interested in renting, and a car safety seat that 20.9% could be interested in renting. 27.2% replied that
they could be interested in renting the baby sway which cannot be rented by any providers now. The
baby sway presumably scores high as this product is closely related to the baby sway motor. This data
analysis indicates that users need to be familiarised with rental purchasing opportunities for specific
84
==PAGE:86==
types of baby equipment and toy products before being interested in taking advantage of rental
offerings. This implies that the market for rental solutions is still an unexploited market with large
potentials. Furthermore, first movers of implementing rental purchasing solutions are needed as stated
by K. Nørgaard.
Figure 25: Chart on what baby equipment and toys could be interesting to rent from a user perspective
The results from the cross-analysis of the survey data was conducted to analyse the relationship
between variables in two or more of the questions for the users - all analyses can be found in Appendix
8 Cross-analysis of the Survey. In Figure 26, an example from the cross-analysis is indicating that the
older the user, the more prone he/she is to have resold used baby equipment and toys.
85
==PAGE:87==
Figure 26: Cross Analysis from survey
More insights to the users practice around purchasing baby equipment and toys were identified through
comments to the survey, through user workshops, and through comments on Facebook mapped in the
Affinity Diagram, Appendix 8 Affinity Diagram;
‘I spent way too much money on my first child, not the second and the third, as I didn’t know
what I would be needing and therefore bought way too much equipment and toys’ - Survey
respondent
‘I have used everything that I bought, but there were items that were only used a handful of
times before being thrown out - these were products that I should have bought at a cheaper
price than I did’ - User participating in the user workshop
‘Parents are prone to buy more (and expensive) products than needed for their first child to
be sure that they have what is needed in regards to safety, well-being etc.’ - User
commenting on the survey post on Facebook
These insights indicate that the older the user is and hereby the more children the user have, the more
prone he/she is to have resold baby equipment and toys. Furthermore, it indicates that first time
parents spend much more money on baby equipment and toys than experienced parents due to lack of
knowledge on products that are needed. Hereby, the large amount of equipment and toys take up space
leading to the parents attempting to sell unused products on used market platforms.
To gather further qualitative data, a workshop with seven users was performed to support a further
exploration of the user practice around purchasing of baby equipment and toys. The workshop was
performed in an interactive MiroBoard. The methods User Activity Cycle, User’s Must-Have Lists,
Comparing Product Prices, and Challenges & Opportunities were reviewed and completed together with
the users, see the Workshop MiroBoards in Appendix 13. These methods started an insightful
discussion and conversation on the users attitudes, principles and feelings around existing purchasing
solutions for baby equipment and toys. An example of a method applied is found in the User Activity
Cycle seen in Figure 27. Here a part of the activity cycle is shown where activities from the during phase
are highlighted - the two other phases of the User Activity Cycle (pre phase and post phase) can be
found in Appendix 8 User Activity Cycle. The method helped the team identify user activities, potential
market gaps and to identify where there is a market share with competitors. A problem identified
86
==PAGE:88==
through the User Activity Cycle is that users spend large amounts of money on new equipment and toys
when having their first child and then later find out that the large amount of products could as well have
been bought used and at a cheaper price. This supports the finding from the cross-analysis and the
Affinity Diagram indicating that the older users are, and the more children they therefore might have, the
more prone they are to buy and sell baby equipment and toys used.
Figure 27: Segmentat of the User Activity Cycle co-developed through the workshop with parents
Another problem identified through the workshop with users is that parents tend to be more concerned
about the hygiene of used baby equipment and toys than with products for themselves or with products
bought from new. This is also seen in the User Activity Cycle where an activity identified, related to the
use of baby equipment and toys, is to wash equipment and toys in a dishwasher or washing machine
before use. This activity leads to the identification of a market gap of providing hygiene services when
buying used (e.g. cleaning services of equipment) and a lack of transparency on the actual hygiene
standard of products. These hygiene concerns and used product hygiene benefits are expressed by the
survey respondents. Users states:
‘I mostly buy baby equipment and toys from new due to hygiene concerns - especially if it is
products that my child will bite in or have close to its body’ - Survey respondent
‘I mostly buy second hand as toxins from dyeing, painting or other surface treatment have
evaporated’ - Survey respondent
These findings indicate that PSS providers including recirculated or used products in their business
model strategies should consider how to meet the hygiene standards and consider how to
communicate the hygiene standards to users. To ensure that the developed PSS concepts meet this
need several criteria were formulated;
87
==PAGE:89==
1)
Used products should be clean; no harming bacteria, no visible stains on contact surface areas,
cleaned with environmentally friendly detergent.
2)
There should be a hygiene guarantee on products (e.g. products can be send back if they do
not meet the hygiene standards of user)
3)
The hygiene (cleaning) history of products should be transparent to the user.
Workshop and Survey Insights Applied to other Methods
Additional methods were applied besides the methods co-developed through workshops with
Moonboon Baby Studio, BabySam, and seven users. These were added as analysis tools to get more
knowledge on possible CE strategies, and on the economic, social, and environmental impacts to the
current market. The insights to the market and the users gained through the survey analyses and
through the workshops were the basis for the methods added. Examples of added methods are Quick
Life Cycle Assessment Study, Total Cost of Ownership, Rebound Effects, and Experience Map. Selected
important insights are highlighted in the section below.
88
==PAGE:90==
Insights from Total Cost of Ownership, Rebound Effects and LCA
By calculating the total cost of ownership of a pram from a user’s perspective, the team gained valuable
insights to the direct and indirect costs associated with owning and using baby equipment or toys, see
Figure 28. The TCO of a pram highlights the actual cost of different types of prams throughout the
entire product life cycle. The cost patterns identified can be applied to other baby equipment and toys
as well.
Figure 28: Total cost of ownership of three types of prams
The costs associated with the user activities of purchasing, delivery, maintenance, and disposal of a
pram are based on the product life cycles of prams of the users that participated in the user workshop.
Three types of prams are analysed in the TCO being a basic middle priced pram bought from new, a
trendy high price pram bought from new, and a trendy high price pram bought from used. Surprisingly,
the pram bought from used is the product with the highest TCO. Furthermore, the TCO analysis shows
that the trendy pram only costs 654 DKK more than the basic, middle priced pram. Thus, it could be
argued that the trendy pram bought from new is the most economically viable product to buy as the
user gets a higher quality and more functionalities for the money and can resell the pram at a high price
at the end of use. Furthermore, the TCO indicated that the pram is not necessarily an economically
89
==PAGE:91==
viable product to potentially rent out as prams can be resold at a relatively high price compared to the
direct cost. Finally, it is found that used prams are resold at a too high price making it economically
unsustainable for the user to invest in a used pram. This is supported by statements from users:
‘I mostly buy equipment and toys from new as it has been difficult to find the energy for
negotiating prices on used products at the end of the pregnancy - it is easier to just buy from
new as people set the prices of used products high and close to the sales prices’ - User
comment from survey.
‘Prices on used equipment and toys are set way too high and it is often difficult to evaluate if
the prices correspond to the quality of the product’ - User comment from Facebook.
Economically viable purchasing solutions of used equipment and toys are therefore demanded by users
as it is seen that the used market prices are too high to be profitable for the users. This leads to more
users buying products from new. In Figure 29, a segment of the method Rebound Effects can be seen
where this consumption pattern is mapped as an indirect rebound effect of users buying too expensive
equipment and toys and reselling it at a high price. This causes the indirect rebound effect of users
buying equipment and toys from new to occur leading to environmental and economic impacts to the
system. All direct, indirect, and economy-wide rebound effects identified from the consumption patterns
of the users can be found in Appendix 8 Rebound Effects.
Figure 29: Segment of the Rebound Effects methods based on insights from the workshops, the surveys, and the literature study
Another method giving valuable insights to environmental sustainability aspects of the baby equipment
and toys market is the Quick LCA Study method, see Appendix 8 Quik LCA Study. Here a review was
performed on a cradle-to-grave LCA of a pram comparing the environmental impacts of a rental and a
traditional ownership business model serving all children born in Singapore over five years (Kerdlap et
al., 2021). The key takeaways from the LCA review were:
90
==PAGE:92==
1.
Life cycle environmental impacts of renting prams are potentially 29-46% lower compared to
the traditional ownership business model if the environmental impacts from the heavy cleaning
in the rental model are reduced by;
a.
Reducing the use of electricity based processes
b.
Reducing the use of wet wipes (minimise water consumption)
c.
Reducing the use of materials for cleaning
d.
Reducing the transportation of products for cleaning
2.
Users should rent prams if the alternative option is to own a pram and use it for only three
years before it is sent for disposal.
3.
Rental pram companies should reduce the amount of heavy cleaning cycles to 4–5 times a
year (once every 3 months) to have a better environmental performance, compared to scenario
ownership 2 where 50% of the prams are passed onto other users.
4.
Scenario 1 and 2 (all prams are disposed after use and 50% are passed on to a new user after
use) always starts off with higher impacts compared to the rental scenarios.
This LCA study highlights that the main environmental impacts of rented prams occur in the
maintenance life cycle stage. For PSS providers to decrease the environmental impact of a pram (and
presumably other baby equipment and toys products as well) compared to owning the product, the
provider needs to reduce the impacts from the heavy cleaning.
91
==PAGE:93==
The Ecosystem Map
The workshop combined with the insights from the analysed survey data gave a thorough
understanding on product-, service, information-, and money flows from the users to other stakeholders
allowing for the startup team to map the flows within the ecosystem of the baby equipment and toys
market, see Figure 30, Appendix 11 Ecosystem Map 2.0.
Figure 30: Mapping of the flows between stakeholders within the baby equipment and toys market
Through a divergent approach to the problem space, a deep understanding of the relationship and flows
between stakeholders was now obtained via workshops with MoonBoon Baby Studio, BabySam, and
several users and through the collection of quantitative and qualitative data through the survey.
To converge the problem space and bring back a focus on identifying the main problems related to
purchasing baby equipment and toys, the team identified needs and problems in all methods applied in
the Explore & Reframe phase. These methods and their respective templates were developed in this
project, as knowledge on important needs and problems of the different stakeholders often get lost
during a comprehensive exploration of a problem space and as the team members found that there
92
==PAGE:94==
were no sufficient methods in the literature to apply to gather loose knowledge. The needs and
problems identified were depicted as seen in Figure 31 throughout the Explore & Reframe phase.
Figure 31: Mapping of needs and problems
Needs and problems from all methods applied during the Explore & Reframe phase tapped into missing
flows in the ecosystem of the baby equipment and toys market. The ecosystem map hereby
summarised the lack of purchasing solutions in the baby equipment and toys market communicated
and visualised through missing flows in the ecosystem map. These missing flows of products, services,
information, and/or money are highlighted in Figure 32 with dotted red lines. The arrows indicate the
direction of the flows.
Figure 32: Mapping of the missing flows between stakeholders within the baby equipment and toys market
93
==PAGE:95==
From the missing flows mapped in the ecosystem of baby equipment and toys in Figure 32, it shows
that when a product is discarded, it is out of the hands of the user - these are valuable resources that
could be given back to the user. The map also shows that there is a missing money flow from
influencers to resellers - expensive high class products (given for free to the influencer) are therefore
promoted as necessary to follow the trend. Additionally, influencers promote new products and not
secondhand products encouraging users to buy equipment and toys from new.
The map shows that there is a missing exchange of expert knowledge from stakeholders like midwives
and chiropractors to resellers - resellers might sell the products that are the most expensive and not the
best ones for the child. Furthermore, there is a lack of exchange of information and advice on products
when buying used leading to more users buying from new. Finally, it is seen that it is up to the product
manufacturers themselves to acquire certificates and pay for them as this is not required by higher
legal institutions - the incentive is therefore low unless the users demand it. Requirements to
certificates of products are also lacking from the resellers to the product manufacturers, as these are
optional for the resellers. Hereby it is seen from the missing flow analysis of the ecosystem map that
there is a huge potential for closing flows and hereby market gaps through the development of more
sustainable purchasing solutions of baby equipment and toys.
The goal of the Explore & Reframe phase of understanding the relationships and flows between
stakeholders and of understanding needs and problems occurring was met. The next step was now to
translate the problems and needs into need-to-have and nice-to-have criteria named Design Concept
Criteria. By doing this, the PSS startup team ensured that the final concept(s) would meet the user
needs and the problems identified by meeting the criteria. Problems and needs were grouped by
applying the methods Identified Problems and Identified User Needs and hereafter translated into
criteria. Hereafter a grouping of criteria based on the area of which it influences was conducted (e.g.
hygiene, convenience, adaptability, identity shaping) and criteria similar to each other were combined
into one. This led to a total of 47 need-to-have and nice-to-have criteria that the developed PSS
concepts should meet allocated under the titles product, product & service, and service (Figure 33,
Appendix 14.
94
==PAGE:96==
Figure 33: Design Concept Criteria for the PSS concept developed for the baby equipment and toys market.
95
==PAGE:97==
Summarise of the Explore & Reframe Phase
Through the test of the methods for the Explore & Reframe phase it was found that the methods
identified from the literature study and selected for this phase were not sufficient to be able to diverge
and converge the solution space. Therefore 15 methods were added of which method templates were
developed for 10 of these as they did not meet the requirements for the methods added to the
guideline.
The solution space for developing innovative purchasing solutions for the baby equipment and toys
market was diverged through knowledge gained through workshops with BabySam, Moonboon Baby
Studio and seven users and through surveys and a literature study. This knowledge was anchored in
methods applied in the phase and by analysing needs and problems of the stakeholders of the
ecosystem the problem space was converged resulting in final Design Concept Criteria for the
sustainable PSS startup developed with the startup case study. Through the Explore & Reframe Phase
the Guideline 1.0 have now been tested which have resulted in the revised version 2.0
96
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Create 
==PAGE:99==
Create
From the first phase Explore & Reframe startups obtained an understanding of the interrelationships
between stakeholders and built empathy for users of the market. The startup gained knowledge on PSS
and CE strategies and understanding on economic, social and environmental sustainable challenges.
The deliverable of the phase was identified Design Concept Criteria for developing the sustainable PSS
startup enabling a CE. The second phase of developing a PSS startup is called Create and incorporates
methods for startup teams to go from the developed criteria to creating personas and ending up with
different created concepts for the PSS. Through the Create phase, the practitioner will develop several
concepts co-created with users and the practitioner will narrow down the ideas to concepts. The
practitioner will explore the created PSS concepts and define how they engage with all three aspects of
sustainability.
The aim of the Create phase is:
To ideate and brainstorm on business models within the startup team and through
co-creation with users to narrow down ideas to concepts contributing to a sustainable and
circular development.
98
==PAGE:100==
Test and Revision of Methods for the Create Phase
The methods applied in the Create phase were based on the collected data from the Explore & Reframe
phase. During the test of the methods it was found that from the identified methods to the guideline, 3
methods needed to be added to diverge the solution space. The method Morphology was added to
create ideas with users from identified problem characteristics and the method Storyboards was added
to gain a common understanding of the selected concepts and to collect feedback to the concepts The
Personas x Concepts method was added to investigate the concepts against the created personas. This
acknowledgement led to the three new methods being applied to the guideline resulting in the Guideline
3.0, see Appendix 5 Guideline 3.0.
The aim of the methods is described in Table 14 together with the area of knowledge that the methods
contribute to (PSS, CE, and/or sustainability). A more detailed description of the aim of the methods can
be found in Appendix 6.
2 out of 3 of the new methods added did not meet one or more of the requirements for the methods
added to the guideline being; 1) it should be descriptive/self explanatory, 2) it should have a template,
and 3) it should be applicable by users with different professional backgrounds. Method templates were
therefore designed by the team, see Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS startup (Appendix 7).
Changes were made to the remaining methods for the Create phase to streamline the components and
design of the templates.
Table 14: Table with applied methods to the Create phase.
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights
to
Added as it
supports:
Rating
1-5
1
Create Persona
Kumar, 2013
To define user personalities (personas)
representing the types of users of the
analysed market and hereby of the future
developed concepts. Concepts should
address the needs of the identified
personas and fit with their context.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The
understanding
of what users
the concepts
should be
designed for.
5
2
Brainwriting
IDEO.org, 2015
To facilitate a common brainstorming
session of concept ideas or concept
features.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
A unified
consensus
around concept
ideas and
features.
4
3
Sustainable
business model
archetypes
N M P Bocken
et al., 2014
To be used as inspiration for adding
criteria ensuring that the brainstormed
solution will contribute to building up a
business model for sustainability.
SUS.
all aspects
Brainstorming
for
sustainability.
3
4
PSS Morphology
Finken et al.,
2013
To support the development of new
concepts or to support the combination of
PSS characteristics systematically to
describe already identified concepts.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The
development of
different
concepts with
users.
5
5
Circular Economy
Business Model
Pattern Cards
MATChE, 2021
To support the ideation and brainstorming
session through inspiration on potential
Circular Economy busineFcircularss model
strategies for your startup concepts.
CE
Brainstorming
for circular
economy.
5
99
==PAGE:101==
6
Napkin pitch
Scherer et al.,
2016
To provide a simple and consistent format
to summarize and communicate new
concepts brainstormed.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Communication
of new
concepts.
4
7
Economic, Social
and Environmental
Layer - 3 business
model canvasses
Joyce &
Paquin, 2016
To explore and define
sustainability-oriented business model
innovation focusing on all three aspects of
sustainability.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The three
concepts focus
on all three
aspects of
sustainability.
5
8
Decision Tree to
Navigate through
PSS Typologies
T. McAloone &
Pigosso, 2018
To navigate through PSS typologies to find
out if concepts are product oriented, use
oriented or result oriented PSSs.
PSS
The concept
being a PSS.
5
9
11 characteristics
of PSS
Haase et al.,
2017
To support a common understanding of
developed concepts by identifying PSS
characteristics of each concept.
PSS
An
understanding
of the PSS
characteristics
for each
concept.
5
Added methods
10 Morphology
Cross, 2005
To support creating a sustainable PSS
startup enabling a CE by combining
problem characteristics systematically and
creating new and suitable combinations.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Creation of new
and suitable
combinations
from the
identified
problem
characteristics.
5
11 Personas x
Concepts
Method
template
developed in
this project
To investigate the generated concepts for
the concepts against the created
personas.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
To ensure that
the concepts
are fitted for the
created
personas.
4
12 Storyboards
IDEO.org, 2015
To support a common understanding of
selected concepts and to support the
communication of the concepts to users
when collecting feedback to the concepts.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
To have a
common
understanding
of the selected
concepts and
to collect
feedback.
5
Learnings from the Create Phase
During the Explore & Reframe the Guideline 1.0 was tested and revised resulting in the Guideline 2.0.
Through the Create phase the Guideline 2.0 is tested and revised resulting in the Guideline 3.0, see
Appendix 5 Guideline 1.0-3.0. The Guideline 3.0 is based on the learnings gained through the use of
methods through the Create phase.
Personas
Potential users of the PSS were generated based on insights, design principles, values and findings
from research. Through a generation of user attributes both demographic and behavioral it was
possible to analyse the types of potential users and organise them according to sets of shared
100
==PAGE:102==
attributes. Four personas were created being true to the findings of the research. A visual profile for
each persona was generated to be able to communicate these. The concepts generated later built on
the needs of the personas to fit with their context. The four personas were The Environmentalist, The
Trend-Follower, The Practicalist and The Economist. All personas are described with a bio, personality
spectrum, their needs, motivations and frustrations and an explanation of what their favorite brands
and websites are. The four personas can be found in Appendix 8 Personas. In Figure 34 the example of
The Environmentalist can be seen.
Figure 34: The Environmentalist Persona
Brainstorming Ideas and Concepts
The personas developed from the findings from the research in the Explore & Reframe phase, helped
identify user types and functioned as a starting point for developing ideas and concepts. The methods
The Circular Economy Business Model Pattern Cards and Sustainable Business Model Archetypes
supported in sensing opportunities and generating ideas about potential CE business models for the
startup development and in describing solutions that can contribute to build up business models for
sustainability Appendix 8 The Circular Economy Business Model Pattern Cards & Sustainable Business
Model Archetypes. The methods were used as inspiration tools for the brainstorming sessions. In the
brainstorming session the two methods Napkin Pitch and Brainwriting were used. Napkin Pitch provided
a simple method to summarise and communicate concepts and Brainwriting allowed for building upon
existing suggestions and elaborating on ideas, see Appendix 8 Brainwriting & Napkin Pitch. Through
these brainstorming sessions 38 ideas were generated, see Appendix 15 38 Ideas.
101
==PAGE:103==
Generating ideas with users through Morphology
Through the generated 38 ideas the different problem characteristics were identified and evolved into a
morphology. Creating the morphology revealed the different characteristics for the PSS system and
supported how new solutions could be created. The different characteristics generated were: product,
service (type of activity, price transparency, repair maintenance cleaning services, advice on product,
environmental impact transparency), product condition, product quality, brand, platform, location,
payment (buy), payment (sell), comments, end-of-life, responsibility, PSS, and CE strategies.
Systematically it was possible to identify new and suitable combinations for different PSS concepts.
The generated ideas by the team members had all been based on the findings from the Explore &
Reframe phase. To keep building empathy with the users, eight users were invited to help generate
ideas through the identified characteristics in the Morphology. Co-designing different PSS concepts
allowed for ideas generated by potential users.
Users were fond of the renting/leasing opportunities with toys and short term use products, but wanted
to be able to pick the products themselves:
‘that is why I do not want the try-these-wine packages, because they always put in something
you do not want’ - User 1
‘I do not want to receive a box with a lot of unuseful equipment or toys. This would result in
me buying extra products beside what I rent’- User 7
The generated concepts can be seen in Figure 35 and in Appendix 8 Morphology with comments.
102
==PAGE:104==
Figure 35: Morphology created with eight use
103
==PAGE:105==
The brainstorming sessions and the co-created morphology concepts with users turned into 45 ideas in
total. By combining brainstormed features and ideas for concept components, the 45 ideas were
combined into 17 concepts. The 17 concepts were narrowed down to three concepts based on the
insights on the market and on the knowledge on user needs and problems identified in the Explore and
Reframe phase and based on the user input collected through the co-creation of concept ideas with
eight users. The three concepts were named PlayCase, PaRENT and MiniStream.
Investigation of the three concepts
To investigate the value proposition of the PSS concepts the method The Triple Layered Business Model
Canvas was chosen to support innovation towards more sustainable business models. This method
extends the original business model canvas by adding two layers - an environmental layer based on a
lifecycle perspective and a social layer based on a stakeholder perspective. By using this method more
knowledge was gained about the objectives of the environmental and social aspects of the startup and
it was identified where the biggest environmental impacts and benefits laid within the three concepts.
The method ensured a focus on all three aspects of sustainability. To investigate the three created PSS
concepts the methods PSS Morphology, 11 PSS Characteristics and Decision Tree to Navigate through
PSS Typologies were conducted. PlayCase and PaRENT scored yes on all the 11 PSS Characteristics,
whereas MiniStream did not have a physical product and therefore not a product life cycle either. It was
revealed through the methods that PlayCase and PaRENT were much alike just focusing on circulating
different types of products.
The three different concepts were investigated through the Personas x Concepts method to ensure that
the concepts would fit the personas and to investigate user patterns, see Figure 36.
Figure 36: Personas x Concepts
Storyboards
Finally, storyboards were created for MiniStream, MiniPlay and PaRENT to have a quick, low-resolution
prototype as well as a short text describing the concepts. The storyboards were chosen to be black and
white to not influence the users. Creating the storyboards allowed for a common understanding of the
selected concepts and it supported the communication of the concepts to users when collecting
feedback. The three concepts are described as follows:
104
==PAGE:106==
MiniStream
MiniStream is an app-based platform with games and activities for children aged 0-3 years. MiniStream
is a concept that encourages parents to minimise large amount of purchased new toys by offering
activities that are built around existing products available in their homes (e.g. kitchen utensils,
cardboard boxes and pencils). MiniStream guides users through tailor-made games for their child's
needs and offers games within motor and cognitive development which at the same time are
entertaining. As a parent, they get access to weekly new games suggested specifically for them.
MiniStream gives users the opportunity to entertain their child at any time and anywhere without having
to invest a lot of money in the latest toy.
Figure 37: MiniStream
PlayCase
PlayCase is a suitcase with pre-defined or personally selected toys that parents get delivered according
to the child's needs. As a subscriber to PlayCase, parents should not think about having to buy the latest
toy for their child, and should not familiarise themselves with what toys are needed for the child in
terms of their age. The toys are carefully selected to be sustainable and circular and the toys are of high
quality brands. As PlayCase subscribers, users can choose whether they want a package sent every
month, every other month or every three months. If their child is particularly fond of a specific toy they
can choose to extend the rental period. PlayCase circulates the products which are thoroughly cleaned
before they are given a new life. With PlayCase, users avoid toys piling up in the home, and they will
always have the right toys for their child's developmental stage.
Figure 38: PlayCase
PaRENT
PaRENT is a package of pre-defined or personally selected products that parents should have for their
child for the first 12 months. By renting quality equipment through PaRENT users avoid spending large
sums on equipment and do not have to worry about the disposal of the products after use. PaRENT
delivers the packages to their homes and takes the products back again for free. All products are
selected on the basis of sustainability and circular principles. The products are carefully quality assured
and cleaned between periods of use. PaRENT packages can easily be ordered online or through the
PaRENT app which also guides users with notifications for the equipment they need depending on their
needs at a certain time (inspired by pregnancy apps).
105
==PAGE:107==
As a user, they have the option to extend the rental period of certain products or send a product back
ahead of time against a refund if the need for the specific product was not there anyway. Through the
app users can also see product specifications, see conditions for the manufacturing staff as well as
information about the transport. Additionally, users can see best-in-test reviews and comments from
other users. With a PaRENT subscription, users avoid having to buy and store products that they use for
a very short time - and they get high-quality products and good design.
Figure 39: PaRENT
The storyboards supported the understanding of the concepts and was helpful in communicating the
concepts to the users when generating user feedback.
Summarise of the Create Phase
During the test of the methods it was found that the identified methods for the guideline were
insufficient in order to diverge the solution space and challenge the brief. Three methods were added to
involve users through co-creation of concepts and to visualise the generated concepts further.
The phase Create incorporates methods for startups to move from the developed criteria to ending up
with different concepts co-created with users. By developing personas it was possible to create
concepts. Ideas were created through different ideation and brainstorming methods which ended in
several problem characteristics gathered in a morphology that users could create ideas and concepts
from. The three generated concepts were analysed through PSS and sustainability methods to ensure
that a sustainable PSS contributing to circular development will be created through sustainable
business models. Through the Create Phase the Guideline 2.0 have now been tested which have
resulted in the revised version 3.0
106
==PAGE:108==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Catalyse 
==PAGE:109==
Catalyse
Ideas for PSS features and aspects of PSS concepts had now been brainstormed and combined into
final concepts through the Create phase. This led the team on to the next phase called Catalyse. This
phase incorporated methods making it possible for startup teams to converge the solution space by
going from having potential sustainable and valuable PSS concepts to having concepts that are
assessed and evaluated against sustainability aspects and evaluated by the users. Through the
Catalyse phase, the practitioner additionally gained an understanding of the change in product-, service-,
money- and information flows between stakeholders within the ecosystem. By the end of the Catalyse
phase the startup team was able to decide on the concept with the highest sustainability potential, but
could choose to move on with several concepts in the Continuing the Journey phase e.g. if the team
wishes to prototype and test several concepts.
The aim of the Catalyse phase is:
To make the PSS concepts tangible by depicting the changes of flows between
stakeholders of each concept to the ecosystem, to determine the sustainability impact of
the concepts and to evaluate concepts against criteria. A final concept may be selected in
the catalyse phase if the practitioner has enough knowledge and support to select the most
feasible concept.
Test and Revision of Methods for the Catalyse Phase
Through the testing of the methods found in the literature study and in online guidelines for the Catalyse
phase, it was discovered that few more methods needed to be added to the guideline to converge the
solutions space.
The methods from the Catalyse phase in the Guideline 3.0 were tested and gave valuable insights to all
aspects of sustainability (LCA Clinic and Rebound Effects) and to the opportunities for changing the
current market being analysed by implementing proposed concepts (Ecosystem Map and Attractiveness
Map). It was found that there was a need for including the users when assessing and evaluating the
concepts before being able to move on to the Continuing the Journey phase. Therefore the method User
Feedback Survey was added to the guideline to gather user feedback, and the method Affinity Diagram
was added to gather and group additional user insights gained through the survey.
Through the testing of the methods for the Catalyse phase it was also discovered that the Design
Concept Criteria developed in the Explore & Reframe phase needed to be incorporated as an evaluation
tool. This method should be incorporated as it is crucial for the developed concepts to meet the defined
criteria if the final concept should be a successful sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE within the
specific targeted market. This led to the Guideline 3.0 being revised resulting in the Guideline 4.0.
Appendix 5 Guideline 4.0.
The aim of each of the new methods applied is described in Table 15 together with the area of
knowledge of which each method contributes to (PSS, CE, and/or sustainability). Furthermore, the
argumentation for adding the three new methods to the guideline can be found in Table 15. A more
detailed description of the aim of each of the newly added methods can be found in Appendix 6.
108
==PAGE:110==
Table 15: Table with applied methods to the Catalyse phase.
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights
to
Added as it
supports:
Rating
1-5
1
LCA Clinic - Life
Cycle Assessment
and Ecodesign in a
Day
Judl et al.,
2015
To analyse the assumptions of
improved environmental impacts of
developed concepts against a
reference (eg. existing market
solutions) and to compare the
environmental impact of selected
concepts.
SUS.
environme
nt
The analysis of
environmental
impacts caused by
the different
developed concepts.
5
2
Rebound Effects
Kjaer et al.,
2017
To provide insights to potential
increased social, economic, and
environmental impacts caused by a
change in user behavior due to the
implementation of a PSS concept.
SUS.
all aspects
The understanding of
potential
environmental, social
and economic
impacts to the system
caused by the
implementation of the
concepts developed.
4
3
Ecosystem
mapping
Finken et al.,
2013
To understand and visualise the
change to the ecosystem caused by
the implementation of concepts by
mapping new established flows and
interactions between stakeholders.
PSS
The understanding of
change in flows and
interactions between
stakeholders of the
ecosystem of each
developed concept.
5
4
Attractiveness
Map
The Market
Opportunity
Navigator,
2020
To evaluate the market opportunity
of each concept and to map the
level of potential and the level of
challenge for the different concepts.
PSS
The evaluation of the
most attractive
concept(s) out of
selected concepts.
3
Added Methods
5
Affinity Diagram
Beyer &
Holtzblatt,
1997
To systemise ideas, opinions and
issues collected from a feedback
survey.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The collection of
feedback from users
that are not anchored
in other methods.
5
6
User Feedback
Survey
Method
template
developed in
this project
To collect feedback to different
generated PSS concepts used for
assessing and evaluating the
concepts. By applying this method,
valuable user feedback is gained
ensuring that the concept is
designed for users and evaluated by
users.
PSS
The gathering of user
feedback on
developed concepts.
5
7
Evaluation of
Concepts Against
Criteria
Method
template
developed in
this project
To evaluate if the previously
generated ‘need to have’ and ‘nice to
have’ are met by the developed PSS
concepts in order to assess the
different concepts.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
The evaluation of
selected concepts -
do they meet the
criteria developed in
the explore & reframe
phase?
5
109
==PAGE:111==
Learnings from the Catalyse Phase
The team had now gotten a common understanding of the three chosen PSS concepts through the
diverging Create phase. To reach the goal, several methods supporting an evaluation of the economic,
social, and environmental feasibility of the concepts were applied to the startup case study in the
Catalyse phase. First, a revised Ecosystem Map for all three concepts was depicted supporting the
understanding of the changes in flows and the changes to interactions between stakeholders.
Furthermore, the Ecosystem Map should support the selection of concepts (or elements of concepts) to
move on with in the next phase of the design process.
As seen in Figure 40, the MiniStream PSS concept closed five out of eight flows identified in the Explore
& Reframe phase. The identified flows and how they are closed are presented below;
●
Flow number 2: MiniStream closes the missing information flow from the private health sector
to product/service providers as the MiniStream games are based on knowledge e.g. from
midwives, chiropractors, and physiotherapists.
●
Flow number 6: MiniStream closes the missing information flow from influencers to users as
MiniStream targets promotion of dematerialising toys through social media.
●
Flow number 7: MiniStream closes the missing information flow from provider to user as
information and advice on the games is provided when purchasing immaterial products
through the platform.
The ecosystems of the PlayCase and PaRENT concepts close the same missing flows as described for
the MiniStream concept above. They also close the flows number 4 and number 8 as they incorporate
recirculated toys or baby equipment in their business model. These can be seen in Figure 41 and Figure
42. All Ecosystem Maps can be found in Appendix 11 MiniStream, PlayCase, & PaRENT.
110
==PAGE:112==
MiniStream
Figure 40: Revised ecosystem map of the MiniStream concept
111
==PAGE:113==
PlayCase
Figure 41: Revised ecosystem map of the PlayCase concept
112
==PAGE:114==
PaRENT
Figure 42: Revised ecosystem map of the PaRENT concept
113
==PAGE:115==
It can be seen from the ecosystems of the three concepts that the user stakeholders and the interaction
between these differ from concept to concept. For the MiniStream concept, the targeted users are
parents of all ages and family members/friends while the end users are children aged 0-3 years. For the
PlayCase concept, the targeted users are parents of all ages and family members/friends while the end
users are children aged 0-2 years. Finally, the targeted users for the PaRENT concept are new parents
with children aged 0-9 months and family members/friends. The end users of the PaRENT concept are
both the parents and the their children as some equipment (eg. a breast pump) is used by the parents
and some (eg. a bedside crib) is used by the child.
As well as a difference in user stakeholders between the concepts, a difference in competitors are also
seen in the ecosystem maps. The competitors to the MiniStream concept encompasses both resellers,
manufacturers, and used market platforms selling toys as well as online platforms providing inspiration
for games, Figure 40. Competitors to the PlayCase and PaRENT concepts are found to be
manufacturers, resellers, used markets and rental companies selling/renting out respectively toys and
equipment.
As seen in the Ecosystem Maps, the MiniStream concept has fewer relationships and flows between
stakeholders as this concept does not incorporate a physical product. Therefore, the infrastructure is
significantly less complex than for the PlayCase and PaRENT concept.
The ecosystem maps of the three concepts show that several flows missing in the ecosystem of the
current market will be closed by implementing both the MiniStream, the PlayCase and the PaRENT
concepts. The PlayCase and the PaRENT concept showed to close two more flows than the
MiniStream concept as these incorporate a physical product element.
To further support a selection of the three concepts, the methods Life Cycle Assessment and Ecodesign
in a Day, Rebound Effects, Attractiveness Map, User Feedback Survey, Choosing Recirculation Strategy
and Evaluation of Concepts Against Criteria were applied in the Catalyse phase, see Appendix 8. These
methods supported the understanding of the feasibility of each concept taking possible economic,
environmental, and social sustainability aspects into account as well as user feedback from 267 users
and possible CE strategies into account. Selected insights from these methods are highlighted in the
sections below.
Life Cycle Assessment and Ecodesign in One Day
The method Life Cycle Assessment and Ecodesign in One Day was applied to get an estimated
quantification of the environmental impact of each of the three concepts. The method template is
inspired by the Life Cycle Clinic for startups template developed by (Judl et al., 2015). The test of the
methods functional unit, the revenue, the system boundaries and the LCA results can be found in
Appendix 8. The concepts were compared to a reference product which is the alternative concept
scenario in the existing market. Six scenarios were hereby mapped in the LCA, see Table 16.
114
==PAGE:116==
Table 16: The different concept scenarios with the reference products and the
The scenarios were modelled and the characterised impact profile at midpoint level and the weighted
impact profile at endpoint level were calculated in SimaPro. In Figure 41, the weighted impact profiles
can be seen. A key takeaway from this chart is that the PaRENT (existing alternative) has the highest
impact to all three endpoint impact categories. This indicates that the biggest potential for minimising
the impact of the user is by choosing the PaRENT concept. This is due to the team assuming that the
impact of renting short use equipment would potentially be 29-46% lower compared to owning the
products as seen in the pram LCA study (Kerdlap et al., 2021). Another key takeaway is that the
MiniStream concept has a higher impact to Ecosystems and Human health compared to the existing
alternative - this indicates that the PlayCase and PaRENT concepts have larger potentials for minimising
the environmental impact than the MiniStream concept.
Figure 41: The weighted impact profile of the modelled scenarios at endpoint level
115
==PAGE:117==
Survey Analysis - Feedback on the Three Concepts
The users were involved in evaluating and selecting concepts through a user survey gathering feedback
on the three concepts, see Appendix 12 Concept User Feedback. In just one day, 267 users responded to
the survey. The large number of respondents once again indicate that there is a need for developing
innovative and sustainable purchasing solutions for buying baby equipment and toys.
The test and the results of the survey analysis method can be seen in Appendix 8 Analysis Survey
Analysis - Feedback. The distribution of favorite concepts amongst the users can be seen in Figure 44.
Here the MiniStream concept takes first place with 50.5% of the users vote followed by the PaRENT
concept with 28.7% and the PlayCase concept with 20.8%.
Figure 44: Users' attitude towards the three  concepts
The survey allowed for the respondents to further elaborate on their selection of favorite concepts.
These are grouped in the Affinity Diagram method and can be found in Appendix 8 Affinity Diagram.
Selected quotes that present consistent attitudes and arguments for choosing the three concepts are
extracted from the affinity diagram and presented below.
‘MiniStream is my favorite concept as it could help me to be more creative with the things
that I have at home and at the same time same money on toys - I have experienced that my
children are most fond of things that are not necessarily designed to be toys like spoons and
tupperware.’ - user
‘I like the PaRENT concept the most as it would be great to be able to borrow equipment
that you do not use for a long period of time - before having a child, you have no idea of what
equipment is necessary.’ - user
116
==PAGE:118==
‘PaRENT is a really great idea for those who want products of high quality but may not be
able to afford it themselves - or for those who do not have a lot of space.’ - user
‘PlayCase is my favorite concept as I am in favor of reuse and recycling of products - The
toys I buy pile up at home but at the same time I want the best toys for my child. Therefore a
rental purchasing solution for toys would fit me’ - User
A cross-analysis of the User Feedback Survey data was performed to further understand the selection
of favorite concepts based on the profile of the user. An example of a cross-analysis chart can be seen
in Figure 45. This demonstrates that there is the highest percentage of users within each ‘number of
children’-category that votes that the MiniStream concept is their favorite concept. Additionally, it is seen
that the PlayCase concept scores lowest for users with one child (waiting second) and for users with
two or more children. This indicates that the PlayCase concept is not needed when there are two or
more children to entertain each other.
Figure 45: User distribution of favourite concepts depending on number of children
Evaluation of Concepts Against Criteria
By evaluating the concepts against the Concept Design Criteria defined in the Explore & Reframe phase,
the team explored to what degree the concepts would be sustainable PSS startup business models
enabling a CE. Hereby, the method Evaluation of Concepts Against Criteria can be used to select a
concept or opt out concept ideas if they do not meet the criteria sufficiently see Figure 46. As seen in
Appendix 8 Concepts Against Criteria, all three concepts meet all need-to-have criteria. Thus, four
product-oriented criteria have been nullified for the MiniStream concept as this concept does not
incorporate a physical product.
117
==PAGE:119==
Figure 46: Concepts Against Criteria.
118
==PAGE:120==
Final Concepts
The evaluation methods led to arguments for choosing different concepts to move on with depending
on the type of evaluation method. Hereby there is no unambiguous answer to what concept is the most
feasible concept to move on with in relation to CE and sustainability.
As found in the method 11 PSS Characteristics in the Create phase, the MiniStream concept was
missing a physical product. As one could argue, the MiniStream concept would therefore be a service
and not a PSS. Thus, as the users favorite concept was the MiniStream concept, it was decided to
merge the concepts MiniStream and PlayCase and hereby apply MiniStream business model aspects to
the PlayCase concept. This resulted in a PSS business model where recirculated, rented toys are
supported by different exercises to the toys through a web and mobile application. The combined
concept was named ‘MiniPlay’ resulting in the concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT to be further developed in
the Continuing the Journey phase.
Other practitioners using the guideline as a framework for developing a sustainable PSS startup could
choose one concept to move on within the Continuing the Journey phase. Thus, it was decided to move
on with two concepts in this startup case study as more user feedback was needed to select one of the
concepts.
Summarise of the Catalyse Phase
Through the converging Catalyse phase it was found that few more methods needed to be added to the
original Guideline 3.0 to converge the solution space. The added methods were methods supporting the
collection of user feedback on proposed concepts and supporting the evaluation of concepts against
the criteria defined in the explore & reframe phase. This led to a Guideline 4.0, see Appendix 5 Guideline
4.0.
The revised ecosystem based on the changes in flows and interactions between stakeholders caused
by the implementation of the three concepts, gave great insights to possible changes to the ecosystem
of the current way of purchasing baby equipment and toys. All three concepts established product-,
service-, money- or information flows that do not exist between stakeholders of the current baby
equipment and toys market today.
A decision on combining the concepts MiniStream and PlayCase was taken based on the understanding
of the feasibility of each concept taking both economic, environmental, and social sustainability aspects
into account as well as user feedback from 267 users and possible CE strategies into account. Hereby
the concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT were chosen to be further explored in the Continuing the Journey
phase.
119
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Continuing 
the Journey 
==PAGE:122==
Continuing the Journey
In the Catalyse phase methods had been incorporated to make it possible for startups to converge the
solution space to end up having concepts evaluated against sustainability aspects and evaluated by
users. It was chosen to move forward with the two concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT.
Through Continuing the Journey the startup will reflect on the concept(s) and create and share
knowledge for the future work of the outcome. The practitioner will gain knowledge around the services
delivered for each concept and gain knowledge on how to build the brand around the circular innovation
and finally a visualisation and strategic plan for the future will be developed.
The aim of the Continuing the Journey phase is:
To define the final concept(s) and to reflect on what needs to be done through further
work as the project is open-ended and more development and knowledge therefore might
be needed to proceed with a concept.
121
==PAGE:123==
Test and Revision of Methods for the Continuing the Journey Phase
Three methods were tested in the Continuing the Journey phase through the case study of developing a
concept within the market for baby equipment and toys. The aim of the methods is described in Table
17 together with the area of knowledge that the methods contribute to (PSS, CE, and/or sustainability).
A more detailed description of the aim of the added methods can be found in Appendix 6.
Through the phase Continuing the Journey it was found that the startup was not ready to move forward
with only one idea as the concepts would need to be explored further. Through the Continuing the
Journey phase it should be ensured that the final Guideline 5.0 had goals and a plan to develop the
startup further in the future. Therefore, the method Roadmap was added to the guideline. The final
business model for the concepts will be developed in the Continuing the Journey phase, a method used
in the Create phase.
Table 17: Table with applied methods to the Continuing the Journey phase.
N
Method
Reference
Aim
Insights
to
Added as it
supports:
Rating
1-5
1
Service
Blueprinting
(Pezzotta et al.,
2018)
To map the user journey and the
company’s processes happening
simultaneously and to support a
common understanding of the
services delivered.
PSS /
CE
The understanding of
the services delivered
for each concept.
5
2
Brand Promise
Ellen MacArthur
Foundation,
2018
To describe your brand purpose
and hereby your message to your
customers and to build the brand
around your circular innovation.
PSS /
CE
The understanding of
the message of each
concept.
4
Added Method
3
Roadmap
Roadmunk, 2021 To visualise and map the
strategic plan that defines the
goal or the desired outcome of
your startup and includes the
major steps and milestones
needed to reach it.
PSS /
SUS. all
aspects /
CE
Building a strategic
plan that defines the
future goals of the
startup and/or
concept.
5
Learnings from the Continuing the
Journey Phase
Elaborating on MiniPlay and PaRENT
From the Catalyse phase the concepts went from three to two. The method Brand Promise was
performed for the two concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT to build the brands around the circular
innovation, see Appendix 8 Brand Promise. The two concepts focus on recirculation of products and
should be reused by several users. When not functioning the products should be either upgraded or
fixed through repair and maintenance. When the product reaches the end of life it should be either
refurbished, remanufactured or repurposed.
122
==PAGE:124==
The method Service Blueprint represents the service delivery process for the two concepts. It facilitates
the description of the relationship between the user and the organisation and describes the user journey
and the company’s process simultaneously. By mapping the service delivery process it can help
improve the employee experience and indirectly the user’s experience, see Appendix 8 Service Blueprint.
This method should be elaborated further when the startup chooses one concept.
As it was chosen not to choose between the two concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT as the startup
assessed that the concepts needed further investigation a roadmap was conducted. The roadmap
serves as a strategic plan for the future. Through the roadmap a development plan was created from
2021-2023, see Appendix 8 Roadmap and Figure 47.
Regarding the development of the two concepts an evolving phase of the concepts is planned for the
Q3 in 2021. Here users will be involved through tests of the concepts by creating a survey and through
focus groups and workshops. It is still very important for the startup to engage with users to make sure
that the final PSS concept will be accepted by users. The business model will be further elaborated for
the final concept both in terms of the economic, social and environmental aspect. The startup will
apply for funding and accelerator programs throughout the rest of 2021 to ensure it is economically
possible to establish the PSS. The PSS concept is reliant on engaging with experts, therefore an
establishment with pediatricians, pedagogues, physiotherapists, health nurses and midwives will be
created and maintained throughout the life of the PSS.
In Q4 2021 a selection of the concepts between MiniPlay and PaRENT will happen. A prototype of the
concept will afterwards be created. Users will be involved in the testing of the prototype to ensure the
successfulness of the PSS for both the app and the chosen products. Through 2022 the startup will
establish themselves as a company and the PSS will kick-off. Instagram will be targeted following a
product release campaign created in collaborations with marketing companies who will also help with
focused advertising. Other potential partnerships will be established e.g. with Lego or BabySam and in
2023 influencers will be targeted to advertise for the PSS. In 2023 the first recirculation of products will
happen which will include maintenance and cleaning as services.
The roadmap has served as a communication tool to help articulate the strategic thinking behind both
the goal and the plan for getting there and therefore the roadmap will also be elaborated on in the
future.
123
==PAGE:125==
Figure 47: Roadmap
124
==PAGE:126==
Triple Layered Business Model Canvas
Several methods from the Create and Catalyse phase could be used again in the Continuing the Journey
phase, to gain a deeper knowledge on the two created PSS concepts. These methods include Decision
Tree to Navigate through PSS Typologies, 11 PSS Characteristics, Concepts against Personas, The Triple
Layered Business Model Canvas, LCA Clinic, Rebound Effects, Ecosystem mapping, Attractiveness map,
Affinity Diagram, Survey Analysis and Criteria checklist..
The Triple Layered Business Model Canvas is added for now as it explores and sums up the
sustainability-oriented business model generated for the two concepts Appendix 8 The Triple Layered
Business Model Canvas. Using the method it shows how to generate multiple types of value - economic,
environmental and social for MiniPlay and PaRENT, see Figure 48 and Figure 49.
125
==PAGE:127==
Figure 48: MiniPlay Economic Business Model Canvas
126
==PAGE:128==
Figure 49: PaRENT Economic Business Model Canvas
127
==PAGE:129==
Through The Triple Layered Business Model Canvas more knowledge was gained about the objectives
and environmental and social aspects of the two concepts. Through the environmental layer it is
appraised how to generate more environmental benefits than environmental impacts. This allowed for a
better understanding of where the environmental impacts lie within the business model and provides
insights on where to focus. Through the social layer key social impacts were captured between
stakeholders and the startup. Furthermore, a better understanding of where the startup’s primary social
impacts are were found as well as insight for exploring ways to innovate the organisation’s actions and
business model to improve the social value creation potential.
The goal of the thesis was to create a guideline for developing sustainable PSS startups enabling a CE.
To ensure that this goal is met, the key characteristics of the concepts are presented below. The key
characteristics mapped clearly show that MiniPlay and PaRENT are sustainable PSS concepts enabling
a CE.
MiniPlay
Economic Sustainability Aspects
MiniPlay is a rented package of pre-defined or non predefined toys that the user can rent when
needed.The predefined packages are fitted to the child’s motor activity and cognitive development
stage. The toys are recirculated by the provider. MiniPlay provides a subscription based toys platform
with guiding the parents to facilitate new games. Through the app MiniPlay encourages parents to
minimise the need for purchasing a lot of new baby equipment by providing numerous ways of using a
toy. Furthermore, MiniPlay proposes activities with equipment existing in the homes of the parents.
Type of PSS
●
Use Oriented - Renting
Environmental Sustainability Aspects
●
Benefits: Less toys are bought (dematerialisation) & Sharing of toys between users
CE Strategies Implemented
The products are not designed and manufactured by the MiniPlay provider but selected based on the
following circular product design strategies (Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016):
●
Product Design Strategies
○
Slowing loop: choosing long-life products
○
Slowing loops: designing for product-life extension (e.g. maintenance & repair and
design for disassembly)
○
Closing: Design for a technological cycle (maintenance and reuse of products)
●
Business Model Strategies
○
Slowing loops: Access and performance model
○
Slowing loops: Classic long life model
○
Slowing loops: Encourage sufficiency
○
Closing: Extending resource value
128
==PAGE:130==
Social Sustainability Aspects
Social Value
●
Eliminates the problem of having to own and store huge amounts of toys
●
Having to constantly reinvent the wheel to stimulate the child
●
The need of having toys fitted to the child’s development phase
Social Benefits
●
Social Benefits (Parents)
○
Community engagement
○
Personal development of parents
○
Knowledge giving.
○
Knowledge sharing
○
Economic equality
●
Social Benefits (Child)
○
Personal development
○
Motor activity and cognitive learning
○
Equality between children
PaRENT
Economic Sustainability Aspects
PaRENT is a rented package of pre-defined or non predefined short usage products for parents used in
the first 12 months of parenthood. PaRENT products are recirculated and cleaned and maintained in
between rental periods. PaRENT provides the users with a guide on what equipment is necessary for
them dependent on the phase of the parenthood. PaRENT eliminates the problem of buying expensive
short use equipment.
Type of PSS
●
Use Oriented - Renting
Environmental Sustainability Aspects
●
Benefits: Less equipment are bought (dematerialisation)
●
Sharing of equipment between users
CE Strategies Implemented
The products are not designed and manufactured by the PaRENT provider but selected based on the
following circular product design strategies (Nancy M. P. Bocken et al., 2016):
●
Product Design Strategies
○
Slowing loop: choosing long-life products
○
Slowing loops: designing for product-life extension (e.g. maintenance & repair and
design for disassembly)
○
Closing: Design for a technological cycle (maintenance and reuse of products)
●
Business Model Strategies
○
Slowing loops: Access and performance model
129
==PAGE:131==
○
Slowing loops: Classic long life model
○
Slowing loops: Encourage sufficiency
Social Sustainability Aspects
Social Value
●
Eliminates the problem of having to own and store parent equipment used for short periods of
time
●
Time and energy saving on researching and gaining knowledge on equipment to fit the child
and parent’s need
●
The need of wanting the newest, high quality equipment at an affordable price
Social Benefits
●
Social Benefits (Parents)
○
Knowledge sharing & Economic equality
Summarise of the Continuing the Journey
Phase
The methods tested in the Continuing the Journey phase helped in generating two concepts with a
circular brand strategy and understanding their service process. A reflection on what is needed to be
done for further work was elaborated through the Roadmap. The two final PSS concepts were defined
and the sustainability aspects and circular strategies of each of the concepts were mapped ensuring
that the concepts are sustainable PSSs enabling a CE. The project is open-ended and the startup needs
to further converge and gain more knowledge to proceed further with only one concept.
Through the Catalyse Phase the Guideline 4.0 have now been tested which have resulted in the revised
version 5.0
130
==PAGE:132==
Presentation of ‘Guideline for Developing
a Sustainable and Circular PSS Startup’
Through the DS II the Guideline 1.0 was successfully tested and a final Guideline 5.0 had now been
created. The startup team has followed necessary, initial steps of establishing a project in connection
with the initial phases of the thesis project. Methods guiding the startup practitioner through the same
steps are proposed in the Orientation & Vision Setting phase. These have not been tested but are
suggestions.
The result of the test of the guideline has led to the final guideline with proposed methods and
templates to these. The guideline is named Guideline for Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS
Startup and can be seen in Figure 50, Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS startup (Appendix 7).
The templates for the Guideline for Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS Startup (Appendix 7) and
the Methods Tested Throughout the Case Study (Appendix 8) have been developed in Adobe Xd. It can
all be accessed through the following link:
Adobe Xd prototype: Guideline for Developing a Sustainable and Circular PSS
Startup and the Methods Tested Throughout the Case Study
The guideline proved to support the development of a sustainable PSS startup enabling a CE. This is
visually depicted in Figure 50.
Figure 50: PSS startups following the guideline will be enablers of a CE and incorporate social,
environmental and economic sustainability practice
131
==PAGE:133==
Choosing Methods from each Phase of
the Systemic Design Approach
For startups to easier navigate through the methods a guide has been made for how many methods to
choose from each phase according to time and according to the rating of the method. It is worth
empathising how important stakeholder engagement is. Therefore, it is highly recommended to have a
sufficient amount of data for the methods and thereby the workshop method and survey method is
highly recommended. Based on how much time available the practitioners have, a guide on what
methods to apply have been created. Here are the suggestions based on if the practitioner has: 1 day, 3
weeks, 4 months or +4 months. The different plans can also be found in Appendix 16 Choosing
Methods.
1 day for the Guideline
Due to the limited time available, the practitioner is recommended to select methods with a rating 5 (on
a scale from 1-5). It is recommended to choose;
●
2 methods from the Explore & Reframe phase
●
1method from the Create phase
●
1 method from the Catalyse phase
●
1 method from the Continuing the Journey phase.
If the practitioner chooses to apply the Conducting a Survey method, it is recommended to only use one
hour on creating the survey and one hour for collecting responses..
3 weeks for the Guideline
Due to the limited time available, the practitioner is recommended to select methods with a rating 5 (on
a scale from 1-5). It is recommended to choose;
●
5 methods from the Explore & Reframe phase
●
2 methods from the Create phase
●
3 methods from the Catalyse phase
●
2 methods from the Continuing the Journey phase.
4 months for the Guideline
For the 4 months guideline it is recommended to apply the methods tested throughout this project from
guideline 5.0. It is recommended to choose;
●
22 methods from the Explore & Reframe phase
●
12 methods from the Create phase
●
7 methods from the Catalyse phase
●
3 methods from the Continuing the Journey phase.
Therefore the final guideline without the recommendations.
132
==PAGE:134==
4+ months for the Guideline
For the 4+ months guideline it is recommended to apply the methods tested throughout this project and
suggested but not tested methods from guideline 5.0. It is recommended to choose;
●
5 methods from the Orientation & Vision Setting phase
●
42 methods from the Explore & Reframe phase
●
23 methods from the Create phase
●
11 methods from the Catalyse phase
●
8 methods from the Continuing the Journey phase.
Concluding notes on the
Descriptive Study II
●
How can the methods of the guideline be tested and evaluated through a startup case study and
how can the Systemic Design Framework contribute to it?
The methods of the guideline were tested through the case study by following the design process
phases proposed in the guideline from the SDF design process suggested by the (Design Council, 2021)
through the four phases Explore & Reframe, Create, Catalyse and Continuing the Journey.
The Explore & Reframe phase provided insights to the market through workshops with BabySam,
Moonboon Baby and seven users. Further knowledge was gained through a comprehensive survey
with 1.093 respondents from DK and 150 respondents outside DK. From a literature study on existing
PSSs within the baby equipment and toys market. The insights gained through methods were analysed
in terms of needs and problems of the stakeholders of the ecosystem. The identified problems and
needs were translated into final criteria for the sustainable PSS to be developed through the startup
case study.
In the Create phase personas were generated to support the ideation and creation of ideas and
concepts. By applying and testing several ideation and brainstorming methods numerous PSS
characteristics
with
the
possibility of being combined into concepts were identified. These
characteristics were gathered in a morphology chart from which the users were able to generate new
PSS concepts fitting their needs and solving their problems. Many concept ideas were brainstormed
and three of these concepts were chosen to move forward with. The three concepts were tested and
developed through different PSS, CE and sustainability oriented methods.
Through the converging Catalyse phase a revised ecosystem based on the changes in flows and
interactions between stakeholders caused by the implementation of the three concepts were made.
This provided insights to changes to the ecosystem of the current way of purchasing baby equipment
and toys. All three concepts generated flows of established product-, service-, money- or information
flow that do not exist in the market today of baby equipment and toys. MiniStream and PlayCase were
chosen to be combined because of the understanding of a PSS. Both economic, social, and
environmental sustainability aspects, feedback from 267 users and possible CE strategies were taken
133
==PAGE:135==
into account. The concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT were thereby chosen to be explored further in the
Continuing the Journey phase.
The testing of the guideline in the Descriptive Study II ended in the Continuing the Journey phase. Here
MiniPlay and PaRENT were elaborated through their brand strategy and in understanding their service
process. A reflection on future work and development was elaborated through a Roadmap from
2021-2023. The startup's future hereby ends openly with the two concepts to be explored further before
moving on and creating the PSS for only one of the concepts.
All methods for the guideline are provided with a text evaluating the aim of each method, area of
knowledge and why it is added as a method to the guideline. Several methods were added through the
Descriptive Study II to gain a deeper understanding of PSS, CE and sustainability aspects and develop a
concept meeting all criteria for the PSS startup. These were found through online guidelines or inspired
by learnings throughout the studies at the Technical University of Denmark and at Aalborg University. All
methods in the Final Guideline 5.0 are 1) descriptive/self explanatory, 2) have a template, and 3)
applicable by users with different professional backgrounds.
An elaboration of the PSS, CE, and sustainability characteristics of the two final proposed startup
concepts MiniPlay and PaRENT proved that both concepts offer both environmental, economic, and
social value. Hereby, it was proved that the guideline supports the development of a sustainable PSS
business model concept enabling a CE.
134
==PAGE:136==
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
Summary of Key Findings
Throughout the Research Clarification it was found that there are many guidelines and methods
supporting sustainable development and circular economy. Thus, the conducted literature search
indicates that there is a lack of a comprehensive guideline gathering methods through a design process
to support the development of a sustainable product/service-system business model enabling a
circular economy.
The study demonstrates the initial phases of the development of a comprehensive guideline tested
with a startup case study going through the Systemic Design Framework phases. An early evaluation of
applied methods in the guideline has been performed, to determine the quality of insights provided by
the methods, accompanied by a designed template for the process of establishing this particular type
of enterprise.
Interpretations & Implications of the Study
The methods applied and implemented in the guideline through the diverging and converging phases of
the Systemic Design Framework covers product/service-system, circular economy, and the three
aspects of sustainability. Interpretation of empirical data from tests of the selected methods was used
for 1) providing direct feedback on the guideline and 2) building design support for the development of
the concepts.
As opposed to guidelines found in the literature, numerous online methods and guidelines are offering
applicable templates that vary in standard from vaguely defined and thoroughly explained. This study
builds on the knowledge and the intuitiveness from these but differs in that it approaches both
product/service-system, circular economy, and sustainability and gathers it all in one guideline.
The results suggest that the developed guideline can be used for startups. In theory, it has the potential
for being applied by different types of practitioners such as students, SMEs, and larger companies.
However, whether it is as successful in practice as it is, in theory, is yet to be explored through several
tests with actual entrepreneurs and other potential practitioners.
The study implies that the methods and their templates act as a bridging element contributing to a
common understanding of the methods and processes within teams, between professors and
students, or between colleagues. The templates and examples from the applied methods contribute to
the MSc degrees of Sustainable Design Engineering & Design & Innovation by providing the guideline
which could be relevant to use in product/service-system courses or other entrepreneurial courses.
Although the focus has been on developing a startup by a startup team, the guideline could equally be
applied by actual entrepreneurs in established startups, or for startup accelerator programs such as
Skylab & SEA AAU. Additionally, elements of the guideline have the potential to inspire larger companies,
and as a positive effect of that create awareness of the two MSc degrees.
The guideline supports the establishment of an interrelationship between product/service-system,
circular economy, and sustainability and has the potential of challenging existing guidelines. E.g. by
136
==PAGE:138==
challenging the circular economy framework by Ellen MacArthur Foundation by incorporating several
theoretical areas rather than just one.
In contrast to the findings from the Research Clarification, this study differs by guiding practitioners
through the phases in the Systemic Design Framework. The study provides new insights into how to
apply and combine the two frameworks (Systemic Design Framework and Design Research
Methodology), by navigating in the diverging and converging phases suggested by the Systemic Design
Framework through the DS II of the Design Research Methodology, when testing the guideline.
The present study shows that in line with (Trautwein, 2021) who concludes that there is hardly any
product/service-system development process designs addressing the particular needs of startups, and
there is a lack of guidance on how to implement the methods. Meanwhile, startups play a major role
towards sustainable development and therefore the guideline should support this. Agreeing,
researchers (Sassanelli et al., 2015) argue that the success on the market relies on the decisions taken
during the initial phases of the development of the product/service-system emphasising the
importance of the focus on startups.
In practice, the guideline has contributed to the practice of developing sustainable and circular
product/service-system startup concepts. The study proposes two startup concepts that meet the
criteria defined in the Explore & Reframe phase. Both concepts equally solve the identified user needs
and problems that follow when purchasing baby equipment and toys. By reflecting on the research by
(O. K. Mont, 2002), the study hopes to support the challenge of developing a product/service-system
system solution where pieces fit together and the outcome provides a certain quality of life to users
while at the same time minimising the environmental impacts of the system. Additionally, the aim of the
startup concepts, being sharing equipment/toys amongst parents, ties well with other previous studies,
where scholars suggest that the key to tackling environmental challenges is by sharing resources (de
Pádua Pieroni et al., 2018; O. Mont, 2004; Tukker, 2015).
The two concepts have the potential to mitigate the environmental impacts. However, similar to the
research of (Pigosso & McAloone, 2016) and (Medini & Boucher, 2016) the impact assessments from
the LCA in the startup case study need to be further investigated through a consequence analysis of the
developed concepts that take into account the potential rebound effects.
137
==PAGE:139==
Limitations of the Study &
Recommendations for Further Work
Reflecting on the scope of the project it turned out to be fairly immense both to create a guideline and
contributing
with
the
experience
to
other
practitioners
by
simultaneously
developing
a
product/service-system startup within the field of baby equipment and toys.
It is beyond the scope of the study to test the guideline more extensively than through the startup case
study, however, the guideline should ideally be tested with other practitioners within different areas of
consumer goods to make it possible to conclude whether it is applicable for other startups or not. The
limited testing with actual entrepreneurs and other practitioners suggests a need for further
investigation on how the guideline would be received and thus determining how it could be evaluated.
An apparent limitation of the applied methods is that none of the tested methods have been removed
from the guideline despite some methods only getting the score of 2 on a scale from 1-5. Considering
the credibility of the rating from 1-5 it is proposed to gather data from a sufficient number of
practitioners and have them rate the methods, and based on the sum of the ratings draw conclusions
about the actual contributions. As a result of not excluding any, the many methods could come across
extensively, and therefore it is recommended that a practitioner could navigate between the methods
depending on the time available. It is beyond the scope of the study to develop the guideline as an
interactive guideline, but potential improvements for the guideline could be a filtering system, enabling
the user to easily gain access according to the specific needs.
Regarding the startup case study, the two sustainable and circular product/service-system concepts
would require improvements and further elaborations of the business model before being able to enter
the market. Further interventions with the user groups are needed to find potential improvements and
kick start the startup. Thus, it will be necessary to conduct a new retrospective study in the future, when
the startup is kicked off to validate the intended allocations in the ecosystem map and assess the
potential rebound effects. It is an anticipated obstacle that the team did not develop the startup fully, as
the result of actually having a startup made based on the guideline, would have acted as a proof of
concept. Therefore, it is recommended that a future study could build on this study by investigating
practice around making a startup and use practice analysis to improve the guideline.
138
==PAGE:140==
Reflecting on Learning Objectives
Throughout this project, the team aims to reach the learning objectives set at the beginning of the
project. These are assessed to be successfully met. In addition, the team has developed a guideline for
product/service-system startups and a product/service-system startup concept - the team hopes to
create a startup or consultancy that could potentially build on the project’s outcomes.
Through the study, an understanding of different product/service-system notions in the research field
was
explored
and
understood.
Thus,
confusion
on
the
product-related
aspect
of
a
product/service-system arose. A product was perceived to have the possibility of being a digital product,
but further elaboration and exploration led the team to conclude that a product/service-system needed
to incorporate a physical aspect. Therefore, a concept change happened.
Startup approaches were analysed throughout the literature, but further study of the online guidelines
was considered. This is because the online guidelines were of high relevance to this study. Therefore it
could have been valuable to look into these earlier in the guideline development and do a comparative
analysis of more online guidelines.
A substantial amount of user needs were identified through the Explore & Reframe phase (initially called
the Value Offering Gallery). Because of scoping wide (both baby equipment and toys), it was hard to
narrow down where to focus the product/service-system startup. If the study had to be conducted
again, it might have been more valuable to have chosen one or only a few products to focus on before
starting the analysis. This could have led to a more focused study, and thereby a better solution might
have been created.
A lot of new knowledge was gained throughout this process and especially for the sustainable potential.
It was mastered how to do a quick LCA, and two new types of business model canvases were
performed through the Triple Layered Business Model Canvas. This will help the team later to do quick
calculations and investigations of the sustainable potential.
The purpose of the thesis was to develop a startup. The team did not end on a final concept as the two
final concepts needed to be explored further. The economic viability of the concepts was calculated at
its minimum. Again it is noted that the scope might have been too broad. Therefore, it is arguable
whether the team ends up being a startup, which challenges the guideline in being too comprehensive.
The team created a guideline using UX principles, but the guideline is yet to be evaluated using external
feedback. The goal is that other startups will test the guideline and that it can be used in
product/service-system related courses to help students in developing a product/service-system
startup concept. It has been a very knowledgeable journey where the team has learned to follow two
project tracks simultaneously from wanting to create a startup to end up with a complete guideline on
how to do so.
An exciting change of perspective in the thesis was when the team, throughout the development of the
guideline, saw potential in creating a startup in consulting, helping other startups developing
sustainable product/service-system  business models through the means of circular economy.
139
==PAGE:141==
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
The aim of the thesis was to close the gap in literature on guidelines for developing sustainable
product/service-system startups enabling a circular economy. The study shows the beginning of
developing a comprehensive guideline, through a startup case study, using the revised Double Diamond
from the Systemic Design Framework. An early evaluation and test of applied methods in the guideline
has been made by the authors, to conclude on the quality of insights provided by the methods.
The purpose of the study was to gather empirical data for the guideline through testing of the selected
methods. The interpretation of the empirical data was used for 1) providing direct feedback on the
guideline and 2) building design support for the development of the startup concepts.
Research Question: Which process and methods are needed to create a guideline that supports the
development of a sustainable product/service-system business model enabling a circular economy?
To develop a guideline that provides a sustainable product/service-system enabling a circular economy,
a design process needs to be followed. The design process chosen to solve the problem was the
Systemic Design Framework. Using this framework, divergent and convergent thinking provided space
and confidence to challenge the problems and supported a more sustainable and systematic design
process.
Criteria
were
defined
to
select
the
methods
required
to
develop
a
sustainable
product/service-system enabling a circular economy. Through the study the interrelationship between
product/service-system, circular economy and sustainability was defined and became the foundation of
the development of the guideline. A final guideline was successfully created closing the gap in the
literature for developing a sustainable product/service-system enabling a circular economy.
-
SQ1: Which sustainable product/service-system startup guidelines enabling a circular economy
exist in the literature and online?
Through the study it was identified that there are no guidelines in the literature collecting methods for
developing sustainable product/service-system startups that contribute to the enabling of a circular
economy. Numerous methods and guidelines were identified that cover development within areas of
product/service-system, circular economy, or sustainability, but none that cover the whole spectrum.
Finally, the literature study showed that there is a tendency to only vaguely define the terms
sustainability and circular economy in the methods and guidelines.
-
SQ2: What are the criteria for a guideline for developing a sustainable product/service-system
startup enabling a circular economy?
Three
different
types
of criteria were identified for the guideline to develop a sustainable
product/service-system startup enabling a circular economy. The first type of criteria were based on the
Systemic Design Framework and required that identified methods should contribute to the design
process following the Systemic Design Framework. The second type of criteria were designed to close
the lack of guidelines and methods for developing a sustainable product/service-system startup
focusing on all three sustainable dimensions and incorporate circular economy strategies. The third
type of criteria were applied to ensure that the final guideline would be understandable and applicable
by the practitioners. Assessing methods against the three types of criteria, the relevant methods were
chosen.
-
SQ3: How can a guideline through a startup case study be tested and evaluated?
141
==PAGE:143==
The guideline was tested and evaluated in the Descriptive Study II phase of the Design Research
Methodology by following the Systemic Design Framework by the (Design Council, 2021) The Explore &
Reframe phase from Systemic Design Framework provided insights to the market and identified needs
and problems translated into final criteria. This phase was followed by the Create phase in which three
concepts were generated. In the Catalyse phase, an ecosystem map provided insights to how the
concepts changed the current way of purchasing baby equipment and toys. Finally, the three concepts
were combined into two concepts and a further elaboration plan was created in the Continuing the
Journey phase.
Through the startup case study, the guideline methods were tested and evaluated and all the methods
chosen for Guideline 5.0 were 1) descriptive/self explanatory, 2) had a template, and 3) applicable by
users with different professional backgrounds.
Limitations and Further Work
The research results in a final Guideline 5.0 but raises the question of ending with a complete startup
guideline, as the startup case study ends with two concepts. Still further steps are needed to be taken
to establish a PSS company. Further user feedback and testing of the concepts is needed before launch
of the startup and the intended allocations in the ecosystem map caused by the implementation of the
developed concepts to the market are yet to be assessed.
The main limitation of the study is the lack of testing of the guideline with actual entrepreneurs and
other practitioners. It presents some limitations, such as not knowing how the guideline will be received
and interpreted. Similarly the rating of the methods lacks credibility, due to lack of sufficient data.
Ratings from other practitioners could help improve the guideline by gathering the sum of the ratings of
the methods, and follow up with elaborative workshops.
Based on these conclusions, to better understand the implications of the results the developed
guideline could take advantage of:
1)
Future research in a more realistic setting, testing of the guideline with actual entrepreneurs
and practitioners and subsequently using the evaluation to improve the guideline.
2)
Further investigation of startups in collaboration with startups to disentangle the complexities
around the practice of developing a startup and use these insights to improve the guideline.
142
==PAGE:144==
Bibliography
Akbar, P., & Hoffmann, S. (2018). Under which circumstances do consumers choose a product service
system (PSS)? Consumer benefits and costs of sharing in PSS. Journal of Cleaner Production, 201,
416–427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.010
B.-N.Sanders, E. (2002). From user-centered to participatory design approaches. In J. Frascara (Ed.),
Design and the social sciences: making connections (Vol. 20020425, pp. 1–8). CRC Press.
https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203301302.ch1
Bacchetti, E., Vezzoli, C., & Landoni, P. (2016). Sustainable Product-Service System (S.PSS) applied to
Distributed Renewable Energy (DRE) in Low and Middle-income Contexts: A Case Studies Analysis.
Procedia CIRP, 47, 442–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.03.085
Baines, T. S., Lightfoot, H. W., Evans, S., Neely, A., Greenough, R., Peppard, J., Roy, R., Shehab, E.,
Braganza, A., Tiwari, A., Alcock, J. R., Angus, J. P., Bastl, M., Cousens, A., Irving, P., Johnson, M.,
Kingston, J., Lockett, H., Martinez, V., … Wilson, H. (2007). State-of-the-art in product-service
systems. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering
Manufacture, 221(10), 1543–1552. https://doi.org/10.1243/09544054JEM858
Bakker, C. (2018). How can servitization drive Circular Product Design? Product Development
Symposium.
Barnaby, F. (1987). Our Common Future: The ‘Brundtland Commission’ Report. Ambio, 16(4), 217–218.
Barquet, A. P., Seidel, J., Seliger, G., & Kohl, H. (2016). Sustainability factors for PSS business models.
Procedia CIRP, 47, 436–441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.03.021
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1997). Creating One View of the Customer. In Contextual Design - Defining
Customer-Centered Systems.
Biolchini, J., Mian, P. G. M., Natali, A. C. C., & Travassos, G. H. (2005). Systematic Review in Software
Engineering. PESC.
Blessing, L. T. M., & Chakrabarti, A. (2009). DRM, A Design Research Methodology (p. 397). Springer.
Blomsma, F., & Brennan, G. (2017). The emergence of circular economy: A new framing around
143
==PAGE:145==
prolonging resource productivity. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 21(3), 603–614.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12603
Blomsma, F., Jensen, T. H., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Collaborating and Networking for
a Circular Economy - A CIRCit Workbook 6.
https://issuu.com/circitnord/docs/wb6-circit?fr=sYWJlMzExOTYxMDI
Blüher, T., Riedelsheimer, T., Gogineni, S., Klemichen, A., & Stark, R. (2020). Systematic literature
review—effects of PSS on sustainability based on use case assessments. Sustainability, 12(17),
6989. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12176989
Bocken, Nancy M. P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., & van der Grinten, B. (2016). Product design and business
model strategies for a circular economy. Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering, 33(5),
308–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124
Bocken, N M P, Short, S. W., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2014). A literature and practice review to develop
sustainable business model archetypes. Journal of Cleaner Production, 65, 42–56.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.039
Bo, W., consultants, .-, & Www.lca-net.com. (2008). Rebound effects of sustainable production. Bridging
the Gap; Responding to Environmental Change – From Words to Deeds.
Catulli, M., Lindley, J. K., Reed, N. B., Green, A., & Hyseni, H. (2013). What is Mine is NOT Yours:     Further
insight on what access-based consumption says about consumers     . Hertfordshire Business
School Working Paper.
Catulli, M. (2012). What uncertainty? Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 23(6),
780–793. https://doi.org/10.1108/17410381211253335
Cross, N. (2005). Engineering Design Methods. John Wiley & Sons, LTD.
Dansk Design Center. (2021). Værktøjskassen. https://danskdesigncenter.dk/da/vaerktoejskassen
de Pádua Pieroni, M., Blomsma, F., McAloone, T. C., & Pigosso, D. C. A. (2018). Enabling circular
strategies with different types of product/service-systems. Procedia CIRP, 73, 179–184.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.327
Design Council. (2021). Beyond Net Zero - A Systemic Design Approach . British Design Council.
de Jesus Pacheco, D. A., ten Caten, C. S., Jung, C. F., Sassanelli, C., & Terzi, S. (2019). Overcoming
144
==PAGE:146==
barriers towards Sustainable Product-Service Systems in Small and Medium-sized enterprises:
State of the art and a novel Decision Matrix. Journal of Cleaner Production, 222, 903–921.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.152
Elkington, J. (1998). The Triple Bottom Line of 21 st-Century Business. ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
MANAGEMENT.
Elkington, J. (2018, June 25). 25 Years Ago I Coined the Phrase “Triple Bottom Line.” Here’s Why It’s
Time to Rethink It. Harvard Business Review.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2013). TOWARDS THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY - Economic and business
rationale   for an accelerated transition . Ellen MacArthur Foundation.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2015). GROWTH WITHIN:  A CIRCULAR ECONOMY  VISION FOR A 
COMPETITIVE EUROPE. Ellen MacArthur Foundation.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2018). Methods. https://www.circulardesignguide.com/methods
Finken, K. H., McAloone, T. C., Avlonitis, V. A., Mateu, A. G. i, Andersen, J. B., Mougaard, K., Neugebauer,
L., & Hsuan, J. (2013). #4 PSS TOOL BOOK A workbook in the PROTEUS series.
Gartner. (2021). Gartner Marketing Maturity Assessment Tool.
https://www.gartner.com/en/marketing/research/marketing-maturity-assessement-tool
Geissdoerfer, M., Bocken, N. M. P., & Hultink, E. J. (2016). Design thinking to enhance the sustainable
business modelling process – A workshop based on a value mapping process. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 135, 1218–1232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.020
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M. P., & Hultink, E. J. (2017). The Circular Economy – A new
sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production, 143, 757–768.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., & Evans, S. (2017). The cambridge business model innovation process.
Procedia Manufacturing, 8, 262–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.02.033
Gibbons, S. (2018a). Empathy Mapping: The First Step in Design Thinking. Nielsen Norman Group.
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/empathy-mapping/
Gibbons, S. (2018b). Journey Mapping 101. Nielsen Norman Group.
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/journey-mapping-101/
145
==PAGE:147==
Giddings, B., Hopwood, B., & O’Brien, G. (2002). Environment, economy and society: fitting them together
into sustainable development. Sustainable Development, 10(4), 187–196.
https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.199
Goedkoop, M. J., van Halen, C. J. G., te Riele, H. R. M., & Rommens, P. J. M. (1999). Product Service
systems, Ecological and Economic Basics. STORRM C.S.
Gustafsson, K. F., & Harild, S. A. (2021). Master Thesis - DfSB in PSS - with links.pdf. DTU Mechanical
Engineering.
Hildenbrand, J., Shahbazi, S., Dahlström, J., Jensen, T. H., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020).
Closing the Loop for a Circular Economy - A CIRCit Workbook 5.
https://issuu.com/circitnord/docs/wb5-circit?fr=sZjQyZjExOTYxMDI
Haase, R. P., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017). Product/Service-System Origins and
Trajectories: A Systematic Literature Review of PSS Definitions and their Characteristics. Procedia
CIRP, 64, 157–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.03.053
Halberstadt, J., & Johnson, M. (2014). Enterprises: Development of a Sustainability Quick-Check and
Reporting Scheme. Leuphana University Lüneburg.
Hirsch, P. M., & Levin, D. Z. (1999). Umbrella Advocates Versus Validity Police: A Life-Cycle Model.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE.
Holden, E., Linnerud, K., & Banister, D. (2014). Sustainable development: Our Common Future revisited.
Global Environmental Change, 26, 130–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.04.006
Holden, E. (2007). Achieving Sustainable Mobility. Ahsgate Publishing Company.
https://books.google.dk/books?hl=da&lr=&id=OTlYwGj_4nUC&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&ots=fi0EfUsieZ&sig
=FIV-gf0nJyz-PxDdB6TDbz0v8VI&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false
Horne, J. (2019). The sustainability impact of new ventures  Measuring and managing entrepreneurial
contributions  to sustainable development . Technischen Universität Berlin.
IDEO.org. (2015). The Field Guide To Human-Centered Design.
Itkin, A. (2021). Circular economy business models and practices. In L. Liu & S. Ramakrishna (Eds.), An
introduction to circular economy (pp. 437–453). Springer Singapore.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-8510-4_22
146
==PAGE:148==
Joyce, A., & Paquin, R. L. (2016). The triple layered business model canvas: A tool to design more
sustainable business models. Journal of Cleaner Production, 135, 1474–1486.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.067
Judl, J., Mattila, T., Manninen, K., & Antikaine, R. (2015). Life cycle assessment and  ecodesign in a day.
Finnish Environment Institute.
Kerdlap, P., Gheewala, S. H., & Ramakrishna, S. (2021). To Rent or Not to Rent: A Question of Circular
Prams from a Life Cycle Perspective. Sustainable Production and Consumption, 26, 331–342.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.10.008
Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. (2017). Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114
definitions. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 127, 221–232.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005
Kjaer, L. L., Pagoropoulos, A., Schmidt, J. H., & McAloone, T. C. (2016). Challenges when evaluating
Product/Service-Systems through Life Cycle Assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 120,
95–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.048
Kjaer, L. L., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017a). A guide for evaluating the environmental
performance of Product/Service-Systems. Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Kjaer, L. L., Pigosso, D. C. A., Niero, M., Bech, N. M., & McAloone, T. C. (2019). Product/Service‐Systems
for a Circular Economy: The Route to Decoupling Economic Growth from Resource Consumption?
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 23(1), 22–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12747
Kjaer, L. L., Pigosso, Daniela. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017b). A guide for evaluating the environmental
performance of Product/Service-Systems.
Knapp, J., Zeratsky, J., Kowitz, B., & Bittner, D. (2016). Sprint- How To Solve Big Problems and Test New
Ideas in Just Five Days (p. 288). Transworld Publishers Ltd.
Korhonen, J., Honkasalo, A., & Seppälä, J. (2018). Circular economy: the concept and its limitations.
Ecological Economics, 143, 37–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.06.041
Kraaijenbrink, J. (2019, December 10). What The 3Ps Of The Triple Bottom Line Really Mean. Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeroenkraaijenbrink/2019/12/10/what-the-3ps-of-the-triple-bottom-l
ine-really-mean/
147
==PAGE:149==
Kravchenko, Jensen, M., Hjort, T., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Circular Economy
Sustainability Screening: CIRCit Workbook 1. Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Kristoffersen, E., Li, Z., Jensen, T. H., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Smart Circular Economy
- A CIRCit Workbook 4. https://issuu.com/circitnord/docs/wb4-circit?fr=sYjVmODExOTYxMDI
Kuhlman, T., & Farrington, J. (2010). What is Sustainability? Sustainability, 2(11), 3436–3448.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su2113436
Kumar, V. (2013). 101 Design Methods - A Structured Approach for Driving Innovation in Your
Organization.
Lingane, A., & Olsen, S. (2004). Guidelines for social return on investment. California Management
Review, 46(3), 116–135. https://doi.org/10.2307/41166224
Lüdeke-Freund, F., Carroux, S., Joyce, A., Massa, L., & Breuer, H. (2018). The sustainable business model
pattern taxonomy—45 patterns to support sustainability-oriented business model innovation.
Sustainable Production and Consumption, 15, 145–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2018.06.004
MATChE. (2021). The MATChE Transition Toolbox. https://www.matche.dk/en/group/13/Our+tools
Matzen, D. (2009). A systematic approach to service oriented product development. Technical University
of Denmark (DTU).
McAloone, T., & Pigosso, D. (2018). A decision tree to navigate through PSS Typologies.
McAloone, T., & Pigosso, D. (2020). Riskiest Assumption Canvas.
McAloone, T. C. (2011). Boundary Conditions for a New Type of Design Task: Understanding
Product/Service-Systems. In H. Birkhofer (Ed.), The future of design methodology (pp. 113–124).
Springer London. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-85729-615-3_10
Medini, K., & Boucher, X. (2016). An approach for steering products and services offering variety
towards economic and environmental sustainability. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and
Technology, 15, 65–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2016.04.009
Mont, O., Dalhammar, C., & Jacobsson, N. (2006). A new business model for baby prams based on
leasing and product remanufacturing. Journal of Cleaner Production, 14(17), 1509–1518.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.01.024
Mont, O. (2004). Product-Service Systems: Panacea or Myth? Lund University, Sweden.
148
==PAGE:150==
Mont, O. K. (2002). Clarifying the concept of product–service system. Journal of Cleaner Production,
10(3), 237–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-6526(01)00039-7
Moonboon Baby Studio. (2021). Om os. https://moonboon.dk/pages/om-os
Murray, A., Skene, K., & Haynes, K. (2017). The circular economy: an interdisciplinary exploration of the
concept and application in a global context. Journal of Business Ethics : JBE, 140(3), 369–380.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2
Obst, L. (2015). Utilizing the Business Model Canvas  to Enable Sustainability Measurement  on the
Business Model Level [Undergraduate thesis].
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., Bernarda, G., & Smith, A. (2014). Value Proposition Design.
Pezzotta, G., Sassanelli, C., Pirola, F., Sala, R., Rossi, M., Fotia, S., Koutoupes, A., Terzi, S., & Mourtzis, D.
(2018). The product service system lean design methodology (PSSLDM). Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management, 29(8), 1270–1295. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-06-2017-0132
Pieroni, M. de P., Jensen, T. H., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Circular Economy Business
Modelling - A CIRCit Workbook 2.
https://issuu.com/circitnord/docs/wb2-circit?fr=sMzg1NzExOTYxMDI
Pieroni, M. P. P., McAloone, T. C., & Pigosso, D. C. A. (2019). Configuring New Business Models for
Circular Economy through Product–Service Systems. Sustainability, 11(13), 3727.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11133727
Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2016). Maturity-based approach for the development of
environmentally sustainable product/service-systems. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and
Technology, 15, 33–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2016.04.003
Potting, J., Hekker, M., Worrell, E., & Hanemaaijer, A. (2017). CIRCULAR ECONOMY:  MEASURING
INNOVATION IN THE PRODUCT CHAIN  . The Hague.
Puttick, R., & Ludlow, J. (2012). Standards of  Evidence for Impact Investing. Nesta.
RaskRask. (2021). Om os - team, historie, presse & værdier. https://www.raskrask.dk/om-os/
Raworth, K. (2017). Why it’s time for Doughnut Economics. IPPR Progressive Review, 24(3), 216–222.
https://doi.org/10.1111/newe.12058
Roadmunk. (2021). Align your whole organization to a customer-driven roadmap. https://roadmunk.com/
149
==PAGE:151==
Sassanelli, C., Pezzotta, G., Rossi, M., Terzi, S., & Cavalieri, S. (2015). Towards a lean product service
systems (PSS) design: state of the art, opportunities and challenges. Procedia CIRP, 30, 191–196.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.02.123
Scherer, J. O., Kloeckner, A. P., Ribeiro, J. L. D., Pezzotta, G., & Pirola, F. (2016). Product-Service System
(PSS) design: Using Design Thinking and Business Analytics to improve PSS Design. Procedia
CIRP, 47, 341–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.03.062
Shahbazi, S., Jönbrink, A.-K., Hjort Jensen, T., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2020). Circular
Product Design and Development - A CIRCit Workbook 3.
https://issuu.com/circitnord/docs/wb3-circit?fr=sMTZjNjExOTYxMDI
Simonsen, J., & Robertsen, T. (2013). Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design.
Sorrell, S. (2007). The Rebound Effect: An Assessment of the Evidence for Economy-Wide. Sussex Energy
Group for the Technology and Policy Assessment function of the UK Energy Research Centre.
Statista. (2021, May 6). Toys & Baby. Www.Statista.Com.
https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ecommerce/toys-hobby-diy/toys-baby/worldwide
Sutherland, J. (2015). SCRUM: The Art of Doing Twice the Work in Half the Time (p. 256). Cornerstone.
Søuld. (2021). Søuld. https://www.sould.dk/
The Market Opportunity Navigator. (2020). The Market Opportunity Navigator.
https://wheretoplay.co/the-navigator/
The World Counts. (2021, June 3). US dollars spent on toys - GLOBALLY THIS YEAR.
https://www.theworldcounts.com/challenges/consumption/other-products/environmental-impact-
of-toys/story
Trautwein, C. (2021). Sustainability impact assessment of start-ups – Key insights on relevant
assessment challenges and approaches based on an inclusive, systematic literature review.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 281, 125330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125330
Tukker, A., & Tischner, U. (2006). Product-services as a research field: past, present and future.
Reflections from a decade of research. Journal of Cleaner Production, 14(17), 1552–1556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.01.022
Tukker, A., & Tischner, U. (2017). New Business for Old Europe - Product-Service Development,
150
==PAGE:152==
Competitiveness and Sustainability.
Tukker, A. (2004). Eight types of product–service system: eight ways to sustainability? Experiences from
SusProNet. Business Strategy and the Environment, 13(4), 246–260.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.414
Tukker, A. (2015). Product services for a resource-efficient and circular economy – a review. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 97, 76–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.049
United Nations. (1997). Agenda for Development .
https://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/documents/WSSD_POI_PD/English/POIChapter1.htm
Varga, D. (2018). Triple-bottom-line impact analysis framework of fintech companies. Vezetéstudomány
/ Budapest Management Review, 49(11), 24–34. https://doi.org/10.14267/VEZTUD.2018.11.03
Waight, E. (2013). Eco Babies: Reducing a Parent’s Ecological Footprint with Second  -  Hand Consumer
Goods    . International Journal of Green Economics.
151
