==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning Approaches to Model the
Error of Hydrodynamic Drainage Models
MSc.Thesis
At the Department of Environmental Engineering of the
Technical University of Denmark.
Supervised by
Roland Löwe
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Morten Borup
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Laura Frølich
Emerging Technologies
DHI
Submitted by
Yunpeng Jiang - s192160
Submitted on
25th of June, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
At present, urban drainage models are mostly used for analysis in the planning stage.
To better serve the daily management of urban ﬂood control and sewer systems, it
is necessary to establish a system that can reﬂect the true operating status of the
drainage system in real time and forecast future condition.
In this thesis, the idea is to predict the error between the MIKE URBAN simulation
and observation at current time. And then by correcting this error based on the
MIKE simulation to obtain the better simulation values.
The Neural Network algorithm and Support Vector Regression methods were con-
sidered to achieve error prediction in this thesis. The MIKE URBAN model was
used to generate the data set. The precipitation and other hydrological data were
used as the input, and error was deﬁned as the output. The main mission of this
thesis is to determine what input variables make the best contribution to predicting
the error. By testing the diﬀerent variables and combinations of them, the simulated
ﬂow and the average and maximum rain were concluded as the best input feature
combination.
Then the performance of the model was evaluated by calculating the error indicator.
And from the results can conclude that this error-correcting method played a certain
eﬀect when the MIKE over-simulated the observed ﬂow. But for some period when
MIKE simulation is smaller than observation, this method can not well predict the
error and obtain better simulation, which may be related to the limitation of input
features.
Finally, a comparison between the performance of SVR and FFNN was managed. In
general, both of them can provide similar results by feeding the same input features.
However, the FFNN can train the model more quickly.
Keywords: Urban drainage system, Machine learning, error correction, Artiﬁcial
neural network, Support vector regression
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Roland Löwe, Morten
Borup and Frølich. Without your help, this thesis would not have been ﬁnished
successfully. From formulating research goals to ﬁnal completion, thank you for
your valuable comments in every meeting. At the same time, I am very grateful to
DHI for giving me this opportunity to cooperate on the project together.
A special thank to Roland Löwe for guiding me through the project over the whole
period and answering my questions very patiently. And gave me a lot of guidance
in the process of completing the report. In the past few months, I have learned a
lot from him that has beneﬁted me a lot.
Finally, I am very grateful to my parents for their support and all the friends who
have sent me help in the process of completing the thesis.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgement
ii
1. Introduction
1
1.1 Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2 Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2. Theoretical Background
3
2.1 Numerical Hydraulic Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1 MIKE URBAN by DHI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2 Hydrodynamic Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2 Artiﬁcial Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1 Feed-forward Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2 Trained with Back-propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3 Optimization Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3 Support Vector Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3. Study Area and Data
10
3.1 Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4. Methodology
12
4.1 Overview of raw data and data selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2 Hydraulic numerical simulation from MIKE URBAN . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3 Data pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.1 Removal of outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.2 Filling of missing values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3.3 Generating Rainfall Data for Measurement Stations . . . . . . .
17
4.3.4 Data Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3.5 Normalize the Input Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4 Building machine learning models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4.1 Deﬁnition of Input Variables of Machine Learning Model . . . .
18
4.4.2 Model Conﬁgurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5 Model training and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5.1 Splitting of Training Set, Validation Set and Test Set . . . . . .
22
4.5.2 Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5. Results
24
5.1 Data Collection and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
iii
==PAGE:5==
5.1.1 Data Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2 Simulation from MIKE URBAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3 Error between the MIKE Simulation and Observation . . . . . .
28
5.2 Cross Correlation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3 Comparison of Models with Diﬀerent Single Input Variable . . . . . . .
30
5.3.1 Rain Intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.2 Simulated Flow and Water Level at Inﬂow_WWTP . . . . . . .
31
5.3.3 Error at Inﬂow_WWTP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.4 Variables from Upstream (Station FT82) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.5 Statistical Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4 Model with Multiple Input Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5 Comparison of the Results of Diﬀerent Machine Learning Models
. . .
43
6. Discussion
45
6.1 Input Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2 Selection of Machine Learning Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3 Inclusion of More Rain Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4 Conﬁguration of Neural Network Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3 Model Validation and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7. Conclusion and Outlook
49
References
51
Appendices
53
A Long Short-term Memory Model
53
A.1 Theory of Long Short-term Memory Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 Conﬁguration of LSTM model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B Training and Validation Loss
56
iv
==PAGE:6==
Technical University of Denmark
1. Introduction
1.1 Context
The urban drainage system is a complex integrated system composed of multiple
processes, including collection, transportation, storage, wastewater and/or rainwa-
ter treatment, and the discharge of treated water. It has a signiﬁcant impact on
society, economy and environment (Hammond et al., 2015). Therefore, the data
monitored by the sensors in the drainage system play a considerable role in urban
water management.
There are already many physics-based predictive models to
simulate ﬂow in urban drainage system (Bisht et al., 2016). The MIKE URBAN
developed by Danish Hydrological Institute (DHI) is one of the preferred software
to simulate various hydrological variables of urban drainage systems. But MIKE
URBAN can never precisely simulate the inﬂow and there is always a deviation be-
tween the simulation and observation. In order to correct the MIKE simulation and
obtain a better estimation of observation, it is needed to have an error prediction,
which will be of great signiﬁcance to the management of the drainage system. One
of the potential application is to train a model to predict the the expected behavior
of the error (Palmitessa et al., 2021).
In recent years, due to the increase in data collection and utilization, new possibilities
have been opened up for the management of urban drainage systems in terms of
information technology (Eggimann et al., 2017). One of the most common examples
of data-driven models used in hydrological ﬁeld is Auto-regressing Moving Average
(ARMA) model, which was used to model the combined sewer ﬂow (Zheng and
Novotny, 1991) and rainfall-runoﬀmodelling (Novotny and Zheng, 1989).
In more recent years, artiﬁcial intelligence technology, being capable to analyze long-
sequence large-scale data, has great development. More and more researchers tend
to apply AI technology to hydrology and water resources management study. The
ability of two soft computing methods including artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)
and support vector machine (SVM) models were investigated in modeling monthly
streamﬂow (Adnan et al., 2017). There is also research on comparing performance of
several artiﬁcial intelligence methods for forecasting monthly discharge time series,
indicating that these AI technologies are promising in modeling monthly discharge
time series (Wang et al., 2009).
Recurrent Neural Network, a class of artiﬁcial neural networks, can be trained to
learn the sequence or the pattern that changes over time. It is considered to be very
eﬀective in modeling the dynamics of complex hydrological processes with accurate
Page 1 of 56
==PAGE:7==
Technical University of Denmark
predictions. RNN was applied to forecast real-time multi-step-ahead water level
(Chang et al., 2014). The Long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, a variant
of RNN, was also used in hydrology prediction, for example the water depth in
combined sewers (Palmitessa et al., 2021).
The purpose of this thesis is to use the machine learning methods to predict the
error between the MIKE URBAN simulation and observation at current time, and
merge the physically-based simulation from MIKE URBAN and predicted error to
simulate the sewer ﬂow.
Hence, the following questions are investigated:
1.
Is it possible to apply machine learning models to predict error between the
hydraulic numerical simulation and observation?
2. What and how many input variables should be used to be fed into the machine
learning models?
3. Which type of machine learning model (SVR, FFNN and LSTM) will have the
best performance to predict the error?
4. How is the performance of combining the physical-based simulation and machine-
learning based predicted error to simulate sewer ﬂow.
1.2 Thesis Structure
The theoretical concepts of numerical hydraulic simulation and of diﬀerent machine
learning models are explained in chapter 2. The study area of Damhus and available
measurement data are declared in chapter 3. Chapter 4 elaborates the process of
obtaining the simulated data and data pre-processing. At the same time, several
models with diﬀerent input variables are deﬁned which are based on addressing the
research questions. Chapter 5 and chapter 6 presents the results and the discussion
of it, respectively. A conclusion is drawn in chapter 7.
Page 2 of 56
==PAGE:8==
Technical University of Denmark
2. Theoretical Background
2.1 Numerical Hydraulic Simulation
2.1.1 MIKE URBAN by DHI
In this thesis, the hydraulic and hydrology modelling was based on the MIKE UR-
BAN software, which is developed by DHI. MIKE URBAN covers all water networks
in the city, including water distribution systems, storm water drainage systems, and
sewer collection in separate and combined systems (DHI, 2017).
2.1.2 Hydrodynamic Simulation
The simulation of MIKE URBAN is based on the physical model. The physical
model consists of 3 subsystems: catchment, drainage network and terrain surface
(DHI, 2015). Figure 1 shows how diﬀerent models are mutually connected, allowing
the water to move between them as in a real physical system. In the project, the
behaviour of water in the network system is the main object. By inputting the
rainfall data into the system, the rainfall-runoﬀsimulation of the catchments and
related drainage network behaviour can be simulated.
Page 3 of 56
==PAGE:9==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 1: Links between the main components of the urban ﬂood model (Figure
from (DHI, 2015))
2.2 Artiﬁcial Neural Network
2.2.1 Feed-forward Neural Network
One of the most common neural network models used in nonlinear hydrological appli-
cations is a multi-layer feed-forward neural network trained using back-propagation
algorithms. The Figure 2 illustrates the structure of neural network as an exam-
ple. The neural network is divided into input layer, hidden layer and output layer.
The ﬁrst layer of the feed-forward network is called the input layer, the last layer is
called the output layer, and the layer that is neither input nor output in the middle
is called the hidden layer.
The ﬁgure below is a 3-layer neural network, the input layer is not counted in the
number of layers. The number of layers of the neural network is called the depth of
the model. The nodes of each layer represent a neuron, and the number of units in
Page 4 of 56
==PAGE:10==
Technical University of Denmark
each layer represents the width of the model.
Figure 2: Architecture of multilayer feed-forward neural network
Each node in layer N is connected to all nodes in layer N-1, and the output of nodes
in layer N-1 is the input of nodes in layer N. And for each node, it receives the
inputs and makes a weighted sum and adds the bias. Then the output is calculated
by an activation function, which transforms the result into a non-linear format. The
detailed equation can be found in Equation 1.
Y = f(
n
X
1
wn × xn + w0)
(1)
where Y is the output of a node, xn is the input data, wn represents the weights and
w0 is called the bias. There are 3 most common activation functions for regression
problems (Herlau et al., 2016): logistic (Sigmoid), hyperbolic tangent (Tanh) and
Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (Relu), with the numerical equations of them in Equation 3,
Equation 2 and Equation 4, respectively.
g(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(2)
g(x) = (1 + e−x)−1
(3)
Page 5 of 56
==PAGE:11==
Technical University of Denmark
g(x) =
(
x, x ≥0
0, x < 0
(4)
2.2.2 Trained with Back-propagation
Back-propagation refers to the method of calculating the gradient of neural network
parameters. In general, back-propagation is based on the chain rule in calculus.
From the output layer to the input layer, it sequentially calculates and stores the
objective function related to the intermediate variables and parameter gradients
of the neural network layers. The calculation steps can be seen in the following
equations:
∂L
∂wn =
∂L
∂xn+1 · ∂xn+1
∂wn
(5)
∂L
∂xn =
∂L
∂xn+1 · ∂xn+1
∂xn
(6)
where L is the loss function, w is the weight from layer n to the layer n+1, x
represents the input of the node. The Equation 5 is to update the weight of present
layer, and Equation 6 is to prepare the calculation of Equation 5 for the previous one
layer. The results of
∂L
∂wn and
∂L
∂xn are with respect to the derivation of L = f(wnxn)
in the feed-forward calculation.
The mentioned loss function L measures the diﬀerence between prediction ˆy and
observation y. For regression problems, the most common loss functions are Mean
Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error(MSE) and Root Mean Squared Er-
ror(RMSE).
MAE:L = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(7)
MSE:L = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(8)
RMSE:L =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(9)
Page 6 of 56
==PAGE:12==
Technical University of Denmark
2.2.3 Optimization Algorithms
2.2.3.1 Gradient Descent
After calculating the gradient of the loss function of all weights in the network,
this gradient will be fed back to the optimization method to update the weights
to minimize the loss function. The basic and simplest method is gradient descent
(Hochreiter et al., 2001), see Equation 10.
wt+1 = wt −λ∂Lt
∂wt
(10)
In the gradient descent, the choice of length of the step for each iteration will aﬀect
the speed and the performance of iteration. If the step size is too large, the iteration
will be too fast, and the optimal solution may even be missed. If the step size is too
small, the iteration speed is too slow, and the algorithm cannot end for a long time.
There are three most common variants of Gradient Descent: Batch Gradient De-
scent(BGD), Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and Mini-Batch Gradient Descent
(MBGD). The diﬀerence between these three forms depends on how much data we
use to calculate the gradient of the objective function.
2.2.3.2 Adaptive Moment Estimation
One of the most eﬃcient advanced optimization algorithms is the Adaptive Momen-
tum Estimation (Adam), introduced by Kingma and Ba (2014). Adam algorithm
combines the advantages of Adaptive Gradient (AdaGrad) and Root Mean Square
Propagation (RMSProp) optimization algorithms. Comprehensive consideration is
given to the ﬁrst moment estimation (the mean value of the gradient) and the sec-
ond moment estimation (the uncentered variance of the gradient), and the update
step size is calculated (Kingma and Ba, 2014). For each parameter wi in Adam
algorithms perform the calculations shown below:
vt = β1vt−1 −(1 −β1) ∗gt
(11)
st = β2st−1 −(1 −β2) ∗gt
2
(12)
ˆvt =
vt
1 −β1
t
(13)
ˆst =
st
1 −β2
t
(14)
Page 7 of 56
==PAGE:13==
Technical University of Denmark
∆wt = −η
ˆvt
√ˆst + ϵ ∗gt
(15)
wt+1 = wt + ∆wt
(16)
where, vt and st are the ﬁrst-order moment estimation and the second-order moment
estimation of the gradient, which can be regarded as the estimation of the expecta-
tion E |gt| and E |gt2|; ˆvt, ˆst are for vt , st correction, so that it can be approximated
as an unbiased estimate of the expectation. β1 , β2 and ϵ are hyperparameters with
default values of 0.9, 0.999, and 10−8 respectively.
2.3 Support Vector Regression
In the physical hydrological process, the relationship between the hydrology ele-
ments is always nonlinear. In this study, one of the famous machine learning model,
the support vector machine, is used to estimate the nonlinear mapping between the
rainfall and the sensor error. The support vector algorithm is a nonlinear general-
ization of the generalized portrait algorithm developed by Vapnik, in the early 1960s
(Vapnik, 1963).
The traditional regression method considers the prediction correct if and only if
when the simulation f(x) is completely equal to the observation y, for example the
(f(x) −y)2 is commonly used in linear regression to calculate its loss. However, the
support vector regression believes the prediction can be considered correct as long
as the simulation f(x) and observation y do not deviate too much.
The objective of the linear SVR is to ﬁnd the optimal ω and b to calculate an
approximation of the function f(x) = ωTx + b. According to the characteristics of
SVR, it is acceptable that if the error between the simulation and observation is
lower than ϵ (Smola and Schölkopf, 2004). And the optimization objective is to ﬁnd
the smallest ω which is ensured by minimizing the term 1
2∥ω∥2. This is called hard
margin. The problem can be written as a convex optimization problem:
minimize1
2∥ω∥2
s.t.
 yi −(ωTxi + b) ≤ϵ
(ωTxi + b) −yi ≤ϵ
(17)
Actually there are still part of the observations and their deviations are relatively
large.
The slack variable ξi and ξi
∗, which are non-negative, are added so that
Page 8 of 56
==PAGE:14==
Technical University of Denmark
the interval of the function is relaxed. So some samples are allowed not to be in
the interval band and this is also called soft margin. Now the convex optimization
problem is shown as below (Vapnik, 2013):
minimize1
2∥ω∥2 + C
l
X
i=1
(ξi + ξi
∗)
s.t.



yi −(ωTxi + b) ≤ϵ + ξi
(ωTxi + b) −yi ≤ϵ + ξi
∗
ξi, ξi
∗≥0
(18)
In the Equation 18 the ﬁrst term, the parameter C represents the weight of the out-
lier, which is a predetermined constant. The larger the C, the greater the inﬂuence
of the outlier on the objective function. So this parameter C is also called penalized
item.
As mentioned before, the relationship of elements in hydrology is nonlinear, here the
kernel function is introduced. The kernel function uses the low-dimensional input
space to convert it into a high-dimensional space, that is, it converts inseparable
problems into separable problems.
In this study, the radial basis function (rbf)
(Schölkopf et al., 2004) with the parameter gamma is chosen as the kernel function.
So there are 2 hyperparameters for the SVR model, C and gamma. Finally the
convex optimization problem is as below:
minimize1
2∥ω∥2 + C
l
X
i=1
(ξi + ξi
∗)
s.t.



yi −(ωTκ(xi, xj) + b) ≤ϵ + ξi
(ωTκ(xi, xj) + b) −yi ≤ϵ + ξi
∗
ξi, ξi
∗≥0
(19)
where the κ(xi, xj) is the kernel function, here it is the radial basis function (rbf):
exp(−γ∥xi −xj∥2), γ > 0
(20)
Page 9 of 56
==PAGE:15==
Technical University of Denmark
3. Study Area and Data
3.1 Study Area
The Damhusåen catchment in Copenhagen is considered as the study area. The
total area of the catchment is around 6816 ha, and the pipes are integrated within
a combined system that ﬂows to a wastewater treatment plant which located at the
south of the area. The provided MIKE Urban model of urban drainage system of
Damhusåen consists of over 6000 pipes and a similar number of nodes. An overview
of the area can be seen in the Figure 3
Figure 3: Catchment and pipe systems of the study area with the rain gauges and
measurement stations.
Page 10 of 56
==PAGE:16==
Technical University of Denmark
3.2 Data
The measurement data used in this study are provided by DHI, and the locations
of given stations are shown in Figure 3. There are 5 stations measuring the ﬂow:
Inﬂow_WWTP, FRD, FT10, FT81 and FT82; 5 stations measuring the level: LT10,
LT20, LH10, UH11 and UH14. And both the measured ﬂow and water level are
available with a temporal resolution of 1 min. The data from Inﬂow_WWTP is
recorded from 2016-08-05 to 2021-02-02. The data from FRD and LT10 are available
from 2014-10-28 to 2021-01-29. And the remaining stations record from 2013-12-31
to 2021-01-29.
12 online rain gauge measurements are available from the Danish wastewater com-
mittee’s (SVK) network in the considered catchments. The location of rain gauges
are shown in Figure 3, and the measurements are at a 5-min resolution. The data
from rain gauges except gauge 5785 are recorded from 2012-12-31 12:00:00, and up
to 2021-01-31 12:00:00. The gauge 5785 starts to record data at the same time but
ends at 2013-07-10 09:55:00.
Page 11 of 56
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark
4. Methodology
In this section, the operations and methods used will be interpreted. The project
mainly consists of four parts: Obtaining the MIKE simulation, Data pre-processing,
building diﬀerent machine learning models, and Model training and evaluation.
Before starting, there is a need to have an overview of the raw data set to select the
research period. The ﬂow data is one of the most important hydrological factor can
directly reﬂect the situation in the sewer system. And the inﬂow of WWTP is with
more practical signiﬁcance for the entire catchment, so in this thesis the inﬂow to
WWTP was considered as the ﬁrst preferred research object.
The initial procedure is to obtain the simulation data from MIKE URBAN, which
can be achieved by inputting the rain data mentioned in section 3.2.
The second step is to pre-process the raw data. It is important to clean and restruc-
ture the data before being fed into the machine learning models, because there are
some problems in the original data set such as outliers and missing values.
Building the machine learning models is the next point. In this project, 3 diﬀer-
ent types of model are built: Support vector regression (SVR), Feed-forward neural
network (FFNN), and Long-short term model (LSTM). Besides, diﬀerent machine
learning models require diﬀerent input data format, so data will also need to be pre-
pared with certain structure. After ﬁnishing the conﬁguration of diﬀerent machine
learning models, the next step is to deﬁne the input of machine learning models.
Based on the available data and the guess of the related factor, various variables
were selected as the input. The FFNN was select as the model to test the best
input variables. To begin with, for each time the models with one single variable
was tested to select the best number of the input time step of this variable. Then
the models with the combination of best variables were tested to get the ﬁnal best
input.
Finally, the combination of variables decided by last step was fed as the input of
machine learning models. According to the error metric to evaluate the performance
of diﬀerent models.
Page 12 of 56
==PAGE:18==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4: Overview of workﬂow during this project
4.1 Overview of raw data and data selection
The time series chart of the raw data were plotted in order to check the the potential
problems. The Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the results of the raw observed data. In
Figure 5, it can be seen that at station FT81 and FT82, there are some extreme
values which make no sense. Besides in Figure 6, there are some extreme values in
LT10 and all the stations contain lots of 0 values. These values can be treated as
problematic data.
Another purpose of this section is also to select a reasonable period as following
research object. Although most of the series of observations started around 2014,
the total ﬂow discharges to wastewater treatment was recorded from the second half
of 2016. So when select the research period, the period of observations should be
chosen between 2016-07 and 2021. Besides, the measurement station UH10 misses
the entire 3 years of observations from 2017 to 2020, and actually the station LT20
is just next to it and they both record the upstream in the north of the study
catchment (see Figure 3), with only slight diﬀerences. So in the following research,
the data from station UH10 was decided not to use.
As the given MIKE URBAN network model was not built recently, to make sure the
location of the sensor is consistent in the simulation model and reality, the entire
year of 2017 was selected as the research period. As station FT81 is missing the
observation for a period in 2017, it was not listed as the object in the following re-
search. And the inﬂow of WWTP is an important monitoring object with signiﬁcant
meaning for the entire catchment. Thus in this thesis, the station Inﬂow_WWTP
was selected and the error for this station was the object to predict.
Page 13 of 56
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 5: The plot of observed ﬂow data
Page 14 of 56
==PAGE:20==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 6: The plot of observed level data
4.2 Hydraulic numerical simulation from MIKE URBAN
The location of the mentioned rain gauges in the previous section was placed in
MIKE URBAN. In order to make the simulation process more ﬂexible, the simulation
time step is set to a minimum of 1 second and a maximum of 60 seconds. And
then the hydrodynamic simulation was performed on all observed rain sequences
Page 15 of 56
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark
mentioned in section 3.2 from 2017-01-01 to 2018-01-01. The simulation was saved
every 5 minutes due to the resolution of observed rain data. The simulation results
include the ﬂow and water level of the stations with observed data mentioned in
section 3.2.
4.3 Data pre-processing
This aim of this section is to clean the raw data and make them ready fed into
the machine learning model. The speciﬁc procedures in this section can be seen
from the ﬂow chart shown in Figure 7. The removal of the outliers is the ﬁrst point
to clean those extreme values. The next step is to ﬁll the missing values in the
observed data. Then, the resolution of the measurements from the rain gauges is
diﬀerent from the ones from the ﬂow/level measurement stations, with 5 minutes and
1 minute respectively. So the data aggregation is prepared to adapt to make the rain
data and discharge data have the same time resolution. In the last step, the input
data was normalized in order to make them have similar ranges and distribution.
The results of data pre-processing can be found in Figure 9 and Figure 10.
Figure 7: Overview of workﬂow during data pre-processing
4.3.1 Removal of outliers
As mentioned in section 4.2, there are some single extreme values in station "FT82",
here the value larger than 15000 m3/h was treated as the outliers. For the level
observation, the baseline should be keep on a certain value according to diﬀerent
stations. Data that was signiﬁcantly lower than the baseline value was treated as
missing values.
Page 16 of 56
==PAGE:22==
Technical University of Denmark
4.3.2 Filling of missing values
First of all, as the observations are not continuous time series data, it is necessary
to ﬁll the gaps in the series. After inserting the time point, the data series contains
a large number of missing values.
For the discharge data, as the stations are not close to each other and the measured
upstreams are not in the same area, also the missing data is in a very short time
period, a linear interpolation was adapted to ﬁll the missing values. The standard of
interpolation is to keep those missing values if the continuous missing-time steps are
over 15 minutes for the ﬂow observation, or 10 minutes for water level observation,
otherwise, the missing values will be interpolated.
Regarding rainfall data, during the rain series, there are some missing values. In this
thesis, those missing values are considered questionable values, which means that
later in the model training, the training samples that contain the missing values will
be removed. But before that these missing values were maintained in the raw series
in order to ensure the continuity of the time series.
4.3.3 Generating Rainfall Data for Measurement Stations
We are more focused on the rainfall data for each ﬂow or level measurement station.
And multiple rain gauges are responsible for the relevant water collection of one
ﬂow
level measurement station. According to the weight of the impervious area
accounted for by each rain gauge in the basin, the rainfall data of each ﬂow or level
sensor is calculated as the sum of the weighted rainfall of diﬀerent rain gauges. The
calculation formula is shown as follows:
i =
X
wimp × igauge
(21)
where, i is the rainfall intensity, and w is the weight of the impervious area in the
basin managed by a rain gauge.
4.3.4 Data Aggregation
As mentioned before, the resolution of observed ﬂow and level is 1 minute, however,
the resolution of rainfall is 5 minute. So the aggregation method was applied to
make them be with the same resolution as rainfall (5 minute). The Equation 22
Page 17 of 56
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark
shows the example of aggregating the observed ﬂow.
ft = 1
5
4
X
i=0
ft−i
(22)
where f represents the observed ﬂow; t-i represents the time step ahead, here the
time step is 1 minute.
4.3.5 Normalize the Input Data
The diﬀerent input features contains the diﬀerent range of data, which may aﬀect
the performance of machine learning model. In order to make them have a common
range of data, the data normalization is applied. First, the training set is normalized.
And then apply the trained parameters (mean and variance) to the test set and
normalize the test set. During this way, the training data set was transformed with
std of 1 and mean 0, and the test set data was with approximately std of 1 and
mean 0.
4.4 Building machine learning models
4.4.1 Deﬁnition of Input Variables of Machine Learning Model
The main purpose of deﬁning input variables is to explore the inﬂuence of diﬀerent
variables on prediction errors. First, the possible input variables were guessed and
selected. Due to the time lag, diﬀerent input time steps of a single variable will
have diﬀerent eﬀects on the error prediction. Therefore, the second step is to select
a single variable each time, and then test diﬀerent input time steps of the selected
single variable to obtain the best input time step of a single variable.
After the best single input variable was obtained, diﬀerent combinations of these
best single variables were tested, and the ﬁnal optimal input variable combination
of the model was obtained according to the RMSE calculated.
4.4.1.1 Selection of Single Input Variables
The selection of the input variables is based on a number of considerations. First,
the input data should be available and valid. In this study, only two hydrological
factors are taken into consideration: rainfall and ﬂow. The sensor error in the past
Page 18 of 56
==PAGE:24==
Technical University of Denmark
time steps should be also another factor that can be used. In addition, because
there is often a certain correlation between the hydrological elements of neighbour
measurement stations, especially between upstream and downstream stations, the
data of the upstream station can be considered as input variables to predict the
error of the downstream station.
In addition to the independent variables mentioned in the previous paragraph, there
are also some statistical variables that are worth providing some information, such
as the average rain intensity of certain continuous time series or the maximum rain
intensity. Table 1 summarizes the diﬀerent input variables.
Table 1: The list of input variables
Input variables
Description
Remark
r
rain intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP
E.g. F_f_3 represents
the model with the
ﬂow ft−1, ft−2,
ft−3 as input,
I.e. F_f_3 =
F(ft−1, ft−2, ft−3),
where F() represents
the FFNN model.
l
simulated water level at Inﬂow_WWTP
f
simulated ﬂow at Inﬂow_WWTP
e
error at Inﬂow_WWTP
rup
rain intensity upstream
lup
simulated water level upstream
fup
simulated ﬂow upstream
eup
sensor error upstream
max_r
maximum rain intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP
E.g.
F_max_r_24 represents
the model with
max rain over
24 time steps as input,
I.e. F_max_r_24 =
F(max(rt−1, rt−2, rt−3,
· · · , rt−23, rt−24)),
where F() represents
the FFNN model.
max_f
maximum simulated ﬂow at Inﬂow_WWTP
max_l
maximum simulated water level at Inﬂow_WWTP
max_e
maximum error at Inﬂow_WWTP
max_rup
maximum rain intensity upstream
max_fup
maximum simulated ﬂow upstream
max_lup
maximum simulated water level upstream
max_eup
maximum sensor error upstream
avg_r
average rain intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP
avg_f
average simulated ﬂow at Inﬂow_WWTP
avg_l
average simulated water level at Inﬂow_WWTP
avg_e
average error at Inﬂow_WWTP
avg_rup
average rain intensity upstream
avg_fup
average simulated ﬂow upstream
avg_lup
average simulated water level upstream
avg_eup
average sensor error upstream
std_r
standard deviation of rain intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP
std_f
standard deviation of simulated ﬂow at Inﬂow_WWTP
std_l
standard deviation of simulated water level at Inﬂow_WWTP
std_e
standard deviation of error at Inﬂow_WWTP
std_rup
standard deviation of rain intensity upstream
std_fup
standard deviation of simulated ﬂow upstream
std_lup
standard deviation of simulated level upstream
std_eup
standard deviation of sensor error upstream
In this thesis, the FT82 measuring station was chosen as the representative of the
upstream station. Because it can be seen from Figure 3 that FT82 is the closest
Page 19 of 56
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark
measuring station to the sensor that monitors the inﬂow of the sewage treatment
plant, there should be a strong correlation between them.
4.4.1.1 Deﬁnition of Input Time Steps of each Single Variable
Diﬀerent input time step will have a great inﬂuence on the result. This is because
hydrological factors often have a time lag, depending on the area of the catchment
area and the location of the station. Therefore, the cross-correlation analysis be-
tween the input variable and the error was applied to obtain a general guess of the
appropriate input time step of the variable. The cross-correlation analysis is shown
in Figure 16. According to the Figure 16, the diﬀerent time lag of various single
input variables can be deﬁned to test.
Finally, for each single variable, the input time step of the model that can provide
the lowest RMSE was selected as the representative of this variable.
4.4.1.2 Selection of Multiple Input Variables
According to the results of the last section, the diﬀerent combinations among those
best variables were made. And these combinations were again fed into the model
and evaluate the results. By comparing the RMSE of the models, select the input
of the model that obtains the lowest RMSE as the ﬁnal best input.
4.4.2 Model Conﬁgurations
4.4.2.1 Feed-forward Neural Network
In this thesis, the feed-forward neural network model was select as the ﬁrst machine
learning model. The object of the diﬀerent machine learning models is to predict
error for the next time step in the future. So the input should be multiple-step-
ahead related hydrological variables (see section 4.4.1), and the output should be a
single prediction of the error in the next future time step.The explanation of FFNN
model and its input and output is shown in Figure 8.
In the ANN models, the input data was treated as a 2D data, which means that
the input is converted to a vector, and the input variable in diﬀerent time steps
and/or the other features were considered as independent variables (without the
consideration of time factor).
Page 20 of 56
==PAGE:26==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 8: Illustration of ANN input and output
The conﬁguration of FFNN model used in this thesis is as follow: It includes 4
layers: an input layer, 2 hidden layer and an output layer. The ﬁrst hidden layer
contains 128 nodes, the other one contains 64 nodes. With more nodes on the ﬁrst
layer, the ﬁrst layer can learn many low-level features, and these lower-level features
can be fed into subsequent layers to extract higher-level features.
The relu activation function, which is concluded as the ﬁrst choice to go in deep
networks nowadays and proved to make the gradient descent run faster (Szandała,
2021), was used for both the 2 hidden layers
Furthermore, in order to avoid overﬁtting, a dropout layer was built after each
hidden layer with the drop rate of 20%. This means that for each hidden layer, only
80% of the results will pass to the next layer as input.
4.4.2.2 Support Vector Regression
Support vector regression is another considered machine learning model in this the-
sis. As mentioned in section 2.3, the rbf was selected as kernel function, which brings
a hyperparameter gamma. So there are two hyperparameters needs to deﬁne, C and
gamma. Inappropriate selection of hyper-parameters will lead to problems of under-
ﬁtting or over-ﬁtting. When selecting hyperparameters, there are two ways, one is
to ﬁne-tune based on experience, and the other is to select parameters of diﬀerent
sizes, bring them into the model, and select the best-performing parameters.
So in this thesis the gridsearch method was applied to select the values for C and
Page 21 of 56
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark
gamma. In the selection of all candidate parameters, through loop traversal, the
best performance parameter is selected as the ﬁnal result. Speciﬁcally, set range 103
to 108 and 10−3 to 0.1 for C and gamma respectively. And ﬁnally set the C = 106
and gamma = 0.001.
The requirement of input data for SVR is the same as the FFNN model, which can
be seen in section 4.4.2.1.
4.5 Model training and evaluation
4.5.1 Splitting of Training Set, Validation Set and Test Set
In order to eﬀectively evaluate the ﬁtting results of the ML model, the data set is
divided into three parts: training set, validation set and test set (Ripley, 2007).
The training set is used to learn the sample data set, and build a regressor by
matching some parameters. The establishment of a regression method is mainly
used to train the model. The validation set adjusts the parameters of the regressor
for the learned model, such as selecting the number of hidden units in the neural
network. The validation set is also used to determine the parameters of the network
structure or control model complexity. The test set is used to test the performance
of the best model ﬁnally selected.
For small-scale sample sets (tens of thousands), the commonly used distribution
ratios are 60% training set, 20% validation set, and 20% test set. Once the wanted
period is selected in section 4.2, the database is split in the training, validation, and
test set in the following Table 2.
Table 2: Training, Validation and Test set split for the data set
Period
Number of samples
Training set
2017-01-01 to 2017-09-01
69985
Validation set
2017-09-01 to 2017-11-01
17569
Test set
2017-11-01 to 2018-01-01
17569
Page 22 of 56
==PAGE:28==
Technical University of Denmark
4.5.2 Model Evaluation
In this project, the RMSE was selected to evaluate the test set. This is because
the result of the evaluation metric RMSE is the same order of magnitude and unit
as the observation data. When describing the model, the error can be seen more
intuitively. The equation of RMSE can be seen in Equation 23
RMSE =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(23)
Page 23 of 56
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark
5. Results
5.1 Data Collection and Processing
5.1.1 Data Pre-processing
The Figure 9 and Figure 10 show the results of the observations after steps of pre-
processing. It can be seen that, in general, the rainfall data has the same trend as
the ﬂow and level observation.
Figure 9: The 5-min-step time series data for the ﬂow of diﬀerent ﬂow measurement
station and rainfall. The red bars represent the rain events period.
Page 24 of 56
==PAGE:30==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 10: The 5-min-step time series data for the level of diﬀerent level measure-
ment station and rainfall. The red bars represent the rain events period.
The Figure 11 and Figure 12 show the detail certain days for station "Inﬂow_WWTP"
and "LT10", it can be seen clearly that the observed ﬂow and observed level are
correlated with observed rainfall. And it can be seen that in Figure 12, there are
some time steps with missing observation. As mentioned in section 4.3.2.1, this
is because the missing value occupies more than 10 time steps, which can not be
interpolated.
Page 25 of 56
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 11: Zoomed ﬁgure of Figure 9 for station Inﬂow_WWTP for several days
Figure 12: Zoomed ﬁgure of Figure 10 for station LT10 for several days
5.1.2 Simulation from MIKE URBAN
By running the network model in MIKE URBAN, the ﬂow and level data in each
station was simulated. The results of simulation and observation for runoﬀdata
can be seen in Figure 13 and Figure 14. The inﬂow to the wastewater treatment
plant was simulated well, and the performance of station FT10 is also good. The
simulation of FT82 has the same trend and order of magnitude as observation,
Page 26 of 56
==PAGE:32==
Technical University of Denmark
although it seems there is a bias between them. However, the simulation of station
FRD station doesn’t perform well and have a big diﬀerence, which may be caused
by the unknown speciﬁc location of the sensor. So the simulation of station FRD
was not used for the project.
For the water level part, the simulation is closed to observation for station UH11.
The simulation in station LT10 is also good, only with a little diﬀerence in the
baseline. The simulations in LT20 and UH14 look good, but the same problem in
these 2 stations is that there is a big bias between the simulation and observation.
As the data will be fed into the machine learning model, it can be considered that
the model can learn the part of the bias. So the simulation can be used for the
following study.
Figure 13: Observation vs simulation for the ﬂow of each station
Page 27 of 56
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 14: Observation vs simulation for the level of each station
In this study, the ﬂow of station Inﬂow to WWTP, FT10 and FT81 are chosen as
the research objects. The Figure 15 indicates that the variance and average of error
between the simulation and the observation do not change over time and the error
can be assumed as the white noise. So the sensor error fulﬁlls the condition and can
be used in the following research.
5.1.3 Error between the MIKE Simulation and Observation
The research question of this project is to predict the sensor error, and ﬂow data is
one of the most important hydrological factor in the urban water management. And
Page 28 of 56
==PAGE:34==
Technical University of Denmark
the water goes to the WWTP is with more practical signiﬁcance, so in this project
the sensor error of inﬂow to WWTP was considered as the ﬁrst preferred research
object. The sensor error can be seen in Figure 15. Compared with Figure 5, it seems
that the sensor error is also aﬀected by the rain events and have the similar pattern
with ﬂow. In another word, with the big rain event, the sensor error is larger.
Figure 15: Flow error of sensor at station Inﬂow_WWTP
5.2 Cross Correlation Analysis
Figure 16 shows the cross correlation between the diﬀerent variables and error at
station Inﬂow_WWTP. It indicates that at WWTP, the simulated ﬂow shows the
biggest correlation with ﬂow error, which decreases over time. So considered input
time lag can be small. The simulated water level and ﬂow from upstream also show
some correlations, but the peak values are shown around 200 minutes later. This
is because there is a distance between the upstream and WWTP, the behaviour
of the station upstream appears earlier than WWTP. The correlations of rainfall
at WWTP and from upstream have a similar pattern, with peaks of correlation
coeﬃcients shown a few minutes later. This is caused by the rain concentration time
of the catchment, the eﬀect of rain would have a time delay. The cross correlation
between the simulated water level and error does not seem reasonable, as there are
some negative values that mean the high water level causes the small error. This
will be later checked again during the model training to see the performance.
According to the cross correlation analysis, the range of input time step can be
roughly estimated. Then the models of single variable with diﬀerent input time step
can be made to test. In the next section, it shows the test results of model with
Page 29 of 56
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark
diﬀerent variables.
Figure 16: Cross-correlation between various variables and sensor error of inﬂow to
WWTP
5.3 Comparison of Models with Diﬀerent Single Input Variable
The section shows the results of the performance of diﬀerent single input variables.
And for each single variable, the test of diﬀerent input time step was applied to
decide the best one.
5.3.1 Rain Intensity at Inﬂow_WWTP
The Figure 17 shows the results of diﬀerent input time steps of rain intensity. It
shows that in the time lag of 1 time step, the simulation of loss is with the best loss
of around 1849.86 m3/hr, which is large compare to the calculated error shown in
Figure 15. But it seems that with more time steps of rain as input, the performance
of error prediction is even worse. By checking the training process shown in Figure 33
in the Appendix, it can be seen that the training loss and the validation loss almost
maintain at a similar level. And in general, the amplitude of the change is quite
small, which can conclude that the model is hard to converge. Therefore under this
conclusion, the rain intensity series can not be a good choice of input feature.
Page 30 of 56
==PAGE:36==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 17: The RMSE of models with diﬀerent time steps of rain intensity
This may be related to the characteristics of the FFNN model. Normally, larger error
values are accompanied by large-scale rainfall events. However, due to the existence
of rainfall concentration time, the rainfall occurring at time t takes a certain amount
of time to aﬀect the ﬂow in the pipe system. In the FFNN model, the time feature
is not considered, so it can only create a mapping at time t from large/small rain
intensity to large/small error. Therefore, it is probably that the rainfall rt at time
t is very large, and the ﬂow ft at this time has not been aﬀected; and at the time
t+tc, the rainfall may decrease or stop, but the ﬂow at this time is increased rapidly
due to the inﬂuence of the rainfall concentration time.
The other format of neural networks such as Long-short Term Memory (LSTM) and
1D Convolutional Neural Network (1D CNN) that can exploit time series pattern
might work better in this case. Because these two types of neural networks consider
the time connection between data.
So only considering the rain intensity series as input for FFNN model can not provide
good prediction for the error.
5.3.2 Simulated Flow and Water Level at Inﬂow_WWTP
Compared with rain intensity, the simulated ﬂow and water level can better predict
the sensor error, see Figure 18. The range of the RMSE for models with the simulated
Page 31 of 56
==PAGE:37==
Technical University of Denmark
ﬂow or water level is from 1570 m3/hr to 1620 m3/hr, and both the lowest RMSE
are shown on the model with 12 time steps of input (1570.49 m3/hr vs 1588.12
m3/hr) . So these 2 features make almost the same contribution predicting the
error, and since the error is based on ﬂow, the performance of the model with the
ﬂow as input is a little bit better than the one with water level as input.
Figure 18: The RMSE of models with diﬀerent time steps of ﬂow and water level
5.3.3 Error at Inﬂow_WWTP
The Figure 19 shows the result of RMSE for models with diﬀerent input time lags of
error at target sensor. It can be seen that the model F_e_18, which is with 18 time
steps of error as input, gave the lowest RMSE value (716.39 m3/hr). Compared
with the results of section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, as the input variables, the sensor error
can get the much more lower RMSE than rain intensity, simulated ﬂow and water
level. Using the multi-step-ahead error to predict the next error can be considered
as the normal time series forecasting model. So from the result, it shows that it is
feasible to apply the model to sensor error prediction.
But from a practical point of view, the role of this input variable is limited. Because
the ultimate goal of predicting sensor error is to correct the simulated value from
MIKE URBAN to make it closer to the actual value. But the error itself has no
actual physical meaning, and also the previous error at target station might be
unknown. In summary, the sensor error at the target is not a good choice for input
variables, even if it ﬁts well.
Page 32 of 56
==PAGE:38==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 19: The RMSE of models with diﬀerent time steps of error
5.3.4 Variables from Upstream (Station FT82)
As shown in Table 1, there are 4 variables: rain intensity at upstream, simulated
ﬂow at upstream, simulated water level at upstream and sensor error at upstream
being selected to test. For the rainfall intensity of the upstream station, also due
to the problem of too little rainfall data and the inability to converge due to the
characteristics of the FFNN model, it cannot be used well for prediction errors.
Figure 20 shows the results of RMSE for models with the input of simulated ﬂow or
simulated water level. Similar to the conclusion of section 5.2.2, the simulated ﬂow
rate of the upstream station and the simulated water level height of the upstream
station has a similar eﬀect on predicting the error of the target station. But the
diﬀerence is that the variables of the upstream station might require more time step
data as input.
In addition, it can be seen that the eﬀect of the upstream simulated ﬂow and water
level is only slightly worse than that of the target station (Inﬂow_WWTP). There-
fore, a conclusion can be drawn: when the past simulation data of the target station
is missing, the simulated ﬂow and water level of the upstream station can be used
as a good alternative input to predict the error.
Page 33 of 56
==PAGE:39==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 20: The RMSE of models with diﬀerent time steps of simulated ﬂow upstream
(left) and simulated water level upstream (right)
Figure 21 shows the result of error from upstream station, and the performance is
not good as the lowest RMSE is even 1740 m3/s. Generally, the performances of
error for the close station are similar, the reason causes the limited eﬀect of the
input of error from upstream could be FFNN model cannot consider the factor of
time.
Figure 21: The RMSE of models with diﬀerent time steps of error from upstream
station
To explain, the large error is mostly caused by the rain event. And due to the
area of monitoring catchments, the concentration time can be diﬀerent among dif-
ferent measurement stations. So there will be a diﬀerence of time showing the error
caused by rain events among diﬀerent measurement stations. Especially in this the-
sis, we focus the inﬂow of the WWTP, which monitoring the entire catchment of
Page 34 of 56
==PAGE:40==
Technical University of Denmark
Damhusåen, however, when the upstream station FT82 only monitoring a small part
of the catchment. So FFNN model cannot provide a good prediction by inputting
the error of upstream station.
Table 3 shows a summary of the best single independent input variables, it can be
seen that without the consideration of error at target station, the simulated ﬂow
series at Inﬂow_WWTP as input can provide the best prediction.
Table 3: The best input single independent variable
Model no.
Input Variable
RMSE
F_r
-
- (around 2000)
F_f_12
12 ts simulated ﬂow at Inﬂow_WWTP
1570.49
F_l_12
12 ts simulated water level at Inﬂow_WWTP
1588.12
F_e_18
18 ts error at Inﬂow_WWTP
716.39
F_rup
-
- (around 2000)
F_fup_12
12 ts simulated ﬂow upstream
1590.57
F_lup_28
28 ts simulated level upstream
1638.39
F_eup_24
24-time-step error from upstream
1740.06
5.3.5 Statistical Variables
The statistical variables were selected to describe the characteristics of the 4 basic
single variables: rain intensity, simulated ﬂow, simulated water level and the error
itself. The reason is to explore if the statistical variable can provide better prediction
compared with the variable series itself.
The same steps as before, testing each single statistical variables with diﬀerent
input time step to select the best one as the representative of the selected statistical
variable. Table 4 shows the list of best statistical input variables. It can be seen that,
compared with directly inputting the rain intensity series, the average rain could
better predict the error with a decrease of RMSE of almost 500 m3/s. This might
because that the FFNN model can better exploit one single variable describing the
information of a time series data to train the model. When selecting the maximum
rain intensity as an input variable, during the training process the result can not
converge. But it could provide the RMSE at the level around 1400 m3/hr. So it is
still can be a good choice if combined with other statistical features.
For the other variables except for rain intensity, from the result, it seems that the
Page 35 of 56
==PAGE:41==
Technical University of Denmark
statistical variables can not provide the lower RMSE. This may because the other
variables contain the complete sequence, in another word, they include the data
both for the dry period and wet period. So the raw series of data can already have
the ability to include all the information. But it is still worth trying to combine
them with independent variables to see the performance. And among the statistical
variables, the standard deviation seems to make a limited contribution in predicting
the error. One of the reason could be that the standard deviation shows the degree
of dispersion between individuals within a group instead of directly showing data
itself.
Table 4: The best input statistical variable
Model no.
Input Variable
RMSE
F_avg_r_96
average rain over 96 ts
1427.57
F_avg_f_6
average simulated ﬂow over 6 ts
1617.48
F_avg_l_21
average simulated level over 21 ts
1612.69
F_avg_e_6
average error over 6 ts
916.77
F_max_r
-
-
F_max_f_12
max simulated ﬂow over 12 ts
1621.37
F_max_l_12
max simulated level over 12 ts
1634.13
F_std_r_48
std of rain over 48 ts
1836.26
F_std_f_30
std of simulated ﬂow over 30 ts
1672.45
F_std_l_30
std of simulated level over 30 ts
1684.19
F_std_e_30
std of error over 30 ts
1696.75
F_avg_rup_120
average rain intensity upstream over 120 ts
1436.66
F_avg_fup_6
average simulated ﬂow upstream over 6 ts
1675.34
F_avg_lup_27
average simulated level upstream over 27 ts
1652.63
F_avg_eup_12
average error upstream over 12 ts
1750.54
F_max_rup
-
-
F_max_fup_6
max simulated ﬂow upstream over 6 ts
1677.26
F_max_lup_30
max simulated level upstream over 30 ts
1669.56
F_max_eup_18
max error upstream over 18 ts
1602.23
F_std_rup_48
std of rain upstream over 48 ts
1848.00
F_std_fup_24
std of simulated ﬂow upstream over 24 ts
1672.46
F_std_lup_24
std of simulated level upstream over 24 ts
1838.37
F_std_eup_30
std of error upstream over 30 ts
1663.50
Page 36 of 56
==PAGE:42==
Technical University of Denmark
5.4 Model with Multiple Input Variables
In section 5.3, the best single input variables were selected, shown in Table 3 and
Table 4. The next step is to make diﬀerent combinations of those best single variables
as the multiple variable inputs to predict the error. As the rain intensity series can
not learn well, during the testing, the combination of maximum rain and average rain
was selected as the replacement of variables describing the rain intensity. And as the
conclusion from Table 3, the simulated ﬂow series and simulated water level series
at Inﬂow_WWTP were selected as one of the combination objects. In addition,
the combination of variables from upstream was also selected as the comparison.
Table 5 shows the list of combinations tried and test in this thesis.
Table 5: The results of models with the input of diﬀerent combinations of best single
variables
Model no.
Input Variable
RMSE
F_avg_f_f
F_avg_f_6 + F_f_12
1569.34
F_avg_l_l
F_avg_l_21 + F_l_12
1575.92
F_avg_r_f
F_avg_r_96 + F_f_12
1317.42
F_avg_r_l
F_avg_r_96 + F_l_12
1323.79
F_avg_max_r_f
F_avg_r_96 + F_max_r_96 + F_f_12
1297.70
F_avg_max_rup_fup
F_avg_rup_120 + F_max_rup_120 + F_fup_48
1376.74
F_avg_max_r_l
F_avg_r_96 + F_max_r_96 + F_l_12
1299.97
F_avg_max_r_f_l
F_avg_r_96 + F_max_r_96 + F_f_12 + F_l_12
1301.90
From the Table 5, it can be seen that the model F_avg_max_r_f, which is with the
input of maximum and average rain over 96 time steps and combined with 12-time-
step of simulated ﬂow, provides the lowest RMSE, 1297.7 m3/hr on the test set.
Compared with model F_f_12 in Table 3, it can be seen that adding the maximum
rain and average rain as one of input variables improves the result a lot.
The model F_avg_max_r_l provides the second lowest RMSE, which is very closed
the lowest one. So it proves the conclusion that the feature of simulated ﬂow and
simulated water level have the similar ability in predicting the error.
In order to test the eﬀect of using only upstream variables as input, the model
F_avg_max_rup_fup was made, which includes the maximum and average rain of
upstream station over 120 time steps and 48-time-step simulated ﬂow of upstream
station. It provides the RMSE with 1376.74 m3/hr, which is slightly lower than
model F_avg_max_r_f. So the variables from upstream station can also be used
Page 37 of 56
==PAGE:43==
Technical University of Denmark
to predict the error at target station.
Figure 22 shows the time series plot of predicted error from model F_avg_max_r_f
and observed error on the test set. It can be seen that the prediction can ﬁt the
large positive error values, and error in the dry period to a certain degree. But,
the prediction can not well ﬁt those large negative values. And Figure 23 shows the
results from model F_f_12, F_l_12 and F_avg_max_r_f. It can be seen that,
by adding the rain feature, the model can better predict the positive error during
the rain events time. It seems that after adding the rain features the performance
is worse.
Figure 22: The predicted error vs observed error on test set
Figure 23: The comparison of ﬂow from models with diﬀerent input variables
Page 38 of 56
==PAGE:44==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 24: The predicted error vs observed error for the training set with diﬀerent
input variables used
In order to check the possible reasons, the time series plots for predicted error and
observed error in training set combined with input variables were made, shown in
Figure 24. At the ﬁrst sight, it can found that there is the same problem in the
Page 39 of 56
==PAGE:45==
Technical University of Denmark
training set showing that the input features can not well predict those negative
error. It is not diﬃcult to ﬁnd that when a rainfall event occurs, a large error value
is caused by the increase in simulated ﬂow. However, according to the performance
of input variables, there is no signal showing that when the error is negative or
positive.
Figure 25: Certain rain events in training set
There is another problem during the training. Figure 25 shows the predicted error
and observed error for the certain rain events in training set with diﬀerent input
variables used. It can be seen that for these small rain events, the prediction is
sometimes overestimated. This might because in the training set most of the rain
Page 40 of 56
==PAGE:46==
Technical University of Denmark
events are large and lead the big error. When the model recognize the rain input,
it will directly tend to predict big error.
Figure 26 shows the comparison of the observed ﬂow, MIKE simulated ﬂow and the
predicted ﬂow bases on error-correcting for the test data period. Figure 27 shows a
certain period of Figure 26. It can be seen that in the dry period, the method used in
this thesis can achieve the error-correcting for MIKE simulation to a certain degree.
This is maybe during the dry period, the error is only aﬀected by the performance
of ﬂow and without the consideration of hydrological parameters like rain intensity.
And during the wet period, for the time when the MIKE simulation overestimates
the ﬂow, the error can be corrected to a certain degree. But for when the simulated
ﬂow is smaller than the observed ﬂow, just as mentioned before, the error can not
be well predicted.
One of the potential reason can be the uncertainty of the record of rain intensity
data. A rain gauge is always set to monitor the rain intensity for a certain catchment.
However, when the rain event comes, the rain intensity at various locations in the
entire catchment is not exactly the same. For example, concentrated rainfall only
occurs in an area at the edge of the monitoring area, and the data recorded by the
rain gauge will be smaller than that of the rainfall area, resulting in a smaller MIKE
simulation ﬂow. Conversely, it is also possible that the simulated value is greater
than the observed value. However, according to the input features, they don’t have
the ability to judge when the simulation will larger or smaller than the observation.
Figure 26: The comparison among observed ﬂow, MIKE simulated ﬂow and the
predicted ﬂow
Page 41 of 56
==PAGE:47==
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 27: The zoomed ﬁgure of Figure 26
Furthermore, some error is in the heels of the rain events, see Figure 28. The big
error between the MIKE simulation and observation could be linked to the emptying
of basins. To explain, during the rain events it is possible that the basin is full of
water and need to be emptied. But in real life, basin emptying is often associated
with real-time control systems.
This means that, for example, when there is a
bottleneck downstream, dynamic ﬂow control is performed on upstream facilities so
that the water in the basin would be emptied slowly. However, in MIKE simulation
we didn’t consider this control method, causing the MIKE simulation is smaller
than observation. And when training the model to predict the error, this factor was
also not considered. Therefore those large negative error can not be well predicted
caused by the basin emptying.
Figure 28: The possible period linked to basin empty
Page 42 of 56
==PAGE:48==
Technical University of Denmark
5.5 Comparison of the Results of Diﬀerent Machine Learning
Models
Figure 29: The comparison among observed ﬂow, MIKE simulated ﬂow and the
predicted ﬂow from FFNN and SVR
Figure 30: The zoomed ﬁgure of Figure 29
The Figure 29 and Figure 30 show the results from FFNN and SVR. In general,
these two models have a similar performance in predicting the error.
From the
Figure 30, it can be seen that the FFNN seems can better correct the error when
the MIKE simulation overestimates the observation.
But it is possible that the
Page 43 of 56
==PAGE:49==
Technical University of Denmark
result is related to the selection of hyperparameters. This is because when selecting
the hyperparameter C for the SVR model, when the value of C is too large, the
computing time for training the SVR model is quite long. And with the increase of
C, the better the performance of the training set, but the tolerance to interference
such as noise is reduced, which may lead to overﬁtting.
So overall the performance of them is similar and the main problem in both results
is still that the one mentioned in section 5.3, the lack of certain input features. But
from the aspect of computing time, the FFNN is the better choice. Once the SVR
trains the data set of a great number of samples, it requires more time than FFNN.
Page 44 of 56
==PAGE:50==
Technical University of Denmark
6. Discussion
During the process of exploring the answering of the research question deﬁned in
the thesis, there are some limitations and uncertainty. So in this chapter, the anal-
ysis of these limitations in this thesis are presented together with a collection of
recommendations for improvement.
6.1 Input Features
From the result part, it can be seen that the model F_avg_r_96 (RMSE 1427.57
m3/hr) outperformed F_r_1 (RMSE 1940.52 m3/hr), which indicates that the
statistical values help the model predict the error.
But in this thesis, only the
statistical variables in one period were considered as input, for example, the average
and maximum rain intensity over only 96 time steps were considered as the rain
input feature (only 2 input variables). Considering only statistical variables in a
time period may lead to missing detailed information in data. Therefore, in order
to avoid this problem, in the follow-up research we can consider entering statistical
variables in multiple time periods to strengthen the description of the data, for
example, inputting the average and maximum rain over 32, 64 and 96 time steps.
Furthermore, as mentioned in the result part, the input features used in this the-
sis are not good enough to predict the error between the MIKE simulation and
observation. For the rain data, the average rain intensity of diﬀerent rain gauges
was computed for each measurement station. Therefore when selecting the input
features, this thesis only considers the calculated average rainfall intensity and its
statistical description at the measurement station but ignores the spatial variation
of the observed rainfall. It is worth adding some statistical variables describing the
spatial variation of the observed rainfall, such as the standard deviation of the mean
rain intensities for diﬀerent rain gauges in the following research.
Another feature needed to be considered is the monitoring ﬂow of the basin or other
water control facilities.
AS can be seen in the results, because of the real-time
control, causing that the MIKE simulation is much smaller than the observation.
And this part of the error cannot be well predicted by the existing features. If the
amount of water out from the basin or the amount of water used for ﬂood dispatch
can be obtained as features, the error might be further predicted.
Page 45 of 56
==PAGE:51==
Technical University of Denmark
6.2 Selection of Machine Learning Model
In this thesis, The feed-forward neural network (FFNN) and support vector regres-
sion (SVR) model were selected to predict the error. From the result, it can be seen
that their performances are similar. However, during the training process, the SVR
requires quite more time to train the data set (around 30 minutes). For FFNN, due
to the application of Adam optimization algorithms and the adjustment of the learn-
ing rate and batch size, it requires less time for training. From the time-consuming
aspect, the FFNN is the ﬁrst choice of these two methods.
There is another model often used in time series prediction called the Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM), which is a variant of the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
This kind of neural network includes the consideration of the time index when train-
ing the data set. The introduction and the theory of LSTM can be seen in appendix
A. In this thesis, the LSTM was also managed to predict the error. Unfortunately,
due to the limitation of time, the test for the LSTM model has not been ﬁnished.
However, from the partial results obtained, LSTM can indeed make better use of the
time characteristics of the input features to predict errors. For example, when test-
ing the error from upstream station in FFNN model, it provides the RMSE around
1740 m3/hr (see Table 3, model F_eup_24). But when input the same feature into
the LSTM model, it can get an RMSE with around 1300 m3/hr. This is because the
LSTM can eﬀectively exploit the time series pattern. For FFNN it considers each
input time step as an individual variable and can not recognize that the data at t
follows the data at t-1. Therefore the FFNN needs ﬁrst to learn this relationship
between the variables which always requires a lot of parameters and even a great
amount of training data.
6.3 Inclusion of More Rain Events
As in the last section mentioned, the rain series data input can not converge in this
case, except converting the neural network model to LSTM or others often used for
time series analysis, another way is to include more historical rain event into the
training set. It would help the FFNN model to learn the time series pattern, and
at the same time more training data is always good for the model training to avoid
overﬁtting.
Page 46 of 56
==PAGE:52==
Technical University of Denmark
6.4 Conﬁguration of Neural Network Models
In this thesis, the FFNN model is simply set up by 2 hidden layers with 128 and
64 nodes respectively. But in the problem of deep learning, the number of hidden
layers is a very important hyperparameter.
Since the all the variables involved
in this thesis are with time series patterns, there is usually a strong non-linear
relationship between the data. Therefore, increasing the depth of the neural network,
that is, increasing the number of hidden layers, may be able to better capture the
characteristics of the input variables and get better predictions.
6.3 Model Validation and Evaluation
The purpose of machine learning is to obtain a model that can be generalized, that
is, a model that performs well on unprecedented data, and overﬁtting is the core
diﬃculty. In this thesis, the data set was split into training set, validation set and
test set to avoid overﬁtting problem. At ﬁrst sight, it looks ﬁne, but when splitting
the data set the time factor was ignored, which may cause some problems. This is
because all the data used in this thesis is time-related, and the hydrological data is
always seasonal. And in this thesis, the total data set only includes a year, to be
speciﬁcally: the training set period is from January to August, the validation set is
from September to October, and the test set is the remaining 2 month in a year.
This causes a problem that the characteristic that the model learns from the training
set are mostly based on spring and summer data. So when validating and testing
the model, the performance may not be that good as the validation period and test
period are mostly in autumn and winter. From Figure 34 it can be seen that the
validation loss is slightly lower than the training loss (around 50 m3/hr). Usually,
the training set should be lower than the validation loss. And this may be related
to the distribution of the data. In this thesis, as mentioned before, it is the diﬀerent
rain events distribution according to the diﬀerent seasons. So for future research,
this problem should be avoided and one of the options is to set the training set,
validation set and test set for a year, respectively. And cross-validation is another
good way to avoid overﬁtting when the number of available data is limited.
Another limitation is when testing which input feature is the best, the RMSE focused
in the thesis is based on the entire period, so includes both the dry period and wet
period. However, in the real-life, the wet period is the one that we are more focused
on and be more meaningful. Because the show of urban ﬂood problem and the
application of ﬂood dispatch plan of the water management is always in the wet
period. Therefore, when evaluating and validating the performance of the model,
Page 47 of 56
==PAGE:53==
Technical University of Denmark
the dry period and wet period should be separately treated.
Page 48 of 56
==PAGE:54==
Technical University of Denmark
7. Conclusion and Outlook
This chapter will return to the research questions asked in Section 1.1 and focuses
on answering and explaining each of the questions.
Q.1 Is it possible to apply machine learning models to predict error be-
tween the hydraulic numerical simulation and observation
Yes. Especially the large error is always caused by the hydrological elements, for
example, rainfall data. When feeding the related hydrological data as input, the
machine learning model can learn the non-linear relationship between them and
error.
But the performance of prediction highly depends on the input features,
which will be answered in more detail in the next question.
Q.2 What and how many input variables should be used to be fed into
the machine learning models?
For the case in this thesis, the 12-step-ahead simulated ﬂow and the average and
maximum rain intensity over 96 time steps, in total 14 input variables, are the best
input features in predicting the error.
But from the result, it can be seen that
only the mentioned features are not good enough to predict the error which may
be related to the artiﬁcial control, such as basin emptying. To construct the best
error-predicting model, there is a need to explore more eﬀective input features.
Q.3 Which type of machine learning model (SVR, FFNN and LSTM) will
have the best performance to predict the error?
The SVR and FFNN almost have the same performance when predicting the error
in this thesis. But the SVR needs more time to train the model, especially when
setting the hyperparameter C with large values. This may be related to the size
of the data set. Therefore, the FFNN seems to be a good choice when the history
data is with a great number of samples. The LSTM was not ﬁshed for all the test,
but from the gotten results it can be seen that the LSTM performs better when
inputting the time series data. So in the following research the LSTM can also be a
good option.
Q.4 How is the performance of combining the physical-based simulation
and machine-learning based predicted error to predict sewer ﬂow.
In general, this method is acceptable as the behaviour of error is related to the
rain events or other hydrological variables. But the most important is to ﬁnd and
Page 49 of 56
==PAGE:55==
Technical University of Denmark
determine the eﬀective and reasonable input features.
In recent years, machine learning methods have developed rapidly. For the tradi-
tional urban water management ﬁeld, how to eﬀectively combine the two and obtain
reliable results is bound to become the future development trend. Predicting the
error between the MIKE URBAN simulation based on the reliable physical model
simulation and the actual value, and then adding the error with the simulation value
can correct the simulation as much as possible to make it more accurate.
Judging from the results of this thesis, the machine learning model is capable of
making a prediction of this error.
The premise is that the input variables need
to be improved and expanded, especially when there is a big diﬀerence between
the physical model simulation and the observed value, which may involve some
artiﬁcially controlled time periods. If these characteristic variables can be found,
then the error will be well predicted, which means that more accurate simulation
values can be obtained. This is of great signiﬁcance to urban water management.
The aim of this thesis is just to predict the error at the current time step, but
this method is also possibly used for forecasting the error in the future. Therefore,
if this method can be improved, it will make a great contribution to urban ﬂood
forecasting.
Page 50 of 56
==PAGE:56==
Technical University of Denmark
References
R. M. Adnan, X. Yuan, O. Kisi, Y. Yuan, et al.
Streamﬂow forecasting using
artiﬁcial neural network and support vector machine models. American Scientiﬁc
Research Journal for Engineering, Technology, and Sciences (ASRJETS), 29(1):
286–294, 2017.
D. S. Bisht, C. Chatterjee, S. Kalakoti, P. Upadhyay, M. Sahoo, and A. Panda.
Modeling urban ﬂoods and drainage using swmm and mike urban: a case study.
Natural hazards, 84(2):749–776, 2016.
F.-J. Chang, P.-A. Chen, Y.-R. Lu, E. Huang, and K.-Y. Chang. Real-time multi-
step-ahead water level forecasting by recurrent neural networks for urban ﬂood
control. Journal of Hydrology, 517:836–846, 2014.
DHI.
Storm water runoﬀfrom green urban areas - modellersâ guideline,
2015.
URL https://watersensitivecities.org.au/wp-content/uploads/
2016/05/TMR_B4-1_StormWaterRunoffGreenUrban.pdf.
DHI. Mike urban, 2017. URL https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/
Cities/CollectionSystem.pdf.
S. Eggimann, L. Mutzner, O. Wani, M. Y. Schneider, D. Spuhler, M. Moy de
Vitry, P. Beutler, and M. Maurer.
The potential of knowing more:
A re-
view of data-driven urban water management. Environmental Science & Tech-
nology, 51(5):2538–2553, 2017.
doi:
10.1021/acs.est.6b04267.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b04267. PMID: 28125222.
M. Hammond, A. Chen, S. DjordjeviÄ, D. Butler, and O. Mark.
Urban ﬂood
impact assessment: A state-of-the-art review. Urban Water Journal, 12(1):14–29,
2015.
doi: 10.1080/1573062X.2013.857421.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
1573062X.2013.857421.
T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup. Introduction to machine learning and data
mining. Lecture notes of the course of the same name given at DTU (Technical
University of Denmark), 2016.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
S. Hochreiter, A. S. Younger, and P. R. Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient
descent. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, pages 87–94.
Springer, 2001.
Page 51 of 56
==PAGE:57==
Technical University of Denmark
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
V. Novotny and S. Zheng.
Rainfall-runoﬀtransfer function by arma modeling.
Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 115(10):1386–1400, 1989. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
0733-9429(1989)115:10(1386).
C. Olah. Understanding lstm networks. 2015.
R. Palmitessa, P. S. Mikkelsen, M. Borup, and A. W. Law. Soft sensing of wa-
ter depth in combined sewers using lstm neural networks with missing obser-
vations. Journal of Hydro-environment Research, 2021. ISSN 1570-6443. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jher.2021.01.006. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1570644321000125.
B. D. Ripley. Pattern recognition and neural networks. Cambridge university press,
2007.
B. Schölkopf, K. Tsuda, and J.-P. Vert. Kernel methods in computational biology.
MIT press, 2004.
A. J. Smola and B. Schölkopf. A tutorial on support vector regression. Statistics
and computing, 14(3):199–222, 2004.
T. Szandała. Review and comparison of commonly used activation functions for
deep neural networks. In Bio-inspired Neurocomputing, pages 203–224. Springer,
2021.
V. Vapnik. Pattern recognition using generalized portrait method. Automation and
remote control, 24:774–780, 1963.
V. Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business
media, 2013.
W.-C. Wang, K.-W. Chau, C.-T. Cheng, and L. Qiu. A comparison of performance
of several artiﬁcial intelligence methods for forecasting monthly discharge time
series. Journal of Hydrology, 374(3):294–306, 2009. ISSN 0022-1694. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.06.019. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0022169409003527.
Z. Xiang, J. Yan, and I. Demir. A rainfall-runoﬀmodel with lstm-based sequence-
to-sequence learning. Water resources research, 56(1):e2019WR025326, 2020.
S. Zheng and V. Novotny. Stochastic Modeling of Combined Sewer Flows. Water
Science and Technology, 24(6):35–40, 09 1991. doi: 10.2166/wst.1991.0138. URL
https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.1991.0138.
Page 52 of 56
==PAGE:58==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendices
A Long Short-term Memory Model
A.1 Theory of Long Short-term Memory Model
Long Short-term Memory Model (LSTM) was ﬁrst proposed by Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber (1997).
It is a special type of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
that is able to use time dependencies among the input sequence. Traditional ANNs
cannot connect previous information to the current time step when dealing with
long-term dependencies, and LSTM was designed to handle this issue (Olah, 2015).
Figure 31 shows the basic structure of the modern LSTM model and the algorithms
in the cells. In the ﬁgure, Ci is a speciﬁc status called the cell state for each time
step, which contains the information for long-term memory. xi represents the time
series input, and the output is presented as hi on the top Figure 31. And in each
LSTM cell, there are three diﬀerent regulators called gates: Forget gate ft, input
gate it and output gate ot.
Figure 31: Basic LSTM layer structure for the time step 0 to t + 1, with a detailed
calculation illustration shown in the LSTM cell at time step t. Figure from Xiang
et al. (2020)
During the training of the LSTM neural network, the ﬁrst step is to decide what
information will be discarded from the cell state. This decision is made through
the forget gate. The gate will read ht−1 and xt, and output a value between 0 and
1 for each number in the cell state Ct−1. 1 means completely reserved, 0 means
completely discarded.
Page 53 of 56
==PAGE:59==
Technical University of Denmark
Then the next step is to determine what new information is stored in the cell state.
There are two parts here: First, the input gate layer with sigmoid function is to
determine what value to update. Second, a tanh layer creates a new candidate value
vector, ˜Ct, which will be added to the state.
The third step is to update the old cell state Ct−1 to Ct. More speciﬁcally, Ct−1
is multiplied by ft, discarding the information that is determined to be discarded.
Then add it ∗˜Ct to get the new state Ct.
Finally, the value determined will be output through the output gate. This process
consists of 2 parts: ﬁrst, a sigmoid layer is used to determine which part of the cell
state will be output. Next, the cell state is fed through tanh function (get a value
between -1 and 1) and multiplied with the output of the sigmoid gate.
The calculation process mentioned above is shown in the following equations:
ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
(24)
it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(25)
ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1, xt] + bo)
(26)
˜Ct = tanh(WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
(27)
Ct = ft × Ct−1 + it × ˜Ct
(28)
ht = ot × tanh(Ct)
(29)
A.2 Conﬁguration of LSTM model
The LSTM requires that input data needs to structured in a diﬀerent format from
classical machine learning models in order to consider the concept of time elements.
The input of LSTM is 3-dimensional vector: the ﬁrst dimension is the number of
Page 54 of 56
==PAGE:60==
Technical University of Denmark
the samples; the second is the number of considered time steps and the last is the
number of features. Take the Figure 32 as an example, the ﬁrst dimension is set as
None, which represents any of the numbers. There are 5 time steps shown in the
ﬁgure and 2 considered features: Rain and Flow, so in this case, the input structure
should be deﬁned as (None, 5, 2).
In this study, The the many-to-one format of LSTM model was used, which means
that the multiple previous time steps data was used as input to predict the sensor
error in the next time steps. As Figure 32 shows, it uses the previous 5 time steps
of rain and ﬂow data to predict the sensor error in the next time step.
Figure 32: Deﬁnition of the input data and output data of LSTM model
The structure of LSTM model is almost the same as Feed-forward neural network
model. The LSTM model includes an input layer, 2 hidden layer and an output
layer. The ﬁrst hidden layer is replaced by a LSTM layer, which also contains 128
nodes, the other one contains 64 nodes. For each hidden layers, the relu activation
function was applied. After the LSTM layer and the dense hidden layer is a dropout
layer with dropout rate of 20%.
Page 55 of 56
==PAGE:61==
Technical University of Denmark
B Training and Validation Loss
Figure 33: Training and validation loss per epochs for models with diﬀerent time
steps of input rain
Figure 34: Training and validation loss per epochs for model F_avg_max_r_f
Page 56 of 56
