==PAGE:1==
 
1 
[X] is widely recognized as key to ...s
==PAGE:2==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
2 
Approval 
 
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Entrepreneurial Department at 
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master 
of Telecommunication Engineering.  
 
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of technology, 
entrepreneurship, and innovation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17/06/2021
==PAGE:3==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title  
 
WEKOK 
Technology-based start-up development and business evaluation  
 
Project  
 
Master Thesis (30ECTS) 
 
Project period 
 
January 2020 – June 2021 
 
Department  
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
Author 
 
Laura Díaz Esteban 
 
Supervisor  
 
Robin van Oorschot 
 
Co-Supervisor 
 
Carlos López Barrio 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A mis padres, hermana y abuela. A mi compañero de vida, Daniel. 
To my parents, sister, and grandmother. To my life partner, Daniel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
5 
Abstract 
 
Having an innovative idea to create a new venture or startup is not enough if we do 
not know how to carry out the process of its development and exploitation. It is not 
enough to make a profit from it.  
 
The lack of knowledge at the beginning of creating a new business is an entry barrier 
that causes many innovative ideas to die along the journey. Therefore, when we decide 
to create a startup with our innovative business ideas, it is essential to rely on 
successful and powerful entrepreneurship methodologies, experts, or professionals 
on the subject.  
 
Consequently, the goal of this thesis is to present a simple and powerful 
entrepreneurship methodology that is efficient enough for anyone who follows its 
guidelines to achieve a feasible and strong initial value proposition to present their 
idea to potential investors, partners or just start developing the product(s) in a 
structured and successful way.  
 
Furthermore, to prove the effectiveness of this methodology, each of the steps will be 
exemplified with my own innovative business idea that started this process as a 
simple vague idea.  Because of this, I have managed to create a strong value 
proposition for my business idea to further develop and exploit at the end of the 
journey through my own methodology.  
 
The foundation of my own methodology is the Lean Startup Method by Eric Ries, the 
principle of Design Thinking and the book Disciplined Entrepreneurship by Bill Aulet. I 
have analyzed their content, and based on this analysis, I have observed what was 
missing from each of these methodologies to create my own, and what I could use, 
and how I could combine them to create a complete and powerful tool. 
 
The methodology is structured as a loop subdivided in three main parts: immersion, 
idea DNA breakdown, and creating the startup. Each of these subphases aims to 
answer five questions: How? Where?, Who?, What? and How? At the end of this loop, 
and after answering the questions, two main objectives should have been achieved: 
learning and building.   
 
The immersion phase is based on the interaction with people, i.e., an empirical or 
qualitative process to validate the problem you want to solve with your business idea 
and a quantitative process to know the size of your potential market. The second 
phase, idea DNA breakdown, aims to define the core of the business idea. To know 
what the DNA of the business idea is. And finally, the third phase, creating the startup, 
I propose to create a Minimum Business Prototype, MBP. That is just an MVP in the 
form of a prototype that is powerful enough to present it and start developing it, as 
well as the business model associated with that prototype. 
 
Finally, in this thesis, a brief section is dedicated to the importance of awareness of 
the Sustainable Development Goals at the initial stage of the creation of your startup.  
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
6 
Key Words 
Startup, new venture, entrepreneurship, market size, two-side market, potential 
customers, Persona, competitors, core, value proposition, DMU, business model, 
pricing framework, LTV, COCA, MVP, prototype, roadmap, launch strategy, SDGs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
7 
Resumen  
 
Tener una idea innovadora para crear un nuevo negocio o startup no es suficiente si 
no sabemos como llevar a cabo el proceso de su desarrollo y su explotación. No es 
suficiente como para llegar a conseguir un beneficio por ella. 
 
El desconocimiento existente en el momento inicial de crear un nuevo negocio es una 
barrera de entrada que hace que muchas ideas innovadoras mueran en el camino. Es 
por ello, que cuando decidimos crear una startup con nuestra idea de negocio 
innovadora, es de vital importancia apoyarse en metodologías de emprendimiento 
exitosas y potentes, expertos o profesionales sobre la materia.  
 
Debido a esto, el objetivo de esta tesis es presentar una metodología de 
emprendimiento sencilla y lo suficientemente eficiente como para que cualquier 
persona que siga sus pautas, consiga una propuesta de valor inicial factible y potente 
para presentar su idea a posibles inversores, partners o simplemente comenzar a 
desarrollar el producto o productos de manera estructurada y exitosa.  
 
Además, para probar la eficacia de esta metodología, cada uno de los pasos serán 
ejemplificados con mi propia idea de negocio innovadora que comenzó este proceso 
como una simple vaga idea.   
 
Gracias a esto, he conseguido crear una propuesta de valor fuerte para mi idea de 
negocio para continuar desarrollando y explotándola al finalizar el viaje a través de mi 
propia metodología.  
 
El fundamento de la creación de mi propia metodología son el Método Lean Startup 
de Eric Ries, el principio de Design Thinking y el libro Disciplined Entrepreneurship de 
Bill Aulet. He analizado su contenido y en base a este análisis, he observado qué 
faltaba de cada una de estas metodologías para crear la mía propia y también, qué 
podía utilizar y como podía combinarlas para crear una herramienta completa y 
potente. 
 
La metodología se estructura como un loop que se subdivide en tres partes 
principales: inmersión, desglose del ADN de la idea y creación de la startup. Cada una 
de estas subfases pretenden dar respuesta a cinco preguntas ¿Cómo?, ¿Dónde?, 
¿Quién?, ¿Qué? y ¿Cómo? Al finalizar este loop y dar respuesta a las preguntas, se 
debe haber conseguido dos objetivos principales, aprendizaje y construcción.   
 
La fase de inmersión se base en la interacción con personas, es decir un proceso 
empírico o cualitativo para poder validar la problemática a la que quieres dar solucion 
con tu idea de negocio y un proceso cuantitativo para conocer el tamaño que tendría 
tu mercado potencial. La segunda fase, desglose del ADN de la idea, tiene como 
objetivo la definición del core de la idea de negocio. Saber cuál es el ADN de la idea 
de negocio. Y finalmente, la tercera fase, creando la startup, propongo crear un 
Minimum Business Prototype, MBP. Esto no es más que un MVP en forma de 
prototipo que tenga la suficientemente potencia como para presentarlo y comenzar a 
desarrollarlo, así como el modelo de negocio asociado a ese prototipo. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
8 
 
Finalmente, en esta tesis se dedica una breve sección a la importancia de la 
concienciación de los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible en el momento inicial de la 
creación de tu startup. 
 
Palabras clave  
Startup, nueva empresa, emprendimiento, tamaño del mercado, mercado de dos 
caras, clientes potenciales, Persona, competidores, núcleo, propuesta de valor, DMU, 
modelo de negocio, marco de precios, LTV, COCA, MVP, prototipo, hoja de ruta, 
estrategia de lanzamiento, ODS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
9 
Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Robin van Oorschot from DTU 
Entrepreneurship. For his patience, help and understanding during the development of 
my thesis. He gave me great ideas and guided me in the right direction during the 
whole thesis process. 
 
My acknowledgements are extended to all the professionals belonging to 
entrepreneurship programs such as DTU Skylab, Xiji Incubator, and ActuaUPM for their 
time and feedback. Moreover, I would like to express my gratitude to my home 
university, ETSIT, for their excellent management and support throughout my 
exchange.  
 
Moreover, I would like to thank all the people who have helped me to validate the 
problem as well as the prototype. People totally unknown to me but who have agreed 
to waste some of their time to talk to me and to take my surveys.  
 
I would also like to say thank you to Maria, Pablo and Campoy. My friends and 
colleagues during my stay in Denmark. For their help, support, experience, and 
company throughout this academic year. They came into my life to stay, I am sure.  
 
To my parents, sister, and grandmother. For their struggle and continuous work to help 
me finish my studies. For offering me unwavering support and continuous 
encouragement throughout my college years and especially this last year away from 
home. This achievement would not have been possible without them.  
 
Finally, I must express my gratitude to my life partner. To Daniel. For having been with 
me for the last eleven years of my life. For his support, encouragement, protection, 
love, and loyalty. I am very proud that he is still by my side and will finish this phase of 
my life with me. Now a new life begins for us.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
10
Contents 
ABSTRACT 
5 
RESUMEN 
7 
INTRODUCTION 
14 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
17 
METHODOLOGY 
29 
SPRINT I: IMMERSION 
32 
1. 
Empathize 
33 
2. 
Market Segmentation & Beachhead market 
35 
2.1. 
An array of market opportunities 
36 
2.2. 
First Market Analysis 
38 
2.2.1. 
Quantitative results - Survey 
39 
2.2.2. 
Qualitative results - Interviews 
47 
2.2.3. 
Two-size market 
49 
2.2.4. 
Market segmentation conclusion 
57 
2.3. 
Beachhead market 
57 
3. 
End-User profile 
58 
3.1. 
End-user customer 
58 
3.1.1. 
Day in the life of an ideal end-user, both male and female 
60 
3.2. 
End-user service provider 
61 
3.2.1. 
Day in the life of a cook 
61 
4. 
Market size 
62 
4.1. 
TAM 
62 
4.2. 
SAM 
63 
4.3. 
SOM 
65 
5. 
Persona 
66 
6. 
Full Life Cycle Use Case 
69 
7. 
SPRINT I conclusion 
71 
SPRINT II: IDEA DNA BREAKDOWN 
72 
8. 
Value proposition 
73 
8.1. 
Value Proposition Canvas 
73 
8.1.1. 
Customer Profile 
74 
8.1.2. 
Value Map 
78 
8.2. 
Quantify the Value Proposition 
83 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
11
9. 
Core 
85 
10. 
Competitive analysis 
86 
10.1. 
Competitive position chart 
91 
11. 
DMU. Customer’s Decision-Making Unit 
94 
12. 
The process to acquire a paying customer 
96 
13. 
Business DNA 
98 
14. 
SPRINT II conclusion 
99 
SPRINT III: CREATING THE STARTUP 
101 
15. 
A customer's day on the board 
102 
16. 
MBP. Minimum Business Prototype 
103 
16.1. 
Paper prototyping 
104 
16.2. 
Digital prototyping 
108 
16.2.1. 
First iteration 
108 
16.2.2. 
Sencond iteration 
113 
17. 
Business model 
115 
18. 
Pricing Framework 
117 
18.1. 
Income statement 
118 
18.2. 
LTV of an acquired customer 
120 
18.3. 
COCA 
121 
19. 
New venture roadmap 
122 
20. 
Launch Strategy 
123 
20.1. 
Cooks launch strategy 
124 
20.2. 
Customers launch strategy 
125 
21. 
Sprint III conclusion 
127 
CONCLUSION 
128 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
129 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
130 
APPENDIX 
133 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
12
Index of figures 
 
FIGURE 1. FEEDBACK LOOP LEAN STARTUP 
20 
FIGURE 2. DISCIPLINED ENTREPRENEURSHIP STRUCTURE 
22 
FIGURE 3. IDEO DESIGN THINKING STRUCTURE 
24 
FIGURE 4. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE THREE METHODOLOGIES USED 
25 
FIGURE 5. SDGS SUMMARY MAP 
26 
FIGURE 6. WEKOK SDGS 
28 
FIGURE 7. METHODOLOGY FOLLOWED IN THE THESIS 
31 
FIGURE 8. SPRINT I IMMERSION 
32 
FIGURE 9. PROFESSIONAL INTERVIEWS 
34 
FIGURE 10. FOLLOWED MARKET SEGMENTATION PROCESS 
36 
FIGURE 11. MAPPING POTENTIAL INDUSTRIES 
37 
FIGURE 12. ARRAY OF MARKET SEGMENTATION 
38 
FIGURE 13. CUSTOMER SURVEY STRUCTURE 
39 
FIGURE 14. BLOCK 1 OF THE SURVEY - BASIS PEOPLE INFORMATION 
42 
FIGURE 15. BLOCK 2 - PEOPLE WHO DO NOT KNOW HOW TO COOK 
42 
FIGURE 16. BLOCK 2 - PEOPLE WHO KNOW HOW TO COOK 
43 
FIGURE 17. BLOCK 3 - DIETARY HABITS 
44 
FIGURE 18. BLOCK 3 - DIETARY HABITS 
45 
FIGURE 19. BLOCK 4 - HOUSEKEEPING SERVICES 
46 
FIGURE 20. COOKS SURVEY STRUCTURE 
50 
FIGURE 21. BLOCK 1 OF THE SURVEY - BASIS COOKS INFORMATION 
51 
FIGURE 22. BLOCK 2 OF THE SURVEY - PEOPLE WHO WORK AS COOK 
52 
FIGURE 23. BLOCK 2 OF THE SURVEY - PEOPLE WHO DO NOT WORK AS COOK 
53 
FIGURE 24. BLOCK 3 OF HE SURVEY - BLOCK TO KNOW ABOUT IN-HOUSE COOKING SERVICES 
54 
FIGURE 25. BLOCK 4 OF THE SURVEY - PEOPLE WHO HAVE COOKED AT CLIENTS' HOMES 
54 
FIGURE 26. BLOCK 5 OF THE SURVEY - OPEN BLOCK 
55 
FIGURE 27. FIGURES ABOUT WOMEN WHO SATISFY THE IDEAL REQUIREMENTS OF END-USER 
59 
FIGURE 28. FIGURES ABOUT MEN WHO SATISFY THE IDEAL REQUIREMENTS OF END-USER 
60 
FIGURE 29. WEKOK'S TAM 
63 
FIGURE 30. WEKOK'S SAM 
65 
FIGURE 31. WEKOK'S SOM 
65 
FIGURE 32. THE PERSONA - CUSTOMER SIDE MARKET 
67 
FIGURE 33. THE PERSONA - COOKS SIDE MARKET 
68 
FIGURE 34. WEKOK'S FULL LIFE CYCLE USE CASE – STILL NOT CUSTOMER 
69 
FIGURE 35. WEKOK'S FULL LIFE CYCLE USE CASE – CUSTOMER 
70 
FIGURE 36. SPRINT II IDEA DNA BREAKDOWN 
72 
FIGURE 37. VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS CHART 
73 
FIGURE 38. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - CUSTOMER JOBS 
74 
FIGURE 39. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - GAINS 
75 
FIGURE 40. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - PAINS 
76 
FIGURE 41. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - CUSTOMER SEGMENT SIDE 
77 
FIGURE 42. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - CUSTOMER COOKS SEGMENT SIDE 
78 
FIGURE 43. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - PRODUCTS & SERVICES 
79 
FIGURE 44. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - PAIN RELIEVERS 
80 
FIGURE 45. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - GAIN CREATORS 
81 
FIGURE 46. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - VALUE PROPOSITION CUSTOMER SIDE 
82 
FIGURE 47. WEKOK'S VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS - VALUE PROPOSITION COOKS SIDE 
82 
FIGURE 48. QUANTIFIED CUSTOMER VALUE PROPOSITION 
84 
FIGURE 49. QUANTIFIED COOKS VALUE PROPOSITION 
85 
FIGURE 50. FOLLOWED COMPETITIVE ANALYSIS PROCESS 
87 
FIGURE 51. WEKOK'S COMPARATIVE TABLE I 
89 
FIGURE 52. WEKOK'S COMPARATIVE TABLE II 
90 
FIGURE 53. WEKOK'S COMPETITIVE POSITION CHART 
93 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
13
FIGURE 54. ROADMAP OF WEKOK'S SUCCESS & THE PROCESS TO ACQUIRE A PAYING CUSTOMER 
97 
FIGURE 55. BUSINESS DNA PROCESS 
98 
FIGURE 56. SPRINT III. CREATING A STARTUP 
101 
FIGURE 57. LOLA'S DAY ON THE BOARD 
102 
FIGURE 58. WEKOK'S PAPER PROTOTYPING 
105 
FIGURE 59. WEKOK'S PAPER PROTOTYPE 
107 
FIGURE 60. WEKOK'S APP IN FIGMA. OVERALL VIEW 
109 
FIGURE 61. LEAN CANVAS MODEL 
115 
FIGURE 62. WEKOK'S LEAN CANVAS MODEL 
116 
FIGURE 63. WEKOK'S ROADMAP 
123 
FIGURE 64. WEKOK DAY 
125 
FIGURE 65. REWARD PACKS FOR WEKOK'S COOKS I. 
125 
FIGURE 66. REWARD PACKS FOR WEKOK'S COOKS II. 
125 
FIGURE 67. REWARD PACKS FOR WEKOK'S CLIENTS I. 
126 
FIGURE 68. REWARD PACKS FOR WEKOK'S CLIENTS II. 
126 
FIGURE 69. REWARD PACKS FOR WEKOK'S CLIENTS III. 
127 
 
 
Index of graphs 
GRAPH 1. INCOME STATEMENT .......................................................................................................................... 120 
 
 
Index of tables 
TABLE 1. INCOME STATEMENT TABLE ................................................................................................................ 119 
 
 
Index of Illustrations 
ILLUSTRATION 1.HOMEPAGE. WEKOK'S APP ...................................................................................................... 110 
ILLUSTRATION 2. LOGIN & SIGN-UP SCREEN. WEKOK'S APP .............................................................................. 110 
ILLUSTRATION 3. MAIN MENU. WEKOK'S APP ................................................................................................... 110 
ILLUSTRATION 4. CHEFS SERVICE II. WEKOK'S APP ............................................................................................. 110 
ILLUSTRATION 5. CHEFS SERVICE I. WEKOK'S APP .............................................................................................. 110 
ILLUSTRATION 6.FOOD TYPE SERVICE. WEKOK'S APP ........................................................................................ 111 
ILLUSTRATION 7. EXPRESS SERVICE I. WEKOK'S APP .......................................................................................... 111 
ILLUSTRATION 8. EXPRESS SERVICE II. WEKOK'S APP ......................................................................................... 111 
ILLUSTRATION 9. EVENT SERVICE I. WEKOK'S APP ............................................................................................. 111 
ILLUSTRATION 10. EVENT SERVICE II. WEKOK'S APP .......................................................................................... 111 
ILLUSTRATION 11. POP-UP EVENT & RESTAURANT SERVICE. WEKOK'S APP ..................................................... 111 
ILLUSTRATION 12. RESTAURANT SERVICE. WEKOK'S APP .................................................................................. 112 
ILLUSTRATION 13. HISTORICAL SERVICE. WEKOK'S APP ..................................................................................... 112 
ILLUSTRATION 14. COOKS PROFILE. WEKOK'S APP............................................................................................. 112 
ILLUSTRATION 15. MAIN SCREEN I. WEKOK'S CHEFS APP .................................................................................. 112 
ILLUSTRATION 16. MAIN SCREEN II. WEKOK'S CHEFS APP ................................................................................. 112 
ILLUSTRATION 17. SUPPORT SCREEN. WEKOK'S CHEFS APP .............................................................................. 112 
ILLUSTRATION 18. 2ND ITERATION CHEFS SERVICE II. WEKOK'S APP ................................................................ 114 
ILLUSTRATION 19. 2ND ITERATION CHEFS SERVICE I. WEKOK'S APP ................................................................. 114 
ILLUSTRATION 20. 2ND ITERATION MAIN MENU. WEKOK'S APP ....................................................................... 114 
ILLUSTRATION 21. 2ND ITERATION COOKS APP ................................................................................................. 114 
ILLUSTRATION 22. 2ND ITERATION COOKS APP ................................................................................................. 114 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
14
INTRODUCTION 
This thesis presents a methodology for the development of a startup or 
entrepreneurial idea. Specifically, it is based on the desire to develop a startup called 
WEKOK. Originally, at the beginning of writing my thesis, it was just a vague business 
idea that I considered innovative and a potential entrepreneurial venture. The result 
was not only a new methodology developed by me from the fusion of other existing 
methodologies, but it also helped me to develop the idea of WEKOK and, consequently, 
the startup. 
Lack of time in the Spanish population's life is becoming increasingly frequent. The 
long workdays due to the culture of the country increasingly avoid the chance to cook 
homemade food and if you dedicate the short free time, you are missing other 
important activities for the mental health of people such as interacting with friends, 
doing sports or simply, spending time with the family. Compared to other cultures, for 
example, the Danish culture, flexibility at work is highly valued. In Denmark, working 
hours are very well defined; working late or overtime makes a bad impression on 
bosses and colleagues because of the deeply rooted work-life balance.  
[1] reported that among Spanish citizens, 43% recognise that they prefer ready meals 
when they do not have time to cook, while 31% order food at home and 24% prefer to 
eat in a restaurant or cafeteria. As a result, the consumption of ready meals has grown 
by more than 30% in the last decade, reaching around 14 kilos per person. Mostly, this 
has been validated in single-person households, young childless couples, young 
independents, families with both parents working and retired people living in large 
urban areas. 
Changing people's behaviour or attitudes is a difficult task for anyone.  However, many 
theories and empirical studies have been developed to help understand how, when, 
and why people decide to change their patterns of behaviour and what has been 
demonstrated is that health is one of the main reasons for change. Encouraging and 
awareness of healthy living habits causes in most cases changes in people’s 
behaviour.  
In light of the above, data from the report 'Healthy Food & Brands' conducted by 
Google in collaboration with Kantar Worldpanel and Lantern, "Spain is getting 
healthier". According to the report, there is a trend in Spanish users' searches on 
healthy eating. [2] 
Sustainability and environmental awareness are becoming a priority worldwide. 
Increasingly, more countries are joining the struggle to be critical of the reality and to 
act towards meeting the objectives of the 2030 Agenda. The 2030 Agenda is a plan 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
15
that proposes a shared plan for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, 
adopted by all United Nations member states in 2015. Thus, this thesis will address 
the awareness of the Sustainable Development Goals in order to contribute to their 
achievement when starting a new business, and as a consequence, my contribution 
to these goals with WEKOK. 
The scope of this thesis, as I mentioned at the beginning of this introductory section, 
is not only a contribution to academia with the creation of a methodology for the 
development of innovative entrepreneurial ideas or startups, but also to convert the 
vague business idea that is WEKOK into a viable business model. 
 
WEKOK is an innovative business idea that aims to fight against the aforementioned 
pains of Spanish society by proposing a mobile application for the reservation of 
cooks. These cooks will come to the customer's home and for some time will carry 
out a batch-cooking service giving the customer the privilege of having a week's worth 
of food semiprepared.  
 
This methodology will be created from a combination of the Design Thinking principle, 
the Lean Startup Method, and the book "Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup", created as an integrated tool to help experienced entrepreneurs 
and beginners to create successful businesses. 
 
Scope of the thesis  
The development of this thesis has two main goals. On the one hand, the elaboration 
of a structured entrepreneurship methodology for the development of successful 
startups, and on the other hand, the application of this methodology to create my own 
business idea, which is currently just a vague idea, and test both the effectiveness of 
the methodology and the viability of my startup. 
 
Besides these two main goals, the proposal of this thesis has more specific 
objectives:  
 
• Research, analysis, and evaluation of current entrepreneurship methodologies, 
Design Thinking, Disciplined Entrepreneurship and Lean Startup.  
 
• Studying the impact of the needs found in society that I want to solve with the 
business idea I have thought of.  
 
• To develop a minimum viable product as a prototype with Figma tool and its 
validation with users.  
 
• Find a viable business model for the start-up.  
 
• Become aware of the impact of the SDGs and the importance of building 
startups considering the 2030 Agenda. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
16
 
Structure of the thesis  
This thesis is organised around a structure based on SPRINTS. The analysis of the 
methodologies studied has led me to conclude that there is a lack of a defined 
structure in them to help new entrepreneurs to develop their business ideas and to 
create my own based on three different sprints, each of them focused on a specific 
task.  
 
Specifically, I have defined three different sprints in which each of them is influenced 
by one or two of the methodologies studied and has a different objective. Applying 
this organisational philosophy has allowed me to manage the thesis and create a 
methodology in a flexible and dynamic way.  
 
• First Sprint, called Immersion. The objective in this sprint is to answer the 
questions Who? Where? When? 
 
• Second Sprint, called Idea DNA breakdown. The objective is to answer the 
question What?  
 
• Third and last Sprint, called Creating the startup. We will answer the question 
How?  
 
Besides this structure that forms the body of the thesis, I will initially make an 
introduction to the thesis, I will expose the theoretical framework study necessary for 
its creation, I will present in detail the methodology created, and finally I will talk about 
the conclusions and insights obtained in its development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
17
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Health habits and the overall situation in Spanish society  
A. Concept and issues of healthy eating 
 
The World Health Organisation (WHO) defines health as "a state of complete physical, 
mental and social well-being". Hence, rather than a healthy life, we should speak of a 
healthy lifestyle, involving several aspects such as diet, physical exercise, work, 
relationship with the environment, social activity, and health prevention.  
 
Major diseases derived from an inappropriate diet are one of the main patterns of 
death in Spain according to the Ministry of Health. According to a study in 2018, the 
leading causes of death as a percentage of total deaths and gross mortality rate per 
100,000 inhabitants are 25.4% cancer and 19.6% heart and cardiovascular diseases. 
Diseases directly caused by poor diet. [3] 
 
Adequate food should therefore be a basic human right, but it has been and is often 
ignored in the context of labour rights. It is the fundamental basis for a productive 
workforce, and therefore, it is surprising how little attention has been paid so far to 
improving productivity and business competitiveness.  
 
Currently, few companies are concerned about the proper nutrition of their employees, 
and many consider diet as a minor issue, missing the opportunity to improve the 
wellbeing and quality of work of their employees. In Spain, office canteens often offer 
a limited and routine food selection. The food and drink vending machines available 
in workplaces generally offer very unhealthy alternatives. And restaurants can be an 
expensive alternative for many workers concerning their salary. As a result, workers 
often do not have the facilities to eat healthily. [4] 
 
In addition, there is a significant increase in fast food and home-delivery consumption 
in Spain, with the home-delivery business accounting for a 23% increase in spending 
in 2019, representing 600 million euros per year. Likewise, the consumption of 
processed foods. And all of this is due to different issues such as long working hours 
and social duties in the professional sphere. [5] 
 
Therefore, the adoption of effective preventive measures to avoid diseases related to 
poor diet would provide an economic benefit and improve the health and quality of life 
of workers. 
 
To conclude, against a global context marked by an increase in obesity and overweight 
and pathology resulting from a poor diet, awareness-raising solution is urgently 
needed to ensure that the population enjoys healthy lifestyle habits that will keep them 
in a state of prosperous health. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
18
B. Batchcooking  
 
To contextualise the reader of this thesis, I will explain what batch-cooking is and the 
advantages it offers, as batch-cooking is part of the solution I propose with the 
development of WEKOK. Nowadays, alternative solutions to the problem exist, such 
as home delivery of semi-prepared food, restaurants, supermarkets, or delivery food. 
Many of them are not entirely healthy or people cannot afford them directly. People 
will continue to grocery shop for their homes, so batch-cooking becomes a healthy, 
efficient, and adapted solution to people's lives as it does not subject them to a 
significant change.  
 
[6], World Health Organization report comments that diets evolve, influenced by many 
interacting socio-economic factors that determine personal dietary patterns. These 
include income, food prices, individual preferences, and beliefs, cultural traditions, and 
geographical and environmental factors. Promoting a healthy food environment, and 
particularly food systems that promote a diversified, balanced, and healthy diet, 
consequently, requires the involvement of different sectors and stakeholders, 
including government, public, and private sectors.  
 
Today's busy lifestyle with endless working hours, last-minute schedule changes, 
business trips, and social obligations have pushed us to abandon previous eating 
habits and shift to fast food, ready meals, and excessive consumption of processed 
foods. 
 
Any ideas that promote a healthy lifestyle are welcome. As mentioned in the previous 
section, many people do not have time during the week and usually spend their 
weekend shopping and cooking what they are going to eat during the week.  
 
The batch-cooking phenomenon started in the 1990s in California, when many 
university students, keeping up with the trend of healthy eating, dedicated one day of 
the weekend to cooking and freezing a large part of the dishes they were going to eat 
for the next seven days [7]. This way, they did not take time away from their studies 
and could defrost something homemade, reliable, self-made, and, consequently, eat 
properly with a single hit of the oven or microwave. Moreover, they not only improved 
their eating habits, but also saved money, avoided food waste, and reduced the "trash 
food" that inevitably leads to the overweight of any sedentary student.  
 
Batch-cooking is a method that proposes cooking for a few hours for the whole week, 
optimising resources to the maximum. There are many benefits to batch cooking, 
including the fact that it brings us closer to home cooking and takes us away from 
ultraprocessed food, fast food, and prepared food from outside the home, always of 
poorer quality than what we can make with our own hands. 
 
Reducing the time we spend in the kitchen and organising our food is another benefit, 
which can be very helpful in improving our diet in terms of both quality and quantity. 
 
Economics is also an advantage of batch-cooking. Not only because it takes us away 
from high-value convenience food or because you know exactly what to buy when you 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
19
plan your menu, but also because you can cook for each day of the week in just a few 
hours, thus also saving on the energy inputs used to prepare the food. 
 
Certainly, batch-cooking translates into a benefit for the environment, as we waste 
less and save energy. Buying exactly what you are going to cook avoids overbuying 
food and avoiding throwing food away. 
 
In a global context, the challenge facing the population in terms of healthy eating risk 
is significant. Therefore, there is a need to make an impact on practices that promote 
awareness and action on a global scale to ensure food security and nutritious diets 
for all. Therefore, what can you do to contribute to the nutritional status of your family 
or yourself and improve the quality of your life? 
 
Batchcooking is a practice that can contribute to the nutritional improvement of 
people. However, according to the results of a survey I created to determine the 
existence of the problem I propose to solve with the creation of WEKOK, only 32.2% 
of the surveyed people (almost 500 people) knew what batch-cooking was. Moreover, 
among all of them, once they knew what batch-cooking was, 68.5% of them valued 
practising it. Thus, we can see one of the great challenges batch-cooking is currently 
facing: its lack of knowledge in society. 
 
C. Conclusion 
 
Indeed, there is a problem with eating habits and work activities among the Spanish 
population. Poor eating habits significantly affect people's performance at work and 
as a consequence have a bad impact upon the economic situation of any company, 
and therefore, of a country. Moreover, health is the most important factor for any 
person, so a significant reduction of diseases that are directly connected to a bad 
eating habit will increase the quality of life and health of the population of the whole 
country and, of course, at a global level, as this is not only happening in Spain.  
 
WEKOK will tackle the problem by offering a solution focused on improving people's 
eating habits to balance a healthy lifestyle with correct work performance.  
 
The Lean Startup  
The Lean Startup methodology was developed by Eric Ries in 2008 in his book "The 
Lean Startup Method: How to create successful companies using continuous 
innovation". Eris Ries' story begins when he became the co-founder of IMVU and was 
hungry for new ideas on how to create a company. It was then when he described that 
by applying the idea of Lean Manufacturing, a process that Taiichi Ohno and Shigeo 
Shingo developed and that had worked for them in the Toyota production system, to 
his own business decisions, with some tweaks and adjustments, he had the basis for 
a new theoretical framework that would allow him to analyse the problems. 
 
Along this line of thinking, the Lean Startup method evolved: the application of lean 
thinking to the innovation process.  
 
The Lean Startup method is based on five principles:  
==PAGE:20==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
20
• Entrepreneurs are everywhere.  
• Entrepreneurship is management.   
• Validated learning.  
• Create-Measure-Learn. 
• Accounting for innovation. 
 
Specifically, The Lean Startup book is divided into three phases: See, Lead and 
Accelerate. Leading goes into detail about the Lean Startup method. In this phase, he 
presents the Create-Measure-Learn feedback loop. Create-Measure-Learn is about 
carrying out the fundamental activity of any startup, which is transforming ideas into 
products, measuring how consumers respond, and learning when to pivot or 
persevere. The goal is to accelerate this feedback loop or, conversely, to minimise the 
total time along the feedback loop. Figure 1 shows the feedback loop.  
 
The Lean Startup defines a startup as a catalyst that transforms ideas into products. 
As consumers interact with these products, they generate feedback and data. This 
feedback can be both qualitative and quantitative. 
 
In this thesis, I will follow this feedback loop deeply into Sprint III where I will create a 
minimum viable product through a prototype to evaluate if I am making progress on 
the idea and decide whether I have to pivot or not. Specifically, a minimum viable 
product is nothing more than a version of the product that allows us to go full circle 
with minimum effort and minimum development time. There is only one thing to do 
with it: measure its impact. 
Figure 1. Feedback Loop Lean Startup 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
21
The decision to use the Lean Startup methodology in Sprint III is because taking into 
account the three methodologies that I will consider to develop my own, this is 
undoubtedly the one that best explains the process of creating a prototype or 
minimum viable product and above all, how to build a custom venture saving time and 
money. Moreover, this methodology should not only be used in this phase of creating 
new businesses, but it is a methodology that should be integrated into the day to day 
of a company to validate new ideas added to the business at a very low cost. 
 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup is a book designed as 
a useful tool for entrepreneurs to help them build successful startups. It is also a tool 
that can be used by experienced entrepreneurs to guide them through the process of 
bringing their products or services to the market more effectively.  
 
Its author, Bill Aulet, had already used many expert sources such as mentors or books 
and his own experience to launch his entrepreneurial venture, but he had never found 
a simple source that had all the main points of entrepreneurship in one integrated tool. 
That is why he created this book.  
 
Bill Aulet's goal behind this book is to provide the reader with a guide to the confusing 
and messy journey that any entrepreneur faces when doing something they have never 
done before starting a venture.  
 
This book was created from Bill Aulet's workshops around the world as well as from 
his courses at MIT. It is a 24-step guide that will help you build a successful venture, 
but it really is an iterative process because to have an optimal result you will probably 
have to refine step 2 by the time you have done step 14. 
 
The 24 steps described in the book are subdivided into six differentiated blocks which, 
after carrying them out, you should be able to answer the questions that are proposed: 
 
1. Who is your customer? 
2. What can you do for your customers?  
3. How does your customer acquire your product?  
4. How do you make money off your product? 
5. How do you design & build your product?  
6. How do you scale your business?  
==PAGE:22==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
22
 
I decided to apply this tool, Disciplined Entrepreneurship, to this thesis methodology 
as a complement to the Lean Startup methodology, as both are completely 
complementary, since The Lean Startup Method offers a strong method of creation 
and validation, whereas Disciplined Entrepreneurship proposes a structured 
methodology based more on numbers, on how to calculate the financials of the 
business to see its viability. 
 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship is the backbone of the proposed methodology. It is 
found in each of the Sprints, being mainly significant in Sprints I and II.  
 
The decision to use it in Sprints I and II is basically because before launching a product 
and validating it, it is essential to analyse if the problem exists and if there is a market 
for that problem. Not only to know if there will be an economic benefit but also to 
focus on where the main paying customer is. In addition to this, Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship lays a solid foundation for defining and quantifying the value 
proposition of the new venture. With this methodology, I found a very defined process 
for calculating quantitative metrics to show value to the customer.  
 
The methodology emphasises the importance of knowing the competitive position of 
the future startup, knowing how the customer is going to acquire the product, i.e., who 
makes the final purchase decision, as well as who influences that decision and how 
to enter the market by creating a sales strategy over time.  
 
Figure 2. Disciplined Entrepreneurship structure 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
23
Finally, Disciplined Entrepreneurship methodology will be the basis for Sprint III as I 
will address its insights into the definition of the MVP, as well as the definition of the 
business model, the pricing framework to determine the value that the customer gets 
from the product created and capture a fraction of that value for the business, I will 
define the COCA, the Cost of Acquiring a Customer and finally, the calculation of the 
lifetime value, LTV, of an acquired customer to know the benefit that a new customer 
provides on average. 
 
Analysing and knowing that I was going to use both methods, I noticed that something 
was still missing to complete my methodology.  
 
Both methodologies address the importance of doing the right market research and 
segmentation, the business model, and the validation of a minimum viable product. 
However, to get off the ground and identify the feelings of the target audience, I was 
facing, I was missing something. This is when I studied the principle of Design 
Thinking. Indeed, the first thing the principle proposed was empathising with people. 
At this moment, I decided that the last tool that would compose my methodology 
would be Design Thinking. 
 
IDEO Design Thinking process  
 
The Design Thinking methodology emerged in San Francisco in the 1970s and was 
first developed theoretically at Stanford University in California. The design 
consultancy Ideo was the first company to apply the methodology for profit. 
According to Tim Brown, the current CEO of Ideo Design Thinking "is a discipline that 
uses the sensibility and methods of designers to match people's needs with what is 
technologically feasible and what a viable business strategy can turn into value for the 
client, as well as a great opportunity for the market". 
 
Throughout the years, the procedure it proposes has been updated and adapted to 
different problems and disciplines. Many important companies use it, such as Apple, 
Google, or Zara, as it is a great generator of innovation and can be applied to any type 
of field. Just as a mini-summary, Design Thinking is a method for generating 
innovative ideas that focus its effectiveness on understanding and providing solutions 
to the real needs of users. It has five basic steps: empathise, define, ideate, prototype, 
and evaluate. [8] 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
24
 
Empathise. Empathy is the first step of the methodology and the basis of the design 
process. It is centred on people and users. The aim is to deeply understand the needs 
of the users who are involved in the problem and the solution we want to propose to 
them. We have to put ourselves in people's shoes to be able to design a solution 
adapted to them.   
 
Observing the behaviour of users in their life context, generating a conversation with 
them, asking why listening to them to generate engagement. 
 
Define. During this phase, the information gathered in the previous step must be sifted 
and we must keep what adds value. Identify the problem whose solution will be the 
key to obtaining an innovative result.  
 
The problem must be framed with a direct approach, capturing the minds and hearts 
of the people studied and helping to solve the impossible problem of developing 
concepts that work for everything and everyone.  
 
Ideate. Here begins the process of designing and generating multiple ideas. There 
should be no bias and all ideas should be noted, never more valid than any other. It is 
a process of unconscious and conscious thinking, rational thought, and imagination. 
This stage comprises the concepts and resources for prototyping and creating 
innovative solutions.   
 
Prototyping. This step is the process of making ideas reality. Tangibly constructing 
ideas. Here we can visualise possible solutions by highlighting elements that need to 
be improved or refined before reaching the final result. Prototyping should be quick 
and cheap but deliverable enough to receive feedback from users.  
 
You should not get too involved in the prototype in order not to get emotionally 
involved and you should be very aware of the feedback from the interaction of the 
Figure 3. IDEO Design Thinking structure 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
25
object with the user. How do I expect to evaluate the user? What will their behaviour 
be like?  
 
Evaluate. This is the feedback process of the prototype. A crucial phase that will help 
us to identify significant improvements, bugs to be solved, or shortcomings. During 
this phase, we will evolve our idea until it becomes the solution we were looking for. 
Besides, this evaluation phase gives us another opportunity to gain empathy. 
 
Design thinking is the best methodology to design innovative ideas and provide 
solutions to users' needs. It is another of the methodologies selected for the 
development of my methodology and consequently, WEKOK. Mostly, Design Thinking 
will be present in Sprint I, specifically in the step of empathising with the users. 
However, as the sprints progress, design thinking will also be presented to design 
concrete aspects during the Sprints to create a more powerful and stronger solution 
for the users.  
 
Comparative table of the three methodologies 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Comparative table of the three methodologies used 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
26
SDGs 
All Member States of the United Nations in 2015 adopted the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. It delivers a shared plan for peace and prosperity for people 
and the planet. At its core are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals as an emergency 
call to action by all developed and developing countries jointly and globally. [9] 
 
The Agenda implies a common and universal commitment, however, as each country 
faces specific challenges in its quest for sustainable development, states have full 
sovereignty over their wealth, resources, and economic activity, and each will set its 
own national goals in line with the Agenda. Spain, in particular, has worked actively in 
the elaboration of this global and renewing agenda to transform the world in the next 
15 years. [10] 
 
 The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development sets out 17 Sustainable Development 
Goals with 169 integrated and indivisible targets covering the economic, social, and 
environmental spheres:  
Creating startups is crucial regarding meeting the 2030 Agenda, therefore every 
entrepreneur should be aware of it and know that no matter what type of startup it is, 
their project will always have a type of impact on its ecosystem.  
 
There is no need to set a large-scale goal such as "end-world hunger", but there is a 
need to set different aspects of the startup in a way that has an impact on sustainable 
goals.  
Figure 5. SDGs summary map 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
27
There are many ways to contribute to the 2030 Agenda, but a successful approach in 
the world of entrepreneurship through startups could be: 
 
1. Knowledge of the SDGs. Understand what the new framework of the United 
Nations 2030 Agenda consists of. Analyse the 17 goals and 169 targets and 
understand the role of business within the framework. In addition, identify 
which SDGs are linked to the business opportunity and drive them in a cross-
cutting manner.  
2. Mapping impacts on the SDGs in startup. Identify through the value proposition 
the positive and negative current and potential impacts on the SDGs. Once the 
objectives with which to align its main business activities have been identified, 
we begin to define priorities for action.  
3. Know the ecosystem that the startup faces or in which the business will 
operate. Resources, roles, relationships, legislation, or regulations in force.  
4. Know the different levels of impact. The key to any venture is to delve into the 
structures and mental patterns that underlie a problem. Changes in mentality 
are very difficult to achieve, and the objective of any entrepreneur does not 
necessarily have to be to change the whole system but to try to anticipate 
behavioural patterns.  
5. Establish your vision and mission. The mission of any business should be 
directly connected to the vision. To differentiate between them, the vision 
should be the guide for all decisions and objectives of the start-up and the 
mission should explain clearly and concisely who you are in the present, what 
problems you are tackling or what needs you are solving, what type of 
organisation you are and what work you do.  
6. Assess impact. Clearly, define what the problem is, who you are solving it for, 
establish objectives, analyse the agents involved in your business, and 
measure the inputs and outputs, i.e., the actions and the tangible products of 
those actions. 
 
Regarding WEKOK's support for the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda, I have studied each 
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, I have analysed the value propositions that 
I deliver with the idea and I have identified those that are aligned with WEKOK's core 
business to start defining priorities for action since the beginning of the creation of 
the startup.  
 
Firstly, I have chosen SDG number 2: Good Health and Well-Being. It aims to ensure 
healthy lives and promote well-being for all people of all ages. What WEKOK proposes 
is essentially to provide users with a tool to improve their quality of life and health 
through proper nutrition.  
 
Secondly, I have chosen SDG 12: Responsible consumption & production. This SDG 
guarantees sustainable production and consumption patterns. WEKOK leaves its 
ecological footprint by changing the methods of production and consumption of 
goods and resources. Its core business is to reduce expenditure on supplies in users' 
households as well as to reduce mass food purchases and thus avoid food waste. 
Reducing global per capita food waste at the retail and consumer level favours the 
creation of more efficient production and supply chains.  
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
28
Finally, SDG 9: Industry, innovation and infrastructure. Build resilient infrastructure, 
promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation, and foster innovation. WEKOK 
offers innovation in the area of digitalisation to improve the economic situation of 
many chefs as well as to improve the quality of life and health of users through its 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. WEKOK SDGs 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
29
METHODOLOGY  
 
The main goal of this work is not only to stimulate and support the Spanish population 
to maintain a healthy lifestyle despite not having time to cook homemade food 
through a tool that facilitates the process of changing their eating habits, but as the 
main aim, this thesis has the development of a new methodology for the creation of 
new ventures ideas through the combination of three existing methodologies. They 
have been analysed and studied to get a 360º vision from all three to see their 
weaknesses and strengths and thus, to be able to put together all the strengths of 
each one and create this one. 
 
Since the beginning of our day, we use digital tools such as smart alarm clocks that 
not only help us to wake up but also to control the quality of our sleep, even mobile 
applications to book a table in a restaurant or order food at home. All these tools have 
a clear goal: to improve people's quality of life. Moreover, if we also consider that 
Spaniards are becoming increasingly aware of healthy lifestyle habits according to 
numerous reports and that, due to the above, the use of mobile applications is 
increasingly common among people of all ages, changing current patterns in terms of 
healthy habits through a mobile platform is a challenging yet simple task. This is 
precisely what I want to develop with the WEKOK business idea, a digital tool in the 
form of a mobile app to tackle the issue of lack of time to cook healthy home-cooked 
meals during the workweek. 
 
The methodology proposed and defined in this thesis is structured around three main 
sprints in the form of loop. Each of them focuses on a specific phase of the creation 
of a startup. I have classified them as follows:  
 
• Sprint I: Immersion. According to Eric Ries, "a startup is a human institution 
designed to create a new product or service under conditions of extreme 
uncertainty".  This uncertainty is the questions shown in Figure 1: Who? Where? 
When? For this reason, this Sprint is called immersion, because its objective is 
to dive into a sea of learning about the main customers, which in this case we 
will exemplify and illustrate the process with the main customers that WEKOK 
will have. In this Sprint we will use the Design Thinking and Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship methodologies because both are focused and based on the 
customer. And that is what we are looking for, to focus on the customer, how 
he/she feels about the problem, and to know if the thought solution fits the 
customer and the problem. 
 
The combination of these methodologies, Design Thinking, and Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship, is because they both lack one of the other and that is why I 
have decided to combine them. While both are customer-centric 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
30
methodologies, Disciplined Entrepreneurship proposes a very definite structure 
that every new venture must pay attention to. This structure consists of 
identifying and affirming, if the problem exists, if there is a paying customer 
who wants our solution to that problem. This defined structure is not found in 
Design Thinking, which simply proposes techniques to carry out its different 
phases. 
 
Thus, the methods that will be used in this section are situational research, 
surveys, interviews, a day in life, creation of the Persona through the study of 
the end-user and the market size of the Persona created. All this follows the 
structure of Disciplined Entrepreneurship but with a strong influence on Design 
Thinking. To exemplify and develop the methodology, we will develop this 
Sprint based on the WEKOK idea. The people analysed are Spanish residents 
at random, regardless of whether they have time to cook or not. The range is 
therefore very wide at the beginning to cover different groups of people in terms 
of gender, age, occupation, etc. to define the target market after analysis and 
synthesis. The main idea is to get a good understanding of the work situation 
they are in, what they think and feel about the lack of time to cook home-cooked 
food and what they think and feel when someone unknown to them works in 
their own home. 
 
• Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown. This Sprint's purpose is to answer the question 
"What?” What value is your idea going to offer by solving the existing problem 
of our target customers defined in Sprint I. Again, the skeleton of this Sprint is 
the Disciplined Entrepreneurship methodology. Among others, we will extract 
essential ideas such as the value proposition, the core of the business, the 
competitive position, the DMU which is the Customer's Decision-Making Unit, 
and the process of acquiring a customer. This whole process will be 
exemplified with the WEKOK business idea for a better overview of the process. 
 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship is the predominant methodology used in this 
Sprint because the other two lack such a detailed structure for something as 
important as the value delivered through a business. It is true that the Lean 
Canvas method has a direct relationship with the value proposition and will 
therefore influence the development of this part of the Sprint. Specifically, I will 
look at the book Value Proposition Design, which describes the Value 
Proposition Canvas. However, the scarcity of a detailed process for the 
development of the DNA of a new company has made me determine that the 
best methodology is Disciplined Entrepreneurship as it relates to the creation 
of a startup.     
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
31
• Sprint III: creating the startup. Finally, we will answer the question "How?" How 
the value proposition will be delivered to the customer and how we will manage 
to create a profitable strategic business to solve the problem.  
 
In this last phase of the process, there will be an influence of two 
methodologies: Lean Startup and Disciplined Entrepreneurship. This decision 
has been taken because Disciplined Entrepreneurship still offers a very solid 
and defined basis for the process of designing and building the product as well 
as defining the business model, but in this case, Lean Startup is undoubtedly 
the methodology that best explains the process of creating a minimum viable 
product and the perfect definition of a business model. Lean Startup stands 
out for being a methodology that focuses on the creation of startups through a 
learning-based process that aims to save the entrepreneur time and money.  
 
The creation of a prototype and its validation with potential customers will be 
the main task that I will develop in this Sprint through the WEKOK idea. This 
process, I have called it in my methodology MBP, Minimun Business Prototype. 
However, other important tasks will also be developed in the Sprint such as the 
business model, the pricing framework, P&L, COCA which is the cost of 
acquiring a customer, and the LFV of an acquired customer.  
 
Finally, in this Sprint I will address three fundamental points that are missing in 
all the methodologies used as a basis for the one created in this thesis. These 
points are the income statement, the roadmap of the new venture, and finally 
the launch strategy.   
Figure 7. Methodology followed in the thesis 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPRINT I: IMMERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. SPRINT I Immersion 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
33
1. Empathize  
 
"To create meaningful innovations, you need to know your users and care about their 
lives. [11]" That is the process of empathizing. The problem the present project wants 
to solve is how to help Spanish citizens to eat healthy and homemade food, since it is 
difficult for them, due to their large workdays, to reconcile social life and free time with 
cooking. And why is this happening? And why should be WEKOK created?  
 
According to data collected by the Spanish National Institute of Statistics and the 
Labor Force Survey, the average weekly working hours in 2019 for the Spanish is 37.7 
hours, above European countries such as the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, and 
Sweden among others. To be even more specific, the average number of hours worked 
by men stands at 40.3 hours per week and that of women at 34.3. In addition to these 
figures, the average among the self-employed is between 42 hours and 45.5 working 
hours per week, a rate that exceeds the legal maximum of 40 hours. Thus, Spain is 
one of the countries with the fewest hours of rest between working days, which is 
detrimental in terms of health as well as a decrease in work performance. Moreover, 
in absolute terms, since 2013 an increase in extra working hours is being registered. 
 
Being Spanish myself, Spain is a country of traditional customs. The Spanish are 
people who like to be social, meet after work with friends and have a drink before 
going home, they are family people, they like gastronomy very much and above all, 
they like to eat "real" food, homemade food, they usually say: "like my grandmother's 
food". Typically, Spanish people wake up, go to bed, eat, and work at very different 
hours than the rest of European countries, later than they usually do. They are active 
sporty people, and they also like to party a lot. 
 
To empathize even more with the population, I have resorted to the technique of 
interviewing experts based on the techniques proposed by Design Thinking in the 
empathizing phase. The goal is to empathize with them to identify the challenge I am 
facing. They can provide me with valuable information about technical aspects, or 
about their own experiences with potential users. In addition, these specialists will 
help me to learn more about how poor nutrition can wreak havoc on the health of 
patients seeking proper nutrition or good eating habits, who are my potential clients. 
 
The interviews were conducted by telephone with Spanish doctors specializing in 
nutrition. As an example, below you can see the structure of the interviews conducted:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the most significant interviews in this process was with Dr. Alvaro Garcia. I 
asked him the above questions (Figure 9) and his answers were as follows:  
 
1. What do you think of batchcooking, and are there any disadvantages? 
 
I think it is a very good way of organizing your meals, which has many advantages. At 
the same time, it has its disadvantages, since it requires a previous planning of the 
ingredients, of the week's menus, and a long period of time to prepare them. 
 
2. Benefits of homemade food compared to convenience food 
 
With homemade food we control what ingredients go into our dishes, we can make more 
natural dishes and avoid additives and preservatives. If you have a preference for healthy 
food, you will get more nutritious and freshly cooked dishes.  
 
3. Would it improve people's health if they ate more homemade food?  
 
Probably yes. Cooking and eating homemade food make you more aware of what you 
put on your plate, with higher quality food, being responsible for your food.  
 
4. Do you think there is a problem in Spain of lack of time to cook?  
 
Figure 9. Professional interviews 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
35
The lack of time arises mainly because of work schedules and lifestyle. In this case in 
Spain it is true that there are longer working hours but this should not imply that there is 
a lack of time to cook basic meals on a daily basis. It is true that for more elaborate 
dishes it would be appreciated to be organized through batch cooking. 
 
5. Consequences of processed and/or precooked food 
 
Less control over what you eat, presence of preservatives and additives. Lower quality 
of food and less fresh food.  So it affects directly to the health. Cheapness is expensive 
in the end, since most diseases in the western world are caused by modifiable habits 
such as food. 
 
I have conducted this interview with 5 other doctors, and they all agree with most of 
Dr. Garcia's answers. There is a lack of time and planning for proper nutrition in 
Spanish society and a solution such as batch-cooking can help a lot to solve it. 
 
Once we have empathized with the current situation of Spanish society, we can see 
that the problem we want to solve with the creation of WEKOK does exist. However, 
first, we must analyze only the sufficient and necessary condition for a business to 
exist, a paying customer. In the next section, we will see how to perform market 
segmentation and the choice of beachhead market. The importance of performing a 
market segmentation. Many times, the importance of performing a correct market 
segmentation at the beginning of the creation of a startup is forgotten for several 
reasons, but the principal one is to adjust the business idea to the main target 
audience. 
2. Market segmentation & Beachhead market  
 
Just as I have pointed out before, for a business to exist, it is not enough that there is 
a problem or a need or even a technology to be created, for a business to exist, the 
only necessary and sufficient reason is that you have a paying customer. Once there 
is a person who will pay for your product or service, you will have a business. 
 
To show how to perform market segmentation, I am going to exemplify it with the 
WEKOK case. And to do so, the first thing to do is to explain what WEKOK is to make 
it easier to get into the situation. WEKOK is a technological idea that provides a mobile 
application for booking cooks. These cooks will come to the customer's home and for 
some time, they will provide a batch-cooking service. In short, batch-cooking, as its 
name suggests, is cooking in batches. With batch-cooking, a weekly menu is planned 
by preparing all the meals in one day and for a while. Among its advantages are a 
healthier and more balanced diet, saving money and time. 
 
The process followed to reach market segmentation 
To complete this market segmentation procedure, I followed the steps in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship methodology, which proposes three steps to carry it out: 
brainstorming, narrowing, and primary market research. This three-step process is 
broken down in this thesis as follows: 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
36
 
 
 
2.1. An array of market opportunities 
 
This episode follows Disciplined Entrepreneurship’s first step, Brainstorming. Here it 
is suggested to make a list of possible strong industries, even if these possible ones 
are crazy ideas, but you believe they are useful to expand the boundaries of 
possibilities. 
 
Based on this, I propose to fill in the cells of an array (Figure 11) with the potential 
industries of your business idea. To show the array mentioned above, I expose the 
array of potential industries that make up WEKOK's business idea in the following 
image:  
Figure 10. Followed market segmentation process 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
37
 
 
In Figure 11, I show the map that lists the potential industries that WEKOK could offer 
its services to, many are "crazy ideas", but it does not matter, in the journey of 
entrepreneurship there are no crazy ideas, the least unexpected things happen. That 
is one of the most exciting parts of the journey. The yellow-coloured ideas represent 
the less crazy industries, the ones that I think might be more likely to be interested in 
the service offered. On the other hand, we have three small ones in different colours. 
These are the ones that I find the hardest to reach but are also worthy possibilities 
and may surprise me as I mentioned earlier. 
 
Once this step is completed, to get that market segmentation array, you have to list 
potential customers for each of those potential industries. However, it is not just 
thinking about potential customers but focusing on end-users since you need a group 
of committed end-users to achieve a profitable business.  
 
I made a very extensive list of end-users (about 6-8 end-users for each of the potential 
industries), but I refined it to be more concise and to expose well who my main end-
users were.  
 
In Figure 12, I show the array of market opportunities in which I filled each of its cells 
with the potential end-users for each of the potential industries and then proceeded 
to refine this list (in the figure you can see the array with the refinement procedure 
already done). This refinement process corresponds to the narrowing step proposed 
by Disciplined Entrepreneurship, in which it states that for each of the potential 
industries, the most interesting market opportunities focused on end-users are listed. 
To do so, it proposes a series of questions that you should answer to guide you in the 
process. In Annex 2 you can see this procedure in more detail, but to show how the 
Figure 11. Mapping potential industries 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
38
narrowing process should be, I show below the questions to be answered for each of 
the potential end-users.  The proposed questions [12] are:  
 
• Is the customer well-financed? 
• Is the customer easily accessible to your sales force? 
• Does the target customer have a compelling reason to buy? 
• Is there an entrenched competition that could block you? 
• If you win this segment, can you leverage it to enter other segments? 
• Is the market consistent with the values, passions, and goals of the finance 
team? 
 
 
The process I followed to perform the narrowing was to use Excel to score which end 
users got the highest score and choose them as the end-users of my market 
segmentation. Overall, I ended up with a total of 16 end-users in the narrowing 
process. The ideal according to Disciplined Entrepreneurship is to get a list of 6-12 
end users, so my list was a bit long. It is OK if this happens, just go back through the 
list and find a relationship between the end-users and either get a clustering or just 
eliminate any that scored lower in the Excel mentioned above.  
 
2.2. First Market Analysis 
 
It is time to analyze potential customers. This market segmentation step is not only 
told in the Disciplined Entrepreneurship book but also in the other two methodologies 
Figure 12. Array of market segmentation 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
39
that I have followed during the development of this thesis, Lean Startup and Design 
Thinking, which emphasize this fact. However, Disciplined Entrepreneurship and 
Design Thinking will be the methodologies chosen for the development of this 
analysis since both are methodologies based and focused purely on the customer.  
 
To know which market opportunity is better or how to adapt your solution to your 
potential audience, you have to talk directly with customers, listen to them, interact 
with them, get involved in a conversation with them and see what they highlight and 
what they do not, to design the idea following their wishes to bring them more value. 
 
To show the market analysis process, I will exemplify it with the WEKOK business idea. 
I did this process with a bidirectional approach. These two ways have provided me 
with both quantitative and qualitative results. Below, I will explain in more detail what 
the process has been like in both cases. 
 
2.2.1.  Quantitative results - Survey 
 
To get a wider range of data from different groups of people, I created an online survey 
created with Google's tool, Google Forms. With it, I wanted to get data related to the 
eating habits of the Spanish population and their working days mainly. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Customer survey structure 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
40
The survey contains 22 questions in total divided into four main blocks. The first block 
contains questions related to basic information about the respondents such as age or 
gender to analyze, above all, which was the age range in which the WEKOK service 
would fit the most. The second block was subdivided into people who could or could 
not cook. If the person answered that he/she could cook, he/she was asked how much 
time he/she normally spends cooking and whether he/she liked to cook or not. If the 
person answered that he/she did not know how to cook, he/she was asked about 
his/her cooking habits if he/she did not know how to cook. The third block was the 
same for everyone, and they were asked about whether they value home cooking over 
precooked food, whether they usually cook on the same day or not, if they know batch-
cooking and if they would value practising it, their habits when they go to work or 
university, if they would like someone to cook for them, questions about home delivery 
services and finally if they knew one of our most significant competitors. Finally, in the 
last block, the questions were related to home chore services and their feelings 
towards them. 
 
The following is an example of how to survey the quantitative validation of a business 
idea. To introduce it, I simply put "Master thesis". This name was a bit strategic to 
cause more engagement among people. Besides, I made a brief introduction following 
the same strategy of the title to briefly introduce the purpose of this survey and 
encourage the recipients to complete this survey by implying that it is a short survey 
for academic purposes: "Hi everyone! First of all, thank you for investing these few 
minutes of your time in helping me to answer these questions that will serve as a 
resource for the development of my master thesis. IMPORTANT: IT IS COMPLETELY 
ANONYMOUS AND THE GREATEST POSSIBLE SINCERITY WILL BE THE KEY TO THE 
SUCCESS OF THIS PROJECT. Secondly, with this survey, I seek to obtain valuable data 
for my dissertation, which seeks a solution to improve the eating habits of Spanish 
society. The goal of this exciting project is to provide a service to solve the problem of 
the lack of time to cook homemade food. But I can't tell you more... IT WILL BE A 
SURPRISE!!! " 
 
Block 1: Basis people information 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
41
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
42
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block 2: People who do not know how to cook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If respondents answered that they could cook, I asked them how often they did it for 
guidance in the analysis of the more working hours they have, the less they cook, and 
thus to validate it. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Block 1 of the survey - Basis people information 
Figure 15. Block 2 - People who do not know how to cook 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
43
Block 2: People who know how to cook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In case the respondents had answered that they did not know how to cook, I asked 
them questions about their everyday food habits to determine whether someone was 
cooking for them. If the interviewee did not find an answer to the proposed answers, 
he/she had a free response option.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Block 2 - People who know how to cook 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
44
Block 3: Dietary habits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Block 3 - Dietary habits 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The densest part of the survey was this block. It consisted mainly of questions to get 
results about eating habits, their knowledge of batch-cooking, and a single question 
about our most direct competitor, Wetaca, asking how they rated their service, 
whether they had used it or not. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Block 3 - Dietary habits 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
46
 
Block 4: Housekeeping services  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lastly, the last block aimed to confirm whether it is common in Spanish society to hire 
services, to carry out household tasks, and specifically to determine which ones they 
were. Moreover, I included a final question about how comfortable the respondent 
would feel if he/she had a cook at home. A little WEKOK-focused brushstroke to get 
feedback on the respondent's feelings. 
 
2.2.1.1. 
Analysis of quantitative results 
 
Almost 500 responses have been achieved with this form. This is a high reach, so I 
have been able to get very specific quantitative results. 
 
Interesting percentages obtained are summarised below: 
 
• Almost 70% of those surveyed value home-cooked food more than ready-made 
food 
 
• 68.5% of people are unfamiliar with the concept of batch-cooking and would 
value practising it.  
 
Figure 19. Block 4 - Housekeeping services 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
47
• 50% of people would feel 100% comfortable with a chef cooking at home on a 
scale of 1 to 5.  
 
However, the most important analysis was looking at the amount of time people spend 
cooking concerning their working days. I examined the case of full-time employees, 
part-time employees, and students.  
 
Comparing just data from full-time and part-time employees, I found that as their 
working hours increased, they cooked less frequently accordingly. As a sample, 23% 
of part-timers cooked 1 to 3 days a week compared to 12% of part-timers, and 15% of 
full-timers cooked 4 to 6 days compared to 22% of part-timers.  
 
Among the students, I observed that almost 50% cooked only occasionally, which 
could be worth taking a niche market into account. Nevertheless, it is questionable, 
since most of the Spanish students still live with their parents while studying, hence, 
it is not very relevant, although it should not be overlooked.  
 
2.2.2. Qualitative results - Interviews 
 
To achieve qualitative results, I have interviewed by in-depth telephone interviews 
directly interacting with the interviewees to get a complete picture of what they think, 
what they say, how they act on the questions and how they feel. To do my interviews 
successfully, I followed a two-step procedure: first, I wrote down some assumptions I 
needed to validate and second, for each of the assumptions I drafted 4 or 5 questions 
related to the hypotheses.  
 
It is a good result to conduct 20-40 interviews and get insight from potential 
customers. 
 
Talking to potential customers is not a process that should be done lightly. Prior 
research should be done beforehand.  Potential customers should not feel that you 
are selling them anything, as they may change their behaviour during the interview and 
not be honest enough with you. It is also about achieving an understanding of their 
pains to design the idea according to those pains, you should not try to get the client 
to design the idea for you. Of course, your behaviour during the interview should be 
curious, be a willing listener, be open-minded and adaptable, and lastly, be patient 
during the process since it is a long-term process.  
 
Below, I will show the interview process I followed with WEKOK. As I mentioned earlier, 
the purpose of these interviews was to validate four main assumptions: 
 
1. Spanish households lack time for cooking. This is mainly due to the 
incompatibility of work schedules. 
 
As an example, here is one of the comments made by one of the people 
interviewed, Lorenzo: "Of course. There is very little free time in the week and the  
little you have; you don't like to spend it cooking. My mother sends him tuppers 
and it helps me a lot to maintain a work and healthy balance." 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
48
2. Spanish people would prefer to eat homemade food rather than fast food or 
premade food if they had the opportunity. 
 
As an example of this assumption, here is a comment from one of the 
interviewees, Ana: "In general terms, Spanish society, due to cultural issues, 
prefers homemade food to precooked food, but our busy lifestyles do not allow 
us to cook or eat it". 
 
3. Eating pre-made food, going out to eat or consuming other existing alternatives 
has an economic impact on people. 
 
Ramiro pointed out: "It is true that not having a clear weekly food plan makes you 
finally consume other alternatives that generate extra expenses and therefore, an 
economic impact on people's lives". 
 
4. In Spanish culture, housekeeping services are normalized and accepted, so 
hiring a punctual home cooking service is a viable option. 
 
The interviewee Rocio commented: "Given my personal situation, home help 
services have never been hired in my home. But the truth is that many people 
close to me have done so because it has been necessary, so yes, it is something 
that is normalized in Spanish society". 
 
Over 30 interviews I carried out among completely random people, who had never met 
me before. Most of them lived in Madrid but also in other Spanish cities. I did it this 
way so that the interviewees would not have any kind of affection towards me and 
that they would be as objective as possible in their answers.  In Annex 3, you can see 
an example of an interview.  
 
2.2.2.1. 
Examples of qualitative results 
 
During the interview, I spoke with a 26-year-old woman who lives alone in Madrid. She 
works full time as a researcher in a university. She validated all hypotheses, and, 
through the conversation, which was very natural and close, she emphasized and 
talked about our most direct competitor, Wetaca, even though I never asked her about 
it. She said that she thought it was a good option for when you do not have time to 
cook, but she tried it once and the experience was not completely satisfactory. 
 
Another example of an interview was the one I conducted with a 54-year-old man. His 
name is Juanma and he is a divorced father of a family. of two children. He lives alone 
in Madrid with his children and works full time. Juanma told me that the lack of time 
to cook homemade food is his daily routine and that because of that, he often buys 
unhealthy things. Juanma pointed out that he does hire help for housework and that 
he feels comfortable with someone working at home. He emphasized the fact that he  
 
would hire a person to help him with meal preparation but that there is currently no 
solution that fits his needs. It does not exist because he believes he would use this 
service once a week, he would not hire a person who would be at home cooking every 
day. 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
49
2.2.3. Two-size market 
 
[13] points out the need to recognise whether your idea is a two-sided market. A 
multisided market means that your idea needs multiple target customers for the 
business to exist and as an example, it mentions eBay. Ebay needs both sellers and 
buyers. Airbnb, as another example, needs home seekers and people to rent out their 
homes.  
 
Hence, a two-sided market structure will require you to repeat steps 2.2.1. and 2.2.2. 
again, this time on the other side of the market. Once you have both sides of the 
market analysed, you will be able to determine which side of the market is more critical 
to winning for the business to be successful and focus more on that side of the 
market.  
 
WEKOK is a two-sided market. I have cooks and users who want the services of that 
cook. Therefore, both supply and demand are necessary for the new venture to 
succeed, the most attention is required from the cooks, because without them the 
business cannot exist.  
 
Sampling the cooks' market segment, I proceeded in the same way as I did with 
potential customers. I launched a form to obtain quantitative results and carried out 
telephone interviews to obtain qualitative results. Rather than explaining the 
procedure in detail, since it is identical to the previous one, I will report the key results 
in this step.  
 
First of all, I validated four main assumptions of the cooks: 
 
1. Due to COVID-19, there is a reduced job offer. 
2. Mostly temporary and part-time contracts, which translates into a lower salary. 
3. Entering someone's house to cook  
4. Availability for extra jobs with flexible contracts and adapted to their daily life. 
 
 
Indeed, COVID-19 has harmed the restaurants' sector worldwide and in Spain to a fairly 
high level since tourism is the main basis of the economy in this country.    
 
2.2.3.1. 
Quantitative results two-size market 
 
The form, again, was made with the Google Forms tool and consists of 5 main 
sections or blocks. There is a division in the first section classifying the respondents 
if they were currently working as cooks or not. 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
50
 
 
The survey contains 21 questions in total divided into five main blocks. The first block 
contains questions related to basic information about the respondents, such as age 
or gender, to analyze, above all, which age range would be the best fit for cooks to 
work at WEKOK. The second block was subdivided into people who worked as cooks 
or did not. If the person responded that they worked as a cook, they were asked about 
their type of contract and working hours, whether their job has been affected by 
COVID19, whether they are satisfied with their salary, and whether they would be 
willing to work as a cook on an extra basis as long as the schedule allows. If the person 
answered that he/she did not work as a cook, he/she was asked about his/her current 
job and the same questions as those working as cooks but in the past tense. The third 
block was the same for all, and they were asked about whether they would be willing 
to cook at the client's home and if they had ever done so. Block four was only for those 
who responded that they had cooked at the client's home and asked them what 
services they had provided and if they had felt comfortable. Finally, in the last block, I 
asked everyone their opinion about working as a home cook. 
 
To introduce the survey, I simply put an introductory text:  Hello everyone! First of all, 
thank you for spending these few minutes of your time helping me to answer these 
questions that will serve as a resource for the development of my master's thesis. 
IMPORTANT: IT IS COMPLETELY ANONYMOUS AND THE GREATEST POSSIBLE 
SINCERITY WILL BE THE KEY TO THE SUCCESS OF THIS PROJECT.  
Figure 20. Cooks survey structure 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
51
 
Secondly, with this survey, I am looking to obtain valuable data for my dissertation, 
which seeks a solution to improve the eating habits of Spanish society and the 
employment situation of chefs. The ultimate goal of this exciting project is to provide 
a service that addresses the problem of the lack of time to cook home-cooked food, 
while at the same time creating new jobs. However, I cannot tell you more... IT WILL 
BE A SURPRISE!  
 
Block 1: Basis people information  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Block 1 of the survey - Basis cooks information 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
52
 
 
The goal of this first block is to obtain demographic data of Spanish cooks to get 
information about potential future cooks who want to work at WEKOK. 
 
Block 2: People who work as cooks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This block was for people who answered in the first block that they were currently 
working as cooks. The purpose of this block was mainly to obtain statistics on how 
many of them had a part-time job and whether they would be willing to work as cooks 
on an extra basis if this were compatible with their working days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22. Block 2 of the survey - People who work as cook 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
53
Block 2: people who do not work as cooks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With this one, I wanted to determine if it was the salary that made them leave their 
jobs as cooks and to know if they would work as cooks again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 23. Block 2 of the survey - People who do not work as 
cook 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
54
Block 3: Block to know about in-house cooking services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The purpose of this block is to get an insight into what they think about working as 
cooks at the client's home regardless of whether they are cooks or not. Moreover, this 
is a selection block again, since the last question was: Have you ever cooked for 
someone in their kitchen? With it, I wanted to know if it is a common thing that 
people/clients want cooks to cook in their homes and if cooks are willing to do it. 
Verify that both parties are interested.  
 
Block 4: People who have cooked at clients' homes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24. Block 3 of the survey - Block to know about in-
house cooking services 
Figure 25. Block 4 of the survey - People who have cooked at 
clients' homes 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
55
I wanted to validate what kind of services are the ones that customers demand the 
most. With this, I wanted to know if my solution was already implemented 
independently in the homes of some customers or if, on the contrary, I could identify 
any other solution to improve the proposal of WEKOK. 
 
Block 5: Open block 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This block was an open question (for all respondents) to determine what they think 
about cooking at the clients' homes. I wanted to know if they found it motivating 
another job opportunity or if they do not like it. 
 
2.2.3.2. 
Qualitative results two-size market 
 
The qualitative analysis process has been the same as for the quantitative analysis. 
The only difference is that during this one, the validation has been done with direct 
contact with the cooks through telephone calls.  
 
I made a total of 16 phone calls to cooks unknown to me. I tried to validate the same 
assumptions exposed in the quantitative validation process:  
 
1. 
Due to COVID-19, there is a reduced job offer. According to Amparo, 
currently a trainer of people in the cooking industry, COVID made her 
reinvent herself and start a professional career other than that of a cook 
because she was out of work. 
 
2. 
Mostly temporary and part-time contracts, which translates into a lower 
salary. Jorge told me: "catering is a somewhat unstable job because there 
are seasons of the year with more work than others, which is why there are 
many temporary contracts, which translates directly into periods of very low 
wages". 
 
3. 
Entering someone's house to cook.  David told me: "I would love that apart 
from the food he cooks in the hospital kitchen where he works, he loves to 
make his creations for people to try". He has worked several times at clients' 
homes and the experience of interacting directly with the client was much 
more rewarding for him personally because he was able to know first-hand 
how people felt about his work. 
 
4. 
Availability for extra jobs with flexible contracts and adapted to their daily 
life. Roberto has been working in a restaurant for three and a half years, and 
due to the pandemic, his working hours have been converted to part-time. 
Besides that, he is satisfied with his salary but would like to have more 
Figure 26. Block 5 of the survey - Open block 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
56
money at the end of the month, which is why he would be willing to work 
overtime with a job opportunity that suits his life and working hours to get 
that money. 
 
I followed the same process as in Figure 20, differentiating whether the person 
telephoned was a cook or not and following the above flow depending on the above.  
 
Thanks to this process, the answers are more "real" in the sense that I could check 
firsthand what the interviewee felt or emphasized. In this way, the insights about 
whether they felt that there could be a new job opportunity and that they were excited 
about working at the client's home were the most remarkable. 
 
As an example, I would like to highlight the conversation with Chef David. As an 
example, I would like to highlight the conversation with Chef David. David is a 25-year-
old chef who is currently working as a cook on a permanent contract. David is more 
or less satisfied with his salary and the COVID has not affected his work because he 
works in a hospital kitchen. He would work as a cook on the side and finds it very 
interesting to work at the client's home as he has experienced it before. In his 
experience, he felt comfortable and considered it a very rewarding experience as he 
had direct contact with his clients and was able to show them his creations. He finds 
it a very different, motivating and enjoyable experience. 
 
2.2.3.3. 
Qualitative results analysis 
 
Analyzing the results of the 50 survey responses and 16 interviews with cooks, I have 
obtained interesting figures and conclusions: 43.75% of those interviewed and 
surveyed have had to change professions due to a lack of job opportunities and the 
type of contracts for which they no longer work as cooks. The remaining 56.25% who 
do work as cooks currently would work overtime as long as it was flexible, and they 
could choose their working hours.  Curiously enough, all those who do not currently 
work as cooks would work as cooks if the work was flexible and adapted to their 
schedules; this represents 75% of those interviewed and surveyed.  
 
Furthermore, 82% of them would be willing to cook at the client's home, 62.5% of those 
who have already done so. Mainly, they have done cooking jobs for family events or 
private lunches and dinners. Among them, 96% felt 100% comfortable doing the job at 
the client's home.  
 
When the interviews and the survey were over, I asked them: What do you think about 
doing a home cooking service? 
 
The answers are highly encouraging and promising.  The most repeated comments 
were:  
 
• It is a good option. 
• It is a job opportunity and that is always good. 
• It is very satisfying and motivating as the clients can get to know your culinary 
creations.  
==PAGE:57==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
57
• A completely new experience, which can be a lot of fun and very challenging.  
• Quite interesting and good business. 
 
2.2.4. Market segmentation conclusion  
 
Market analysis is the first step that any entrepreneur must face to analyse the 
business opportunities of a future startup and identify multiple potential market 
opportunities.  
 
The direct analysis of the parameters obtained through the market segments studied 
will help determine which markets are the best for the business idea as it will not only 
validate your initial market opportunity idea but also help you adapt the idea to other 
alternatives that you did not initially expect. The final goal of this process is to present 
a spectrum of potential customers on which we should focus the business.  
 
Validating the assumptions I initially made when thinking about the business idea has 
been the main aim I have had during this process. Specifically, to validate directly 
through personal interviews that the interviewees do not have time to cook because 
of their long working hours and that the cooks have emphasised to me that they find 
it a very interesting job opportunity. Moreover, an important step for me was the 
brainstorming of industries and potential end-users because I have always focused 
on the problem and the solution, but I had never focused on listing the potential 
customers and I was surprised how many possibilities WEKOK's idea could have.  
 
Finally, analysing the results, I have concluded that WEKOK is a possible successful 
business idea in Spain (the market where I initially want to focus the business idea) 
as I have validated that there is a lack of time for cooking at home and those cooks 
would be willing and motivated to work successfully in a job opportunity that is flexible 
and adapted to their working day at customers' homes. Thus, the business could exist 
because I have supply and demand.  
 
2.3. Beachhead market 
 
Concerning what the Disciplined Entrepreneurship book shows [14], by selecting a 
single market in which to excel, the business can easily establish a stronger market 
position and consequently become a viable business in economic terms. In this way, 
you can position yourself faster by getting the all-important positive word of mouth 
that can be the source of success or failure for any entrepreneur.  
 
Likewise, it also points out that the beachhead is where, once you have achieved a 
dominant market share, you will have the strength to attack adjacent markets with 
different service offerings, building a larger business. 
 
In light of the above, I started considering a market where I could dominate in a 
relatively short period. The main prerequisites were that the customers in the market 
would buy similar things, that the customers within the market would buy the value 
provided by WEKOK in the same way, and that the word of mouth mentioned above 
would exist easily. 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
58
By analysing the above, WEKOK beachheads are families with both parents working 
and employees or self-employed people who live alone or in a couple and have a busy 
working life. 
 
These are selected for several reasons:  
 
• Either Spanish families or people who work a lot and live alone are frequently 
hiring household services and this can be very helpful for them.  
 
• In both markets, word of mouth exists, and spreads very fast as Spanish people 
like to meet with friends and discuss everything that happens in their lives. 
 
• In 90% of both markets, clients have quite similar lives. 
3. End-User profile  
 
Having already selected the WEKOK beachhead market, I now have to focus on the 
potential customer and build my business around this potential customer, which 
consists of a combination of two important terms: an end-user and a decision-making 
unit.  
 
An end-user is a real person who is going to use your product or service. Here I am 
going to build the profile of an end-user who will use the WEKOK service to be able to 
perform the next step: Total Addressable Market, TAM, of the beachhead market. [15] 
 
Since this is a two-sided market, this section has been divided into two: the end-user 
as a customer and the end-user as a cook. 
 
3.1. End-user customer 
 
To build my end-user customer, I have been very restrictive and have used the data 
obtained from interviews and surveys. Starting this process, I asked myself: Who 
would be my ideal end-user? What requirements should they meet to make them 
ideal?   
 
My ideal end-user should meet the following requirements: 
1. Full-time working day 
2. No time for cooking  
3. Value practising batch cooking  
4. Do not mind someone working in their home  
5. Prefer someone to cook for him or her. 
 
All of those are the filters that I have put in my excel database where I have loaded all 
responses from both the interviews and the surveys. 
 
As I mentioned before, this process is very restrictive, and consequently, the obtained 
percentages are also very restrictive. Despite this, I consider them to be good results. 
Below are the results segregated into women and men. 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
59
 
1. Women who satisfy the ideal requirements:  
 
There are a total of 45 women who meet each of the ideal end-user requirements. 
They work full-time, have a short time to cook, value batch-cooking and prefer to have 
someone cook for them. Briefly, out of a total of 305 women, 16.06% fulfilled these 
exhaustive restrictions.  Considering the total population of ideal end-users in Madrid, 
which we consider as the initial city to expand the business, and assuming a 50/50 
ratio of women and men in the company, this figure would constitute 31.2%.  
 
Naturally, if we remove some of the filters, such as the value of batch-cooking, since 
it is possible that many of those who answered no, do not know all the benefits of 
practising it, the percentage of women who satisfy the ideal conditions to be an end-
user increases significantly. 
 
2. Men who satisfy the ideal requirements:  
 
There are a total of 63 men who meet each of the ideal end-user requirements. They 
work full-time, have a short time to cook, value batch-cooking and prefer to have 
someone cook for them. Overall, out of a total of 178 men surveyed and interviewed, 
35.4% met these exhaustive restrictions.   
 
Considering Madrid as the start-up creation centre and again assuming a 50/50 split 
of women and men in the ideal end-user society, this figure would constitute 68.8% of 
the total. 
Figure 27. Figures about women who satisfy the ideal requirements of end-
user 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
60
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing some of the filters also significantly increases the number of men who 
would be potential end-users. Finally, to conclude the numerical analysis, for both 
women and men, the ideal age range is 25-55 years. 
 
3.1.1. Day in the life of an ideal end-user, both male and female 
 
A typical family from Madrid. Full time working married couples who live at home with 
their children. They usually leave work between 17.00h and 19.00h.  
 
On a normal weekday, when it is time to leave work, they either pick up the children 
from school and take them to their afterschool activities or they pick up the children 
from the afterschool activities and go home afterwards. Furthermore, they have to do 
the household tasks if they have not hired an external service to help them with this 
task. 
 
When the weekend arrives, this family wants to enjoy family activities and get out of 
the house, but at the same time, they want to lead a healthy lifestyle to inculcate it in 
their children and, of course, to be healthy. However, their lifestyle is very stressful and 
taking time out to cook prevents them from enjoying family time on many weekends.  
 
On the other hand, some young entrepreneurs or employees live alone or with a partner 
and do not have children. They want to lead a healthy lifestyle both to look their best 
and to take care of their health and simultaneously work a lot of time to achieve a 
successful professional life.  
 
Generally, in a normal working week, these people leave work between 17.00h and 
20.00h. When they finish their working day, they usually go to work at the end of the 
week. At the end of their working day, they usually go to the gym or practice a sport or 
go out for a drink with their friends or partner. Their time is reduced, and they arrive 
home very tired, so they end up eating the first thing they find in the fridge, they order 
delivery food or if they are lucky, they have a tupperware of food that their mother or 
grandmother has prepared for them. Combining work, a healthy lifestyle, socialising 
and cooking is a difficult balancing act for them. 
 
Figure 28. Figures about men who satisfy the ideal requirements of end-
user 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
61
3.2. End-user service provider  
 
To build my cook end-user, I set two key parameters: that working at the client's home 
would be a motivating and a good business opportunity for them and that they would 
not mind working extra as long as the job opportunity fits their schedule. Having set 
these parameters as the key to building my end-user cook, I asked myself again, how 
should my ideal end-user cook?  
 
My ideal end-user cook should be currently working as a cook and would be willing to 
work on an extra basis at the client's home performing the work of a cook. I need 
cooking to be their passion and interacting with the customer to be one of their 
priorities to keep improving in their profession.  
 
In light of the above, these are all the filters I have put in my Excel database where I 
have uploaded all responses from both the interviews and the surveys. 
 
As I have already mentioned in the previous end-user section, I have made this process 
very restrictive in order to be as realistic as possible and not to fall into the error of 
believing that my business idea is the best. The most important results I have obtained 
are:   
 
• 58.8% are currently working as cooks.  
 
• Of these, 100% are willing to work extra if the work is flexible and fits in with 
their current working day.  
 
• 98% of them are willing to work at the client's home as they find it, in general 
terms, interesting, satisfying, recommendable, good business, and very 
stimulating. 
 
Finally, looking at demographics, the age range in which my ideal end-user cook is 
between 22 and 45 years old. 
 
3.2.1. 
 Day in the life of a cook 
 
Part-time cook or recently unemployed due to COVID-19 living in Madrid. He is 
passionate about cooking and would love people to know his creations. He loves the 
contact with the customer and the one-to-one treatment with him.  
 
The cook only works 20 hours a week so an extra job can help him to make some 
money. Because he works for a restaurant, the customers eat the food he makes but 
not his creations. Moreover, he does not know how long this situation will persist and 
whether his contract will be extended to a full-time contract.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
62
4. Market size  
 
Lack of details on the market analysis process in the book Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship has made me do some research on it, and I have broadened the TAM 
section of it for my methodology.  
 
The book talks about TAM as Total Addressable Market size but actually, TAM is the 
Total Available Market. In the methodology created in this thesis, I propose to use the 
TAM-SAM-SOM process.  
 
Truly, the TAM referred to in the book is the SAM that I am referring to. Thus, the 
process I will explain and apply for the WEKOK case in the SAM is the one proposed 
by Disciplined Entrepreneurship. In the following sections I explain this process based 
on the WEKOK example to make it easier for the reader. 
 
(All data, statistics and numbers in sections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 have been obtained from 
[16]). 
 
4.1. TAM 
 
The Total Available Market aims to calculate the maximum annual revenue that the 
business idea represents.  The TAM represents the maximum growth potential that 
the company can achieve in the specific market of home cooking services. This 
market size is too large for one company but gives a great insight into what could be 
done by scaling the company, for this, I have taken the households in Madrid that 
match the following requirements defined in the End User Profile (section 3). 
 
• There are 409,000 households in the city of Madrid composed of a married 
couple with children.   
 
• There are a total of 256,000 cohabiting couple households without children in 
Madrid.   
 
• The total number of single-person households in the city of Madrid is 207,000.  
 
These numbers sum up giving a Total Available Market of 872,000 households which 
results in a yearly revenue for WEKOK of 500 million Euros. This revenue derives from 
the estimation that each household would use the service for 2 hours, 2 times per 
month with an average price of 12 euros per hour (after taxes). 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
63
 
 
4.2.  SAM  
 
The Serviceable Available Market or SAM is the market that I can objectively reach in 
the medium-long term. The size of this market is lower than the one on the TAM, but 
it is much more accurate showing the yearly revenue that the company can make in 
reality when gaining the required customer base. For the SAM, I used the demographic 
breakdown of the end-user to quantitatively determine the size of the market using the 
data specified in [16]. The goal is to understand how many potential users I am 
targeting to develop at least an approximate market size in the right direction. 
  
With the help of the previous step, the definition of the end-user profile for the 
beachhead market, it becomes easier to specify the SAM calculation, following the 
parameters and characteristics defined by the end-user. The SAM calculation 
indicates the amount of annual profit the company will make if it achieves 100% market 
share in the defined SAM.  
 
[17] explains the definition of Total Addressable Market or TAM. I have adapted it in 
this case to the SAM because the structure proposed by me, in this case, seems to 
me to be clearer and easier. Therefore, the resource used to explain the SAM, in this 
case, is the one exposed in [17]. 
  
There is a tendency among entrepreneurs to inflate the SAM with excessive optimism, 
but it is not necessary to have a very large figure, as this result is not intended to 
impress others, but to develop a figure that is consistent with maintaining your belief 
in the business.   
Figure 29. WEKOK's TAM 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
64
  
Your company's SAM should be large enough to reach a critical market mass and 
therefore generate a positive cash flow. Normally, the size of the Serviceable Available 
Market is even smaller than you think. It is quite normal to revisit this step as the 
business develops to refine the figure.  
  
Focusing on WEKOK, I calculated the number of end-users that fit my ideal end-user 
by doing a bottom-up analysis. I have analyzed their demographic characteristics: age, 
gender, place of residence, family situation, employment situation, income, among 
others.  
  
From the TAM described before, more filters were added to find the size of the SAM. 
The ideal end-user must also be a full-time worker. Researching how many people are 
affiliated or working full-time in the city of Madrid, I have obtained a figure of 828,992 
people. Out of a total population of 3,690,025 people, 1,400,000 of whom are working 
full time across the city, this represents 59% of the population working full time. It 
should also be noted that in Madrid city there are 3,266,126 people registered, of 
which 1,486,000 are in the 26 to 55 age range, the range in which our ideal end-user 
is situated.  
  
Further data to take into consideration is the percentage of people working concerning 
their household size situation. Focusing on this, I came up with the following statistic:   
 
• 55% of family households with children have both parents working full-time.   
 
• 62% of households with a cohabiting couple without children have both working 
full-time and 36% have only one of them working full-time.   
 
• 95% of single-person households have the person living in the household 
working full time.  
  
To top off the SAM, I decided to do more research on the income of the users I am 
targeting. Specifically, I have defined that at least, my end-user must have a salary of 
+2,000€ net per month, since I believe that this type of user is the one who would use 
the service.   
  
• There are 60.7% of households in the city of Madrid meeting this requirement. 
Thus, breaking it down and relating it to the type of household:   
 
• 60.7% of 135,000 family households with children whose parents work full time, 
gives us a figure of 81,000 households that meet the requirement of +2000€ 
per month net.   
 
• 60.7% of 212,000 single person and cohabiting couple households without 
children (I have added them together) whose members work full-time, 
translates into 127,000 households meeting the +€2000 per month net 
requirement.  
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
65
This breakdown and study of the market size indicate to me a total of 208,000 
households in the city of Madrid that would use WEKOK's service as they meet the 
requirements of the ideal end-user. This number of users and assuming a total of 2 
services per customer per month and considering costs, represents a SAM of 
120.000.000€. 
 
4.3. SOM 
 
The Serviceable Obtainable Market represents the portion of the market that I want to 
reach in the short-medium term. Consequently, this calculation should estimate the 
number of users that are ready to buy the product currently and that can be obtained 
easily. For the SOM, I have taken a time 
horizon of three years. The growth of the 
company 
relies 
on 
the 
marketing 
effectiveness. It is meant to be exponential as 
the more users, the more impact and the more 
known the company will be. It is unclear when 
the exponential growth will occur, and the 
company will be popular. Therefore, I set a 
time horizon of 3 years in which I expect to 
reach a market share of 10 % of the SAM. 
 
This results in a SOM of 208,000 households 
with a yearly revenue of 12,000,000€. 
 
Figure 30. WEKOK's SAM 
Figure 31. WEKOK's SOM 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
66
5. Persona  
 
Unlike the end-user, who is a person who represents your target market, the Persona 
is the person who best represents the first customer in the beachhead market. The 
Persona is one of your end-users who best makes the target customer tangible. 
Business development should always focus on pleasing and making that Persona 
happy. [13] 
 
Because the process of creating the Persona is a design process, the decision to use 
Design Thinking seemed important to me to include it in this step. One of the 
techniques in the ideation process within the workflow proposed by Design Thinking, 
one of the techniques to do so is "Personas". The goal of "Personas" is nothing more 
than the creation of user archetypes to support the development of a final solution. 
[17] 
 
There can be several "Personas" for each identified customer segment. "Persona" 
consists of a tool consisting of creating user profiles that make use of the service or 
product. These user profiles are created with the attributes of users that have been 
previously interviewed qualitatively. 
 
Since WEKOK has no revenue or sales yet, I have to think about the person I believe 
would pay for our services. These questions helped define the persona: If I only had 
one end-user to represent our end-user profile, which one would it be? Which end-user 
would pay for WEKOK's service first to represent our end-user profile?  
 
The answer to these questions will help me choose and define our Persona. In the 
following image (Figure 32), you can see who my chosen Persona is. To create this 
Persona, I have compiled feedback from the qualitative interviews conducted for 
market segmentation, and from the analysis and research conducted for market 
sizing. 
 
This process can also be modified as the business idea development process 
progresses to refine it. 
 
Since WEKOK's core business is a two-sided market, i.e., I not only need customers to 
use the service but also cooks to perform the service, I need two personas, one for 
each side of the market.  
 
For the market side of the user who will demand the WEKOK service, I have created 
one Persona for the beachhead market on the demand side: families with both parents 
working, but I could have created another Persona for the beachhead market: 
employees or self-employed people who live alone or in a couple and have a busy 
working life, mentioned in section 2.3.  
 
Moreover, through the information received from the quantitative and qualitative 
results of the form and the interviews with the cooks, I have constructed the Persona 
for the cooks' side, i.e., for the market side of the supply (Figure 33).  
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
67
Through this step, I can refer to a specific individual who will use the WEKOK service 
and a specific individual who will perform the WEKOK service since I need the 
coexistence of both for the business to exist. The better I know people's needs, 
behaviours, motivations, history, and pains, the more successful I will be in tailoring 
services to them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 32. The Persona - Customer side market 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 33. The Persona - Cooks side market 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
69
6. Full Life Cycle Use Case 
 
Creating a visual representation of the full product or service lifecycle of your venture 
will help you to see how the value chain develops with the customer and the obstacles 
that may arise during the customer journey. 
 
Creating a visual representation of the full product or service lifecycle of your venture 
will help you to see how the value chain develops with the customer and the obstacles 
that may arise during the customer journey. 
 
Below (Figure 34) is the WEKOK Full Life Cycle Use Case. During this lifecycle you will 
see that there are two distinct parts. I have decided to divide this process into an initial 
phase with a person who is not yet a customer and a business phase with somebody 
who is already a customer. In the Figure 34 you can see an orange part that shows the 
process of a use case of a person who is not yet a customer and the green part that 
shows the process of a use case of a person who is already a customer. To develop 
this circuit, [18] proposes to answer the questions shown in red.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 34. WEKOK's full life cycle use case – Still not customer 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
70
During the orange phase, it is suggested to think about the needs that someone who 
is not yet a customer may have but that the business idea aims to cover how they will 
discover the product or service and how they will be able to analyse and acquire the 
product or service. In the case of WEKOK, I already know that the need is the lack of 
time to cook homemade food. However, I have never discussed how customers will 
discover WEKOK and how they will be able to determine more about the service.  
 
The aim is for WEKOK to become known through digital marketing such as social 
networks in an initial phase and thong term through partnerships with companies to 
sponsor us as a healthy alternative and a contribution to people's wellbeing.  Finally, 
the client will be able to analyse our service through the mobile application and/or the 
website and observe how it works and the reviews of those who are already clients. 
The way to acquire it will be a download of the application or a visit to the website.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Throughout the green phase, the aim is to show what the use case of the product or 
service is like for a person who is already a customer. The Figure 35 shows the 
customer journey of someone who will use our service through the mobile application.  
 
It is not a highly detailed diagram in which I only show the overall idea of how the 
process of acquiring, supporting, and payment of the service would be. In the last 
Sprint of the methodology, each of these phases of the process will be shown in detail.  
Point 10 proposes to answer the following question: How they will buy more products 
and/or spread awareness (hopefully positive) about your product? Simply put, WEKOK 
Figure 35. WEKOK's full life cycle use case – Customer 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
                                                                                         Sprint I: Immersion 
 
 
 
71
will be successfully expanded if a critical mass of customers and chefs is created who 
spread the service through word of mouth and will be used again if the chef's service 
is of high quality. 
7. SPRINT I conclusion  
 
This first SPRINT aimed to answer the questions Who? Where? When? To answer 
these questions, I used two methodologies, Design Thinking and the book Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship.  
 
This entire Sprint explains the process of identifying potential customers, analysing 
them, defining the end users who will use the services and/or products of the business 
ideas, and finally building the Persona. I have exemplified this process with WEKOK.  
 
The first and for me the most important step was to empathise with potential 
customers to determine if the problem I want to solve with WEKOK exists. In this step, 
Design Thinking has played an important role since I have directly defined the 
procedure as "empathising", as the methodology itself does. I have empathised and I 
have done it as the method proposes.  Thanks to this, I have seen who the people with 
the problem are. I have listened to them, asked them questions, and analysed them to 
get as much feedback as possible. Not only that, but I have also seen why WEKOK 
should be created.  
 
In the next steps, no less important to start any venture, the influence of Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship and its proposed methodology has been predominant. In them, I 
have been able to answer the questions Who? I have empathised and I have done it 
as the method proposes.  Thanks to this, I have seen who the people with the problem 
are. I have listened to them; I have asked them questions and I have analysed them to 
get as much information as possible. And not only that, but I have also seen why 
WEKOK has to be created.  
 
Not only I have been influenced by the book Disciplined Entrepreneurship but to 
answer them, the Design Thinking methodology has also been the basis of the 
process. Specifically, I have carried out the step "Define" through the techniques "End-
user profile" and "People" also developed in the Disciplined Entrepreneurship 
methodology. I designed who and how our buyer personas are.  
 
Thanks to Disciplined Entrepreneurship and its methodology, in this first SPRINT I 
have answered the questions "Where?" and "When?" through the techniques of market 
segmentation, target market selection, and TAM calculation.  
 
This is a first development, but not less important, since, to present your business idea 
to any potential investor or partner, it is necessary to show the analysis and the data 
collected during the procedure.  
==PAGE:72==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
72
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPRINT II: IDEA DNA BREAKDOWN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 36. SPRINT II Idea DNA breakdown 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
73
8. Value proposition  
 
The Disciplined Entrepreneurship book not only helped me to determine the value 
proposition of the business idea but also, in the book, explains how to calculate 
quantitative metrics to show the value that the customer gets from the product or 
service delivered.  
 
Before quantifying the value proposition with quantitative metrics, it is necessary to 
determine and design the value proposition which is just defining the benefits that the 
Personas created in Section 5 are going to obtain. Therefore, I am going to separate 
this section into two different parts, on the one hand, I will talk about the Value 
Proposition Canvas and on the other about the Quantified Value Proposition proposed 
by Disciplined Entrepreneurship. 
 
8.1. Value Proposition Canvas 
 
[19] proposes to fill in a chart that is divided into two parts, the customer profile and 
the value map. At the end of the process, you have to be able to make both parts fit 
together. In the Figure 37 you can see the Value Proposition Canvas chart.  
 
The part on the right consists of the Customer Profile. In this part, a set of 
characteristics that you assumed, observed, and validated in the market during the 
Sprint I process will be exposed. The left part is the Value Map. Here, a set of value 
proposition benefits that you will design with your product or service to attract 
potential customers will be written down. It is important to always start the Value 
Proposition Canvas on the Customer Profile side. This ensures that we focus on the 
Figure 37. Value Proposition Canvas chart 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
74
customer's needs and wants. Fundamentally, you need to distance yourself from the 
solution and try to understand what the customer wants by empathizing with them 
and capturing it in the Value Proposition Canvas. 
 
8.1.1. Customer Profile  
 
The Customer Profile is divided into three main parts: customer jobs, pains, and gains.  
 
Customer Jobs 
Consists of the things that your potential customers are trying to get done in their 
lives. These things could be the needs they are trying to satisfy, the problems they are 
trying to solve, or the actions they are trying to carry out.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the case that concerns WEKOK, the customer jobs I found are eat healthy, have 
time to reconcile their professional and personal lives, decide which cook goes home 
to cook, decide which service they want, decide which day to schedule the service, 
post reviews of the service to create value in the app and/or register in the app. 
Moreover, customers will need to make payments within the app and advertise the 
service to get benefits such as discounts or offers.  
 
 
 
 
Gains 
Figure 38. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Customer Jobs 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
75
Gains are the benefits, results, and features that the customer requires or desires. 
These are job results or desired features of a value proposition that help customers 
perform a job well. 
 
To fill in this part, some questions that may help are: What savings in terms of time, 
money, and effort would they value? What performance and quality do they expect?  
What would make your customers' work or life easier? What positive social 
consequences do your customers want? What would increase the likelihood that your 
customers would adopt a value proposition? Do they want lower cost, lower 
investment, lower risk, or higher quality?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As an example, the gains I find with WEKOK's services are saving time and money, 
achieving a balance between work and professional life, less effort to think about the 
week's menu as well as to cook, achieving healthy lifestyle habits and therefore an 
increase in quality of life, home cooking, something that the target customer wants 
the most, an easy-to-use application and personalized and direct service. Finally, I also 
talk about help with household chores, which in this case is cooking.  
 
Pains 
Pains describe anything that bothers your customers before, during, and after 
attempting to perform a job or that simply prevents them from performing the job. 
Pains also describe the risks, i.e., potential bad outcomes, associated with performing 
a job poorly done or not done. 
 
Figure 39. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Gains 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
76
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Among the pains I find in WEKOK is lack of time to cook, quality homemade food, not 
knowing how to use a mobile app, bad eating habits, never having registered in a 
mobile app, not knowing which cook best suits your desires or habits, bringing a 
stranger into your home, not being used to having help with household chores, distrust 
in personalized services and/or talking to a stranger and spreading the app among 
friends to get benefits within the app. Finally, paying through an App and making use 
of a new service. 
 
The final picture of the WEKOK customer profile would look like this: 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 40. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Pains 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
77
 
Importantly, the Customer Profile should be done without mixing several customer 
segments in a single customer profile. In my case, I have done it based on one of the 
beachheads defined in Section 2.3. "Families with both parents working".  
 
Furthermore, it is important not only to think about functional jobs such as signing up 
for the App, when filling in the Customer Jobs section but also to think about social 
and emotional jobs such as the decision to choose a cook or to have time for work-
life balance.  
 
Besides, it is meaningful to make the pains and gains tangible and concrete. That is, 
set them out in a way that you can understand exactly how customers will measure 
the success and failure of the value proposition.  
 
The Value Proposition Canvas process should be repeated for each of the customer 
beachheads you have found if you have more than one for your business idea. 
Furthermore, in case you are in a two-size market case, you need to do it for both 
sides. Therefore, I will now expose the Customer Profiles on the cooks' side: 
 
 
 
Figure 41. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Customer Segment Side 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
78
 
8.1.2.  Value Map  
 
The Value Map is divided into three main sections: products and services, gain 
creators, and pain relievers. The Value Map focuses on the product or service offered 
by the business idea. Now you have to completely forget about the customer in order 
not to add elements that you do not really cover with your value proposition and only 
satisfy the things mentioned in the Customer Profile section.   
 
Products & Services 
Here, you simply describe the specific products or services you offer in your business. 
You can also describe the elements that you want to develop in the future to provide 
more value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 42. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Customer Cooks Segment Side 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
79
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The products and services I offer with WEKOK are a mobile application through which 
the customer will get a home cooking service and a personalized weekly menu 
planned through the batch-cooking tool. In addition, this same service of home 
cooking can be applied to private parties and events. I propose a personalized 
nutritionist service as a future project to complement the current value proposition. 
 
Pain Relievers 
Pain relievers describe how exactly your products or services alleviate specific 
customer pains.  
 
Your solution is only useful if it helps customers overcome a significant pain point. 
You describe how products or services alleviate pain, eliminate discomfort, or 
eliminate the risks associated with performing your customers' jobs.  
 
Effective value proposition focuses on the pains that matter to the customer. Some 
of the questions that can help you find the pains relievers are: could your products and 
services produce savings in terms of time, money, or effort; could your products and 
services remove the barriers that prevent your customers from adopting value 
propositions; or could your products and services remove the risks that your 
customers fear in terms of financial, social, technical risks or things that could go 
wrong; or could your products and services eliminate the risks that your customers 
fear in terms of financial, social, technical risks or things that could go wrong? 
 
 
 
Figure 43. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - 
Products & Services 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
80
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Among the pain relievers highlighted in WEKOK are an easy-to-use App, a community 
of customers to build trust in the service, a secure payment system, offers cooks to 
cook for you when it suits you best and most importantly, a healthy alternative to bad 
eating habits. 
 
Gain Creators 
Once you are done with the painkillers, it is time to list the benefits and positive 
outcomes that your solution can create for your customers. These are the Gains 
Creators: how you make your customer’s life better. 
 
Again, answering a few questions can help you find those win creators: can your 
solution create savings that please your customers in terms of time, money, and 
effort? Can it do something specific that customers are looking for? in terms of good 
design, warranties or specific features? Can it help make adoption easier through 
lower cost, less investment, lower risk, better quality, better performance, or better 
design? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 44. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - 
Pain Relievers 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the case of WEKOK, I have listed the following gain creators: increase in the quality 
of health, save time because the customer does not have to cook, save money 
because the customer will buy less food and will have fewer expenses in supplies, 
save effort fewer customers because they will not have to cook, a quick adaptation to 
the App through a secure software, more free time, personalized help and at all times 
and finally qualified cooks. 
 
Be careful not to make certain mistakes such as listing all your products and services 
instead of only those targeted to a specific segment or adding products and services 
to the pain reliever and profit creator fields.  
 
Best practices for the value map are to list only the set of products and services that 
together form a value proposition for a specific customer segment and to be clear 
that pain relievers and profit creators are explanations or features that make explicit 
the value creation of your products and services. 
 
Finally, the final map of WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas for the beachhead 
customer “Families with both parents working" would be as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 45. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - 
Gain Creators 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
82
 
Again, the Value Map process should be repeated for each of the customer 
beachheads you have found. To conclude, I lay out the Value Proposition Canvas for 
the cooks' side of the market:   
 
Figure 46. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Value Proposition Customer Side 
Figure 47. WEKOK's Value Proposition Canvas - Value Proposition Cooks Side 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
83
8.2. Quantify the Value Proposition  
 
The Quantified Value Proposition converts the benefits the Person gets from your 
product or service into a tangible metric that aligns with the Person's top priority.  
 
Your products or services may have many benefits, for example, in the case of WEKOK, 
your service may help a customer ease the process of household chores or help them 
improve their eating habits.  The benefits are divided into three categories: "better", 
"faster" and "cheaper" and the aim is to align the benefits of the product or service 
with what your customer most wants to improve.  
 
Focus on what the customers selected as beachhead markets want to gain rather than 
getting into details about the technology, features and functions. They must justify the 
investment required to purchase your product or service by offsetting this with how 
much money your product or service will make them or how it will improve their life in 
a way that matters to them.   
 
The following are the main priorities of the person representing WEKOK. First of all, 
the priorities of the Person on the buyer's side of the market:   
 
• Help with household chores. In this case, cooking.  
• Achieving a healthy lifestyle.  
• Free time to enjoy with family, friends, and other activities.  
• Feeling good about yourself.  
• Eating real, home-cooked food.  
• A simplified weekly menu.  
• Saving money.  
• Not wasting food.  
 
For the market side of the Person providing the service, i.e. cooks, the priorities would 
be:  
• Get more money per month.  
• Publicise their creations.  
• Direct contact with the customer.  
• New job opportunity.  
• Job flexibility. 
 
The top priority of the chosen Persona, Lola, is to have the work week meal semi-
prepared for her and her family as she does not have much time to cook. So below, I 
will show a timing diagram comparing Lola's current situation with the situation Lola 
would be in using WEKOK services. 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
84
 
 
In the diagram above (Figure 48) we can see the comparison of Person Lola using 
WEKOK and not using WEKOK. With this example, I can quantify the value proposition 
by showing what the WEKOK service would look like in the Persona's real life and how 
to visually show the service quantifies one of their top priorities. 
 
Optimally this is best represented with quantitative metrics of money or time in terms 
of savings, for example, but I have not yet developed any pricing structure with WEKOK 
and therefore do not show it in this chart. I only show qualitative metrics. 
 
In the case of the cooks’ side of the market I will also present a diagram (Figure 49) 
of the Quantifying the Value Proposition in which you can see how the use of WEKOK 
by chefs also corresponds to one of their top priorities, a new job opportunity to get x 
Figure 48. Quantified Customer Value Proposition 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
85
 
9. Core  
 
So far, I have developed the methodology focusing on how to meet the needs and 
problems that our target customer has. But from now on, the focus should be 
exclusively on communicating what makes the new business idea special, what its 
secret ingredient is.  
 
As [20] states, the core is the definition of how you are going to deliver the benefits of 
your business to your customers and what are your advantages and differences that 
you deliver, unlike your competitors. What makes you different from them. What is 
that unique thing that you have and offer that they don't and that, moreover, will be 
very difficult for any other company to duplicate. You simply have to think about 
answering the question: What is it that you do better than others? What does your 
product or service do that your competitors can't duplicate, or can't easily duplicate? 
That is your core. 
 
The best way to show the answer to these questions and to clearly understand what 
the core of a business idea is to explain it with an example. So, I will explain the core 
of WEKOK.  
Figure 49. Quantified Cooks Value Proposition 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
86
WEKOK's culture and differentiation from the rest of the alternatives are focused on 
highlighting customer service. A high, personalized, and exclusive quality of service. 
This is a potential core that will allow me to retain customers at a very high rate 
compared to competitors and therefore avoid costly customer churn. In addition, it 
will also be easy to attract new customers in a much more efficient way as users who 
are delighted with the service will become WEKOK sellers creating positive word of 
mouth. This core requires a very strong commitment from the entire WEKOK team to 
execute a high level of customer satisfaction. This core is easy for a competitor to 
duplicate, but if ours works before they do, it will be the most effective. 
 
Another indispensable component of the WEKOK Core is the network effect. As soon 
as WEKOK achieves a critical mass in the market, it makes no sense for customers to 
use another competitor's service. The potential of this part of the core is that the value 
obtained by each customer in the network is exponentially related to the number of 
users in the network. The more users there are in the network, the more valuable the 
company is, and therefore, the more customers using the service. This is a positive 
feedback loop. The more customers who require the service, the more future 
customers there will be, and also, the more cooks there are, the more future cooks 
there will be who will be able to perform more services, which translates into more 
profit for the company. 
 
Finally, another fundamental part of the WEKOK core is the interaction between 
customers and chefs. A social community will be created in which customers will be 
able to validate the service through the experience of other customers and will also 
have direct contact with them and the chefs.  
 
In this way, I determined a core that would protect me and give me a huge competitive 
advantage. Certainly, it was not obvious at the beginning, but after the market analysis 
finally, the definition of WEKOK's core was obvious. 
 
Now that the core of the new venture is clear, a better analysis of competitors can be 
made, as this will protect you overtime above and beyond anything else. It is worth 
mentioning the importance of continuously developing and strengthening the core. 
Defining and strengthening it is an essential step in maximising the value of the 
business.   
10.Competitive analysis  
 
[21] proposes to make a chart showing the competitive situation of your business. 
But, before doing this, a thorough analysis of the current competitors and their 
comparison with your product and service must be done in order to be able to 
represent this chart. The [21] does not explain how to carry out this preliminary 
analysis process and I have relied on other sources such as [22], [23] and [24]. 
 
The process I propose to analyse the competitive situation is the one shown in Figure 
50: 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
87
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Who are your competitors? Identify the main competitors and categorise them. 
This categorisation can be done in many ways. For example, some 
classifications can be direct competitors, indirect competitors, competitors in 
the same sector, competitors in the same market, actual and/or potential 
competitors.  
 
I have done this process for WEKOK as follows. First of all, because the WEKOK 
service itself does not currently exist on the market, I have looked for 
companies that are dedicated to performing WEKOK services independently, 
i.e. companies that send ready-made food to your home and companies that 
send chefs to your home to perform a specific dinner or lunch service.   
Additionally, another of my competitors are delivery food companies.  
 
These competing companies are Wetaca, MenuDiet, Miplato, Foodfilin, 
Takeachef Thesupperstars, Espai Boisà, Glovo, Deliveroo, UberEats and 
JustEat. These are the most competitive companies for WEKOK.  
 
Once WEKOK's top competitors have been identified, they must be categorised. 
I have done this categorisation on the basis of the service that each one offers 
with respect to what WEKOK provides to the customer.  
 
On the one hand, the companies Takeachef, Thesupperstars and Espai Boisà 
are direct competitors. That is, they offer a very similar service to WEKOK, 
target the same market segment and use a very similar sales strategy. They 
offer a home chef service for lunch or dinner. WEKOK also offers a home chef 
service, but in this case, they not only offer this type of service but also offer 
cooking for a whole week, among others. The way in which WEKOK delivers 
this service makes it different from its competitors. Due to the mobile 
application, the service contract is simpler and more convenient. 
 
Unlike the above, the companies Wetaca, MenuDiet, Miplato and Foodfilin are 
indirect competitors. In other words, they offer a service to cover the same 
need. These companies offer products or services that are usually substitutes 
Figure 50. Followed competitive analysis process 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
88
for what you offer with your business. The companies mentioned previously 
seek to offer a service that covers the same need that I have identified with 
WEKOK, the lack of time to cook. They offer pre-cooked food delivered to 
homes while WEKOK offers semi-prepared food cooked in the customer's own 
home, delivering a stronger value proposition as it is a more exclusive, 
personalised and quality service. 
 
Finally, there is the case of food delivery companies such as Glovo, JustEat, 
Deliveroo and UberEats. These I have categorised as competitors in the same 
sector. That is, these companies produce services that are within the same 
production sector. The food sector and its delivery to the customer's home. I 
have identified them as competitors even though they are neither exactly the 
same service nor the same value proposition, but at some point, they can 
become a quick and effective solution to the problem of lack of time to cook. 
However, it is not a solution that will last over time.  
 
2. Competitor analysis and assessment. Here you have to analyze and evaluate 
the main competition by looking for information about the companies. You just 
have to look for, on the one hand, the objectives and strategies they have to 
know what they are giving more importance to. And on the other hand, their 
strengths and weaknesses to know how to better respond to their attacks and 
defend ourselves or instead, attack them in their weak points and take 
advantage of the opportunity.  
 
In my case, I simply inspected the websites and apps of each of the 
competitors. Look at how their services work and what their generic features 
are in commercial and functional terms. 
 
3. Comparison with the competitor you are going to interact with.  This last step 
will allow us to conclude, in a visual and effective way, the differences of our 
business idea with the rest of the top competitors. What we have to do is to 
choose 2 or 3 competitors considered as potential competitors and to show in 
a table their differences with respect to our business idea.  
 
The choice of these 2 or 3 competitors can be done following different 
strategies. One may be to choose weak competitors, to quickly stand out from 
them. Another strategy may be to choose strong or dominant competitors in 
order to work more on the competitive differences and build a stronger 
proposition than theirs and thus make it more difficult to attack us.  
 
In WEKOK's case, I have made two comparative tables. One comparative table 
has been for the group of direct competitors and the other for the indirect 
competitors. I have chosen this strategy because I consider that these are the 
competitors that could attack me the fastest because they propose solutions 
to the same problems that I have found. It is true that neither of them has 
realized the WEKOK business opportunity yet because both parties suffer from 
the lack of the other's solution.  
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 51. WEKOK's comparative table I 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once the process of analysis of WEKOK's competitors has been carried out, I can 
conclude that there is a threat since there are already companies established that 
Figure 52. WEKOK's comparative table II 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
91
want to solve both the lack of time to cook and to provide people with a healthy diet 
to increase their health.  
 
However, despite this, WEKOK proposes a stronger value proposition since it joins 
both issues and brings them together in a single business opportunity offering a more 
sophisticated, personalized, close and complete service.  
 
It is worth mentioning that currently the strongest competitor is Wetaca. Many people 
interviewed had already tried their services and although they all told me that they still 
did not feel that it was 100% real food and that it was expensive, Wetaca is the 
strongest competitor I have with WEKOK. It is implementing a very strong marketing 
strategy and finally, it solves the problem of "lack of time to cook". 
 
10.1. 
 Competitive position chart 
 
Secondly, my main resource is the one proposed by the book Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship because it seems to me a very visual and concise proposal about 
the situation of your business idea with respect to the top competitors. 
 
Customers often shop comparatively, considering all options and determining which 
solution best fits their priorities. Thus, the competitor positioning chart will help you 
analyze how much better off you are relative to your company, as well as highlight 
areas of weakness. This, combined with the quantified value proposition (section 8.2), 
demonstrates that your product is needed and that you are the right organization to 
solve the problem. 
 
In the Competitive Positioning Chart, you visually show how well you meet your 
Persona's top two priorities versus how well your competition does. The goal is to 
show that your Competitive Position leverages your core and that your product meets 
your Persona's priorities much better than existing or logical future products. [25] 
 
Having conducted primary customer research during Sprint I, in this case, we start 
with mapping the competitive situation. The first thing to do is to be clear on the two 
main priorities of the defined Person. The second is to build the chart.  
 
In my case, WEKOK four main priorities because as it is a two-sided market, I have 
defined two different Personas.  
 
For the customer Persona, the top two priorities are: having the work week menu semi-
prepared for her and her family and the free time left during the day not having to 
spend it on cooking.  
 
For the Persona chef, the two top priorities are: a new job opportunity adapted to her 
schedule and making her own culinary creations known.  
 
 
Now begins the creation of the graph: 
 
1. It is a graph with X-axis and Y-axis that are divided into two halves.  
==PAGE:92==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
92
 
2. On each of the axes, you write the priorities of the People.  
 
3. Now, on the halves of the X and Y axes that are closer to the origin of 
coordinates, write the "bad state" of the priority assigned to each axis. On the 
other hand, in the half of the axis that is farther away from the axis, we write 
"the good status" of the priority of the axis we are on.  
 
4. The last step is to place your business idea on the graph and then the 
competitors selected as top on the same graph. 
 
To visualize this process, I will present the WEKOK case. It is worth mentioning that I 
will have two graphs due to the two-side market situation (Figure 53):  
==PAGE:93==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
93
Figure 53. WEKOK's competitive position chart 
 
 
As can be seen in the above graphs, WEKOK is located in the upper right quadrant of 
both graphs. It sits in the upper right-hand corner of each priority. This means that I 
have conducted good primary market research in Sprint I.  
 
Otherwise, if the business idea is in the lower left quadrant, it means that you should 
go back to the first step of SPRINT I and reconsider the proposed solution. The other 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
94
quadrants are not necessarily bad positions, they simply mean that the product or 
service should be re-evaluated in comparison with the competition.  
 
To validate this chart 100% correctly, you can discuss with a couple of potential 
customers your idea and listen to their opinion. But this is not a necessary step, only 
recommended. 
 
11.DMU. Customer’s Decision-Making Unit 
 
[26] proposes to define the Customer's Decision-Making Unit or DMU. I found it a very 
interesting concept to add in my methodology because to achieve a successful sale 
of the product or service it is very important to identify all the people who will 
participate in the decision to purchase the product for the end user. And that is what 
defines the DMU. 
 
In this book, a very simple and common language is proposed to describe this process 
and therefore, I have decided to integrate it in the methodology and, consequently, in 
the development of my startup, WEKOK.   
 
The goal throughout this process is to operate in "researcher" mode rather than 
"salesperson" mode, to get useful information about the DMU. 
 
The first step is to put yourself in the situation where you have already created the 
product to be able to offer the service. For example, in the case of WEKOK, I have 
already created the mobile application and the Web for the first customers to start 
booking the cooks. Now I have to answer the following questions (I will exemplify the 
answer to these questions with the WEKOK case):  
 
• Who is involved in the buying process? In the buying process is involved only 
and exclusively each customer.  
• Who makes the purchasing decision? Again, the purchasing decision is made 
by the customer.  
• Who has a positive influence? Every chef will have a positive influence through 
his or her profile. In other words, if your profile is attractive to customers, your 
photos, your reviews, your availability... But each customer will also have a 
positive influence. It is a service in which word of mouth is essential for its 
success, so each customer is essential for the positive influence.  
• Who can delay or block the process? Competitors such as Wetaca or MenuDiet 
can block the buying process for customers. But also, again, customers 
themselves can block the process through negative feedback and chefs 
through poor service. 
• Where does the budget come from? From the customers who use WEKOK's 
service.  
 
According to [26], once you have these questions answered, make a list of the people 
who you believe are in that customer and who may have the roles of User, Payer, or 
Champion. 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
95
• The Payer is the first decision maker in the purchase decision making process 
as they control the budget.  
 
• The End-user is the person who uses the product. The person to whom we have 
to deliver 100% of the value proposition. 
 
• The Champion is the person who advocates your product, usually actively 
participates in the buying process, and pushes for its successful completion. 
 
According to the answers to the previous questions and the definition of the roles 
described above, for WEKOK I can conclude that the role of Payer and End User is 
shared by the same person, which in our case is the customer. Specifically, and 
relating it to the Persons described above, this role would be played by the Person 
Lola. 
 
On the other hand, the role of Champion would be developed by each cook who 
performs the WEKOK service. They will be the ones who best defend the product and 
service and who will participate the most in the process of buying and pushing to 
reach more customers. The better they play their role, the more successful the sales 
process will be. Here, I am talking about the Tomás Person. 
 
But you may also encounter other roles that may not be so obvious, such as 
Influencers, Veto power, and Regulators.  
 
• Influencers: is the person or people who influence the buying process 
positively. There are two types: those who do it directly and those who can do 
it indirectly, such as suppliers, family, associations, blogs...  
 
• Veto power: is the one who has the power to hinder, veto or sabotage the 
purchasing decision. They are usually people who do not want you to sell 
because they feel threatened by you, someone who protects your product. 
 
• Compliance officer: professionals in the field of regulation or standard or 
quality control entity that can exercise a power to hinder the sale. 
 
Regarding these roles, at WEKOK I can specify that I will have two types of influencers. 
Those who will do it directly, which are the customers themselves through word of 
mouth and the chefs through creating attractive profiles and performing good 
services. And those who will do it indirectly, which will be considered for the marketing 
or expansion plan. The idea is a large investment in marketing so in Spain advertising 
through Instagram and its Influencers will be essential. In addition, partnerships with 
supermarkets and companies will be sought.  
 
On the other hand, in the case of Veto Power, WEKOK will have a very strong threat 
from competitors, specifically Wetaca. Wetaca has a very strong marketing campaign 
in Spain and more and more people know about their service. 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
96
12. The process to acquire a paying customer  
 
After you know who will make the decision, how will you make that decision? Defining 
how the buying decision will be made will optimize the process of getting the product 
or service into the customer's hands and the money into the company's hands.  
 
However, the process by which you convert a lead into a paying customer, and from 
initial contact to final payment, is more complicated than asking your Champion and 
Influencer to push your Lead Economic Buyer. 
 
[27] proposes a map structure to visualize the process of Acquiring a Paying 
Customer. Thanks to this map, you will be able to understand the sales cycle time for 
both acquiring new customers and projecting cash flow accurately. Build a basis for 
the Customer Acquisition Calculation (COCA, we will see it in SPRINT III). Identify the 
obstacles to selling the product or service and therefore to getting paid. And finally, to 
be able to demonstrate to potential investors that you understand the customer 
buying process. 
 
In short, determining a paying customer's acquisition process defines how the DMU 
decides to purchase the product, and identifies other obstacles that may hinder your 
ability to sell your product. 
 
In order to go deeper into this procedure for the WEKOK case, I am going to expose 
how the ideal process of acquiring a paying customer would look like in the following 
roadmap: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
97
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As you can see in the Figure 54, it would not be until after 6 or 7 months that I would 
get my first customer to buy WEKOK's service in an ideal situation, with no obstacles.  
This is the ideal process I should follow to make WEKOK successful. 
 
Obviously, the success of WEKOK lies in finding a critical mass of both cooks and 
customers buying the service. Therefore, in the first step of the above roadmap we 
find the first possible obstacle that I would face with the idea of WEKOK, getting cooks 
willing to do the job.  
Figure 54. Roadmap of WEKOK's success & the process to acquire a 
paying customer 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
98
 
Despite the strong value proposition delivered to them, without them it is not possible 
to perform the service and therefore impossible to get a paying customer. Therefore, 
my defense will be to make a strong sales campaign firstly to them to make them trust 
the business and achieve the proposed value. 
 
Once I have cooks willing to work for WEKOK and who fully trust the idea, I have to 
make an advertising campaign through indirect influencers to get the first customers 
and after a while get that critical mass of customers that I mentioned above. Once 
both critical masses are achieved, the influence will be direct and indirect, and I will 
achieve the success of WEKOK. 
13. Business DNA 
 
During the process followed in this Sprint, the DNA of the business idea has been 
defined. This section is a point that I have not found described in any of the reference 
methodologies but that seems to me a very appropriate way to show the value 
proposition of any new venture and present it in a summarized way to any potential 
investor or partner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following the steps indicated during this Sprint, answers have been given to each of 
the steps described in the Figure 55. In this way we have been describing the DNA 
loop of our business idea. 
 
Figure 55. Business DNA process 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
99
The aim of this step is that in a few lines of text you will be able to recount each of the 
steps in the loop to define the DNA of the startup.  
 
As an example, I will now describe the WEKOK DNA:  
 
WEKOK is based on two very different customer segments: the customers who pay 
for the service and the cooks who provide the service. Both have needs that are 
currently not covered, such as the lack of time to cook a healthy and planned menu 
due to the lack of time in their working days in the case of the paying customers, and 
the lack of job opportunities and knowledge of their culinary creations in the case of 
the cooks.  
 
In response to their pains and gains, WEKOK proposes a very powerful core value to 
eliminate these shortcomings in the lives of its potential customers. This core is fully 
defined by homemade food, new job opportunities, improving the health and well-
being of the customers, providing real free time to their customers, avoiding food 
waste and saving and earning money respectively for the paying customers of the 
service and the cooks.  
 
This, finally, builds differentiating advantages for WEKOK in comparison to its main 
competitors: innovative and complete service as there is currently no such complete 
service available, transparency in the food preparation process as it takes place in the 
customer's own home and the guarantee of an exclusive, sophisticated and 
personalised service to its customers.  
 
14.SPRINT II conclusion  
 
The goal of this Sprint is to answer the question What? What is your business idea 
going to bring to differentiate it from your competitors and what is your business idea 
going to deliver to your main potential customers.  
 
The proposed process to answer this question builds the DNA of the business idea. 
This DNA will be a key point when it comes to finding a future investor or partner. It is 
a summarised way of telling the core of the business.  
 
The methodologies that have been present as a reference to build this Sprint have 
been Disciplined Entrepreneurship and Lean Startup, with a predominant presence of 
the book Disciplined Entrepreneurship. 
 
In relation to WEKOK, with this Sprint I have been able to define a detailed value 
proposition of the business and its core. Besides, I have made an exhaustive analysis 
of the competitive situation in which I find myself with WEKOK.  
 
The most interesting points for me during this process have been the definition of the 
DMU and the process of acquiring a paying customer. Both are two points that 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship includes in its 24 steps to a successful startup and that 
I have not found in the other two methodologies. Thanks to them, I have seen who the 
main people would be involved during the buying decision process. Not only the 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
                                                                                            Sprint II: Idea DNA breakdown 
 
 
 
100 
interested people, but we will also define the people who will be an "obstacle" in this 
process. Moreover, a vision of what the roadmap of getting a paying customer would 
look like and finally, achieving WEKOK's success.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPRINT III: CREATING THE STARTUP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 56. SPRINT III. Creating a startup 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
102 
15.A customer's day on the board 
 
During this Sprint, the Lean Startup and Disciplined Entrepreneurship methodologies 
will have a significant influence. But it is true, that this step of defining the day of one 
of the potential customers or the Persona defined as the starting point to create the 
minimum viable product is not explained in any of the methodologies mentioned 
above.  
 
I consider it a very important preliminary step and, therefore, in this section, the story 
of a customer, namely the Persona defined in section 5 as Lola, using WEKOK's 
services will be told as an example.  
 
To do so, I propose to create a storyboard in a comic form to show how your potential 
customer is going to use your product or service on one of his/her days. 
 
  
 
Figure 57. Lola's day on the board 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
103 
In the storyboard shown in Figure 57 I illustrate the story of Lola, a customer who 
decides to make use of WEKOK's services. Here you can see that it is a Family Sunday 
in which Lola decides to use the WEKOK App and book the cook Tomás. The 
storyboard shows the process from the moment Lola books the chef until the chef 
leaves her home.  
 
While Lola watches a movie with her family, Tomás performs a batchcooking service 
for her for 2.5 hours. Once it is ready, Tomás gives Lola instructions on how to 
preserve and prepare all the food he has cooked. When the cook leaves Lola's house, 
she will be able to enjoy the rest of her day off with her family, and during the week 
ahead, she will not have to worry about preparing food, and the time she spent 
preparing food will be used for other activities. 
16.MBP. Minimum Business Prototype 
 
The most successful and influential methodology in the field of prototyping and its 
validation process is the one proposed by Lean Startup. [29] defines the MVP as the 
version of the product of your business idea that allows you to make a full round of 
the Create-Measure-Learn loop with minimum effort and minimum development time.  
 
The MVP is a version missing many elements that may be essential later on. However, 
creating an MVP requires extra work: measuring its impact. The method proposed by 
[29] is called "innovation accounting". This is a qualitative approach that will allow us 
to see if our efforts are paying off. In this way, we will be able to observe progress 
objectively.  
 
Furthermore, [29] highlights the importance of pivoting. Pivoting is the process that 
continues at the end of the Create-Measure-Learn loop. At the end, we must make the 
decision to pivot the initial strategy or to persevere with it. 
 
But it is not only this methodology that emphasises the importance of creating a 
minimum viable product. Disciplined Entrepreneurship also talks about the 
importance of creating it. But it does not call it MVP but rather MVBP or Minimum 
Viable Business Product.  
 
[30] defines the MVBP as the process that combines your key individual assumptions 
into the integrated product to be sold. This means the main priorities of the defined 
Person. This MVBP will allow you to test the assumption(s) that we have defined as 
those that our customers will pay for our product or service.  
 
The MVBP allows you to test the hypotheses that you have defined as those that your 
customers will pay for your product or service. Therefore, it proposes that your MVBP 
should meet the following requirements:  
 
1. The customer gets value from the use of the product. 
2. The customer pays for the product. 
3. The product is sufficient to start the customer feedback loop, in which the 
customer can help it iterate towards a better and better product. 
 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
104 
Both techniques seem to me to be very powerful tools for defining a minimum viable 
product. Therefore, I propose the creation of a MBP, Minimum Business Prototype.  
 
By this concept I intend to convey the need to create a minimum product through a 
prototype with the minimum effort and time that both methodologies have in 
common. By combining the key idea of Lean Startup, which is to learn and pivot to 
know how to measure the progress of the process, and with respect to the Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship methodology, to test the main assumptions made to define our 
Persona. 
 
16.1. 
 Paper prototyping  
 
The first step I would propose for the creation of this MBP is the creation of a 
prototype of your business idea's product on paper.  
 
This process consists of drawing sketches of the product to create a first contact with 
its functionality. This paper prototyping step is not a substitute for digital or real 
prototyping, it is simply a useful process for conceptualisation at an early stage.  
 
By applying this step prior to digital or real prototyping we can obtain numerous 
advantages:  
 
• Rapid iteration. Paper prototyping will allow multiple versions to be created, and 
discarded, without wasting a lot of time.  
 
• Economical. Paper is cheap and therefore an economical and efficient 
alternative.  
 
• Greater creativity. Often, digital prototyping reduces a lot of imagination due to 
the lack of some software resources. With pen and paper, everything is 
possible, and nothing is limited.  
 
• Ease of teamwork. The whole team can participate in this process. There are 
no limits of intermediary software.  
 
• Tangible. Paper prototypes are tangible documents, i.e. they can continue to be 
reused and future features can be added as iterations progress. And they can 
always be left visible. 
 
As an example of what this process would look like, I am going to make a paper 
prototype of the WEKOK mobile application: 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More than details, what I mainly wanted to describe with the paper prototype was the 
functionality of the different services I want to offer with WEKOK.  
 
In Figure 58, what I want to highlight the most is the main screen once a user or 
customer has logged in. It shows the services I want to offer with WEKOK.  In the 
image you can see how the buttons S1, S2, S3, S4, S5 and S6.  
 
Figure 58. WEKOK's paper prototyping 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
106 
• S1 is the service called Chef. It will be used to book a chef to prepare a 
batchcooking service. The customer will simply have to enter the location, the 
date and the day on which he/she wants the service and upon that, a list of 
available chefs near him/her will appear.  
 
• The S2 is the so-called Express service. It is a service that you want to hire in 
the next 48 hours at the most. Again, you select the day, the available time slot 
and the cook who is available for those requirements.  
 
• The S3 is the Event service. If this is the desired service, a screen will appear to 
select the type of event desired, the number of attendees and the date and time 
of the event. Once the requirements are defined, a pop-up will appear with a 
message thanking the client and telling them that we will contact them shortly 
to provide a solution.  
 
• The S4 is the Job Portal service. With this service I intend to put restaurants at 
the disposal of cooks in case they need more cooks or just want to hire 
someone new.  Here the restaurant will have to enter the number of cooks they 
need, when they need them for and a brief description of exactly what they 
need. Again, the pop-up will appear at this point with a message to a contact 
from WEKOK giving them a solution. 
 
• The S5 is the Food Type service. It is simply a filter from which, when the 
customer clicks on a specific type of food, the chefs who specialise in that type 
of food will appear and they will be able to contract their services.  
 
• Finally, the S6 service consists of a history of the last services contracted by 
the logged-in user to speed up the process if they wish to repeat a previous 
service.  
 
Moreover, in Figure 58, you can see a screen that consists of the chef's profile. This 
screen will consist of a summary of the cook's personal data, as well as photos of his 
creations, reviews made by other customers for his services and a proof of his 
availability. 
 
In the following image I am going to show the paper prototype of what the App would 
look like in the case of a cook logging in:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The screens for cooks are simple and intuitive. The initial screen will be your profile, 
which they can edit whenever they want and has four main buttons.  
 
• Button 1. It consists of a button to add content as photos or videos to their 
profile.  
 
• Button 2. Support. Support service for any questions or problems that may arise 
for the cook. WEKOK will take care of it.  
 
• Button 3. This button consists of the activation and deactivation of work. That 
is, when the cook arrives at the client's house and starts cooking, he/she must 
swipe to go online and when he/she leaves the house, swipe to go offline. In 
this same screen they will have a support option for any question that may arise 
during the service.  
 
• Button 4. This will be a configuration and information button. Here, cooks will 
be able to access their account settings, see their accumulated payouts, 
configure their work schedule, observe their history or check their reviews.  
 
Once this procedure is done, it is time to move on to digital prototyping. But already 
with a base that will facilitate the way and will save us a lot of time invested. In the 
next section I will talk about this process. 
 
 
Figure 59. WEKOK's paper prototype 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
108 
16.2. 
Digital prototyping  
 
Digital prototyping is a fundamental business tool to drive your product validation 
quickly, safely and cost-effectively.  
 
These prototypes can take different forms, from a working sample to a model or 
simulation of a digital product or service, thus developing an early-stage minimum 
viable product.  
 
The creation of these prototypes allows:  
 
• Test hypotheses and refine ideas.  
• Perform usability tests with real users of the product or service.  
• Collect data and validate product requirements.  
 
This process allows you to develop the simplest iteration of a product in a cost-
effective way. Testing and listening to feedback from your target audience allows you 
to improve the digital product or service over time, adapting as you learn as you go. In 
this way, you can observe changes in user behaviors and needs and adjust your 
offering to better address those needs as they evolve. 
 
This approach is the message you want to convey [29] with the build-measure-learn 
loop. It allows you to test and learn early before bringing a product to market. It brings 
clarity to what you are trying to do while eliminating risk and ensuring that you focus 
on delivering business value, rather than features that contribute little to your 
objectives.  
 
With lower barriers to entry, developing a digital prototype can be key to bringing a 
business plan to life, securing funding and acceptance of digital initiatives. 
 
Next, I will show the process of creation and validation through different iterations 
with the WEKOK digital prototype. 
 
16.2.1. First iteration 
 
The first version I made of the WEKOK mobile application was in Denmark during my 
exchange program as an exchange student doing the thesis you are currently reading. 
When I started writing my entrepreneurial thesis, I started to think that I would need to 
learn some technological tool for the development of digital prototypes to complete 
100% the methodology. At that time, I started to learn the Figma tool, and that is 
therefore, I used it for the development of the first digital prototype of the application 
that I propose with WEKOK.  
 
To design this first iteration or prototype design I was inspired by the most important 
Spanish multiplatform applications nowadays and specifically I focused on mobile 
applications because they are the most used among the population since it would be 
accessible to a wider audience. Another filter I used to look for applications that 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
109 
inspired me was mobile applications that were successful for being intuitive and easy 
to use.  
 
Among the applications that inspired me to create the first prototype of WEKOK I 
highlight Glovo, Airbnb, Revolut and Uber. In addition, during my stay in Denmark I 
started working delivering food with Wolt.At this point, I realized that this app followed 
the same business model as WEKOK but applied to restaurants and delivery drivers.  
The cooks that I wanted to go to the customers' homes were me as a delivery person. 
And the operation of the App would be the same. Thus, Wolt was a very powerful 
source of inspiration. It met the requirements I was looking for and also the business 
model was similar to the one I propose with WEKOK.  
 
Once I had chosen the tool to carry out the first prototype and analyzed and evaluated 
the characteristics of the previously mentioned applications, I adapted them to 
WEKOK's business model.  
 
In this first version I intended to replicate the paper prototypes that can be seen in the 
section and improve them from the analysis of the applications used as inspiration 
(Figure 60). 
 
As I commented in section 16.1, with this first design I intended to create the home 
page, the main menu, define and design the main services offered by WEKOK and 
finally, the login as a cook and its main features since it is different from that of the 
clients. 
 
Figure 60. WEKOK's APP in Figma. Overall view 
==PAGE:110==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 
1.Homepage. 
WEKOK's App 
Illustration 2. Login & Sign-up screen. 
WEKOK's App 
Illustration 3. Main 
menu. WEKOK's 
App 
Illustration 5. Chefs 
service I. WEKOK's 
App 
Illustration 4. Chefs 
service II. WEKOK's 
App 
==PAGE:111==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 6.Food 
type service. 
WEKOK's App 
Illustration 7. Express 
service I. WEKOK's App 
Illustration 8. Express 
service II. WEKOK's App 
Illustration 9. Event 
service I. WEKOK's App 
Illustration 10. Event 
service II. WEKOK's 
App 
Illustration 11. Pop-up Event 
& Restaurant service. 
WEKOK's APP 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 12. 
Restaurant service. 
WEKOK's App 
Illustration 13. Historical 
service. WEKOK's App 
Illustration 14. 
Cooks profile. 
WEKOK's App 
Illustration 15. Main 
screen I. WEKOK's Chefs 
App 
Illustration 17. Support 
screen. WEKOK's Chefs 
App 
Illustration 16. Main 
screen II. WEKOK's Chefs 
App 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
113 
As we have seen in the theoretical part, this part of the methodology is based on the 
approach of the Lean Startup method of validation and learning. This I have done with 
WEKOK by validating the following assumptions:  
 
1. Validation at usability level. What is easy for me is also easy for them. Both for 
the buying customers as well as for the cooks.  
2. Validation at the technological level. To validate that the functional analysis of 
the APP is correct. That the workflow is correct. 
3. At a professional/employability level.  To validate legal issues.  
 
 
On the one hand, I analyzed the assumption of usability to different people. A total of 
10 people. From them I extracted a lot of very valid information from which the most 
important comment was that they considered it very intuitive and pleasant to the eye. 
But also, I acquired feedback to make different changes that I will discuss in the next 
section.  
 
On the other hand, I analyzed the assumption at a technological level with expert 
mobile application developers from Think&Lab. They gave me very positive feedback 
from which I learned a lot. Among the things I learned were that it made excessive use 
of different elements that were not necessary on all screens. But again, I will discuss 
that in the next section.  
 
Finally, to validate the assumption at the employability level, I interviewed a legal 
professional and current HR worker in a large company. I validated the assumption 
that it is a fully viable business model in terms of employability and that I could 
successfully pursue the idea. 
 
To conclude this first iteration, I noted that further iterations of metrics and learning 
would be necessary, in addition to making numerous improvements at the functional 
level. This is a process that will be relentless in the development of a business model.  
 
16.2.2. Sencond iteration  
 
Regarding the improvements at functionality level, one of the changes that I had to 
make for a correct workflow of the application was the location bar in the client 
application. They told me that it would only be useful at the moment of selecting the 
desired service, not during all the screens of the application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As you can see in the images above, the location bar will only be visible when 
configuring the cook's reservation and will disappear in the rest of the screens.  
 
On the other hand, one of the improvements I made was at the level of usability in the 
APP of the cooks. They emphasized that they needed an application that was very 
clear in economic terms. That they could always see their economic aspects and that 
it was always clear their activity with respect to the client. Because of this, I added a 
pop-up that would always indicate if they were making a correct use of the APP and 
see if they were online or offline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Illustration 20. 2nd 
iteration main 
menu. WEKOK's 
APP 
Illustration 19. 2nd 
iteration chefs 
service I. WEKOK's 
APP 
Illustration 18. 2nd 
iteration chefs 
service II. WEKOK's 
APP 
Illustration 21. 2nd 
iteration cooks APP 
Illustration 22. 2nd 
iteration cooks APP 
==PAGE:115==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
115 
So far, I have iterated and created the WEKOK’s MBP. One or more iterations could be 
done and create a more powerful and validated MBP for further actual development. 
But due to time constraints I am not going to develop this process further for my 
thesis. 
17. Business model 
 
When any entrepreneur starts to develop his or her own business idea, he or she needs 
to transform it into what is called a business plan. But not everyone knows how to 
define what they think, what they do, how to do it and who they are.  
 
Entrepreneurs often spend a disproportionate amount of time on their business 
model. They spend a lot of time developing the end-user profile, product definition and 
value proposition, showing how they are going to create value for the customer, but 
they spend hardly time figuring out how that value translates into a profitable 
business. They are so excited to get the product to market that they simply adopt by 
default whatever business model is popular in similar markets. 
 
Fortunately, thanks to the book "Business Model Generation", written by Alexander 
Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur, the method of creating business models using the 
Business Model Canvas approach will be standardized. This is a tool created by Alex 
Osterwalder that makes it easy to create a business model visually.  
 
But it was Ash Maurya, author of the book "Running Lean" [31] who optimized and 
adapted Alex Osterwalder's model for startups by creating the Lean Canvas. As far as 
this thesis is concerned, I propose to create this Lean Canvas created by Ash Maurya.  
Figure 61. Lean Canvas Model 
==PAGE:116==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
116 
 
[32] emphasizes the importance of taking the time to decide what the business model 
of your startup will be to capture value. He defines the business model as a framework 
through which you will be able to extract from your customers a part of the value of 
the product you create for them. It is the idea that the amount of money your company 
receives is based on the value the customer gets from your product, not an arbitrary 
margin based on your costs.   
 
To illustrate a business model, I will present the Lean Canvas of WEKOK: 
 
The decisions made to define the business model will have a direct impact on the 
profitability of the startup. Moreover, this profitability will be measured by two key 
variables, the lifetime value of a customer acquired (LTV) and the cost of customer 
acquisition (COCA), which I will explain in the following sections. 
 
It is important to keep in mind that we must choose a business model that 
distinguishes us from our competitors and gives us an advantage over them, since 
once the business model is established, it is difficult to change it and therefore, 
competitors will not be able to change it either.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 62. WEKOK's Lean Canvas Model 
==PAGE:117==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
117 
18.Pricing Framework  
 
Having a business model in hand, you can now make a good first estimate of your 
Pricing Framework understanding that it is likely to change as you continue to move 
through the startup development process. It is important to keep in mind that fine-
tuning your pricing strategy can have a big impact on your profits. 
 
While your business model is much less likely to change, pricing is often subject to 
change based on market conditions.  
 
Your goal for the moment is to create a first step strategy that allows you to calculate 
the Lifetime Value of an Acquired Customer, which together with the Cost of Customer 
Acquisition is an important variable that indicates the profitability of your business. It 
also helps you to define the income statement. 
 
[33] state that the pricing framework is your attempt to strike a balance between 
capturing as much revenue as possible and attracting as many customers as 
possible. 
 
[33] proposes a guide that I found very interesting to define the Pricing Framework. In 
the guide he proposes to take into consideration the following points:  
 
1. Costs should not be a factor in deciding the price. 
2. Use the DMU and the Procurement Process of a Paying Customer to identify 
key pricing points. 
3. Understand the pricing of customer alternatives. 
4. Different types of customers will pay different prices. 
5. Be flexible with pricing for early testers and "lighthouse customers". 
6. It is always easier to lower the price than to raise it. 
 
With these tips in mind, I have set up the following Pricing Framework for WEKOK: 
 
Regarding the business model defined above, WEKOK has different revenue streams 
such as in-app advertising (at least at the start of the business) and partnerships with 
supermarkets. But the main source of revenue will be the fee for service.  
 
The fee-for-service payments will be focused in two ways. One way will be payment 
for service. The other will be a subscription model. These payments will be made 
within the application and WEKOK will get a percentage of that service. This payment 
will be made through credit or debit card, PayPal and restaurant tickets. 
 
Below, I will show the pricing structure of each usage model.  
 
Batchcooking service usage model:  
Each customer will pay for each batchcooking done at their homes per hour.   
Features: 
• Average service time: 2h (will depend on the customer's home facilities and the 
number of guests).  
==PAGE:118==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
118 
• Price: 18€/h (134.1 dkk) 
• Extra services can be paid as distance bonus, shopping service, extra service 
bonus (the price will depend on the service). 
 
Usage model for event service: 
Each customer will pay for each hour spent cooking for the event.  
Features:  
• Price: 18€/h (134.1dkk). 
• Extra services can be paid as distance bonus, shopping service, extra service 
bonus (price will depend on the service). 
 
Subscription model:  
Each customer will pay a monthly amount for batchcooking services done. There will 
be two types of subscription. 
Features: 
• WEKOK Premium. Service of 2 batchcooking services per month. Price: 
65€/month  
• WEKOK PRO. Service of 4 batchcooking services per month. Price: 120€/month 
More subscription models will be studied as business development progresses.  
 
The pricing structure for other types of services has not yet been studied because the 
focus of the development will be initially on these services. However, more services 
will be studied in the future, such as express services and the employment portal. 
 
18.1. 
           Income statement 
 
Once the price framework is defined, an overview of the income statement can help 
enormously to have a very broad vision of how profitable the business you intend to 
shape with your startup would be. Not only this, thanks to them you will be able to see 
the cost structure that you will have to take into account when looking for financing.  
 
To show a real example, I will expose the economic projection of WEKOK, by which I 
estimate the expenses and income in the coming years. These figures helped me to 
study the viability of the business and to be able to estimate when I will start 
generating real income. 
 
Expenses and revenues have been calculated based on the first three years (once the 
application is ready to be used and with a working team formed). And as income, I 
have only considered the sales for batchcooking service at customers' homes in the 
city of Madrid.  
 
Both income and expenses estimated for WEKOK are fully scalable to the number of 
users we reach. Moreover, although the startup is focused on Madrid, it is a business 
model applicable to different cities. But as I have learned developing this 
methodology, it is fundamental that we start our sales focusing on our Personas or 
our beachhead market.  
 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
119 
As I discussed in section 4.3. SOM, the sales target for the first 3 years will be to reach 
10% of our SAM, which puts me at a total of 20,800 customers.  
 
All data shown in the following table are calculated from this SOM and the 
batchcooking service price rates specified above. Specifically, averaging 2 
batchcooking services per month per customer. 
 
 
The Table 1 shows that it is in the year 2023, or second year, when the net income 
percentage starts to be positive and remains so the following year. The table only 
shows an overview or summary of the expenses I have estimated. 
 
Besides, I would like to show the Graph 1 that shows the relationship between 
expenses and income over the three years. The most interesting thing about this graph 
is to see that at the end of year 3 or in the last quarter of that year, is when the break-
even point is reached. This point means that this is the moment when WEKOK 
becomes a profitable business. 
Table 1. Income statement table 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Annex 5, I attach a table showing in detail the quarterly summary results for the 
three years of the income statement. 
 
18.2. 
LTV of an acquired customer  
 
As Disciplined Entrepreneurship defines in [34], calculating the lifetime value of an 
acquired customer (LTV), along with calculating the cost of customer acquisition 
(COCA), will help you determine the profitability of your business in the beachhead 
market, as I noted in the previous section.  
 
Specifically, LTV is the most important checkpoint to determine the viability of the 
business and to make sure you clearly understand what will drive the sustainability 
and profitability of the business so that you stay focused on the future. 
 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship proposes a procedure for calculating a customer's LTV. 
The number you get at this moment is far from definitive at this early stage of the 
startup's development. When you get real paying customers, you will have to reanalyze 
the LTV and its trend. In this way, the necessary adjustments will be made to 
continuously monitor whether the economics of your business are on a path towards 
a viable, sustainable and attractive future. 
 
For new business [34] defines LTV as the net present value of profits from year 0 to 
year 5. This is a calculation in monetary units per customer. That is, $/customer, 
€/customer or Dkk/customer, for example.  
 
For each revenue stream, you will use the gross margin and the retention rate to 
calculate your profit for the first year the customer buys the product from you ("year 
0"), as well as the next five years. You will then add up the profit for all revenue streams 
for each year.  
 
Graph 1. Income statement 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
121 
However, you will have to do one more thing before you can add up the profit figures 
and get the LTV. The last calculation is called present value above cost of capital, 
which discounts the profit to account for the fact that your investors will need to 
recoup their investment in your business with interest.  
 
To calculate the present value of the profits for each year after year 0, use the 
following formula:  
 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒= 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡∗(1 −𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒)^𝑡 
 
where t is the number of years after year 0.  
 
This is how it is explained in [34], but to show a real example, I will adapt what is told 
here, in a simpler procedure for the WEKOK case and to complete my methodology.  
 
The LTV tells us the total revenue generated by a user throughout his relationship with 
our business. So, one way to calculate it is:  
 
𝐿𝑇𝑉= 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒∗𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
∗𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑟 
 
Thus, assuming an average purchase value of 36€, 18 purchases per year (2 
purchases per month for 9 months) and assuming 1 year average customer lifetime, 
WEKOK has an LTV of 648€/customer. 
 
The LTV by itself will not tell you how attractive your business is; for this, you will also 
need to calculate the COCA, which you will do in the coming section. An LTV of 
10,000€/customer, for instance, is great if your COCA is 1,000€/customer but is poor 
or at best "challenging" if your COCA is 50,000€/customer. 
 
18.3. 
COCA 
 
As developed by Disciplined Entrepreneurship in [35], to determine COCA, one must 
quantify all sales and marketing costs involved in acquiring a single average steady-
state customer. COCA does not include fixed production costs or expenses outside 
the sales and marketing department, such as research and development, finance, and 
administration, or overhead. It does include all sales and marketing costs, even when 
a potential customer decides not to buy your product. 
 
To facilitate the calculation of this parameter, what I propose in my methodology is 
the following formula:  
 
 
𝐶𝑂𝐶𝐴=
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 & 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑎𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
122 
It can be calculated, just like LTV, for each year for any period you want. In my case, I 
have calculated it for WEKOK for the first quarter of the year 2022. This means that I 
determine the initial COCA. For this, I have only considered the incomes and marketing 
expenses, without considering other expenses. As the COCA is being calculated, it 
should decrease over time. 
 
Specifically, the revenue for the first quarter of 2022 is €51,192/quarter. Estimated 
marketing expenses for this time period are €26,000. Thus, the total sales and 
investment is €25,192/quarter. On the other hand, the number of customers I expect 
to get in the first quarter is 300. Dividing both figures, rounding up, is 84€/customer.  
 
Thus, the LTV/COCA ratio is 7.71. This means that the business is profitable.  
 
19.New venture roadmap 
 
Coming to the end of the development process of a new startup, I would like to 
contribute two more steps that no methodology already created has an emphasis on 
and that from my point of view are essential.  
 
What I propose for my methodology are two more steps, the "New venture roadmap", 
which I will explain in this section, and "Launch strategy", which I will explain in the 
next section.  
 
The New venture roadmap consists of a route map that forms the business technique 
to be followed for the development of a short- and medium-term planning strategy. It 
establishes the specific objectives that make it possible to solve business challenges.  
 
Through it, business uncertainty will be addressed by applying solutions tailored to 
the economic and financial reality of each business.  
 
To show an example of a roadmap, I will show the one I want to follow with WEKOK.  
 
The WEKOK development projection is organized from the beginning of the 
application development. As shown in the following illustration, the different activities 
can be divided into three major blocks: technical development, marketing actions and 
sales actions. The times will be applied as quarterly objectives.  
 
In the table below (Figure 63), you can see the 12 quarters of the first 3 years from the 
beginning of the development. I am currently in phase 0. I plan to start developing the 
startup 100% in September 2021.  
 
So far, I have worked on it what I have been developing while creating the 
entrepreneurship methodology proposed in this thesis. At the same time, I have 
participated in a startup incubation program, Xiji Incubator, and I am enrolled in a 
startup acceleration program of my home university called ActúaUPM. With this 
program, I intend to find my first investor in September and form a team of coworkers 
for WEKOK.  
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
123 
During this time, I have worked on the validation of the idea and the product, I have 
developed important data to show to any potential investor and I have found very 
positive synergies with people involved in the world of entrepreneurship very 
interested in my business idea.  
20.Launch Strategy  
 
In light of the above, the launch strategy is another important point to consider in the 
creation of any new venture. 
 
By having a thoughtful launch strategy designed once your product is created, you can 
reduce time, which always gives you an advantageous position.  
 
The strategy must be simple and clear. It should be understood by the whole team 
that makes up your startup. Building a simple strategy will make the difference 
between a good and a bad execution. Often, plans can go wrong if those who are going 
to perform a certain task think they know what they have to do when they really don't. 
 
Besides, the elaboration of your launch strategy plan is also useful for you to 
understand your business model and reformulate aspects that may be outdated. 
 
One aspect of great importance is that all your communication channels are aligned 
and that you understand the voice of the company: its opinions, market vision, social 
vision, among others. Your voice should reflect your mission, vision, and values. 
Figure 63. WEKOK's Roadmap 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
124 
 
Finally, it is very important to know your audience. Be clear about your customers' 
buying process. Thus, you will create a powerful strategy for them. 
 
My approach for the launch of WEKOK will be through two different ways, one online 
and one offline.   
 
The online strategy will be mainly through the actions of the Digital Marketing Plan, 
with direct actions through email marketing campaigns, social networks, 
sponsorships and advertising.  
 
The marketing strategy is based on a high potential for digital growth through the 
development of valuable content, leading to potential buyers, popular social networks 
and online communication, the development of valuable content, the development of 
a comprehensive media plan for potential influence and participation in social 
networks, popularity, and audience. 
 
Among the social networks I most want to exploit are Instagram, Facebook, and 
LinkedIn for online outreach. For several reasons, the target audience uses these 
social networks very frequently in Spain and it will be easier to access the target 
groups.  
 
In addition, Google AdWords will be another key lever to generate visibility in the global 
digital environment. 
 
Simultaneously, I will seek a marketing plan through relationships with private 
companies, cooking schools and supermarkets in the form of sponsorships and 
advertising. 
 
Since WEKOK must not only attract customers but also chefs because it is a two-side 
market, the offline launch strategy will be divided on both sides of the market.  
 
20.1. 
Cooks launch strategy  
 
The launching strategy aimed at cooks will have two visions, one to attract cooks and 
the other to keep them.  
 
As the main activity for recruiting chefs, I will launch the WEKOK DAY in cooking 
schools in Madrid. Here will be taught workshops on different topics: cooking from 
different countries, food handling course or baking.  
 
Besides, as a first welcome to the WEKOK team, there will be merchandising 
promotions such as aprons or kitchen hats.  
 
On the other hand, as a keeping strategy for the cooks, I have thought of optional 
training sessions every 2 months and rewards for achievements in the form of 
personalized professional material.  
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.2. 
Customers launch strategy  
 
Figure 64. WEKOK day 
Figure 65. Reward packs for WEKOK's cooks I. 
Figure 66. Reward packs for WEKOK's cooks II. 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
126 
The launching strategy on the customer side will also have two approaches. On the 
one hand recruitment and on the other maintenance.  
 
For every new customer who registers as a new customer using the subscription 
form of the WEKOK service there will be a welcome pack as a set of tuppers. In 
addition to maintain them, there will be promotions for loyalty.  
 
All this, both for the cooks' side and for the customers' side in parallel to the 
powerful online marketing strategy, so that they feed back to each other, thus 
achieving the success of the business.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 67. Reward packs for WEKOK's clients I. 
Figure 68. Reward packs for WEKOK's clients II. 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Sprint III: creating the startup 
 
 
127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. Sprint III conclusion  
 
The aim of this sprint III was to answer the question “How?” How are you going to 
offer your product or service to your end-users. And how are you going to make them 
aware of your business. 
 
To give this answer, the Lean Startup Method and the book Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship have had a direct influence. Both agree on the importance of 
prototyping and prototype validation.  
 
But as we have seen throughout the thesis, both methodologies suffer from a lack of 
some concepts from each other. That is why for the creation of mine, I have taken 
some essential concepts from Disciplined Entrepreneurship such as LFV and COCA 
that are not explained in Lean Startup.  
 
 
I have also considered other steps and concepts that are not explained in either of the 
two methodologies but that I have found important for my own. These are the 
customer story on the board, the income statement, the business roadmap for the 
next 3 years and the launch strategy.  
 
Thanks to this procedure I have found a very structured answer to the “how?” answer 
in relation to WEKOK. Because of this, I have seen that WEKOK has a viable business 
model, a very advanced and validated prototype and a launch strategy as of 
September 2021. 
 
 
 
Figure 69. Reward packs for WEKOK's clients III. 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
128 
CONCLUSION 
 
This thesis presents an innovative entrepreneurship methodology focused on new 
business ideas or startups. However, that is not all, the methodology's operation has 
been exemplified with my own business idea, which at the beginning of this thesis was 
just a vague idea, without any development, study or analysis.  
 
In the whole process of the thesis, three main methodologies are applied as a 
foundation: Lean Startup, Design Thinking and Disciplined Entrepreneurship. Through 
them, I sought to create my entrepreneurship methodology as a contribution to the 
academy.  
 
By using this methodology, I have been developing a value proposition for my venture 
idea, WEKOK. This methodology is based on learning, customer analysis, creation of 
end-user buyers, market research, competition analysis, prototyping and validation, 
economic research, launch strategy and startup journey planning.  
 
Each of these main points are developed in different sprints that I propose in this 
methodology. I have developed three main sprints, immersion, idea DNA breakdown 
and creating the startup. Creating a methodology with a circular procedure. Once the 
full circle of sprints has been completed, a powerful new business proposal for 
potential investors or simply to continue developing the new business product will 
emerge.  
 
In the first sprint, interaction with customers for problem validation and market sizing 
has been the main aspect. The second sprint focuses on defining the core of the 
business idea. In the creation of the powerful value proposition. Finally, in the third 
and last sprint the key concept is the creation of the prototype and the business 
feasibility study.  
 
Before I end with this conclusion, I wanted to introduce WEKOK. WEKOK is a mobile 
application that aims to fight against some pains of the Spanish society such as the 
lack of time to cook homemade food and the lack of planning in the menu of a working 
week. With the mobile application, the customer will be able to book the services of 
home cooks. These cooks will go to the client's home and for a period they will do 
batch-cooking giving the client the privilege of having a week of semi-prepared food.  
 
After following my own methodology, I can conclude that I have managed to obtain 
an extremely powerful value proposition for WEKOK. Turning it into a business with a 
vision towards the future and that promises good results with its business model. 
 
Finally, and as an important factor, for the development of WEKOK I have taken into 
account the fulfillment of the 2030 Agenda. Currently, before starting with the 
development of any startup or business, it is important to take into account the 
Sustainable Development Goals so that we get a growing awareness. Thanks to this, 
that startups become aware of them, more and more companies will comply with 
them.  
 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
129 
In light of the above, with WEKOK I have taken into account three Sustainable 
Development Goals. Number 3, good health and well-being. Number 9, industry, 
innovation and infrastructure. And finally, number 12, responsible consumption and 
production. 
 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK  
 
Throughout the whole project, because startup creation is a long-term journey, the 
limitation of time and resources have not allowed me to fully develop my own 
business idea. That is why, as a future work, I can only think of continuing to develop 
the startup and consequently, create a second part of the methodology.  
 
Therefore, the next steps I am going to take with respect to WEKOK, is to participate 
in startup acceleration programs to form a good team of professionals interested in 
the idea, as well as a possible investor for the startup.  
 
WEKOK needs not only a technical push for the development of the application and 
the web but also a great economic support for its launch in terms of marketing.  
 
In addition to this, the problem has been analyzed and focused on the Spanish society, 
and specifically on the city of Madrid. So, another of the steps that would have to be 
taken would be a market study for the expansion of business to new cities and even 
countries.  
 
Finally, another step that I will take in the future would be the improvement of the 
digital prototype and its validation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
130 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
[1]  S. R. M. A. -. ASEFAPRE, “More than three hour in the kitchen,” 2 August 2018. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.hoyplatospreparados.es/notas-de-prensa/mas-
de-tres-horas-en-la-cocina/. 
[2]  E. Press, “Infosalus,” Europa Press, 06 November 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.infosalus.com/nutricion/noticia-espana-cada-vez-mas-healthy-
son-busquedas-alimentacion-google-20191106135305.html. 
[3]  S. M. o. Health, "Mortality patterns in Spain," Spanish Ministry of Health, Madrid, 
2018. 
[4]  I. L. O. (ILO), "Poor nutrition at work affects health and productivity New ILO 
report," 
2005. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-
ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_006116/lang--es/index.htm. 
[Accessed 
April 
2021]. 
[5]  J. 
Hellín, 
"Europapress," 
20 
July 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.europapress.es/economia/noticia-mercado-comida-domicilio-
online-crecio-23-2019-espana-740-millones-20200720122740.html. [Accessed 
April 2021]. 
[6]  W. H. Organisation, "World Health Organisation - Healthy Diet," 31 August 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.who.int/es/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/healthy-diet. [Accessed 23 April 2021]. 
[7]  Cucinare, "Cucinare - Batch-cooking, the latest in gastronomy," 8 May 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.cucinare.tv/2019/05/08/batch-cooking-lo-
ultimo-en-materia-gastronomica/. [Accessed 23 April 2021]. 
[8]  I. o. D. a. S. -. D.school, "Mini guide: an introduction to Design Thinking," Felipe 
Gonzalez . 
[9]  U. N. -. D. o. E. a. S. Affairs, "The 17 Goals," United Nations Publications, [Online]. 
Available: https://sdgs.un.org/es/goals. [Accessed 1 April 2021]. 
[10]  E. U. a. C. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Sustainable Development Goals," Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation , [Online]. Available: 
http://www.exteriores.gob.es/portal/es/politicaexteriorcooperacion/naciones
unidas/paginas/objetivosdedesarrollodelmilenio.aspx. [Accessed 1 April 2021]. 
[11]  I. o. D. a. Stanford, "An Introduction to Design Thinking," Hasso Plattner. 
[12]  B. Aulet, "Market segmentation," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons , 2013, pp. 30-32. 
[13]  B. Aulet, "Market segmentation," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup., New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2013, pp. 41-
58. 
[14]  B. Aulet, "Beachhead Market," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Hoboken, 2013, pp. 41-
47. 
[15]  B. Aulet, "Build an End User Profile," in Disciplined Entrepreneuship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup, pp. 67-71. 
==PAGE:131==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
131 
[16]  S. I. o. t. M. Community, "Statistical Institute of the Madrid Community," 2019. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.madrid.org/iestadis/. [Accessed April 2021]. 
[17]  B. Aulet, "Calculate the Total Addressable Market (TAM) Size for the Beachhead 
Market," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, pp. 75-
78. 
[18]  Dinngo, 
"Design 
Thinkin 
en 
Español," 
Dinngo, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.designthinking.es/inicio/herramienta.php?id=19&fase=idea. 
[Accessed 2021]. 
[19]  B. Aulet, "Full Life Cycle Use Case," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup, New Jersey , John Wiley & Sons, 2013, pp. 83-90. 
[20]  Y. P. G. B. A. S. Alexander Osterwalder, Value Proposition Design, New Jersey & 
Canada: John Wiley and Sons, 2014.  
[21]  B. Aulet, "Define your core," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a 
successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Son, 2013, pp. 121-129. 
[22]  B. Aulet, Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New 
Jersey : John Wiley & Sons, 2013.  
[23]  M. Quiroa, "Economipedia - Análisis de la competencia," 14 Enero 2020. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://economipedia.com/definiciones/analisis-de-la-
competencia.html. [Accessed 27 May 2021]. 
[24]  CEF, "Marketing XXI," CEF, [Online]. Available: https://www.marketing-
xxi.com/analisis-competitivo-17.htm. [Accessed 27 May 2021]. 
[25]  A. I. Sordo, "Cómo hacer un análisis de tu competencia," Hubspot, 11 May 2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://blog.hubspot.es/marketing/guia-analisis-
competencia. [Accessed 27 May 2021]. 
[26]  B. Aulet, "Chart Your Competitive Position," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 
steps to a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons., 2013, pp. 131-
138. 
[27]  B. Aulet, "Determine the Customer's Decision-Making Unit (DMU)," in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New Jersey , John Wiley & 
Sons, 2013, pp. 139-147. 
[28]  B. Aulet, "Map the Process to Aquire a Paying Customer," in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2013, pp. 149-156. 
[29]  E. Ries, The Lean Startup, New York: Crown Business, 2011.  
[30]  B. Aulet, "Define the Minimum Viable Business Product (MVBP)," in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2013, pp. 235-244. 
[31]  A. Maurya, Running Lean, Gravenstein Highway North: O’Reilly Media, 2012.  
[32]  B. Aulet, "Design a Business Model," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to 
a successfull startup, New Jersey, John Wiley, 2013, pp. 173-180. 
[33]  B. Aulet, "Set Your Pricing Framework," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps 
to a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, 2013, pp. 173-180. 
[34]  B. Aulet, "Calculate the Lifetime Value (LTV) of an Acquired Customer," in 
Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New Jersey, John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013, pp. 181-193. 
==PAGE:132==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
132 
[35]  B. Aulet, "Calculate the Cost of Customer Acquisition," in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2013, pp. 203-218. 
[36]  B. Aulet, "Profile the Persona for the Beachhead Market," in Disciplined 
Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, pp. 87-94. 
[37]  B. Aulet, "Design a Business Model," in Disciplined Entrepreneurship: 24 steps to 
a successful startup, New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, 2013, pp. 163-172. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
133 
APPENDIX  
 
A1. Ethical, economic, social, and environmental aspects. 
This master's thesis is framed within the sector of entrepreneurship and technology, 
specifically in the world of startups. The project is developed at the Technical 
University of Denmark, in the department of DTU Entrepreneurship.  
 
The objective of this project is to research and create a structured methodology for 
the creation of future startups by combining powerful concepts developed in other 
entrepreneurship tools and methodologies. A question that will be evaluated 
throughout the project is the effectiveness of these methodologies and tools through 
the development of my own business idea with the created methodology.   
 
Another objective of this project is to point out the importance of considering the 
Sustainable Development Goals at the beginning of any business or at the beginning 
of any startup. This is where the main impact appears, the environmental, economic, 
and social. Indirectly, the knowledge of the existence of the 2030 Agenda in the initial 
phase of any project could improve the fulfillment of these sustainable objectives.  
 
• Social and environmental aspects:  
 
The goal of the 2030 Agenda is change. Taking steps towards a sustainable and 
dignified future for all. We need to take action to change the economy, the 
environment and society.  
 
As a general objective with this thesis, I intend to show the importance that the 
creation of disruptive startups contribute directly to accelerate the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations. Therefore, the creation 
of this methodology has a direct impact on social and environmental aspects. Thus, 
the creation of this thesis has had a positive impact in social and environmental terms. 
 
Another main social impact that concerns this thesis is that of the end users who will 
benefit from the outcome of this thesis. Thanks to the methodology created many 
users who have an innovative idea will be able to create a structured business model 
as an initial phase to a future development of a profit-making business.  
 
In addition to all this, the creation of new startups, leads to the creation of new jobs 
impacting in a social way as well.  
 
On the other hand, the creation of startups has environmental impacts such as the 
purchase of materials for the development of products, occupation of territory or use 
of natural resources among others depending on the type of business that is 
developed. In relation to this thesis, there is no significant environmental impact other 
than the purchase of the computer on which the thesis has been developed.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
134 
• Economic impact  
 
One of the possible economic repercussions that this project may have in the long 
term is the creation of new companies, which generates a positive impact on the 
economy of any country, as well as the saving of indirect costs during the creation of 
the same by not needing to hire any external professional services in the creation and 
development of startups.  
 
Another economic impact is that the creation of new startups generates new job 
opportunities, as I mentioned above. This has a positive impact on the economy of 
people and countries. 
 
• Ethical impact  
 
For the development of this thesis, I have made use of online tools in which I have had 
to register and therefore, accept the terms and conditions of them. In addition, some 
of them I recommend the reader to use. 
 
A2. Economic budget. 
 
The economic budget of this master thesis is broken down into 4 parts: material costs, 
labor costs, licensing costs, and others.  
 
• Material costs 
 
A personal computer with 8 GB RAM and 256 GB disk space was used for the thesis. 
In addition, I have made use of a 22 pixel monitor. For the calculation of this budget I 
have taken into account that the computer is not new and has a useful life of 10 years, 
and it has been used during these 6 months. In addition, the monitor has a useful life 
of about 15 years.  In the table below you can see the breakdown: 
 
Material costs 
Item 
Unit Price 
Use (years) 
Amortization 
(Years) 
Cost 
Laptop 
1200€ 
0.5 
10 
60€ 
Monitor 
250€ 
0.5 
15 
8.3€ 
Total 
68.3€ 
 
• Labour costs  
 
To calculate the labor cost, the hours spent on the project and the average annual 
salary (€52,711) of a telecommunications engineer were considered. Assuming a full-
time contract of 1,827 hours per year, the hourly salary of a Telecommunications 
Engineer is €28.85 (regarding the Spanish law). The following table shows a 
breakdown of the hours spent: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
135 
Labour Costs 
Task 
Hours 
Master thesis (30ECTS) 
825 
Extra work 
75 
Total 
900 
 
 
As 900 hours have been worked for the development of the project, at €28.85 per hour, 
the total cost is €25,965. 
 
• Licence costs 
 
I have made use of several tools for the development of this thesis, but for one of 
them I had to pay a license fee. It is a design program called Canva for the creation of 
the images and the general design of the document. I paid for a two-month 
subscription to Canva Pro. A total of 26€ for the two months. The use of other tools 
such as Figma or Miro has been free thanks to the university and its license. 
 
• Other costs 
 
The cost of consumables is estimated at 66 €/month for electricity and WIFI in 
Denmark, necessary to develop this thesis. This total extends to €396 for the 6 months 
of my stay. 
 
The total cost is shown in the table below, where all the costs described above are 
shown with the application of the 21% tax, following the Spanish law (as these 
annexes oblige me to introduce them in my master thesis at my home university). 
 
Total cost 
Concept 
Cost 
Material costs 
68.3€ 
Labour costs 
25,965€ 
Licence costs 
26€ 
Other costs 
396€ 
Subtotal 
36,455.3€ 
Taxes (21%) 
7,655.61€ 
Total 
44,110.91€ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
136 
A2. Narrowing end users of the market segmentation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market
Is the customer well funde
Is the customer readily 
accesible to your sales 
force?
Does the target customer 
have a compelling reason to 
buy?
Can you today with the 
help of partners deliver a 
whole product?
Is there entrenched 
competition that could block 
you?
If you win this segment, can you 
leverage it to enter additional 
segments?
Is the market consistent 
with the values, passions 
and goals ogf the funding 
team?
Sum
Family with both parent working and 
want to spend their free time with their 
children 
Household activities, children 
care
13
Large families
Usually high economic 
level
Household activities, children 
care
13
Self employed, entrepreneurs
Very dependant on the 
income
Most of the time spent 
working
Household activities
12
Monoparental families with the 
father/mother working
Household activities, children 
care
12
First-time employees  
They earn money but 
they don't save a lot of 
money
Household activities,
11
Singles living alone with tough 
workdays
Good salary
They might have weekends 
free to cook. Not familiar 
obligations
Household activities,
11
Elderly people with reduced mobility
The pension is low, very 
dependant on the savings 
The family should contract 
us
They need help on everyday 
activities, cooking included
Household activities
11
Elderly men living alone and who don't 
know how to cook
The pension is low, very 
dependant on the savings 
The family should contract 
us
They need help on everyday 
activities, cooking included
Household activities
11
Couple of elder people living alone
The pension is low, very 
dependant on the savings 
The family should contract 
us
At least one person knows 
how to cook in most of the 
cases
Household activities
10
Private events (weedings, parties, 
familiar meetings)
they want to enjoy more than 
to work, and they could want 
a cheap alternative that is still 
healthy, homemade and tasty
Animation services, decoration, 
bar 
10
Students + employees 
They earn money but 
they don't save a lot of 
money
Young people is not that 
concerned about healthy 
habits as adults. They prefer 
homemade meals and most of 
them don't know how to cook
Household activities, but they 
don't have a lot of money and 
can do it themselves
9
Disabled people
Average salary
They ususally have external 
help, Which can cook for 
them
Household activities, but they 
could need special needs or 
medical assistance.
9
Companies with kitchen or canteen
They have cheap alternatives 
as contracting catering 
services or allowing 
employees to cook themselves
9
Company events where there is kitchen
There are well known 
alternatives that are not 
dependant on their resources 
(kitchen)
9
Students who live away from home 
As a student, the user 
doesn´t have a lot of 
money, but their parents 
could want them to eat 
healthy and fund them
Young people is not that 
concerned about healthy 
habits as adults. They prefer 
homemade meals and most of 
them don't know how to cook
Household activities, but they 
don't have a lot of money and 
can do it themselves
8
==PAGE:137==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
137 
 
A3. Personal interview in order to achieve qualitative results during the market 
segmentation process. 
 
==PAGE:138==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
142 
 
 
A4. Business model iterations. 
 
First iteration:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:143==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
143 
 
 
Second iteration:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
144 
 
A5. Income statement breakdown. 
 
 
 
 
Year
2021
2022
2023
2024
REVENUE
0
706450
3872504
10563640
Employees costs
0
559800
3102854
8302336
Cooks
0
496800
2723280
7428720
Management and Direction
0
14400
43200
90000
Support staff
0
12600
118800
340200
App developer
0
14400
33600
57600
RRHH
0
7200
46800
72000
Marketing
0
14400
46800
72000
Bonuses
0
0
90374
241816
Marketing costs
0
184000
280000
340000
Social media advertising
0
80000
80000
80000
Influencers advertising
0
65000
100000
100000
Marketing offline
0
39000
100000
160000
App costs
50100
400
400
400
App development
50000
0
0
0
Servers
100
400
400
400
Headquarters costs
0
28000
80000
200000
Rent
0
20000
40000
80000
Other costs
0
8000
40000
120000
Other expenses costs
0
21193
116175
316909
DIRECT COSTS
50100
793393
3579430
9159645
EBITDA (Operating Income)
50100
86944
293075
1403995
EBITDA MARGIN
-12,31%
7,57%
13,29%
Depreciation
0
0
0
0
Amortization
0
0
0
0
EBIT
50100
86944
293075
1403995
Taxes
0
0
77191
350999
Net Income
50100
86944
215884
1055552
Net income margin
-12%
6%
10%
Year
2021
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
REVENUE
0
51192
102384
204768
348106
556969
807639
1090390
1417506
1842912
2395786
2874943
3450000
Employees costs
50400,00
86400,00
160200,00
262800,00
465848,40
654832,80
867054,00
1115119,20
1472539,50
1889689,50
2253444,30
2686662,30
Cooks
36000,00
72000,00
144000,00
244800,00
391680,00
567960,00
766800,00
996840,00
1296000,00
1684800,00
2021760,00
2426160,00
Management and Direction
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
10800,00
10800,00
10800,00
10800,00
22500,00
22500,00
22500,00
22500,00
Support staff
1800,00
1800,00
3600,00
5400,00
18000,00
25200,00
32400,00
43200,00
60750,00
76950,00
93150,00
109350,00
App developer
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
8400,00
8400,00
8400,00
8400,00
14400,00
14400,00
14400,00
14400,00
RRHH
1800,00
1800,00
1800,00
1800,00
11700,00
11700,00
11700,00
11700,00
18000,00
18000,00
18000,00
18000,00
Marketing
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
3600,00
11700,00
11700,00
11700,00
11700,00
18000,00
18000,00
18000,00
18000,00
Bonuses
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00
13568,40
19072,80
25254,00
32479,20
42889,50
55039,50
65634,30
78252,30
Marketing costs
26000,00
48000,00
50000,00
60000,00
70000,00
70000,00
70000,00
70000,00
85000,00
85000,00
85000,00
85000,00
Social media advertising
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
Influencers advertising
20000,00
20000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
Marketing offline
6000,00
8000,00
10000,00
15000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
25000,00
40000,00
40000,00
40000,00
40000,00
App costs
50100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
App development
50000,00
Servers
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
100,00
Headquarters costs
0,00
7000,00
7000,00
7000,00
7000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
50000,00
50000,00
50000,00
50000,00
Rent
5000,00
5000,00
5000,00
5000,00
10000,00
10000,00
10000,00
10000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
20000,00
Other costs
2000,00
2000,00
2000,00
2000,00
10000,00
10000,00
10000,00
10000,00
30000,00
30000,00
30000,00
30000,00
Other expenses costs
1535,76
3071,52
6143,04
10443,17
16709,07
24229,17
32711,69
42525,19
55287,36
71873,57
86248,28
103499,99
DIRECT COSTS
50100,00
85035,76
144571,52
223443,04
340343,17
572657,47
769161,97
989865,69
1247744,39
1662926,86
2096663,07
2474792,58
2925262,29
EBITDA (Operating Income)
50100,00
33843,76
42187,52
18675,04
7762,43
15688,51
38477,15
100523,91
169762,09
179985,14
299122,53
400150,14
524737,23
Depreciation
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Amortization
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
EBIT
50100
33844
42188
18675
7762
15689
38477
100524
169762
179985
299123
400150
524737
Taxes
9619
25131
42441
44996
74781
100038
131184
Net Income
50100
33844
42188
18675
7762
15689
28858
75393
127322
137545
224342
300113
393553
Cash balance
50100,00
83943,76
126131,28
144806,32
137043,89
152732,40
123874,54
48481,60
78839,96
216384,58
440726,48
740839,08
1134392,01
2022
2023
2024
==PAGE:145==
 
 
DTU Entrepreneurship 
 
 
Laura Diaz Esteban – s201591 
 
 
145 
 
