==PAGE:1==
Object detection, recognition, and track-
ing by an unmanned aerial vehicle
by use of machine learning methods
Vilborg María Carlsdóttir (s192916)
Master of Science in Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Object detection, recognition, and tracking by an unmanned aerial vehicle, by use of machine
learning methods
Report written by:
Vilborg María Carlsdóttir (s192916)
Advisor(s):
Matteo Fumagalli, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
25 January - 25 June 2021
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Vilborg María Carlsdóttir, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The problem of object detection and tracking is both an open one and a heavily re-
searched one because of the immense relevance it has to a wide variety of applications.
Nowadays, machine learning methods, especially deep learning algorithms, dominate in
these fields. These algorithms have introduced much higher accuracy and speed and can
now allow for real-time applications, such as for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Thus,
the work carried out here has made use of machine learning methods to build an object
detection, recognition, and tracking system based on a tracking-by-detection scheme.
The process involved a number of steps for choosing optimal methods taking into
consideration the speed-accuracy trade-off. The solution is tested first in a simulated
environment where both object detector and tracker are chosen based on evaluation and
then utilized to build a solution to achieve the task at hand with acceptable performance.
Next, the same process was followed to evaluate two-folded data from a real environment;
taken with and without an UAV with objects located on or just below water surface level.
The aim is to examine the air stream from an UAV that can cause fast movements and
occlusion. Finally, the developed solution was experimentally validated on data from an
UAV. Results show that air stream from the drone imposes an ambitious challenge that
allows for further investigation of the problem.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Explanation
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
AP
mean Average Precision
mAP
mean Average Precision
IoU
Intersect over Union
FPS
Frames Per Second
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
YOLO
You Only Look Once
SSD
Singe Shot multi-box Detector
ROS
Robot Operating System
CPU
Central Processing Unit
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
TPU
Tensor Processing Unit
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Abbreviations
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Deep Learning for Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Object Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Software Frameworks
17
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
ROS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Gazebo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Google Colab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Deep Learning Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
OpenCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Bridge between OpenCV and ROS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Data Collection
21
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Data for Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Data for Object Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Data for Experimental Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Simulation
31
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Object Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Functional Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Real Environment
43
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Object Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4
Experimental Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Conclusion
55
Appendices
57
A Code for Detection
59
B tracking.cpp
63
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter will present the context of the project and introduce its main objectives
along with the methodology used to achieve these respective objectives. In this project,
the focus is set on achieving object detection and recognition using deep learning methods
and then tracking-by-detection to enhance speed and accuracy. The field of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) is of interest where the aim is on applying formerly mentioned
methods to generate data precise enough to achieve the task of capturing an object that
is located on or just below water surface level.
Autonomous UAVs, commonly referred to as drones, have become widely popular in
recent years. An UAV is defined as an aircraft that can navigate without a human pilot
on board and it can be controlled remotely, fly autonomously, or operate by a mixture of
the two. In particular, UAVs equipped with cameras have become vastly popular both
for commercial use and because of usage potential related to computer vision methods.
By applying computer vision methods, a fully autonomous flight can be accomplished.
For a drone to be fully autonomous it has to be able to operate with no direct user
input. All phases of the operation, from planning to execution, should be carried out
independent of a pilot’s input. To attain full autonomy, an element of learning needs to
be online so that inputs derived from the environment can be handled. Further, UAVs
can be used for a wide range of applications, such as inspection and monitoring, precision
agriculture, and aerial imaging to name a few. The options seem to be endless. However,
there exist some common drawbacks such as limited computational resources and the
need for more or less real-time processing for many applications such as perception and
navigation. The field of computer vision, including object detection and tracking, is
essential for full autonomy and a collision-free flight in a dynamic environment.
1.1
Objectives
The objective is to achieve object detection, recognition, and tracking in a way that is
precise enough for the task of capturing the object to be possible. The specific object will
be located on or just below water surface level. Figure 1.1 references the task at hand
where the blue arrow illustrates the output of the developed system, data to facilitate
capturing the object. Object detection can be described as the technique of identifying
variable objects in a given image or image stream and with a certain probability and
inserting bounding boxes to provide localization of the objects. In this task, the UAV
will be looking for a specific object, thus, object recognition is needed. Object tracking
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Flowchart describing the task attempted to achieve
can then be described as a technique that receives an initial bounding box for the first
frame of an image stream and utilizes that information to track the object for the
upcoming sequence of frames. The motive to change from object detection to object
tracking when the specific object has been detected is the benefits of object tracking.
Object tracking can be much more eﬀicient than object detection in cases where there
is occlusion, motion blur, viewpoint variation, scale changes, background clutters, and
illumination variation. Some of these cases are very likely to occur during the task of
capturing the object since it will be carried out near water and the air stream from the
drone will cause distortions. Another advantage of object tracking is that it can be faster
than detection and that it preserves identity. Object detection is a question of looking
at each frame separately while tracking takes into account a sequence of frames.
There are many possible obstacles and complications involved with achieving the task
at hand. Diﬀiculties UAVs faces are, for example, top-down view, hardware constraints
related to weight resulting in a trade-off between accuracy, frame rate, and real-time
constraints. Other issues that can arise are that objects are usually small, and occlusion
is common when working with an UAV.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Thesis outline
3
The objectives of this master thesis can be divided into four different parts.
1. Object detection. Implement object detection where custom objects are detected
and recognized.
Different object detection algorithms should be reviewed and
tested, the default object detector should then be chosen and implemented.
2. Object tracking. Different object trackers should be evaluated and the default
one is chosen based on performance. Effects of air stream from a drone on the
water should be examined in relation to the task.
3. Combination of object detection and tracking. Develop a solution where
the object detection and tracking are integrated to achieve the task at hand. The
output of this solution should make capturing the object possible. This should
then be validated in simulation.
4. Experimental validation
Finally, a realistic application is performed and data captured to validate the
developed solution.
1.2
Thesis outline
The paper is organized in the following way: Chapter 2 reviews the literature concerning
the topics of this project along with the state-of-the-art and other necessary material
related to the task at hand. Chapter 3 covers the various software frameworks utilized
to build the software solution to accomplish the task at hand. Chapter 4 covers the col-
lection and generation of data. The solution is both tested for a simulated environment
and a real environment, chapters 5 and 6 cover those two scenarios. Chapter 6, regard-
ing the real environment, also touches on possibilities for future work and improvements.
Lastly, chapter 7 summarizes results and concludes the work.
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
2.1
Introduction
The following chapter covers the current background related to the topics of the thesis,
along with the state-of-the-art will be covered. The task at hand is by nature twofold as
it both touches on object detection and tracking along with combining the two by using a
so-called tracking-by-detection method. Figure 2.1 illustrates where the two merge. The
reason why one would want to combine the two is to increase both speed and accuracy
when an object has been recognized. Object detection can recognize a specific object
with a certain probability and localize it if the object falls under one of the classes the
detector knows. The location of the object can then be passed to an object tracker
which able to follow the object more accurately and faster.
For clarification, object
detection examines one frame (image) at a time while tracking a sequence of frames
(image stream). Objects detector’s input is a frame and its output is a bounding box,
class, and class probability. In the case of an object tracker, the input is a sequence of
frames along with an initial bounding box for the first frame and the output a bounding
box.
Figure 2.1: Missions for object detection and tracking along with outputs utilized for
the integration of the two.
The following sections will outline the literature review. First, object detection will
be discussed, including both performance measurements and different deep learning
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Literature Review
algorithms. Second, object tracking will be introduced following a similar scheme. Ad-
ditionally, other necessary material related to the task at hand will be briefly explained.
2.2
Object Detection
Object detection is simply the task of detecting one or multiple objects in an image,
video, or camera stream where objects are both located and recognized. An object can be
anything from a plastic bottle to a building. In object detection, the algorithm processes
one frame at a time. The presence of an object is marked with a bounding box and the
object assigned to a class with a certain probability, this process of object detection is
frequently referred to as generic object detection. A bounding box is a simple rectangle
marked with a point, width, and height in pixel values, that declares the location of
an object. Figure 2.2 demonstrates a bounding box, x- and y-axis directions, and what
is referred to as width and height. Notice that the y-axis in pixel coordinates has the
opposite direction to the y-axis in Cartesian coordinates.
Figure 2.2: A bounding box. Directions of axes are explained along with what is con-
sidered width and height.
Objects can be detected by image processing and computer vision, whereby the more
traditional computer vision approaches include a sliding window where a rectangular re-
gion of fixed width and height slides across an image to search for the object. However,
these approaches are very computationally expensive and not suitable for real-time ap-
plications.
In this work, a benchmark for real-time will be 30 FPS. Modern object
detection algorithms use other approaches, along with deep neural networks to perform
both more accurately and faster. Here, generic object detection applied to images by
the use of deep learning methods is of interest.
Before introducing deep learning object detectors, performance metrics related to
machine learning and object detection will be discussed. Many of these performance
metrics are used both for object detection and tracking.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Object Detection
7
2.2.1
Performance Metrics
Numerous metrics exist in the literature that serve as measures to assess how well models
perform. Performance metrics are important for the comparison of different models and
benchmarks.
2.2.1.1
Intersect over Union
Intersect over Union (IoU) is an overlap measure of a predicted bounding box and a
ground truth box. The area of overlap of the two boxes is divided by the area of union
between the two. The equation and the figure below illustrate the aforementioned IoU.
Several performance metrics rely on IoU as a threshold.
IoU = area of overlap
area of union =
2.2.1.2
Average Precision
Before average precision (AP) can be explained, some concepts that it relies on have to
be introduced. Most assessment metrics in machine learning have a shared association
with four basic concepts, namely, true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative
(TN), and false negative (FN). All of these concepts except for TN are used in object
detection frameworks [1].
• TP is the number of detection with IoU over a certain threshold.
• FP is the number of detection with IoU under or equal to a certain threshold or
detection of a non-existing object.
• FN is when there is no predicted bounding box located where an existing object
is.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Literature Review
Now, precision (P) and recall (R) will be explained.
Precision defines a model’s
ability to identify only relevant objects, while recall defines the model’s ability to find
all relevant cases, as in all ground truth boxes.
P =
TP
TP + FP =
TP
all detections
R =
TP
TP + FN =
TP
all ground truths
AP is the final metric for finding the area of the so-called precision-recall curve, the
curve shows the trade-off between P and R for different thresholds. AP summarizes the
curve as the weighted mean of precision achieved at each threshold, where the increase at
the threshold is used as weight. AP is calculated individually for each class. Currently,
all-points-interpolation [1], where all recall points are interpolated through, is the more
popular metric.
The precision at each level r is obtained by taking the maximum
precision which has a recall value greater or equal than the one at level r+1.
APall =
∑
n
(Rn+1 −Rn)Pinterp(Rn+1)
where
Pinterp(Rn+1) =
max
˜R:R≥Rn+1
P( ˜R)
2.2.1.3
mean Average Precision
As the name implies, mean Average Precision (mAP) is the average of the AP, calcu-
lated for all the classes. This is the performance metric used for the comparison of
neural networks trained for object detection in this report. mAP@0.5 refers to the mAP
calculated at an IoU threshold of 0.5. mAP can be calculated by the following equation
where N is the total number of classes evaluated and i is the number connected to each
class.
mAP = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
APi
2.3
Deep Learning for Object Detection
In 2012, AlexNet took part in the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) and took the computer vision world by storm by achieving remarkable results
and sweeping the victory [2]. AlexNet is the first convolutional neural network (CNN)
architecture and sparked an immense interest in deep CNNs. Nowadays, deep learning
dominates research in computer vision based detection as well as problem-solving in
different application domains [3].
The field of deep learning for object detection has grown extremely rapidly in recent
years whereby it allowed for faster and more accurate results. Deep learning based object
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Deep Learning for Object Detection
9
detection algorithms have now been divided into three categories based on detection
methods: Two-stage detectors, one-stage detectors, and advanced detectors [4]. The
main difference between the three categories refers to the placement and existence of
anchors.
Two-stage detectors use anchors as regression references and classification
candidates for possible predictions, while one-stage detectors use anchors for deciding
the final bounding box [5]. Advance detectors, on the other hand, do not use anchors.
Each category will be explained and state-of-the-art object detectors discussed.
2.3.1
Two-stage Detectors
Two-stage detectors detect objects in two passes: The first stage includes preliminary
tests, screening out of positive samples, and region proposal generation. The second
stage is where regional classification is performed and location refinement of the proposed
regions. These proposed regions are potential bounding boxes; they are proposed in
the first stage and chosen in the second one. Two-stage detectors are relatively more
complicated than one-stage algorithms and do achieve higher mAP scores. However,
one-stage object detectors do achieve higher speed [6], and can therefore be used for
real-time applications. For this reason, one-stage object detectors will be utilized in this
project and the focus is set on explaining their structure. Some well known two-stage
detectors are Faster-RCNN [7], Mask RCNN [8], Cascade RCNN [9], and R-FCN [10].
2.3.2
One-stage Detectors
The challenge for real-time application is time eﬀiciency and lower memory usage, espe-
cially for UAVs where net weight is important. One-stage detectors were introduced to
meet these challenges by providing higher speed and require less memory usage. A whole
image is forwarded a single time through the network that what the name comes from
drawn from. A single-stage object detector has three important parts, namely model
backbone, neck, and head. First, the backbone mainly extracts informative features from
the input image. Second, the neck is primarily to extract important feature pyramids
that help models generalize on object scaling. In other words, the neck helps to identify
the same object with different sizes and scales. Lastly, the head then performs the final
detection part, applies anchor boxes on features, and generates the final output vectors.
Output vectors include information regarding class probability, objectness score, and
the location of bounding boxes.
Some widely known one-stage detectors are You Only Look Once (YOLO), Single
Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD), RefineDet [11] and RetinaNet [12]. However, for the
purpose of this thesis, YOLO and SSD will be discussed further.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Literature Review
2.3.2.1
YOLO
The first version of YOLO [13] was introduced in 2015. Now, YOLO is a family of models
[14, 15, 16] with YOLOv5 being released in 2020. Each version of YOLO is different
and includes various sub-versions. Additionally, some versions have different authors
and are build on different machine learning libraries. Tiny versions of YOLO perform
with lower accuracy but much higher speed. The idea behind YOLO is to apply a single
network on a full image by dividing the image into regions and predicts bounding boxes
along with probabilities for each region. Looking at how YOLO detects objects from
a high-level way, the first step is to divide the image into small grid cells. The size of
these cells depends on the size of the input image, each cell then predicts several boxes
in the image. Along with a bounding box a prediction is given of the confidence that the
bounding box includes an object and the probability of what class the object is. Next, a
technique called non-maximum suppression is used to eliminate bounding boxes based
on a low confidence score or because a bounding box covers the same object as another
bounding box with a high confidence score. As mentioned, the YOLO family is quite
diverse and going into detail about every network version and sub-versions long-winded.
Details of network structures can be accessed through their citation except for YOLOv5
as the paper on it has not been made publicly available.
Both YOLOv3 and YOLOv4 along with their tiny versions will be examined here. In
the YOLOv4 paper [16], the authors state that the object detector improves YOLOv3’s
AP and FPS by 10% and 12% respectively. The main difference between the two object
detectors is the backbone since YOLOv3 is YOLOv4´s head, YOLOv4 uses CSPDark-
net53 but YOLOv3 Darknet53. Figure 2.3 shows experimental results where YOLOv3,
YOLOv4, and other object detectors are compared on precision and speed on the Mi-
crosoft COCO dataset.
Figure 2.3: Comparison of YOLOv4 with other state-of-the-art object detectors. The
image is retrieved from the paper: YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object
Detection [16]
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Deep Learning for Object Detection
11
2.3.2.2
SSD
Single Shot multi-box Detector (SSD) [17] was introduced in 2016 whereby authors
claimed that it was both more accurate and faster than the previous state-of-the-art
object detector (YOLO) at that time. SSD localizes and classifies objects in a single
forward pass, one-stage detector.
Multi-box refers to a technique for bounding box
regression and detector to object detection. SSD discretizes the output space of bounding
boxes into a set of default boxes over different aspect ratios and scales of feature map
location. When predicting, the network generates scores for each class in relation to each
default box and makes adjustments to the box to match the object’s shape better. The
authors claim that SSD is easy to train and straightforward to integrate into systems
since it eliminates proposal generation and subsequent pixel or feature resampling stages.
There exist many variants of SSD and smaller versions, SSDLite [18] is one of those. The
smaller versions are made for more speed but lose accuracy. The code for SSD is open-
source and available on Github.
2.3.3
Advanced Detectors
Advanced detectors are the most recent addition to deep learning object detectors. The
main difference between the advanced detectors is that they do not use anchors like
two-stage and one-stage detectors. It should be pointed out that advanced detectors
can also be categorized as one-stage detectors, this differs between documents. These
detectors have made a significant contribution to the field and aim to improve the speed-
accuracy tradeoff. Examples of advanced detectors include CornerNet [19], CenterNet
[20], and FoveaBox [21], all of these models are very recent. CornerNet was released in
2108, Centernet in 2019, and FoveaBox in 2020. As has been mentioned, these object
detectors are based on an anchor-less methodology. Instead, CornerNet detects bounding
boxes as a pair of key points using a single convolution neural network and introducing
a new pooling layer. CenterNet utilizes a single keypoint estimation to find the center
point of bounding boxes and then regression to predict other object properties such as
size. FoveaBox’s approach is explained as twofold; the first step is predicting category-
sensitive semantic maps for the object existing possibility, in the second one category-
agnostic bounding boxes are being produced for each position that potentially contains
an object. All three models achieved state-of-the-art performance on the COCO object
detection benchmark and outperformance a range of state-of-the-art detectors. These
types of models for object detection are expected to be heavily researched in the near
future.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Literature Review
2.4
Object Tracking
Object tracking is the process of following an object of interest in a specific scene over
time in a sequence of images, referred to as frames. The input is a sequence of frames,
that can both be a recorded video or an online image stream.
In general, there are two key underlying models in object tracking, a motion model
and a visual appearance model. A motion model describes the dynamic behavior of
an object and predicts the potential position of the object in future frames to reduce
search space along with computational cost. A visual appearance model is to understand
the appearance of the object of interest and learn to discriminate the object from its
background. A tracking algorithm consists of a few components, the most important ones
are target initialization, appearance modeling, motion estimation, and target positioning.
Target initialization is the first stage, the algorithm needs to know the coordinates of
the object being tracked, and this information is introduced as a bounding box. The
appearance modeling is, as has been described above, a phase where the visual features
of the object in motion, various view-points, scale, and illuminations are modeled and
learned. The motion estimation is to predict a region where the object of interest is
most likely to be located in the subsequent frames. The final stage is then the target
positioning where the location of the object is predicted resulting in a bounding box.
In this project, detection based tracking is used where the bounding box that is used
for object tracking is received from an object detection model, this is called tracking-
by-detection. The aim is online tracking where predictions are available immediately
and future frames are not available. The learning of the tracker is also done online
since the initial frame is used. The task consists of possibly detecting multiple objects,
recognizing a specific object, and tracking that object. Therefore, single object trackers
are of interest here. The following section will outline built-in OpenCV trackers will be
introduced, and then a deep learning online trained tracker, MDNet, will be discussed.
2.4.1
OpenCV Trackers
All of the built-in object trackers from OpenCV are listed in table 2.1 below and then
further described. OpenCV itself is introduced in the next chapter which touches on
used software frameworks.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Object Tracking
13
Table 2.1: Built-in OpenCV trackers listed, a compact overview of their advantages and
disadvantages along with their publication year
Traker name
Year
OpenCV version required
Boosting
2006
3.0.0
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)
2009
3.0.0
Minimum Output Sum of Squared
Error (MOSSE)
2010
3.4.1
MedianFlow
2010
3.0.0
Tracking Learning Detection (TLD)
2011
3.0.0
Kernelized Correlation Filter (KCF)
2014
3.1.0
Generic Object Tracking Using
Regression Networks (GOTURN)
2016
3.2.0
(+additional model files)
Channel and Spatial Reliability
Tracker (CSRT)
2017
3.4.2
The single object trackers will now be described in more detail. All trackers except
GOTURN are examined in the project. It is known beforehand that the air stream
from the drone will cause occlusions on the water surface and may cause object to move
fast. As a result, a tracker that copes well with occlusions, fast movements and stable
reporting of failures is desirable. The performance of these trackers will however be
discovered later when they are tested on real data from the desired application.
• Boosting [22] The tracker builds on the AdaBoost (Adaptive Boosting) algorithm
and is trained online with positive and negative examples of the object to track.
The tracker receives an initial bounding box and treats pixels outside the box as
background. When a new frame is received, the classifier runs on every pixel near
the previously located bounding box and a score is recorded. The new location
of the bounding box will be where the maximum score is. The tracker is then
constantly updated with these new positives. This tracker is over a decade old and
concurrently expected to be outdated in terms of speed and other performance
matrices.
• MIL [23] The idea here is similar to Boosting, the model searches within a certain
neighborhood of the previous bounding box but additionally considers patches
around the current location to generate potential positive examples. The tracker
tries to learn an adaptive appearance model by training a discriminative classifier
online to separate the object to track from the background where both positive
and negative examples are extracted, called bags. The tracker then chooses the
most probable to be nicely located to update the tracker model.
• MOSSE [24] This tracker uses adaptive correlation filtering for object tracking.
The appearance of objects is modeled using filters trained on example images.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Literature Review
When the tracker receives an initial bounding box, the tracking and the filter start
to work together. MOSSE is an optimization problem where a filter is built to
minimize the sum of squared error between the desired and actual output of a
convolution. The tracker is by far the fastest of the built-in OpenCV trackers.
• MedianFlow [25] This algorithm introduced an innovative method for detecting
tracking failure. This is achieved by minimizing the Forward-Backward error by
tracking the object both forward and backward in time at each given frame and
measuring the discrepancies between the two trajectories. The authors assert that
the discrepancies and real tracking failures are highly correlated.
The tracker
achieved state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks at the time of its
release.
• TLD [26] The tracker is based on the MedianFlow tracker where long-term track-
ing is investigated, that is what the tracker’s name is drawn from, tracking, learn-
ing, and detecting (TLD). The idea is that the tracker should learn from detected
appearances in the past and correct the tracker if necessary. The MedianFlow-
based tracker follows the object from frame to frame The detector localizes ap-
pearances and is composed of a patch variance module, ensemble classifier, and
a nearest neighbor classifier. The learning is done by estimating the detector’s
errors and update them to avoid future errors by using a novel method called P-N
learning. This tracker is notorious for producing a lot of false positives but might
work well with occlusion.
• KCF [27] This tracker is built on similar ideas as Boosting and MIL and utilizes
that multiple positive examples in MIL tracker have overlapping regions these
properties result in a circulant matrices. These circulant matrices can then be
diagonalized to enhance the processing speed and accuracy simultaneously. Kernel
regression is used as a classification method.
• CSRT [28] As the name suggests, channel and spatial reliability concepts are
introduced to discriminative correlation filter (DCF) tracking.
The result is a
novel learning algorithm that improves filter update and tracking process. The
spatial reliability map is used to adjust the filter support and restrict the search to
the part of the object suitable for tracking. The channel part of the filter is then
utilized as a weighting coeﬀicient localization to reduce noise. The authors claim
that the tracker runs in real-time on a CPU.
There have been made many comparisons of the built-in single object trackers of
OpenCV. A very competent benchmark paper was released in the latter part of 2020
[29] where robustness, precision, speed, and success rate of each of the tracking algo-
rithms is compared. Robustness was evaluated according to two matrices, OPE (One
Pass Evaluation) where the initial bounding box is standardized, and SRE (Spatial Ro-
bustness Evaluation) where the bounding box is scaled. The precision was measured
as the distance from the center of a ground truth bounding box and the bounding box
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Summary
15
generated by the tracker.
Speed was measured in average FPS. The success rate is
then based on the overlap of the two bounding boxes. The dataset used to evaluate
is OTB-100 (Object Tracking Benchmark), it includes 98 videos of various lengths and
resolutions, the frame rate of all videos is however 30 FPS. An important detail about
the dataset is however that it divides the videos into 11 classes, those are, for exam-
ple, occlusion, motion blur, fast motion, and out-of-view. The paper concluded that in
terms of success rate boosting and MIL trackers performed the best but MOSSE and
MedianFlow trackers were the fastest. However, in terms of precision and IoU rate, the
CSRT tracker showed the best performance. In two upcoming chapters, chapters 5 and
6, seven different OpenCV chapters will be evaluated on data generated for this project
and optimal trackers chosen to be used in experimental validation.
2.4.2
MDNet
Multi-Domain Network (MDNet), which was introduced in 2015, is a learning multi-
domain convolutional neural network for visual tracking [30]. MDNet is composed of
two parts; shared layers and multiple branches of domain-specific layers. The domains
correspond to individual training sequences where each branch is responsible for binary
classification to identify a target versus background. When new data is introduced, a
new network is constructed by combining the shared layers in a pretrained CNN with a
new binary classification layer that is updated online. The authors believe in a simple
architecture for a visual tracker for three reasons. The first one is that a tracker only
attempts to distinguish between two classes, the object, and its background. Secondly,
because a deep CNN is less effective for precise target localization. Thirdly, since object
tracking targets are typically small and lastly a smaller network is more eﬀicient when
training and testing are performed online. The authors claim to have tested deeper
networks and achieved lower accuracy and a slower algorithm. The MDNet tracker has
achieved state-of-the-art performances and was the winner of the VOT2015 benchmark
challenge [31].
2.5
Summary
In this chapter, important literature related to the work carried out in this project has
been reviewed. Performance metrics and the field of object detection and tracking have
been discussed along with state-of-the-art architecture.
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Software Frameworks
3.1
Introduction
This chapter will touch on the various software frameworks used to accomplish the task
of object detection, recognition, and tracking. The software implementation made is
written in C++ but relies on several frameworks to operate.
Due to the nature of
the task, most of them are related to the fields of robotics, computer vision, machine
learning, and programming. The most important frameworks will be listed down below.
3.2
ROS
The Robot Operating System[32], hereby called ROS, is an open-source middleware for
robot software development run on Unix-based platforms. ROS is a collection of tools,
libraries, and conventions made to simplify the creation of robot software across a wide
variety of robotic platforms. ROS supports collaborative robotics software development
and facilitates the task of communication and information exchange between different
functions and programs.
ROS allows the user to exchange information between programs by the usage of nodes
and topics. In short, nodes are processes that perform some computation or task. Nodes
can communicate with other nodes by sending and receiving messages, and, additionally
able to indecently execute code to perform a task. Topics include the information a node
possesses and the type. It is possible to both publish and subscribe to a topic to either
transmit or receive data.
3.3
Gazebo
In all robotic development, simulation is extremely important considering that robotic
hardware can both be fragile and expensive. During a simulation, algorithms can be
tested, robots designed and performance assessed in realistic scenarios. Gazebo [33] is an
open-source robotics three-dimensional simulator. Gazebo allows accurate and eﬀicient
robotic simulations in both indoor and outdoor environments where the robots come
across obstacles, objects, and more. Furthermore, Gazebo uses a physical engine, where
gravity, illumination, and inertia can be simulated according to the users’ preference.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Software Frameworks
Gazebo can work as a stand-alone simulator but is used with ROS in this project
where a world file is launched. A world file contains a description of the world to be
simulated, layout information of models, and can be used to control the physical engine.
Models represent individual elements, for instance, robots, sensors, lights, static and
dynamic objects.
3.4
Google Colab
Colaboratory or Colab for short is a product from Google Research. It allows anybody
with a Google account to execute python code through a browser in the form of a Jupyter
notebook. Colab runs wholly in the cloud and therefore does not require any setup. It
is free, offers users access to three different computing resources; central processing
unit(CPU), graphics processing unit (GPU), or tensor processing unit(TPU) and sup-
ports most popular machine learning libraries such as PyTorch, TensorFlow, Keras, and
OpenCV. Notebooks are stored in Google Drive, sharing is allowed and simultaneous
editing by more than one person is possible. The drawback is, however, that Google
Colab does not guarantee unlimited usage, and usage limits sometimes fluctuate. Colab
was used in this project for all training of neural networks as the author of this project
did not have direct access to a CUDA supported GPU (Nvidia) and training a deep
neural network on a CPU is nearly impossible. More information Regarding Colab can
be accessed through the link connected to the citation in the bibliography section [34].
3.5
Deep Learning Frameworks
To use a deep neural network for object detection on the UAV, some frameworks were
relied on. In this project, Darknet ROS is relied on, however, Darknet ROS relies on
Darknet, for this reason, the two will be explained here.
3.5.1
Darknet
As has been mentioned before, YOLO is a state-of-the-art one-stage object detector
working in real-time.
Darknet [35] is an open-source neural network framework for
YOLO. Darknet is written in C and CUDA, it is fast, easy to install, and supports both
CPU and GPU computations. A GPU performs much faster than a CPU. Darknet can
be accessed through the following GitHub link: Darknet link. Darknet includes many
different networks, including YOLO v1 through YOLO v4 in a few different versions
along with their tiny versions. Additionally, Darknet includes other well-known deep
neural networks like AlexNet, ImageNet, ResNet, and VGG. Darknet both allows for
the usage of pre-trained models for detection and the creation of a custom dataset with
instructions for training one.
==PAGE:27==
3.6 OpenCV
19
3.5.2
Darknet ROS
Darknet ROS [36] is a package developed for the usage of YOLO within the ROS frame-
work for both GPU and CPU. The author is Marko Bjelonic but the Robotic Systems
Lab at ETH Zurich is listed as aﬀiliation. The package is written fully in C++ but
the software depends on and requires OpenCV, boost (C++ library), and, as expected,
ROS. For Darknet ROS to run on GPU an Nvidia GPU is needed along with the in-
stallation of CUDA. The author of the ROS package states that YOLO can run around
500 times faster on GPU than CPU which is a considerable increase in speed. The
package includes versions of YOLO v2, v2-tiny, and v3, however adding more versions
is possible. The name of the node for the package is darknet_ros, it is subscribed to
a camera reading topic which can be modified according to the camera reading desired
for any desired application. Three nodes are published, they are all listed in table 3.1.
The package then allows the user to see the results of the detection along with bounding
boxes through an image window, window can be seen in the upper left corner of figure
5.2. Darknet ROS both supports downloading pre-trained weights for object detection
and using one’s own object detection dataset along with some instruction on train one
to get weights and exploit it to use on an image or an image stream. The latter option
was chosen in this project.
Table 3.1: Darknet ROS topics names along with descriptions and types of messages.
Information in this table can be accessed at citation [36].
Topic name
Description
Type of message
/camera_reading
The camera measurements.
sensor_msgs/Image
/object_detector
Publishes the number of detected objects.
std_msgs::Int8
/bounding_boxes
Publishes an array of bounding boxes that
gives information of the position and size
of the bounding box in pixel coordinates
darknet_ros_msgs
::BoundingBoxes
/detection_image
Publishes an image of the detection image
including the bounding boxes.
sensor_msgs::Image
All information and building instructions can be accessed through a GitHub reposi-
tory, the link is accessible from the bibliography section at the end of this report.
3.6
OpenCV
Open Source Computer Vision Library, better known as OpenCV, is an open-source
image processing, computer vision, and machine learning library. OpenCV is natively
written in C++ but is cross-platform and also has Python, Java, and MATLAB interfaces
along with supporting Windows, Linux, Android, and Mac OS. OpenCV was built to
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Software Frameworks
provide a common infrastructure for computer vision applications and accelerate the use
of machine perception. OpenCV has a focus on real-time vision applications and it is a
highly optimized library.
The application possibilities of OpenCV range from stitching together images to
rapid face detection and classifying human actions in videos. The library offers a wide
variety of appliances. In this project OpenCV was used for image processing and for
making use of built-in single object trackers, those have been explained in chapter 2.
3.7
Bridge between OpenCV and ROS
CvBridge is a package for interfacing ROS with OpenCV and is a part of a library for
programming functions for real-time computer vision [37]. The ROS package is an object
that facilitates the conversion between OpenCV images and ROS image messages. This
package was used to read image topics from a ROS node and converting them to visual
media that OpenCV is able to process.
3.8
Summary
In this chapter, the most important software frameworks used in the project were in-
troduced and further discussed. Many different aspects of robotics, computer vision,
machine learning, and programming are combined in this project. For that reason, the
focus was not set on trying to reinventing the wheel but rather utilize what already
exists to be able to achieve the objective of tracking, recognizing, and tracking an object
and get on the road to new discoveries related to water behavior due to an air stream
from a drone.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Data Collection
4.1
Introduction
Data collection is simply the process of gathering information for an application to eval-
uate outcomes or gaining valuable insights.
Data was gathered for object detection,
tracking, and for testing the full software solution. The data is visual, both images and
videos. Images are for training object detection algorithms and videos for evaluating dif-
ferent trackers and the full software solution. This chapter will cover the data collection
along with alternations made to generate usable data.
4.2
Data for Object Detection
To train a neural network in computer vision with supervised learning, labeled data is
needed. There exists a great number of datasets with many different classes. A class
refers to a certain object that is of interest to classify, for example, a car, person, or build-
ing. A few widely known datasets are PASCAL VOC, ImageNet, and COCO. Datasets
have various classes, the number of classes, the quantity of images, and different anno-
tation formats. For example, PASCAL VOC includes 20 different classes and around
10000 images [38] while COCO includes 80 classes and around 330000 images [39].
No dataset for this specific application where water is a class existed beforehand. The
objective is to detect an object on or just below water surface level where the air stream
from the drone will cause distortions on and in the water. This will lead to an object
to both move fast if on water surface level and to become occluded, especially when
located below water surface level. Thus, a dataset was developed. To create a dataset
for supervised learning, data has to be gathered, and then it needs to be processed and
labeled. For this application, the data is in the form of images and labeling is done by
hand-annotating a bounding box for each object in the image, see figures 4.1. 4.3, and
4.4 for reference. The annotations were made by the free, open-source, graphical image
annotation tool, LabelImg [40]. These annotations are then considered as the ground
truth both for training a neural network and evaluating its performance.
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Data Collection
4.2.1
Simulation
At first, a dataset was made of the simulated environment where a drone was flown over
the pool in the simulated environment, and images were taken by use of the ROS package
image_view [41]. These were then annotated and used to train a deep neural network.
The dataset of the simulated environment was very limited in terms of size and consisted
of 141 images with a total of 471 annotations, all images are 640x480 pixels. The images
are then resized to a 416x416 before being used for training a neural network to enhance
speed and accuracy. This dataset included 4 classes; can, cube, water, and orange since
the simulation environment contains an orange tree. Figure 4.1 illustrates an image
taken by a drone of the simulated environment and the hand-annotated bounding boxes
representing the objects.
(a) Image taken in simulation environment
(b) Annotated image
Figure 4.1: Image taken in simulation with drone annotated
Obtaining data from the simulated environment allows for training a deep neural
network for object detection and uploading the weights to the simulated drone for sim-
ulated on-flight object detection. This will be further discussed in the next chapter,
Simulation chapter 5.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Data for Object Detection
23
4.2.2
Real Environment
Next, images from the real environment were taken. The real environment is DTU’s
Autonomous Systems Test Arena, hereby called ASTA, see figure 4.2a . ASTA is located
at DTU’s Lyngby campus next to building 329 and is an indoor infrastructure for testing
mobile robot technology on land, in air, and on or under water. ASTA has a ceiling
height of 14 meters and a pool that is 6.5x3.5x3 meters in size. In figure 4.2b, shows how
images and videos were captured by a drone flying over the pool in ASTA. The drone
used is called M100 and is a DJI Matrice 200 series.
(a) Aerial shot of ASTA, copyright Nikolaj Katkjær
(b) Images and videos were cap-
tured by a drone (M100) in ASTA
Figure 4.2: DTU’s Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA)
The images were taken in various ways, both with and without a drone. The images
included 3 classes; can, bottle, and water. The reason for these classes is the possibility
of a real-life application of object capturing on or under water. Images with the drone
were taken to have images where the air stream from the drone does cause the water to
move and objects to become more occluded. The intention is to provide a neural network
for these images to learn from and then hopefully be able to detect the objects during
a real-life application. This is important to examine if the application of detecting an
occluded object below or on water surface is indeed possible by using a state-of-the-
art object detector. The images from the real environment are 1785 in total. Images
captured with the drone are 1280x720 pixels, and images captured without are 640x480
pixels. All images were then hand-annotated, with 6604 annotations in total.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Data Collection
(a) Image taken in real environment
(b) Annotated image
Figure 4.3: Image taken in the real environment without a drone annotated
(a) Image taken in real environment
(b) Annotated image
Figure 4.4: Image taken in the real environment with a drone annotated
4.3
Data for Object Tracking
Data was conjointly captured for object tracking. The data is collected to evaluate the
various object trackers. The data is in the form of videos. Videos were taken both for
the simulated environment and the real environment, all videos are 1280x720 pixels.
4.3.1
Simulation
For the simulated environment, six different videos were captured. The videos were
captured by flying the simulated drone over the pool and capturing the camera stream
as a video by using the formerly mentioned ROS package image_view [41]. The videos
from the simulated environment were 30 frames per second (FPS). In table 4.1, the six
different videos are described. The length of each video is given in frames. One can
simply divide the frames by FPS to get the total seconds of the video as follows
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Data for Object Tracking
25
seconds = total frames
FPS
The first frame of each video, or the first still image in the video, is then studied and a
bounding box initialized for each of the six videos. These bounding boxes along with the
first frame can be seen in figure 4.5. Frame length of each video, the coordinates of each
bounding box, and which object is being tracked are listed in table 4.1. Additionally,
the table includes information of weather or not the object goes out of the frame at any
time instance and then when it goes out and comes back in. If there is a dash in the in
column, an object goes out of the frame and does not return.
Table 4.1: Parameters of videos taken in simulated environment, their length in frames,
initial bounding box coordinates (in pixels), which object is being tracked, if the object
goes out of the frame and when.
filename
frames
initial bounding box
object
o.o.f
out
in
x
y
w
h
take1_cut.mp4
1174
699
330
62
114
beer can
no
take2_cut.mp4
160
473
290
48
34
coke can
yes
130
-
take3_cut.mp4
631
529
64
54
63
cube
yes
280
290
take4_cut.mp4
424
910
226
63
55
cube
no
take5_cut.mp4
546
703
496
27
54
beer can
partly
80
100
take6_cut.mp4
812
462
232
115
105
cube
no
Figure 4.5 below, shows the first frames of each video of the simulated environment
in table 4.1 along with initial bounding boxes for each one of those.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Data Collection
(a) take1_cut.mp4
(b) take2_cut.mp4
(c) take3_cut.mp4
(d) take4_cut.mp4
(e) take5_cut.mp4
(f) take6_cut.mp4
Figure 4.5: First frames along with initial bounding boxes, videos from the simulated
environment.
4.3.2
Real Environment
For evaluating different trackers, sixteen videos were captured from the real environment.
Videos were captured both with and without a drone, with eight videos for each case.
Each video is 1280x720 pixels and captured at 30 FPS. The videos are of different lengths,
or from 39 to 893 total frames which equal around 1.3 to 29.8 seconds. The reason why
videos were captured both with and without a drone is to evaluate how much the air
stream from the drone will affect the tracker’s performance. As has been mentioned, it
is expected that the air stream from the drone will cause both fast movements of objects
on or under water surface level, along with occlusions on the water surface. This will
likely cause the task of detecting, recognizing, and tracking an object problematic, this
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Data for Object Tracking
27
will be investigated in upcoming chapters.
Table 4.2 includes the same parameters as the table above for each video and ex-
presses frame length, initial bounding boxes, which object is being tracked, and if, and
when, the object leaves the frame at any instant. Following are then two figures that
show the first frames of each video along with the initial bounding box. Figure 4.6 shows
videos taken without a drone and figure 4.7 taken with a drone, all videos are taken in
the same environment.
Table 4.2: Parameters of videos taken in real environment, their length in frames, initial
bounding box coordinates (in pixels), which object is being tracked, if the object goes
out of the frame and when.
filename
frames
initial bounding box
object
o.o.f
out
in
x
y
w
h
pool1_cut1.mp4
893
1049
372
43
96
green can
yes
420
430
pool1_cut2.mp4
227
628
600
32
66
green can
no
pool1_cut3.mp4
484
660
359
77
117
red can
no
pool1_cut4.mp4
574
547
260
75
62
red can
partly
400
410
pool2_cut1.mp4
744
696
603
111
41
plastic bottle
partly
160
180
pool2_cut2.mp4
711
255
86
65
51
red can
yes
685
700
pool2_cut3.mp4
632
415
429
87
54
red can
yes
140
190
pool2_cut4.mp4
430
492
320
36
41
red can
no
bag1_cut.mp4
39
1128
530
47
62
plastic bottle
no
bag5_cut1.mp4
480
640
317
33
26
red can
yes
100
340
420
140
350
-
bag5_cut2.mp4
263
735
526
70
26
red can
yes
190
200
bag6_cut1.mp4
155
597
554
23
26
white can
no
bag6_cut2.mp4
226
676
357
33
21
plastic bottle
no
bag8_cut.mp4
293
897
176
31
23
red can
yes
280
-
bag9_cut1.mp4
124
579
246
31
45
black can
no
bag9_cut2.mp4
158
633
500
28
28
red can
no
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Data Collection
(a) pool1_cut1.mp4
(b) pool1_cut2.mp4
(c) pool1_cut3.mp4
(d) pool1_cut4.mp4
(e) pool2_cut1.mp4
(f) pool2_cut2.mp4
(g) pool2_cut3.mp4
(h) pool2_cut4.mp4
Figure 4.6: First frames along with initial bounding boxes, videos from the real environ-
ment(ASTA) taken without a drone.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Data for Object Tracking
29
(a) bag1_cut.mp4
(b) bag5_cut1.mp4
(c) bag5_cut2.mp4
(d) bag5_cut1.mp4
(e) bag6_cut2.mp4
(f) bag8_cut.mp4
(g) bag9_cut1.mp4
(h) bag9_cut2.mp4
Figure 4.7: First frames along with initial bounding boxes, videos from the real environ-
ment(ASTA) taken with a drone.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Data Collection
4.4
Data for Experimental Validation
To enhance the experimental validation, ten videos were captured in the real environment
for experimental validation. Half of the videos were captured by the formerly mentioned
DJI drone called M100, the drone can be seen in figure 4.2b. M100 is a rather large
drone and does emit quite a bit of air stream. The other five videos were captured by
a DJI mini 2 drone. The drone was around eight meters above the water and the zoom
function was used. The intention was to get two types of data, with and without air
stream for comparison. The DJI mini does emit a small amount of air stream but hardly
any at that height, especially compared to the M100. The videos captured with the DJI
mini were scaled to the same resolution as the ones captured by M100, 1280x720. The
objects were in the camera frame at all time for these 10 videos listed below in table 4.3
Table 4.3: Parameters of videos taken in real environment for experimental validation,
their length in frames, frames per second (FPS), which object is being tracked, and
which drone was used to captured the video.
filename
frames
FPS
object
drone
RE1.mp4
915
10
red can
M100
RE2.mp4
918
10
red can
M100
RE3.mp4
913
10
red can
M100
RE4.mp4
900
10
red can
M100
RE5.mp4
907
10
red can
M100
DJI1_lr.mp4
3218
30
green can
DJI mini 2
DJI2_lr.mp4
2523
30
green can
DJI mini 2
DJI3_lr.mp4
2864
30
red can
DJI mini 2
DJI4_lr.mp4
2854
30
red can
DJI mini 2
DJI5_lr.mp4
1950
30
red can
DJI mini 2
4.5
Summary
A common conclusion in deep learning is that more data produces better results. The
process of labeling data for supervised learning, as was done here for object detection
is, however, a tedious and time-consuming activity. Since the main aim of this project
is to design and build a computer vision solution able to detect and track an object
along with investigating the effect of the drone’s air stream on the water, the focus was
set on those aspects rather than a full collection and creation of data. In total, 1926
images were labeled with 7075 annotations for training object detectors. For evaluating
object trackers, 10180 frames of video were recorded which corresponds to 339.3 seconds
at a 30 FPS rate. More data could have motivated better results but because of time
limitations, more focus was set on achieving the task at hand of detecting, recognizing,
and tracking the object.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Simulation
5.1
Introduction
To begin with, the whole system was implemented and tested in simulation. Simulation is
important because drones can be both fragile and expensive. Simulation also allows work
to be carried out independent of a licensed drone pilot and assures functional validation of
the software. Both object detection and object tracking were implemented in simulation.
Both features were first implemented separately to examine their independent functions
and performances. The two features were then later merged to work together to achieve
the task of object detection and tracking.
5.2
Analysis
A thorough survey was made in the year 2020 where deep learning based object detection
methods were compared on a low-altitude UAV dataset [4], which is the kind of data this
work will be performed on. The main conclusion was that CornerNet, an advanced object
detector, achieved the best result on an UAV dataset. Both SSD and YOLO have good
frameworks for training custom models and a variety of smaller models of the networks
which is important because the solution will mainly be run on a CPU, not a GPU. The
performance of SSD was very poor compared to YOLO on the VisDrone dataset. This
might not have been startling, since SSD is more suitable for detecting larger objects
[42], and objects from the viewpoint of a drone are usually small. Another paper [43],
studies the performance of object detectors in autonomous vehicles using camera data,
the conclusion is that for low-resolution images with small objects YOLOv3 has the best
speed-accuracy tradeoff. Consequently, YOLOv3 and YOLOv4, along with their tiny
versions, will be examined in this project.
For object tracking, built-in OpenCV single object trackers will be utilized. The
7 different trackers that have been explained in chapter 2 will all be examined and
evaluated on different videos, explained in chapter 4.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Simulation
5.3
Object Detection
The formerly mention mini-dataset consisting of images taken in the simulated environ-
ment from a drone was used to train YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and their tiny versions. The
best weights were then downloaded and used with ROS darknet mention in chapter 5.
The mini-dataset consisted of formerly mentioned 141 images. Those images are split
into training-, validation- and test sets. 120 (85%) images were used for training, 14
(10%) for validating, and 7 (5%) for testing. The results of the training can be seen in
table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Results from training YOLO version3 tiny on a mini-dataset of images from
the simulated environment
can
cube
orange
water
AP
AP
AP
AP
mAP@0.5
YOLO v3 tiny
98.72 %
100.00 %
0.00 %
93.33 %
73.01 %
YOLO v3
76.14 %
100.00 %
62.63 %
70.50 %
71.43 %
YOLO v4 tiny
71.72 %
20.07%
33.33%
91.85%
54.24%
YOLO v4
100.00%
100.00%
57.08%
71.25%
82.08%
There are is a big class imbalance along with very few images in the mini-dataset.
Class imbalance refers to that there are not equal amounts of annotations between classes.
In the dataset, there are 471 annotations in total or 3.3 annotations on average per image.
The annotations were 211 for oranges, 149 for water, 87 for cans, and 24 cubes. For this
reason, the average precision (AP) values in the table above are undependable because
the validation set consists only of 7 images included so there could be non or very
few annotations for some classes. The mean average precision is a more informative
evaluation since it takes into account all classes. As can be seen, the mean average
precision is quite high. The mAP for YOLOv3 tiny on the COCO dataset is 33.1%
[15] which is considerably lower than here (73.01%). It should be pointed out that this
can be caused by overfitting. Overfitting occurs when the model fits too closely to the
training data, then the model is not able to generalize well to new data. Figure 5.1 shows
detection by all four networks on a random image from the mini-dataset, it should be
pointed out that the figure is fully descriptive, values in table 5.1 are far more telling
regarding the overall performance.
The weights for the network were suﬀicient to upload to the simulated drone and
obtain acceptable results for simulation purposes. This is illustrated in figure 5.2, where
YOLO v3 tiny runs on the image stream from the drone in Gazebo with the assist of
darknet ROS package, bounding boxes are formed (see upper left corner), and class
probability can be seen in the terminal (see lower-left corner).
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Object Detection
33
(a) YOLOv3
(b) YOLOv3 tiny
(c) YOLOv4
(d) YOLOv4 tiny
Figure 5.1: Trained weights from simulated data for YOLOv3, YOLOv3-tiny, YOLOv4,
and YOLOv4 tiny ran on a random image from the dataset, predicted bounding boxes
are drawn along with class probability.
Figure 5.2: YOLOv3 tiny running on drone in simulated environment
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Simulation
5.4
Object Tracking
The next step is object tracking. Built-in OpenCV single-object trackers will be used
for this task, the trackers have been explained in detail in chapter 2. The trackers have
different advantages and disadvantages in terms of speed, accuracy, and reliability. To
measure the trackers’ speed the average FPS was calculated. It should be noted that
when a tracker fails, the FPS becomes much faster. For this reason, the average FPS is
only are only liable when the tracker successfully completed a whole video.
To evaluate the trackers for the simulated environment, videos were captured by
the simulated drone. The tracker is given a defined bounding box, see table 4.1 for
coordinates of the six different videos. In some videos the object leaves the frame and
comes back into the frame, this is also documented in the formerly mentioned table. Next,
the performance of the tracker is visually evaluated and documented. For a tracker to
be successful on a video it has to keep a bounding box on the object throughout the
video. The results of each video can be seen in the following six tables.
Table 5.2: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take1_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
27
no
Failed around frame 20.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 20.
MOSSE
2308
no
Failed from beginning.
MedianFlow
141
no
Failed around frame 20.
TLD
12
no
Failed around frame 150. Starts
jumping between objects.
KCF
183
no
Failed around frame 20.
CSRT
181
no
Failed around frame 30.
Table 5.3: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take2_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
60
no
Failed from beginning.
MIL
18
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MOSSE
4787
no
Failed from beginning.
MedianFlow
118
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
10
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
KCF
490
no
Failed from beginning.
CSRT
89
yes
Bounding box well centered.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Object Tracking
35
Table 5.4: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take3_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
41
no
Failed from beginning.
MIL
17
no
Failed from beginning.
MOSSE
3639
no
Failed from beginning.
MedianFlow
106
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
7
no
Failed around frame 400. Starts
jumping between objects.
KCF
301
no
Failed around frame from beginning.
CSRT
179
no
Failed around frame 30.
Table 5.5: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take4_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
41
no
Failed around frame 250. Bounding
box not well centered.
MIL
17
no
Failed around frame 250. Bounding
box not well centered.
MOSSE
3232
no
Failed from start.
MedianFlow
104
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
8
no
Failed around frame 80.
KCF
266
no
Failed from beginning.
CSRT
28
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 5.6: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take5_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
61
no
Failed around frame 80.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 190. Bounding
box not well centered.
MOSSE
4049
no
Failed from beginning.
MedianFlow
108
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
14
no
Failed around frame 130. Starts jumping
between objects, recovers around frame
200 but BB not well centered.
KCF
450
no
Failed from beginning.
CSRT
219
no
Failed around frame 150.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Simulation
Table 5.7: Results of OpenCV trackers on video take6_cut.mp4
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
16
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 460. Bounding
box not well centered.
MOSSE
1768
no
Failed from beginning.
MedianFlow
107
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
12
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
KCF
158
no
Failed around frame 460. Bounding
box not well centered.
CSRT
94
no
Failed around frame 500. Bounding
box well centered.
Neither MOSSE nor KCF trackers managed to track a video successfully. The other
five trackers managed to track at least one video successfully. Although Boosting, MIL,
and TLD did manage to track an object successfully the bounding boxes were not well
centered and the size of the bounding boxes changed very frequently and was unstable.
When CSRT performed successfully, the bounding box was stable but it was much
slower than MedianFlow in speed.
MedianFlow was successful in 5 out of 6 videos
and additionally has high speed. Table 5.8 summarizes how many times trackers were
successful, the ratio, and their average speed when successful.
Table 5.8: Analysis of successful trackers
Tracker
Successes
Success ratio
aFPS
Boosting
1
16.67%
16
MIL
1
16.67%
18
MedianFlow
5
83.33%
108.6
TLD
2
33.33%
11
CSRT
2
33.33%
58.5
To sum up, the MedianFlow tracker showed the best results in simulation both in
terms of successes and speed, it will thereby be used when object detection and tracking
are combined.
5.5
Functional Validation
Now that both detection and tracking work separately, the focus is set on combining
the two to achieve the goal of detecting, recognizing, and tracking an object. By using
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Functional Validation
37
an object detection algorithm an object can be found and recognized, assuming that
the algorithm is trained for that specific object class. The object detection will return
class, class probability, and a bounding box. The tracker’s input is the bounding box
and the output is also a bounding box, the bounding box the tracker gives the object
of interest at each instance. This kind of tracking is called tracking by detection. As
has been mentioned in chapter 1, the reason why one would want to switch from object
detection to tracking is two-folded; to increase performance and to increase speed. An
object detection algorithm analysis each frame independently but a tracking algorithm
a sequence of frames allied.
For achieving this, two programs were made, both in C++. The detection program is
called detection.cpp and the tracking program is called tracking.cpp. The two programs
change information in the form of ROS topics regarding the present state of the function.
The two will be shortly described here. The full code is available in the appendix, A.1
and B.1 for detection and tracking respectively.
•
detection.cpp This program is a subscriber to Darknet ROS and receives infor-
mation regarding the classes, class probability, and bounding box coordinates from
the topic /darknet_ros/_bounding_boxes. Weights have been downloaded from
training the suitable version of YOLO algorithm, the neural network can detect
object classes it is trained for. Those classes are can, cube, orange and water for
the mini-dataset. When water has been detected with an amount of certainty, the
search is directed to the desired object. When the desired object has been detected
with an amount of certainty, the program informs tracking.cpp and passes on the
bounding box by use of a topic named /object_detection/bounding_box_to_track.
detection.cpp then shuts down when it has has received information regarding re-
ceiving a bounding box from tracking.cpp. That information is passed with a topic
named /object_tracker/tracking_ok.
• tracking.cpp When the tracker has successfully received the bounding box it ini-
tializes the tracking and publishes information to confirm that. The tracking algo-
rithm applied here is MedianFlow since it showed the primary performance to the
other trackers, see section 5.4. The program then publishes a topic that includes
information of the bounding box that the tracker outputs. This information is pub-
lished as a topic named /object_tracker/bounding_box_output and is intended to
make the objective of capturing the object possible. Additionally tracking.cpp is
a subscriber to a camera stream through a topic called /webcam/image_raw and
publishes a topic called /object_tracker/raw_image. The camera stream topic can
be changed to any other topic of the same type. The published image topic is the
image stream from the camera with a bounding box that represents the tracker’s
output.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Simulation
Table 5.9: Topics connected to both detection.cpp and tracking.cpp information regarding
names, types of messages and cases of publisher(P) and subscriber(S) for each program.
Topic name
Type of message
detection.cpp
tracking.cpp
P
S
P
S
/darknet_ros/
bounding_boxes
darknet_ros_msgs::
BoundingBoxes
✓
/object_detector/
bounding_boxes_to_track
std_msgs::
Int32MultiArray
✓
✓
/object_tracker/
tracking_ok
std_msgs::Int8
✓
✓
/object_tracker/
bounding_box_out
std_msgs::
Int32MultiArray
✓
/webcam/image_raw
sensor_msgs::
image_encodings
✓
/object_tracker/
raw_image
sensor_msgs::
image_encoding
✓
The image stream topics from table 5.9 are reading in the image stream to process it
for both detection and tracking and also for visual observation. There are three messages
generated to achieve the task of capturing the object and those are further described
and listed below. Those three messages will be further described here.
• /object_detection/bounding_box_to_track This message includes seven in-
teger variables. The first one is a boolean variable, 1 indicates that the object has
been found and the tracker should start while 0 that the detection is still ongoing.
The second and third integers indicate the x and y coordinates of the bounding
box respectively. The third and fourth are the width and the height of the box,
and the fifth and the sixth the x and y coordinates of the center of the bounding
box.
• /object_tracker/tracking_ok This message only includes one integer variable
and was created to assure that the tracking.cpp has indeed received a bounding
box and detection.cpp can shut down. The integer 1 indicates that a bounding box
has been received, 0 the opposite.
• /object_tracker/bounding_box_out This message is then the final produc-
tion of the combined detection and tracking. The message includes six integer
variables. The first and the second ones are the x and y coordinates of the bound-
ing box. The second and third are the width and height and the fifth and sixth
express the center of the bounding box.
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Functional Validation
39
Figure 5.3 is to facilitate visualizing the exchange of information between the two
programs by use of ROS topics along with subscription and publishing of topics with
messages.
Figure 5.3: Exchange of information between detection.cpp and tracking.cpp
The usage of ROS topics results in the two programs running synchronized allows for
exchange of information. Figures 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7 are screenshots from 4 different
stages in the simulation. Figure 5.4 illustrates when the water has been certainly found
and the object detection shifts to search for the specific object which is a can in this
case. Figure 5.5 is captured when the specific object has been found and tracking is
being initialized. In figure 5.6, the bounding box has been passed from detection to
tracking, and tracking has begun applying MedianFlow tracker. The last figure, 5.7, is
captured at the end when the tracker has been running for 4821 frames, or around 161
seconds. MedianFlow tracks the object very steadily; it keeps the bounding box well
centered and functions at a high FPS rate.
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Simulation
Figure 5.4: Object detection stage; certain of finding water
Figure 5.5: Object detection stage; certain of finding a specific object. In this case the
specific object is a can
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Functional Validation
41
Figure 5.6: Object tracking stage; the bounding box from the object detection has just
been passed to the object tracker. Here, using the MedianFlow tracker.
Figure 5.7: Object tracking stage; after object has been tracked for 4821 frames or 2.42
minutes.
It has been said that a picture is worth more than a thousand words but a video
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Simulation
can be even more descriptive, especially for this specific application. The video of the
two functionalities working in simulations can be accessed through the following link
youtu.be/BfIVtoBk0ck. The switch from object detection to object tracking occurs 37
seconds into the video. It can be seen in the video that the tracker tracks the object very
accurately both regarding the center and size of the bounding box. It should be noted
that the object detection in the video has been sped up 4x and 2x for object tracking.
Everything is running on CPU which explains the stagnant, especially for the object
detection.
5.6
Summary
In this chapter, object detection, recognition, and tracking were tested and achieved
satisfactory results for the simulated environment. Simulation allows for an important
proof of concept and validation of the program’s function, however, the performance of
a system is never the same in simulation as in a real-life application. For this particular
application, the leading concern is related to how the object behavior will be affected
by the air stream of the drone and how that will influence the performances of both the
detection and tracking. This will be further discussed and investigated in the following
chapter where the real environment is studied.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Real Environment
6.1
Introduction
The solution is fully functioning in simulation and ready to be tested in the real environ-
ment when object optimal object detector and object tracker have been established. The
same steps are followed as in the previous chapter to choose the optimal object detector
and object tracker. Additionally, the system will be experimentally validated by testing
it on data from the real environment.
6.2
Object Detection
The dataset of images from the real environment consists of 1785 images. Those images
are split into training-, validation- and test sets.
1518 (85%) images were used for
training, 178 (10%)for validating, and 89 (5%) for testing. The same four variations of
the YOLO family were trained and the results can be seen in table 6.1. All images were
resized to 416x416 pixels to enhance the speed and accuracy of the training.
Table 6.1: Results from training YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and tiny versions of both on a the
dataset with images from the real environment
can
bottle
water
AP
AP
AP
mAP@0.5
YOLOv3 tiny
47.59 %
56.99 %
58.62 %
54.40 %
YOLOv3
66.06 %
69.75 %
67.46 %
67.76 %
YOLOv4 tiny
57.19 %
54.41 %
57.98 %
56.52 %
YOLOv4
66.98%
71.03%
66.72%
68.24%
For this dataset, is also a class imbalance here like in the simulated mini-dataset. This
dataset includes 6604 annotations in total for 1785 images, an average of 3.7 per image.
Annotations of cans are 1969, bottles are 1580, and water 3060. Although the mAP@0.5
is lower for the data from the real environment than the simulated one, the values are
still quite high. When trained on the COCO dataset, YOLOv3 achieved 55.3% mAP for
a 416x416 image, YOLOv3 tiny 33.1% mAP, YOLOv4 62.8%, and YOLOv4 tiny 40.2%.
This could be related to overfitting or the fact that the dataset is quite homogeneous and
==PAGE:52==
44
6 Real Environment
has few classes. Figure 6.1 shows predictions from the 4 different models on a random
image from the dataset. As has been stated, this is not very descriptive as it only shows
limited results for one random image, values from table 6.1 are much more expressive
as they take into account results of multiple images.
(a) YOLOv3
(b) YOLOv3 tiny
(c) YOLOv4
(d) YOLOv4 tiny
Figure 6.1: Trained weights from real environment data for YOLOv3, YOLOv3-tiny,
YOLOv4, and YOLOv4 tiny ran on a random image from the dataset, predicted bound-
ing boxes are drawn along with class probability.
Since the object detection will be run on a CPU, not a GPU, one of the tiny versions
is more suitable to enhance speed. Since YOLOv4 tiny performed better than YOLOv3
tiny, that version will be utilized when running the full software solution.
6.3
Object Tracking
Now, to focus is set on the object tracking. The same approach was taken to evaluate
the trackers as in section 5.4.
Each tracker was ran on sixteen different videos, see
table 4.2 in section 4.3. Half of the videos were captured by a drone (M100) and the
other half by a camera. Each video is assessed, to check their average FPS, if they were
successful and a short description made. The conditions for a tracker to achieve success
are that the bounding box the tracker produces is on the object throughout the video.
The results for the sixteen videos can then be reviewed in the sixteen tables, 6.2 through
6.17, below.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Object Tracking
45
Table 6.2: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool1_cut1.mp4, 893 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
38
no
Failed around frame 420.
MIL
17
no
Failed around frame 40.
MOSSE
2785
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
126
no
Failed around frame 420, recovered
around frame 750.
TLD
13
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
181
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
90
no
Failed around frame 450.
Table 6.3: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool1_cut2.mp4, 227 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
55
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MIL
19
yes
Bounding box well centered.
MOSSE
3856
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
115
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
13
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
405
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
29
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 6.4: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool1_cut3.mp4, 484 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
23
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MIL
19
yes
Bounding box well centered.
MOSSE
2012
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
107
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
TLD
14
no
Failed around frame 180.
KCF
249
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
18
yes
Bounding not box well centered.
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Real Environment
Table 6.5: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool1_cut4.mp4, 574 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
36
no
Failed around frame 400. Bounding
box not well centered.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 140. Bounding
box well centered.
MOSSE
2586
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
109
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
TLD
11
no
Failed around frame 300.
KCF
217
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
29
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 6.6: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool2_cut1.mp4, 744 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
37
no
Failed in the beginning, recovers around frame 200
MIL
18
no
Failed from the beginning.
MOSSE
2634
no
Failed from the beginning .
MedianFlow
111
yes
Failed in the beginning, recovers around
frame 70. Bounding box not well centered.
TLD
13
no
Failed around frame 300.
KCF
143
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
28
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 6.7: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool2_cut2.mp4, 711 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
43
no
Fails around frame 685.
MIL
19
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MOSSE
3296
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
111
yes
Bounding box well centered.
TLD
13
no
Failed around frame 100.
KCF
262
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
35
yes
Bounding box well centered.
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Object Tracking
47
Table 6.8: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool2_cut3.mp4, 632 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
37
no
Fails around frame 50.
MIL
19
no
Fails around frame 140.
MOSSE
2642
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
150
no
Fails around frame 140.
TLD
13
no
Fails around frame 140.
KCF
390
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
141
no
Fails around frame 140.
Table 6.9: Results of OpenCV trackers on video pool2_cut4.mp4, 430 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
63
no
Fails around frame 40.
MIL
19
no
Fails around frame 40.
MOSSE
4163
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
150
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
13
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
390
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
35
no
Fails around frame 100.
Table 6.10: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag1_cut.mp4, 39 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
46
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MIL
19
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MOSSE
4043
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
108
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
TLD
28
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
217
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
29
yes
Bounding box well centered.
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Real Environment
Table 6.11: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag5_cut1.mp4, 480 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
64
no
Failed from the beginning.
MIL
16
no
Failed around frame 100.
MOSSE
4788
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
104
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
25
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
636
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
55
no
Failed around frame 100.
Table 6.12: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag5_cut2.mp4, 263 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
30
no
Failed around frame 190. Bounding
box not well centered.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 190. Bounding
box not well centered
MOSSE
2274
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
104
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
21
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
176
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
52
no
Failed around frame 250. Bounding
box well centered.
Table 6.13: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag6_cut1.mp4, 155 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
70
no
Failed around frame 100.
MIL
17
no
Failed around frame 100.
MOSSE
4780
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
105
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
26
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
681
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
34
no
Failed around frame 100. Jumped
to another object.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Object Tracking
49
Table 6.14: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag6_cut2.mp4, 226 total frames.
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
73
no
Failed from the beginning.
MIL
18
no
Failed around frame 80.
MOSSE
5211
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
121
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
32
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
752
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
32
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 6.15: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag8_cut.mp4
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
65
no
Failed from the beginning.
MIL
18
yes
Bounding box not well centered.
MOSSE
5179
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
108
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
25
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
566
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
38
yes
Bounding box well centered.
Table 6.16: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag9_cut1.mp4
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
56
no
Failed from the beginning.
MIL
17
no
Failed around frame 70.
MOSSE
5051
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
102
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
18
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
413
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
30
no
Failed around frame 80.
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Real Environment
Table 6.17: Results of OpenCV trackers on video bag9_cut2.mp4
Tracker
aFPS
Success
Description
Boosting
64
no
Failed around frame 70.
MIL
17
no
Failed around frame 80.
MOSSE
5057
no
Failed from the beginning.
MedianFlow
102
no
Failed from the beginning.
TLD
25
no
Failed from the beginning.
KCF
643
no
Failed from the beginning.
CSRT
133
no
Failed around frame 80.
To sum up, MOSSE, TLD, and KCF trackers all failed for all sixteen videos. That
is very similar to the evaluation of the trackers on the videos from the simulated envi-
ronment, the difference here is that TLD is also in the no-success category for the real
environment videos. Interestingly, the MedianFlow tracker, which performed the best
on the simulated videos from chapter 5, does not perform acceptably on the videos from
the real environment. It is noticeable that the performance of the trackers is significantly
worse when tracking an object in the videos taken by a drone. This might be expected
since the air stream from the drone does cause light objects on the water surface to
move fast and also causes immense occlusion on the water surface. All trackers had dif-
ficulties when an object left the frame. The trackers that succeeded a whole video were
BOOSTING, MIL, MedianFlow, and CSRT, and table 6.18 represents a quick summary
of those, including the number of successes, the ratio of success, and average FPS when
the trackers turned out to be successful.
Table 6.18: Analysis of successful trackers
Tracker
Successes
Success ratio
aFPS
Boosting
3
18.7% 5
41.33
MIL
5
31.25%
18.8
MedianFlow
5
31.25%
109.2
CSRT
8
50%
29.75
From visual observation, CSRT was the most stable regarding the bounding box
centering and size. Additionally, CSRT was also the tracker that managed to complete
the task of tracking an object throughout a video the most often. For this reason, CSRT
is the tracker that will be implemented on the real system on the drone. The camera
mounted on the drone will have an FPS rate of 30 and it can be seen from table 6.18
that CSRT has an average FPS rate just around that benchmark. Although this does
not seem to be the optimal solution, since the CSRT tracker failed in half of the videos,
it should be noted that the tracker does follow the object well at the beginning of each
video.
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Experimental Validation
51
6.4
Experimental Validation
The object detection and tracking are now all set to be tested on data from a real drone.
As formerly mentioned, videos were captured with a rather large drone that emits quite
a lot of air stream and with a small drone with a small amount of air stream and the
zoom function used from a height of around 8 meters to ensure a small effect of the air
stream on the water and object. The two programs, detection.cpp and tracking.cpp, run
simultaneously and exchange information in the same way as was described chapter 5.
The object detector used is YOLOv4-tiny with custom trained weights and the object
tracker CSRT.
First, all videos were evaluated running the program on a CPU. The object detector
can only process around 1 FPS on a CPU. The results can be seen in table 6.19 below.
The procedure is considered to be successful when the task of detecting water, detecting
a can, and then tracking the can with the bounding box from the detection until the
object is out of the frame of the video is completed is achieved.
Table 6.19: Results when the 10 different videos were evaluated with the software solu-
tion when ran on a CPU.
filename
Success
Description
RE1.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
RE2.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
RE3.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
RE4.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
RE5.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
DJI1_lr.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
DJI2_lr.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
DJI3_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
DJI4_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
DJI5_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
When the system ran on a CPU, none of the videos captured by the M100 drone
managed to successfully complete the task of object detection, recognition, and tracking.
Three of the videos captured by the DJI mini 2 were successful. Interestingly, in the
videos where the object was a green can the system failed and the ones where the object
was a red can it succeeded.
Looking at the dataset, there are more red cans than
green, which may be the root of the problem. It should be pointed out that the videos
captured with the M100 are 10 FPS, not 30 FPS like other videos in the work, this was
not intentional but because of time limitations, capturing more videos with the M100
was not possible. Here, the intention is to compare the effect of air stream from the
drone on the water, the incompatibility in the frame rate causes bias. Additionally, the
videos are not of the same length. Additionally, the information from the software should
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Real Environment
ideally be utilized for determining the trajectory of the drone. That was not carried out
in the experimental validation but may have motivated better results.
A recording when the system is run on a CPU with DJI5_lr.mp4 can be accessed by
the following link youtu.be/0ZiC1yOHzyY.
Next, the same experiment was run on a GPU. The results can be accessed A rough
estimation of the speed difference is that the object detector ran about 100 times faster
on the GPU. The results can be seen in the table below.
Table 6.20: Results when the 10 different videos were evaluated with the software solu-
tion when ran on a GPU.
filename
Success
Description
RE1.mp4
no
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker failed.
RE2.mp4
no
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker failed.
RE3.mp4
no
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker failed.
RE4.mp4
no
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker failed.
RE5.mp4
no
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker failed.
DJI1_lr.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
DJI2_lr.mp4
no
Water was successfully detected but the can was not.
DJI3_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
DJI4_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
DJI5_lr.mp4
yes
Water and can were detected successfully, tracker succeeded.
The main difference when the object detector runs on a GPU is that it manages to
detect both the water and the can in the videos captured by the M100. However the
tracker fails each time, this implies that the tracker has a diﬀicult time with the faster
movements and water distortions that are present in the videos. Looking at the videos
captured by the small drone from high altitude, the results are the same. This further
highlights that the object detector does not manage to detect a green can.
Two recordings of the systems function are available here for visual observation, one
captured by the M100 and one by DJI mini 2. A recording when the system is run on
a GPU with RE5.mp4 can be accessed by the following link youtu.be/8-zGLTI4-V8. A
recording when the system is run on a GPU with DJI5_lr.mp4 can be accessed by the
following link youtu.be/XgIE0ZPV47U.
6.5
Future Work
After reviewing results from data captured from the real environment, it can be stated
that some improvements would enhance the performance of the system. Therefore, the
following approaches to future work are proposed.
==PAGE:61==
6.6 Summary
53
1. Enhancing the dataset. The data used to train a neural network can be boosted
in various ways. More data can be added to it, the data in the current dataset is
quite homogeneous, more data could be added that is less uniform. Additionally,
data augmentation could boost performance along with twisting various hyper-
parameters like learning rate and batch size.
2. Implementing a state-of-the-art object tracker. The object trackers utilized
did perform poorly when challenged with fast movements and occlusion. Imple-
menting an advanced object tracker can boost performance.
3. Looping between object detection and tracking. Generally, when an object
left the camera frame, object tracking failed. Turning back to object detection
when tracking fails may be a good approach to crack this problem.
6.6
Summary
In this chapter, various aspects were covered when working with data from the real en-
vironment. Those aspects are, training neural networks for object detection, evaluating
object trackers, and experimental validation of the software solution. Experimental val-
idation implies that the task of detecting, recognizing, and tracking an object on or just
below water surface level by a powerful UAV, that emits a good amount of air stream,
is a challenging one. The chapter was concluded by a proposal of additional work to
enhance the performance of the system.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
UAVs are interesting platforms for applying real-time machine learning methods for a
wide variety of applications because of their relatively small size and flexibility. An UAV
equipped with intelligence and vision techniques can facilitate many tasks and impose
a faster solution to a broad line of applications. In this master thesis, an attempt was
made to solve the task of detecting, recognizing, and tracking an object by an UAV
when the object is located on or just below water surface level. A software solution was
developed and the effect of air stream from a drone on water investigated.
Once the detection, recognition and tracking system was developed and fully func-
tional in simulation it fulfilled the first three objectives of this work, those are:
1. Object detection
2. Object tracking
3. Combination of object detection and tracking
The last objective was then attempted, to receive experimental validation on the
performance of the developed solution. Experimental results suggest that further devel-
opment of the system is required to detect and track an object in a more precise way.
This project can serve to set a foundation for further development and improvement of
the solution and proves that more stable performance is only a few steps away.
==PAGE:64==
56
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Code for Detection
1 %% detection.cpp
2 #include <ros/ros.h>
3 #include <darknet_ros_msgs/BoundingBoxes.h>
4 #include <string >
5 #include <iostream >
6 #include <cstdlib >
7 #include "std_msgs/Int32MultiArray.h"
8 #include "std_msgs/Int8.h"
9
10 using namespace std;
11
12 bool detect = true;
13 bool firstWater = true;
14 int waterCounter = 0;
15 bool searchForObject = false;
16 int objectCounter = 0;
17 bool foundObjOnce = true;
18 int track_ok = 0;
19
20 //Variables to publish
21 bool track = false;
22 int bbx = 0;
23 int bby = 0;
24 int bbw = 0;
25 int bbh = 0;
26 int bbxm = 0;
27 int bbym = 0;
28
29
30 //Change this value for more "certainty"
31 int certainity = 3;
32
33 //Change this to an object that is desired to find (bottle or water)
34 string objectToFind = "can";
35
36 void getBoundingboxes(const darknet_ros_msgs::BoundingBoxes::ConstPtr& msg
)
37 {
38
for( int i=0; i < msg->bounding_boxes.size(); i++)
39
{
40
//Variables for the bounding boxes
41
int x_m = 0;
42
int y_m = 0;
==PAGE:68==
60
A Code for Detection
43
44
//ROS_INFO("%s detected", msg->bounding_boxes[i].Class.c_str());
45
if(msg->bounding_boxes[i].Class == "water" && msg->bounding_boxes[i].
probability >= 0.7));
46
{
47
waterCounter++;
48
if (firstWater == true)
49
{
50
ROS_INFO("Water has been detected");
51
firstWater = false;
52
}
53
if (waterCounter == certainity)
54
{
55
ROS_INFO("Certain of water --> Searching for object: %s",
objectToFind.c_str());
56
searchForObject = true;
57
}
58
}
59
60
61
if(msg->bounding_boxes[i].Class == objectToFind && searchForObject ==
true)
62
{
63
if(foundObjOnce == true)
64
{
65
ROS_INFO("Found object: %s", objectToFind.c_str());
66
foundObjOnce = false;
67
}
68
69
if (msg->bounding_boxes[i].probability >= 0.7) {
70
objectCounter++;
71
}
72
if (objectCounter >= certainity)
73
{
74
ROS_INFO("Certain of finding object: %s --> Switching to Tracking
mode", objectToFind.c_str());
75
detect = false;
76
track = true;
77
}
78
79
x_m = (msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmax - msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmin)/2
+ msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmin;
80
y_m = (msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymax - msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymin)/2
+ msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymin;
81
//ROS_INFO("Middle of bounding box: (%d, %d)", x_m, y_m);
82
83
bbx = msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmin;
84
bby = msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymin;
85
bbw = msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmax - msg->bounding_boxes[i].xmin;
86
bbh = msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymax - msg->bounding_boxes[i].ymin;
87
bbxm = x_m;
88
bbym = y_m;
==PAGE:69==
A Code for Detection
61
89
}
90
}
91 }
92
93 //This is just to check if the tracker has definitely recieved the
bounding box from the detection
94 void track_ok_Callback (const std_msgs::Int8::ConstPtr& msg)
95 {
96
track_ok = msg->data;
97 }
98
99 int main(int argc, char **argv)
100 {
101
ros::init(argc, argv, "detection");
102
ros::NodeHandle nh;
103
ros::Publisher BB_pub = nh.advertise <std_msgs::Int32MultiArray >("/
object_detector/bounding_box_to_track", 1000);
104
ros::Subscriber sub = nh.subscribe("/darknet_ros/bounding_boxes", 1,
getBoundingboxes);
105
ros::Subscriber sub_track = nh.subscribe("/object_tracker/tracking_ok",
1000, track_ok_Callback);
106
ros::Rate rate(5);
107
108
while(ros::ok())
109
{
110
ros::spinOnce();
111
rate.sleep();
112
113
std_msgs::Int32MultiArray msg;
114
if (track == true){msg.data.push_back(1);}
115
else{msg.data.push_back(0);}
116
msg.data.push_back(bbx);
117
msg.data.push_back(bby);
118
msg.data.push_back(bbw);
119
msg.data.push_back(bbh);
120
msg.data.push_back(bbxm);
121
msg.data.push_back(bbym);
122
123
BB_pub.publish(msg);
124
125
if (track == true && track_ok == 1) {
126
ROS_INFO("Tracking initialized");
127
ros::shutdown();
128
}
129
}
130
return 0;
131 }
Listing A.1: detection.cpp
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
tracking.cpp
1 %% tracking.cpp
2 #include <ros/ros.h>
3 #include <image_transport/image_transport.h>
4 #include <cv_bridge/cv_bridge.h>
5 #include <sensor_msgs/image_encodings.h>
6 #include <std_msgs/String.h>
7 #include "std_msgs/Int32MultiArray.h"
8 #include "std_msgs/Int8.h"
9
10 #include <opencv2/imgproc/imgproc.hpp>
11 #include <opencv2/highgui/highgui.hpp>
12 #include <opencv2/tracking.hpp>
13 #include <opencv2/core/ocl.hpp>
14 #include <opencv2/core/mat.hpp>
15 #include <opencv2/imgcodecs.hpp>
16
17 #include <iostream >
18 #include <string >
19 #include <sstream >
20 #include <math.h>
21
22 static const std::string OPENCV_WINDOW_OUT = "Object Tracking";
23
24 using namespace std;
25 using namespace cv;
26
27 #define SSTR(x) static_cast <std::ostringstream&>((std::ostringstream()<<
std::dec<<x)).str()
28
29 //Variables for bounding box from object detection
30 int track;
31 int bbx = 0;
32 int bby = 0;
33 int bbw = 0;
34 int bbh = 0;
35 int bbxm = 0;
36 int bbym = 0;
37
38 //Variables to publish
39 int out_bbx = 0;
40 int out_bby = 0;
41 int out_bbw = 0;
==PAGE:72==
64
B tracking.cpp
42 int out_bbh = 0;
43 int out_bbxm = 0;
44 int out_bbym = 0;
45
46 void BB_Callback (const std_msgs::Int32MultiArray::ConstPtr& msg)
47 {
48
track = msg->data.at(0);
49
bbx = msg->data.at(1);
50
bby = msg->data.at(2);
51
bbw = msg->data.at(3);
52
bbh = msg->data.at(4);
53
bbxm = msg->data.at(5);
54
bbym = msg->data.at(6);
55
//ROS_INFO("Data: [%d], [%d], [%d], [%d], [%d], [%d], [%d]", track, bbx,
bby, bbw, bbh, bbxm, bbym);
56 }
57
58 class Object_Tracker
59 {
60
ros::NodeHandle nh;
61
ros::Subscriber BB_sub = nh.subscribe("/object_detector/
bounding_box_to_track", 1000, BB_Callback);
62
//Publishes 0 if tracking is not started and 1 if tracking is started
for detection to shutdown.
63
ros::Publisher track_ok = nh.advertise <std_msgs::Int8 >("/object_tracker/
tracking_ok", 1000);
64
ros::Publisher BB_out = nh.advertise <std_msgs::Int32MultiArray >("/
object_tracker/bounding_box_out", 1000);
65
image_transport::ImageTransport it;
66
image_transport::Subscriber image_sub_;
67
image_transport::Publisher image_pub_;
68
69
//Placeholders for images
70
cv::Mat img_proc(cv::Mat);
71
cv::Mat input_image;
72
cv::Mat output_image , img_track;
73
74
//For tracking
75
bool init_track;
76
Ptr<Tracker > tracker;
77
cv::Rect2d bbox;
78
int fail_count;
79
80 public:
81
Object_Tracker()
82
: it(nh)
83
{
84
// Subscribe to input video feed and publish output video feed
85
image_sub_ = it.subscribe("/webcam/image_raw", 1, &Object_Tracker::
imageCb , this);
86
image_pub_ = it.advertise("/object_tracker/raw_image", 1);
87
cv::namedWindow(OPENCV_WINDOW_OUT);
==PAGE:73==
B tracking.cpp
65
88
init_track = true;
89
}
90
91
~Object_Tracker()
92
{
93
cv::destroyAllWindows();
94
}
95
96
void imageCb(const sensor_msgs::ImageConstPtr& msg)
97
{
98
cv_bridge::CvImagePtr cv_ptr;
99
//namespace enc = sensor_msgs::image_encodings;
100
101
try
102
{
103
cv_ptr = cv_bridge::toCvCopy(msg, sensor_msgs::image_encodings::BGR8
);
104
}
105
catch (cv_bridge::Exception& e)
106
{
107
ROS_ERROR("cv_bridge exception: %s", e.what());
108
return;
109
}
110
input_image = cv_ptr->image;
111
112
//if the image there --> start tracking object
113
if (cv_ptr ->image.rows > 400 && cv_ptr->image.cols > 600 && track ==
1){
114
track_obj(cv_ptr->image);
115
116
//show the raw input image in a window
117
//cv::imshow(OPENCV_WINDOW , input_image);
118
}
119
120
cv::waitKey(3);
121
image_pub_.publish(cv_ptr->toImageMsg());
122
}
123
124
void track_obj(cv::Mat img)
125
{
126
img.copyTo(img_track);
127
128
string trackerType = "MEDIANFLOW";
129
//string trackerType = "CSRT";
130
131
if (init_track == true)
132
{
133
//ROS_INFO_STREAM("Tracking initialized ");
134
#if (CV_MINOR_VERSION < 3)
135
{
136
tracker = Tracker::create(trackerType);
137
}
==PAGE:74==
66
B tracking.cpp
138
#else
139
{
140
if (trackerType == "MEDIANFLOW")
141
tracker = TrackerMedianFlow::create();
142
if (trackerType == "KCF")
143
tracker = TrackerKCF::create();
144
if (trackerType == "CSRT")
145
tracker = TrackerCSRT::create();
146
}
147
#endif
148
149
bbox.x = bbx;
150
bbox.y = bby;
151
bbox.width = bbw;
152
bbox.height = bbh;
153
154
//send a msg that the tracker has recieved some values
155
std_msgs::Int8 msgTrack;
156
if(bbox.x == 0 && bbox.y == 0 && bbox.width == 0 && bbox.height ==
0)
157
{
158
msgTrack.data = 0;
159
track_ok.publish(msgTrack);
160
}
161
else
162
{
163
msgTrack.data = 1;
164
track_ok.publish(msgTrack);
165
}
166
//Display bounding box
167
cv::rectangle(img_track , bbox, Scalar(0, 0, 255), 2, 1);
168
cv::imshow(OPENCV_WINDOW_OUT , img_track);
169
tracker ->init(img_track , bbox);
170
init_track = false;
171
}
172
//ROS_INFO_STREAM("Tracking");
173
double timer = (double)getTickCount();
174
bool ok = tracker ->update(img_track , bbox);
175
float fps = getTickFrequency() / ((double)getTickCount() - timer);
176
177
if (ok)
178
{
179
//Tracking success --> Draw a bounding box
180
fail_count = 0;
181
cv::rectangle(img_track , bbox, Scalar(0, 0, 255), 2, 1);
182
ROS_INFO_STREAM("bounding box: "<< bbox.x << ", " << bbox.y << ", "
<< bbox.width <<
", " << bbox.height);
183
cv::putText(img_track , "Tracking detected", Point(100,80),
FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX , 0.75, Scalar(50,170,50),2);
184
185
//publish bounding box information to topic for capturing
186
out_bbx = bbox.x;
==PAGE:75==
B tracking.cpp
67
187
out_bby = bbox.y;
188
out_bbw = bbox.width;
189
out_bbh = bbox.height;
190
out_bbxm = bbox.x + (bbox.width/2);
191
out_bbym = bbox.y + (bbox.height/2);
192
cv::circle(img_track , cv::Point(out_bbxm , out_bbym), 2, (0,0,255),
-1);
193
194
std_msgs::Int32MultiArray msg;
195
msg.data.push_back(out_bbx);
196
msg.data.push_back(out_bby);
197
msg.data.push_back(out_bbw);
198
msg.data.push_back(out_bbh);
199
msg.data.push_back(out_bbxm);
200
msg.data.push_back(out_bbym);
201
BB_out.publish(msg);
202
}
203
else
204
{
205
//Tracking failed (making sure it didn't just fail for one frame)
206
fail_count++;
207
if(fail_count > 3)
208
{
209
init_track = true;
210
}
211
cv::putText(img_track , "Tracking failure detected", Point(100,80),
FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX , 0.75, Scalar(0,0,255),2);
212
}
213
cv::putText(img_track , trackerType + " Tracker", Point(100,20),
FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX , 0.75, Scalar(255,255,255) ,2);
214
cv::putText(img_track , "FPS : " + SSTR(int(fps)), Point(100,50),
FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX , 0.5, Scalar(50,170,50), 2);
215
cv::imshow(OPENCV_WINDOW_OUT , img_track);
216
}
217
218 };
219
220 int main(int argc, char** argv)
221 {
222
ros::init(argc, argv, "Object_Tracker");
223
Object_Tracker ic;
224
ros::spin();
225
226
return 0;
227 }
Listing B.1: tracking.cpp
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Rafael Padilla, Sergio Netto, and Eduardo da Silva. “A Survey on Performance Met-
rics for Object-Detection Algorithms.” In: July 2020. doi: 10.1109/IWSSIP48289.
2020 (cit. on pp. 7, 8).
[2]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classifica-
tion with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks.” In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. Ed. by F. Pereira et al. Vol. 25. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2012. url: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2012 / file /
c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf (cit. on p. 8).
[3]
Md. Zahangir Alom et al. “The History Began from AlexNet: A Comprehensive
Survey on Deep Learning Approaches.” In: (Mar. 2018) (cit. on p. 8).
[4]
Payal Mittal, Raman Singh, and Akashdeep Sharma. “Deep learning-based object
detection in low-altitude UAV datasets: A survey.” In: Image and Vision Comput-
ing 104 (2020), p. 104046. issn: 0262-8856. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.imavis.2020.104046. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0262885620301785 (cit. on pp. 9, 31).
[5]
“Deep Learning for Generic Object Detection: A Survey.” In: International journal
of computer vision 128 (2020), pp. 261–318 (cit. on p. 9).
[6]
Sankar Pal et al. “Deep learning in multi-object detection and tracking: state of
the art.” In: Applied Intelligence (Apr. 2021). doi: 10.1007/s10489-021-02293-7
(cit. on p. 9).
[7]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with
Region Proposal Networks.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence 39 (June 2015). doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031 (cit. on
p. 9).
[8]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask R-CNN.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). Oct. 2017 (cit. on p. 9).
[9]
Zhaowei Cai and Nuno Vasconcelos. “Cascade R-CNN: Delving Into High Quality
Object Detection.” In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition. 2018, pp. 6154–6162. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00644 (cit. on
p. 9).
==PAGE:78==
70
Bibliography
[10]
Jifeng Dai et al. “R-FCN: Object Detection via Region-based Fully Convolutional
Networks.” In: CoRR abs/1605.06409 (2016). arXiv: 1605.06409. url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1605.06409 (cit. on p. 9).
[11]
Shifeng Zhang et al. “Single-Shot Refinement Neural Network for Object Detec-
tion.” In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion. 2018, pp. 4203–4212. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00442 (cit. on p. 9).
[12]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection.” In: CoRR abs/1708.02002
(2017). arXiv: 1708.02002. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02002 (cit. on
p. 9).
[13]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detec-
tion.” In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2016, pp. 779–788. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.91 (cit. on p. 10).
[14]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger.” In: 2017
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2017,
pp. 6517–6525. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.690 (cit. on p. 10).
[15]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement.” In:
arXiv (Apr. 2018) (cit. on pp. 10, 32).
[16]
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien-Yao Wang, and Hong-yuan Liao. “YOLOv4: Optimal
Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection.” In: (Apr. 2020) (cit. on p. 10).
[17]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector.” In: vol. 9905. Oct. 2016,
pp. 21–37. isbn: 978-3-319-46447-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_2 (cit.
on p. 11).
[18]
Mark Sandler et al. “MobileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks.” In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). June 2018 (cit. on p. 11).
[19]
Hei Law and Jia Deng. “CornerNet: Detecting Objects as Paired Keypoints.” In:
CoRR abs/1808.01244 (2018). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.01244 (cit. on
p. 11).
[20]
Xuan Zhou et al. “Apple and maize physiological characteristics and water-use
eﬀiciency in an alley cropping system under water and fertilizer coupling in Loess
Plateau, China.” In: Agricultural Water Management 221 (2019), pp. 1–12. issn:
0378-3774. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2019.04.019. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378377418314434
(cit. on p. 11).
[21]
Tao Kong et al. “FoveaBox: Beyound Anchor-Based Object Detection.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 29 (2020), pp. 7389–7398. doi: 10.1109/TIP.
2020.3002345 (cit. on p. 11).
[22]
H. Grabner and Michael Grabner and H. Bischof. “Real-Time Tracking via On-line
Boosting.” In: 1 (2006), p. 6 (cit. on p. 13).
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
71
[23]
Boris Babenko, Serge Belongie, and Ming Hsuan Yang. “Visual tracking with online
multiple instance learning.” In: IEEE CVPR Workshops. United States: IEEE
Computer Society, 2009, pp. 983–990. isbn: 9781424439935. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW.
2009.5206737 (cit. on p. 13).
[24]
D. Bolme et al. “Visual object tracking using adaptive correlation filters.” In: 2010
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(2010), pp. 2544–2550 (cit. on p. 13).
[25]
Zdenek Kalal, Krystian Mikolajczyk, and Jiri Matas. “Forward-backward error:
Automatic detection of tracking failures.” In: In Proceedings of the 2010 20th In-
ternational Conference on Pattern Recognition, ICPR ’10. IEEE Computer Society,
2010, pp. 2756–2759 (cit. on p. 14).
[26]
El Mehdi Abdali et al. “Hardware Acceleration of the Tracking Learning Detection
(TLD) Algorithm on FPGA.” In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Distributed Smart Cameras. ICDSC 2017. Stanford, CA, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2017, pp. 180–185. isbn: 9781450354875. doi: 10.1145/
3131885.3131933. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3131885.3131933 (cit. on
p. 14).
[27]
João F. Henriques et al. “High-Speed Tracking with Kernelized Correlation Fil-
ters.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37.3
(2015), pp. 583–596. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2014.2345390 (cit. on p. 14).
[28]
Alan Lukezic et al. “Discriminative Correlation Filter With Channel and Spatial
Reliability.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR). July 2017 (cit. on p. 14).
[29]
Adnan Brdjanin et al. “Single Object Trackers in OpenCV: A Benchmark.” In:
Aug. 2020. doi: 10.1109/INISTA49547.2020.9194647 (cit. on p. 14).
[30]
Hyeonseob Nam and Bohyung Han. “Learning Multi-Domain Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks for Visual Tracking.” In: Arxiv (Oct. 2015), pp. 4293–4302 (cit. on
p. 15).
[31]
Matej Kristan et al. “A Novel Performance Evaluation Methodology for Single-
Target Trackers.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence 38.11 (Nov. 2016), pp. 2137–2155. issn: 0162-8828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
2016.2516982 (cit. on p. 15).
[32]
Robot Operating System. https://www.ros.org/ (cit. on p. 17).
[33]
Gazebo website. http://gazebosim.org/ (cit. on p. 17).
[34]
Colaboratory. https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html (cit. on
p. 18).
[35]
Joseph Redmon. Darknet: Open Source Neural Networks in C. http://pjreddie.
com/darknet/. 2013–2016 (cit. on p. 18).
[36]
Marko Bjelonic. YOLO ROS: Real-Time Object Detection for ROS. https://
github.com/leggedrobotics/darknet_ros. 2016–2018 (cit. on p. 19).
==PAGE:80==
72
Bibliography
[37]
CvBridge. http://wiki.ros.org/cv_bridge (cit. on p. 20).
[38]
DeepAI - PASCAL VOC. https://deepai.org/dataset/pascal-voc (cit. on
p. 21).
[39]
Microsoft COCO. https://cocodataset.org/#homee (cit. on p. 21).
[40]
LabelImg. https://github.com/tzutalin/labelImg (cit. on p. 21).
[41]
image_view. https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline (cit. on
pp. 22, 24).
[42]
Lixuan Du, Rongyu Zhang, and Xiaotian Wang. “Overview of two-stage object
detection algorithms.” In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1544 (May 2020),
p. 012033. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1544/1/012033. url: https://doi.org/
10.1088/1742-6596/1544/1/012033 (cit. on p. 31).
[43]
Manuel Carranza-García et al. “On the Performance of One-Stage and Two-Stage
Object Detectors in Autonomous Vehicles Using Camera Data.” In: Remote Sens-
ing 13.1 (2021). issn: 2072-4292. doi: 10.3390/rs13010089. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/2072-4292/13/1/89 (cit. on p. 31).
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:82==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
