==PAGE:1==
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent
Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time
with ALMA
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
David Blánquez Sesé
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
ESO, José Francisco Salgado
Published by:
DTU, Department of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics, Elektrovej,
Building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months under the supervision of Georgios Magdis
at the division for Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics, DTU Space, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Earth and Space Physics and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of astronomy and astro-
physics.
David Blánquez Sesé - s195558
Signature
Date
ii
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Gas plays a paramount role in the galactic life cycle and is one of the main drivers of galaxy
evolution. While gas mass reservoirs (Mgas) of star forming galaxies (SFGs) are routinely
measured out to the highest redshifts, this is a very challenging feat for high redshift
quiescent galaxies (QGs).
The limited existing attempts so far yield contradictory or
inconclusive results regarding the gas fraction (fgas = Mgas/Mstar) of these systems and
its evolution with time, primarily due to technical limitations or biased sample selections.
To address this issue in this project we attempt to measure the fgas for representative
samples of massive (Mstar > 1010M⊙), 1< z < 3 QGs. Our samples are selected in the
GOODS-South field taking advantage of the existing ZFOURGE UV to mid-IR multi-
wavelength catalogues and are complemented by the new GOODS-S ALMA 1.1 mm map
that covers 72.42 arcmin2 of the field. By selecting QGs based on their UV J colours or
their distance to the main sequence (MS), we measure the rest frame dust emission (or
estimate the corresponding upper limits) in the the R-J tail of the populations through
ALMA stacking and infer their fgas using a range of techniques. We find that galaxies
residing in the envelope below the MS (1/5 < δMS < 1/2) have an average fgas that ranges
from 67.5% down to 30.9% (depending on the adopted method), while UV J selected QGs
have fgas < 18.8%. The inferred estimates comply with previously estimated fgas and
support the current understanding that quiescent galaxies have lower gas fractions than
main sequence galaxies at their correspondent redshifts while at the same time suggesting
higher fgas in high-z QGs compared to those in the local universe. A more sophisticated
stacking approach in the UV-plane is the next step forward aiming to boost the stacked
signal and fully characterise the fgas of high-z QGs and get a better insight into the
quenching mechanisms in the early universe.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I want to thank Georgios Magdis for his invaluable help and guidance
throughout the entire project, for placing his trust in me as a student and opening a path
for me to follow. I must also thank Iary Davidzon, who also was one of my first mentors
and gave me the basic knowledge and tools without which I could not have done this
project. Thanks to Luis Fontán, for supporting my academic career all these years.
I want to thank DTU and all the friends and companions I have found here, who, even if
they might not know, have saved my life in different ways. Specially, thanks to those who
stood by my side when I needed it the most.
Finally, I want to show my most sincere appreciation to my family, who have always been
there to support me and help me through the most challenging endeavours. Thanks to
Cris, Jorge, Miriam, my Mom and my Dad.
It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate:
I am the captain of my soul
(Invictus 13-16) by William Ernest Henley
iv
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AGNi = Active Galactic Nuclei
CDFS = Chandra Deep Field South
CMB = Cosmic Microwave Background
DM = Dark Matter
GOODS = Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey
IR = Infrared
ISM = Interstellar Medium
ΛCDM = Lambda- Cold Dark Matter Model
MS = Main sequence
QG = Quiescent galaxy
SB = Starburst Galaxy
SED = Spectral Energy Distribution
SFE = Star Formation Eﬀiciency
SFG = Star forming galaxy
SFH = Star Formation History
SFR = Star Formation Rate
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Galaxy types & components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Galaxy evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Gas history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Data
17
2.1
ZFOURGE catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
GOODS-ALMA survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Analysis
25
3.1
ZFOURGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
EAZY catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
ZFOURGE-EAZY comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Final preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results
39
5
Discussion
47
5.1
Caveats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Summary
51
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Bibliography
55
A ZFOURGE catalog additional properties
61
B EAZY
65
vi
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Astronomical observations have always provoked awe and genuine curiosity to understand
our surroundings and the properties of nature.
One of the most transcendent picture
that needs needs to be understood is the evolution of the universe as a whole as a way
of learning our place in it. Our comprehension of the cosmos is built on the study and
research performed by many past civilizations. Most of our time this knowledge has been
limited to the visible part of the celestial vault, i.e stars, planets, satellites and their
motion. It was not until the telescope was developed, that the window to a further and
hidden universe was opened. From the XVIIIth century on, the concept of galaxy was
spread and research over the last centuries has proven that the evolution of the entire
universe is closely linked to the formation and evolution of galaxies.
Our knowledge of galaxies has evolved from a mere description such as a flat disk full of
stars, similar to nebulae, to the profound and deep classification that currently is held.
Not only that, but how different components and parameters interplay to command their
evolution. In order to picture the evolution of galaxies across cosmic time one has to
study galaxies at different distances. The fact that light travels at a definite speed allows
to study our universe’s past the further away we gaze into. Therefore, to study galaxies
at an early epoque one must look out to further distances. Observing galaxies at different
lookback times gives the opportunity to draw a timeline of their evolution and using them
as tracers of the evolution of the universe, helps placing constraints on the current universe
and galaxy evolution model, known as the Λ Cold Dark Matter Model (Λ−CDM). This
model set ups the scenario under which different structure formation models have been
developed.
Structures are formed from small density perturbations, given that these are larger than
the Jeans length, λJ. This parameter expresses the minimum length a massive structure
can have if it must collapse under its own weight. Overdense regions smaller than λJ,
merely oscillate in density. The observed anisotropy in the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB), which is a result of the initial Big Bang conditions and is identified as temperature
gradients, which can trace these initial gravitational perturbations. These can be studied
from two different models. The adiabatic model assumes a top down formation process
in which galaxies form from the fragmentation and collapse of the initial gravitational
perturbations. On the other hand, the isothermal model considers that galaxies are formed
from hierarchical clustering of small perturbations, i.e. a bottom up formation that ends
up with the birth of galaxies as they are currently known. Both models take into account
cold dark matter.
As of today, dark matter (DM) is an unidentified component that
has only been observed by the gravitational effects it exerts on the baryonic part of the
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
1
==PAGE:10==
universe. For instance, it provides the necessary mass density for large scale structures to
behave the way the do and to predict the measured velocities of certain stars according to
the radius to the galactic center [Ryden, 2006].
Some theories interpret that the formation of one or other class of galaxy depends on
the rapidity of star formation during its initial collapse. Other propose that the largest
elliptical galaxies can only be the result of galaxy mergers. The fact that galaxies with
stellar masses above 1012M⊙are very rare is not covered by any known theory though.
Radiative cooling suggests that an upper limit on the mass of galaxies must exist, thus
implying that galaxy formation and evolution is not the result of gravitational physics
alone. The current understanding of all these phenomena have led to the conclusion that
galaxies evolve within DM halos, much bigger and massive than the galaxies themselves.
DM halos exert a gravitational pull on the visible, baryonic matter of galaxies which is
clustered once it becomes cool enough to condense.
To model and compute simulations that hypothesize theories like the one above, a large
number of galaxies must be observed and studied. In order to do so, galaxies are mostly
classified into groups, that ease their understanding.
1.1
Galaxy types & components
The baryonic matter of galaxies is composed mostly by stars and the interstellar medium
(ISM). The most visible component are the stars, which are mostly unresolved.
It is
possible, though, to analyse their luminosities, their colour and spectra. Joining their
spectrum to the one from the ISM results in the total emission spectrum of the galaxy.
Galaxy classification has been based on the morphology and light profiles. According to
morphological features, galaxies are classified as:
1. Spiral galaxies:
They usually have thin disks with spiral arm structures. Within this category barred
or non barred spirals can be found, depending on whether there is a bar shaped
structure in its central part. Finally, they can be further classified depending on the
light fraction of the central bulge, the degree at which the arms are resolved into
stars and how close the arms are to the main body of the galaxy.
2. Elliptical galaxies:
These objects have a large number of subtypes (E1, E2,..., E7) depending on the
ratio between its semimajor and semiminor axes. As their name states, they have
an elliptical shape and are often filled with old populations of stars.
3. Lenticular galaxies:
This type has properties of both ellipticals and spirals. They have thin discs and a
central bulge but do not show any spiral arms.
4. Irregular galaxies:
This kind of galaxies lack any symmetry or feature that makes them identifiable
under any of the other classes. They do not show any rotationally symmetric disc
and their shapes can vary greatly.
The classification above is known as the Hubble sequence, and is schematically depicted
in fig. 1.1 below.
2
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Schematic representation of different galaxy morphologies [Abraham, 1998].
Spiral galaxies
They are also identified as disk galaxies, containing a larger range of features than ellipti-
cals, such as size and number of arms or central bulges. They usually consist on a thin gas
disk with a barred or non barred central bulge, from which spiral arms grow outwards. It
is in this arms where the younger population of stars, HII regions and high concentrations
of dust and molecular gas are found. Evidence exists that most disk galaxies are embedded
in stellar halos that extend out to large radii [Mo et al., 2010]. Spiral galaxies often show
an exponential brightness profile, which depends on the luminosity of the disk and the
central bulge. Observations show that there is a trend in that bigger galaxies tend to be
more luminous.
Figure 1.2: On the left is the spiral galaxy NGC5457. On the right is the barred spiral
galaxy NGC7773 (Credits to NASA & ESA).
Their spectrum is typically prominent in the blue colors when comparing with similar
luminosity elliptical galaxies.
The reason behind this is that in the arms highly star
forming regions are found, which emit as a blue continuum. At first sight, the central
bulges were thought to be redder due to the inclination of the observed galaxies, which
extinguished the light coming from the core. However, future observations proved that
the color of the bulges actually matches the color of the inner part of the disk. Finally,
the vertical structure of the disk has also been studied and it has been concluded that
the luminosity distribution in that direction is independent to the distance to the galactic
center.
Regarding their shape and form, half of the spirals have visible bars in their central bulges,
as can be seen in fig. 1.2. More than half spiral galaxies show bar-like structures in their
inner regions. Most spiral arms (usually there are 2) can be traced out to a wide range
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
3
==PAGE:12==
of radii, and are closely linked to a bar structure in the inner part of the galaxy. Outside
the arms the before mentioned stellar halos can be found. So far they have been observed
in a small number of galaxies since their surface brightness is very low (our own and M31
f.e.). They are observed as stellar streams, which are composed of material stripped from
other galaxies as a result of gravitational tidal forces [Helmi et al., 1999].
The gas content of spirals can be characterized with neutral and molecular hydrogen.
Their gas mass fraction varies from 5 % in very massive galaxies up to 80 % in less
massive ones. As it is expected, the metallicity content of the gas decreases as the studied
radius increases. This is because the older population of stars is located in the central
regions, whereas on the outer parts the younger stars are found. Most of the gas and stars
within the galaxy move in circular orbit around the central bulge. Most interestingly,
the Tully-Fischer relation [Tully et al., 1992] relies on the found correlation between the
velocity at which a galaxy rotates (measured as far away as possible from the center) with
its luminosity.
Elliptical galaxies
Elliptical galaxies are characterized by smooth, elliptical surface brightness distributions
I(R).They contain small quantities of gas and have redder colors, which usually come
from old stellar populations. Their I(R) is usually described as a function of the isophotal
semimajor axis R [Mo et al., 2010], in turn this parameter is often characterized with
average surface brightness within an effective radius Ie:
⟨I⟩e =
L
2πRe2 ,
(1.1)
where L is the luminosity and Re is the effective radius. The curves of equal brightness, i.e
the isophotals, are shaped in ellipses, all of them sharing the same semimajor to semiminor
axis ratio. Elliptical galaxies tend to have low angular velocities. These are calculated by
comparing the maximum line-of-sight streaming motion vm and ¯Σ which is the average
value of the line-of-sight velocity dispersion inside Re/2. This method compares the total
observed streaming velocity with the random motions happening within the galaxy, which
gives a measure of the general rotational and travelling velocity of the source. At the
center of most ellipticals the dispersion velocity drastically increases, maybe due to the
effect of a super massive black hole on its nearby stellar populations.
On the regions
outside the center, contrarily, the dispersion velocity is observed to be constant or have
very weak relation to position.
4
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Image of Abell S0740 galaxy cluster with an elliptical galaxy in its center
(Credits to: NASA & ESA)
As stated before, the characteristic red color of elliptical galaxies comes from old, metal-
rich stellar populations. A correlation exists between the luminosity of the galaxy and its
color, such that more luminous galaxies have redder colours [Peletier et al., 1990]. Their
gas and dust content was thought to be low, however, it has been shown that they contain
a considerable amount of both components. Not only that but the composition of the dust
and gas also differs greatly from the one found in spiral galaxies. The ISM in elliptical
galaxies can contribute up to 1010M⊙of the total system’s mass [Mo et al., 2010], and emit
strongly in the X-ray spectrum. It either is accreted from external sources or produced
by the stellar populations within the galaxy. The total amount of dust and gas, does not
affect the total luminosity of the galaxy, though.
1.1.1
Interstellar medium
The ISM can be considered the component that fills the space between stars in all galaxies.
It consists on gas and dust particles that absorb the light from its surrounding stars and
scatter it. The major distinction between the two is that their absorption properties have
different wavelength dependencies.
Interstellar gas
Gas is an opaque medium principally in the extreme UV spectrum. It reprocesses the
light it absorbs in the UV, optical and IR. Cool gas constitutes a crucial component in
the formation of young stellar populations, and therefore it is abundant in star forming
regions [Young and Scoville, 1991].
Interstellar dust
Dust is composed of graphitic carbon, silicate and hydrocarbon grains [Mathis et al., 1977;
Leger and Puget, 1984]. The average interacting cross section is dominated by small size
grains, whereas the largest contribution to the mass comes from the larger grains. Their
size can be compared to that of the wavelength of blue light. which is why the reprocess
that part of the spectrum more than the red one. Its opacity increases with wavelength
and the following attenuation law can be used in order to model its light extinction:
Iobs
Istar
= eaλ−∆τ
(1.2)
Where aλ is a wavelength-dependent reddening law and ∆τ is the thickness of the ISM
screen.
Technical limitations prevent from being able to observe the morphological characteris-
tics of a galaxy, therefore using them as a classification method loses its meaning when
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
5
==PAGE:14==
studying galaxies at great distances. The current methodology to study galaxies involves
recording their spectral energy distribution (SED), which represents the galaxy emitted
fluxes at different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. The shape and magnitude of
the SED shine light on most of the compelling properties: redshift, stellar mass (Mstar),
star formation rate (SFR), dust mass (Mdust), gas mass (Mgas), AGN activity and so on.
Following this type of analysis, astronomers have found that galaxies can be divided in
two types: star forming galaxies (SFGs) and quiescent galaxies (QGs) depending on the
amount of star formation activity they hold. They are also generally known as late type
galaxies and early type galaxies respectively.
These passively evolving quiescent galaxies have been observed at many cosmic epochs,
both in photometric (Cimatti, 2003; Toft et al., 2005) and spectroscopic surveys (Gobat
et al., 2012; Whitaker et al., 2013; Valentino et al., 2020). They are characterized by very
low or nearly non-existent amounts of star formation activity and small amounts of dust.
For this reason, their stellar populations are old and evolved with a redder spectrum. On
the other side we have SFGs which have younger stellar populations, bright in the UV and
bluer part of the spectrum.
1.2
Galaxy evolution
It has been observed that the SFR density peaked at z ≥1 .
This means that star
formation rates were on average higher in the past. Progressively, as we approach to the
peak of the SFR density, so does the relative contribution of dust obscured SFG to the
total measured SFR.
Figure 1.4: Evolution of the cosmic SFR density (ρSFR) across the Hubble time in GalICS
2.0 simulation code (curves) and a compilation of measured data points. More information
at [Cattaneo et al., 2017].
The cosmic evolution of star formation and its subsequent stellar mass growth has been
constrained up to z ∼5 [Liu et al., 2019]. The period at which ρSFR peaked is known
as cosmic noon.
Since then, it seems that the universe is slowly shutting down, with
the average SFR density decreasing towards present times.
This period of decreasing
SFR is known as cosmic dusk.
Finally the epoque beyond redshift z >2-3 is known
as cosmic dawn and comprises the time when the first galaxies where formed and thus
6
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:15==
galactic evolution started. Figure 1.4 poses a large number of unanswered questions. The
most straightforward is why there is a maximum in ρSFR and why is it located at that
specific redshift. There are arguments in favour of black holes depleting galaxies from the
necessary gas to form stars, since their activity also peaked at a similar redshift [D.M.,
2005]. Another observational challenge is the fact that galaxies are apparently not very
eﬀicient in forming stars. If they were, most of the mass of the universe would be observed
in a baryonic form, when in fact it is not [Fukugita and Peebles, 2004].
1.2.1
Main sequence of star forming galaxies
The tight relation between a galaxy’s stellar mass and its SFR has led to the definition
of a main sequence (MS) of star forming galaxies. It has been observed that the SFR is
partially governed by the amount of stellar mass, and their correlation has been proved
from z ∼0 to z ∼4 (Elbaz et al., 2007; Schreiber et al., 2015). The spread of this narrow
locus in the Mstar-SFR plane has also been studied, being today accepted a 0.3 dex spread
at all redshifts. The finding of this correlation was accompanied by the definition of an
specific star formation rate (sSFR = SFR/Mstar) at each redshift. It was observed that
the MS was not consistent with random star formation bursts which are thought to be
triggered by major galaxy mergers. These galaxies that lie above the MS locus are known
as starburst galaxies or starbursts (SB). Following the discovery of the MS, other ways of
identifying the main sequence have appeared. Another set of parameters used to identify
it are the total LIR (LIR = L8−1000µm) and L8 which is the luminosity at rest frame 8µm.
The ratio between them, IR8 ≡L8/LIR defines a second main sequence consistent with
the one found in the Mstar-SFR plane, where SB galaxies are also outliers. The fact that
these parameters are correlated for galaxies at most redshifts means that a common IR
SED must be shared and that its shape has not evolved greatly with cosmic time. Finally
the last set of parameters with which the MS has been constrained are the molecular gas
mass (MH2) and SFR. The star formation eﬀiciency of a galaxy (SFE ≡SFR/MH2) is a
parameter that measures ability of a galaxy to transform its gas reservoirs to stars. It was
also found that SB systems have larger SFE than MS galaxies (Genzel et al., 2010).
Figure 1.5: Evolution of (SFRMS) with Mstar at different redshift bins using [Schreiber
et al., 2015] parametrization formula (eq. (1.5)).
Below the MS of galaxies another population of galaxies is found, quiescent galaxies (QGs).
This means that for a determined stellar mass and redshift their SFR is lower than usual,
leading to the hypothesis that they must have had their star formation stopped or dimin-
ished. The picture of galaxy evolution has been drawn starting from this initial dicotomy
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
7
==PAGE:16==
of SFG vs QGs. The underlying reason for this is that so far the task of understanding
galaxy evolution has been a matter of studying its star formation history and the param-
eters that affect it. Therefore, it is adamant to recognize that SFGs and QGs are not two
completely different species, but different phases of the same entity. Understanding how
galaxies form, grow and what different phases they go through is the puzzle that needs to
be solved.
1.2.2
Quenching
The fact that star formation eﬀiciency peaks at a determined halo mass, the observations
that more massive galaxies have older stars and the misalignment between theoretical
halo and observed stellar masses [Man and Belli, 2018] creates the need to introduce a
mechanism that diminishes or turns off star formation, quenching. It is also a necessary
phenomenon for the observable universe to be reproduced by the ΛCDM model. Quenching
is understood either as:
• A process that completely stops star formation activity
• A process that is able to maintain a galaxy’s quiescence for the rest of its lifetime.
The most important difference between these two is that they inherently must have dif-
ferent timescales. The physical phenomena responsible for them is still one of the most
important voids in the story of galaxy formation. In order to present the different quench-
ing models considered today, it must be considered how stars are formed in first place.
Basically, stars form from cool gas at T < 102K, which has cooled down after being ac-
creted as hot gas from cosmological filaments by the graviational pull of a galaxy’s dark
matter and baryonic mass.
Taking that into account, a quenching mechanism can act in different ways into that
process to either halt it or terminate it. As compiled by [Man and Belli, 2018], a possible
explanation for quenching could be ”cosmological starvation” [Feldmann and Mayer, 2014],
i.e. that the gas accretion on to the dark matter halo of the galaxy is diminished. However,
this process alone may not terminate star formation completely, since the gas formed in
stellar evolution could still produce young stellar populations. We also find arguments
that are supported on the premise that if gas is not allowed to cool down, it will not be
able to form stars. It is already known that virial shocks heat up the gas infalling to the
galaxy [Rees and Ostriker, 1977]. It has also been simulated that this shocks appear above
a certain halo mass, this being Mhalo > 1012M⊙. The fact that galaxies seem to have an
Mstar limit of 1012M⊙supports the prevention of gas cooling as a quenching mechanism
and the existence of virial shocks should be proved by the traces that it should leave
circumgalactic medium. Long term quenching would still require an additional heating
process though, for when the gas has already settled within the galaxy’s halo, it should
cool down and start forming stars. Some proposed heat sources are type Ia supernovae or
the feedback of super massive black holes, being the latter the most commonly accepted.
It is also theorized that quenched galaxies are those which are not eﬀiciently forming
stars. It has already been learnt that galaxies do have different SFE, such as MS and
SB galaxies. It is argued that a quenching mechanism could forestall the cool gas from
losing kinetic energy and therefore make it unable to form stars. The sources responsible
for this injection of kinetic energy range from stellar bulge produced turbulence to stellar
bar formation, low power AGN feedback and magnetic fields. This phenomena is known
as ”morphological quenching” [Cornuault et al., 2018]. It was also found that this type of
quenching is more effective at galaxies with low gas fractions (fgas = Mgas/Mstar < 10%).
Using the SFE as a starting point again, it could be argued that galaxies become quenched
8
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:17==
because they consume their gas too rapidly. This is possible if the star formation activity
occurs in a burst which can be triggered by compressive gas motions or angular momentum
losses which facilitate aggregation of cool gas that form stars.
These two phenomena
are thought to be the after effects of galaxy mergers [Tabatabaei et al., 2018] or disk
instabilities [Zolotov et al., 2015]. Finally along these lines the final possibility is that gas
is dispelled from the galaxy. This removal could be powered by the accretion of matter
towards a super massive black hole, which is able to liberate enough energy or momentum
to displace the gas from a galaxy [Di Matteo et al., 2005]. The most common parameter
that we observe in all quenching mechanism is gas, the fuel of star formation. Therefore
a further study on the physical properties of the ISM, the physical conditions of gas at
different phases and the intricacies of different feedback processes will shine light on what
processes are behind the quiescence of galaxies and whether they have remained the same
with cosmic time.
Identifying quiescent galaxies can be done either by photometric fluxes estimates (and
subsequent colours), or by obtaining stellar populations parameters from SED fitting.
Rest frame Colour-colour diagrams are used because they require less data processing and
therefore introduce a smaller uncertainty in the final result. Among them we find the UV J
colour-colour diagram (eq. 1.3) [Labbé et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2009] and the NUV rJ
diagram (eq. 1.4) [Ilbert, O. et al., 2013]. Both of them rely on the delimitation of an area
in the colour-colour space that encloses the quiescent population of galaxies. The UV J has
been widely used at different photometric surveys [Straatman et al., 2016; Skelton et al.,
2014], for its biggest advantage is that it gets rid of the dust-age degeneracy. It is known
that SFG are heavily obscured by dust, and that the most extremely star forming galaxies
are those who are also greatly obscured by dust [Schreiber et al., 2015], such as luminous
and ultraluminous IR galaxies. Dust obscuration affects the total emission and the SED
of galaxies (see eq. (1.2)). It has been noted that age and dust obscuration affect the
observed colours of a galaxy in a very similar way, therefore it is hard to discern whether
a galaxy is very old and not dusty or heavily obscured and young. The UV J selection
method, circumvents this problem and is formulated as follows, applied at all redshifts:
QG =





Urest −Vrest > 1.3
Vrest −Jrest < 1.6
Urest −Vrest > 0.88×(Vrest −Jrest) + 0.49
(1.3)
{
MNUV −Mr > 3(Mr −MJ) + 1,
MNUV −Mr > 3.
(1.4)
The second method is based on comparing the SFR of a determined galaxy to the measured
SFR of the MS (SFRMS) at the redshift of the observed galaxy. To do so, models have
been created to calculate the evolution of SFRMS with cosmic time [Schreiber et al., 2015]:
log10(SFRMS [M⊙/yr]) = m −m0 + a0·r −a1[max(0, m −m1 −a2·r)]2
(1.5)
Where m≡log10(Mstar)/109M⊙, r≡log10(1 + z) and m0 = 0.5 ± 0.07, m1 = 0.36 ± 0.3,
a0 = 1.5±0.15, a1 = 0.3±0.08, a2 = 2.5±0.06. The SFRMS thus depends on the redshift
and Mstar.
Using the SFRMS allows identify the galaxy type (quiescent, star forming or starburst)
according to its distance to the main sequence which is defined as ∆SFR = SFR/SFRMS.
This approach though, can become vague depending on the selection criteria, since the
journey from star forming to quiescence is not immediate.
When a galaxy is being
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
9
==PAGE:18==
quenched it will traverse from the SFRMS locus to the lower SFR values.
Therefore
a selection that comprises SFR values close to the MS might englobe star forming sources
with inherently low SFR, and transient galaxies that are becoming quenched.
Studies have been carried out in order to understand the effects of quenching on the
observable properties of galaxies (colours and stellar population parameters). Some of
them studying the star formation history (SFH) of galaxies [Belli et al., 2019], which is done
by fitting galaxy models to the observed SED. Doing this for QGs has two main drawbacks:
first is that old stellar populations do not evolve greatly, therefore time differences among
them are hard to observe. The second is the degeneracy between mass formation history
and mass assembly history. It represents how it is diﬀicult to know whether the total
stellar mass of a system has been formed within it or if a galaxy merger brought all the
observed mass together. Studying the SFH, the relative contribution of stellar populations
of different age to the total emission is found.
This approach has shone light on two
different quenching ”paths” that galaxies follow. Thanks to the correlation between median
age and rest frame colors found in the UV J diagram. In Figure 1.6, we can observe the
diagonal line with which the quiescent galaxies are differentiated, such that all sources
above the diagonal are considered quiescent. This is a modified UV J quiescent selection
from the one showed before (eq. (1.3)), this is due to the fact that the original constraints
(which can be seen as dashed lines in Figure 1.6), leave out dusty QGs misinterpreted as
SFGs. It is then found that the median age of galaxies increases as one travels upward to
the right in the direction marked by the diagonal. This trend, together with ability of the
diagram to locate quiescent galaxies has allowed to differentiate between young and old
quiescent populations, and led to two different quenching types: fast and slow quenching.
Figure 1.6: UV J diagram showing the different quenching paths described by Belli et al.,
2019. We find all galaxies in the UltraVISTA catalog with 1.5 < z < 2 and Mstar >
1010M⊙color coded according to their log10(Mstar/M⊙). The black diagonal line rep-
resents the modified UV J quiescent selection criterion used by [Belli et al., 2019]. The
original criterion [Williams et al., 2009] corresponds to the dashed lines. Finally the blue
and green curves show a representative example of fast and slow quenching paths, with
the post-starburst region limited by the black rectangle.
10
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:19==
Young quiescent sources are considered post-starburst galaxies for they are observed shortly
after their main star forming epoque. They are found at a constant number at all cosmic
times. Their relevance to the total quiescent population, though, decreases at lower red-
shifts. At z ∼2.5 they conform 34 % of all quiescent galaxies, value that decreases to a
mere 4% at z ∼1. It is estimated that crossing the post starburst region (depicted with
a black box in Figure 1.6) takes 500 Myr. However, the fact that the number density of
post-starburst galaxies decreases with redshift means that there must be another quench-
ing path for galaxies, that takes at least more than 1 Gyr, this is, that they cross to the
quiescent area of the UV J diagram without crossing the post-starburst region. Galaxies
that are considered post-starburst must have suffered a sudden termination of their star
formation, whereas most massive galaxies are a product of slow quenching, which allowed
to build up old stellar populations without being fully quenched.
The nominal paths that each of these two different quenching types follow are also shown
in Figure 1.6.
In those, each circular dot represents a time difference of 1 Gyr.
The
position at which a galaxy crosses the quiescent limiting diagonal will depend on the
dust attenuation and quenching timescale [Belli et al., 2019]. The physical mechanisms
proposed for fast quenching a compaction phenomenon that is able to trigger a starburst
phase that ultimately leads to gas exhaustion. Concerning slow quenching, the proposed
mechanism is a different one. SFGs have typical depletion timescales of 1 Gyr, therefore in
order to maintain a continuous formation of stars a steady replenishment of gas is required.
Should this replenishment be stopped, then the galaxy will consume its resting gas mass
and quench over a larger time than the post starburst galaxies. The halting of gas inflow
into a galaxy, which is a main gas replenishment process is known as mass starvation.
Which can happen either if gas is not able to gas not being able to cool down due to large
halo masses or if AGNi heat the existing cool gas. A signature of these processes is that
the stellar metallicities of QGs are higher than those of SFG [Belli et al., 2019], since the
available cool gas is that which has been injected by stellar evolution.
1.2.3
Gas study methods
A very popular technique to study the ISM of QGs is that of stacking [Schreiber et
al., 2015; Tomczak et al., 2016; Gobat et al., 2018; Magdis et al., 2021], which extends
the reach of a telescope by allowing the statistical acquisition of new data. Far IR and
radio images rarely reach the near IR attained imaging depths, therefore the use of stack
data has increased in order to account for that imbalance. The procedure is based on
creating, for a determined image, individual cutouts or image tiles of a number of galaxies.
Then by calculating the mean/median of the sum of all stacked images the rms decays
proportionally as σimg ∝
√
N, where N is the number of stacked cutouts, i.e galaxies.
Median stacking represents the bulk of stacked sources with more fidelity, however it
decreases the possibility of outliers detection. In addition to that, the handling of median
statistic data is more challenging than that of mean stacking. The use of stacking for the
study of a particular group of galaxies can be a double edged tool though. The decreasing
of the rms of the stacked image comes at the cost of combining the fluxes of multiple
galaxies, it is therefore critical that the stacked sources are similar or belong to the same
class. This can be of extreme importance when studying the ISM of QGs for instance,
whose emission is intrinsically dim, and therefore the flux of a few SFG can bias the final
image. The study of individual sources also poses a number of inconveniences, such as
the introducing of selection effects, i.e. the fact that the study of an individual source
cannot be representative of the entire population. Some of the results in Figure 1.7 and
1.8 were obtained by stacking FIR images, for example. The deepest images in the FIR
regimes have so far been taken by the Spitzer Space Telescope and the Herschel Space
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
11
==PAGE:20==
Observatory which cover measurements at 24, 100 and 160 µm. This range can accurately
probe the peak of the FIR SED. However, precise Mdust estimations require of a second
data point in order to constrain the R-J tail. The importance of rest frame submillimiter
data (λrest ≥250µm) then arises, since its addition can greatly reduce the uncertainties
on the diffuse ISM emission.
The importance of a reliable estimation of the dust mass comes from the selected method
of calculating the gas fraction, which is through a gas to dust mass relation. In order to
derive gas masses a variety of techniques have been discovered. Due to the fact that cool
gas has a very faint emission, its estimation usually depends on correlating its abundance
with another measurable component, i.e.
gas tracers.
The most popular are carbon
monoxide CO [Carilli and Walter, 2013], CI [Puglisi et al., 2019; Bourne et al., 2019], and
dust continuum emissions [Magdis et al., 2012; Gobat et al., 2018; Magdis et al., 2021].
The CI method is based on observing the neutral atomic carbon lines. It offers a number
of advantages compared to the dust continuum and CO methods. First is that its emission
lines, [CI](1-0) and [CI](2-1) emit a higher energy than CO(1-0) [Jiao et al., 2017]. That
makes them a better tracer of gas at higher redshifts, since CO is only able to trace warm
dense sections of H2. It has also been observed that cosmic rays are able to break down
CO molecules leaving a rich C phase. This, together with the fact that CI is an optically
thin medium makes CI a powerful tracer of cool gas. This method has yet to be calibrated
and more tightly constrained at lower redshifts before implementing it in higher redshift
surveys. Unluckily, the observation of CI in the local universe has proven a diﬀicult task,
due to the weak atmospheric transmissions at the frequencies of the CI emission lines.
The CO conversion has been more extensively calibrated and used at both low and high
redshift surveys. It is based on the following relation:
Mgas = αCO·L′
CO
(1.6)
Where αCO is the CO-H2 conversion factor and L’CO is the luminosity of the observed
CO emission line. Gas studies of quiescent galaxies have relied on the gas to dust relation
method which uses another conversion factor, δGDR, which is again dependant on the
gas-phase metallicity:
Mgas = Mdust×δGDR
(1.7)
Metallicity is usually obtained through the fundamental metallicity relation, which allows
to infer it from the SFR and Mstar of a galaxy.
However this relation has only been
constrained up to z ∼2 and it is not confirmed whether the relation holds above it or if
a broken relation is needed. In addition to that another caveat is that at higher redshifts
the contrast between the CMB and the dust continuum emission lines diminishes, which
makes their observation more challenging as the lookback time increases. The majority
of high redshift gas studies have used the δGDR conversion, because the observation of
CO lines require accurate spectroscopic redshifts, making it a more expensive method
concerning observation time and therefore impractical to obtain measurements of large
populations. It must be noted that gas estimations performed with CO lines and dust
continuum emissions have been compared, and both methods give similar results [Magdis
et al., 2017; Magdis et al., 2012]. The challenge of using the dust gas technique resides
in that it requires a detailed far IR SED, including the R-J tail. As it has already been
mentioned, constraining the FIR SED at high redshifts poses many diﬀiculties. Many of
them come from the limited angular resolution that Herschel offers in the 100 and 160 µm
bands, which goes down to 5 arcseconds. When adventuring into the high redshift universe,
such resolutions usually lead to blending of sources and create the need to introduce further
corrections in order to differentiate between target galaxy and possible satellites. If the
12
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:21==
FIR SED is known, the Mdust can be derived by assuming that the SED is represented by
a single temperature modified black body (MBB):
Mdust =
Sν D2L
(1 + z)κrest Bν(λrest, Td) with κrest = κ0
( λ0
λrest
)β
(1.8)
where Sν is the flux density, DL the luminosity distance, κrest is the rest frame dust
mass absorption coeﬀicient at the observed wavelength and β is the dust emissivity. This
approach does not take into account the size of the dust grains and that the actual FIR SED
of galaxies is actually composed of dust components with different temperatures. Most of
the dust emission at short wavelengths comes from the warmer component, however, it only
accounts for 10% of its mass. The R-J tail is the SED part that if constrained, allows for a
better estimation of the dust’s temperature Td and therefore more accurate Mdust. Another
assumption that this method makes is that in high redshifts galaxies, gas is mostly found
in a molecular state (MH2 ≫MHI), and therefore the measured gas represents the actual
cool gas that galaxies use to form stars. The dust-mass weighted luminosity LIR/Mdust,
dust temperature Td and mean radiation field ⟨U⟩are closely related parameters and their
relation can be described with:
⟨U⟩∝LIR
Mdust
∝T 4+β
d
(1.9)
The derivation of this parameters require a precise SED FIR peak and R-J tail estimation,
which imply deep, FIR data highly diﬀicult to obtain for quiescent high redshift galaxies.
1.3
Gas history
The ISM has been well documented and studied in SFG across cosmic times [Dekel et al.,
2009; Magdis et al., 2012; Popping et al., 2014; Narayanan et al., 2015]. It has, together
with the Mstar-SFR relation and the IR8 ratio, been able to describe the MS of galaxies.
It has also been found, concerning gas, that there must be two regimes for star formation,
a long lasting mode (which is represented by the locus of MS galaxies) and a limited
starburst mode. These two rely on the amount of gas (H2), which was poorly determined
before the number of gas studies increased not so long ago. The ISM has been studied by
exploring the far IR (FIR) properties of galaxies SED, which hold information on the dust
continuum emission, and other gas tracers. It has been observed that the dust and gas
mass fraction have greatly declined since z ≈2. SFGs at that redshift had 10 times more
ISM mass, and therefore fuel for star formation than local SFGs [Liu et al., 2019]. The
population of SFGs at higher redshifts is characterized by higher SFR, shorter depletion
times (τdep) and a higher SFE. Finally it was also observed that the temperature of dust
in galaxies increases with redshift, following the increase observed in star formation and
the intensity of the radiation field [Magdis et al., 2012]. The conclusions reached by many
studies were that the variation in the gas fraction might be a consequence of the observed
spread in the MS. In addition to that, the shape of the IR SED of MS galaxies seemed to
be uniform, thus opening a window to place constraints on their gas content through dust
and metallicity estimates. There has not been a similar study of gas in quiescent galaxies
though, their gas mass is poorly constrained across cosmic time and its uncertainties as
of today are large.
A question that must be answered is whether QGs have considerable amounts of unused
gas. If it is so, it means that galaxy are not quenched because they run out of it. Quiescent
galaxies have been observed up to redshifts z ∼3,4 [Gobat et al., 2018]. This means that
at a time as early as 2 Gyr after the Big Bang, the processes that quenched galaxies
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
13
==PAGE:22==
were already leaving its footprint. There have also been observations that the number of
low mass galaxies (Mstar < 1010M⊙) has increased enormously from z ≈2 to z ≈0.1,
comparing it to the growth of SFGs. At Mstar > 1010M⊙, the number of QGs grows by a
factor of 6 (from z = 2 to z = 0.1 ) and this factor becomes ≈15-30 at masses lower than
Mstar = 1010M⊙. The small growth observed in the star forming populations, which only
grow by a factor of 2 [Tomczak et al., 2014], linger in comparison. Observing quiescent
galaxies at high redshift is a very powerful tool when constraining the physical processes
that quench galaxies, since they place an age limit on the possible scenarios. The fact that
we find quiescent massive galaxies at high redshifts requires of a quenching mechanism
that is rapid, in order to have halted the star formation activity in such early times; and
eﬀicient, since higher Mstar galaxies have been observed to inherently have higher SFR.
It becomes clear then that the study of the ISM across cosmic time, and more specifically of
gas in high redshift quiescent galaxies is a crucial piece of the puzzle. It means to find the
unused or remaining gas reservoirs. To study them at high redshifts, poses a challenging
task, not only because of the technical limitations of the data acquisition but for its
subsequent processing and interpretation. Contrarily to the study of the ISM in SFG, this
is a new and evolving study field. Considering the current methods, studying gas means to
constrain the FIR properties of galaxies, these being: Mgas, fgas, Mdust, Tdust, τdepandLIR.
The shape of the FIR SED of high z QGs remains still unexplored, due to the photometric
data required to probe its most important features, these being the peak of the FIR SED
and the Rayleigh-Jeans tail (R-J tail). Understanding these features helps to build models
and evolution tracks that can be used to understand the properties implied in the SED,
mentioned above.
Figure 1.7: Mdust/Mstar measurements in the 0.3 < z < 2.5 range [Magdis et al., 2021].
The grey shaded region is the expected values for the MS [Kokorev et al. 2020]. The blue
dashed line represents the best fit to the measurements and the purple one does the same
taking into account the progenitor bias analysis of [Gobat et al., 2020]. The conversion of
Mdust to fgas is done with a gas to dust ratio assuming solar metallicity (δGDR=92).
14
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.8: Evolution of fgas of QGs with redshift. Smaller symbols represent individual
galaxy observations and the bigger ones represent measurements obtained from stacked
ensembles. Further information at [Gobat et al., 2020].
Figure 1.9: fgas measurements presented by [Williams et al., 2021]. The star symbols
represent their obtained measurements of individual sources using CO line emission. All
galaxies are color coded according to their log(sSFR).The black line represents the fgas of
the main sequence for an stellar mass of 1011M⊙. The dashed and dotted lines correspond
to different depletion time models: in blue models with constant depletion times, in yellow
models with a varying τdep according to scaling relations and in purple the depletion time
models calculated by [Liu et al., 2019]. More information at [Williams et al., 2021]
In the above figures the most recent results for gas fraction measurements can be seen.
Figure 1.8 shows that indeed quiescent galaxies seem to have lower gas fractions that main
sequence galaxies, represented by the green shaded area. The high gas fraction observed
in the higher redshift measurements is attributed to the progenitor bias. This effect refers
to the observational trend that arises when studying quiescent galaxies. It can not be
known if a galaxy has left the MS at an early redshift and has evolved passively since
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
15
==PAGE:24==
then or if it has lately become an early type galaxy. Therefore, if only high redshift QGs
are selected, one excludes the late type galaxies that will eventually become quiescent at
lower redshifts. The effect of this bias is usually an underestimation of the evolution of the
quiescent population. Recent studies of the evolution of gas across cosmic times [Gobat
et al., 2020; Magdis et al., 2021] reveal that the decrease in Mgas is sharply followed by
a decrease of in SFR. There also seems to be a decrease of Mdust from z ∼1 to z ∼0,
representative of consumption of gas without replenishment. At 1 < z < 2, the evolution
of Mdust flattens. The ISM conditions of quiescent galaxies does not seem to evolve with
redshift, which shows that possible different quenching mechanisms at different redshifts
result similar ISM properties. The final conclusions are that the evolution of fgas is a
combination of the non evolution of ISM conditions, the observed progenitor bias at z <
1 and the passive evolution of QGs. However, results obtained from individually observed
galaxies, see Figure 1.9, reveal a 3σ upper limit lying well below the measurements shown
in Figure 1.8. Such low measurements imply that quenching mechanisms are much more
eﬀicient than previously thought and that quiescent galaxies do not have considerable
amounts of gas left after they become quenched.
The difference could be due to the
fact that measurements in Figure 1.9 were obtained from more massive galaxies (Mstar >
1011.2M⊙) and that their gas masses were calculated from CO conversion coeﬀicients (αCO)
instead of converting the FIR emission into an Mgas measurement.
1.4
Motivation
The different kinds of methods and techniques used for the study of the ISM at high
redshifts and the novelty of the field have resulted so far in contradictory and inconclusive
results.
Further constraints must be ascertained in order to make robust predictions
on the evolution in fgas and quenching mechanisms. It is agreed that the fgas of QGs
is smaller than that of the MS at their correspondent redshift, the question that needs
to be answered is: by how much?
Studies that obtain fgas estimates from individual
galaxy observations may suffer from selection biases, i.e the fact that the estimates of a
small number of galaxies might not be representative of the entire quiescent population.
Estimates obtained from stack ensembles have been carried out on surveys with large
beam sizes, and therefore are subject to blending biases. The aim of this project is to
investigate the viability of selection a representative sample of high redshift QGs, large
enough to get rid of selection biases and study it with a high angular resolution map,
through which blending biases are greatly reduced. This way the weaknesses of the two
different approaches can be circumvented and promising results can be obtained.
The highest resolution FIR observations are obtained through ALMA, whose power has
already been directed to the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey (GOODS) field,
which is the most deeply documented field in the sky.
A large range of surveys have
been performed in it (e.g. ZFOURGE [Straatman et al., 2016], 3D-HST [Skelton et al.,
2014], CANDELS [Grogin et al., 2011]). Their recollected deep photometric data makes
it available to identify a considerable population of high redshift quiescent galaxies which
combined with the deepest ALMA observations of the GOODS-S field, i.e. the ALMA-
GOODS 1.1 mm map [Franco et al., 2018; Franco et al., 2020a; Franco et al., 2020b;
Gómez-Guijarro et al.,in prep], can obtain measurements of their R-J tail emission, which
will help draw a more precise picture of the evolution of the average high redshift quiescent
population ISM and study their gas and dust masses.
16
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2
Data
The choice of a reliable data set is of extreme importance. Moreover, it must cover a
deep enough field so that a considerable number of high redshift galaxies are available.
GOODS-S . This chapter will clarify our chosen sky field and catalog, explaining their
properties and characteristics, together with why they are appropriate for this project.
As explained in section 1.4, this project is supported on the opportunity brought by the
deep high resolution map that has been created with ALMA in the GOODS-S field [Gómez-
Guijarro et al.,in prep]. In it, we find the deepest and most extensive photometric studies
of the entire sky, comprising deep observations of Spitzer, Herschel, Hubble, Chandra etc.
which allow to obtain a large enough amount of high redshift quiescent galaxies to make a
compelling stacking of their FIR emission and analyse their properties. Due to the nature
of the stacking procedure, it is critical to ensure the quiescence of the selected galaxies.
Either directly or indirectly, photometric data points and the redshift derived from them
are the base to select quiescent galaxies. A catalog with quality photometric redshifts and
enough photometric fluxes to make reliable SED fittings is necessary. Not only that, but
it must be large enough to be able to collect a minimum number of quiescent galaxies that
fall within the footprint of the GOODS-ALMA survey.
2.1
ZFOURGE catalog
Among the latest, most complete catalogs we find the FourStar galaxy evolution survey,
ZFOURGE. Covering a total of 400 arcmin2 in three different fields : COSMOS, CDFS
(Chandra Deep Field South) and UDS. Containing approximately 70000 sources extracted
using the Ks band. The use of the K band is convenient for two major reasons. First,
as the optical rest frame and near-IR trace galaxies according to their stellar mass, the K
band selects galaxies according to this stellar mass up until z ∼2 [Gavazzi et al., 1996],
thus it tends to be more mass complete than other detection filters. The second reason is
that since spectral shapes in the before mentioned range of the spectrum are very similar,
it makes the K band free of biases in favour of a particular class of galaxy. Selection
criteria with other filters are more sensitive to the SFR of galaxies, and therefore become
biased to detect active galaxies opposed to passive quiescent ones [Cimatti, 2003]. Using
the FourStar NIR camera on the Magellan Baade telescope, and its available bands: J1,
J2, J3, Hs, Hl and Ks; the survey covers the same range as the classical J, H and K filters.
This represents an extreme advantage when probing high redshift galaxies. The Balmer
break, which at rest frames occurs at 4000 Å, moves into the near IR spectra at redshifts
z > 1.5. It is therefore useful to have narrower bands in order to measure the break in a
more precise way. This catalog is able to then obtain, with the use of EAZY [Brammer
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
17
==PAGE:26==
et al., 2008], reliable photometric redshifts for its sources, together with stellar population
parameters and other characteristics achieved with FAST [Kriek et al., 2009]. Through the
entire analysis ZFOURGE assumes an standard ΛCDM cosmology with ΩM=0.3, ΩΛ=0.7
and H0=70 km s−1 Mpc−1.
The image processing and preparation first requires, after processing the raw data, to make
a photometric calibration of the filters. To do so, a standard star is selected, with a Ks
magnitude ≈15.5, the star is then observed photometrically after making an observation
with a determined filter. The obtained measurements are then calibrated with the primary
observations of the standard star. Then, the actual depth of the FourStar pictures was
calculated with the rms error of the background pixels.
After randomly placing 5000
apertures all over the image where the background had already been subtracted, their
flux is calculated giving as a result the variation in the background noise, of which the
standard deviation σ is calculated. After making a flux correction for possible missing
light outside the 0.6” aperture, the limiting depth of the image is set at 5σ. Which in AB
magnitude is calculated as following:
depth(5σ) = zp −2.5log10[5σ·appcor]
(2.1)
Where zp and appcor are the magnitude zeropoint and the aperture correction factor
respectively, the latter ranging between 1.7-2.6. This process shows that the individual
FourStar images have a limit depth of 24.8 AB for CDFS. Combining the FourStar/Ks
images with preexisting deep K-band imaging, taken from HST imaging from the Cosmic
Assembly Near-IR Deep Ex- tragalactic Legacy Survey (CANDELS,[Grogin et al., 2011]),
super-deep detection images are created with a depth of detection (5σ) in CDFS ranging
between 26.2 and 26.5 in AB magnitude [Straatman et al., 2016].
The catalog is afterwards enlarged by adding another 39 filters from other public sur-
veys (see Table 2.1). In order to complement the archive with far-IR information, deep
Spitzer/MIPS observations at 24 µm and public observations of Herschel/PACS at 100
and 160 µm are added, though they are only available for CDFS. However this does not
pose a problem for the current project since it is this latter field the one we are interested
in. All of the filter information is given in the main ZFOURGE file, which mainly consists
of the id, pixel coordinates (”x, y”), ”RA” and ”DEC”, followed by the fluxes ”f[]” and
error ”e[]” in µJy and weight corresponding to median normalized ”w[]” of each filter. Fi-
nally a ”use” column is used to flag extremely reliable sources: S/N>5, not catastrophic
EAZY or FAST fit etc.
Together with this main file, other catalogs are given containing compelling information.
First the EAZY photometric redshift catalog shows information concerning the EAZY
fit parameters, such as derived photometric redshift with/without a K luminosity prior
”z_a”/”z_m1” , minimum χ2 value, best fit redshift ”z_p”, default derived redshift and
its peak probability ”z_peak” and ”peak_prob”. Another ”zspec” column is added for
sources that have a measured spectroscopic redshift. Then we also find the FAST extracted
stellar population parameters catalog, among which we highlight the SFR[M⊙/yr], specific
SFR[1/yr] and stellar mass [M⊙], all of them in logarithmic scale (log10() ).
The last, and also most appealing characteristic of the ZFOURGE survey is that a great
effort has already been invested into applying the UV J quiescent selection criteria in
search of quiescent galaxies.
On top of that, they went on to confirm the quiescence
of those galaxies with the calculated mean value of their sSFR=0.5±1.0 x 10−10, and
validating the UV J classification up to z = 3.5 [Straatman et al., 2016].
18
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:27==
Table 2.1: List of passband filters in ZFOURGE-CDFS [Straatman et al., 2016].
Table 2.1 provides the central wavelength of the filters in µm and their FWHM in arc-
seconds. It also gives their effective zeropoints, which include the galactic extinction and
offset corrections, such that the effective zeropoints is calculated as: zp = zpI + offset
+ galactic extinction. It is critical for the project that when the ZFOURGE catalog is
mentioned, it refers to the part of the survey focused on CDFS, since that is the field
where the GOODS-ALMA survey is located at.
2.2
GOODS-ALMA survey
The Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) together with the enormous
efforts made in the obtaining and processing of deep sky data have opened the window
to explore the dust emission of QGs at high redshift. ALMA is composed of fifty 12-m
antennas in its main array with an additional twelve 7-m and four 12-m antennas in its
Total Power Array. Its band coverage ranges from 35 to 950 GHz (approximately 315-8500
µm), making it able to study the ISM properties of galaxies from the Rayleigh-Jeans tail
to the SED peak. Its most advantageous property is its outstanding angular resolution,
which spreads from a few arcseconds to ∼10 mili-arcseconds, which represents a capability
to discern a distance of a couple hundred parsecs at a distance of z∼2. Located on the
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
19
==PAGE:28==
plateau in the Atacama dessert at 5,000 meters, it stands at an unbeatable location for
astronomical observations.
GOODS-ALMA is a 1.1 mm galaxy survey that covers a total area of 72.42 arcmin2
in the GOODS-South field centered at α= 3h 32min 30s, δ= -27deg 48’ 00”. Removing
the edges, which are the least sensitive regions of the map, reduce its total surveyed
area to 69 arcmin2. The second version of the map, known as GOODS-ALMA 2.0: is
a combined version of two images taken with different antenna configurations.
These
two configurations produced a high resolution and low resolution map. The latter, due
to lower observation time is shallower than the high resolution one. The latter, even if
deeper, has a higher resolution that might dilute the signal. The combination of these two
maps, presented by [Gómez-Guijarro et al., in prep] is built as a version that combines
the strengths of both.
Figure 2.1: GOODS-ALMA 1.1 mm footprint. In blue the GOODS-S field, in green the
deep HST-WFC3 region. The black regions delineate the different individual submosaics
which compose the entire survey [Zhou et al., 2020].
First, a high resolution survey was produced with an extended antennae array configura-
tion, able to discern smaller spatial scales. This version, presented by Franco et al., 2018,
reached a sensitivity of σ = 89 µJy beam−1 with an angular resolution of 0.251”×0.232”
calculated as beam FWHM . The map is composed of of 846 different pointings, divided
in 6 different parallel mosaics, inclined 70deg (named A-F in Figure 2.1). Each mosaic
consists of 141 pointings, each separated by 0.8 × HPBW, the primary half power beam
width of the antenna; covering a total 6.8’×1.5’ area, which is marginally overlapping with
its neighbour mosaics. Each pointing required an observation time of sim 60 s, summing
up to three execution blocks per mosaic. The highest frequencies of band 6 were selected
to perform the observation, due to them being optimal for dust continuum observations.
The correlator was then optimised at 264.9 GHz (λ=1.13 mm) using four different spec-
tral windows centered at 255.9 GHz, 257.9 GHz, 271.9 GHz and 273.9 GHz, all of them
with a bandwidth of 1875 MHz, accounting for a total width of 7.5 MHz. The antenna
configuration used a maximum baseline distance of 1500 m, using 40 antennae. These
observations were carried out on late summer 2016, under optimal water vapor conditions
20
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:29==
(precipitable water vapor ∼1 mm).
The low resolution array, carried out mainly between January and and March 2019, was
performed in a very similar way to the high resolution one.
The map, presented by
[Goméz-Guijarro et al.,in prep] was also composed of 6 mosaics, all of them in an identical
disposition and with the same size as the other map. The only difference is the antennae
configuration used , which was more compact, with a maximum baseline distance of 360.5
m. A total of 18 execution blocks were used for the six mosaics, which account for 14.39
hours of observation time in similar precipitable water vapor conditions (approx 1.16-
2.9 mm ). The achieved sensitivity of the map is of 95.2 µJy beam−1 with an angular
resolution of 1.33”×0.935”.
The data was processed in an analogous manner for both maps in order to avoid systematic
errors. Due to the lack of very bright sources and large flux ranges, the usage of the CLEAN
algorithm was avoided, in order to avert possible biases.
A comparison between the
clean and dirty version of the maps showed that its noise levels were practically the same
[Gómez-Guijarro et al.,in prep]. The imaging was then performed with a multifrequency
synthesis algorithm, CASA. In both maps, and therefore the combination, the sensitivity
and angular resolution changed slightly due to different observing conditions between
pointings. Accordingly, their values are averaged to obtain the final data. Each mosaic
of the high and low resolution maps was combined independently to then form the final
GOODS-ALMA 2.0 map, which achieved a sensitivity σ=68.4 µJy beam−1 and a resolution
of 0.447”×0.418”. All these parameters have been clearly portrayed in table 2.2, produced
by [Goméz-Guijarro et al.,in prep].
2.2.1
Stacking procedure
A Python code was written in order to produce mean stacked images of a number of
galaxies selected in the GOODS-ALMA map.
Firstly it reads the catalog from which
the galaxies will be selected, being mandatory that it contains information on the RA
and DEC of the galaxies, so that they can be translated into pixel coordinates. Then a
selection according to the catalog properties is defined, such as redshift, SFR, Mstar, ∆MS,
S/N of 24 µm filter etc. Such selection will retrieve N number of galaxies from the chosen
catalog. Then the software proceeds to make a M0×M0 pixel cutout centered around the
previously calculated pixel coordinates of each galaxy. To translate the astrometric data
into pixel coordinates, the Astropy package [Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018] is used,
which reads the RA and DEC center of the map as well as the angle value equivalent to a
map pixel. For the GOODS-ALMA map file, which consists of an array of 18000×18000
pixels, each pixel equals 0.05 arcseconds.
When making the cutout around each galaxy it must be taken into account that the true
center of the galaxy might not be an integer and therefore making a cutout of M0×M0
pixels around it becomes impossible. An approach that can circumvent this problem is to
interpolate the flux values between each pixel with a spline and recalculate the flux of each
pixel as a function of the ones around it. Doing so, the cutout can then be centered around
the true coordinates of each galaxy. To do so, the Scipy package [Virtanen et al., 2020]
offered 2D interpolation method which fits a bivariate spline to the flux values of all pixels,
thus allowing to calculate flux values between them. It is then made a second cutout of size
M×M (such that M0 > M), whose central pixel coincides with the astrometric coordinates
of the galaxy.Next they are stacked in a matrix of size N×M×M so that the stacked image
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
21
==PAGE:30==
flux can be calculated. For mean stacking:
Fij =
N
∑
n=1
fij,n
N
(2.2)
Where Fij is the stacked image flux for the i, j pixel and fij,n is the flux for the i, j pixel
of the nth galaxy in the selection. Finally, the image is normalized to a [0,1] scale and
smoothed with a gaussian filter included in the Matplotlib library imshow function.
To assess the proper functioning of the code a test trial is attempted with the ZFOURGE
catalog. The cutout sizes were of M0 =151 and M=141, resulting in a final cutout of
7.05”×7.05”. In order to obtain a clear detection, the most massive and brightest K band
sources in the GOODS-ALMA map were chosen (Mstar > 1010.5M⊙), summing up to a
total 450 galaxies. After performing mean stacking, this was the resulting image:
Figure 2.2: 7.05”×7.05” (141×141 pixels) stacked cutout using GOODS-ALMA images of
450 galaxies with Mstar > 1010.5M⊙in the ZFOURGE survey.
A clear detection can be distinguished, opposed to the empty background. However, it is
observed that the flux is not evenly scattered around the central pixel (i=70,j=70) but it
is shifted towards bottom left of the image. The fact that the mean flux of 450 galaxies is
not properly centered leads to the possible conclusion that there might be an offset in the
astrometric data. For that reason,the apertures used to calculate the photometric flux of
the stacked images, are placed on an slightly shifted position from the center of the image,
5 pixels below and to the left. An image with no apparent flux (produced by stacking 10
randomly selected QGs) has no visible bulk of flux at its center, and it simply shows the
noise fluctuations of the data (see Figure 2.3)
22
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.3: 7”×7” (141×141 pixels) stacked cutout using GOODS-ALMA images of 10
randomly selected quiescent galaxies using the UV J selection method, which does not
show any observable flux but scattered noise.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 2.2: Summary of GOODS-ALMA maps data
24
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Analysis
The following chapter describes the analysis performed on the data sets pertinent to the
final results of the project.
3.1
ZFOURGE
The ZFOURGE CDFS field catalogue is divided into different files, each containing aper-
ture fluxes information, photometric redshift data, stellar population parameters among
other properties. In order to hasten the data analysis and preparation, it is more suitable
to merge all the compelling information in one unique catalogue. This is done using the
Topcat [Taylor, 2005] program, which allows to analyse a catalog’s information and more
importantly, to crossmatch data between different catalogs using a common identifier,
such as the galaxy’s ’ID’. In the ZFOURGE case, it is decided to merge information from
the following files:
1. ”cdfs.v1.6.9.zout”, which contains information concerning the EAZY photometric
fit.
2. ”cdfs.v1.6.9.fout”, which contains information about the SED fitting estimates: stel-
lar mass, star forming rate, goodness of fit (χ2 method).
3. ”cdfs.v1.6.9.rest.v0.9.cat” which has information rest frame fluxes, in µJy units, of
the following filters. From SDSS, u, g, r , i, z; from Johnson, U, B, V; from 2MASS,
J, H, K and from tophat uv13, uv15, uv19, uv22, uv28.
4. ”cdfs.v1.6.9.sfr.v0.4.cat” which contains MIPS 24 µm flux and error ”f24, e24”, rest
frame 2800 Åluminosity ”L24” and the UV +IR derived SFR ”SFR_UV IR”.
5. ”cdfs.v1.6.9.herschel.v0.4.cat” contains the same information as the last file, however
in addition to that it gives the fluxes values and errors for Herschel/PACS 100 µm
and 160 µm filters.
In addition to that, the RA and DEC information of each galaxy was added from another
external file. All of this crossmatching was performed using the ID of the sources. In the
final file, exactly 30911 sources can be found. Finally, the provided fluxes are converted
to magnitude values through the following equation:
mag = −2.5×log10(f) + m0
(3.1)
Where f represents the flux in each band and m0 the magnitude zeropoint, which given
that the ZFOURGE bands fluxes are in µJy, equals 23.9.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
25
==PAGE:34==
A number of properties are included in the final catalog for their importance in the analysis.
Concerning redshifts we have ’zphot’ which represents the EAZY estimated photometric
redshifts; ’zspec’, containing the spectroscopic redshifts included in the ZFOURGE catalog
and ’zspec,2’ which is an additional spectroscopic redshift compilation in CDFS [N.Hathi,
private communication]. As a rule, the photometric and spectroscopic redshifts coincide,
with just a few disagreements.
A new additional column is created, called ’z’.
This
takes the spectroscopic redshift value, if there is one (prioritizing zspec over zspec2) or the
photometric estimate otherwise. Finally, the signal to noise ratios of the Spitzer/MIPS and
Herschel/PACS (24, 100 and 160 mum) filters are calculated, since they offer information
about possible AGN activity or dust obscured star formation.
The stellar masses given in the file containing the stellar population parameters are es-
timated with the FAST performed SED fitting. Together with them we find the SFR
associated to the fitted model for each galaxy, which in the catalog is found as SFRmod.
In addition to that, there is another SFR estimate obtained through the UV and IR lu-
minosities: LUV and LIR [Kennicutt, 1998]. LIR is derived with the Spitzer/Herschel
24-160 µm photometry, to which a spectral template is fitted in order to calculate its total
luminosity (integrated from 8 to 1000 µm). Then LUV is estimated by integrating the
rest frame 1216-3000 ÅUV emission (LUV =1.5νLν,2800) [Straatman et al., 2016]. The star
formation rate is then estimated with Bell et al., 2005 conversion:
SFR[M⊙/yr] = 1.09×10−10(LIR + 2.2LUV )
(3.2)
accounting for the younger stellar population UV emission and the dust obscured star
formation emission (in the IR), thus obtaining the total SFR for galaxies. In the analysis’
first steps, only the SED fitted SFR is taken into account, however later insights its
characteristics invite to use SFRUV +IR as a secondary estimate. However, until further
notice, the following parts of the analysis take the SFRmod as the nominal SFR.
Once the data table is built, Mstar vs SFR plots, RA vs DEC, colour-colour diagrams
are built in order to have a preliminary analysis of the general properties of the catalogue.
Firstly, though, a preliminary selection criteria is applied, to get rid of sources with un-
determined photo-z and sources with negative fluxes values in any of the following bands:
U, V, J. By doing so, the catalog is reduced to a total amount of 30800 galaxies.
Figure 3.1: log10(Mstar) vs log10(SFR) diagram color coded according to their photometric
redshift estimates.
26
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: Redshift distribution of ZFOURGE catalog.
Figure 3.3: Mstar distribution of ZFOURGE catalog.
Figure 3.4: SFR distribution of ZFOURGE catalog.
Figure 3.1 shows the clear correlation between the stellar mass of galaxies and their SFR,
i.e. the fact that the more massive are, the greater their SFR will be in general. This
comes together with the increase in redshift that it is observed in the most star forming
galaxies, resembling the fact that most of the star formation took place at high redshifts,
during the cosmic noon. The only issue that arises is the potential stratification occurring
in the diagram, which results in the upward diagonal lines where most of the sources
concentrate, instead of an even spread.
This is a possible product of the SED fitting
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
27
==PAGE:36==
software, which is limited by the amount of available galxy templates. The maximum
recorded photometric redshift is of 9.64, however in Figure 3.6, it becomes clear that most
sources are located between 0 < z <1 in addition to the fact that it is nearly certain that
the highest redshift sources are star forming galaxies. In Figure 3.3, it can be observed how
the population of high Mstar galaxies (Mstar > 1010.5M⊙) is much less numerous. This
poses a primary adversity, in that the higher the Mstar of the stacked quiescent sources,
the larger their Mgas is supposed to be, and therefore more easily detected. Not having a
large enough number of massive galaxies might bring the mean gas mass of the population
down, making its observation more diﬀicult.
In order to select the quiescent population of galaxies, the UV J colour-colour diagram
selection devised by Williams et al., 2009 is used. Its constraints were applied in two
different instances, firstly as they were originally proposed (see equation 1.3) and then
with a more restrictive version which has an applied offset of 0.1 in magnitude from the
original constraints (see blue limits in Figure 3.5). These tighter limits are used to get
rid of galaxies that lay just on the limits established in eq. (1.3), which could be galaxies
ongoing quenching, crossing to the quiescent region but still not fully quiescent.
The
criteria results in a total of 2854 QGs that comply with the nominal constraints, and are
flagged in the catalog by assigning them a value of 1 in a ’QGwill1’ column (which is
set to zero for the rest of the galaxies). The 2570 that comply with the more restrictive
constraints are also flagged in an additional column named ’QGwill2’.
Figure 3.5:
UV J color-color diagram with sources color coded according to their
log10(SFR). In red the original QG selection criterion by Williams et al., 2009 and in
green the restricted version of the same.
In Figure 3.6, we can see both the Mstar evolution of the entire ZFOURGE survey, which
is an indirect representation of the catalog’s detection limit. Since the total luminosity
of a galaxy increases proportionally to its stellar mass, and the apparent magnitude also
increases proportionally to redshift; the minimum detected Mstar increases proportionally
to redshift. It can also be recognized that most of the QG population has a z < 1 and
that an unusually high number of those quiescent galaxies have very low stellar masses,
lower than the estimated mass completeness limit (f.e. Mstar ≈107.6M⊙at z = 0.5 and
Mstar ≈108M⊙at z = 1) [Tomczak et al., 2014].
28
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: Mstar vs redshift diagram of galaxies in the ZFOURGE catalog, with UV J
selected quiescent galaxies highlighted in red.
The QGs scatter all across the GOODS-s field.
The next step is to select those QGs
that fall within the GOODS-ALMA map footprint. A rectangular region is defined to
exclude the edges of the map (see Figure 3.7) in order to avoid the lower sensitivity areas
of the same.
The region will also reject galaxies that reside in or close to the map’s
edges, whose cutouts could bias the final stacked image. The region is defined with the
DS9 software [Joye and Mandel, 2003], and then exported to the Jupyter notebook in
which all the catalog and map analyses are carried out. Once the map and the region
are uploaded, sources that fall within the region are selected (highlighted in red in Figure
3.7). In order to ease the stacking procedure, it was decided that all ZFOURGE galaxies
within the rectangle region in the GOODS-ALMA footprint would be selected to form
the final catalog. That way, the properties of all galaxies inside the map can be studied,
and stacked images of other sources apart from UV J selected QGs can be obtained. A
total of 10755 ZFOURGE galaxies reside in the GOODS-ALMA field, of which 781 are
UV J selected. For clarity reasons, Figure 3.7 only shows the QGs population , but it is
representative of the implemented procedure over the entire ZFOURGE catalog.
In order to avoid dusty star forming galaxies to be mistaken for QGs and possible blending
biases, a list of of ALMA detected sources was correlated with the catalog using the RA
and DEC of both. Doing so, a ’separation’ column was created which measures for each
galaxy, the distance to the closest ALMA detected source, in arcseconds. Galaxies that are
luminous in the submillimiter-millimeter bands are the one of the most intense starbursts
in the universe [Casey et al., 2014]. Their high Mdust absorbs the light emitted by the
younger stellar populations and radiate it in the FIR. This separation column can later
be able to reject galaxies that are too close to any of these kind of starbursts and could
therefore either be mistakenly identified as quiescent, or alter the flux of the final stacked
image.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.7: Sky map of ZFOURGE quiescent galaxies.
In grey, the GOODS-ALMA
surveyed area. The blue rectangle represents the defined region that excludes the less
sensitive area of the GOODS-ALMA map. Highlighted in red there are the UV J selected
QGs of ZFOURGE survey that are within the limits of the defined region. The rest of
QGs are represented by black dots.
During the first analysis of the ZFOURGE catalog, a quick collection of UV J selected
QGs was formed in order to perform a preliminary stacked image and observe the results.
It was found that the content of massive quiescent galaxies was not as large as expected
and that when stacking QGs with no detected flux at 24 µm (S/N24µm) , which can be the
signature of dust obscured star formation or AGN activity, the final obtained image did
not show any apparent flux. This failed stacking attempt, paired up with the stratification
of the Mstar-SFR diagram and the large amount of QG galaxies found below the mass
completeness limits led to doubting its reliability to offer a sound population of sources
to proceed with the stacking software. Instead of switching to another data source, it was
preferred to gain a deeper insight on the models through which the data in the ZFOURGE
catalog was calculated.
The first step taken in that direction was to study the individual SED model fits performed
by the FAST code. Inside the ZFOURGE catalog release, a file containing the flux of
the model for all wavelengths was found. Together with the photometric fluxes data, a
Jupyter notebook was created to plot the SED fitted model together with the photometric
datapoints and assess the quality of the fit. Even though the majority of the SED fits
did not show any quality issues, it was also found that some of the UV J selected galaxies
30
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:39==
showed signs of AGN activity through their near IR data points, being these the IRAC
bands. If an AGNi is luminous enough when comparing it to its host galaxy, the dip in the
galaxy SED will be filled by the blackbody emission of the AGN, producing a powerlaw
in the IRAC bands [Donley et al., 2012],i.e that the SED will grow.
(a) Good quality SED
(b) Poor quality fit
Figure 3.8: Examples of SED fitting together with the recorded fluxes. In red, the FAST
selected galaxy model. The black dots represent the measured fluxes in µJy, together with
their associated errors. The dotted vertical lines represent the Lyman break (in blue) and
the Balmer break (in green). Finally the blue dot represent the Spitzer/MIPS 24 µm flux.
The axes are in logarithmic scale.
It was then decided to use the photometric fluxes given in ZFOURGE and re do the SED
fitting process again, using EAZY [Brammer et al., 2008] instead of FAST, and compare
both catalogs, this new created catalog is referred to as the EAZY catalog.
3.2
EAZY catalog
EAZY is mainly used as a redshift fitting software for galaxies.
In addition to that,
it can also be used to obtain stellar population parameters.
The objective is to use
EAZY with the same settings that were used in ZFOURGE, and obtain a catalog with
the same information as the one provided by ZFOURGE, to then compare whether the
newly created catalog satisfies the requirements to be used in the next attempt of stacking
quiescent sources and obtaining a meaningful signal. It is hoped that the run will first
obtain a much smoother distribution of sources in the Mstar vs SFR plane, without having
the characteristic layering observed in Figure 3.1, and that the population of quiescent
galaxies does not show a large number of sources below Mstar <8.
As an SED fitting code, EAZY requires to define a parameter file called zphot.params, in
which the needed inputs (such as catalogs, filters) are described and also the parameters
of the SED fitting are established. We set up the conditions in a similar way to those used
by Straatman et al., 2016, by looking at their own parameter file. Firstly a file containing
the filter responses curves and their errors are uploaded, which contain the responses
curves to all filters used in the ZFOURGE survey, together with the filters from Spitzer
and Herschel telescopes. Then the templates file is uploaded. In our case another set of
templates was used, which were obtained from the template library included in the EAZY
software, these being ’fspsQSF12v3narrow.param’, including a total of 20 different models
at different ages. Then EAZY allows to set a condition named ’TEMPLATE_COMBOS’.
If the condition is set to 1, then EAZY will fit a unique model to the photometry, if 2 then
a pair of templates will be fit with non negative coeﬀicients. If the value is set to 99, like we
did, then it allow EAZY to combine all the available models with non-negative coeﬀicients.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
31
==PAGE:40==
In addition, the template errors are uploaded (TEMPLATE_ERROR.v2.0.zfourge file),
together with the file that defines the wavelength grid. Finally, the file containing the Ks
magnitude prior and the photometric zeropoint offsets is also included. Apart from the
mentioned conditions and input files, all the other options were set to their default mode.
The number of minimum detected colors to perform the fit is set to 3, the IGM absorption
is applied according to [Madau, 1995] and the cosmological parameters are set identically
to [Straatman et al., 2016], and the redshift grid is defined from 0 to 10 with a 0.05 step.
The last two input files are the photometric catalog: ’cdfs.v1.6.11.cat’ and the translate
file. Since the filter response files contains information not limited to ZFOURGE filters,
the translate file indicates to EAZY which of them are wanted to be included in the SED
fitting. In this EAZY run, all the ZFOURGE filters are used, with the addition of the
Spitzer/MIPS 24 µm. (See more at appendix B)
The resulting catalog includes redshift and stellar population parameter estimates. The
photo-z generally agree with the available spectroscopic redshifts, as it can be seen in
Figure 3.9.
It was also found that the majority of the SED fits were of great quality
(Figure 3.10), and those which were not had a KMAG > 25, which as a result became the
magnitude limit for the project’s studies.
For instance, the galaxy fitted in Figure 3.10 has a ZFOURGE catalog redshift of 0.64
whereas the photometric redshift estimated in this EAZY run is of 0.57.
Even if the
difference is not substantial, it shows that indeed the new catalog is different to the one
provided by Straatman et al., 2016. The layering observed in the Mstar-SFR plane of
the ZFOURGE catalog (Figure 3.1) disappears and a more homogeneous distribution of
sources can be observed. There is an abrupt diagonal setting a maximum SFR for each
Mstar, this is a simple limitation of the models used, which cannot assign higher SFR.
Figure 3.9: Comparison of photo-z obtained by EAZY and spectroscopically obtained
redshifts.
32
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.10: Left: Example of an EAZY fitted galaxy model. The galaxy model (in blue)
is fitted to the photometric data points represented by black squares. The blue circles are
the model’s flux values at the different photometric filter’s wavelengths. The fluxes are
given in muJy and the wavelengths in µm. In the legend there is information about the
fitted redshift, as well as the galaxy ID and its K band magnitude. Right: The redshift
probability distribution function.
Figure 3.11: log10(Mstar) vs log10(SFR) diagram color coded according to their photo-
metric redshift estimates, using the EAZY calculated Mstar and SFR estimates.
3.3
ZFOURGE-EAZY comparison
First an analogous data processing and analysis process was performed on the EAZY
catalog, which included a UV J colour-colour diagram QG selection, selection of galaxies
within the GOODS-ALMA footprint and the addition of FIR filters’ fluxes and errors
(100, 160 µm), the separation to ALMA detected star forming galaxies.
It was also
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
33
==PAGE:42==
decided, as a secondary method to detect quiescence, to compute for both catalogs the
distance of a galaxy to the main sequence through their distance to the MS; ∆MS =
log10(SFR/SFRMS). In order to calculate the SFR of the main sequence, the Mstar and
redshift of a galaxy is used as inputs in equation 1.5 Schreiber et al., 2015. A correction is
applied to the Mstar and SFR values given in the catalog to transform their values which
are obtained from a Chabrier IMF [Chabrier, 2003] to Salpeter IMF [Salpeter, 1955], by
multiplying their values by a 1.7 factor.
Figure 3.12: Redshift distributions of ZFOURGE (red) and EAZY (black) catalogs.
Figure 3.13: Mstar distribution of ZFOURGE (green) and EAZY (black) catalogs.
Figure 3.14: SFR distributions of ZFOURGE (blue) and EAZY (black) catalog.
Both catalogs agree in their SFR and redshift estimations, with the majority of sources
being located below z=2 (see Figure 3.12) and the SFR distribution peaking at an SFR ≈
34
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:43==
1 M⊙/yr (see Figure 3.14). There is however a noticeable mismatch between the estimated
stellar masses. It seems that there is an overestimation of Mstar at the EAZY catalog,
which is measured to be 50% greater than the ZFOURGE stellar masses. The fact that
both distributions look practically equal in shape, but with a constant offset leads to the
conclusion that the error must be systematic, however without further study it can not
be told whether the error is found in the ZFOURGE or EAZY. The first proposed guess
is that the IMF used by ZFOURGE and the one used by EAZY are different, but the
measured offset does not match with the previously estimated difference factors of 1.4-1.8
[Chabrier, 2003].
Concerning the UV J selection, 781 galaxies were identified as quiescent in the ZFOURGE
survey, whereas 711 was the final count for the EAZY catalog. 613 of those galaxies are
shared between both, which represents a 78% and 86% of their total selections, respectively.
A representation of the estimated SFR of those sources is done through a ∆MS versus
redshift, which allows to visualize whether the selected QGs are found below the main
sequence region or not.
(a) ZFOURGE survey
(b) EAZY catalog
Figure 3.15: ∆MS vs redshift plot of ZFOURGE galaxies within the GOODS-ALMA map.
The green line represents SFRMS calculated with equation 1.5. The red upper and lower
boundaries represent the 0.3 dex dispersion of the MS below which sources can star to be
considered quiescent or ongoing quenching. In cyan the galaxies identified as quiescent
with the UV J selection criterion.
The quiescent galaxies in both catalogs generally appear well below the main sequence.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
35
==PAGE:44==
The principal issue that arises here is that neither ZFOURGE nor EAZY, but especially
EAZY, seem to have the main bulk of their sources within the MS dispersion boundaries,
when they supposedly should. As it was observed, the SFR distribution of both catalogs
were very similar. Therefore , the fact that the stellar mass has a significant offset might
be the reason why EAZY fails to recover the main sequence.
This failure, led to the
discard of the EAZY catalog as a data set for the stacking attempts. The main reason for
this choice is that the time constraints of the project did not allow to make an in depth
analysis of how EAZY works, why its calculated stellar masses were different or how
were the SFR calculated from the mixture of models that EAZY uses to fit the observed
photometry. Finally the fact that it is apparent that the EAZY catalog does not comply
with previously accepted galaxy evolution models such as [Schreiber et al., 2015] main
sequence SFR estimation led to the same conclusion.
3.4
Final preparation
Due to the decision of using ∆MS as a quiescence selection tool, two different ∆MS where
computed, in order to have a robustness check of the star formation rates extracted from
the SED fitted models. The first SFR is computed with the latter; whereas the other is
calculated with the SFRUV IR, calculated with the LUV and LIR luminosities. However,
a major issue with the nature of SFRUV IR was detected. Only 15% of galaxies in both
catalogs have a S/N > 3 in the Spitzer/Herschel bands, which brings great uncertainties
to the subsequent infrared luminosity required to calculate the SFR with [Bell et al., 2005]
relation. For that reason, it is convened that in the final version the ZFOURGE catalog a
hybrid SFR version will be used, which will be composed of the SED fitted SFR for those
galaxies with S/N24,100,160 < 3, and the SFRUV IR for those sources detected in the same
bands.
Figure 3.16: Scatter plot of ∆MS vs redshift. The green line represents the SFR of the
main sequence calculated with equation 1.5. The red upper and lower boundaries represent
the 0.3 dex dispersion of the main sequence below which sources can star to be considered
quiescent or ongoing quenching. In cyan we can see the galaxies identified as quiescent
with the UV J selection criterion.
Figure 3.16 shows how the use of SFRUV IR as an estimator makes the scatter more
homogeneous, instead of the noticeable layering that occurred in Figure 3.15a, due to the
36
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:45==
constraints of the used galaxy models. This stratification is also present with the new
hybrid SFR, but to a lesser degree.
Having carried an extensive analysis on the properties of the ZFOURGE survey, having
compared it with a personally made EAZY catalog and applied a series of robustness
checks, the ultimate catalog contains a total of 10755 galaxies, of which 781 are consid-
ered quiescent according to the UV J selection criterion. The redshifts are a mixture of
spectroscopic measurements provided by ZFOURGE and additional external compilations
as well as EAZY photometric estimates. A hybrid SFR is also used, which takes SFRUV IR
(eq. (3.2)) for sources with a S/N > 3 in the 24, 100 and 160 µm filters. We also account
for the K band magnitude as well as the separation to the closest ALMA detected star
forming source. This catalog will be the one used to make stacked images and obtain flux
measurements.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Results
As it is explained in subsection 2.2.1, the stacking software requires an input catalog, de-
scribed in chapter 3 and a galaxy selection. Among the different selection criteria that are
used, there is a common set of constraints. First is that the maximum K band magnitude
is limited to 25, in order to ensure that the SED fits have been performed correctly and
their stellar population parameters are more reliable. The other is a minimum separation
from the closest ALMA detected SF galaxy of 1 arcsecond.
Optimally, the stacked image should be comprised of very massive quiescent galaxies and
at the highest redshift possible. The higher the stellar mass is the higher its gas mass is
assumed to be, and therefore easier to observe. The majority of gas fraction measurements
across cosmic times have also been extracted from very massive galaxies or populations
[Magdis et al., 2021; Gobat et al., 2020; Williams et al., 2021].
Concerning redshift,
as it was explained in chapter 1, the higher it is the less time it offers to the observed
quiescent galaxy to have evolved since it underwent quenching.
At lower redshifts it
becomes harder to descry whether the galaxy has recently been quenched or if it has been
passively evolving. The drawback that prevents from making such a selection is the low
amount of massive quiescent galaxies that are found at z > 2, which by themselves are
not enough to give a compelling and reliable stacked image and therefore, a gas detection.
The task then becomes making a fine representative selection with the suﬀicient number
of quiescent galaxies that can result in a detection.
Two different minimum stellar masses are used 1010M⊙and 1010.5M⊙as well as two
different redshift ranges: 1 < z < 2 and 1 < z < 3. Finally we will stack QGs selected by
Williams et al., 2009 UV J method and by defining ∆MS ranges. All the selection criteria
can be observed on table 4.1 below. For the selection depending on distance to the MS,
instead of using ∆MS = log10(SFR/SFRMS) the linear δMS = SFR/SFRMS will be used.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
39
==PAGE:48==
Selection
G
<z>
σz
log10(< Mstar >) [M⊙]
σMstar
flux [mJy]
rms [mJy]
1 < z < 2 ; log10(M∗/M⊙) > 10
1/2 < δMS < 2
106
1.44
0.28
10.49
2.78×1010
0.1850
0.0283
1/5 < δMS < 1/2
30
1.44
0.25
10.57
2.48×1010
0.0740
0.0223
δMS < 1/5
86
1.38
0.28
10.68
4.47×1010
0.0092
0.0153
UV J selection
95
1.41
0.29
10.57
4.32×1010
0.0196
0.0154
1 < z < 2 ; log10(M∗/M⊙) > 10.5
1/5 < δMS < 1/2
15
1.44
0.27
10.75
2.08×1010
0.1245
0.0274
δMS < 1/5
44
1.44
0.28
10.86
5.06×1010
0.0280
0.0206
UV J selection
52
1.42
0.27
10.84
4.81×1010
0.0379
0.0179
1 < z < 3 ; log10(M∗/M⊙) > 10
1/2 < δMS < 2
189
1.87
0.55
10.47
2.49×1010
0.1932
0.0096
1/5 < δMS < 1/2
41
1.74
0.56
10.50
2.36×1010
0.0893
0.0166
δMS < 1/3
125
1.61
0.51
10.65
4.01×1010
0.0382
0.0141
UV J selection
117
1.60
0.50
10.68
4.26×1010
0.0302
0.0128
1 < z < 3 ; log10(M∗/M⊙) > 10.5
1/5 < δMS < 2
15
1.44
0.27
10.74
2.08×1010
0.1245
0.0279
δMS < 1/3
66
1.63
0.47
10.77
4.39×1010
0.0473
0.0179
UV J selection
67
1.65
0.51
10.77
4.65×1010
0.0464
0.0206
Table 4.1: Compilation of measurements extracted from the different stacked images.
G indicates the number of galaxies present in the selection. The fluxes shown in table
4.1 are calculated by placing a 1.6 arcsec diameter circular aperture on the center of the
stacked image. The flux within the aperture is corrected by multiplying it by an aperture
correction factor of 1.54050907. Most of the measurements shown above do not show any
visible flux in their stacked images. It was decided to use the data from the selections
with Mstar > 1010M⊙for they have a larger number of selected galaxies and therefore
their rms is lower. The selections that are most promising, at least visually are shown in
Figure 4.1 and have bold fonts in table 4.1.
(a) 1<z<3, log10(M∗/M⊙)>10,
UV J selection
(b) 1<z<3, log10(M∗/M⊙)>10,
δMS < 1/3
(c) 1<z<3, log10(M∗/M⊙)>10,
1/5 < δMS < 1/2
Figure 4.1: 7.05”×7.05” (141×141 pixel) stacked cutouts of the highlighted selections in ta-
ble 4.1, using images from GOODS-ALMA survey of galaxies selected from the ZFOURGE
catalog.
40
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:49==
These three stacks are selected to be followed up by gas and dust mass calculations. One
of them (Figure 4.1a and 4.1c) have a S/N > 3, whereas the other are calculated as 3σ
upper limits. In the images’ center a faint flux emission can be observed, especially in
Figure 4.1c.
Taking their flux measurements, or 3σ upper limits, the calculation of a
gas/dust mass can be done. Two different approaches will be used. The first will be based
on the QG FIR template described in Magdis et al., 2021. The template is created taking
photometric measurements of 3 stacked ensembles, which are mostly located around the
peak of the SED and near the R-J tail. The template has a native dust mass (M0
dust)
of 1.11 × 108 M⊙and a native L0
IR = 1010 L⊙. This two are related by the inherent
luminosity to dust ratio of the model L0
IR/M0
dust = 90 L⊙/M⊙. The dust temperature
associated with the template is of 28deg K. The aim is to adjust the FIR template to
the flux measured from the GOODS-ALMA stack and scale it, therefore obtaining a new
Mdust that can be converted to Mgas with the δGDR coeﬀicient. Given that N = LIR/L0
IR,
then we can use Magdis et al., 2021 to calculate fgas:
fgas = N×GDR(Z)×M0
dust
Mstar
(4.1)
Where GDR(Z) is the gas to dust ratio coeﬀicient, which adopting a universal solar metal-
licity corresponds to GDR(Z⊙)=92. Mdust and LIR are calculated by multiplying the
native values of the model by the scaling factor N. Considering that the FIR template
has rest frame Lν values [ergs·Hz−1·s−1] and the fluxes extracted from the GOODS-
ALMA map are in mJy, the scaling factor between the model and our measurements
can be computed with the following calculations. Equation 4.2 is used to find the rest
wavelength of each stack image flux, calculated with mean redshift of the stack selection.
λrest = 1100[µm]
1 + ⟨z⟩
(4.2)
fν [ergs·Hz−1·s−1·cm−2] = 1023×f [Jy]
(4.3)
Lν,measured = 4fν·π·d2
L
(4.4)
After converting the measured flux in mJy to fnu (with eq. (4.3)), the latter can be
converted to luminosity using equation 4.4, in which dL represents the luminosity distance
computed with the cosmological parameters described in chapter 2 since dL ∝⟨z⟩. Finally
the scaling factor is calculated as:
N = Lν,measured
Lν,model
(4.5)
The uncertainty in the fgas estimate is calculated by:
σfgas =
√(σf
f
)2
+
(
σMstar
√
G⟨Mstar⟩
)2
(4.6)
Where f and σf are the GOODS-ALMA measured flux and rms respectively. For a given
stack ensemble fgas measurement, its value depends on N and the native dust mass of the
template M0
dust. Apart from the QG FIR template, another three FIR templates are taken
to use as a comparison. The three of them are MS galaxy templates each with a higher
dust temperature Td, and therefore a higher L0
IR/M0
dust relation. All four templates are
normalized to a native infrared luminosity of 1010L⊙and their luminosity to dust ratios
are, in increasing order: 90, 384, 1530 and 3184 L⊙/M⊙. The higher the ratio is, or the
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
41
==PAGE:50==
hotter the dust temperature of the template is, which is considered constant for each,
template the lower fgas it will compute for a given luminosity. The difference in measured
fgas can be seen in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2:
fgas measurements calculated with different FIR templates for our two
GOODS-ALMA 3σ detections. The grade shaded area represents the MS computed with
[Liu et al., 2019] fgas,MS model.
It is seen, that as expected, the models with the warmest Td, i.e larger LIR/Mdust, have
the smaller fgas estimates. As a robustness check for these measurements, we compute
the minimum measurable fgas from the GOODS-ALMA map, and then the same is done
for the stacked image, whose rms ∝(
√
G)−1 and thus is reduced, which allows to obtain
3σ detections with a smaller flux. The δMS < 1/3 selected stack (Mstar >10 and 1<z<3)
is used as a test. In Figure 4.3 first we see that the minimum measurable fgas decreases
with Mstar. This is due to the fact that the measured Mgas is constant for a determined
luminosity, but the gas fraction decreases proportionally as Mstar increases. We take the
GOODS-ALMA map rms value from [Goméz-Guijarro et al., in prep], which has a value of
σmap=68.4 µJy/beam. Using a 3sigmamap value as an upper limit, the correspondent fgas
is calculated, which evolves as a function of Mstar. Then the analogous process is carried
out with the rms of the stacked image which has a value of σstack=σmap/
√
G. A lower rms
value allows for lower gas measurements. Figure 4.3 reveals that the fgas measurement
complies with the minimum observable fgas. The same robustness check is run with the
other two chosen measurements and their results are equally satisfactory.
42
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.3: Plot showing the minimum measurable fgas using the rms of the GOODS-
ALMA map (in blue) and the stacked image (in cyan). The red circle represent the actual
measured fgas from the 1/5 < δMS < 1/2 selected stack image and the black vertical
dashed line marks the ⟨Mstar⟩of the stack subsample.
The second fgas measure method is based on [Scoville et al., 2016], which uses a single
flux measurement in the R-J tail to make an Mgas estimation. The reason for this is that
warmer dust has a much higher emission than the colder one at shorter wavelengths, but
correspond to less than 10% of the total Mdust [Liu et al., 2019]. Colder dust, which then
amounts to most of the Mdust can be approximated with a single observation in the R-J
tail. It is formulated as:
Mmol = 1.78 Sν,obs [mJy] (1+z)−4.8×
(ν850µm
νobs
)3.8
(dL[Gpc])2×
{6.7×1019
α850
} Γ0
ΓRJ
1010 M⊙
(4.7)
The formula is requires the flux measurements to have a rest wavelength of λrest >250µm,
which all our measurements fulfill. Sν,obs is the observed flux density, ν850µm is the corre-
spondent frequency to λ=850µm and νobs is the correspondent frequency of the wavelength
of the observation, in this case 1.1 mm. dL is the luminosity distance, which is calculated
as a function of redshift. Next, α850 is the luminosity to mass ratio of obtained from
Planck data in Taurus [Scoville et al., 2016], such that α850=6.2×1019 erg s−1 Hz−1 M−1
⊙.
Finally ΓRJ represents the correction for departure in the rest frame of the Planck function
from Rayleigh-Jeans:
ΓRJ(Td, νobs, z) =
hνobs(1 + z)/kTd
exp hνobs(1 + z)/kTd −1
(4.8)
Where h and k are the Planck and Boltzmann constants respectively. Γ0 represents the
value taken by equation 4.8 when z=0, Td = 25 K and λ=850µm which is 0.71. Ap-
proximating Mmol to Mgas we have a set of fgas estimations of our selected stack images
through three different approaches:
1. Scaling of QG FIR template [Magdis et al., 2021]
2. Scalation of MS FIR template [Magdis, 2012]
3. Use of flux density in R-J tail with [Scoville et al., 2016] model.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
43
==PAGE:52==
Selection
fgas,1 [%]
SFRUV +IR,1
τdep,1
fgas,2 [%]
SFRUV +IR,2
τdep,2
fgas,3 [%]
1 < z < 3 ; M∗/M⊙> 10
1/5 < δMS < 1/2
67.5 ± 14.8
5.2
4.1
39.3 ± 8.6
10.9
1.3
30.9 ± 5.7
δMS < 1/3 (3σ upper limit)
22.3
2.7
3.7
13.2
5.4
1.1
10.4
UV J selection (3σ upper limit)
18.8
2.3
3.8
13.4
4.9
1.1
10.6
Table 4.2: Collection of fgas estimates for the selected stack ensembles.
The SFRUV +IR values are in M⊙/yr and τdep are in Gyr and find that the values obtained
with the QG FIR template comply with previously presented values in [Magdis et al.,
2021]. In order to assess the obtained results they are compared to the fgas evolution
plot found in [Gobat et al., 2020], which collects a large number of fgas measurements for
quiescent galaxies across cosmic times. The fgas,MS is modelled with [Liu et al., 2019]
characterization:
log10(fgas) = (a + ak × log10(Mstar/1010)) × ∆MS
+ b × log10(Mstar/1010)
+ (c + ck × log10(Mstar/1010)) × tcosmicage
+ d
which takes the following values: a=0.4195,ak=0.1195,b=-0.6906,c=-0.1543,ck=0.0320,
d=0.9339.
44
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:53==
(a) fgas estimations obtained with quiescent FIR template
(b) fgas estimations obtained with main sequence FIR template
(c) fgas estimations obtained with R-J tail dust mass estimation [Scoville et al., 2016]
Figure 4.4: fgas vs z evolution plot. The measurements are shown in red, orange and
green; representing the 1/5 < δMS < 1/2 detection, δMS < 1/3 upper limits and UV J
selection upper limits respectively. The grey shaded area represents the fgas of the MS [Liu
et al., 2019] calculated with a Mstar = 5×1010M⊙and the orange shaded area represents
the fgas evolution estimation for QGs from [Magdis, 2012]. The grey data points show the
estimated fgas of various studies, check 1.8.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
45
==PAGE:54==
We observe that the three measurements are located below or partially below the main
sequence (see table 4.2). The highest gas fractions correspond to the estimates obtained
from the quiescent FIR SED template, which corresponds to the model with the coldest
dust temperature of the two. When calculating fgas with the main sequence template,
which has a warmer dust temperature, and a higher light to dust ratio, lower gas fractions
are obtained. The final measurements, obtained with [Scoville et al., 2016] Mgas calculation
method, are the lowest of the three scenarios. As a rule we observe that, independently
of the fgas calculation method or type of FIR template used, the estimated fgas is below
the main sequence for the three stacked ensembles. The three different estimations for
each ensemble are combined in Figure 4.5, in which for each stack an error bar is plotted,
covering an fgas range that goes from the minimum to the maximum fgas estimation
depending on the method used.
Figure 4.5: fgas vs z plot with fgas estimations of selected stack ensembles. The mea-
surements are plotted as a vertical range, covering from the minimum to the maximum
calculated gas fraction according to the calculation method used. The green and black
ranges correspond to the upper limits of the (δMS<1/3 and UV J selection stacks) and
the red range corresponds to the 1/5< δMS<1/2 detection. The grey data points show
the estimated fgas of various studies (check 1.8) and the grey shaded area represents the
predicted fgas for the MS [Liu et al., 2019].
46
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Discussion
Out of the 13 stacked subsamples, only three showed promising fluxes in their images. In
Figure 4.1c, we can see a clear detection, with the flux concentrated around the center
of the image and no noise spikes nearby.
The fact that we are able to see clumps of
emission might be due to the GOODS-ALMA map high resolution, since when producing
the analogous image with the low resolution version, a round, smoothed flux appears. The
other two stacked subsamples, Figures 4.1a and 4.1b, have larger noise amounts polluting
the fluxes that can be discerned at their centers. The S/N ratios of the measured fluxes,
with a placed aperture of 1.6 arcsec diameter are of 2.7 for Figure 4.1b and 2.3 for Figure
4.1a. The high amount of noise that we observe might be due to a very bright galaxy
near to a selected QG that biases the stack. However, the fact that we discard galaxies
that have an ALMA detected SF galaxy closer than 1 arcsecond should act as a partial
barrier for that issue. Taking all of this into account, their fgas are calculated as 3σ upper
limits. It must be considered that a selection concerning 24µm fluxes is not made, this
is, discarding sources that are bright in the FIR since it might be a signature of AGN
activity and thus could be biasing the stack. It is still unsure whether a bright 24µm
detection comes from AGN activity or if it is a product of old stellar populations, which
are characteristic of quiescent galaxies. As a robustness check, we compare the calculated
τdep obtained through the SFRUV IR estimates with the ones obtained through QG stacked
ensembles at with solar metallicity (GDR=92). The values of our fully quiescent stacked
ensembles which have a τdep ≈3.7 Gyr similar to the ≈3.4 Gyr obtained by Magdis et al.,
2021 (Note that the SFR values have been transformed from their original Salpeter IMF
value to Chabrier IMF by dividing τdep by a factor of 1.7, in order to be compared with
our estimates).
Another property that arises concern is the large redshift range that is being used in the
stack subsamples. However, the fact that the FIR part of the SED of quiescent galaxies
does not evolve with redshift together with the shape of the R-J tail, allow for a ”negative
K correction”. Due to the negative steep slope of the R-J tail, the higher the probed
redshift is, the smaller its rest frame wavelength it will be, which will correspond to a
higher FIR flux as a result of the shape of the SED. Therefore the cosmological dimming
occurring by an increase in redshift (and therefore an increase in distance) is canceled out
with the brightening of its rest frame flux. This negative K correction is the phenomenon
allowing to stack sources with such different redshifts, since they all have similar fluxes in
the GOODS-ALMA map.
From the three available MS models, it was decided to use the one with the coldest
dust temperature and lowest luminosity to dust ratio (LIR/Mdust = 384 L⊙/M⊙) as
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
47
==PAGE:56==
representative of the MS. The difference of estimated fgas of the different main sequence
models can be seen in Figure 4.2.Even though the δGDR method obtains a measurement
of the mass of all the gas, this can be approximated to MH2 taking into account the
MHI/MH2 measured for local quiescent galaxies. This observation is extended to high
redshift quiescent galaxies and therefore the measured fgas can be interpreted as fH2. It
must be noted that the mean Mstar of our stacked ensembles is lower than the Mstar of
individually observed galaxies or stack samples used for fgas estimations in Figures 1.8,1.9,
which range from 1010.8 to 1011.6M⊙. Looking at Figure 4.5, from a broad viewpoint, we
see that the obtained estimations follow the general trend, this being that QGs seemingly
have lower gas fractions that main sequence galaxies. The 1/5 < δMS < 1/2 subsample
results in a higher fgas estimate. The fact that the ensemble select sources that are much
closer to the main sequence means that those galaxies are not necessarily quiescent yet, but
might be undergoing quenching. The obtained fgas measurement range from 67.54±14.84
% to 30.86±5.75, both of which are below the main sequence, but not as low as the QG
subsample fgas, i.e. the range of gas fractions that could be expected of galaxies that are
becoming quenched. The quiescent subsamples (UV J selection and 1/3 δMS < 1/3) upper
limits, which range from 18.8 to 10.6 % and 22.3 to 10.4 % respectively, are not precise
enough to give any conclusive information. A robust detection would be required in order
to obtain a compelling and reliable fgas estimate. The fact that the quiescent subsamples
recover a 2.3 and 2.7 σ detections encourages to make an attempt on recovering a sound
signal with the proper data treatment, such as uv stacking [Lindroos et al., 2014].
Our obtained results verify the previously drawn picture that local QGs have lower fgas
and therefore smaller gas reservoirs than high redshift QGs. However they can not place
any further constraints on the evolution of fgas with cosmic time and on the possible
quenching mechanisms. The results shown by [Williams et al., 2021], if we consider them
representative of the quiescent population, demonstrate that massive QGs at z > 1 have
very low amounts of gas after being quenched, thus indicating the effectiveness of the
processes that either dispel or consume cool gas. These results do not comply with previous
fgas estimates obtained through stacked images [Gobat et al., 2018; Magdis et al., 2017],
which estimate an fgas ∼16%. These contrasting results could be the consequence of
a large heterogeneity in the population of quiescent galaxies, which would mirror the
diversity of quenching processes. We will now see how different fgas estimates result in
different τdep and greater or lesser evolution of the gas reservoirs in QGs.
A scenario with very low fgas, resembling [Williams et al., 2021], results is the result of
a very fast consumption of the gas reservoir and the disruption of gas accretion on to
the galaxy. The earlier the accretion is stopped, the more time the galaxy will have to
consume its gas and reach the observed fgas. Observations resemble a picture in which
galaxies halt their accretion at z > 3.5 and then consume their remaining gas with τdep <
0.6 Gyr, common of star forming MS galaxies. On the other hand, an scenario with higher
fgas estimates (> 16%), result in a difference of two orders of magnitude between local
and high redshift QGs. Hydrodynamical simulations on the evolution of quiescent galaxies
propose that SFE drop by a factor of 5-10 once the gas fraction falls below a determined
value fgas ∼25% [Magdis et al., 2017]. Therefore the halt of star formation activity does
not necessarily imply the expulsion of consumption of all the entire gas reservoirs. The
lower fgas of local quiescent galaxies can then be explained by the passive evolution of
these not star forming eﬀicient galaxies. However in order to keep fgas below its critical
value, another mechanism must appear in order to account for the new gas that is accreted
on to the galaxies through mergers and cosmic gas filaments. Three possible scenarios are
then proposed: very massive halos (>1013M⊙) that hold hot atmospheres, preventing the
48
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:57==
accretion of cold gas; AGNi feedback which can heat up and dispel the cold gas and finally,
gas heating by gravitational interactions. The picture of fgas evolution then remains yet
unsolved, however the project has given promising results that with a more sophisticate
analysis and data processing might clarify the diverse and complex phenomenology of
galaxy quenching.
5.1
Caveats
The stacking method followed in this project, as well as the selected subsamples pose a
number of limitations to the obtained results and the performed analysis. The first is the
narrow constraints placed on the produced galaxy subsamples. The mean stellar mass of
our selected stack ensembles range from 1010.50M⊙to 1010.68M⊙, is lightly smaller than
the average Mstar of the stacked ensembles used to obtain fgas estimations in 1.8 which
were of ≈1010.8M⊙. A higher limit on the minimum Mstar of the subsample would be
desirable.
However, the number of galaxies in the stack necessary to obtain a robust
image is also affected by imposing a higher minimum Mstar. We also acknowledge that
the constructed ∆MS relies on SFR obtained through template SED fitting, which can not
be taken as a true measure of the SFR but as an estimation and on SFRUV IR. The latter
is approximated from LIR and LUV which are themselves calculated from fitted templates
to the IR and UV photometric data, which we found not to be very sound in most of
the cases, with 85 % of the galaxies not having a S/N > 3 in the Spitzer/Herschel bands.
Further, the fact that we are not applying any cuts according to the 24 µm emission of
galaxies might mean that flux coming from AGN activity and star forming galaxies is
biasing the stacked images flux.
There is also a need to have a closer investigation of the templates used by EAZY since
their SFR derivation is still in a exploratory phase.
Finally two of the three selected
catalog subsamples have doubtful stacked images, showing strange morphology and large
amounts of noise outside the center of the image.
A more thoughtful analysis on the
emission of each of the galaxies belonging to the stacks would be helpful to see whether a
small amount of wrongly classified quiescent galaxies is biasing the obtained image flux.
Finally the fact that we are stacking the images and not the uv-plane observations might
be decreasing the S/N of the stack ensembles.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Summary
This project first starts with a review of the nature of galaxies, their classes, and their
evolution. From how do they start in the first place to how they evolve, and their com-
ponents with them. It is acknowledged that galaxies can be classified according to the
amount of stars they form, and can either be star forming or quiescent. The fact that we
observe that the SFR density of the universe peaked at z∼2, and has decreased ever since
and the observation of quiescent galaxies to such early times (z∼4 or tlookback ∼11.5 Gyr)
has shifted the attention of some part of the scientific community to understand why do
galaxies quench and through what physical processes do they become quiescent. How can
it be that quiescent galaxies exist at such early times in the universe?
A large number of mechanisms have been proposed and the common feature among all of
the is cooled gas, i.e. the fuel for star formation. It is found that all the possible physical
processes involve, in many different ways, the incapability of a galaxy to accrete mass,
to cool it down and allow the formation of stars or to eject it from the galaxy. Another
possible scenario is the one in which a galaxy, due to a sudden burst of star formation,
which could be triggered by a major merger followed by a compaction event, in which
the remaining gas can be rapidly consumed.
Studying the remaining gas in quiescent
galaxies can shine some light on whether is the lack of gas the phenomenon triggering
quiescence, or whether if it is due to another mechanism.
Making an analysis on the
evolution of the gas mass can also show whether the gas fraction in QGs has changed
with cosmic time, or if galaxies in the past are getting quenched for the same reason
they are getting quenched now.
The study of gas in quiescent galaxies across cosmic
time is a relatively new field. The measurements carried out until now show that QGs
apparently have smaller fgas than the main sequence of galaxies at their correspondent
redshift and that quiescent galaxies had higher gas masses in the past than they do today.
However, some these values have been obtained by studying individual sources, whose
results suffer from selection biases, this is, the fact that an individual source can not be
representative of the average population. Other measurements have been carried out by
stacking of FIR images, which allow to reach depths not attainable by usual telescope
images.
These subsamples of galaxies, when stacked, lower the rms of the individual
image and can statistically obtain compelling data. The issue is the fact that this stacked
images have been obtained with surveys of low angular resolution, and thus suffer from
blending caveats. The scope of the project then was to select an average population of
quiescent galaxies at high redshift and stack their emission from the recently produced
GOODS-ALMA 2.0 1.1 mm survey [Gómez-Guijarro et al.,in prep], which reaches a very
high angular resolution of 0.447”×0.418” and a sensitivity of 68.4µJy/beam. The fact that
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
51
==PAGE:60==
this GOODS-ALMA survey is located at GOODS-South, the most studied field in the sky
brings an opportunity to select a large enough number of high redshift quiescent galaxies
to obtain a compelling observation of their FIR continuum properties, and analyse their
ISM.
To do so the ZFOURGE catalog built by [Straatman et al., 2016] was selected, containing
30911 galaxies. An analysis of its main properties was carried out, stellar mass, SFR,
redshift distribution, sSFR estimates etc. A quiescent galaxy selection was done through
the UV J color-color diagram [Williams et al., 2009]. An unexpectedly large number of low
mass quiescent galaxies, well below the 108M⊙mass completeness limit, were detected.
This finding led us to revisit the SED fittings that the FAST software had performed,
and from which stellar population parameters are extracted. It was then observed that
even if most of the fits were properly performed, a not negligible amount of them were
catastrophic. The fact that some of this catastrophic SED fits were identified as quiescent
galaxies led to the creation of a secondary catalog, using EAZY to fit galaxy templates
to the photometric data provided by ZFOURGE and observe whether there were any
major changes. The Spitzer/MIPS 24µm filter was introduced in the SED fitting process
to assess its effect on the obtained stellar population parameters, even though no major
changes were detected. A UV J selection criteria was also applied to this EAZY catalog
to identify and flag quiescent sources.
The comparison between the EAZY built and ZFOURGE catalogs was restricted to those
galaxies that were within the GOODS-ALMA 2.0 survey footprint, at a small distance
from the less sensitive edges of the map, which accounted to ≈10000 galaxies out of the
original 30911 sources included in the CDFS part of the ZFOURGE catalog. There is an
agreement between the redshift and SFR distributions. It is not the case for the stellar
masses, where an appreciable offset could be observed. This difference was even more
visible when comparing the ∆MS = log10(SFR/SFRMS) vs z plots of the two catalogs.
For both of them, the main population of UV J selected sources were found below the
main sequence values. The issue arose in the EAZY catalog plot, where the bulk of the
sources was not within the main sequence region (represented by a 0.309 dex dispersion).
Where, by definition, is the place were the majority of galaxies is expected to be. This
finding, led to the discard of the EAZY built catalog due to the time constraints imposed
on the project, which would not allow a deeper analysis on the intricacies of the software.
Then using the ZFOURGE catalog the stack ensembles were defined and their GOODS-
ALMA cutouts stacked. All galaxy subsamples shared the following criteria: KMAG < 25,
which got rid of all catastrophic SED fits and a minimum distance from the closest ALMA
detected SFG of 1 arcsecond. Together with that criterion, different redshift ranges were
defined and minimum Mstar were established. The most promising ensembles were all
extracted from a 1 < z < 3 redshift range and a minimum stellar mass of 1010M⊙. The
quiescence of the stacked ensembles was defined either by UV J selection or δMS < 1/3
(where δMS = SFR/SFRMS). The most clear detection came from the 1/5 < δMS < 1/2
stacked ensemble, whereas the other two showed considerable amounts of noise and didn’t
record a 3σ detection, and were thus treated as upper limits.
The calculation of their gas masses or gas fractions was carried out by using the obtained
fluxes as rest frame measurements of the R-J tail which were in turn used to scale previously
built FIR templates (with a native dust mass and infrared luminosity). Then using a δGDR
conversion factor assuming solar metallicity, the dust mass measurements obtained from
the templates was converted to a gas mass. Two different FIR templates were used, one
representing a quiescent galaxy and another representative of a main sequence galaxy,
with a higher light to dust mass ratio. As a third estimation method, the obtained fluxes
52
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:61==
were used to calculate Mgas following the calculation described in Scoville et al., 2016.
This latter method resulted in the lowest fgas estimations of the two and the QG FIR
template gave the highest fgas measurements.
However all three estimations coincide
and comply with previous gas studies in that quiescent galaxies seem to have a lower
gas fraction that main sequence sources at their correspondent redshifts. The two most
quiescent selections, obtained an upper limit fgas estimations that ranged from 22% to
9%, depending on the method used to derive fgas. Both upper limits though, obtained
very similar fgas measurements. The 1/5< δMS < 1/2 ensemble derived gas fractions
from 67.5±14.8 % to 30.9±5.7%.
These latter estimations, comply with the fact that
the galaxies selected in this subsample might be undergoing quenching, but are not fully
quenched yet, and thus have higher gas fractions than the quiescent stack ensembles, but
below the estimated values for main sequence galaxies. The two upper limits, offer non
conclusive results but promising S/N, leading to the conclusion that under the proper
data processing, a detection might be obtained which allows to place further constraints
on the fgas and Mdust of high z QGs and understand the nature of the mechanisms that
quenched them.
6.1
Future work
This project lays a number of paths to follow in order to extend and improve the current
analysis, obtain more precise results and therefore place more robust constraints on the
evolution of gas and its implications.
1. Stacking in the uv-plane to improve the robustness of the obtained images, and
improve the S/N of some of the ensembles with hope of obtaining a 3σ detection
2. Use the IRAM/GISMO 2mm survey in the COSMOS field, to carry out a similar
analysis and complement the obtained results.
3. Use different subsamples to obtain stack images or analyse the used ones in search
of a possible flux bias, coming, for instance from 24µm bright galaxies. Use different
quiescent identification methods (NUV rK color color diagram [Ilbert, O. et al.,
2013]).
4. Make a deep analysis on the functioning of EAZY and understand the reason for the
non satisfactory obtained results.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Ryden, Barbara (2006). Introduction to Cosmology.
Abraham, R.G. (1998). “Perspectives in Physical Morphology”. In: doi: astro-ph/9809131.
Mo et al., H. (2010). Galaxy formation and evolution. isbn: 978-0-511-72962-1.
Helmi et al., A. (1999). “Building up the stellar halo of the Galaxy”. In:
Tully et al., R. (1992). “Luminosity–Line Width Relations and the Extragalactic Distance
Scale. I. Absolute Calibration”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 387, p. 47. doi: 10.1086/
171059.
Peletier et al., R.F. (1990). “CCD Surface Photometry of Galaxies with Dynamical Data.
II. UBR Photometry of 39 Elliptical Galaxies”. In: A&A 100, p. 1091. doi: 10.1086/
115582.
Young, J. S. and N. Z. Scoville (1991). “Molecular Gas in Galaxies”. In: Annual Review
of Astronomy and Astrophysics 29.1, pp. 581–625. doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.29.090191.
003053.
Mathis, J. S., W. Rumpl, and K. H. Nordsieck (1977). “The size distribution of interstellar
grains.” In: The Astrophysical Journal 217, pp. 425–433. doi: 10.1086/155591.
Leger, A. and J. L. Puget (1984). “Identification of the “unidentified” IR emission features
of interstellar dust ?” In: The Astrophysical Journal 500, pp. 279–282.
Cimatti, Andrea (2003). “Galaxy evolution in the K-band”. In: Memorie della Societa
Astronomica Italiana Supplementi 3, p. 167.
Toft, S. et al. (2005). “Distant Red Galaxies in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field”. In: The
Astrophysical Journal 624.1, pp. L9–L12. doi: 10.1086/430346. url: https://doi.org/10.
1086/430346.
Gobat, R. et al. (2012). “The Early Early Type: Discovery of a Passive Galaxy at z spec
∼3”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 759.2, p. L44. doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/759/2/l44.
url: https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/759/2/l44.
Whitaker, Katherine E. et al. (2013). “Quiescent Galaxies in the 3D-HST Survey: Spec-
troscopic confirmation of a Large Number of Galaxies with Relatively Old Stellar Pop-
ulations at z ∼2”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 770.2, p. L39. doi: 10.1088/2041-
8205/770/2/l39. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/770/2/l39.
Valentino, Francesco et al. (2020). “Quiescent Galaxies 1.5 Billion Years after the Big Bang
and Their Progenitors”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 889.2, p. 93. doi: 10.3847/1538-
4357/ab64dc. url: https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab64dc.
Cattaneo, A. et al. (2017). “The new semi-analytic code GalICS 2.0 – reproducing the
galaxy stellar mass function and the Tully–Fisher relation simultaneously”. In: Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 471.2, pp. 1401–1427. issn: 0035-8711. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stx1597. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx1597.
Liu, Daizhong et al. (2019). “Automated Mining of the ALMA Archive in the COSMOS
Field (A3COSMOS). II. Cold Molecular Gas Evolution out to Redshift 6”. In: APJ
887.2, 235, p. 235. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab578d. arXiv: 1910.12883 [astro-ph.GA].
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
55
==PAGE:64==
D.M., Alexander et al. (Apr. 2005). “Rapid growth of black holes in massive star-forming
galaxies”. In: Nature 434, pp. 738–40. doi: 10.1038/nature03473.
Fukugita, Masataka and P. J. E. Peebles (2004). “The Cosmic Energy Inventory”. In: The
Astrophysical Journal 616.2, pp. 643–668. issn: 1538-4357. doi: 10.1086/425155. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/425155.
Elbaz, D. et al. (2007). “The reversal of the star formation-density relation in the distant
universe”. In: AAP 468.1, pp. 33–48. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20077525. arXiv: astro-
ph/0703653 [astro-ph].
Schreiber, C. et al. (2015). “The Herschel view of the dominant mode of galaxy growth from
z= 4 to the present day”. In: Astronomy & Astrophysics 575, A74. issn: 1432-0746. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201425017. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201425017.
Genzel, R. et al. (2010). “A study of the gas-star formation relation over cosmic time”. In:
MNRAS 407.4, pp. 2091–2108. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16969.x.
Man, Allison and Sirio Belli (2018). “Star formation quenching in massive galaxies”. In:
Nature Astronomy 2.9, pp. 695–697. issn: 2397-3366. doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0558-1.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41550-018-0558-1.
Feldmann, Robert and Lucio Mayer (2014). “The Argo simulation – I. Quenching of mas-
sive galaxies at high redshift as a result of cosmological starvation”. In: Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society 446.2, pp. 1939–1956. issn: 0035-8711. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stu2207. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/446/2/
1939/9387050/stu2207.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stu2207.
Rees, M. J. and J. P. Ostriker (1977). “Cooling, dynamics and fragmentation of massive
gas clouds: clues to the masses and radii of galaxies and clusters.” In: MNRAS 179,
pp. 541–559. doi: 10.1093/mnras/179.4.541.
Cornuault, Nicolas et al. (2018). “Are cosmological gas accretion streams multiphase and
turbulent?” In: AAP 610, A75, A75. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629229.
Tabatabaei, F. S. et al. (Nov. 2018). “Discovery of massive star formation quenching by
non-thermal effects in the centre of NGC 1097”. In: Nature Astronomy 2, pp. 83–89.
doi: 10.1038/s41550-017-0298-7. arXiv: 1710.05695 [astro-ph.GA].
Zolotov, Adi et al. (July 2015). “Compaction and quenching of high-z galaxies in cos-
mological simulations: blue and red nuggets”. In: MNRAS 450.3, pp. 2327–2353. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stv740. arXiv: 1412.4783 [astro-ph.GA].
Di Matteo, Tiziana, Volker Springel, and Lars Hernquist (Feb. 2005). “Energy input from
quasars regulates the growth and activity of black holes and their host galaxies”. In: Nat
433.7026, pp. 604–607. doi: 10.1038/nature03335. arXiv: astro-ph/0502199 [astro-ph].
Labbé, Ivo et al. (May 2005). “IRAC Mid-Infrared Imaging of the Hubble Deep Field-
South: Star Formation Histories and Stellar Masses of Red Galaxies at z>2”. In: APLJ
624.2, pp. L81–L84. doi: 10.1086/430700. arXiv: astro-ph/0504219 [astro-ph].
Williams, Rik J. et al. (2009). “Detection of Quiescent Galaxies in a Bicolor Sequence from
Z = 0-2”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 691.2, pp. 1879–1895. issn: 1538-4357. doi: 10.
1088/0004-637x/691/2/1879. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/691/2/1879.
Ilbert, O. et al. (2013). “Mass assembly in quiescent and star-forming galaxies since z
from UltraVISTA”. In: A&A 556, A55. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321100. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201321100.
Straatman, Caroline M. S. et al. (2016). “The FOURSTAR Galaxy Evolution Survey
(ZFOURGE): Ultraviolet to Far-Infrared Catalogs, Medium-Bandwidth Photometric
Redshifts with Improved Accuracy, Stellar Masses, and confirmation of Quiescent Galax-
ies to z￿3.5”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 830.1, p. 51. issn: 1538-4357. doi: 10.3847/
0004-637x/830/1/51. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/830/1/51.
56
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:65==
Skelton, Rosalind E. et al. (2014). “3D-HST WFC3-Selected Photometric Catalogs in
the Five CANDELS/3D-HST Fields: Photometry, Photometric Redshifts and Stellar
Masses”. In: The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 214.2, p. 24. issn: 1538-
4365. doi: 10.1088/0067- 0049/214/2/24. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0067-
0049/214/2/24.
Belli, Sirio, Andrew B. Newman, and Richard S. Ellis (2019). “MOSFIRE Spectroscopy of
Quiescent Galaxies at 1.5 < z < 2.5. II. Star Formation Histories and Galaxy Quench-
ing”. In: APJ 874.1, 17, p. 17. doi: 10.3847/1538- 4357/ab07af. arXiv: 1810.00008
[astro-ph.GA].
Tomczak, Adam R. et al. (2016). “The SFR–M*Relation and Empirical Star Formation
Histories from ZFOURGE at 0.5 <z< 4”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 817.2, p. 118.
issn: 1538-4357. doi: 10.3847/0004-637x/817/2/118. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/
0004-637X/817/2/118.
Gobat, R. et al. (2018). “The unexpectedly large dust and gas content of quiescent galaxies
at z > 1.4”. In: Nature Astronomy 2, pp. 239–246. doi: 10.1038/s41550-017-0352-5.
arXiv: 1703.02207 [astro-ph.GA].
Magdis, G. et al. (2021). “The interstellar medium of quiescent galaxies and its evolution
with time”. In: AAP 647, A33, A33. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039280. arXiv: 2101.
04700 [astro-ph.GA].
Carilli, C. L. and F. Walter (2013). “Cool Gas in High-Redshift Galaxies”. In: ARAA
51.1, pp. 105–161. doi: 10 . 1146 / annurev - astro - 082812 - 140953. arXiv: 1301 . 0371
[astro-ph.CO].
Puglisi, A. et al. (2019). “The Main Sequence at z ∼1.3 Contains a Sizable Fraction
of Galaxies with Compact Star Formation Sizes: A New Population of Early Post-
starbursts?” In: APJL 877.2, L23, p. L23. doi: 10.3847/2041- 8213/ab1f92. arXiv:
1905.02958 [astro-ph.GA].
Bourne, N. et al. (2019). “The relationship between dust and [C I] at z = 1 and beyond”.
In: MNRAS 482.3, pp. 3135–3161. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2773. arXiv: 1810.01640
[astro-ph.GA].
Magdis, Georgios E. et al. (2012). “The Evolving Interstellar Medium of Star-forming
Galaxies since z = 2 as Probed by Their Infrared Spectral Energy Distributions”. In:
APJ 760.1, 6, p. 6. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/760/1/6. arXiv: 1210.1035 [astro-ph.CO].
Jiao, Qian et al. (2017). “Neutral Carbon Emission in Luminous Infrared Galaxies: The
[C I] Lines as Total Molecular Gas Tracers”. In: APJL 840.2, L18, p. L18. doi: 10.3847/
2041-8213/aa6f0f. arXiv: 1704.07780 [astro-ph.GA].
Magdis, G. E. et al. (2017). “Dust and gas in star-forming galaxies at z 3. Extending
galaxy uniformity to 11.5 billion years”. In: AAP 603, A93, A93. doi: 10.1051/0004-
6361/201731037. arXiv: 1705.06296 [astro-ph.GA].
Dekel, A. et al. (2009). “Cold streams in early massive hot haloes as the main mode of
galaxy formation”. In: Nature 457.7228, pp. 451–454. doi: 10.1038/nature07648. arXiv:
0808.0553 [astro-ph].
Popping, Gergö, Rachel S. Somerville, and Scott C. Trager (2014). “Evolution of the atomic
and molecular gas content of galaxies”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 442.3, pp. 2398–2418. issn: 0035-8711. doi: 10 . 1093 / mnras / stu991. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/442/3/2398/3590273/stu991.pdf. url:
https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stu991.
Narayanan, Desika et al. (2015). “The formation of submillimetre-bright galaxies from gas
infall over a billion years”. In: Nature 525.7570, pp. 496–499. doi: 10.1038/nature15383.
arXiv: 1509.06377 [astro-ph.GA].
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
57
==PAGE:66==
Tomczak, Adam R. et al. (2014). “Galaxy Stellar Mass Functions from ZFOURGE/CAN-
DELS: An Excess of Low-mass Galaxies since z = 2 and the Rapid Buildup of Quiescent
Galaxies”. In: APJ 783.2, 85, p. 85. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/783/2/85. arXiv: 1309.5972
[astro-ph.CO].
Gobat, R. et al. (2020). “The evolution of the gas fraction of quiescent galaxies modeled
as a consequence of their creation rate”. In: AAP 644, L7, p. L7. doi: 10.1051/0004-
6361/202039593. arXiv: 2011.10547 [astro-ph.GA].
Williams, Christina C. et al. (2021). “ALMA Measures Rapidly Depleted Molecular Gas
Reservoirs in Massive Quiescent Galaxies at z ￿1.5”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 908.1,
p. 54. issn: 1538-4357. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abcbf6. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4357/abcbf6.
Grogin, Norman A. et al. (2011). “CANDELS: The Cosmic Assembly Near-infrared Deep
Extragalactic Legacy Survey”. In: APJS 197.2, 35, p. 35. doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/197/
2/35. arXiv: 1105.3753 [astro-ph.CO].
Franco, M. et al. (2018). “GOODS-ALMA: 1.1 mm galaxy survey. I. Source catalog and
optically dark galaxies”. In: AAP 620, A152, A152. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201832928.
arXiv: 1803.00157 [astro-ph.GA].
Franco, M. et al. (2020a). “GOODS-ALMA: The slow downfall of star formation in z =
2-3 massive galaxies”. In: AAP 643, A30, A30. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038312.
arXiv: 2005.03043 [astro-ph.GA].
Franco, M. et al. (2020b). “GOODS-ALMA: Using IRAC and VLA to probe fainter mil-
limeter galaxies”. In: AAP 643, A53, A53. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038310. arXiv:
2005.03040 [astro-ph.GA].
Gavazzi, G., D. Pierini, and A. Boselli (1996). “The phenomenology of disk galaxies.” In:
AAP 312, pp. 397–408.
Brammer, Gabriel B., Pieter G. van Dokkum, and Paolo Coppi (2008). “EAZY: A Fast,
Public Photometric Redshift Code”. In: APJ 686.2, pp. 1503–1513. doi: 10.1086/591786.
arXiv: 0807.1533 [astro-ph].
Kriek, Mariska et al. (2009). “An Ultra-Deep Near-Infrared Spectrum of a Compact Qui-
escent Galaxy at z = 2.2”. In: APJ 700.1, pp. 221–231. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/700/
1/221. arXiv: 0905.1692 [astro-ph.CO].
Zhou, L. et al. (2020). “GOODS-ALMA: Optically dark ALMA galaxies shed light on a
cluster in formation at z = 3.5”. In: Astronomy & Astrophysics 642, A155. issn: 1432-
0746. doi: 10.1051/0004- 6361/202038059. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-
6361/202038059.
Astropy Collaboration et al. (2018). “The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science
Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package”. In: AJ 156.3, 123, p. 123. doi: 10.3847/
1538-3881/aabc4f. arXiv: 1801.02634 [astro-ph.IM].
Virtanen, Pauli et al. (2020). “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
in Python”. In: Nature Methods 17, pp. 261–272. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Taylor, M. B. (2005). “TOPCAT & STIL: Starlink Table/VOTable Processing Software”.
In: Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XIV. Ed. by P. Shopbell, M.
Britton, and R. Ebert. Vol. 347. Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series,
p. 29.
Kennicutt Robert C., Jr. (1998). “Star Formation in Galaxies Along the Hubble Sequence”.
In: ARAA 36, pp. 189–232. doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.36.1.189. arXiv: astro-ph/9807187
[astro-ph].
Bell, Eric F. et al. (2005). “Toward an Understanding of the Rapid Decline of the Cosmic
Star Formation Rate”. In: APJ 625.1, pp. 23–36. doi: 10.1086/429552. arXiv: astro-
ph/0502246 [astro-ph].
58
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:67==
Joye, W. A. and E. Mandel (2003). “New Features of SAOImage DS9”. In: Astronomical
Data Analysis Software and Systems XII. Ed. by H. E. Payne, R. I. Jedrzejewski, and
R. N. Hook. Vol. 295. Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, p. 489.
Casey, Caitlin M., Desika Narayanan, and Asantha Cooray (2014). “Dusty star-forming
galaxies at high redshift”. In: Physics Reports 541.2, pp. 45–161. issn: 0370-1573. doi:
10.1016/j.physrep.2014.02.009. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2014.02.009.
Donley, J. L. et al. (2012). “Identifying Luminous Active Galactic Nuclei in Deep Surveys:
Revised IRAC Selection Criteria”. In: APJ 748.2, 142, p. 142. doi: 10.1088/0004-
637X/748/2/142. arXiv: 1201.3899 [astro-ph.CO].
Madau, Piero (1995). “Radiative Transfer in a Clumpy Universe: The Colors of High-
Redshift Galaxies”. In: APJ 441, p. 18. doi: 10.1086/175332.
Chabrier, Gilles (2003). “Galactic Stellar and Substellar Initial Mass Function”. In: Publi-
cations of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 115.809, pp. 763–795. issn: 1538-3873.
doi: 10.1086/376392. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/376392.
Salpeter, Edwin E. (1955). “The Luminosity Function and Stellar Evolution.” In: APJ
121, p. 161. doi: 10.1086/145971.
Scoville, N. et al. (2016). “ISM MASSES AND THE STAR FORMATION LAW ATZ=
1 TO 6: ALMA OBSERVATIONS OF DUST CONTINUUM IN 145 GALAXIES IN
THE COSMOS SURVEY FIELD”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 820.2, p. 83. issn:
1538-4357. doi: 10.3847/0004-637x/820/2/83. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/0004-
637X/820/2/83.
Magdis, Georgios (2012). Georgios E. Magdis, Software. http://www.georgiosmagdis.com/
software/. Accessed: 2021-05-10.
Lindroos, L. et al. (2014). “Stacking of large interferometric data sets in the image- and uv-
domain – a comparative study”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
446.4, pp. 3502–3515. issn: 0035-8711. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2344. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/mnras/stu2344.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
ZFOURGE catalog additional
properties
In this appendix additional analysis carried out on the ZFOURGE survey will be shown.
Figure A.1: RA & DEC coordinates of the sources in the ZFOURGE catalog
Here it is shown the differences in the ∆MS according to the different chosen star formation
rates: SFR from the SED fitted models, SFRUV IR obtained from LIR and LUV or a hybrid
SFR which is a combination of both depending on whether a galaxy has robust detections
in the 24,100 and 160µm IR filters.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) SFR from SED fitted models
(b) SFRUV IR
(c) Hybrid SFR
Figure A.2: Plots showing the scatter of ∆MS vs redshift of the ZFOURGE catalog. The
green line represents the SFR of the main sequence calculated with equation 1.5. The red
upper and lower boundaries represent the 0.3 dex dispersion of the main sequence below
which sources can star to be considered quiescent or ongoing quenching. In cyan we can
see the galaxies identified as quiescent with the UV J selection criterion.
62
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:71==
Another method for comparing the selected quiescent sources is to portray them in the
Mstar plane. Firstly, a plot with simulated data is built, to use as a reference. In order
to build the synthetic data, for each defined redshift range, first a group of 10000 galaxies
is built whose log10(Mstar) are assigned from a random distribution ranging from 108 to
1012M⊙.
Then another 10000 sources are added to the data , whose log10(Mstar) are
assigned from a normal distribution with µ = 9.5 and σ = 0.5. We then use [Schreiber et
al., 2015] main sequence SFR calibration formula to define the SFR-Mstar main sequence
locus. The dispersion of the main sequence is obtained by adding synthetic noise to the
data which is drawn from a normal distribution with zero mean and σ = 0.3 which is the
current measured dispersion for the main sequence [Schreiber et al., 2015]. A population
of starburst galaxies is simulated following the same procedure assign Mstar but then the
SFR is calculated as 4 times the SFRMS plus a random uncertainty in order to simulate a
scatter in the starburst population, which we restrict to a 1% of the total mains sequence
population. Finally quiescent galaxies are simulated, firstly by estimating the quantity as
a fraction of the main sequence population, which varies depending on the plotted redshift
range. Then the SFR of the QG population is calculated by multiplying the SFRMS by a
random factor ranging from 1/1000 to 1/10. The results can be seen below in figure A.3.
In it we observe the position in which quiescent galaxies are relative to the main sequence
locus, so then a comparison with the actual data can be done.
Figure A.3: Mstar vs SFR diagram of simulated data. The blue curve and grey shaded area
represent the Schreiber et al., 2015 predicted MS locus with a 0.3 dex dispersion. Then
we the simulated data scattered in hexagonal bins color coded according to the number of
galaxies within the bin. In blue the main sequence galaxies and in orange the quiescent
galaxies. Finally the individual SB galaxies are plotted in red.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
63
==PAGE:72==
(a) 0.8 < z < 1.3
(b) 1.3 < z < 2.3
Figure A.4: Mstar vs SFR diagram of the ZFOURGE data. The blue curve and grey shaded
area represent the Schreiber et al., 2015 predicted MS locus with a 0.3 dex dispersion. The
orange sources represent the UV J selected sources. The rest of the galaxies are plotted
in blue.
It is observed that the scarce amount of QG is located below the main sequence, similarly
to what we see in figure A.3. There is, though a small offset between the bulk of the rest of
galaxies and the defined main sequence area. However the issue that arises in these plots is
the great amount of low Mstar galaxies that have very low predicted star formation rates.
Why do they have such low SFR and are not considered quiescent by the UV J color-color
criterion? This uncertainty in the SFR is then acknowledged for the performed analysis.
64
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
EAZY
Here we can see the settings that were utilized for the EAZY run.
Figure B.1: Settings used for the EAZY run
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
65
==PAGE:74==
The other set of specifications that are not defined in the Jupyter cell above are set to the
default state.
In a similar fashion to appendix A, the EAZY catalog data is plotted on the Mstar-SFR
plane and see its relative position to the main sequence predicted SFR and observe whether
the main bulk of galaxies remains within the locus of the main sequence. Also the position
of UV J selected QG in the plot will help assessing the quality of the quiescent selection
and whether it is contaminated by star forming galaxies.
(a) 0.8 < z < 1.3
(b) 1.3 < z < 2.3
Figure B.2: Mstar vs SFR diagram of the EAZY data. The blue curve and grey shaded
area represent the Schreiber et al., 2015 predicted MS locus with a 0.3 dex dispersion. The
orange sources represent the UV J selected sources. The rest of the galaxies are plotted
in blue.
The quiescent selection of galaxies seem to be well bellow the main sequence. However,
the offset seen in figure 3.15b seems to be present in this plots too. It can be observed how
66
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
==PAGE:75==
the defined main sequence locus fails to capture or encompass the bulk of non quiescent
galaxies, with a considerable amount of them found above the main sequence region. The
reason for this is still unclear, it might be due to the Mstar offset found in figure 3.13,
however, without a deeper analysis of EAZY’s procedures, the question remains unclear.
Tracing the Interstellar Medium of Quiescent Galaxies across Cosmic Time with ALMA
67
==PAGE:76==
DTU Space
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english
