==PAGE:1==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Integrating Modelica simulations in a
cloud-based BIM platform
Master's Thesis
Esben Visby Fjerbæk (s190190)
Kongens Lyngby, June 2021
==PAGE:2==
SUPERVISOR:
Christian Anker Hviid, Associate Professor
Section for Energy and Services
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 118, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
cah@byg.dtu.dk
CO-SUPERVISOR:
Kevin Michael Smith, Researcher
Section for Energy and Services
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 118, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
kevs@byg.dtu.dk
CO-SUPERVISOR:
Mikki Seidenschnur, Industrial PhD
Private & Public Buildings East, Commissioning, Indoor
Rambøll
Hannemanns Allé 53, 2300 København S
msei@ramboll.dk
CO-SUPERVISOR:
Ali Kücükavci, PhD student
Section for Energy and Services
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 118, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
alikuc@byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared between January and June 2021 at the Department of Civil
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the de­
gree Master of Science in Engineering (Architectural Engineering), MSc Eng. The project is
credited to 35 ECTS points.
Firstly, I would like to thank my two main supervisors Christian Anker Hviid and Kevin Michael
Smith for helping me through this project through numerous meetings. If other students get
the same amount of attention, I felt you gave me, I wonder how you do anything else than
supervising!
A special thanks goes out to Mikki Seidenschnur and Ali Kücükavci, who are working on the
main project that this thesis is just a small part of. By offering me a place in your office, you
not only gave me a chance to get away from my home office and keep close contact to you
during the periods where we worked closely together; you also received me as an equal,
even though you have been working on this project for years, which made me feel welcome
and comfortable with asking for your help.
Esben Visby Fjerbæk ­ s190190
Signature
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis documents the development of a toolchain, that automatically generates and
simulates models of hydronic systems based on information in building information modelling
(BIM) models. The toolchain is part of a cloud­based platform, that stores BIM models in a
database format. The toolchain can translate the BIM models in this data format to simulation
models, simulate them and send the results to the database. This allows detailed insights
into the system dynamics for part­load analyses and also serves as a way to replicate the
non­ideal behavior caused by delays in the system controls. By generating the simulation
models from the BIM database, it is ensured that the simulation models will replicate the
actual system and not inherit any assumptions or human errors usually associated to creating
complex simulation models.
Poor modelling of non­ideal behavior in heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) sys­
tems, has, by various sources, been identified as a cause for the significant gap between
predicted and measured energy consumption of buildings, since traditional simulation pro­
grams will assume ideal control and operation of HVAC systems. This causes underesti­
mated predictions of the energy consumption, and hence the toolchain aims to reduce this
gap.
The simulation models are built in Modelica, that is a highly flexible modelling language, used
across multiple domains. Since the language is purely text­based, it allows easy parsing of
any data format that includes definition of component properties. The parsing is carried out
with templates defined in the popular Python programming language. To simulate the Mod­
elica models, the commercial Modelica simulation environment Dymola is accessed through
its Python interface.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Common tools for simulating hydronic systems . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Dynamic simulation of HVAC systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
BIM to simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Aim and activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.2
Reading guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theory on Modelica
11
2.1
Equation­based modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Structure of Modelica language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Simulating Modelica models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods and approach
17
3.1
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Case description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Modelica prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Used libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Used models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Cloud­based BIM platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Data structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Developed toolchain
31
4.1
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
System extraction and data enrichment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.2
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Simulation and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Database requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Limitations and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Integration in BIM platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Application and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.1
Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5.3
Simulation speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion and further work
43
5.1
Flexibility and robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Modelica
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
49
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
vii
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
References
51
A Requirements for BIM database
55
B Prototype modelica model
59
C Code
67
D Auto­generated modelica model
85
viii
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The ever­increasing focus on energy efficiency in buildings has been present for decades,
and, for the first time, in 1998 the Danish Building Regulations specified requirements for
the yearly energy consumption in buildings. This introduced the need for reliable methods to
predict the energy performance of Danish buildings, and today methods have evolved from
simple steady­state models to complex dynamic simulations, able to predict hourly energy
consumption. The need for reliable prediction tools is seen in the “Building Energy Software
Tools Directory” provided by IBPSA­USA [1], where more than 200 tools for building energy
performance simulations (BEPS) are currently listed. The majority of these are developed
for so­called whole building simulation, where energy consumption and indoor climate are
simulated in multiple zones, but many tools for other purposes also exist.
Despite the availability of simulation tools for almost all purposes, there is often a significant
gap between the predicted and actual energy use, often called the “performance gap” [2],
with a magnitude as large as 2,5 times the predicted energy consumption [3]. Causes for
the performance gap are vast and include factors such as occupant behavior, temperature
set­points, construction errors, bad control implementation, etc. [4–8].
A significant source for the performance gap is poor commissioning1 of HVAC (Heating, Ven­
tilation and Air Conditioning) systems, which results in unexpected and non­ideal operation of
the systems. Since most simulation tools assume perfect operation, this non­ideal behavior
is not considered in many BEPS models. The effect of commissioning was studied by Mills
[9], who showed median reductions in energy consumption in new and existing buildings of
16% and 13% respectively. In other words, had the new buildings not been commissioned
correctly, a BEPS model for these buildings, assuming perfect system operation, would pre­
dict 16% lower energy usage, only due to the imperfect HVAC systems. Even after commis­
sioning there may still be non­ideal behavior under certain circumstances, and hence, the
simulation results would show even higher results.
The above considerations related to commissioning shows the need for accurate modelling
of the hydronic systems if the performance gap is to be closed. This requires sophisticated
simulation tools and detailed information of the systems. Here, the exchange of information
is crucial since small changes to any part of the system can have a big impact on the rest
of the system, and hence these changes must be communicated efficiently. This applies to
information exchange between disciplines, when, e.g. the ventilation engineer changes the
airflow and thereby the heating demand, but also between the project phases, so that design
intents, such as room temperature set­points and heating schedules, are communicated to
the commissioning team for correct implementation.
The exchange of information on building systems is done with Building Information Modelling
(BIM), which is a framework for digitalizing the building industry and managing building infor­
mation. The evolution of BIM information exchange is described in the Bew­Richards BIM
Maturity Model [10]. The model, as seen in fig. 1.1, identifies 4 levels of BIM maturity, starting
with level 0, where information exchange is done through 2D drawings and ends with level
1The process of adjusting and balancing building systems to function optimally. This should ideally be done
just before the client takes over a new building but can also happen later in the building life­cycle.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3, where models from all parties are stored in a centralized database for easy access and
integration.
Figure 1.1: Bew­Richards BIM Maturity Model. Source: [10]
• In level 0 information is produced with 2D drawings created with Computer­Aided De­
sign (CAD) software. Exchange of information is carried out by sharing paper­based
drawings between project parties.
• Level 1 includes the use of 2D CAD drawings based on project­ or company­specific
drawing standards, but the use of 3D models may also be present in this level. Infor­
mation exchange is file­based, which means that in order to access the model from
another discipline, the model file must be shared. The use of standards and digital
files makes collaboration more streamlined than in level 0, though it still depends on
manual sharing of files.
• In level 2, also known as collaborative BIM, all parties have detailed models that include
information relevant to their fields. The models may be aligned to a centralized model
containing the geometry of the building, but collaboration is still file­based. In level 2 it is
possible to export all models to a common file format, such as the Industry Foundation
Class (IFC) [11], so that all parties can see other people’s work even though they work
with different software. This is currently the aim for many companies, and has been
the standard on all public projects in the U.K. since 2016 [12].
• Level 3 envisions a centralized project model, stored in an online database, where
project members can access and modify parts of the model relevant to their project
role through a web­based platform. Changes will be accessible immediately, and built­
in conflict handling will react instantly when e.g. ducts and structural walls are colliding
or a room lacks a heat source. Different services can be integrated to allow easy pars­
ing to e.g. structural load analyses or energy performance simulations that will return
2
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
results to the database and support decision making or even automatically optimize
parameters of building components. After the design, construction, and commission­
ing phases, the platform is used as a facility management system, where all aspects of
building operation will be handled. The centralized database in level 3, should ideally
be built on open data formats to allow third parties to integrate new modules in the
project platform. While level 2 is currently being implemented in the industry, level 3
demands new workflows in project teams and therefore needs more time to be imple­
mented. However, research within tools to support level 3 is already in progress.
It should be noted that the BIM Maturity Model mainly relates to collaboration and the ex­
change of information and hence does not consider the amount of information in the models.
Thus, in levels 1­3, the same amount of information can be stored, even though a correlation
between the amount of information and BIM maturity levels may exist.
An important aspect of both levels 2 and 3 is the potential for exchanging information to
programs that can assist the design process. An example of this could be the aforementioned
hydronic simulations, but other examples could be indoor climate simulations, structural load
calculations, and daylight simulations.
In level 2 export to BEPS models is achieved by exporting the model from the native and
usually proprietary file format to an open format such as IFC. The IFC file is then imported to
the simulation program and a model file for the BEPS tool is created. The simulation results
are either read inside the BEPS tool or exported for analysis in a third software where the
design is evaluated. The responsible engineer will then implement changes in the original
BIM file.
The vision for level 3 is that instead of exporting between different formats, the platform with
the centralized BIM model will include alignments to the data format needed in the simula­
tions, whereby the models can be loaded directly into the BEPS tool. Instead of reading the
results in the simulation program or through a third tool, the results are transferred to the
database and stored for analysis inside the platform. If the BEPS tool provides optimization
suggestions, these can be implemented directly into the database. In this way, the simulation
is an integrated part of the application instead of a stand­alone program.
It is reasonable to assume that a level 3 platform with alignments to BEPS tools for hydronic
systems will provide a stepping stone for closing the performance gap related to poor com­
missioning and faulty design since all changes can be included in the simulation models with
the click of a button. In the design stage, the system can be tested before the operation phase
to make sure that controls are working and that the system is well­balanced, also under part
load. If changes are made to the systems, new simulations can be done without updating
the simulation models manually. During commissioning of the building, where the hydronic
systems are balanced and controls are adjusted, the simulations can be used as an initial
estimate for valve and pump settings, making balancing both faster and simpler, and hence
improving building energy performance. The initial estimates and potential adjustments will
then be incorporated in the BIM model for use during building operation, where the model
will act as a digital twin of the building, and locate system faults based on building sensor
data and real­time simulations.
1.2
State of the art
From the previous section, it is clear that there is a need for increased focus on simulations
of hydronic systems reduce the performance gap related to non­ideal operation, and that
integrating the simulation tool in a BIM platform will improve the interoperability and thereby
further reduce the gap.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
In this section, state­of­the­art tools used for hydronic simulations are presented in sec­
tion 1.2.1, while previous studies that have utilized dynamic simulations of hydronic systems
are presented in section 1.2.2. Lastly, in section 1.2.3, a review of previous efforts towards
using BIM as the basis for BEPS models is carried out.
1.2.1
Common tools for simulating hydronic systems
When talking about BEPS tools, many people will think about whole­building simulations,
where thermal comfort, air quality and energy consumption are predicted through tools such
as BSim [13], IDA ICE [14] and EnergyPlus [15], that are commonly used in Denmark.
While the use of the above simulations is wide­spread and often mandatory for compliance
with building codes, detailed dynamic simulations of hydronic systems, is a limited field of
work. Hence the availability of tools is considerably lower. However, some tools do allow
this, and a selection of these are presented in this section. First, steady­state tools, used
for system dimensioning are presented, followed by tools that integrate hydronic systems
in whole­building simulation tools and lastly a dedicated program for hydronic systems is
presented.
The use of software to carry out steady­state dimensioning and balancing of hydronic sys­
tems is wide­spread and supported in many tools. Examples include dedicated tools such
as HVAC Solution Pro [16] and Pipe Flow Expert [17], but also BIM­integrated tools such as
MagiCAD [18] or Revit MEP [19] are available. As mentioned, these are merely steady­state
tools, which is sufficient for designing and balancing hydronic systems. However, they do not
allow dynamic analysis of the systems and are therefore not of great interest to this project.
Apart from offering detailed simulations of multi­zone indoor climate and energy simulations,
IDA ICE also allows detailed modelling of heating plants and air handling units. This is done
through either predefined configurations or the ESBO plant module, that allows non­standard
plant configurations to be modelled. Modelling of hydronic networks with pipes, valves and
pumps is, however, not supported.
Similar to IDA ICE, the free simulation tool ESP­r [20] allows modelling of heating plants
and includes models for different flow systems, which allows for detailed modelling of both
plant and distribution network. Combined with the simulation of thermal zones, ESP­r is a
competent tool for simulating non­ideal behavior of heating systems.
IES­VE [21], a commercial BEPS tool, also allows detailed modelling of HVAC systems,
similar to ESP­r, but only through predefined configurations. Combined with an intuitive
graphical user interface (GUI), the predefined systems make the design process faster and
requires fewer skills from the user, but it reduces flexibility and means that novel designs
cannot be used.
Whereas IDA ICE, ESP­r and IES­VE are all tools for thermal zone simulation that have
”add­on” functionalities for hydronic systems, the cloud­based Hysopt tool [22] is specifically
developed for design and optimization of hydronic systems and includes both steady­state
design optimization algorithms and simulation capabilities. In 2020, it won the CIBSE Build­
ing Awards in the category ”Product or Innovation of the Year – Thermal Comfort” [23] for its
potential for energy savings in new and existing buildings.
When creating hydronic system models in Hysopt, predefined blocks with either components
or component collections, such as temperature control shunts, are used, to make the design
process fast and straightforward. Compared to IES­VE, the system configuration is a lot
more flexible, but still, the number of possible configurations is limited.
Although Hysopt is mainly developed for heating systems, a simplified room model is included
4
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
to model zone heat demand. Alternatively, heat demands generated in other simulation tools
can be imported, but system behavior will affect the room temperature in this case. Hence,
there is an integration between the room model and the hydronic systems, though it is limited
by the simplicity of the thermal zone model.
Most of the tools listed in this section have limited flexibility regarding possible configurations
of hydronic systems, since only specific configurations can be used in most of the tools.
IDA ICE has much flexibility but can only model systems on plant level, whereas IES­VE
and Hysopt have full­system modelling, including distribution networks, but lacks flexibility to
different extents. ESP­r allows for total flexibility, but only pre­defined components can be
used. This means that novel components cannot be included in the models without creating
new models in the source code.
To combat the issues with flexibility, much work towards using the multi­disciplinary modelling
language Modelica [24] for modelling of HVAC systems has been carried out over the last
15 years [8, 25–27]. A big driver in this development is the Annex 60 project in which an
extensive library for modelling of buildings and building systems, called the IBPSA library
[28], was created.
The advantage of Modelica is, that it works with object­oriented modelling, where compo­
nent models can easily be integrated into system models, making it fully flexible and allows
modelling of very complex systems. Component models are usually pre­defined and stored
in libraries for reusability, but components not present in any libraries can also be created
specifically for a project.
The basis for most modelling in Modelica, is the Modelica Standard Library (MSL), developed
by the Modelica Association, that also maintains the Modelica language [29]. This library
contains base models for problems ranging from heat transfer through fluid dynamics to
electronics, and many third­party libraries have used this library to create even more models.
The modelling of buildings and building systems in Modelica is supported by several libraries,
mainly around four libraries that are based on the previously mentioned IBPSA library; AIXLIB
[26], Buildings [30], BuildingSystems [27] and IDEAS [31]. The four libraries overlap in many
areas, but are each developed for specific purposes and since they are based in both Europe
and USA, they cater to different practices in the HVAC industry.
1.2.2
Dynamic simulation of HVAC systems
To fully motivate the use of detailed dynamic modelling of hydronic systems and to show
possible use cases, a review on previous research that has used such simulations to analyze
and optimize building systems is presented in this section.
In general, the review showed that the use of dynamic modelling of heating and cooling
systems is mainly motivated by the following three factors:
1. Modelling of complicated systems that are impossible to model in regular simulation
software [32, 33]
2. Analysis of the dynamic behavior of individual components for fault detection [34–36]
3. Optimization of control sequences and parameters [33, 36]
Though listed as three separate points, several aims can be present in the same study.
In [32], a two­pipe combined heating and cooling system operating at close to room tempera­
tures was modeled. Based on several efforts to model the system in conventional programs
as BSim and EnergyPlus, Modelica was chosen because of its ability to combine different
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
systems and model the controls detailedly. The study showed primary energy savings of
12%­18% compared to a regular four­pipe system.
In [33], the HVAC system of a floating house on a lake was analyzed. The primary heating and
cooling source, a brine­water heat pump connected to the lake, was modelled in Modelica
to minimize end energy use by optimizing control sequences. Hence, this study utilized the
flexibility of Modelica to both model complex systems and to improve control sequences.
Results for the yearly energy consumption of the heat pump varied between 509 kWh and
854 kWh depending on the control strategy.
Dai et al. [34] and Henze and Floss [35] used dynamic simulations of cooling and heating
systems, respectively, to model parameters that had previously been identified as causes of
the ”low ∆T syndrome”2. Both studies used detailed modelling of, i.a. valve characteristics
and sizes to provide insights into the dynamic behavior of systems that are usually only
observed during observation. In this way, design decisions can be based on the behavior of
the actual system instead of common ”rules of thumb”, based on previous experience with
other systems. Besides aiding the design phase, these analyses can also be done during
commissioning and operation to identify causes for malfunctioning systems.
Cockroft et al. [36] analyzed 125 combinations of common building types, heating systems
and controls in the UK to evaluate the use of dynamic simulations and found unexpected in­
sights in system dynamics that would have been impossible to find without detailed modelling
of both the heating systems and the building.
1.2.3
BIM to simulation
The use of detailed dynamic simulations of hydronic systems is limited outside academia and
research, and the design of hydronic systems is usually limited to steady­state models under
full­load conditions. This approach is simple and can be done quickly, especially by expe­
rienced engineers, without numeric simulations, thereby limiting needed computer capacity.
However, the analyses mentioned in section 1.2.2 would rarely be possible with steady­state
simulations. Especially analysis of valve sizes and characteristics will not be implemented
in steady­state calculations and will usually be handled by the designer’s experience.
The use of hydronic simulations is, however, inhibited by the amount of work needed to create
such models. Therefore, creating the models from BIM data could be an improvement of the
workflow and allow designers without detailed knowledge of simulations to test the design
under dynamic loads.
Generating BEPS models from BIM data is a field in expansion, and both BIM­ and BEPS­
software work on integrating the two. E.g. the BEPS­software IDA ICE [14] has a module to
import building geometry, work is done to do the same for BSim [13] and many companies
have created workflows for copying data from BIM­software to the Danish compliance testing
software Be18. Also energy analysis tools have been implemented into BIM tools such as
Revit, taking an opposite approach and implementing the BEPS tool inside the BIM software.
In [37] three common approaches to using BIM as an information source for BEPS have
been identified, which also reflect the examples of BSim, IDA ICE, Be18 and Revit:
1. Implementing the BEPS­tool directly in the BIM­tool or coupling the BIM Application
Programming Interface (API) to the BEPS­software. This method will usually rely on
proprietary file formats and structures of the BIM­tool. This corresponds to the Revit
integration mentioned above.
2The observation that expected temperature differences in heating and cooling systems are rarely realised.
6
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2. Exporting the information of interest to a Green Building XML (gbXML) file format, which
is loaded into the BEPS tool. This approach is sometimes used in Be18, but also
integrated Revit tools use this approach.
3. Exporting the relevant information to an IFC­file which is then loaded into the BEPS
tool. This is, for example, done in the IDA ICE BIM import function.
The generation of Modelica models from BIM data can be done by any of the three methods,
as will be seen in this section, where three tools for BIM­generated Modelica models are
described.
One tool, IFC2Modelica [37], whose system architecture is seen in fig. 1.2, uses Python
to create Modelica models directly from IFC4 files through the open­source Python module
IfcOpenShell. Classes in the IFC file are mapped to the IDEAS library based on a library
template, which is either generic or specific for the project and covers both thermal zones
and HVAC systems. As seen in fig. 1.2, the tool also includes checking the IFC file for
compliance with a set of data requirements specified in the I2M­MVD file. If the IFC file
complies with the requirements, the IFC file will be mapped to create a Modelica model. If
not, a spreadsheet with missing information is created so that the user can fill in missing
values.
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
Verification
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
Enrichment
BEPS model generation process
I2M MVD-
compliant IFC ?
No
yes
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Topology 
generation
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Mapping 
process
I2M-MVD
IFC input
Spreadsheet file
report
I2M-compliant 
IFC
Topology
Modelica BEPS model 
(.mo)
Spreadsheet file
Report updated
Library template
Ifc2Modelica
Figure 1.2: System architecture of IFC2Modelica. Source: [37]
The open­source BIM2Modelica, described in [38], uses Python to convert IFC files to Mod­
elica. In the case of district heating modeling, the data source is CityGML and/or JSON. The
tool uses the BuildingSystems library and maps the IFC classes to Modelica components
through the Code Templating Tool (CoTeTo) Python module. The tool can be used on dis­
trict, building and room level, but no cases with implementation of HVAC systems is provided.
The system architecture is seen in fig. 1.3
Revit2Modelica, described in [25], is a toolchain that creates Modelica models based on the
Revit API, which is accessed, manipulated, and converted with a C# plug­in. Revit2Modelica
maps the Revit model to a purpose­built library based on the Buildings library and the work­
flow is shown in fig. 1.4. No HVAC systems are modelled in the case studies.
The tools outlined above all take different approaches which are compared in table 1.1. While
BIM2Modelica and IFC2Modelica correspond to category 3, Revit2Modelica is in category 1
and relies heavily on proprietary software versions, meaning that if the Revit API is changed,
significant changes in the C# code must be done, making the tool vulnerable to changes in
new software versions. The tools in category 3 are less vulnerable, as changes to the IFC
standard made by the buildingSMART alliance are in general well­documented and indepen­
dent of software and versions. For example, Revit does not allow opening files from a more
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Generator 3 D
Generator 1 D
Generator 0 D
Building data model
Data sources
Data mapper
Template based 
code generator 
IFC
JSON
MySQL
Database
Generated models
Building model
Room model
District model
Geometry
Topology
Construction
Ambient data
Building use
Type A
Type B
Type D
CityGML
Type C
CoTeTo
Figure 1.3: System architecture of BIM2Modelica. Source: [38]
Figure 1.4: Workflow of Revit2Modelica. Source: [25]
8
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
recent version in an older version of the program, whereas newer versions of Revit can still
export to older IFC formats.
Tool
IFC2Modelica
BIM2Modelica
Revit2Modelica
Category
3
3
1
Language
Python
Python
C#
Data source
IFC
IFC
Revit
HVAC systems
Yes
No
No
Open­source
No
Yes
No
Modelica library
IDEAS
Building Systems
Buildings
Reference
[37]
[38]
[25]
Table 1.1: Comparison of three tools for BIM­generated Modelica models.
All three tools rely on the exchange of files to work and only Revit2Modelica returns the
results to the BIM tool. Hence, all these tools belong in the BIM maturity level 2, even though
Revit2Modelica comes close to level 3. Only one of the tools specifically used a case study
including HVAC systems, whereas the others mainly focused on simulation of thermal zones.
The state of the art study proves that there is a gap in the research regarding database BIM
and simulation models of hydronic systems and that detailed dynamic simulations of hydronic
systems can provide insights that are difficult to identify without dynamic analyses. Hence,
in DTU work towards development of a web­based platform for centralized modelling of flow
systems is done. The platform aims to support late design, commissioning and operational
diagnostics through the use of different design and BEPS tools, including Modelica.
1.3
Aim and activities
Based on the previous sections, the aim is to create a toolchain that links data for hydronic
systems, defined in the previously described online centralized database, and simulations in
Modelica.
The research questions are as follows:
1. Is it possible to automatically generate and simulate Modelica HVAC models from a
cloud­based BIM database containing information on HVAC systems?
2. Is it possible to integrate pt. 1 in a web­based platform and return results for subsequent
analysis and optimization?
1.3.1
Scope
The following points have not been considered in the work of this study, due to limitations on
time and access to resources:
• The focus of the study was heating systems since it was the only system available in
the database format. Hence, generic ventilation systems and rooms have been used.
• Database structure and data querying has not been handled within this study.
• Actual analyses of heating system design have not been considered and are only briefly
covered to show the potential of dynamic simulations.
• Only BIM models with a high level of detail have been considered for the toolchain.
1.3.2
Reading guide
Following the introduction in chapter 1, chapter 2 gives an introduction to the Modelica lan­
guage, equation­based modeling, and the simulation procedure.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
In chapter 3, the approach and methods used in the thesis are described. Here, the case
study used for testing the toolchain is described, alongside a prototype Modelica model of
the case study, used to gain knowledge on Modelica and to decide on the component models
used for modelling. Chapter 3 ends with describing the BIM platform in which the toolchain
is built and the data structure of the database.
Chapter 4 describes the developed toolchain. It begins with an overview of the toolchain’s
system architecture and a thorough description of the different processes in it. Afterwards,
requirements for the database are listed, followed by a brief description of the limitations and
assumptions. Also the integration into the BIM platform is described, before the final section
in the chapter, section 4.5, evaluates the toolchain by testing it on the case study. Here,
common results are shown, and a brief presentation of the simulation speed is made.
Chapter 5 provides a discussion of the toolchain and its usability together with an evaluation
of Modelica as a tool for simulating hydronic systems. Future work required to overcome
some of the limitations and assumptions are discussed throughout the chapter.
Chapter 6 concludes and summarizes the work.
Since the aim of this thesis is to create a piece of software, much of the work during the project
consisted of writing Python code. While the written code is the core of the work, the aim of
the report is to simplify the code so that readers without much knowledge on programming
will also benefit from the report. This means that whenever segments of code are presented
in so­called listings, some parts of the code may have been intentionally left out to simplify
the code segment. This is done to draw the focus on the main functions of the presented
code instead of secondary functions and variables. In appendix C, all code related to the
toolchain is included without any modifications. Comments are included in the main parts of
the code to describe the functionality of the individual parts of the code. Along with the report,
a digital copy of the code has also been distributed. It should be noted that the digital form of
the code needs modifications, if it is to be run as stand­alone, since it is normally integrated
in a larger platform.
10
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:19==
2
Theory on Modelica
Since the Modelica language has been chosen as the superior choice for BIM­generated
BEPS models, this chapter will introduce the language, the concept of equation­based mod­
eling and the libraries and models used in the toolchain.
The Modelica Language, developed by the Modelica Association [29] since 1997, is an
equation­based (see section 2.1) modeling language, used in multiple engineering disci­
plines. The language is object­oriented, meaning that model creation is done by connect­
ing predefined reusable component models to create complex multi­system models. The
free open­source Modelica Standard Library, also maintained by the Modelica Association,
is widely used and includes models applicable to a wide range of engineering problems, in­
cluding heat transfer, fluid dynamics, electronics, etc. The use of libraries is described in
section 3.2.1.
The object­oriented nature of Modelica makes it very flexible, since complex systems can be
created by building the system bottom­up from the component models defined in libraries
to the full system, consisting of smaller subsystems, as illustrated in fig. 2.1. Here, the
bottom­up modelling approach is depicted. The modelling starts by creating component
models, that describe the physical behavior of physical components in the systems, e.g. the
flow characteristics for a valve or the heat output from a radiator. These components are
usually built from partial models that each describe one aspect of the component behavior.
By combining the component models, larger subsystem models, such as a radiator loop,
can be created. By combining these subsystems, models that describe complete systems,
e.g. a heating system, can be created. The system models may also be combined to create
multi­system models to analyze multiple systems and their interaction.
Component 
models
Subsystem 
models
System 
models
Valve
Radiator
Pipe
Pump
Radiator 
loop
Floor 
heating loop
DHW 
loop
Heating system
Cooling system
Figure 2.1: System modelling in Modelica
Usually, component models are defined in libraries that collect models for specific disciplines,
such as HVAC, since they are used multiple times, across projects. Subsystem and system
models are, by contrast, usually created specifically for a project. However, it may be that
commonly used subsystem models are also saved as reusable models in libraries, since it
will simplify the model creation process.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY ON MODELICA
2.1
Equation-based modeling
To understand the concept of equation­based (or acausal) modeling, it is needed to define
its opposite; causal modeling. Here, equations in a model are defined in series and causality
between variables and equations is implied. If, for example, the transmission loss through a
wall, Φt, was to be calculated, the following series of equations would have to be performed
in causal modeling:
U = 0.5 W/(m2 K)
A = 25 m2
∆T = 25 °C
Φt = U · A · ∆T
(2.1)
= 312.5 W
In this example, the heat transfer coefficient, U, the area A and the temperature difference,
∆T, would have to be specified to calculate the transmission loss. If any of these variables
are missing, the equations will be useless.
However, there may be situations where the transmission loss is known, and e.g. the heat
transfer coefficient is of interest. In such cases, in causal modelling languages, a new se­
ries of equations must be created. In equation­based or acausal modelling, however, only
eq. (2.1) must be specified, and as long as there are only one unknown, all variables can be
deduced from the equation.
Naturally, for a program to simulate the models, a set of causal equations must be present,
but this is only created after the models have been defined. In this step, the models are
translated from Modelica language and a set of causal equations are established.
This makes acausal modelling more flexible to different system since it can be unclear which
factors cause the change. Another example could be the flow through a pipe; here, it is not
always clear whether the flow rate causes a pressure difference or the pressure difference
causes the flow. In causal modelling, this should be stated, but in acausal or equation­based
modelling, it is irrelevant and will be handled in the model translation.
Also, the acausal modelling practice, provides a solid basis for the object­oriented approach
of Modelica, since causality is not implied in the models. Hence, a single model can be used
in several applications, no matter which variable is unknown.
2.2
Structure of Modelica language
Whether modelling large systems or single components, the structure of the Modelica model
is the same, and follows the syntax and structure of the Modelica language, which will be
covered in this section. Hence, there is no difference between reusable component models,
such as a model for a valve, and specific models for a whole building or a district heating
network. To illustrate the structure of such models, the simple first­order differential equation
in eq. (2.2) is considered. This example is adapted from Tiller [39].
dx
dt = (1 −x)
(2.2)
In Modelica language, eq. (2.2) will look like listing 2.1:
12
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY ON MODELICA
model FirstOrder
Real x;
equation
der(x) = 1-x;
end FirstOrder;
Listing 2.1: Modelica model of a first­order differential equation.
The first line of code, model FirstOrder, states that the class is a model with the name
FirstOrder. Other class types could be package, connector, function, etc. depending
on the use of the class. The class type model is the most commonly used to describe the
physical behavior of components.
Between the model and equation statement, all variables are defined. In this example, only
one variable is defined, and since it is unknown, the only thing needed is instantiating the
variable. The prefix Real states that the type of the variable is a real number. Other built­in
types include Integer, Boolean and Boolean, but the type prefix can also define the unit of
the variable.
The term equation states that the following lines are the physical equations that describe the
model’s behavior. In this example, eq. (2.2) is the only equation that needs to be described.
This is done with the term der(x), which is a built­in function that returns the time derivative
of x.
Complex models that reuse other models from libraries such as Modelica Standard Library
or Buildings are in principle built like the one described above. Components are instantiated
as variables, and the type prefix will refer to a pre­defined class.
To exemplify this, a model with a radiator and a valve, as seen in fig. 2.2 is considered.
To allow for reuse of the class in combination with other models, three ports have been
implemented; two fluid ports to connect the model to the heating system and one heat port
to connect the model to e.g. a room. A model like this could be relevant in many situations,
since radiator valves are typically considered a part of the radiator.
radiator
valve
M
fluidPort_in
fluidPort_out
heatPort
Figure 2.2: Graphical representation of a Modelica model combining a radiator and a valve.
The model from fig. 2.2 expressed in Modelica language is seen in listing 2.2. As for the
FirstOrder model, the first line states the class type and the name. Between the model and
equation statements, the components are instantiated as variables. Instead of the prefix
Real, that defines a real number variable, the first component has the type Buildings.-
Fluid.HeatExchangers.Radiators.RadiatorEN442_2. This long prefix means that the com­
ponent is a radiator model defined in the Buildings library. Most libraries are hierarchically
organized, where dots in the name indicate a nested subpackage to the library. Hence the
RadiatorEN442_2 model is in the subpackage Radiators, which, in turn, is in the HeatEx­
changers subpackage of the Fluid package.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY ON MODELICA
model ExampleRadiator
Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.Radiators.RadiatorEN442_2 radiator;
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear valve;
Modelica.Fluid.Interfaces.FluidPort_a fluidPort_in;
Modelica.Fluid.Interfaces.FluidPort_b fluidPort_out;
Modelica.Thermal.HeatTransfer.Interfaces.HeatPort_a heatPort;
equation
connect(radiator.port_a, valve.port_b);
connect(fluidPort_out, radiator.port_b);
connect(fluidPort_in, valve.port_a);
connect(radiator.heatPortCon, heatPort);
connect(radiator.heatPortRad, heatPort);
end ExampleRadiator;
Listing 2.2: Text representation of fig. 2.2.
The valve defined in line 3 of listing 2.2 also refers to a model in the Buildings library, whereas
the three ports, defined in line 4­6 are referencing connectors from the Modelica Standard
Library (MSL).
In the equation part, no actual equations are present, since these are all defined in the individ­
ual models and instead the components have been connected with the connect statement.
As an example the connect(radiator.port_a, valve.port_b) equation states that port
a of the radiator and port b of the valve are connected. port_a and port_b are common
names for ports and under nominal conditions, they usually denote input and output ports,
respectively. Hence, the flow will move from the valve to the radiator. Each connect­term in
listing 2.2 corresponds to a blue or red line connecting the components in fig. 2.2. When all
components have been connected, this enables Modelica to setup a set of n equations with
n unknowns and solve it numerically.
2.3
Simulating Modelica models
Simulation of Modelica models is handled by many different simulation environments, both
available as commercial and free software. Some of these, e.g. Dymola or OpenModelica,
supports viewing the models in a graphical interface and show results. In contrast, others,
such as the free but discontinued JModelica, only support simulation through a Python inter­
face.
The simulation procedure is split into two steps: In the first step, translation, the Modelica
models are translated from Modelica language to C code to produce an executable program.
During simulation, the executable C code is accessed by a solver algorithm, which defines
the numerical methods being used.
Some of the most common solvers are DASSL and LSODAR that both base their solution
estimates on multiple previous steps and have variable step size. This provides good esti­
mates for the solution, but means that they are vulnerable to discontinuities in the system,
since they have to ”restart” at all discontinuities. So, for example, if a system includes many
on/off controllers, that cause so­called state events, where the solution changes in a discon­
tinuous manner, the use of these multi­step algorithms may cause long computation times.
In such cases, the use of single­step algorithms, which only consider one previous step,
can be used. Here, a common choice is the Radau IIa, that also uses variable step sizes.
Also methods with fixed step length exist, though they are rarely used. A comparison of a
selection of algorithms, is found in table 2.1.
14
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY ON MODELICA
Algorithm
Order
Method
Step size
LSODAR
Variable
Multi­step
Variable
DASSL
Variable
Multi­step
Variable
Radau IIa
5
Single­step
Variable
Cvode13
Variable
Multi­step
Variable
Euler
1
Single­step
Fixed
Rkfix4
4
Single­step
Fixed
Table 2.1: Comparison of solver algorithms. Source: Adapted from [40]
In the variable step size algorithms, the step size depends on the estimated error of the
solution. Therefore, a tolerance for the estimated error of the solution is specified to tell the
algorithm, when the step size is sufficiently small. The default used by both Dymola and
OpenModelica is 0.0001, which will also be the default value of the toolchain.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY ON MODELICA
16
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:25==
3
Methods and approach
This chapter aims to illustrate the work carried out in this project towards creating a functional
toolchain that auto­generates Modelica models from BIM models stored in a cloud­based BIM
database. The main parts of the work are listed below:
1. Finding a case study to use for testing the toolchain and learning Modelica. No real
cases with the needed detail level were found. The case is reported in section 3.1.1.
2. Manual creation of a prototype Modelica model for the case study presented in sec­
tion 3.1.1. This provided general knowledge on Modelica and insight into the suitable
component models for the system, including the needed information regarding compo­
nents. This served as the basis for the database requirements described in appendix A.
3. Development of the toolchain in Python. As it is an initial proposition for such a tool,
the focus was on replicating the prototype model based on the data format of the case
study. The following points were larger parts of the creation process. The toolchain is
described in details in chapter 4.
(a) Creation of the custom Modelica library ToolchainLib that is used for certain com­
ponent types in the toolchain.
(b) Mapping of system components through Python templates.
(c) Creating a Python template for connecting the Modelica component models.
(d) Setting up the simulations to run automatically by interfacing Dymola through
Python.
(e) Setting up a script to load results and return the needed results based on the
component type.
4. Implementation of the toolchain in the cloud­based BIM platform through an API to
establish a connection between the database and the toolchain.
5. Testing the toolchain on the case study and analyzing the results to evaluate whether
the simulation results are realistic.
The work is described in the following sections, starting with a description of the case study
in section 3.1, followed by description of the prototype model and the Modelica models and
libraries used in the the prototype model and toolchain in section 3.2. In section 3.3, the
cloud­based BIM platform, in which the toolchain is integrated is introduced to describe the
context of the toolchain. The toolchain and the testing is described in chapter 4.
3.1
Case study
To learn the basics of Modelica and provide a test case for the toolchain, a case study was
used for creating a prototype Modelica model and for testing the toolchain. To make sure
that the case study can be used with the toolchain, it should ideally:
• contain 5­10 component types typically found in hydronic systems,
• be well­documented in a BIM model with a high level of detail (LOD),
• have a low complexity level,
• be a heating or cooling system,
• have been analyzed in previous studies.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
In reality, finding a case study that complied with all the above requirements proved practically
impossible. While many case studies with detailed analysis of hydronic systems were found
(some of them described in section 1.2.2), few of these provided enough information on
the systems to model them in Modelica, and hence find associated BIM models. Few BIM
models were found, but none had the needed LOD to carry out simulations and were usually
too complicated.
Because of the difficulties of finding case studies, a case study already implemented in the
Virtual Commissioning (VC) platform was picked, since it had already been imported to the
correct data format and contained enough information to model it in Modelica. The case study
does not depict a real system, since it is fabricated as a testing case for the VC platform, but
it is designed to reflect common practices in heating system design and has relatively low
complexity. Thereby it satisfies four of the five criteria listed above.
3.1.1
Case description
The case used for testing and developing the toolchain is a generic heating system with a
radiator and a heating coil in an air handling unit in separate loops, as seen in fig. 3.1. A 3D
view of the system can be seen in fig. 3.2. The radiator is heating a room (see section 3.1.1)
and the heating coil is heating the room supply air, directly from the outside.
+
Heat
source
Heating coil
Radiator
Main Pump
Secondary
Pump
Pump
Balancing valve
Check valve
M
Motorized control valve
Room
Heating supply
Heating return
Ventilation
Outdoor
Figure 3.1: Diagram of the heating system used in the evaluation study
The pumps are operated with constant speed to simplify the case, although pumps are usu­
ally controlled for constant or proportional pressure. The radiator circuit is controlled by a
thermostatic radiator valve (TRV), which is not drawn in fig. 3.1, since it is considered a part
of the radiator.
The heating coil output is controlled by a mixing shunt that decreases the supply temperature
at lower heat demand by closing a motorized control valve, controlled with a PI­controller.
18
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
On both strings balancing valves on the return pipes balance the flow between the two strings.
The system is connected by a generic heat source with a fixed temperature of 70 °C, which
is not modeled in detail.
Figure 3.2: 3D­view of heating system evaluation case
Room
Even though the focus of this project is to simulate heating systems it is necessary to connect
the system to a thermal model of a room, to simulate the dynamic behavior of the systems
accurately. The room is 30 m2, has a height of 3 m and a south­facing window of 4 m2. All
four walls are exterior walls, whereas the floor and ceiling are considered adiabatic surfaces,
meaning no heat loss through these constructions. There is one window of 4 m2 on the south­
facing wall, and a simple 3D model of the room and its dimensions is found in Figure 3.3.
The walls have a U­value of 0.27 W/(m2 K) and the windows are generic two­layer windows
with a Uw­value (for a reference window) of 1.31 W/(m2 K) and a g­value of 0.73.
Figure 3.3: Dimensions of room used in the evaluation study
Design conditions
The room volume (as described in section 3.1.1) is 90 m3 and an air change rate of 1 h−1 is
assumed, which gives a supply air flow of 90 m3/h through the heating coil.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
For this case study, the supply temperature is fixed at 18 °C, and the design outdoor tem­
perature is ­10 °C, resulting in a design heat flow for the heating coil of 843 W, as seen in
eq. (3.1).
Φv = q · ρ · c · ∆T
(3.1)
= 90 m3 h−1
3600 s h−1 · 1.2 kg m−3 · 1003 J kg−1 K−1 · −28 K
= −843 W
where
Φv
is the heat flow of the heating coil
q
is the volume flow rate
ρ
is the density of air
c
is the specific heat capacity of air
∆T
is the difference between inlet and outlet temperature of the air
The design heat loss of the room is calculated based on DS 418 [41], though, for simplicity,
only transmission losses from walls and windows have been considered. This results in a
total design heat loss of 844 W as seen in eq. (3.2):
Φt = (Uwindow · Awindow + Uwall · Awall) · (Tin,dim −Text,dim)
(3.2)
=
(
1.31 W/(m2 K) · 4 m2 + 0.27 W/(m2 K) · 86 m2)
· (20 °C −(−12 °C))
= 28.5 W/K · −32 °C
= −911 W
where
Φt
is the transmission loss
U
is the heat conductance of the building parts
A
is the area of the building parts
Tin,dim
is the inside design temperature
Text,dim
is the external design temperature
Dimensioning of components
Since the case study is not based on an actual building, component dimensions must be
specified for the system to give valid results. In principle, random dimensions could be used,
but not only would this cause pointless results, it would also introduce risks of system oscilla­
tion, which can cause longer simulation times. In the first two sections, the size of the radiator
and heating coil is found, and in the last section, pipes, valves and pumps are dimensioned.
Dimensioning of pipes, valves and pumps is done through the hydronic systems optimization
tool Hysopt since it provides useful algorithms for steady­state design. Hence, the design
should resemble that done in a regular design process or maybe even perform better.
Radiator
The size of the radiator was chosen to match the design heat loss calculated in
section 3.1.1. This is covered by a Thermrad radiator of 400 mm height and 1400 mm length.
This radiator has a heat flux of 1681 W at a temperature set of 75/65/20°C, corresponding to
974 W at 70/40/20°C, which gives a 7% safety margin.
Heating coil
The chosen heat exchanger is an Alnor HDW­100 that has a heat flow of
1.06 kW under nominal conditions. The nominal temperatures and flow are found in table 3.1.
Though the nominal conditions are not similar to the design conditions, it is clear that this heat
exchanger is suitable for the design conditions.
20
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
Tair,in
Tair,out
Twater,in
Twater,out
Φ
qair
qwater
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
[kW]
[m3/h]
[l/s]
0
28.7
60
40
1.06
110
0.01
Table 3.1: Nominal conditions for the HDW­100 heat exchanger
Pumps, pipes and valves
To provide suitable values for pump characteristics, pipe diam­
eters, valve setting, etc., a system model has been created in the hydronic systems optimiza­
tion software Hysopt [22], which is a tool to model, design and simulate hydronic systems.
Even though it only supports specific system configurations and does not support integration
of the ventilation system, it serves as a good tool for dimensioning components through a set
of design and optimization algorithms. The system as modelled in Hysopt is seen in fig. 3.4.
Since Hysopt does not support ventilation systems, the heating coil is modeled as a radiator
with an output, defined by the heating coil controls, marked by a grey box. The radiator
is connected to a simple room model to model dynamical behavior and is controlled by a
thermostatic valve.
The optimization algorithm ”Optimize system components” in the tool has been used for
dimensioning.
Figure 3.4: Hysopt model of the evaluation case
3.2
Modelica prototype
To gain knowledge on the Modelica language, the modelling process and the required in­
formation to model hydronic systems, a prototype Modelica model of the case study was
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
created manually before developing the toolchain.
The model is based on the Buildings library [30], ToolchainLib and the Modelica Standard
Library (MSL), all described in section 3.2.1. Figure 3.5 shows the system as modeled in
Modelica, and the text version of the model can be found in appendix B and the model files
are distributed along with the report. A description of the component models can be found
in section 3.2.2.
pumMain
regValA
M
tee1
tee2
pipSup
10
pipRet
10
pipSupA2
10
pipRetA2
10
pipRetA1
10
pipSupA1
10
plant
regValA1
M
regValA2
M
room
tee4
tee3
pumSecondary
cheValA2
regValA21
M
heaCoi
tempConVal
M
radiator
Figure 3.5: Graphical representation of the evaluation case Modelica model
On the left side of fig. 3.5, the system is connected to a generic heat source providing a
constant supply temperature defined in the parameters. This could be interpreted as e.g,
a district heating connection or a boiler but could also be defined in greater detail. In this
example, the set­point for the supply temperature is fixed, but it could also be defined by e.g.
a weather compensation curve.
22
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
All bends were disregarded to simplify the model creation process, and instead, pipe resis­
tances were doubled.
3.2.1
Used libraries
The Buildings library Wetter et al. [30], developed by the Simulation Research Group at
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (SRG LBNL) has primarily been used for modelling
the case study. The library is based on the Annex 60/IBPSA project 1 library described
by Wetter and Treeck [28] and includes models for HVAC systems, controls, heat transfer,
multizone airflow, etc. The library was chosen due to the extensive documentation provided
by SRG LBNL and promising future projects such as Spawn of Energyplus (SoE) that aims
to combine thermal zone simulations from EnergyPlus with Modelica simulations. The library
has been extensively tested and validated as described in various papers [30, 42, 43].
As with other libraries, Buildings is hierarchically organized and groups classes in 16 pack­
ages of which eight packages relevant to this thesis are described in table 3.2.
Package
Description
Airflow
Contains models of airflow between thermal zones
BoundaryConditions
Contains models that calculate external conditions
based on weather data
Controls
Contains models used for control systems such as
PID­controllers
Fluid
Contains models of fluid system components
HeatTransfer
Contains models for heat transfer in the form of
conduction, convection and radiation
Media
Contains models for different media, such as air,
water and refrigerants
Occupants
Contains models for occupant behavior
ThermalZones
Contains simplified and detailed models for ther­
mal zones
Table 3.2: Description of selected packages of Buildings Modelica library
The package with the most relevance to this thesis is the Fluid package, which contains
models for flow system components, and most of the models used in this study are from this
package. This includes radiators, valves, pumps, etc., and a full list of the Modelica models
used in the toolchain is found in section 4.1.2.
ToolchainLib library
In order to create auto­generated models through the toolchain, the library, ToolchainLib, has
been built specifically for this project. The library extends specific models from the Buildings
library to implement default controls (as in the MotorValve model) and group models for
simpler mapping (as in the Radiator model). An overview of the models can be found in
table 3.3 and all models are described in section 3.2.2 along with the models employed from
the Buildings library.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
Model
Description
PumpConstantPressure
Model for pumps controlled for constant pres­
sure
PumpConstantSpeed
Model for pumps with constant speed
Radiator
Model of radiator including thermostat
MotorValve
Motorized control valve including PI controller
GenericPlant
Generic heat source
Table 3.3: Models in the ToolchainLib library
3.2.2
Used models
From Buildings and ToolchainLib several models were used, and table 3.4 shows which
models were used for the components. The rest of this section will describe the models in
detail.
Component
Class
Main pump
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure
Secondary pump
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure
Pipes
FixedResistances.Pipe*
Tees
FixedResistances.Junction*
Check valve
FixedResistances.CheckValve*
Balancing valves
Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear*
Radiator
ToolchainLib.Radiator
Heating coil
HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow*
Motorized control valve
ToolchainLib.MotorValve
Heat source
ToolchainLib.GenericPlant
Room
ToolchainLib.Room
Table 3.4: Models used in the prototype model. *In Buildings.Fluid package
Pumps were modeled with the class ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed that combines the
SpeedControlled_y pump model from the Buildings library with a constant speed input signal
between 0 and 1. The pressure curve of the pump is specified in the pump model’s proper­
ties for pump characteristics. In case the pump operates with constant pressure, the class
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure can be used.
pumSpeed
k=speed
pum
P
y_actual
M
y
port_a
port_b
Figure 3.6: Graphical representation of ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed
Pipes were modeled as the FixedResistances.Pipe class that takes the pipe diameter and
length as input and calculates the pressure drop at the nominal flow rate. This pressure drop
24
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
is then used to calculate a fixed flow coefficient, k, used to calculate the flow rate outside
nominal conditions through eq. (3.3):
m = k ·
√
∆p
(3.3)
To account for bends and other fittings, the model allows a factor for multiplication of the flow
coefficient, which was set to 2 in the prototype model.
Besides pressure drop, thermal characteristics can be specified by giving properties for thick­
ness and thermal conductivity of the pipe’s insulation layer. This is only used if the pipes are
connected to a heat sink such as a room or the outside.
Tees were modeled with the FixedResistances.Junction class. This takes a manual entry
of nominal pressure loss and nominal mass flow rate at the three ports to calculate flow
resistances as for the pipe model.
trv
M
%
rad
conP
P
K
temp
tempSetPoint
k=273.15 + tempSP
supply_port
heatPort
return_port
Figure 3.7: Graphical representation of the ToolchainLib.Radiator model
The radiator was modeled with the ToolchainLib.Radiator class, that combines the Radiator­
EN442_2 from the Buildings library with a TRV valve. The radiator model uses nominal
parameters for power, Φ, supply temperature, Ts, return temperature, Tr, room air temper­
ature, Ti, and room radiative temperature, Trad to calculate heat flow at different operating
conditions with eqs. (3.4) and (3.5), according to the EN442­2 norm. These parameters are
available from most manufacturers. The ToolchainLib.Radiator model can be seen in fig. 3.7.
Here, it is seen that the radiator thermostat (TRV) is modeled as a proportional controller with
a proportional band of 0.5 K, which is a typical value [44]. The TRV measures the room tem­
perature and compares it to a fixed setpoint. The radiator model is connected to pipes and
fittings with the supply­ and return port connectors and to the room through the heat port.
Φ = Φ0
( ∆Tm
∆Tm,0
)n
(3.4)
∆Tm =
Ts −Tr
ln (Ts −Ti) −ln (Tr −Ti)
(3.5)
where
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
Φ
is the actual heating output
Φ0
is the heating output under nominal conditions
∆Tm
is the actual logarithmic mean temperature difference
∆Tm,0
is the logarithmic mean temperature difference under nominal conditions
n
is the dimensionless radiator factor (∼1.3)
Ts
is the radiator supply temperature
Tr
is the radiator return temperature
Ti
is the indoor room temperature
The heating coil was modeled with the class HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow, which
is a model of a counter flow heat exchanger, taking arguments for nominal conditions of
heat flow of both mediums. From the nominal output, Φnominal and the nominal temperature
set of both mediums, the thermal conductance of the heating coil, UA, which is given as a
parameter, can be calculated by the following equation where ∆TA and ∆TB are the tem­
perature differences in each end of the heat exchanger and ∆TLM is the logarithmic mean
temperature difference between the two sides.
UAnominal = Φnominal
∆TLM
(3.6)
∆TLM =
∆TA −∆TB
ln ∆TA −ln ∆TB
(3.7)
Like the radiator, the heating coil is connected to the supply duct for the room described in
section 3.2.2 to model dynamic behavior correctly. The coil is controlled by a fixed set­point
for the supply temperature,but with few modifications, this set­point could be controlled by
the room temperature in a cascade control scheme.
The control valve for the heating coil is modeled with the ToolchainLib.MotorValve model,
which combines a valve with an equal­percentage opening characteristic with a PI­controller
and a setpoint. Hence, the measured supply temperature of the ventilation system is given
as input to the control valve, as seen in fig. 3.8.
controlValve
M
%
conPI
PI
setPoint
k=273.15 + tempSP
port_a
port_b
controlInput
Figure 3.8: Graphical representation of the ToolchainLib.MotorValve model
The heat source was modeled with the ToolchainLib.GenericPlant class, that defines a heat
source with a constant supply temperature. The model, as seen in fig. 3.9, uses the Boundary
class from Buildings, which simply provides a source with a prescribed temperature and
pressure. The temperature is controlled by the constant temSetPoint, which can be replaced
26
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
with either a schedule for lower temperatures during night or weather compensation curves.
T
bou
temSetPoint
k=273.15 + setpoint
port_a
port_b
Figure 3.9: Graphical representation of the ToolchainLib.GenericPlant model
The room is modeled with the ToolchainLib.Room model, which implements the thermal
zone model MixedAir from the Buildings library, connects it to the ventilation system and de­
fines constructions parameters and weather data, as seen in fig. 3.10. The glaSys defines the
composition of the windows and matLayExt defines the layers in the opaque constructions.
room
q
boundary
air
radiation
surface
uWin
uSha
weaDat
out
fanSup
P
y_actual
m_f low
fanRet
P
y_actual
m_f low
matLayExt
glaSys
senTem
T
weaBus
weaBus
weaBus
port_vent_warm
port_vent_cold
heatPort
weaBus
Figure 3.10: Graphical representation of the ToolchainLib.Room model
The MixedAir model from the Buildings library, described by Wetter et al. [43], is a detailed
thermal zone model, that calculates heat exchange to the environment and other thermal
zones from its constructions through convection, conduction, infrared radiation and solar
radiation. The most critical functionalities will be described in simple terms, and for detailed
information about other aspects, refer to [42, 43].
Heat conduction through opaque constructions is modeled as a one­dimensional heat flow,
using finite volume methods for each layer to compute the heat distribution in the construc­
tion.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
Windows are modeled with a layer­by­layer model, that computes heat conduction and solar
radiation from the window specification that defines the properties of each pane and the gas
fillings between the panes. This means that common window properties, such as Ug­, Uw­
and g­values are not explicitly defined.
The external conditions are imported through the weather data classes, that import weather
data in the TMY3 format [45] and extract all relevant weather data.
3.3
Cloud-based BIM platform
The toolchain is part of the cloud­based BIM platform, currently under development at DTU.
The project aims to create a platform that will serve as the primary tool for engineers during
design and commissioning of HVAC systems. Hence, it has been given the name Virtual
Commissioning (VC), indicating that the platform can be used as a virtual environment for
doing commissioning of buildings. The project is still in its initial development stages, and
hence not yet online. All work is done on a local server and functionalities are still limited.
The concept of the BIM platform and its database is described in this section.
As seen in fig. 3.11 which shows the application’s system architecture, the core of the platform
is a database containing information and geometric data for HVAC systems and rooms. The
systems can be created directly in the application, but the proposed workflow is to create the
initial model in a BIM­modelling tool such as Revit and import it to the database. To support
the design process, the application includes services for system calculation and simulations,
such as VarmeNet, which is used for steady­state calculations of hydronic systems, and
IES­VE, which is used for simulations of thermal zones (see section 1.2.1). These tools are
suitable in the early design stages, but with the higher level of detail (LOD) reached during the
final design stages, they do not provide the complexity needed for a multi­system simulation,
that can support the commissioning process. Hence, the need for the toolchain to generate
Modelica simulations. During commissioning, the multi­system simulations will provide initial
proposals for e.g. pump settings and control parameters, so that commissioning is more
efficient and that the intended control schemes are implemented in the building. In addition,
during operation, the Modelica models will be used for fault detection in the building, by
providing a baseline for the system behavior.
In fig. 3.11, the processes related to the toolchain are marked with red. The process Run
calculation/simulation in combination with the Heating dimensioning is marked since it is
used to evaluate the dimensioning of the heating system. Also the Run diagnostics process,
which leads to the Fault detection module, is marked since Modelica simulations are the
cornerstone for fault detection.
3.3.1
Data structure
HVAC systems are defined in the database with the Flow Systems Ontology (FSO) [47, 48],
which describes components and their relations in flow systems such as heating or ventilation
systems. The ontology under development at DTU assigns each component a class, that
defines the type of the component. These classes are built in a hierarchy starting with the
Component class, which covers all physical components in flow systems. The Component
class has 8 different subclasses, listed below, based on the function of the component.
• EnergyConversionDevice is used for components that transfer heat from one medium
to another. For instance heating coils.
• Fitting is used for components that connect other components. Examples are tee
junctions and duct reduction fittings.
28
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
See fig. 4.1
Figure 3.11: System architecture of web application. Source: [46]
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. METHODS AND APPROACH
• FlowController is used for components that control the flow in the system. Typically
valves of different kinds.
• FlowMovingDevice is used for components that move fluids and increase flow and/or
pressure. Typically pumps or fans.
• Segment is used for pipes and ducts.
• StorageDevice is used for components that store mass or energy. Typically hot water
tanks.
• Terminal is used for components that allow a system to interact with the environment.
Examples are taps, air terminals and radiators.
• TreatmentDevice is used for components that treat the medium flowing through it and
remove unwanted substances. Examples are air and water filters.
Figure 3.12 shows the main classes used in this project along with the associated hierarchies
and attributes needed for each class. The arrows imply inheritance from the higher­level
classes, meaning that attributes to a class also are found in its subclasses. Hence, the
attributes tag (used to uniquely identify all components), systemName and connectedWith
from the Component class are available in all the other classes in the diagram.
Component
+ tag
+ systemName
+ connectedWith
Segment
+ nomFlow
+ thicknessIns
+ lambdaIns
+ dimension
+ length
FlowMovingDevice
+ controlType
+ head
+ pressureCurve
+ powerCurve
Radiator
+ nominal_heat_flux
+ nominal_supply_temp
+ nominal_return_temp
+ nominal_room_temp
+ nominal_pressure_loss
Terminal
FlowController
+ valveType
+ kvs
+ kv
+ nomFlow
HeatExchanger
+ nom_heat_flux
+ nom_supply_temp_1
+ nom_return_temp_1
+ nom_supply_temp_2
+ nom_return_temp_2
+ nom_flow_1
+ nom_flow_2
+ nom_dp_1
+ nom_dp_2
EnergyConversionDevice
Figure 3.12: Class diagram showing classes and attributes used in the project
Relations between components is handled with the connectedWith attribute, that is given
to each component and stores the tag of connected components and the location of the
connection.
30
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:39==
4
Developed toolchain
This chapter describes the developed toolchain and the methods used for mapping, imple­
mentation etc. Section 4.1 describes the overall system architecture of the toolchain and
aims to explain the individual processes in detail. Section 4.2 describes the requirements
for the database in order to make the toolchain fully functional, followed by a short overview
of limitations and assumptions of the toolchain in section 4.3. In section 4.4, the connection
between the toolchain and the VC platform is described, followed by a test of the toolchain,
where BIM data for the case study is used to simulate the heating system in the case study
and the results are evaluated.
All code for the toolchain is found in appendix C and in the digital appendix.
4.1
System architecture
In fig. 4.1, the architecture of the toolchain is seen. The figure is split into three parts; the bot­
tom shows the data being exchanged, the middle describes the processes and the top part
shows the Python functions used. The process starts on the left in the BIM application, where
the toolchain is activated. Data is sent to the toolchain, either by request from a user or as
part of a larger workflow (e.g. running performance evaluations during operation). The data
is cleaned and the heating system is extracted, after which the data goes through an enrich­
ment process. The mapping to Modelica language is handled through the python function
map_to_modelica_model that uses templates defined in the modelica_connector_mapper
and modelica_component_mapper modules. After the mapping process, the model is simu­
lated, and the results are sent back to the database for analysis. In the following sections,
the different processes are described.
Enriched data
(JSON)
{;}
Results
(JSON)
{;}
enrich_data_for_modelica
Simulation model
.mo
Results
.mat
Heating system
(JSON)
{;}
read_simulation_results
map_to_modelica_model
simulate_modelica_model
result_keys.json
.json
extract_system_from_data
Raw data
(JSON)
{;}
Data
Processes
Python 
functions
modelica_component_temps
modelica_connector_temps
Map to 
Modelica
Enrich 
data
Simulate 
model
Read & send 
results
Extract heating 
system
BIM Platform
See fig. 3.11 and 4.2
Figure 4.1: Diagram of the toolchain’s system architecture
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
4.1.1
System extraction and data enrichment
When data is sent to the toolchain, it is sent as a JSON format [49], which is a text­based
data structure commonly used for data transfer in web applications. The wanted system, here
exemplified as the heating system, is extracted, and components are restructured. This is
all handled with the extract_system_from_data function.
The enrich_data_for_modelica function enriches data with needed attributes. Here, the
lengths and diameters of pipe segments are calculated from their connectors and the name
of Modelica port connectors are associated with each component based on the component
type. The port names are used when connecting components in the mapping step.
4.1.2
Mapping
The mapping process maps each database component to a corresponding Modelica model
and parses parameters from the component to the model. The mapping between compo­
nents and Modelica models is defined in the map_to_modelica_model python function. After
a component has been mapped to a model, the corresponding model template, defined as
a Python function in the modelica_component_temps module, is instantiated for each com­
ponent.
The model templates utilize so­called f­strings that are strings of text, where parameters from
the data source are wrapped with curly braces, {}. This is seen in listing 4.1, where a tem­
plate for a radiator is seen. The template is defined as a function of the name radiator that
takes a component, comp, as input. The parameters of the component, e.g. comp["nominal_ ⌋
heat_flux"], are then parsed to fill out the needed parameters. Optional parameters, such
as the comp["KV"] are only parsed if they are present in the component attributes. The
name of each component equals the tag, with a prefixed c, since Modelica does not allow
component names to start with a number.
def radiator(comp):
s = f'''
ToolchainLib.Radiator c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
rad(
Q_flow_nominal={comp["nominal_heat_flux"]},
T_a_nominal={comp["nominal_supply_temp"]+273.15},
T_b_nominal={comp["nominal_return_temp"]+273.15},
dp_nominal={comp["nominal_pressure_loss"]},
TAir_nominal={comp["nominal_room_temp"]+273.15})'''
if "KV" in comp.keys():
s+= f''',
trv(Kv={comp["KV"]}))
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},
{0+y_pos*30}}}, {{{20+x_pos*30}, {20+y_pos*30}}}}})));
,→
'''
else:
s+= f''')
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},
{0+y_pos*30}}}, {{{20+x_pos*30}, {20+y_pos*30}}}}})));
,→
'''
return s
Listing 4.1: Radiator template.
32
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
As seen in listing 4.1, mapping is a simple procedure, as long as a suitable component
model exists in Modelica, and is thereby easily extended with new classes if a specific project
requires modelling of other components. The mappings included in the current version of the
toolchain are seen in table 4.1.
After mapping all components to a Modelica model, connectors between components (see
section 2.2) must be created. Each component (with a few exceptions) is connected to two
components. One connection is the input and the other is an output connection, but only input
connections are considered to avoid duplicate connections in the Modelica model. Thus, for
each component, the connector mapping module identifies the tag(s) of the upstream input
connection(s) and connects the input port (usually port a) of the considered component with
the output connector of the upstream component (usually port b).
The template for connections is seen in listing 4.2. The first argument to the connect function
is the upstream component with the tag intag. The output port’s name, which may vary
based on the component type, is defined in the outportname variable. The second argument
to the connect function is the name of the considered component and the name of its input
port.
con_string =
f'''connect(c{intag}.{outportname},c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]})'''
,→
Listing 4.2: Template for component connections.
In the mapping module, all components are mapped, followed by the connections, to match
the Modelica model structure described in section 2.2. After the model has been created, a
temporary model file is saved for simulation.
Mapping of controls
Since the BIM model does not contain information on controls, default controls have been
built into some of the models in the purpose­built ToolchainLib library, as described in sec­
tion 3.2.2. This is, for example the case for the MotorValve class that combines a motorized
valve with a PI­controller. The setpoint is defined as a parameter to the valve model, but
the process variable1 needs to be known. Hence, in the current version of the toolchain, it
is assumed that the process variable for all motorized valves is the ventilation supply tem­
perature. However, in the future, when the BIM model includes data on controls, it will be
possible to deduct the process variable directly from the data.
4.1.3
Simulation and results
In the simulation process, the auto­generated Modelica model is simulated in Dymola. The
BuildingsPy Python module [50], that interfaces Dymola through Python is used to automate
the simulations. After the simulation, Dymola stores the results in a MAT­file2 which can be
read by BuildingsPy. After reading the data through BuildingsPy, the read_simulation_results
function restructures the results to a JSON format, then sends them to the database. Based
on the component type, only specific results are sent to the database to reduce the size of
data. For example, segment results only include flow and pressure drop, whereas radiator
results will have more detailed results including supply­/return temperature, heat output, etc.
The wanted results for each class are specified in the result_keys.json file, which can be
updated if other results are needed.
1The variable being controlled.
2A file format for storage of Matlab data
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
Component
Modelica
Note
Segment
model: Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
parameters: m_flow_nominal=comp.nom_flow,
thicknessIns = comp.insulation.thickness,
lambdaIns = comp.insulation.lambda,
diameter = comp.dimension,
length = comp.length
FlowMovingDevice
model: ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed
parameters: speed = comp.speed,
per = comp.per
If
comp.control_type
= con­
stant_speed
FlowMovingDevice
model: ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed
parameters: constPressure = comp.Head,
per = comp.per
If
comp.control_type
= con­
stant_pressure
Radiator
model: ToolchainLib.Radiator
parameters: rad.Q_flow_nominal = comp.nominal_heat_flux,
rad.T_a_nominal = comp.nominal_supply_temp,
rad.T_b_nominal = comp.nominal_return_temp,
Tair_nominal = nominal_room_temp,
rad.dp_nominal = comp.nominal_pressure_loss
HeatExchanger
model: Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow
parameters: m1_flow_nominal = comp.flow_nominal_air,
m2_flow_nominal = comp.flow_nominal_water,
dp1_nominal = comp.dp_nominal_air,
dp2_nominal = comp.dp_nominal_water,
UA_nominal = comp.UA_nominal
Bend
model: Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend
parameters: delta = comp.Angle,
d_hyd = comp.Dimension,
R_0 = comp.Radius
Tee
model: Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction
parameters: m_flow_nominal = {1, ­1, comp.port3_dir}
FlowController
model: Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear
parameters: m_flow_nominal = comp.nom_flow,
Kv = comp.Kv
If ValveType
= STAD
FlowController
model: Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.CheckValve
parameters: m_flow_nominal = comp.nom_flow,
Kv = comp.Kvs
If ValveType
= KONT
FlowController
model: ToolchainLib.MotorValve
parameters: m_flow_nominal = comp.nom_flow,
Kv = comp.Kvs
If ValveType
= MOTOR
Table 4.1: Mapping between database and Modelica.
34
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
4.2
Database requirements
Since the toolchain is based on data, it is important to document what information must be
given for it to function. This section gives a brief overview of this.
All necessary component properties, such as working points for radiators and heat exchang­
ers, and pump characteristics, must be available in the BIM database to be able to use the
toolchain. In contrast, some optional properties, such as the radiative fraction of a radiator’s
heat output or valve opening characteristics, are optional and will be given a default value if
not specified. In table 4.2, mandatory and optional properties for a radiator are given. In ap­
pendix A, a complete list of requirements for all classes is found. In addition to class­specific
properties, all components must have a unique ID and a class tag to uniquely identify all
components and their associated classes.
Parameter
Unit
Mandatory?
Radiative fraction
­
No
Radiator constant, n
­
No
Kv of valve
m3 (h
√
bar)−1
No
P­band of thermostat
K
No
Nominal heat flux
W
Yes
Nominal supply temperature
K
Yes
Nominal return temperature
K
Yes
Nominal room temperature
K
Yes
Nominal pressure loss
Pa
Yes
Table 4.2: Data requirement for radiators.
Another vital piece of information required for the components are the connections to other
components. Here, there must be an unambiguous connection from one component to other
components. It should be possible to identify, whether the connection is a flow (e.g. between
pipes), heat flux (e.g. between a radiator and a room) or signal (e.g. from a controller to a
valve) and whether it is an input or output. To a certain extent, this can be deducted from the
class of the connected components, but for certain components with several connections,
this may be too complicated and prone to errors.
4.3
Limitations and assumptions
This section will describe the limitations and assumptions that are connected to the tool­
chain. Most of these can be overcome with further development and possible solutions are
also proposed. These are also discussed in further detail in chapter 5.
In the current version of the toolchain, a limited number of classes are supported, as seen
in section 4.1.2. This limits the usability of the toolchain significantly since other models
will have other classes. Including more classes, however, is a simple process, as long as
a Modelica model for the component exists, and can be done in an ongoing process when
needed.
The toolchain needs much information to instantiate components correctly, much of which is
only available if a specific product is chosen. This is the case for heat exchangers, radiators,
and pumps, to name a few examples, that need detailed, product­specific nominal param­
eters in order to be modeled correctly. In order to support early design stages, where the
products are unknown, generic components that only take few inputs such as the needed
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
heat output in the case of a radiator and use standard conditions for nominal temperature
sets for example.
All end units (radiators and heating coils) are connected to the same room since the definition
of rooms is currently not supported in the database. This also means that the toolchain only
supports one heat exchanger since the implementation of multiple heat exchangers would
lead to coupling all to the same room in parallel.
In the given data, no information about the heat source was given. Hence, the toolchain
assumes a generic heat source, as described in section 3.2.2. Other models for heat sources
can be defined in the ToolchainLib library and used instead of the generic heat source, but
a detailed definition of the heat source is not supported.
4.4
Integration in BIM platform
In fig. 4.1, the toolchain is depicted as a stand­alone program that receives data from an
unknown source and sends results back. To integrate this in the VC platform, as shown in
fig. 3.11, the toolchain and the platform have been connected through an application pro­
gramming interface (API), that is an interface designed to connect pieces of software. An
API can, in many ways, be seen in contrast to a user interface, that connects a computer
program to a person. The process for information exchange is seen in fig. 4.2.
BIM platform
See fig. 3.11
API
Toolchain
See fig. 4.1
POST
(JSON)
Response
(JSON)
Raw data
(JSON)
Results
(JSON)
Figure 4.2: Connection between the BIM platform and the toolchain through and API.
When the toolchain is activated in the BIM platform, a so­called POST request is sent to the
API. In the body of the POST request the raw data is included. The API forwards the raw
data to the toolchain that then handles the data, as described in fig. 4.1. The results are sent
to the API that forwards the results to the BIM platform as a response containing the results
in the body.
Since the BIM platform is still under development, some of the data needs, such as the
direction of connections, have not yet been implemented in the database. Therefore, a direct
link between the API and the platform is not yet fully functional, and during development and
testing, the API was tested by manually sending the data to the API.
4.5
Application and testing
This chapter presents testing of the toolchain on the case study presented in section 3.1.1
to evaluate the performance of the toolchain. Section 4.5.1 describes the simulation setup,
and section 4.5.2 shows the results from the simulation. The text version of the generated
model can be found in appendix D and in the digital appendix.
4.5.1
Simulation setup
Since the simulations in this example do not serve as the basis for an actual analysis, the
simulation has been limited to the first seven days of a year to make results more visible
than for a whole­year simulation. Since only the heating system is of interest, this period
is also the most interesting since it includes the lowest temperatures of the weather data.
To initialize the model, the simulation starts with the last day of the year before moving to
January 1st. This, however, causes discontinuities in the weather data since the transition
36
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
from December 31st to January 1st has not been smoothened, which will impact the results,
but the solution is still better than without the initialization period.
The use of Danish weather data has caused troubles in version 7.0.0 of the Buildings library,
which have been fixed in release 7.0.1, released shortly before the deadline of this thesis.
Hence, weather data for Chicago, USA, has been used, even though the system was de­
signed for Danish conditions.
In Dymola, the solver algorithm DASSL has been used. Like most solver algorithms, it uses a
variable step size. In contrast to more simple methods, it uses a multi­step approach, which
means that it takes previous time steps into account, when estimating the results. This makes
the algorithm vulnerable to discontinuous system behavior, but since most building systems
operate with continuity and the system is relatively small, DASSL is an appropriate choice.
Had the system included controls that cause discontinuities, also known as state events, a
single­step solver such as RADAU, could be used.
Table 4.3 shows all relevant simulation settings.
Start time [days]
­1
Stop time [days]
7
Output interval [min]
5
Algorithm
DASSL
Tolerance [­]
0.0001
Table 4.3: Simulation parameters.
4.5.2
Results
This section presents different results for the system, to showcase which results can be
found when using Modelica and to prove that the system performs as expected. Proposals
for optimizing poor design will be made, but since it is outside the scope of this study to
optimize systems, they will not be tested.
In fig. 4.3, overall room and ventilation supply temperature results are compared to the out­
door temperature. It is seen that the room temperature, though relatively stable, has an
offset from the setpoint of around 0.5 °C. Since the radiator thermostat acts as a P­controller,
this behavior is expected, because P­controllers often introduce an offset from the setpoint.
In reality, this would be handled by changing the setpoint on the thermostat to make up for
the offset. A decrease of the controllers proportional band would also help, but since the
proportional band for regular thermostats has been chosen, it is not deemed viable. To com­
pletely avoid this issue, a digital controller with PI­control would eliminate the offset, but this
is uncommon in many traditional buildings.
The ventilation supply temperature, as seen in fig. 4.3 is stable around the setpoint with only
one significant dip on day 7, where the outdoor temperature drops below ­20 °C. Also in the
beginning of the simulation, there is a drop in temperature. This is because of the sudden
temperature drop associated with the initialization, as explained in section 4.5.1. Hence, this
drop can be ignored.
To understand the reason for the drop in ventilation supply temperature on day 7, fig. 4.4,
shows the opening of the heating coil control valve, the heating coil supply temperature and
the ventilation supply temperature. Since the temperature does not reach the setpoint, it is
expected that the control valve, controlling the supply temperature, is fully open to maximize
the supply temperature to the heat exchanger. This is confirmed in fig. 4.4, where the valve
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
20
0
Outdoor temperature
21
22
23
Temperature [°C]
Room temperature
Setpoint
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Day
16
18
20
Ventilation supply
Setpoint
Figure 4.3: Results for outdoor, room and ventilation supply temperature.
is fully open (opening = 1) in the entire period from hour 3 to 8. Conclusively, the control of
the valve is as expected. Also the supply temperature is behaving as expected, since it is
maximized at full opening. Hence, the issue is with the flow rate, suggesting that the pump
is too small. However, since the system is designed for Danish conditions with a minimum
temperature of ­12 °C, the issue is not caused by the system design but because the dynamic
simulation uses different weather conditions than in the steady­state design.
In section 3.1.1, it is stated, that the supply temperature of the heat source is 70 °C, but in
fig. 4.4 the maximum heating coil supply temperature is above 70 °C. This is because the
excessive power for the pumps is transferred to the water. Thereby, the temperature is raised
slightly, since no heat loss has been considered for the pipes.
In fig. 4.5 the performance of the radiator heating is analyzed by comparing the room tem­
perature to the solar gains and radiator output. It is clear that the peaks in room temperature
are related to the solar gains, since they peak simultaneously.
As expected, the radiator output decreases with the high solar gains. However, even though
the solar radiation by far exceeds the radiator output ­ e.g. on day 1, the radiator output is
approx. 600 W, whereas the solar gains reach 2000 W ­ the radiator is never turned off. This
happens because of the constant offset caused by the proportional band of the TRV. Though
not ideal, this behavior is expected and shows the need for including this non­ideal behavior.
Traditional BEPS tools without coupling to hydronic system models would usually assume a
heater with an ideal control. Thus, the 200 W delivered by the radiators during sunny periods
would not be considered in traditional tools.
Similar to the ventilation supply temperature, the room temperature drops significantly on day
7, where the outdoor temperature drops below 20 °C. As for the heating coil, this is related to
the fact that the radiator was dimensioned for different weather conditions than those used
in the simulation.
38
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
0.8
0.9
1.0
Opening [-]
Control valve
60
65
70
75
Temperature [°C]
Heating coil supply
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Hour
16
18
20
Temperature [°C]
Ventilation supply
Figure 4.4: Results for heating coil control and ventilation supply temperature.
21.0
21.5
22.0
Temperature [°C]
Room temperature
Setpoint
0
1000
2000
Gain [W]
Solar gain
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Day
250
500
750
Output [W]
Radiator output
Figure 4.5: Comparison of radiator output, solar gains and room temperature.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
When analyzing heating systems, a topic of considerable interest is the temperature differ­
ence, ∆T, achieved over heaters and the system in general. Therefore, fig. 4.6 shows ∆T
for the heating coil loop, the radiator and the system. Here it is seen, that the temperature
difference varies between 35 °C and 45 °C, corresponding to a return temperature of 25
°C­35 °C, which in many regards seems reasonable. Naturally, improvements can be made,
and a more steady return temperature could be a target, but this will not be analyzed here.
20
10
0
Temperature [°C]
Outdoor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
35
40
45
T [°C]
System
Radiator
HC loop
Figure 4.6: ∆T of the system, the radiator and heating coil loop (HC loop).
4.5.3
Simulation speed
Although it is outside the scope of this thesis to optimize the simulation speeds, a short
presentation and analysis of the speed of the simulations will be made in this section. To give
a better idea of the simulation speed, the time range of the simulations has been extended
to 1 year instead of 7 days, since much happens, when the simulation range is extended.
Simulating the system for 365 days through the toolchain takes approximately 20 minutes,
including generating the model and reading the results. A breakdown of the time usage into
the main processes of the toolchain is seen in table 4.4. Here, it is seen that the majority of
the time is used for simulating the models and that the model generation does not affect the
overall time.
Process
Time
Model generation
0.04 s
Simulation
19 min 26 s
Results reading
29 s
Total
19 min 55 s
Table 4.4: Breakdown of time into the main processes of the toolchain.
Even though there is no specific goal for the computation time 20 min is a long time for sim­
ulating such a small system. However, when simulating the created model directly through
Dymola, the simulation only takes 4 minutes and 43 seconds. This suggests that simulating
the models through BuildingsPy significantly increases the simulation time. Conclusively, if
40
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
the issue with BuildingsPy can be solved, possibly by finding an alternative way to interface
Dymola through Python, the simulation speed will be reasonable.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. DEVELOPED TOOLCHAIN
42
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion and further work
The toolchain built in this project is, in many ways, simple to use. By clicking a button,
users can generate Modelica models, simulate them and see the results. However, for this
procedure to work, many requirements for workflow, product information, assumptions, etc.,
exist. Also, a number of limitations apply, as seen in section 4.3, which limits the functionality.
These considerations and many more, including the applicability of Modelica for hydronic
simulations, will be discussed in this chapter.
The test of the toolchain, presented in section 4.5, aimed to show the use of the toolchain
and examples of results from the simulations to test whether the system behavior modelled
by the toolchain is realistic. By looking at the results, it is clear that the systems behave as
expected and that the simulations catch the non­ ideal behavior caused by delays and offset
in controllers. Hence, it is proved that these simulations can help close the performance gap
and that the toolchain is functional.
The speed of the toolchain mainly depends on the simulations; in the case study, the model
generation took only 40 milliseconds compared to the simulation part that took approximately
5 minutes. Reading the simulation results took 29 seconds, which is relatively high. The
results reading time can be attribute to the short output interval of 10 minutes. This means
that for a whole year, approximately 53000 data points are present for each component
results. Hence, the size of the results data means that the reading process is very time
consuming. Having such a fine resolution would rarely be relevant, and hence increasing the
output interval to 30 minutes or one hour would still give valuable results, while decreasing the
time spent on reading the results significantly. Alternatively, less results for the components
can be picked. For example, pipe results may not be of significant value in many situations,
and therefore these could be left out.
Taking into account that the heating system from the case study is a simple system with few
controls, the simulation time is relatively high, even when using the simulation time outside
BuildingsPy (see section 4.5.3). A reason for this could be that the bends have been modeled
with a detailed model from the Modelica Standard Library that calculates the pressure drop
through advanced equations. In comparison, the pipes have been modeled with a simple
model that uses a fixed resistance coefficient. With the amount of bends present in the model,
it is likely that by changing the bend models to a simplified model, the simulation speed will
decrease significantly. Using lower complexity models, will of course reduce the validity of
the results, and the consequences of the compromise between faster computation speed
and lower validity of the models should be explored.
While the toolchain can be used on the case study and it produces reasonable results in an
accepted time frame, it is still an initial proposal for a fully functional program. Hence, many
limitations and challenges exist. The limitations can be divided into three groups, that are
listed below and will be discussed individually in the following sections.
• Flexibility and robustness: If the toolchain is to be widely used, it needs to be robust
and flexible towards the given input. The challenges here are issues such as varying
system configurations, lacking information and unknown components.
• Extensibility: Currently, the toolchain only supports modelling of heating systems and
a limited number of component types. Hence, the toolchain needs to be extended with
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
support for more component and system types. Possibilities and challenges regarding
this are discussed in this group.
• Usability: Apart from the concrete and software­related challenges mentioned above,
the success of the toolchain depends on the general usability, related to processes
around the software and the VC application. Examples of these challenges are level of
detail (LOD) in BIM models, accessibility to commercial software needed in toolchain
and availability of product information.
Although these groups are listed separately, they all have overlaps between each other, but
they will be treated as separate points in the following. Challenges related to Modelica are
handled separately in section 5.4, even though some are related to the toolchain and coincide
with these points.
5.1
Flexibility and robustness
Suppose the toolchain must handled by people without detailed knowledge of programming
and Modelica. In that case, it must be robust to various system configurations and detail
levels and include mapping to a broader range of component models to make it more flexible.
As seen in section 4.5, the toolchain simulated the case study and created realistic results
within a reasonable time range. This shows that the toolchain works and that it is indeed
possible to carry out simulations in this way. However, the toolchain has not been tested
on other cases because no other cases have yet been implemented in the VC application.
Therefore it cannot be proved, that the toolchain works for different system configurations.
Although only one test has been carried out, it is reasonable to believe that minor adjustments,
such as different valve positions and types, longer pipes, or a different configuration of the
mixing shunt, will not cause inconsistencies in the results. Components that are unknown to
the mapping module will, on the other hand, cause errors, but as long as a suitable Modelica
model exists, mapping new component types to Modelica models is a simple process. This
will be elaborated in section 5.2.
However, more extensive changes in the systems, such as addition of more radiators or
heating coils, will not behave as expected. The simulations will likely still run, but since the
data available in the VC application does not yet contain room information, all end­users are
connected to the same generic room. Therefore, the radiators would all heat the same room
and the heating coils would be connected in parallel to the same fans in the room model. All
motorized control valves for the heating coils would control the supply air temperature in the
room.
The above challenges show that there is a need to provide coupling of rooms and end units
to increase the flexibility of the toolchain. First of all, this means that rooms must be imple­
mented in the database, either with full representation of the geometry or as generic rooms.
The attributes of end­units must describe connections to rooms and that controller compo­
nents contain information on process variables and setpoints. This increases the database
requirements since information on control is a rare dimension in BIM models, even though
it is supported in several data formats, including IFC. This challenge will be discussed in
section 5.3.
An alternative to adding room information in the database is to create separate rooms for
each end unit, or create a varying generic load for each unit, according to the unit size. This
will also allow the toolchain to support different information levels; in some project phases, it
may be required to run simulations, even though the rooms are not yet fully specified, and
44
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
here, this approach will make it possible. In later stages of the project, where the rooms are
fully specified, the toolchain may use detailed models instead of the generic ones.
In general, the toolchain must be able to handle different levels of detail in the design process.
This is a big challenge since specific parameters of components have to be known to run
the simulations. Some of these parameters, such as the Kv of radiator thermostats or the
insulation thickness of pipes, can assume default values without causing troubles in the
system. However, other parameters, such as the Kv value of balancing valves, need to
match the rest of the system to balance the system correctly. No stable solutions have
been identified for this challenge. However, it should be noted that the toolchain is primarily
intended for the late stages in design or during commissioning, where a certain level of detail
in the BIM models can be expected and information on most components is known. In those
cases, there may be issues with representing the information in the BIM model, which is
discussed further in section 5.3.
5.2
Extensibility
To support modelling of multi­system networks, where room models are coupled to models
of the HVAC systems and co­simulated, the current state of the toolchain needs to be ex­
tended to other domains and components, since only heating systems and a limited number
of component types are supported.
Extending the toolchain’s mapping module and implementing templates for more component
models is a relatively simple process. If the component model already exists in a Modelica
library, it is as simple as creating templates similar to the one presented in listing 4.1 in
section 4.1.2. Only if the component is split into two physical pieces, such as a differential
pressure controller that has a pressure gauge on the supply string, further work has to be car­
ried out, since the connector templates must be extended. This is, however, still a relatively
simple task.
To allow for easy extension of the component mappings, an interface for creating new map­
pings can relevant. In such an interface, the user can select a component in the BIM model
and decide which Modelica model should represent that component type through the 3D
viewer. After the mapping has been created, the user will pick which parameters from the
database should be parsed to the model parameters, thereby creating a new template. In
this framework, control connections could also be created directly in the 3D viewer. In this sit­
uation, the toolchain is close to the vision of a fully BIM­integrated 3D graphical user interface
(GUI) for Modelica model generation.
Whereas implementing support for new component types in the toolchain is, in many cases,
a simple process, implementing support for cooling and ventilation systems can be a more
complicated task. While cooling systems are similar to heating systems and thereby simple to
implement, ventilation systems have some fundamental differences that make the mapping
process different. First of all, control of ventilation systems is much more complex, since it
is based on electrical signals with more sensors than in many heating and cooling systems.
Ventilation systems may also be controlled for both air quality and thermal comfort, meaning
that this must be represented in the data and parsed to the models. However, creating
the ventilation system components and the flow connections between them is as simple as
extending the existing mapping, as described above.
Hence, the challenges related to implementing ventilation systems mainly relate to storing
description of controls in the database. However, if the database fully supports description
of control connections in a structured and consistent manner, mapping these connections to
Modelica connections is a relatively simple process.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
5.3
Usability
By integrating the toolchain into the Virtual Commissioning (VC) platform, a big step towards
multi­system simulations is made. The integration allows detailed analysis of the dynamics
when several systems are co­ simulated and the serves as an essential tool for reducing the
energy performance gap. Coupling of the simulations to BIM is of great importance, since
HVAC systems quickly become large and complex, which means that modelling the systems
manually in Modelica will be time consuming and error­prone, most likely making the task
unprofitable. Especially, if the toolchain is to be used in the design phases, manual model
creation will be unviable, since changes might occur even before the model is created. Here,
the toolchain and the VC platform will allow preliminary simulations, which will give great
insights into the design phase.
Even though linking Modelica to BIM gives many advantages and may be the only way to
make co­simulation of multiple systems accessible outside academia, it also means that the
model creation becomes very dependent on the available information in the BIM models.
This may pose significant issues, since BIM models rarely contain all the information needed
to carry out these simulations. This does not necessarily mean that the information does not
exist; important component properties such as valve or pump sizes may be known, even in
the early stages of the design phase. However, instead of being documented in BIM models,
it may be written in tender material or product specifications. Hence, the issue is not always to
provide the information but to include it in the BIM models. The issue with getting information
to the BIM models is a core challenge of BIM and is related to workflow and traditions in the
industry. Many measures are taken towards populating BIM models with data, and as long
as the needed component properties are supported, this issue will likely disappear in the
future. Maybe the possibility of carrying out hydronic simulations through a BIM platform will
even encourage HVAC engineers to include more data in BIM models.
As mentioned above, the lacking information of HVAC components in BIM models poses
a significant challenge, but with the right measures, it is likely to be solved in the future.
However, as seen in section 5.2, hydronic simulations also require information on controls;
primarily regarding process variables and setpoint, which is rarely documented in detail be­
fore the construction phase, although it is supported in multiple data formats including IFC.
As described in section 5.2 this poses an immediate obstacle towards implementing venti­
lation systems in the toolchain. If detailed analyses of other systems are to be carried out,
implementation of control schemes is, however, also essential. For example, many heating
systems have varying supply temperatures, which is controlled by a weather compensation
curve and must be defined in the BIM data format, if this has to be considered in the simula­
tions. As mentioned, this is in principle supported in some data formats, such as IFC and the
BRICK schema [51]. The problem is that controls are rarely handled by the design engineer
and is usually not considered before the construction phase. Therefore, alternatives where
controls are only partly implemented as component parameters may be a solution, until more
experience with representing controls in BIM models is gained.
Section 5.1 mentions the need for coupling end units and rooms to support systems with mul­
tiple end units. Work is currently done to support definition of room data in the VC database,
and once this is finished, it will be possible to create parsers for room data to Modelica and
thereby, coupling to end units can be done.
Another aspect related to the general usability of the toolchain is the software requirements.
Currently, the commercial Modelica simulation environment, Dymola, is used since it is cur­
rently the only Modelica environment with a GUI, that supports the Buildings library. During
development and testing of the toolchain, the Dymola GUI played a significant role in check­
46
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
ing the models for errors, since it allowed visual inspection of the auto­generated models.
For full implementation of the toolchain and the VC platform, the use of Dymola is, however,
not ideal. First of all, Dymola requires a license since it is a commercial tool. Secondly, cloud­
based environments such as the VC platform are usually run in other operating systems than
Windows, where Dymola needs to be installed. This may be possible to solve, but it is not
ideal.
To combat the issues with Dymola, the open­source Modelica environment JModelica, that
is a Python­based tool, can be used, since it also supports the Buildings library, which is
documented through various tests run with each update of the library. JModelica is free, can
be run in any operating system and comes with its own Python distribution, so that no extra
installations are required. A drawback of JModelica is that it has been discontinued, meaning
that there will be no more updates to the program. Thus, errors will not be fixed and it will not
support potential changes in the Modelica language. It is however still available, and tests
of the Buildings library are still carried out.
As an alternative to JModelica, the open­source OpenModelica can be used. It does not
fully support the Buildings library since the translation module of OpenModelica is not fully
compliant with the Modelica language. However, this problem is expected to be overcome
during 2022, and after this, OpenModelica may be used. OpenModelica is very similar to
Dymola, since it includes a GUI for model viewing, but it can also be accessed through
Python.
5.4
Modelica
Modelica generally proved to be a potent tool for simulating hydronic models. The testing
in section 4.5 showed that the components behaved as expected, and that many relevant
results can be found from the simulations. The flexibility is unmatched in any of the other tools
for hydronic simulation described in section 1.2.1 and the computation speed was acceptable,
even when considering the size of the model and the fact that no optimization of simulation
speed was carried out.
Although the flexibility of Modelica makes it a state­of­the­art tool, it comes with certain chal­
lenges. First of all, creating models requires deep knowledge of the systems since the com­
plexity of the systems requires a detailed description of control schemes, component proper­
ties etc. In many conventional tools, this is handled through assumptions in the models, built
into the predefined system configurations, but in Modelica everything must be described.
The complexity in the Modelica models also creates requirements for the needed information
since all component properties must be known. This information may not be available in
many projects, and consequently, Modelica cannot be used. While the aim of using Modelica
is to handle complex systems with all sorts of compositions, it may help to provide generic
components with default values that can be used in projects where the required information
is not accessible. It could also be generic subsystems, so that assumptions can be made for
larger parts of a system. Such a subsystem could be, e.g. a mixing shunt or the entire heat
generation plant. This concept is, to some extent, done in the ToolchainLib library, which
defines default controls for, e.g. motorized valves, where a PI controller and a setpoint is
connected to the valve, and only the process variable needs to be specified. Extending
this library may provide some basis for more generic control implementation, but if complete
representation of the control systems is needed, the information must be available.
When working with complex simulation models, there are always issues with ensuring the
stability of the models. In general, numerical modelling is dependent on the continuity of the
systems and even small, sudden changes in the system may cause significant delays in the
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
solution and cause the simulation to stall for extended periods. To a large extent, this can be
solved by using the toolchain since it restricts the use of models to models that have been
tested together and automatically creates connections to make sure that no connections are
missing. A common issue in manual creation could be that a pipe is connected opposite to
the flow direction, which can cause numerical instability, but with the toolchain, this issue is
avoided.
48
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, the aim was to show if and how Modelica models can be auto­generated and
simulated on the basis of cloud­based BIM models. Through Python templating, it was pos­
sible to create a toolchain that maps components in the BIM model format to templates of
Modelica models, simulates them in Dymola, and sends the results to the database. By test­
ing the toolchain on a heating system used as a case study, it was clear that the toolchain
was functional, and that detailed simulation of hydronic systems adds important insights to
the dynamic behavior of buildings and HVAC systems, that could not have been modeled
with traditional simulation tools.
Since the aim of this study was to prove that it was possible to design such a toolchain and
provide a proposed procedure, the work mainly focused on making the toolchain work for the
case study. Therefore, certain limitations and assumptions are built into the toolchain, which
means that bigger systems with more complicated configurations are not fully supported.
This is partly due to lacking information in the BIM model, which proved to be a significant
challenge for the usability of the toolchain. Extending the toolchain with new modules to
support more complex systems, can be done in a fairly simple way. The big challenge in
this regard is to make sure that the needed data is available in the project stages where the
toolchain is used. This requires work within environments where such data can be stored, by
extending existing data format, but mainly it requires a paradigm shift in the industry so that all
parties are aware of the importance of delivering information to BIM models. Hopefully, tools
such as the toolchain that are highly dependent on information will also act as a motivational
factor for engineers, since they see more advantages of documenting HVAC systems in large
detail in BIM systems.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
50
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:59==
References
[1]
IBPSA­USA. “Building energy software tools directory.” (2021), [Online]. Available:
https://www.buildingenergysoftwaretools.com/ (visited on 01/29/2021).
[2]
P. de Wilde, “The gap between predicted and measured energy performance of build­
ings: A framework for investigation,” Automation in Construction, vol. 41, pp. 40–49,
May 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2014.02.009.
[3]
A. C. Menezes, A. Cripps, D. Bouchlaghem, and R. Buswell, “Predicted vs. actual
energy performance of non­domestic buildings: Using post­occupancy evaluation
data to reduce the performance gap,” Applied Energy, vol. 97, pp. 355–364, Sep.
2012. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.11.075.
[4]
J. Kragh, J. Rose, H. N. Knudsen, and O. M. Jensen, “Possible explanations for the
gap between calculated and measured energy consumption of new houses,” Energy
Procedia, vol. 132, pp. 69–74, Oct. 2017. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.638.
[5]
E. Loukou, P. K. Heiselberg, R. L. Jensen, and H. Johra, “Energy performance eval­
uation of a nearly zero energy building and the reasons for the performance gap
between expected and actual building operation,” IOP Conference Series: Earth
and Environmental Science, vol. 352, p. 012 017, Oct. 2019. DOI: 10.1088/1755-
1315/352/1/012017.
[6]
E. E. Osaji, S. Suresh, and E. Chinyio, “The impacts of contributory factors in the gap
between predicted and actual office building energy use,” in Sustainability in Energy
and Buildings, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 757–778. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
642-36645-1_68.
[7]
J. Schein, “An information model for building automation systems,” Automation in
Construction, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 125–139, Mar. 2007. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2006.07.
006.
[8]
M. Wetter, M. Bonvini, and T. S. Nouidui, “Equation­based languages – a new paradigm
for building energy modeling, simulation and optimization,” Energy and Buildings,
vol. 117, pp. 290–300, Apr. 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.10.017.
[9]
E. Mills, “Building commissioning: A golden opportunity for reducing energy costs
and greenhouse gas emissions in the United States,” Energy Efficiency, vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 145–173, Feb. 2011. DOI: 10.1007/s12053-011-9116-8.
[10]
M. Bew and M. Richards, “BIM Maturity Model. Paper presented at the Construct IT
Autumn 2008 Members’ Meeting, Brighton, UK,” 2008.
[11]
Industry foundation classes (ifc) for data sharing in the construction and facility man­
agement industries – part 1: Data schema (iso 16739­1:2018), eng, 2020.
[12]
BIM Level 3: Is the industry ready? en­US, Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.globalcad.co.uk/bim-level-3-is-the-industry-ready/ (visited on 05/31/2021).
[13]
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. “Bsim.” (2021), [Online]. Available: https://sbi.dk/
bsim/Pages/Start.aspx.
[14]
EQUA Simulation AB. “Ida indoor climate and energy.” (2021), [Online]. Available:
https://www.equa.se/en/ida-ice.
[15]
N. R. E. Laboratory. “Energyplus.” (2021), [Online]. Available: https://energyplus.
net/.
[16]
HVAC Solution. “Welcome to HVAC Solution.” (Jun. 2021), [Online]. Available: http:
//www.hvacsolution.com/.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
51
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
[17]
“Pipe Flow Expert Software: Model Pipe Networks, Calculate Flow & Pressure Drop.”
(), [Online]. Available: https://www.pipeflow.com/pipe-flow-expert-software (visited
on 06/11/2021).
[18]
“MagiCAD | BIM solution for MEP (Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing) design.” en­US.
(), [Online]. Available: https://www.magicad.com/en/ (visited on 06/11/2021).
[19]
“Revit Software For MEP | Revit Mechanical and Electrical | Autodesk.” en­NL. (),
[Online]. Available: https://www.autodesk.eu/products/revit/mep (visited on 06/11/2021).
[20]
J. W. Hand, Strategies for deploying virtual representationsof the built environment
(aka the esp­r cookbook), ed. by Energy Systems Research Unit, Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.,
May 1, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.esru.strath.ac.uk/Courseware/ESP-
r/tour/Downloads/strategies_may_2018.pdf.
[21]
Integrated Environmental Solutions | IES. “Iesve 2021.” (Jun. 11, 2021), [Online].
Available: https://www.iesve.com/ve2021.
[22]
Hysopt. “Hysopt ­ hydronic system optimisation.” (), [Online]. Available: https://www.
hysopt.com/ (visited on 05/18/2021).
[23]
The Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers. “Product or Innovation of
the Year – Thermal comfort.” (Jun. 13, 2021), [Online]. Available: https://www.cibse.
org/Building-Performance-Awards/2020-Winners/Product-or-Innovation-of-the-Year-
%E2%80%93-Thermal-comfor.
[24]
S. E. Mattsson and H. Elmqvist, “Modelica ­ an international effort to design the next
generation modeling language,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 151–
155, Apr. 1997. DOI: 10.1016/s1474-6670(17)43628-7.
[25]
J. B. Kim, W. Jeong, M. J. Clayton, J. S. Haberl, and W. Yan, “Developing a physi­
cal BIM library for building thermal energy simulation,” Automation in Construction,
vol. 50, pp. 16–28, Feb. 2015. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2014.10.011.
[26]
D. Müller, M. Lauster, A. Constantin, M. Fuchs, and P. Remmen, “Aixlib ­ an open­
source modelica library within the iea­ebc annex 60 framework,” in BauSIM 2016,
Sep. 2016.
[27]
C. Nytsch­Geusen, J. Huber, M. Ljubijankic, and J. Rädler, “Modelica BuildingSys­
tems ­ eine modellbibliothek zur simulation komplexer energietechnischer gebäudesys­
teme,” Bauphysik, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 21–29, Feb. 2013. DOI: 10.1002/bapi.201310045.
[28]
M. Wetter and C. van Treeck, IEA EBC Annex 60: New Generation Computing Tools
for Building and Community Energy Systems. Sep. 2017, ISBN: 978­0­692­89748­5.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iea-annex60.org/pubs.html.
[29]
The Modelica Association. “Modelica and The Modelica Association.” (Jun. 2021),
[Online]. Available: https://modelica.org/.
[30]
M. Wetter, W. Zuo, T. S. Nouidui, and X. Pang, “Modelica buildings library,” Journal
of Building Performance Simulation, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 253–270, Mar. 2013. DOI: 10.
1080/19401493.2013.765506.
[31]
F. Jorissen, G. Reynders, R. Baetens, D. Picard, D. Saelens, and L. Helsen, “Imple­
mentation and verification of the IDEAS building energy simulation library,” Journal
of Building Performance Simulation, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 669–688, Feb. 2018. DOI:
10.1080/19401493.2018.1428361.
[32]
A. Maccarini, M. Wetter, A. Afshari, G. Hultmark, N. C. Bergsøe, and A. Vorre, “En­
ergy saving potential of a two­pipe system for simultaneous heating and cooling
of office buildings,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 134, pp. 234–247, Jan. 2017. DOI:
10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.10.051.
[33]
S. Burhenne, D. Wystrcil, M. Elci, S. Narmsara, and S. Herkel, “Building performance
simulation using modelica: Analysis of the current state and application areas,” eng,
52
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
INT BUILDING PERFORMANCE SIMULATION ASSOC­IBPSA, 2013, pp. 3259–
3266, ISBN: 9782746662940.
[34]
M. Dai, X. Lu, and P. Xu, “Causes of low delta­t syndrome for chilled water systems
in buildings,” Journal of Building Engineering, vol. 33, p. 101 499, Jan. 2021. DOI:
10.1016/j.jobe.2020.101499.
[35]
G. P. Henze and A. G. Floss, “Evaluation of temperature degradation in hydraulic
flow networks,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1820–1828, Aug. 2011. DOI:
10.1016/j.enbuild.2011.03.025.
[36]
J. Cockroft, D. Kennedy, M. O’Hara, A. A. Samuel, and P. G. Strachan Pauland
Tuohy, “Development and validation of detailed building, plant and controllermod­
elling to demonstrate interactive behaviour of system components￿,” in 11th Inter­
national IBPSA Conference, Jul. 27, 2009.
[37]
A. Andriamamonjy, D. Saelens, and R. Klein, “An automated IFC­based workflow for
building energy performance simulation with modelica,” Automation in Construction,
vol. 91, pp. 166–181, Jul. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2018.03.019.
[38]
C. Nytsch­Geusen, A. Inderfurth, W. Kaul, K. Mucha, J. Rädler, M. Thorade, and
C. R. Tugores, “Template based code generation of modelica building energy simula­
tion models,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Modelica Conference, Prague,
Czech Republic, May 15­17, 2017, Linköping University Electronic Press, Jul. 2017.
DOI: 10.3384/ecp17132199.
[39]
M. M. Tiller, Modelica by Example v0.6.0. Jun. 2019.
[40]
Dassault Systèmes AB, Dymola Full User Manual, Sep. 2020.
[41]
Dansk Standard, Beregning af bygningers varmetab: DS 418. Charlottenlund: Dansk
Standard, 2011, ISBN: 9788757124583.
[42]
T. S. Nouidui, K. Phalak, W. Zuo, and M. Wetter, “Validation and Application of the
Room Model of the Modelica Buildings Library,” in Proceedings of the 9th Interna­
tional MODELICA Conference, September 3­5, 2012, Munich, Germany, Linköping
University Electronic Press, Nov. 2012. DOI: 10.3384/ecp12076727.
[43]
M. Wetter, W. Zuo, and T. S. Nouidui, “Modeling of heat transfer in rooms in the
modelica ”buildings” library,” eng, Proceedings of Building Simulation 2011: 12th
Conference of International Building Performance Simulation Association, pp. 1096–
1103, 2011.
[44]
Danfoss, “Danfoss radiatortermostater,” Danfoss, Tech. Rep., 2021.
[45]
S. Wilcox and W. Marion, “Users manual for TMY3 data sets (revised),” Tech. Rep.,
May 2008. DOI: 10.2172/928611.
[46]
M. Seidenschnur and A. Kücükavcic, “Flow properties classes,” 2021, Unpublished.
[47]
V. Kukkonen, A. Kücükavcic, M. Seidenschnur, M. H. Rasmussen, K. M. Smith, and
C. A. Hviid, “Proposing a Semantic Web Ontology to Support Flow System Descrip­
tions from Design to Operation of Buildings,” Feb. 5, 2021.
[48]
“Flow Systems Ontology Web Page.” (Jun. 2021), [Online]. Available: https://alikucukavci.
github.io/FSO/.
[49]
ECMA international, Ecma­404 2nd edition ­ the json data interchange syntax, 2017.
[50]
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ­ Simulation Research Group. “Buildingspy.”
(May 4, 2021), [Online]. Available: https : / / simulationresearch . lbl . gov / modelica /
buildingspy/ (visited on 05/04/2021).
[51]
B. Balaji, A. Bhattacharya, G. Fierro, J. Gao, J. Gluck, D. Hong, A. Johansen, J.
Koh, J. Ploennigs, Y. Agarwal, M. Berges, D. Culler, R. Gupta, M. B. Kjærgaard,
M. Srivastava, and K. Whitehouse, “Brick: Towards a unified metadata schema for
buildings,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Systems
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
53
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
for Energy­Efficient Built Environments, ACM, Nov. 2016. DOI: 10.1145/2993422.
2993577.
54
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:63==
A
Requirements for BIM database
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
55
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX A. REQUIREMENTS FOR BIM DATABASE
Class
Parameter
Optional
Default value
Unit
Segment
Insulation thickness
Optional
0.05
m
Insulation thermal conductivity
Optional
0.037
W/m K
Nominal flow
Mandatory
m3/s
Dimension
Mandatory
Length
Mandatory
m
Radiator
Radiative fraction
Optional
0.35
­
Radiator constant, n
Optional
1.3
­
Kv of TRV
Optional
0.1
m3 (h
√
bar)−1
P­band of thermostat
Optional
0.5
K
Nominal heat flux
Mandatory
W
Nominal supply temperature
Mandatory
K
Nominal return temperature
Mandatory
K
Nominal room temperature
Mandatory
K
Nominal pressure loss
Mandatory
Pa
FlowMovingDevice
Pressure curve (Flow ­ Pressure)
Mandatory
m3/s ­ Pa
Power curve (Flow ­ Power)
Mandatory
m3/s ­ W
Control type
Mandatory
­
Head
Optional
Pa
HeatExchanger
Nominal flow air side
Mandatory
m3/s
Nominal flow water side
Mandatory
m3/s
Nominal pressure loss air side
Mandatory
Pa
Nominal pressure loss water side
Mandatory
Pa
Nominal supply temperature air side
Mandatory
K
Nominal return temperature air side
Mandatory
K
Nominal supply temperature water side
Mandatory
K
Nominal return temperature water side
Mandatory
K
Nominal heat flux
Mandatory
W
Bend
Radius
Mandatory
m
56
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A. REQUIREMENTS FOR BIM DATABASE
Dimension
Mandatory
m
FlowController
Kvs
Mandatory
m3 (h
√
bar)−1
Kv
Optional
m3 (h
√
bar)−1
Nominal flow
Mandatory
m3/s
ValveType
Mandatory
­
Table A.1: Requirements for component properties in the BIM database.
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
57
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX A. REQUIREMENTS FOR BIM DATABASE
58
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:67==
B
Prototype modelica model
within EvaluationCase;
model Ejvinds_Optimized
"Prototype model of the case study"
package MediumW = Buildings.Media.Water(T_default=273.15+70) annotation (
__Dymola_choicesAllMatching=true);
parameter Modelica.SIunits.MassFlowRate m_flow_nom=0.0294 "Nominal flow on
water side";
,→
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure pumMain(
pum(per(pressure(V_flow(displayUnit="m3/s") =
{0,2.2e-06,4.7e-06,6.9e-06,
,→
9.4e-06,1.17e-05,1.47e-05,1.64e-05,1.89e-05,2.11e-05,2.36e-05},
dp(
,→
displayUnit="bar") =
{151200,150600,146800,139700,129500,115900,
,→
94500,79200,56100,29600,0}), use_powerCharacteristic=true)),
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
constPressure=95000)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{-38,-54},{-18,-34}})));
parameter Modelica.SIunits.MassFlowRate m_flow_max=m_flow_nom*2;
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear regValA(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal=
m_flow_nom,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=0.3)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(
,→
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=180,
origin={-32,-80})));
parameter Modelica.SIunits.PressureDifference dp_pump=20600;
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant valConA2(k=1) annotation (Placement(
transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=0,
origin={-70,-108})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction tee1(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,-1},
dp_nominal={0.1,-0.1,-0.1}) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=90,
origin={40,-20})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction tee2(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
59
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,1},
dp_nominal={0.1,-0.1,0.1})
annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=180,
origin={100,-80})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipSup(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.01,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=1.5)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{0,-54},{20,-34}})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipRet(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.01,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=1.5) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=180,
origin={10,-80})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipSupA2(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.001,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=4.6) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=90,
origin={40,20})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipRetA2(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.001,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=4.6) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=270,
origin={100,20})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipRetA1(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
60
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.01,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=3) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=270,
origin={170,-50})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe
pipSupA1(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
thicknessIns=0.001,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.015,
length=3) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=0,
origin={70,-20})));
parameter Modelica.SIunits.MassFlowRate m_flow_air=V_room*1.2/3600;
parameter Modelica.SIunits.Volume V_room=6*5*3;
ToolchainLib.GenericPlant plant(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nom=m_flow_nom,
bou(use_T_in=true),
setpoint=70) annotation (Placement(transformation(rotation=0,
extent={{-78,
,→
-72},{-58,-52}})));
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear regValA1(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=0.12) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=180,
origin={130,-80})));
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear regValA2(
redeclare package Medium = Buildings.Media.Water,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=0.16) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=-90,
origin={100,-50})));
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant regValCon(k=1) annotation (Placement(
transformation(
extent={{10,-10},{-10,10}},
rotation=0,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
61
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
origin={148,-28})));
ToolchainLib.Room room
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{120,128},{180,188}})));
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant valOpen(k=1) annotation (Placement(
transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=180,
origin={130,110})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction tee4(
redeclare package Medium = Buildings.Media.Water,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,-1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0}) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{10,10},{-10,-10}},
rotation=90,
origin={100,90})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction tee3(
redeclare package Medium = Buildings.Media.Water,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0}) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=90,
origin={40,90})));
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure pumSecondary(
pum(per(pressure(V_flow={0,1.4e-06,2.5e-06,3.9e-06,5e-06,6.4e-06,7.8e-06,
,→
8.9e-06,1e-05,1.14e-05,1.25e-05}, dp(displayUnit="bar") =
{57300,
,→
57100,55600,52900,49100,43900,35800,30000,21200,11200,0}))),
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
constPressure=36000) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=90,
origin={40,126})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.CheckValve cheValA2(
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=13.5,
redeclare package Medium = Buildings.Media.Water) annotation (Placement(
transformation(
extent={{-10,-10},{10,10}},
rotation=180,
origin={70,90})));
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear regValA21(
redeclare package Medium = Buildings.Media.Water,
m_flow_nominal=m_flow_nom,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=0.16) annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=-90,
origin={100,128})));
62
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow
heaCoi(
redeclare package Medium1 = Buildings.Media.Air,
redeclare package Medium2 = MediumW,
m1_flow_nominal=0.0367,
m2_flow_nominal=0.01,
show_T=true,
dp1_nominal(displayUnit="Pa") = 8.16,
dp2_nominal(displayUnit="kPa") = 720,
UA_nominal=29.9)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{86,138},{56,168}})));
ToolchainLib.MotorValve
tempConVal(redeclare package
Medium = MediumW,
tempSP=18,
Kv=0.16,
m_flow_nom=m_flow_nom)
annotation (Placement(transformation(
extent={{-10,10},{10,-10}},
rotation=270,
origin={100,56})));
ToolchainLib.Radiator radiator(rad(
Q_flow_nominal=1681,
T_a_nominal=348.15,
T_b_nominal=338.15,
dp_nominal(displayUnit="bar") = 27600))
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{134,26},{164,56}})));
equation
connect(plant.port_b, pumMain.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-68,-54.2222},
,→
{-68,-44},{-38,-44}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(regValA.port_b, plant.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-42,-80},{-68,
,→
-80},{-68,-58.6667}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(valConA2.y, regValA.y) annotation
(Line(points={{-59,-108},{-52,-108},
,→
{-52,-62},{-32,-62},{-32,-68}},
color={0,0,127}));
connect(pumMain.port_b, pipSup.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{-18,-44},{0,-44}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(pipSup.port_b, tee1.port_1)
annotation (Line(points={{20,-44},{40,-44},{40,-30}},
color={0,127,255}));
,→
connect(tee1.port_2, pipSupA2.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{40,-10},{40,10}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee1.port_3, pipSupA1.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{50,-20},{60,-20}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee2.port_2, pipRet.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{90,-80},{20,-80}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(pipRet.port_b, regValA.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-1.77636e-15,
,→
-80},{-22,-80}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(pipRetA1.port_b, regValA1.port_a)
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
63
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
annotation (Line(points={{170,-60},{170,-80},{140,-80}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(regValA1.port_b,tee2. port_1) annotation
(Line(points={{120,-80},{110,
,→
-80}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(pipRetA2.port_b, regValA2.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{100,10},{100,-40}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(regValA2.port_b,tee2. port_3)
annotation (Line(points={{100,-60},{100,-70}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(regValCon.y, regValA1.y) annotation
(Line(points={{137,-28},{130,-28},
,→
{130,-68}},
color={0,0,127}));
connect(regValCon.y, regValA2.y) annotation
(Line(points={{137,-28},{80,-28},
,→
{80,-50},{88,-50}},
color={0,0,127}));
connect(tee3.port_3,cheValA2. port_b)
annotation (Line(points={{50,90},{60,90}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(cheValA2.port_a,tee4. port_3)
annotation (Line(points={{80,90},{90,90}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(valOpen.y,regValA21. y)
annotation (Line(points={{119,110},{80,110},{80,128},{88,128}},
color={0,0,127}));
connect(pumSecondary.port_b,heaCoi. port_a2)
annotation (Line(points={{40,136},{40,144},{56,144}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(regValA21.port_a,heaCoi. port_b2)
annotation (Line(points={{100,138},{100,144},{86,144}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee3.port_2,pumSecondary. port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{40,100},{40,116}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee4.port_1,regValA21. port_b) annotation
(Line(points={{100,100},{
,→
100,118}},
color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee4.port_2,tempConVal. port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{100,80},{100,66}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(heaCoi.port_a1, room.port_vent_cold) annotation
(Line(points={{86,162},
,→
{100,162},{100,169.667},{125,169.667}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(heaCoi.port_b1, room.port_vent_warm) annotation
(Line(points={{56,162},
,→
{40,162},{40,175.667},{125,175.667}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(tee3.port_1, pipSupA2.port_b)
annotation (Line(points={{40,80},{40,30}},
color={0,127,255}));
,→
connect(room.heatPort, radiator.heatPort)
annotation (Line(points={{150,133},{150,53},{149,53}},
color={191,0,0}));
,→
64
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
connect(pipSupA1.port_b, radiator.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{80,-20},{
,→
128,-20},{128,41},{134,41}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(tempConVal.port_b, pipRetA2.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{100,46},{100,30}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(radiator.port_b, pipRetA1.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{164,41},{170,41},{170,-40}},
color={0,127,255}));
,→
connect(room.inTemp, tempConVal.conInput) annotation
(Line(points={{121.667,
,→
158},{116,158},{116,76},{80,76},{80,56},{89,56}},
color={0,0,127}));
annotation (
Diagram(coordinateSystem(extent={{-100,-120},{240,200}})),
Icon(coordinateSystem(extent={{-100,-120},{240,200}})),
experiment(
StartTime=-86400,
StopTime=1209600,
Interval=600,
__Dymola_Algorithm="Dassl"));
end Ejvinds_Optimized;
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
65
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX B. PROTOTYPE MODELICA MODEL
66
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:75==
C
Code
This appendix presents the written Python code. When implemented in the BIM platform,
the toolchain is structured in the directory tree seen below. In the api folder, the API for the
toolchain is located in the routes.py file. The mappers folder contains files related to the
mapping process, including templates. In the services folder, functions that combine map­
pers and provide other services are defined. Static files that contain settings and variables
are defined in the statics folder.
api
routes.py
mappers
modelica_mapper.py
modelica_component_mapper.py
modelica_connector_mapper.py
services
modelica_simulation_service.py
enrich_data_for_modelica.py
statics
result_keys.json
routes.py
from app import app
from flask import request
from app.services import modelica_simulation_service
@app.route('/run_modelica_simulation', methods=['POST'])
def run_modelica_simulation():
data = request.get_data()
results_from_modelica_simulation =
modelica_simulation_service.convert_simulate_modelica(data)
,→
return results_from_modelica_simulation
modelica_simulation_service.py
import json
import os
import time
from app.mappers.modelica_mapper import map_to_modelica_model,
create_modelica_package
,→
from buildingspy.simulate.Simulator import Simulator
from buildingspy.io.outputfile import Reader
def convert_simulate_modelica(data):
'''
Main function that combines model creation, simulation and results
reading
,→
'''
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
67
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX C. CODE
start_time = time.perf_counter() # Timer
data_parsed = json.loads(data)
system = extract_system_from_data(data_parsed)
# Info on package/model name and simulation length (days)
package_name = "Auto_Generated"
model_name = "Model"
days = 7
modelica_package = create_modelica_package(package_name) # Create
Modelica package text
,→
modelica_model =
map_to_modelica_model(system,days,package_name,model_name) # Create
Modelica model text
,→
,→
# Write Modelica package to temporary file
pa_path = f"../../rawdata/{package_name}"
if not os.path.exists(pa_path):
os.makedirs(pa_path)
pa_fp = os.path.join(pa_path,"package.mo")
with open(pa_fp, "w") as pa_file:
pa_file.write(modelica_package)
pa_file.close()
# Write Modelica model to temporary file
mo_fp = os.path.join(pa_path,f"{model_name}.mo")
with open(mo_fp, "w") as mo_file:
mo_file.write(modelica_model)
mo_file.close()
model_creation_time = time.perf_counter()- start_time # Timer
# Simulate model
solver = "dassl"
simulation_model = f"{package_name}.{model_name}"
output_dir = f"../../rawdata/{package_name}_Output"
package_path = f"../../rawdata/{package_name}"
simulate_modelica_model(days,output_dir,package_path,solver,simulation_model)
,→
model_simulation_time = time.perf_counter() - start_time -
model_creation_time # Timer
,→
# Read results file
mat_file = os.path.join(output_dir,f"{model_name}.mat")
results = read_simulation_results(system,mat_file,output_dir)
68
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C. CODE
results_reading_time = time.perf_counter() - start_time -
model_simulation_time
,→
# Print times to console
total_time = time.perf_counter() - start_time # Timer
print(f"Model creation time: \t {model_creation_time}")
print(f"Model simulation time: \t {model_simulation_time}")
print(f"Results reading time: \t {results_reading_time}")
print(f"Total time: \t {total_time}")
return results
def extract_system_from_data(data):
# Extract heating system components to one list:
system = []
system += data["system"]["SubSystems"]["heating"]["SupplySystem"]
system += data["system"]["SubSystems"]["heating"]["ReturnSystem"]
system += data["system"]["SubSystems"]["heating"]["Suppliers"]
system += data["system"]["SubSystems"]["heating"]["Consumers"]
return system
def simulate_modelica_model(days,output_dir,package_path,
solver="dassl",model = "Auto_Generated.Model"):
,→
# Parameters:
duration = 24*60*60*days # set duration in seconds based on input
intervals = duration/(3600/6) # define number of intervals in output -
every 10 minutes
,→
s=Simulator(model,
"dymola",outputDirectory=output_dir,packagePath=package_path) #
instantiate model for simulation in BuildingsPy
,→
,→
s.setStartTime(-24*3600) # set start time to -1 days for initialization
s.setStopTime(duration) # set stop time of simulation
s.setSolver(solver) # set solver - default is DASSL
s.setNumberOfIntervals(int(intervals)) # define number of intervals in
output
,→
s.showGUI(show=True)
# show Dymola GUI when simulating
print("Starting simulation")
s.simulate() # simulate model
print("Simulation done!")
return
def read_simulation_results(system,mat_file,output_dir):
# Read results from
r = Reader(mat_file, "dymola")
# Import needed results keys:
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
69
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX C. CODE
fp = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__),
'../static/result_keys.json')
,→
with open(fp, "r") as res_keys_file:
res_keys = json.load(res_keys_file)
res_keys_file.close()
results = {}
i = 0
for comp in system:
# get needed results for component based on its class
if comp["ComponentType"] != "FlowController" and
comp["ComponentType"] != "FlowMovingDevice":
,→
keys = res_keys[comp["ComponentType"]]
elif comp["ComponentType"] == "FlowMovingDevice":
keys = res_keys[comp["ComponentType"]][comp["control_type"]]
elif comp["ComponentType"] == "FlowController":
keys = res_keys[comp["ComponentType"]][comp["ValveType"]]
comp_results = {}
for key in keys:
(t,y) = r.values(f'''c{comp["Tag"]}.{key}''')
comp_results[key] = dict(zip(t.tolist(),y.tolist()))
results[comp["Tag"]] = comp_results
i+=1
# write results to JSON text string
results_json = json.dumps(results, indent = 4)
return results_json
enrich_data_for_modelica.py
import json
import math
def add_lengths(system):
'''
Calculates length of components, that include the key Length (mainly
pipe segments).
,→
'''
for component in system:
if "length" in component.keys() and component["length"] == None and
None not in component["ConnectedWith"]:
,→
len_X = component["ConnectedWith"][0]["Coordinates"]["X"] - \
component["ConnectedWith"][1]["Coordinates"]["X"]
len_Y = component["ConnectedWith"][0]["Coordinates"]["Y"] - \
component["ConnectedWith"][1]["Coordinates"]["Y"]
len_Z = component["ConnectedWith"][0]["Coordinates"]["Z"] - \
component["ConnectedWith"][1]["Coordinates"]["Z"]
component["length"] =
round(math.sqrt(len_X**2+len_Y**2+len_Z**2),2)
,→
70
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C. CODE
elif "length" in component.keys() and component["length"] == None
and None in component["ConnectedWith"]:
,→
component["length"] = 0.125
return system
def add_port_names(system):
'''
Adds name of in- and out ports to components and their connectors.
'''
# Add info on class and port name in components
for component in system:
if component["ComponentType"] == "Tee":
component["inport_name"] = "port_1"
component["secondaryport_name"] = "port_3"
component["outport_name"] = "port_2"
elif component["ComponentType"] == "HeatExchanger":
component["inport_name"] = "port_a2"
component["outport_name"] = "port_b2"
else:
component["inport_name"] = "port_a"
component["outport_name"] = "port_b"
# Add port names in connectors
for component in system:
for con in component["ConnectedWith"]:
if con != None:
if con["Tag"] != "Not connected":
connector_type = [c["ComponentType"] for c in system if
c["Tag"] == con["Tag"]][0]
,→
if connector_type == "Tee":
con["inport_name"] = "port_1"
con["secondaryport_name"] = "port_3"
con["outport_name"] = "port_2"
elif connector_type == "HeatExchanger":
con["inport_name"] = "port_a2"
con["outport_name"] = "port_b2"
else:
con["inport_name"] = "port_a"
con["outport_name"] = "port_b"
else:
con["inport_name"] = None
con["outport_name"] = None
return system
def enrich(system):
system = add_lengths(system)
system = add_port_names(system)
return system
modelica_mapper.py
import app.mappers.modelica_component_mapper as comp_mapper
import app.mappers.modelica_connector_mapper as conn_mapper
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
71
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX C. CODE
from app.services.enrich_data_for_modelica import enrich
def create_modelica_package(package_name = "Auto_Generated"):
'''
Function that creates text for a Modelica package file.
'''
s = f'''within ;
package {package_name}
annotation (uses(Buildings(version="7.0.0"),
Modelica(version="3.2.3"),ToolchainLib));
,→
end {package_name};'''
return s
def map_to_modelica_model(system,days,package_name = "Auto_Generated",
model_name = "Model"):
,→
'''
Function that maps a system (in JSON format) to templates from defined
in comp_mapper and conn_mapper
,→
'''
comp_mapper.model_name = model_name
comp_mapper.package_name = package_name
# Enrich data:
system = enrich(system)
# Write first lines of model:
mo_file = comp_mapper.model_start()
counter = 0 # Counter for visual distribution of components
gridwidth = 9 # Width of the visual distribution of the components
# Loop over each component in the system and map to Modelica templates
for component in system:
comp_mapper.x_pos = counter % gridwidth
# Position in x dimension
,→
comp_mapper.y_pos = int((counter - comp_mapper.x_pos)/gridwidth)
# Position in y dimension
,→
if component["ComponentType"] == "Segment":
mo_file += comp_mapper.segment(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "FlowMovingDevice":
mo_file += comp_mapper.pump(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "Radiator":
mo_file += comp_mapper.radiator(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "HeatExchanger":
mo_file += comp_mapper.heaCoil(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "Bend":
mo_file += comp_mapper.bend(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "Tee":
mo_file += comp_mapper.tee(component)
elif component["ComponentType"] == "FlowController":
72
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C. CODE
mo_file += comp_mapper.valve(component)
else:
mo_file += f'''
// Component with Tag {component["Tag"]} of type
{component["ComponentType"]} not recognized.'''
,→
counter += 1
# Instantiation of plant
mo_file += comp_mapper.plant(system)
# Instantiation of room
mo_file += comp_mapper.room()
mo_file+= '''
equation'''
# Create connectors
for component in system:
conn_mapper.mo_file = mo_file # Used for identifying previous
connections
,→
mo_file += conn_mapper.connector(component)
# Add end of model
mo_file+= comp_mapper.model_end(days)
return mo_file
modelica_component_mapper.py
def model_start(): # Starting text of model - define media
s = f''' within {package_name};
model {model_name} "Auto-generated model"
package MediumW = Buildings.Media.Water(T_default=273.15+70)
annotation (
,→
__Dymola_choicesAllMatching=true);
package MediumA = Buildings.Media.Air annotation (
__Dymola_choicesAllMatching=true);
'''
return s
def model_end(days): # Last part of model
stop_time = 24*60*60*days
s = f'''
annotation (experiment(StopTime={stop_time},
__Dymola_Algorithm="Dassl"));
,→
end {model_name};'''
return s
def segment(comp):
dimension = [conn["Dimension"] for conn in comp["ConnectedWith"] if conn
!= None][0]
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
73
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX C. CODE
s = f'''
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal={comp["nom_flow"]},
thicknessIns={comp["insulation"]["thickness"]},
lambdaIns={comp["insulation"]["lambda"]},
diameter={dimension},
nSeg=2,
length={comp["length"]})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
'''
return s
def pump(comp):
if comp["control_type"] == "constant_speed":
s = f'''
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
speed={comp["speed"]},
pum(per(
pressure(V_flow={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["V_flow"]))}}},
dp={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["pressure"]))}}}),
,→
use_powerCharacteristic=true,
power(V_flow={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["V_flow"]))}}},
P={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["power"]))}}}))))
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
'''
elif comp["control_type"] == "constant_pressure":
s=f'''
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantPressure c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
pum(p_start(displayUnit="Pa") = {comp["Head"]},
per(pressure(V_flow={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["V_flow"]))}}},
dp={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["pressure"]))}}}),
,→
,→
power(V_flow={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["V_flow"]))}}},
P={{{', '.join(map(str,comp["per"]["power"]))}}}))),
,→
constPressure(displayUnit="Pa") = {comp["Head"]})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
'''
else:
s = f'''
// Control type of pump {comp["Tag"]} not recognized.
'''
return s
74
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C. CODE
def ispropin(prop, comp): # Function to check if a property is included in
the component. If it is, it will return the property definition.
,→
if prop in comp.keys():
return f'{prop} = {comp[prop]},'
else:
return ''
def radiator(comp):
'''
Parsing of radiators to custom radiator model including TRV with one
heat port and one control port (for setpoint). If room setpoint is
specified, it will be written. Otherwise default in model is used.
,→
,→
'''
s = f'''
ToolchainLib.Radiator c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
rad(
Q_flow_nominal={comp["nominal_heat_flux"]},
T_a_nominal={comp["nominal_supply_temp"]+273.15},
T_b_nominal={comp["nominal_return_temp"]+273.15},
{ispropin('n',comp)}
{ispropin('fraRad',comp)}
dp_nominal={comp["nominal_pressure_loss"]},
TAir_nominal={comp["nominal_room_temp"]+273.15})'''
if "KV" in comp.keys():
s+= f''',
trv(Kv={comp["KV"]}))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y
,→
'''
else:
s+= f''')
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y
,→
'''
return s
def heaCoil(comp):
import math
delta_T_A = comp["t_supply_nominal_water"]-comp["t_return_nominal_air"]
delta_T_B = comp["t_return_nominal_water"]-comp["t_supply_nominal_air"]
LMTD = (delta_T_A-delta_T_B)/(math.log(delta_T_A)-math.log(delta_T_B))
Q = comp["Q_flow_nominal"]
UA = Q/LMTD
s = f'''
Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium1 = MediumA,
redeclare package Medium2 = MediumW,
m1_flow_nominal={comp["flow_nominal_air"]},
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
75
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX C. CODE
m2_flow_nominal={comp["flow_nominal_water"]},
show_T=true,
dp1_nominal={comp["dp_nominal_air"]},
dp2_nominal={comp["dp_nominal_water"]},
UA_nominal={round(UA,2)})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{20+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{0+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
'''
return s
def bend(comp):
import math
if "Angle" in comp.keys():
comp["delta"] = round(comp["Angle"]*math.pi/180,4)
s = f"""
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c{comp["Tag"]}(redeclare
package Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
{ispropin('delta',comp)}
{ispropin('K',comp)}
d_hyd={comp["Dimension"]},
R_0={comp["Radius"]}))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
"""
return s
def tee(comp):
inports = [con["Direction"] for con in
comp["ConnectedWith"]].count("In")
,→
if inports == 1:
port3_dir = "-1"
elif inports == 2:
port3_dir = "1"
s = f"""
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={{1,-1,{port3_dir}}},
dp_nominal={{0,0,0}})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
"""
return s
def valve(comp):
'''
Parsing of valves. Kv is currently hardcoded, but could be defined by
Kvs and a constant control
,→
'''
s = ""
76
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX C. CODE
if "Kv" not in comp.keys():
comp["Kv"] = comp["Kvs"]
if comp["ValveType"] == "STAD":
if "Kv" in comp.keys():
y = comp["Kv"]/comp["Kvs"]
else:
y = 1
s = f"""
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal= {comp["nom_flow"]},
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv={comp["Kvs"]})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant valCon{comp["Tag"]}(k={y})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{-30,-30}},{{-10,-10}}}})));
,→
"""
if comp["ValveType"] == "ASV-PV":
if "Kv" in comp.keys():
y = comp["Kv"]/comp["Kvs"]
else:
y = 1
s = f"""
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayPressureIndependent
c{comp["Tag"]}(
,→
m_flow_nominal={comp["nom_flow"]},
show_T=true,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv={comp["Kvs"]},
redeclare package Medium = MediumW)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant valCon{comp["Tag"]}(k={y})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{-30,-30}},{{-10,-10}}}})));
,→
"""
if comp["ValveType"] == "KONT":
s = f"""
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.CheckValve c{comp["Tag"]}(
m_flow_nominal={comp["nom_flow"]},
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv={comp["Kvs"]},
redeclare package Medium = MediumW)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
77
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX C. CODE
"""
if comp["ValveType"] == "MOTOR":
s = f"""
ToolchainLib.MotorValve c{comp["Tag"]}(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
tempSP=18,
Kv={comp["Kvs"]},
m_flow_nom={comp["nom_flow"]})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
"""
return s
def plant(system):
'''
Instantiates the heating plant as a generic plant with a fixed supply
temperature of 70 deg C.
,→
Could be extended with a conditional statement to support definition of
the plant type in database.
,→
'''
nom_flow = [comp["nom_flow"] for comp in system if "nom_flow" in
comp.keys()][0]
,→
s = f"""
ToolchainLib.GenericPlant plant(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nom={nom_flow},
bou(use_T_in=true),
setpoint=70)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
"""
return s
def room():
s = f"""
ToolchainLib.Room room(redeclare package MediumA = MediumA)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{{{{0+x_pos*30},{0+y_pos*30}}},{{{20+x_pos*30},{20+y_p
,→
"""
return s
modelica_connector_mapper.py
def connector(comp):
tags = [con["Tag"] for con in comp["ConnectedWith"] if con != None and
"Direction" in con.keys()] # List with tags of connected components
,→
inout = [con["Direction"] for con in comp["ConnectedWith"] if con !=
None and "Direction" in con.keys()] # List whether the above
components are in- or output
,→
,→
78
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C. CODE
outportnames = [con["outport_name"] for con in comp["ConnectedWith"] if
con != None and "Direction" in con.keys()] # List the Modelica
output connector port name for the connectors
,→
,→
con_string = "" # Instantiate connector string
if "In" in inout and comp["ComponentType"] != "Tee": # All components
that have input connectors but tees
,→
intag = tags[inout.index("In")] # Tag for the input connector
if f'''{intag}.{outportnames[inout.index("In")]}''' in mo_file: # If
tag of the connected component is already input to another
component assume the connected component is a tee and use
secondary port (port 3)
,→
,→
,→
print(f"""{intag} is input to multiple components and is treated
as Tee. {comp["Tag"]} has been connected to port_3. \n""") #
Create awareness of this
,→
,→
con_string = f'''
connect(c{intag}.port_3,c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]})
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
else: # If tag of connected component has not been used before,
treat it as normal connection
,→
con_string = f'''
connect(c{intag}.{outportnames[inout.index("In")]},c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
if comp["ComponentType"] == "FlowController" and comp["ValveType"]
!= "KONT" and comp["ValveType"] != "MOTOR": # If the component
is a valve (and not a motor or check valve), also connect it to
a constant input
,→
,→
,→
con_string += f'''
connect(valCon{comp["Tag"]}.y, c{comp["Tag"]}.y) annotation
(Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
elif "In" in inout and comp["ComponentType"] == "Tee": # Tees with input
connectors
,→
in_idx = [i for i in range(len(inout)) if inout[i] == "In"] # Index
of all input connections
,→
intags = [tags[i] for i in in_idx]
outports = [outportnames[i] for i in in_idx]
# Tees with 1 input
if len(intags) == 1:
con_string = f'''
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
79
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX C. CODE
connect(c{intags[0]}.{outports[0]},c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]})
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
# Tees with 2 inputs
elif len(intags) ==2:
con_string = f'''
connect(c{intags[0]}.{outports[0]},c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]})
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
connect(c{intags[1]}.{outports[1]},c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["secondaryport_name"]})
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
# Tees with more (or 0) inputs - return error in model
else:
con_string = f'''
// Too many (or 0) input connectors for tee {comp["Tag"]}
'''
print(f"""Too many (or 0) input connectors for tee
{comp["Tag"]}""")
,→
elif comp["SystemName"] == "varme, frem": # If there are no inputs and
the component is in the heating supply system, treat is as the first
component and connect it to the plant
,→
,→
con_string = f"""
connect(plant.port_b,c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["inport_name"]})
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
"""
print(f"""Could not find input connector for {comp["ComponentType"]}
{comp["Tag"]}, which will be treated as start of system. \n""")
,→
else:
con_string = f"""
// Connector for {comp["ComponentType"]} {comp["Tag"]} could not be
created.
,→
"""
if "Out" not in inout: # If there is no output connector on the
component, treat it as the end of the system and connect it to the
plant
,→
,→
con_string += f"""
80
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C. CODE
connect(c{comp["Tag"]}.{comp["outport_name"]},plant.port_a)
annotation (Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
"""
print(f"""Could not find output connector for
{comp["ComponentType"]} {comp["Tag"]}, which will be treated as
end of system. \n""")
,→
,→
if comp["ComponentType"] == "Radiator": # Connect radiators to the room
con_string += f'''
connect(c{comp["Tag"]}.heatPort, room.heatPort) annotation
(Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
if comp["ComponentType"] == "HeatExchanger": # Connect heating coils to
the ventilation system
,→
con_string += f'''
connect(c{comp["Tag"]}.port_b1, room.port_vent_warm) annotation
(Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
connect(room.port_vent_cold, c{comp["Tag"]}.port_a1) annotation
(Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
if comp["ComponentType"] == "FlowController" and comp["ValveType"] ==
"MOTOR": # Connect motorized valves to the room supply air
temperature
,→
,→
con_string += f'''
connect(room.inTemp, c{comp["Tag"]}.conInput) annotation
(Line(points={{{{-46,16}},{{-28,
,→
16}},{{-28,0}},{{-10,0}}}}, color={{0,127,255}}));
'''
return con_string
result_keys.json
{
"Segment": [
"m_flow",
"dp",
"heatPort.T"
],
"Bend": [
"m_flow",
"dp"
],
"HeatExchanger": [
"m2_flow",
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
81
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX C. CODE
"dp2",
"Q2_flow",
"sta_a2.T",
"sta_b2.T"
],
"FlowController": {
"MOTOR": [
"tempConValve.m_flow",
"tempConValve.dp",
"tempConValve.k"
],
"STAD": [
"m_flow",
"dp",
"k"
],
"KONT": [
"m_flow",
"dp",
"k"
],
"ASV-PV": [
"m_flow",
"dp",
"k"
]
},
"FlowMovingDevice": {
"constant_speed": [
"pum.m_flow",
"pum.dp",
"pum.P",
"pum.y"
],
"constant_pressure": [
"pum.m_flow",
"pum.dp",
"pum.P",
"pum.y"
]
},
"Radiator": [
"rad.m_flow",
"rad.dp",
"rad.Q_flow",
"rad.sta_a.T",
"rad.sta_b.T"
],
"Tee": [
"res1.m_flow",
82
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX C. CODE
"res2.m_flow",
"res3.m_flow",
"res1.dp",
"res2.dp",
"res3.dp"
]
}
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
83
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX C. CODE
84
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:93==
D
Auto-generated modelica model
within Auto_Generated;
model Model "Auto-generated model made with mako templates"
package MediumW = Buildings.Media.Water(T_default=273.15+70)
annotation (
,→
__Dymola_choicesAllMatching=true);
package MediumA = Buildings.Media.Air annotation (
__Dymola_choicesAllMatching=true);
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1614445(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.28)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{0,0},{20,20}})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction c1619208(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0})
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{30,0},{50,20}})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1619209(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.89)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{60,0},{80,20}})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1639399(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=4.7)
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
85
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,0},{110,20}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1645277(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.02)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,0},{140,20}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1645287(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.85)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,0},{170,20}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1645492(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.75)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,0},{200,20}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1645494(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,0},{230,20}})));
,→
86
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1645496(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,0},{260,20}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646582(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=4.33)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{0,30},{20,50}})));
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646632(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.02)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,30},{50,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646636(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.85)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,30},{80,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646640(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
87
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.75)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,30},{110,50}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1646642(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,30},{140,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646936(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=3.53)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,30},{170,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647082(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=3.31)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,30},{200,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647195(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.14)
88
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,30},{230,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647198(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.36)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,30},{260,50}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647201(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.14)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{0,60},{20,80}})));
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647204(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 0.7854,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,60},{50,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647209(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 0.7854,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,60},{80,80}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647213(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
89
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.55)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,60},{110,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647216(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 0.7854,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,60},{140,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647913(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,60},{170,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647915(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,60},{200,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647925(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,60},{230,80}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655822(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
90
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.125)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,60},{260,80}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1656403(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,90},{20,110}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction c1656419(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,-1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,90},{50,110}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1656420(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=8.64)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,90},{80,110}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1656425(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 0.7854,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,90},{110,110}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1658714(
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
91
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.34)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,90},{140,110}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1670764(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.18)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,90},{170,110}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670787(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,90},{200,110}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670789(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,90},{230,110}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1670916(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
92
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
nSeg=2,
length=0.18)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,90},{260,110}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670933(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,120},{20,140}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670935(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,120},{50,140}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1702980(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,120},{80,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1703078(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.64)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,120},{110,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1625643(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
93
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.86)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,120},{140,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction c1625755(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,-1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,120},{170,140}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.MotorValve c1638649(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
tempSP=18,
Kv=0.16,
m_flow_nom=0.05)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,120},{200,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1638773(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.83)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,120},{230,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1638919(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.024999999999999977,
nSeg=2,
length=0.125)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,120},{260,140}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1639051(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
94
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.024999999999999977,
nSeg=2,
length=1.58)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,150},{20,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1645849(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.02)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,150},{50,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1645859(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.86)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,150},{80,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646590(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.024999999999999977,
nSeg=2,
length=3.27)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,150},{110,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646605(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
95
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.58)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,150},{140,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646648(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=1.02)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,150},{170,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1646652(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.86)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,150},{200,170}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1646656(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,150},{230,170}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647084(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
96
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
length=8.64)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,150},{260,170}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647250(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,180},{20,200}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Junction c1647288(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal={1,-1,1},
dp_nominal={0,0,0})
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,180},{50,200}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1647289(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=3.81)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,180},{80,200}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647598(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,180},{110,200}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647921(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
97
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,180},{140,200}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1647923(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,180},{170,200}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1648179(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,180},{200,200}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear c1648251(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal= 0.05,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=3)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,180},{230,200}})));
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant
valCon1648251(k=0.09999999999999999)
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{-30,-30},{-10,-10}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1648253(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=3.07)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,180},{260,200}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1654825(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
98
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.35)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,210},{20,230}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1655431(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,210},{50,230}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear c1655452(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal= 0.05,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=3)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,210},{80,230}})));
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant
valCon1655452(k=0.05333333333333334)
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{-30,-30},{-10,-10}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655454(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.024999999999999977,
nSeg=2,
length=0.89)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,210},{110,230}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear c1655556(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal= 0.05,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=3)
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
99
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,210},{140,230}})));
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant
valCon1655556(k=0.05333333333333334)
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{-30,-30},{-10,-10}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655615(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.024999999999999977,
nSeg=2,
length=3.78)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,210},{170,230}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655634(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.45)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,210},{200,230}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.Actuators.Valves.TwoWayLinear c1655706(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
m_flow_nominal= 0.05,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=3)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,210},{230,230}})));
,→
Modelica.Blocks.Sources.Constant valCon1655706(k=0.04)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{-30,-30},{-10,-10}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655765(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
100
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=4.06)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,210},{260,230}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1655782(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.21)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,240},{20,260}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.CheckValve c1662687(
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
CvData=Buildings.Fluid.Types.CvTypes.Kv,
Kv=8,
redeclare package Medium = MediumW)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{30,240},{50,260}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1662689(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.34)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,240},{80,260}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1670714(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.19)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{90,240},{110,260}})));
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
101
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670740(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{120,240},{140,260}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670742(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{150,240},{170,260}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.FixedResistances.Pipe c1670862(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
allowFlowReversal=true,
m_flow_nominal=0.05,
thicknessIns=0.05,
lambdaIns=0.037,
diameter=0.025,
nSeg=2,
length=0.19)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{180,240},{200,260}})));
,→
Modelica.Fluid.Fittings.Bends.CurvedBend c1670891(redeclare package
Medium
,→
= MediumW, geometry(
delta = 1.5708,
d_hyd=0.025,
R_0=0.5))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{210,240},{230,260}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed c1614379(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
speed=1,
pum(per(
pressure(V_flow={0.0, 1.4e-06, 2.5e-06, 3.9e-06, 5.3e-06,
6.7e-06, 7.8e-06, 8.9e-06, 1.03e-05, 1.14e-05, 1.25e-05},
dp={3510, 3510, 3510, 3510, 3510, 3510, 3510, 2794, 1971,
1039, 0}),
,→
,→
,→
102
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
use_powerCharacteristic=true,
power(V_flow={0.0, 1.4e-06, 2.5e-06, 3.9e-06, 5.3e-06, 6.7e-06,
7.8e-06, 8.9e-06, 1.03e-05, 1.14e-05, 1.25e-05}, P={0, 18,
18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18}))))
,→
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{240,240},{260,260}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.PumpConstantSpeed c1703076(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
speed=1,
pum(per(
pressure(V_flow={0.0, 2.5e-06, 5.3e-06, 7.8e-06, 1.06e-05,
1.31e-05, 1.58e-05, 1.81e-05, 2.06e-05, 2.28e-05, 2.53e-05},
dp={9265, 9265, 9265, 9265, 9265, 9265, 9265, 7373, 5186,
2735, 0}),
,→
,→
,→
use_powerCharacteristic=true,
power(V_flow={0.0, 2.5e-06, 5.3e-06, 7.8e-06, 1.06e-05, 1.31e-05,
1.58e-05, 1.81e-05, 2.06e-05, 2.28e-05, 2.53e-05}, P={0, 18,
18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18}))))
,→
,→
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{0,270},{20,290}})));
,→
Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.DryCoilCounterFlow c1670656(
redeclare package Medium1 = MediumA,
redeclare package Medium2 = MediumW,
m1_flow_nominal=0.0367,
m2_flow_nominal=0.01,
show_T=true,
dp1_nominal=8.16,
dp2_nominal=720,
UA_nominal=29.86)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{50,270},{30,290}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.Radiator c1670836(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
rad(
Q_flow_nominal=1681,
T_a_nominal=348.15,
T_b_nominal=338.15,
n = 1.3,
fraRad = 0.35,
dp_nominal=27600,
TAir_nominal=293.15),
trv(Kv=0.1))
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,270},{80,290}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.GenericPlant plant(
redeclare package Medium = MediumW,
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
103
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
m_flow_nom=0.05,
bou(use_T_in=true),
setpoint=70)
annotation
(Placement(transformation(extent={{60,270},{80,290}})));
,→
ToolchainLib.Room room(redeclare package MediumA = MediumA)
annotation (Placement(transformation(extent={{60,270},{80,290}})));
equation
connect(c1614379.port_b,c1614445.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1619209.port_b,c1619208.port_1) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1662689.port_b,c1619208.port_3) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647925.port_b,c1619209.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1656403.port_b,c1639399.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670789.port_b,c1645277.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1645494.port_b,c1645287.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1645496.port_b,c1645492.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1645492.port_b,c1645494.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1614445.port_b,c1645496.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
104
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
connect(c1647913.port_b,c1646582.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670935.port_b,c1646632.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646642.port_b,c1646636.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647915.port_b,c1646640.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646640.port_b,c1646642.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1702980.port_b,c1646936.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647216.port_b,c1647082.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647204.port_b,c1647195.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647209.port_b,c1647198.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1656425.port_b,c1647201.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647198.port_b,c1647204.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647201.port_b,c1647209.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1656419.port_2,c1647213.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
105
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647195.port_b,c1647216.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647082.port_b,c1647913.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646582.port_b,c1647915.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1639399.port_b,c1647925.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(plant.port_b,c1655822.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1656420.port_b,c1656403.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646936.port_b,c1656419.port_1) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1656419.port_3,c1656420.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647213.port_b,c1656425.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1619208.port_2,c1658714.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670787.port_b,c1670764.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1645277.port_b,c1670787.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
106
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
connect(c1645287.port_b,c1670789.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670933.port_b,c1670916.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646632.port_b,c1670933.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646636.port_b,c1670935.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1703078.port_b,c1702980.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1703076.port_b,c1703078.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655452.port_b,c1625643.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1625643.port_b,c1625755.port_1) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1638773.port_b,c1638649.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(room.inTemp, c1638649.conInput) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1625755.port_2,c1638773.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1648251.port_b,c1638919.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1638919.port_b,plant.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
107
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1638649.port_b,c1639051.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670740.port_b,c1645849.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670742.port_b,c1645859.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647598.port_b,c1646590.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646590.port_b,c1646605.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670891.port_b,c1646648.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646656.port_b,c1646652.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646648.port_b,c1646656.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647250.port_b,c1647084.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655634.port_b,c1647250.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655782.port_b,c1647288.port_1) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647084.port_b,c1647288.port_3) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
108
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
connect(c1647288.port_2,c1647289.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646652.port_b,c1647598.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1646605.port_b,c1647921.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1639051.port_b,c1647923.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647289.port_b,c1648179.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1648253.port_b,c1648251.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(valCon1648251.y, c1648251.y) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1648179.port_b,c1648253.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1625755.port_3,c1654825.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1645859.port_b,c1655431.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655454.port_b,c1655452.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(valCon1655452.y, c1655452.y) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655431.port_b,c1655454.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
109
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655615.port_b,c1655556.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(valCon1655556.y, c1655556.y) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647923.port_b,c1655615.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655556.port_b,c1655634.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655765.port_b,c1655706.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(valCon1655706.y, c1655706.y) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1647921.port_b,c1655765.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655706.port_b,c1655782.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1654825.port_b,c1662687.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1662687.port_b,c1662689.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670656.port_b2,c1670714.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670714.port_b,c1670740.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
110
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX D. AUTO­GENERATED MODELICA MODEL
connect(c1645849.port_b,c1670742.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670836.port_b,c1670862.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670862.port_b,c1670891.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1658714.port_b,c1614379.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1655822.port_b,c1703076.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670764.port_b,c1670656.port_a2) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670656.port_b1, room.port_vent_warm) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(room.port_vent_cold, c1670656.port_a1) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670916.port_b,c1670836.port_a) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
connect(c1670836.heatPort, room.heatPort) annotation
(Line(points={{-46,16},{-28,
,→
16},{-28,0},{-10,0}}, color={0,127,255}));
annotation (experiment(StopTime=31536000, __Dymola_Algorithm="Dassl"));
end Model;
Integrating Modelica simulations in a cloud­based BIM platform
111
==PAGE:120==
