==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Project details
Title:
Performance and feasibility of a Carnot battery for integration
in the energy system
Student:
Niels Langballe Førby, s143458
Supervisors:
Brian Elmegaard
Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen
Kai Knobloch
External supervisors:
Lars Reinholdt
ECTS:
30
Starting date:
25/1, 2021
Ending date:
25/6, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the current, and further expected, increase in the usage of sustainable energy sources like
wind and solar power, grid-scale energy storage will be necessary due to the ﬂuctuating nature
of these. One potential technology for this is a Carnot battery, or pumped thermal energy storage
(PTES), which is investigated in this thesis. The PTES consists of a cold storage and hot storage,
and acts as a heat pump (HP) during charging and as an organic Rankine cycle (ORC) during
discharging. Due to irreversibilities, surplus heat must be rejected to the ambient, and this was
accounted for with a secondary HP. The surplus heat rejection was initially assumed to take
place during the discharging cycle, but using part of the discharging power for the secondary
HP was found to reduce the round-trip efﬁciency with up to almost 10 percentage-points (%p).
To accommodate this, the secondary HP was instead used during the charging process, which
was found to increase the round-trip efﬁciency on the order of 5 %p compared to the previous
method.
It was also found that the hot storage temperature should be maximized for increasing the
round-trip efﬁciency, since this allows signiﬁcantly better matching of temperature-proﬁles in
the high-pressure heat transfer with the hot storage, resulting in higher Lorenz efﬁciencies of
both the charging and discharging processes. An optimum in hot storage temperature glide
was seen to appear due to optimum in ORC evaporator temperature-matching, quantiﬁed by
its exergy efﬁciency.
Round-trip efﬁciencies of more than 45 % was obtained with a hot storage at 150 ◦C, which is
expected for a planned commercial plant, although requiring high-performance components.
This could potentially reach almost 50 % by increasing the possible hot storage temperature to
180 ◦C.
An important result was that, depending on temperature conditions and working ﬂuid, the
ORC evaporator can potentially have pinch-temperature difference at both outlet and inside,
or at only one of the two. Due to these three possibilities, a future investigation with variation
of temperatures and working ﬂuid should contain an optimization of the ORC high-pressure
as well as the ORC turbine inlet temperature, as it is difﬁcult to make robust assumptions on
these.
An economic analysis was conducted with a dynamic programming tool using hourly electric-
ity spot market data for a year. This showed income in one year of up to one million DKK. It
was found that the plant had very little operating time, since a round-trip efﬁciency slightly
above 45 % means that the selling price of electricity must be more than twice the buying price
for proﬁt. This could prove difﬁculties in the economic feasibility of a plant.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to send my sincerest gratitude to my beautiful and supportive girlfriend and my
family. I am also very grateful for all my friends who have made my time at DTU the most
memorable years of my life.
Working on this project alone and forced to work at home in my dorm-room due the covid-19
lockdown was a much larger adversity than I could have expected. In this context I should
also especially extend my deepest gratitude for my teammates and friends at Gentofte Hockey
Klub, without whom my mental health would deﬁnitely have suffered greater than it did due
to this isolation.
Similarly, it should also be acknowledged that a much needed breathing space was provided
for me by Manchester City Football Club, especially Kevin De Bruyne, in their always enter-
taining matches, which has also been very helpful to my well-being.
For this project a great help was provided by Emmanuel Jacquemoud of MAN Energy Solutions
Schweiz AG. He shared a lot of useful information pertaining the MAN ETES technology, of
which I am very grateful.
Lastly a great thanks to my supervisors for their interest and support in my project. While this
was my ﬁrst time working with Erasmus and Kai, Brian has on multiple occasions in the past
supervised my projects, and so a special thanks should go to him for his efforts through the
years in helping me grow as an engineer.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Nomenclature
1
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.1
Energy storage technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Introducing the PTES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
For the non-academic readers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
Returning to the academics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.3
Further thermodynamic assessment: the Lorenz efﬁciency . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.4
Some words on refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Numerical tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
ETES plant in Esbjerg and correspondence with MAN Energy Solutions
. . . . .
14
1.5
Brief presentation of literature on Carnot-batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.6
Problem statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Methods
17
2.1
Assumptions regarding storages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Charging process: Heat pump cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Discharging process: ORC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4
Combining the charge and discharge processes: Carnot battery
. . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Preliminary summary of methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.6
Changing method of surplus heat rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.6.1
Analytical investigation of secondary heat pump change . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.6.2
Heat exchanger for free heat rejection to the ambient
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.7
Exergy analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.8
Economic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3
Results
43
3.1
Initial method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.1.1
Simple example of system results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.1.2
Study of temperature conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2
Updated method for surplus heat rejection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.2.1
Simple example of system results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.2.2
Study of temperature conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.2.3
Further investigation of temperature conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.2.4
Volumetric ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
i
==PAGE:6==
3.2.5
Sensitivity Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.2.6
Brief summary of some case results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.3
Comparison with others . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.3.1
Veriﬁcation with Bachelor thesis model results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.3.2
Comparison with MAN Energy Solutions ETES plant expectations . . . .
66
3.4
Economic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4
Discussion
69
4.1
Comparison of results with literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2
Reﬂections on the project model and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5
Conclusion
77
Bibliography
80
Appendices
83
A
84
A.1 Temperature difference at HP condenser outlet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Case with ORC expansion process entering the two-phase region . . . . . . . . .
85
A.3 Inputs for CoolPack-model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.4 System state-point notation for exergy balances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.5 Extended temperature maps of CO2 – initial method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.6 Extended temperature maps - updated method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.7 Results from economic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
ii
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Roman letters
W
Work, [kJ] or [MJ]
˙W
Power, [kW] or [MW]
Q
Heat, [kJ] or [MJ]
˙Q
Heat ﬂow, [kW] or [MW]
T
Temperature, [◦C] or [K] for differences
t
Time, [s]
cp
Speciﬁc heat at constant pressure,
h
kJ
kg·K
i
˙Cp
Heat capacity ﬂow,
h
kW
K
i
˙m
Mass ﬂow rate, [kg/s]
s
Speciﬁc entropy,
h
kJ
kg·K
i
h
Speciﬁc enthalpy,
h
kJ
kg
i
p
Pressure, [bar]
˙V
Volumetric ﬂow,
h
m3
s
i
N
Number of elements in discretization, [-]
E
Exergy, [kJ]
e
Speciﬁc exergy,
h
kJ
kg
i
˙E
Exergy ﬂow, [kW]
x
Vapor quality of ﬂuid, [-]
y and y∗
Exergy destruction ratios, [-]
c
Cost, [DKK/MWh]
rn
Ratio of normalized price ﬂuctuation, [-]
v
Speciﬁc volume, [m3/kg]
Greek letters
η
Efﬁciency, [-] or [%]
α
Non-dimensional Helmholtz energy [-]
δ
Non-dimensional density [-], or pertaining incremental values
τ
Non-dimensional temperature [-]
ρ
Density
h
kg
m3
i
, or energy density
h
kWh
m3
i
∆
Difference
σ
Standard deviation
1
==PAGE:8==
Subscripts
RT
Round-trip
in
Into component or cycle, inlet
out
Out of component or cycle, outlet
HP
Heat pump
ORC
Organic Rankine Cycle
th
Thermal
L
Lorenz
C
Cold
H
Hot
0
Ideal-gas contribution, dead-state property
r
Residual
c
Charging, critical point property, condensation
irr
Irreversibility
sec
Secondary (for secondary heat pump)
d
Discharging
charged
Charged state of storage
discharged
Discharged state of storage
E
Energy
s
Isentropic
i
Element index, ideal
p
Pinch
HEX
Heat exchanger
sat
Saturation-property (temperature or pressure of saturated liquid)
comp
Compressor
exp
Expander
hs
Hot storage
cs
Cold storage
o.c. (or out.cond.)
Outlet of condenser
pump
Pump (component)
e
Evaporation
SH
Superheating
SC
Subcooling
SL
Suction line
net
Net power
amb
Ambient
AHEX
Ambient heat exchanger
2
==PAGE:9==
Subscripts (continued)
evap
Evaporator
refrigerant
Pertaining a property of the refrigerant (or working ﬂuid) of the plant
storage
Pertaining a property of storage media
ex
Exergy
ph
Physical
ch
Chemical
kn
Kinetic
pt
Potential
F
Fuel
P
Product
D
Destruction
k
Arbitrary component
cond.
Condenser
DH
District heating
ideal
(for round-trip efﬁciency) not including work for a secondary heat pump
real
(for round-trip efﬁciency) including work for a secondary heat pump
Abbreviations
CO2
Carbondioxide
CAES
Compressed Air Energy Storage
Li-ion
Lithium-ion
TES
Thermal energy storage
PTES
Pumped thermal energy storage
TEES
Thermo-electric energy storage
HP
Heat pump
CFC
Chloroﬂuorocarbons
HCFC
Hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons
ODP
Ozone depletion potential
GWP
Global Warming Potential
HFO
Hydroﬂuorooleﬁns
EES
Engineering Equation Solver
ORC
Organic Rankine Cycle
ETES
Electro-thermal energy storage
P2P
Power-to-power
HEX
Heat exchanger
AHEX
Ambient heat exchanger
DH
District Heating
%p
Percentage points
amb.
Ambient
3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
About this thesis
For reader assistance the structure of this thesis will be brieﬂy presented here.
The ﬁrst chapter is an introduction to the topic and the thesis work. In this section the subject
for this thesis will be presented. The purpose of this is to make it clear for the reader why this
subject is investigated (see Section 1.1), and to present some information that might be useful
for the reader to know (see Section 1.2). The Problem Statement shows what will be investi-
gated in the thesis. This can be thought of to cover what will be investigated and why.
The second chapter presents the methods used for the analyses. This generally pertains how the
investigations were conducted. The important model simpliﬁcations and assumptions are pre-
sented. The chapter initially covers the charging and discharging processes. Some analyses are
presented, even though presentation of of results in the methods-chapter is unorthodox – this
was chosen since the analyses were part of the decision-making process for model assumptions.
The connection between the charging and discharging processes, forming a Carnot-battery, is
then presented. The connection between the two is then revised for a slight change in method-
ology. Lastly some other subjects of investigation is presented, namely a presentation of con-
ventional exergy analysis and an economic analysis.
In the third chapter the results from the analyses are presented. A few results are brieﬂy pre-
sented using the initial assumptions regarding the charging and discharging cycle connection.
Results with the revised methodology is then presented both with some comparison to the
previous and with a more thorough study. Lastly some results of the economic analysis is pre-
sented.
The results will then be discussed and evaluated in the fourth chapter, both with comparison
to results from others, as well as in light of some of the assumptions that were made for the
model. Following this, some of the tasks that could be done further are also presented.
Lastly, the conclusion will summarize the most important points from each chapter.
4
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Background and motivation
While it is still considered a controversial subject by some, the emissions of carbondioxide
(CO2) and other greenhouse gases have for many years been known to cause the global warm-
ing (or global change), with a doubling in atmospheric CO2-concentrations expected to result in
a global temperature increase of 2 ◦C - 3.5 ◦C [1].
In the Paris Agreement by the United Nations it was decided that greenhouse gas emissions
must be decreased to such an extent that the global temperature increase does not exceed 2 ◦C
from ”pre-industrial levels” [2]. Following this, in 2018 the Danish government made an agree-
ment for Denmark to have net-zero carbon emissions by the year 2050 [3].
In the efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, sustainable energy sources, such as
wind and solar, show increasing prevalence. In Denmark the greatest source of electrical en-
ergy generation is now wind turbines [4]. The annual generation of electrical energy from
various sources is shown in Figure 1.1. Over a span of 25 years wind energy production has
increased from being insigniﬁcant to providing almost half of the electricity consumed in Den-
mark, while coal has been reduced from the far majority to being largely phased out. A signif-
icant amount of the coal usage has been replaced by biomass, both to reduce emissions and for
a more renewable energy source.
Globally, however, coal is still the greatest source of electrical energy, as can be seen in Figure
1.2. While the electricity generation of wind, solar and hydro is increasing, the consumption of
electric energy has increased such that coal and natural gas have also seen increased usage. A
signiﬁcant continued increase in the use of sustainable energy sources should thus be expected
in order to reach the goals of reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
All data was imported from the International Energy Agency [5].
Figure 1.1: Electricity generation in Denmark from various sources vs. time. The data was
imported from the International Energy Agency [5].
However, a well-known issue with these sustainable sources is the ﬂuctuations in energy gen-
eration. Since the energy generation from these sources is determined by the weather and
cannot be controlled by operators – except, to some extent, hydro power – it is necessary to
equip the electricity grid with storage capacity. It is thus expected that the required electricity
grid energy storage will increase in the future. An estimate is a required additional electricity
storage of almost 500 GW in order to double the share of energy production from sustainable
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Global electricity generation from various sources vs. time. The data was imported
from the International Energy Agency [5].
sources by the year 2030 [6].
The need for energy storage is seen already in what is called the ”Duck Curve” [7]. The solar
power generation is in warm areas high during the day-time hours but low in the morning
and evening when power demands are often high. The required power generation by other
sources, eg. conventional power plants, show high peaks at these times. The power that must
be supplied from other sources than solar shows a curve shaped like a rubber duck, hence the
name. Issues regarding this are both limitations in power plant power output variations and
high ﬂuctuations in electricity price that can result from this.
The beneﬁts of increased electricity storage capacity does not only stem from the variations in
power generation from sustainable sources, but also from the variations in grid-scale power
demand. Power plants must be designed to meet some peak demand while running at low-
load operation the majority of the time. The solar power ﬂuctuations, resulting in the duck
curve, exacerbates this issue. With sufﬁcient electric energy storage a power plant could be
designed to meet the average demand – and not the maximum demand – and run constantly
at its design operation. This should be beneﬁcial to the thermal efﬁciency of power plants and
can actually be a requirement to nuclear power plants which must run relatively closely to the
design load [8, 9].
1.1.1
Energy storage technologies
By far the currently most common electric energy storage technology is pumped hydroelectric en-
ergy storage, or pumped hydro, representing 99 % of the power capacity. Round-trip efﬁciencies
are in the range 70 % - 80 % [6]. A signiﬁcant restriction to this technology is the geographical
constraints, since this requires both a large body of water and possibility to pump this to a large
reservoir at a high altitude. This rules out large parts of the world – including Denmark – and
other technologies must be used.
In addition, most of the large reservoirs with large altitude differences within close range are
already used, and so further usage of the pumped hydro potential will require using reservoirs
6
==PAGE:13==
situated further apart, with the main potential seen for reservoirs up to 20 km apart [10].
Another technology is compressed air energy storage (CAES). This shows round-trip efﬁciencies
similar to those with pumped hydro and can show the required capacity for long-duration load
shifting [11, 12]. However, this has the geographical constraint of requiring large caves for stor-
ing the compressed air.
Technologies allowing electrical energy storage without geographical requirements are thus
needed. A relevant question then arises from this: Can’t common chemical batteries be used?
Conventional chemical batteries can be divided into lead-acid based, nickel-based and lithium-
ion (Li-ion)-based.
Lead-acid based batteries have a round-trip efﬁciency of 85 % - 90 % and low cost. However,
they show fairly short life cycles (5 years - 15 years), and full discharge can damage the batter-
ies, shortening the lifetime. Nickel-based batteries show longer lifetimes, but the costs can be
10 times higher than for lead-acid based, and efﬁciencies are generally between 60 % and 80 %.
Li-ion batteries are superior in energy density and efﬁciency (90 % - 100 %), but at very high
costs of 900 US$/kWh - 1300 US$/kWh. [13]
It will be necessary to have energy storage with high capacity-to-power ratio, meaning nominal
charging and discharging times of longer than 4 hours. Li-ion chemistry batteries cannot fulﬁll
this requirement at the moment, but because their nominal price (in €/kWh) is decreasing, they
might become usable. [12]
Thermal energy storage (TES) has been found to be signiﬁcantly cheaper than batteries and
have no geographical requirements [14]. This can potentially compensate for the generally
lower round-trip efﬁciencies obtained with systems using TES.
A Carnot-battery is a technology that converts electric energy to thermal energy and stores this,
before converting it back to electricity for user consumption. An important type of Carnot-
battery is the pumped thermal energy storage (PTES), sometimes also referred to as thermo-electric
energy storage (TEES).
1.2
Introducing the PTES
PTES technology consists of a charging cycle that uses electricity to heat a media in order to
store the electricity as thermal energy, and a discharging cycle for generating electricity from
the stored thermal energy.
In PTES systems the charging cycle usually consists of a heat pump or an electric heater, while
the discharge cycle generates electricity through a heat engine. Charge and discharge can be
obtained through both Rankine and Brayton cycles, but is not limited to this. Furthermore,
a PTES system can have separate cycles for charge and discharge, or potentially a single, re-
versible cycle.1
Storages can be either latent, meaning phase-changing and hence often isothermal, or sensible,
meaning changing in temperature. In general latent thermal storages might be more compact,
in terms of kWh/ton, but also more expensive per capacity (€/kWh). [12]
1Note that this ”reversible” cycle is not what is generally known as thermodynamically internally reversible, but
simply a single cycle that can switch direction to act as either a heat pump or a heat engine.
7
==PAGE:14==
For this project a cold storage was used as well as a hot storage. It would be possible to simply
use the ambient as the ’cold storage’. However, the discharging cycle would thus need to reject
heat to the ambient through the condenser. Using cold storage at a lower temperature than the
ambient allows the expansion process during discharging to reach a lower pressure, increasing
the generated electricity power output. The cold storage supplies heat to the charging process
and is thus cooled, and during discharge heat is transferred to the cold storage.
However, an important issue arises from this that must be accounted for.
Due to irreversibilities within the system, the electrical energy output from the discharge is
less than the electrical energy input used during the charge. Suppose that all thermal energy
transferred to the hot storage during charging is also removed from it during discharging. A
consequence of the irreversibilities is then that the heat which must be removed from the dis-
charge cycle is larger than the heat transferred from the cold storage during the charge cycle. If
all heat removed from the charge cycle was transferred to the cold storage, the system would
thus degrade over time, making the cold storage warmer for each cycle of charge and dis-
charge. For this reason it is necessary to remove the surplus heat from the irreversibilities to the
surrounding ambient conditions.
1.2.1
For the non-academic readers
Should any non-academic readers (eg. friends and family of the author) ﬁnd this thesis, a brief
introduction to the topic is presented here.
It is fairly intuitively known by anyone that heat ﬂows from one object to another if the ﬁrst
object is of higher temperature. An example is a warm cup of coffee, which cools down to
warm up the surrounding air, because heat ﬂows from the high temperature cup.

Note that heat is energy in transit, like the amount of heat transferred from the
coffee to the air, while temperature is a property of a media, like that of a cup of
coffee, and the two should not be confused. A temperature difference results in a
ﬂow of heat (from the warm coffee cup to the air), and a ﬂow of heat results in a
different temperature (cold coffee and very slightly warmer air).
Since two medias of different temperatures might provide some ﬂow of heat, it might be possi-
ble to extract power from it and generate electricity. In any heat engine, a temperature difference
is used to generate power. In fact, conventional power plants work in this fashion, and the nec-
essary temperature difference is often obtained by burning eg. coal or biomass, providing most
of the world’s electricity production (see Figure 1.2).
Oppositely, energy (from electricity) can be used to create a difference in temperature. All
cooling cycles – like a common house-hold refrigerator or freezer – and heat pumps work in
this fashion. In this sense, refrigerators and heat pumps might be thought of as power plants in
reverse. The main difference between a cooling cycle and a heat pump is whether the intention
of the generated temperature difference is to cool down something (like food) or to heat up
something (like a living room).
8
==PAGE:15==

A common misconception is that a heat pump physically moves something from
one location to another, because ”regular” pumps often do this, like pumping
water. A heat pump can be thought to ”move heat”, hence the name. In reality
it heats up something and cools down something else, and the process requires
energy from electricity.
How heat engines and heat pumps work will not be explained here, only that both require a
working ﬂuid, also called a refrigerant. In most power plants water is used, in heat pumps many
different refrigerants are used, like propane or carbondioxide (CO2).
A Carnot-battery – which is the subject of this thesis – combines a heat pump and a heat engine.
A heat pump creates a temperature difference to charge the storage system by using electricity.
Indeed, the storage is simply large tanks with medias (water, for instance) at different temper-
atures. A heat engine utilizes this temperature difference to discharge the storage, thus gen-
erating electricity. Discharging the storage in this sense is simply ”removing the temperature
difference” with heat ﬂow.
A heat pump, ie. the charging process, works better when it does not have to generate a large
temperature difference. However, the heat engine, or the discharging process, works better
when it has a large temperature difference. So which temperatures are best? This is one of the
key questions asked for this thesis.
In order to compare the energy storage unit with other types, like common chemical batteries
and pumped hydro or simply other Carnot-batteries, it is relevant to ask: how much energy
was put into the unit, and how much energy was extracted from it?
A commonly used measure of efﬁciency for an energy storage unit is how many percent of the
electrical energy put into the unit that is extracted later as electricity. This is measured for a
complete charging process and a discharging process, thus returning to the starting point, and
is for this reason called the round-trip efﬁciency. This measure is used extensively throughout
this report, denoted ηRT. Due to some physical laws, which will not be presented here, the
round-trip efﬁciency will always be below 100 %. For Carnot-batteries it is signiﬁcantly lower
than 100 %, probably closer to 50 %.
1.2.2
Returning to the academics
It is relevant to discuss the perhaps most important measure of any energy storage unit, the
round-trip efﬁciency. Afterwards another measure will be presented which is useful for assessing
the charging and discharging processes and comparing their performance.
The round-trip efﬁciency should be deﬁned as the ratio of the total energy output to the total
energy input for the storage unit, as shown in the general deﬁnition in Equation 1.2.1:
ηRT = Win
Wout
=
R ˙Wout dt
R ˙Win dt
(1.2.1)
By assuming steady-state operation and equal charge and discharge times, this reduces to:
ηRT =
˙Wout
˙Win
(1.2.2)
For this, it is relevant to present the COP and the thermal efﬁciency ηth of the charging and
9
==PAGE:16==
discharging processes, respectively:
COP =
˙Qout,HP
˙Win,HP
(1.2.3)
ηth =
˙Wout,ORC
˙Qin,ORC
(1.2.4)
Inserting ˙Win,HP and ˙Wout,ORC obtained from these into Equation 1.2.2, replacing ˙Win and ˙Wout
respectively, reduces to:
ηRT = COP · ηth ·
˙Qin,ORC
˙Qout,HP
(1.2.5)
If no heat loss from the hot storage is assumed, the round-trip efﬁciency further reduces to:
ηRT = COP · ηth
(1.2.6)
This relation shows that the round-trip efﬁciency of the plant is simply the product of the efﬁ-
ciencies of the partial processes, ie. charging and discharging. It should be expected that larger
temperature-difference of the hot and cold storages will yield lower COP of the charging HP
process but higher thermal efﬁciency of the discharging process. With this in mind, Equation
1.2.6 could indicate that an optimum occurs as a ’trade-off’ between the two cycles.
However, the relation in Equation 1.2.6 does not necessarily take into account the heat from
irreversibilities that must be removed.
Since large temperature difference of the cold and hot storages will yield low heat pump COP
and high heat engine thermal efﬁciency, it is relevant to take this into account by showing these
relative to what they could be from the given temperature conditions. For this reason the Lorenz
efﬁciencies are relevant.
1.2.3
Further thermodynamic assessment: the Lorenz efﬁciency
An important measure for thermodynamic evaluation of the system is the Lorenz efﬁciency,
which will be brieﬂy presented and discussed here.
The Lorenz efﬁciency of a heat pump or a heat engine is related to the corresponding Lorenz
cycle.
The Lorenz cycle is, similarly to the Carnot-cycle, an ideal cycle from a set of temperature
conditions. This assumes isentropic compression and expansion, and inﬁnitesimal temperature
difference throughout all heat transfer. The Carnot cycle assumes no temperature glide of the
heat sink and source. The Lorenz cycle includes temperature glides by assuming and inﬁnite
number of Carnot-cycles such that for each of these the temperature glides of both heat sink and
source become inﬁnitesimal. The COP of a Lorenz heat pump cycle (the Lorenz COP) becomes
similar to the Carnot COP but use the logarithmic mean temperatures of the sink and source.
The same relation is true for a Lorenz heat engine cycle (and its Lorenz thermal efﬁciency) and
the Carnot efﬁciency. [15]
The deﬁnitions of Lorenz COP and the Lorenz thermal efﬁciency are shown in Equations 1.2.7
and 1.2.8.
COPL =
TH
TH −TC
(1.2.7)
10
==PAGE:17==
ηL = 1 −TC
TH
(1.2.8)
T denotes a logarithmic mean temperature, while the subscripts C and H denote the heat sink
and source, respectively.
It is clear from these that the Lorenz COP and thermal efﬁciency are related inversely:
COPL = 1
ηL
(1.2.9)
This is intuitive since this effectively means that the ratio of heat and work of an ideal heat
pump and heat engine are related inversely.
The logarithmic mean temperature is deﬁned as:
T = Tin −Tout
ln
 Tin
Tout

(1.2.10)
The cycle Lorenz efﬁciencies are then deﬁned as ratio of the COP or thermal efﬁciency with their
respective Lorenz counterparts:
ηL,HP = COP
COPL
(1.2.11)
ηL,ORC = ηth
ηL
(1.2.12)
These Lorenz efﬁciencies thus relate the COP and thermal efﬁciency to those that could be
achieved ideally, and can be thought of as the ’realization’ of the ideal cycle.
Inserting Equations 1.2.11, 1.2.12 and 1.2.9 into the round-trip efﬁciency in Equation 1.2.6 also
shows that:
ηRT = ηL,HP · ηL,ORC
(1.2.13)
The Lorenz efﬁciencies take into account the temperature conditions, and the charging and dis-
charging processes should have the same temperature conditions when cold and hot storages
are used. Hence the relation in Equation 1.2.13 means that for any set of temperature condi-
tions the round-trip efﬁciency is a product of the cycle efﬁciencies relative to what they could
ideally be from the given temperature conditions.
1.2.4
Some words on refrigerants
Without going into too much detail, a few notes should be added on the subjects of refrigerants,
or working ﬂuids.
Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFC) and hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFC) are currently phased out or
are in the process of being so due to high ozone depletion potential (ODP). Similarly hydroﬂu-
orocarbons (HCF) are looking to be replaced due to high global warming potentials (GWP).
Details regarding the phase-out of these can be found in eg. the regulation on ﬂuorinated
greenhouse gases of the European Union [16]. The refrigerants that should be expected to re-
place these are natural refrigerants and low-GWP synthetic hydroﬂuorooleﬁns (HFO).
Both natural refrigerants and synthetic HFOs can show very low GWPs but are susceptible to
high ﬂammability, which is an issue that must be dealt with accordingly in the future if these
are to show the required increase in prevalence.
11
==PAGE:18==
Examples of natural refrigerants are ammonia (R717), CO2 (R744) and hydrocarbons such as
propane (R290), butane (R600) and isobutane (R600a), which all have fairly broad use already.
Examples of HFOs are R1234ze(E) and R1234yf, which are both expected to replace the highly
used R134a due to signiﬁcantly lower GWPs.
In this project some of these low-GWP refrigerants that are expected to see increased use in the
future were of greatest interest. Particularly CO2 is interesting, as will be seen, since this has a
low critical temperature, meaning that transcritical cycles can be obtained with relatively low
temperatures, while other refrigerants generally require signiﬁcantly higher temperatures for
transcritical cycles due to higher critical temperatures.
In this context it is relevant to show some behavior of gases at supercritical states. In Figure 1.3
the constant-pressure speciﬁc heat capacity cp is shown with increasing temperature, evaluated
at different pressure levels. It should be noted that the critical point of CO2 is at around 31 ◦C
and 73.8 bar. A couple of trends are seen from the data. It is clear that the speciﬁc heat capacity
shows a peak at a certain temperature. However, increasing the pressure is seen to reduce
the peak. The temperature of maximum cp is slightly above the critical temperature when the
pressure is slightly above the critical pressure, and the temperature of maximum cp is seen to
increase with increasing pressure.
The same trends can be shown for other refrigerants, although the pressures and temperatures
will be different due to different critical points.
Figure 1.3: Speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure for CO2 vs. temperature, evaluated at
different pressures.
The data shown in Figure 1.3 was evaluated using the CoolProp-package in Python. In this con-
text it is relevant to brieﬂy present the tools used for numerical evaluation of thermodynamic
data.
12
==PAGE:19==
1.3
Numerical tools
Through this project thermodynamic properties have been evaluated extensively, which was
also expected to be the case from the beginning of the project. A few words will be added to
this.
For thermodynamic property data, Engineering Equation Solver (EES) is a commonly used soft-
ware tool at the institution of the author (Technical University of Denmark, Department of
Mechanical Engineering), and at other academic institutions as well. In this program a system
of equations is entered, and the program solves this system by the Newton-Raphson method.
To do this, EES requires guess-values of all parameters entered in the system of equations. EES
has a broad range of useful functions, such as uni- and multivariate optimization, sensitivity
analysis and – perhaps more importantly – evaluation of thermodynamic properties of a wide
range of medias [17].
Python is an object-oriented programming language. Python is used very widely across many
ﬁelds of both science and engineering and is considered very versatile due to the many avail-
able packages with functions, while still showing ease of use due to the relatively simple lan-
guage.
In order to solve systems of equations, similarly to how EES uses the Newton-Raphson method,
the fsolve-function from the SciPy-pacakge can be used in Python. This uses initial guess-
values for the system of equations to ﬁnd variables for solving the system through Powell’s
Hybrid Method [18].
For thermodynamic property data in Python, the CoolProp-package can be used.
Thermodynamic properties are evaluated in CoolProp for the equation of state (EOS) using the
non-dimensional Helmholtz Energy [19]. Equation 1.3.1 shows the generally used notation for
this:
α = α0 + αr
(1.3.1)
Here α0 denotes the ideal-gas contribution while αr is the residual. These terms are functions
of the non-dimensional parameters δ and τ:
δ = ρ
ρc
(1.3.2)
τ = Tc
T
(1.3.3)
Here ρ and T are the ﬂuid density and temperature, respectively, and the subscript c denotes
the property at the critical point.
The evaluation of the Helmholtz energy terms α0 and αr varies for different for ﬂuids, but most
commonly these are deﬁned as an extensive summation of eg. 36 terms using a long range of
ﬂuid-dependent correlation parameters.
From the Helmholtz energy other thermodynamic properties – eg. speciﬁc enthalpy – are ob-
tained through analytic derivatives.
Since not all property evaluations are implemented using the density and temperature as in-
puts, evaluations of eg. temperature from inputs of eg. pressure and enthalpy requires itera-
tion, which is implemented in the CoolProp package functions.
13
==PAGE:20==
It was chosen to use Python for the numerical model, although EES could as well have been
used. One major reason for this choice was the ambition of making a robust model by creating
a function that would generate guess-values for equation-solving from given conditions, eg.
conditions of ﬂuid and temperatures.
1.4
ETES plant in Esbjerg and correspondence with MAN Energy So-
lutions
Very early in this project it was announced in a press release by MAN Energy Solutions that
they were commissioned by Danish utility-company DIN Forsyning to make two ETES (Electro-
Thermal Energy Storage) heat pump-systems in Danish port city Esbjerg. [20] The plant will
supply district heating with a thermal energy storage, which should also serve for electricity-
generation purposes.
The plans for the unit, as stated in the press release, is a heat pump situated at the port of
Esbjerg with a capacity of 50 MW using CO2 as refrigerant in a transcritical cycle.
The plant is based on the MAN ETES technology, developed by MAN Energy Solutions.
The company was contacted by the author to get information about the plans and expectations
regarding this plant. Throughout the project contact with the company has been kept through
email correspondence with Technical Project Manager and Senor Engineer Emmanuel Jacque-
moud. [21]
A lot of useful information was shared pertaining some of the expectations regarding the plant,
which was used for thesis.
Some of the key features of the MAN ETES include CO2 as the working ﬂuid, a hot storage
consisting of pressurized water in multiple tanks at different temperatures from 30 ◦C up to
150 ◦C, and a cold storage consisting of freezing water. Different machinery is used for charging
and discharging processes.
Some of the information shared by MAN Energy Solutions will be used in this thesis, both for
making results as well as some comparison of results with the expectations of the MAN ETES
technology.
1.5
Brief presentation of literature on Carnot-batteries
Different conﬁgurations of Carnot-batteries are presented by Dumont et al [12], mainly focus-
ing on PTES. By using an electric heater for charging the heat storage it is possible to produce
high-temperature storage with low investment cost. A Brayton cycle PTES is also capable of
reaching high temperatures with a better round-trip efﬁciency, although a higher cost should
be expected with a Brayton HP replacing an electric heater. A Rankine cycle PTES is potentially
able to achieve relatively high round-trip efﬁciencies (≈60 %) at relatively low temperatures
(< 200 ◦C), also at investment costs lower than Brayton cycle and similar to electric heater alter-
natives. Furthermore, a Brayton-cycle PTES is only capable of reaching round-trip efﬁciencies
above 60 % with highly efﬁcient compressor and expander machinery, ie. isentropic efﬁciency
of at least 90 %. However, increasing machinery efﬁciency might help reduce total installed
power capacity and thus potentially reduce investment costs. [22]
14
==PAGE:21==
A PTES system in which a single cycle acts changeably as a Rankine heat pump and and
power-cycle (HP/ORC cycle) has been somewhat investigated in recent years. In a reversible
HP/ORC cycle, the HP condenser acts as a ORC evaporator, and vice versa. Likewise, the HP
compressor could act as a ORC expander. Since an expansion valve is commonly used in a HP,
an auxiliary pump is necessary for the ORC. The obvious advantages of such a system is less
equipment required, which should reduce the costs substantially. It might also be possible to
use the ORC pump as a HP expander for work recovery, which should increase the efﬁciency.
In another study by Dumont and Lemort [23] a PTES is investigated using waste heat recovery
(thermally integrated PTES). Using waste heat as the heat source for a HP and air for ORC heat
sink allows better performance. However, this performance increase stems from an assumption
that the waste heat is freely available. The energy used to generate the waste heat is not con-
sidered, and hence round-trip efﬁciency can exceed 1, why it is instead called Power-to-Power
factor (P2P). This concept might be useful when eg. geothermal energy is available to the PTES
system.
For Brayton-cycle PTES purposes argon can be used, because argon achieves high temperature
change at a given pressure ratio due to high speciﬁc heat ratio. However, this requires very
large temperature differences in hot and cold storage for usable round-trip efﬁciencies (eg.
-160 ◦C and 500 ◦C). [24]. This technology was made commercial by Isentropic Ltd. The com-
pany went bankrupt, but their facility was taken over for research by Newcastle University. [25]
A transcritical CO2 cycle is capable of reaching similar round-trip efﬁciencies at signiﬁcantly
less extreme temperatures, allowing the use of water in both storages. Good temperature-
matching of refrigerant with both heat sink and source can be achieved in a transcritical CO2
with a latent cold storage and a sensible hot storage. The phase change in the latent cold stor-
age can appear at around -23 ◦C to 0 ◦C by adding salt to the water to decrease the temperature
of freezing. Likewise, the sensible hot storage can be heated to near the boiling point of water,
which can be increased by pressurizing the water. These options make this technology ﬂexible.
However, the speciﬁc heat capacity of supercritical CO2 varies with temperature much more
than that of water. To accommodate this, multiple hot water tanks can be used to change the
heat capacity ﬂow of water to obtain good temperature matching of the hot storage and CO2.
Such a transcritical CO2 cycle is investigated by Morandin et al [11, 26, 27]. The maximum
round-trip efﬁciency obtained is 64 %.
Another possibility for cycle improvement is isothermal compression and expansion of the
working ﬂuid. Compression in multiple stages with intercooling reduces the speciﬁc work for
compression, and likewise reheating can increase the speciﬁc expansion work. The effect of
isothermal compression is thus similar to a very high number of stages with heat rejection/in-
jection. This can be achieved by a liquid piston device with heat exchange to and from the hot
storage water. [24] During the charge, heat is removed in compression and added to the hot
storage, and during discharge heat is added to the expander from the hot storage.
L¨ofﬂer and Griessbaum [28] investigated the use of auxiliary storage devices for a HP in order
to decrease the temperature differences occuring in heat transfer between a sensible storage
and a phase-changing working ﬂuid. It was found that this increased the COP with 10 % to
50 %.
It is clear that many options for PTES systems are possible. Storages can be either latent or sen-
sible, and cycles can be adjusted to this with Rankine, Brayton and transcritical cycles, which
can in turn be improved through options such as intercooling, thermal integration, isother-
15
==PAGE:22==
mal compression/expansion and auxiliary storage devices for temperature-matching of heat
transfer with a phase-changing ﬂuid or a ﬂuid with changing heat capacity.
Many of the studies shown pertain a fairly speciﬁc case for investigation. However, it might be
interesting to investigate the achievable round-trip efﬁciencies based on different conditions of
storages and working ﬂuid. Increasing temperature difference between hot and cold storage
should decrease the HP coefﬁcient of performance (COP) but increase the heat engine thermal
efﬁciency, and for this reason an optimum might be found.
1.6
Problem statement
A Carnot-battery can store electricity by converting it to thermal energy. A plant could be used
to generate district heating and cooling when neither charging nor discharging the storage,
which could improve the economic feasibility of the plant. This project will investigate the at-
tainable round-trip efﬁciency and evaluate economic feasibility of a PTES system. An analysis
of efﬁciency with parametric variation will be performed to ﬁnd optimum working conditions.
This should answer questions as:
• How well can a HP/ORC plant operate as a PTES system in terms of round-trip efﬁ-
ciency?
• How does the round-trip efﬁciency depend on the temperature conditions, and why?
• What parameters does the system performance show high sensitivity towards? Does this
lead to useful conclusions?
• How economically feasible could such a plant be?
A HP/ORC PTES system will be studied for this. To elaborate the investigation, a conventional
exergy analysis will be conducted in order to gain information about the exergy destructions
and efﬁciencies of the system components.
Furthermore, a simple economic analysis is conducted to quantify the potential monetary in-
come that could be generated by a PTES.
16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Methods
In this section the methods used for analyses will be presented. The ﬁrst part pertains the ther-
modynamic model of the Carnot-battery. This was split into models of the charging process, ie.
heat pump conﬁguration, and the discharging process, ORC conﬁguration.
The investigated system can be seen illustrated in Figure 2.1.
In order to reject surplus heat to the ambient, a secondary heat pump is required, because the
temperature of the cold storage should be lower than the ambient. The surplus heat, denoted
˙Qirr, as well as the power used to for the secondary heat pump, denoted ˙Wsec, are both shown in
Figure 2.1. This secondary heat pump was initially assumed to be driven by the ORC expander.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of investigated system setup. Energy streams related to the removal of
heat from system irreversibilities are shown as ˙Qirr and ˙Wsec. Notice the secondary heat pump
used during discharge to reject surplus heat from irreversibilities.
All heat exchangers are assumed as counter-ﬂow. For heat exchangers, the component inlet
for the refrigerant will be next to the component outlet for the corresponding storage media.
17
==PAGE:24==
Throughout this report, the terms inlet and outlet of components will be used with respect to
the refrigerant, eg. the heat pump evaporator outlet denotes point 1 of the charging cycle in
Figure 2.1.
2.1
Assumptions regarding storages
For all purposes both cold and hot storages were assumed to have a constant heat capacity cp.
This means that for the storages the heat ﬂows can be deﬁned as:
˙Q = ˙mcp∆T = ˙Cp∆T
(2.1.1)
Note that in Equation 2.1.1 ∆T denotes the temperature glide of the storages.
The hot storage was modeled as pressurized water at the pressure yielding an evaporation
temperature 10 K higher than the hot storage temperature. Furthermore, a constant cp was as-
sumed and evaluated using the mentioned tank pressure and the arithmetic mean temperature
of the hot storage. The mass ﬂow ˙m was then calculated through Equation 2.1.1.
The energy density of the hot storage was evaluated by assuming a constant density ρ, at the
same conditions as the cp, and evaluating the volumetric ﬂow of pressurized water in m3/hr.
The energy density (in kWh/m3) was then deﬁned as the energy ﬂow divided by the hourly
volumetric ﬂow:
ρE,hs =
˙Qhs
˙Vhs
(2.1.2)
A cold storage will most likely in practice be latent with water freezing and melting. Using salt
water allows to lower the freezing point of water, for which reason the analysis on temperature
conditions should include cold storage temperatures below 0 ◦C. However, in a latent cold
storage using salt water the freezing temperature will vary as the water freezes because the
concentration of salt increases, until the eutectic point is reached (at 27 wt% salt, with a freezing
temperature of -21.1 ◦C). For this reason the freezing will not be isothermal. [11]
The CoolProp functions currently do not support freezing, or any function evaluation below
the freezing point of any ﬂuid.
Due to these circumstances, it was chosen to also assume a constant cp for the cold storage, and
a temperature glide of the cold storage is needed. In general small temperature glides should
be used for the cold storage, since all cycles should be subcritical or transcritical, yielding a
phase change in the low-pressure heat exchangers. Since there should be some superheating
in the HP evaporator and desuperheating in the ORC condenser, some temperature glide of
the cold storage might also be beneﬁcial for matching of temperature-proﬁles. Cold storage
temperature glides of 5 K (and lower) have been used for the results.
2.2
Charging process: Heat pump cycle
The charging process was modeled as a simple vapor-compression heat pump cycle. This in-
cludes four components: a compressor and an expander as well as an evaporator and a con-
denser, ie. two machinery components and two heat exchangers. For cases in which the cycle
becomes transcritical, the the HP high-pressure HEX is in often called a gas cooler, since the
ﬂuid does not condense, but in this report the term condenser will be used to avoid confusion.
18
==PAGE:25==
For state-point numeration of the heat pump, see the charging cycle in Figure 2.1.
Both machinery components were implemented with deﬁnitions of isentropic efﬁciency ηs:
Compressor :
ηs =
˙Ws
˙W = h2,c,s −h1,c
h2,c −h1,c
(2.2.1)
Expander :
ηs =
˙W
˙Ws
= h3,c −h4,c
h4,c −h4,c,s
(2.2.2)
Note that these deﬁnitions assume no heat loss from the machinery components. The sign con-
vention for Equations 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 is opposite such that in Equation 2.2.1 the sign is positive
for electric power into the compressor, while in Equation 2.2.2 it is positive for electric power
out of the expander. Subscripts with s denotes an isentropic process, eg.
˙Ws, or a state point
resulting from an isentropic process, eg. h2,s.
For the heat exchangers the minimum (or pinch) temperature difference was deﬁned as ∆Tp.
This ∆T is the difference in temperature of the two ﬂuids on either side of the HEX, as opposed
to ∆T in Equation 2.1.1 denoting a temperature glide. For a physical model the minimum tem-
perature difference across the heat exchanger at any point should be greater than or equal to
this deﬁned value ∆Tp, as shown in Equation 2.2.3. This serves to impose a ﬁnite size of the
heat exchanger.
min (|∆THEX|) ≥∆Tp
(2.2.3)
For a mathematical and numerical model, however, this was implemented with a discretization of
the HEX into N −1 elements with an equal incremental heat transfer δQ across each, yielding N
points, and the N temperature-differences ∆Ti across the heat exchanger were evaluated. Note
that this ∆Ti denotes temperature difference between sink or source media and refrigerant at
a point i in the respective heat exchanger. A result of the assumption of constant cp for the
storages is that the storage media temperature difference through each element will be equal,
while for the refrigerant the enthalpy difference of each element will be equal, which must be
used to evaluate the refrigerant temperature in the N points.
For condensers the N values of ∆Ti were evaluated as positive for higher temperatures of refrig-
erant than of storage media, and oppositely for evaporators, the ∆Ti were evaluated as positive
for higher temperatures of the storage media than of the refrigerant, as shown in Equations
2.2.4 and 2.2.5:
Condensers :
∆Ti = Tre f rigerant,i −Tstorage,i
(2.2.4)
Evaporators :
∆Ti = Tstorage,i −Tre f rigerant,i
(2.2.5)
To converge to a solution, the minimum value of the N temperature differences ∆Ti should
then be equal to the deﬁned value of minimum temperature difference ∆Tp:
min (∆Ti) = ∆Tp
(2.2.6)
A discretization of N = 250 points were used for all heat exchangers.
For evaluation of the temperature differences ∆Ti the HEXs were assumed to be counterﬂow
HEXs with no pressure loss:
∆pHEX = 0
(2.2.7)
19
==PAGE:26==
The amount of superheating after the evaporator (in Kelvin) was used as an input for the heat
pump model:
T1,c = Tsat(p1,d) + ∆TSH,HP
(2.2.8)
For all results throughout this report 5 K superheating was used, unless stated otherwise.
For the outlet of the HP condenser (state point 3,c), an analysis was conducted to investigate
possible assumptions.
For subcritical systems, ie. the most common vapor-compression heat pump cycle, the con-
denser outlet was assumed to have a temperature difference between the two ﬂuids equal to
the pinch temperature difference, since high heat pump performance is often obtained with
pinch at two places in the condenser – both the outlet and at the point where the refrigerant is
saturated vapor.
However, for transcritical systems this is not as apparent due to the variation in heat capacity
of supercritical ﬂuids as shown in Figure 1.3.
For this reason, a transcritical cycle using CO2 was investigated with a varying temperature
difference across the condenser outlet.
Following the state-point numeration in the charging cycle in Figure 2.1, the energy ﬂows of
the heat pump were deﬁned as:
˙Qin,HP = ˙mHP(h1,c −h4,c)
(2.2.9)
˙Qout,HP = ˙mHP(h2,c −h3,c)
(2.2.10)
˙Wcomp,HP = ˙mHP(h2,c −h1,c)
(2.2.11)
˙Wexp,HP = ˙mHP(h3,c −h4,c)
(2.2.12)
˙Wnet,HP = ˙Wcomp,HP −˙Wexp,HP
(2.2.13)
Note that the sign convention is somewhat ﬂexible, since for ˙Qout,HP and ˙Wexp,HP the energy
stream is deﬁned as ˙m(hin −hout) – with in and out denoting the corresponding component
inlet and outlet – and for ˙Qin,HP and ˙Wcomp,HP the energy stream is deﬁned as ˙m(hout −hin).
These deﬁnitions were used to ensure that all energy streams should be positive.
From the energy streams the COP of the heat pump was deﬁned as in Equation 2.2.14. Here it
has been used that the mass ﬂow ˙mHP is the same through all HP components.
COP =
˙Qout,hp
˙Wnet
=
h2,c −h3,c
h2,c −h1,c −(h3,c −h4,c)
(2.2.14)
The mass ﬂow of refrigerant was obtained by sizing the plant with an input value of the heat
supplied to the hot storage, ˙Qhs, and assuming that all the heat out of the HP condenser enters
this hot storage:
˙Qhs = ˙Qout,HP
(2.2.15)
The system converges to a solution of the condition of pinch-point temperature difference in
Equation 2.2.6 by iterating from an initial guess x0 of pressures. From this pressure, the two
pinch-point temperature differences are evaluated, and a new guess value is made for the next
iteration. This procedure was implemented with the fsolve-function as mentioned in Section
1.3.
Figure 2.2 shows a TQ-diagram of a transcritical heat pump cycle with CO2 as the refriger-
ant. The hot storage media was assumed to be heated from 30 ◦C to 100 ◦C. The cycle had
20
==PAGE:27==
an imposed temperature difference across the condenser outlet, denoted ∆To.c.. The cycle con-
verges to pressures from the previously discussed assumptions as well as the deﬁned ∆To.c..
The obtained COP is presented for each used value of ∆To.c.. The TQ-diagram is presented in
increments (hundredths, or percent) of the heat transferred in a heat exchanger. This was cho-
sen for easier comparison since the heat transfer (in kW) through the evaporator would vary
for each cycle with the COP.
The cycles obtained are also presented in a p-h diagram in Figure 2.3. Note that a throttling
valve was used, in practice implemented as an expander with an isentropic efﬁciency of zero
(see Equation 2.2.2), hence the vertical line from an isenthalpic expansion in Figure 2.3. This
was used since this is most common practice in heat pumps in order to save expenses on the
expander. This was later changed for results in Chapter 3.
It can be seen that the higher values of ∆To.c. yields a lower pressure and hence a lower tem-
perature difference at the condenser inlet. Hence it appears to show a trade-off of temperature-
matching of the ﬂuids either at the inlet or the outlet.
Increasing ∆To.c. from 5 K to 14 K – hence effectively increasing the refrigerant temperature
from 35 ◦C to 44 ◦C – increases the evaporator inlet enthalpy and thus decreases the evaporator
heat transfer, resulting in lower COP.
An isotherm is shown of the hot storage media at the condenser outlet, ie. the discharged
hot storage temperature, which will be denoted Ths,discharged. Because the isotherm becomes
almost vertical, it should be expected that, for a given value of ∆To.c., attempting to reduce the
evaporator inlet enthalpy by increasing the condenser pressure would be inefﬁcient, although
this analysis was not conducted.
Figure 2.2: TQ diagram of heat pump cycles obtained with a varying temperature difference
across the HP condenser outlet. The calculation of COP follows the deﬁnition in Equation
2.2.14. Heat transfer is shown in increments for comparison simplicity.
The same methodology was implemented with the hot storage heated from 70 ◦C to 140 ◦C.
This can be seen in the appendix (see App. A.1). Again the result obtained is that the outlet
temperature should be as low as possible in order to minimize the evaporator inlet enthalpy.
The results of COP vs. ∆To.c. are collected in Figure 2.4. Due to these results, it was assumed that
the condenser outlet should temperature difference equal to the pinch temperature difference,
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.3: ph-diagram of the cycles shown in Figure 2.2.
as shown in Equation 2.2.16.
∆To.c. = ∆Tp
(2.2.16)
This is the same as the mentioned assumption for the subcritical cycles, and hence the model
did not have to change depending on whether a subcritical or a transcritical HP cycle was
obtained.
Figure 2.4: Heat pump COP vs. condenser outlet temperature difference ∆To.c., summarizing
the results of Figures 2.2 and 2.3 and Figures A.1 and A.2 in the appendix.
22
==PAGE:29==
2.3
Discharging process: ORC
The discharging process was, similarly to the HP, modeled with 4 components: a pump, an
evaporator, an expander and a condenser. Note that for transcritical cycles the high-pressure
HEX is often denoted a gas heater, but will be denoted evaporator in this thesis to avoid con-
fusion, similarly to the use of condenser for transcritical HP cycles. These components were
modeled in the same manner as for the HP: the pump was implemented as the HP compres-
sor using the deﬁnition of the isentropic efﬁciency in Equation 2.2.1, and the expander was
modeled with the isentropic efﬁciency in Equation 2.2.2, but both with the discharging process
state-points instead, simply replacing c with d in the state-points shown in Equations 2.2.1 and
2.2.2.
The evaporator and the condenser were modeled as isobaric counterﬂow heat exchangers with
pinch-point temperature difference deﬁned using the discretization procedure presented pre-
viously with Equations 2.2.4, 2.2.5 and 2.2.6.
While the compressor suction superheat was used as input for the HP, for the ORC the sub-
cooling before the pump was assumed.
T1,d = Tsat(p1,d) −∆TSC,ORC
(2.3.1)
1 K subcooling was assumed, since some subcooling should always be used to avoid cavitation
in the pump, but this should be small for temperature matching.
In the ORC the evaporator is the high-pressure HEX while the condenser is the low-pressure
HEX, oppositely of the HP cycle. For the evaporator an assumption had to be made to model
a cycle. In order to do this, an analysis was conducted with an initial assumption of pinch-
temperature difference at the outlet.
For illustrative purposes, two important scenarios are presented, in Figures 2.5 and 2.6. Note
that these were not obtained with convergence to a solution of pinch-conditions, since this was
done in order to investigate which assumptions could be useful. The pressures used were set
manually through variation, ie. not by a root-ﬁnding algorithm, and hence might not adhere
to conditions regarding pinch temperature difference.
The two ﬁgures show a case in which the hot storage is heated from 80 ◦C to 130 ◦C, and the
media was assumed to be heated from -18 ◦C to 125 ◦C, ie. with pinch at the outlet. The reader
should note that this is presented mostly for illustrative purposes.
The pressures used for this evaporation process was varied from one third of the ﬂuid critical
pressure to 150 % of the ﬂuid critical pressure, ie. representing both subcritical and transcritical
cycles.
For both ﬁgures, ie. both scenarios, a TQ-diagram for the evaporation at different pressures is
shown, as well as the minimum temperature difference obtained for each value of evaporator
pressure, ie. the minimum value of the N temperature differences evaluated in the discretiza-
tion.
In Figure 2.5 the pressure variation was performed on a cycle using CO2 as refrigerant, and
it can be seen that for any pressure the minimum temperature difference is obtained at the
evaporator outlet, and pinch cannot occur inside the evaporator. The other scenario, presented
in Figure 2.6, using isobutane, shows that some pressures yield lower (even negative) pinch
temperature difference inside the evaporator, appearing at the point of saturated liquid. The
23
==PAGE:30==
negative temperature differences are clearly not physical and should be avoided by conver-
gence to pinch-compliance.
The ﬁrst scenario should generally be avoided, mainly because poor performance – in terms
of ORC thermal efﬁciency – is achieved when pinch inside the evaporator cannot occur but
only at the outlet. For most refrigerants pinch can occur inside the ORC evaporator in many
feasible cases. However, since CO2 has a remarkably low critical temperature, this will show
the phenomenon at lower temperatures than other refrigerants. For this reason all uses of CO2
should have the hot storage heated from a low temperature. Throughout this project most uses
of CO2 as refrigerant will use a hot storage heated from 30 ◦C or lower.
Other refrigerants could show the issue presented in the ﬁrst scenario, but generally at signiﬁ-
cantly higher temperatures - eg. maybe a case in which the hot storage is heated from 150 ◦C to
200 ◦C. Such extreme cases are not investigated in this project, and the discharged hot storage
temperatures were generally kept low to ensure pinch inside the ORC. This limited the tem-
perature ranges that can be used by the model.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: Variation of evaporator-pressure with CO2. (a) TQ-diagram (b) minimum tempera-
ture difference across evaporator vs. pressure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: Variation of evaporator-pressure with CO2. (a) TQ-diagram (b) minimum tempera-
ture difference across evaporator vs. pressure.
24
==PAGE:31==
An assumption regarding the evaporator outlet was investigated for subcritical cases with
pinch inside the evaporator at saturated liquid, since it is then possible – but not necessary
– to have pinch at two places in the evaporator.
Figure 2.7 shows two cases, one in which pinch at the evaporator outlet was assumed and one
in which a larger temperature difference at the outlet was assumed (36 K), leading to less su-
perheating. For these cycles the pinch-condition was complied by convergence of pressures.
Assuming pinch at the outlet leads to a large amount of superheating, which reduces the evap-
oration pressure, while decreasing the amount of superheating allows for a higher evaporation
pressure.
To assess and compare the two cycles the thermal efﬁciency was deﬁned.
Following the state point numeration of the discharging cycle in Figure 2.1, the energy streams
of the ORC were deﬁned as:
˙Qin,ORC = ˙mORC(h3,d −h2,d)
(2.3.2)
˙Qout,ORC = ˙mORC(h4,d −h1,d)
(2.3.3)
˙Wpump,ORC = ˙mORC(h2,d −h1,d)
(2.3.4)
˙Wexp,ORC = ˙mORC(h3,d −h4,d)
(2.3.5)
˙Wnet,ORC = ˙Wexp,ORC −˙Wpump,ORC
(2.3.6)
Again the sign convention used is somewhat ﬂexible to ensure that all energy streams are pos-
itive.
The ORC thermal efﬁciency was then deﬁned as:
ηth =
˙Wnet,ORC
˙Qin,ORC
= h3,d −h4,d −(h2,d −h1,d)
h3,d −h2,d
(2.3.7)
This deﬁnition of thermal efﬁciency was used to calculate the values shown in Figure 2.7. It can
be seen that the higher pressure obtained with a low amount of superheating leads to a higher
thermal efﬁciency.
Figure 2.9 continues the analysis from Figure 2.7, showing thermal efﬁciency versus superheat-
ing after the evaporator for some various refrigerants.
An important result from Figures 2.7 and 2.9 is that the higher evaporation pressure yields a
better thermal efﬁciency. This implies that it should generally be sought to increase the pressure
instead of the temperature at the turbine inlet in order to maximize the thermal efﬁciency. It can
also be seen in Figure 2.7 that increased turbine inlet superheating increases the superheating at
the turbine outlet, and hence also at the condenser inlet, yielding worse temperature-matching
in the condenser.
Following these results it was chosen that, for subcritical cases, the amount of superheating (in
Kelvin) after the evaporator should be small.
T3,d = Tsat(p3,d) + ∆TSH,evap.,ORC
(2.3.8)
In general throughout this report’s results 2 K superheating was used.
However, for transcritical cycles it is not possible to make an assumption regarding superheat-
ing. The matter of determining the ORC evaporator pressure posed difﬁculties, and while this
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.7: Illustrative TQ-diagram of two possible cycles using isobutane. The full lines are
sink and source curves, the dotted lines are the cycle with low evaporator-outlet superheating,
and the dashed lines are the cycle with high evaporator-outlet superheating. The heat transfer
is shown in increments for easier comparison.
Figure 2.8: Ts-diagram of the two cycles shown in Figure 2.7 using isobutane. The line-styles
(dotted vs. dashed) correspond to those used in Figure 2.7.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.9: ORC thermal efﬁciency ηth vs. the superheating after the evaporator, using different
refrigerants.
should not be presented as a lament, some of the issues will be explained – not only to present
the decision-making process, but also to present some things learned that could be useful for
future work.
An optimization procedure for determining the ORC evaporator pressure was unsuccessfully
implemented. A further discussion on this will be provided in Chapter 4.
An assumption of pinch at both the evaporator outlet and somewhere inside the evaporator
was implemented. As noted (and shown) previously, not all temperature-conditions are possi-
ble to match with pinch at evaporator outlet and inside the evaporator, and hence this assump-
tion limits the possible temperature-ranges of the model.
This method proved useful for transcritical cycles using eg. CO2, However, other refrigerants,
eg. R1234ze(E), showed issues since it might not always be possible to have pinch both inside
the evaporator and at the outlet. Speciﬁcally it was found that the evaporator outlet could not
have pinch for many transcritical cases.
This is most likely explained by the peak in cp for supercritical heating. Since high values of
cp appear at higher temperatures than the critical temperature, the supercritical ﬂuid (of eg.
R1234ze(E)) in the ORC evaporator reaches a high cp near the outlet of the evaporator, and
hence pinch cannot appear.
It was implemented to allow larger temperature differences at the evaporator outlet. However,
an issue which appeared from this was that the ORC turbine expansion process would enter
the two-phase region, and the turbine outlet could potentially have a low vapor-quality. An
example of such a case is shown in the appendix, see Figure A.4 in App. A.2.
From the correspondence with MAN Energy Solutions it was mentioned that it was expected
for the Esbjerg plant that the ORC expander will be a turbine, and this was also assumed for
this project.
For turbines the appearance of liquid droplets can cause damage to turbine blades, and hence
27
==PAGE:34==
this should be avoided. This will be also be discussed in Chapter 4.
During variation of the temperature conditions for a mapping of the plant performance it was
unknown to what extent two-phase ﬂow in the ORC turbine would appear at the various con-
ditions.
To accommodate this issue another assumption was attempted for these cases, which might
seem signiﬁcantly more unorthodox than the previously mentioned. The state-point entropy
of the ORC evaporator was set to be equal to that of saturated vapor at the condenser pres-
sure. Since the expansion process was modeled with an isentropic efﬁciency below one, the
expansion process should thus end in the superheated region, ie. the turbine outlet should be
superheated vapor.
A graphical illustration of the concept is shown in Figure 2.10. This shows both a cycle in
red, in which the evaporator outlet entropy is equal to the entropy of saturated vapor at the
condensing pressure, and another cycle for comparison in blue, which could be an example of
a cycle in which a higher evaporator outlet temperature is reached, potentially with pinch at
the outlet.
Temperature T
Speciﬁc entropy s
Figure 2.10: Ts-diagram for graphical illustration of possible transcritical cycles. The red cycle
uses the assumption of evaporator outlet entropy equal to the entropy of saturated vapor at
the condensing pressure. The blue cycle could correspond to one with pinch at the evaporator
outlet. Note that this is not a numerical result but only an illustration.
For temperature variation of ﬂuids with high critical temperatures, mainly R1234ze(E), it was
hence implemented to use either a subcritical cycle or one with this stated assumption on en-
tropy. This was never used for any cycles using CO2.
28
==PAGE:35==
2.4
Combining the charge and discharge processes: Carnot battery
In order to model the Carnot battery using the two presented processes, it is necessary to ensure
that these constitute a cycle with ﬁnal conditions equal to the initial conditions. This means
that after discharge the storage temperatures must return to those before the charge. For this
project the storages were modelled with input-deﬁned temperatures, so the cyclic conditions
were obtained by matching the heat transfer to and from each storage.
The hot storage was used to scale both processes, as expressed in Equation 2.4.1:
˙Qhs = ˙Qout,HP = ˙mHP(h2,c −h3,c) = ˙Qin,ORC = ˙mORC(h3,d −h2,d)
(2.4.1)
Hence the cyclic operation of the hot storage was achieved simply by using the same value of
˙Qhs for both processes. It was thus assumed that no heat-loss from the hot storage occurred to
the ambient.
An important detail to include is the surplus heat generated by the irreversibilities. These ir-
reversibilities occur as entropy generation in compression and expansion processes as well as
temperature differences across heat exchangers. In practice, since the hot storage heat transfers
of the two processes are equal, this surplus heat build-up will appear as a larger heat transfer
to the cold storage during the discharge process than heat transfer from the cold storage dur-
ing the charging process. Since the two must be equal, the surplus heat removed during the
discharge process - meaning the heat removed but not transferred to the cold storage – must be
rejected to the ambient.
This heat of irreversibilities was evaluated as in Equation 2.4.2.
˙Qirr = ˙Qout,ORC −˙Qin,HP
(2.4.2)
If cold storage temperatures are lower than ambient temperatures, the surplus heat rejection
cannot occur freely, and a secondary heat pump is required to remove the surplus heat.
To simplify the Carnot battery model this secondary heat pump was not modelled in the same
manner as presented in Section 2.2. Instead the a heat pump cycle was modeled in the CoolPack
software [29], using a ”One-stage cycle with DX-evaporator” cycle model, and the cooling COP
was evaluated for a range of evaporation temperatures. This was chosen to simplify the model
and was used to get an estimate of the penalization of having to remove surplus heat at low
temperatures to a higher temperature ambient.
The inputs used in the CoolPack model can be seen in the appendix (see App. A.3).
The obtained cooling COP values were then used to make a data-ﬁt, with least-squares ﬁtting in
Python, using the polyfit and polyval functions of the NumPy package [30, 31]. The evaluated
COP values and the dataﬁt are shown in Figure 2.11.
In the Carnot-battery model the electrical energy required to use the secondary heat pump for
surplus heat rejection was assessed using the relation in Equation 2.4.3, in which the secondary
HP COP is denoted as a function of the evaporation temperature:
˙Wsec =
˙Qirr
COPsec(Te,sec)
(2.4.3)
The evaporation temperature of the secondary heat pump was assumed to be equal to the
charged cold storage temperature, since both the cold storage and the secondary heat pump
evaporator should have temperatures below that of the ORC condensing temperature to achieve
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.11: Dataﬁt of secondary heat pump cooling COP, using data from CoolPack.
heat transfer. Note that the secondary heat pump inputs for CoolPack presented in previously
show that 5 K superheating was used, and this might not comply with the pinch-temperature
difference conditions since this was not included in convergence of pressures to pinch-conditions.
The electrical energy in Equation 2.4.3 was then subtracted from the net energy output of the
ORC, such that the actual round-trip efﬁciency would be deﬁned as:
ηRT,real =
˙Wnet,ORC −˙Wsec
˙Wnet,HP
(2.4.4)
2.5
Preliminary summary of methods
The methods presented this far were used to generate the initial results.
The inputs were refrigerant and temperature condisions, meaning that charged and discharged
temperatures of both hot and cold storages. Other inputs were pinch temperature differences
for each heat exchange (5 K as default), isentropic efﬁciencies of machinery (0.85 as default),
superheating in HP compressor suction line (5 K as default), subcooling in ORC pump suction
line (1 K as default).
All heat exchange processes were assumed to be isobaric and HEXs were assumed to be coun-
terﬂow types.
The HP was assumed to have pinch at both condenser outlet and inside for all purposes. The
ORC was assumed to have 2 K superheating after the evaporator in subcritical cases. For tran-
scritical discharging cycles using CO2 the evaporator should have pinch at both outlet and
inside, while other refrigerants could not necessarily have pinch at the outlet, and for these
the entropy at the evaporator outlet was assumed to be equal to that of saturated vapor at the
condensing pressure.
The storages were assumed to have no loss to the ambient, and the heat transfer to and from
30
==PAGE:37==
the hot storage in charging and discharging processes were assumed to be equal.
It was assumed that a secondary heat pump should reject surplus heat from irreversibilities to
the ambient, and the penalty of this, in terms of energy, were included by calculating the COP
of a simple single-stage vapor compression heat pump in CoolPack. This secondary heat pump
was assumed to be driven by the discharging process, and the energy consumption, ˙Wsec, was
thus deducted from the net power output, ˙Wnet,ORC.
Results obtained using these methods are shown in Section 3.1.
2.6
Changing method of surplus heat rejection
As will be shown in the Results section, the Carnot battery performance was impacted quite
signiﬁcantly by using part of the net power output to use a secondary heat pump to reject
surplus heat to the ambient. It was for this reason chosen to look into different methods.
Instead of using the secondary heat pump to remove the excess heat during the discharge
process, it could instead be used during the charge process to remove the same amount of heat
from the storage. The power consumption of the secondary heat pump must then instead be
added to the power consumption of the charging process.
The new system is illustrated in Figure 2.12. Note that for illustration simplicity this draw-
ing shows only the state-points of the charging and discharging cycles as well as some of the
energy-ﬂows concerning the surplus heat rejection. For notation of all state-points, which will
be relevant later, see Figure A.5 in Appendix A.4.
Since some readers might be skeptical about the improvement from this, perhaps arguing that
”the amounts of electrical energy generated and consumed are still the same”, a very simple
example might help.
Consider a hypothetical Carnot-battery in which the charging HP cycle net power is 10 MW, the
discharging ORC net power output is 5 MW and the secondary heat pump power consumption
is 1 MW. The round-trip efﬁciencies obtained with the initial and the new methods would then
become:
ηRT,initial =
˙Wnet,ORC −˙Wsec
˙Wnet,HP
= 5 MW −1 MW
10 MW
= 0.4
(2.6.1)
ηRT,new =
˙Wnet,ORC
˙Wnet,HP + ˙Wsec
=
5 MW
10 MW + 1 MW = 0.455
(2.6.2)
While this might seem overly simpliﬁed, the general notion holds. One detail must be changed,
however. With this change it is not possible to have an evaporation temperature in the sec-
ondary heat pump equal to the cold storage temperature, since the secondary heat pump now
must remove heat from the cold storage, and a temperature difference is thus required. This
was taken into account by assuming an evaporation temperature of the secondary heat pump
5 K below the cold storage temperature. This slightly reduces the COP of the secondary HP
and thus increases its power consumption.
An important side-note to this is that the PTES should be expected to charge at times with low
electricity price and discharge at times with higher electricity price. The new method should
thus also serve to use cheaper electricity for the secondary HP and have a higher plant power
output at times of high electricity price. This should signiﬁcantly improve the economy of a
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.12: Illustration of new system setup. Energy streams related to the removal of heat
from system irreversibilities are shown. The main differences from the initial system shown in
Figure 2.1 are placement of secondary HP and the added ambient HEX (AHEX). Component
designations not shown here are similar to those in Figure 2.1.
32
==PAGE:39==
PTES plant.
Clearly the example above does not serve as proof that this method change is exclusively ben-
eﬁcial. For this reason an analytical approach was taken, to investigate whether this model
change would have the impact that the stated example implies.
2.6.1
Analytical investigation of secondary heat pump change
In this section the improvement – or change – of using the secondary heat pump during charge
instead of discharge is investigated analytically. The initial method, with surplus heat rejection
during discharge, is denoted with round-trip efﬁciency as ηRT,1, while the method of using the
secondary HP during charge is denoted with round-trip efﬁciency as ηRT,2.
For brevity the net power consumption and generation of the HP and ORC, ˙Wnet,HP and ˙Wnet,ORC,
respectively, are denoted ˙Win and ˙Wout in this section, since these two correspond to (electrical)
energy into and out of the PTES system.
The ”ideal” round-trip efﬁciency, ηRT,i, will denote the round-trip efﬁciency of a system with
real components but without the use of a secondary heat pump. As seen in Equation 1.2.6, by
assuming no energy loss in the storages this becomes the product of the HP COP and the ORC
thermal efﬁciency:
ηRT,i = COP · ηth =
˙Wout
˙Win
(2.6.3)
The round-trip efﬁciency obtained by running the secondary heat pump cycle during discharge
is deﬁned as:
ηRT,1 =
˙Wout −˙Wsec
˙Win
= ηRT,i −
˙Wsec
˙Win
(2.6.4)
The COP of the secondary heat pump, COPsec, is deﬁned as:
COPsec =
˙Qirr
˙Qsec
(2.6.5)
An energy balance of the PTES system yields:
˙Win −˙Wout −˙Qirr = 0 ⇒
˙Qirr
˙Win
= 1 −ηRT,i
(2.6.6)
Equations 2.6.5 and 2.6.6 combines to:
˙Wsec
˙Win
=
1
COPsec
(1 −ηRT,i)
(2.6.7)
Inserting this last expression into Equation 2.6.4, and remembering that ηRT,i = ηL,HP · ηL,ORC
from Equation 1.2.13, reduces to:
ηRT,1 = ηL,HP · ηL,ORC

1 +
1
COPsec

−
1
COPsec
(2.6.8)
Similarly the round-trip efﬁciency obtained by running the secondary heat pump cycle during
the charging process is:
ηRT,2 =
˙Wout
˙Win + ˙Wsec
(2.6.9)
33
==PAGE:40==
Taking the inverse of this, in order to have a single-term denominator, as well as using the
secondary heat pump COP deﬁnition (from Equation 2.6.5), shows:
1
ηRT,2
=
˙Win +
˙Qirr
COPsec
˙Wout
⇒
1
ηRT,2
=
1
ηRT,i
+
˙Qirr
˙Wout
1
COPsec
(2.6.10)
To determine
˙Qirr
˙Wout , the same energy balance of the PTES system as in Equation 2.6.6 is used to
show the following:
˙Qirr = ˙Win −˙Wout ⇒
˙Qirr
˙Wout
=
1
ηRT,i
−1
(2.6.11)
Inserting this into Equation 2.6.10 yields:
1
ηRT,2
=
1
ηRT,i

1 +
1
COPsec

−
1
COPsec
(2.6.12)
Then, again using the relation of the ’ideal’ round-trip efﬁciency as a product of the process
Lorenz efﬁciencies, the new round-trip efﬁciency becomes:
ηRT,2 =

1
ηL,HP · ηL,ORC

1 +
1
COPsec

−
1
COPsec
−1
(2.6.13)
To quantify the difference between the two methods of surplus heat rejection, the difference
between the two round-trip efﬁciencies (with the deﬁnitions in Equations 2.6.8 and 2.6.13) was
investigated as:
∆ηRT = ηRT,2 −ηRT,1
(2.6.14)
By using Equation 2.6.14 it can be concluded that if ∆ηRT is positive, then rejecting the surplus
heat during the charging process is more efﬁcient. Conversely, if ∆ηRT is negative then surplus
heat rejection during discharge must be advantageous.
Since it was assumed that interpretation of the expression of ∆ηRT is fairly unintuitive to most
readers, is not presented here, but shown plotted for values of ηL,HP and ηL,ORC between 0 and
1 by assuming COPsec = 5 in Figure 2.13. Note that the same value of COPsec was used for
ηRT,1 and ηRT,2, while it should in practice be lower for ηRT,2, as mentioned earlier. A cut-out
zoomed view with some fairly realistic values of Lorenz-efﬁciencies (0.6 to 0.8) of both charging
and discharging processes is also shown in Figure 2.13. This cut-out zoom shows numbers with
reasonably expected improvements in round-trip efﬁciency by changing the method of surplus
heat rejection.
From Figure 2.13 it is seen that, since ∆ηRT is positive, surplus heat rejection during the charge
process should be advantageous. Large values of Lorenz efﬁciency decrease the change to-
wards zero. This is intuitive since the amount of surplus heat decreases towards zero when
Lorenz efﬁciencies go towards one. In Figure 2.13 a cut-out is presented for an area of Lorenz-
efﬁciencies that might be feasible to reach for both charging and discharging cycles. It is seen
that this results in values of ∆ηRT between 0.03 and 0.08, meaning an increase in round-trip
efﬁciency of 3 to 8 percentage points by switching from surplus heat rejection during discharge
to during charge. In Figure 2.14 the secondary heat pump COP is varied, while Lorenz efﬁcien-
cies were assumed to be 0.7. It is seen that increasing COP decreases the difference in the two
round-trip efﬁciencies. This is also intuitive since increasing this COP decreases the work used
for surplus heat rejection.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.13: Change in round-trip efﬁciency of Carnot-battery plant (contours) vs. Lorenz ef-
ﬁciency of charging (x-axis) and discharging (y-axis) processes. For this the COP of secondary
heat pump (COPsec) was assumed to be 5. A zoom cut-out is presented to show concrete values
of ∆ηRT obtained for Lorenz efﬁciencies between 0.6 and 0.8.
Figure 2.14: Change in round-trip efﬁciency of Carnot-battery plant (∆ηRT) vs. COP of sec-
ondary heat pump (COPsec). Lorenz-efﬁciencies of both charging and discharging processes
were assumed to be 0.7 for this. Since ∆ηRT > 0 the surplus heat rejection during discharge
should be advantageous.
35
==PAGE:42==
2.6.2
Heat exchanger for free heat rejection to the ambient
In addition to the change regarding the use of the secondary HP, another measure was taken
in the change of setup in the attempt to increase efﬁciency. Depending on both temperature
conditions of storages and used refrigerant, it is possible to have a large amount of superheating
at the turbine outlet during ORC operation. If the temperature here is sufﬁciently above the
ambient temperature it is possible to reject some heat freely to the ambient, thus saving some
secondary HP capacity and power consumption.
For this reason it was chosen to implement a check in the model to see if this was possible. It
was assumed that the potential ambient heat exchanger (AHEX) would be counter-ﬂow, and
that the temperature-glide of the ambient media would be low, and hence pinch should be at
the refrigerant outlet. Thus the temperature of the refrigerant after this heat rejection should
be:
T4b,d = Tamb + ∆Tp,AHEX
(2.6.15)
Here Tamb denotes the ambient temperature, and ∆Tp,amb is the pinch-temperature difference of
the inserted ambient heat exchanger.
A value of ∆Tp,amb = 5 K was chosen.
Following this it is clear that the check should only apply the ambient HEX in case the temper-
ature at the ORC expander outlet is high enough. This was implemented with the procedure
presented in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1: Find the necessary heat into the secondary HP, ˙Qevap.,sec
Run ORC model
if T4,d > Tamb + ∆Tp,AHEX then
T4b,d = Tamb + ∆Tp,AHEX
˙Qamb = ˙mORC(h4,d −h4b,d)
else
˙Qamb = 0
end
if ˙Qamb < ˙Qirr then
˙Qevap.,sec = ˙Qirr −˙Qamb
else
˙Qevap.,sec = 0
end
After this the following energy balances were used:
˙Qout,ORC = ˙Qamb + ˙Qcs
(2.6.16)
˙Qcs = ˙Qin,HP + ˙Qevap.,sec
(2.6.17)
The power consumption of the secondary HP was then evaluated as:
˙Wsec =
˙Qevap.,sec
COPsec
(2.6.18)
COPsec was evaluated with the data-ﬁt as previously stated.
The new round-trip efﬁciency was then deﬁned as:
ηRT,new =
˙Wnet,ORC
˙Wnet,HP + ˙Wsec
(2.6.19)
The results obtained with this new method can be seen in Section 3.2.
36
==PAGE:43==
2.7
Exergy analysis
Exergy analysis is a useful tool for obtaining information of energy within an investigated
system. While the round-trip efﬁciency, based on ﬁrst-law considerations, is a quintessential
measure of assessment of a PTES plant, an exergy analysis, based on second-law considera-
tions, can help explain phenomena pertaining ﬁrst-law results. Some considerations based on
a conventional exergy analysis were used for investigations shown in the Results chapter.
The deﬁnitions and notation of the exergy analysis generally follow those in Thermal Design &
Optimization by Bejan et al [32].
The dead state was deﬁned as:
p0 = 1 bar
(2.7.1)
T0 = 20 ◦C
(2.7.2)
These were used to deﬁne the dead-state enthalpy and entropy h0 and s0. Dead-state enthalpy
and entropy was evaluated for each media, ie. refrigerant and storage medias. The storage
medias were assumed to be water at 20 bars pressure, so that no evaporation would occur. A
limitation of this was that the cold storage had to be at least 0 ◦C for all uses of the exergy
analysis.
Total exergy is deﬁned as the sum of physical, chemical, kinetic, and potential exergies:
E = Eph + Ech + Ekn + Ept
(2.7.3)
The speciﬁc exergy (per unit of mass) will be denoted with a lower case e.
The kinetic and potential exergies, ekn and ept, were neglected, and since no chemical reactions
should take place in the model, the chemical exergy ech was also neglected. Hence only the
physical exergy was used, since only this was assumed to be signiﬁcant:
e = h −h0 −T0(s −s0)
(2.7.4)
The speciﬁc exergy was for all state points evaluated as in Equation 2.7.4, with h0 and s0 eval-
uated at dead-state conditions for a given media.
For the ambient heat exchange, it was assumed that the ambient would have a small tempera-
ture glide. This corresponds to having a large ﬂow of the ambient media across the AHEX. It
was chosen to use air, although sea, lake or river water might in practice be used if possible,
and a temperature glide of 2 K was assumed. The dead-state conditions were used. Using
Algorithm 1 to obtain ˙Qamb, an energy balance was used to obtain the mass ﬂow of air:
˙Qamb = ˙mamb(h2,amb −h1,amb)
(2.7.5)
h1,amb is the ambient enthalpy at the dead-state conditions, while h2,amb corresponds to the
heated air.
The exergy of the ambient was evaluated using the same procedure as with refrigerant and
storage media, ie. with exergy deﬁnition in Equation 2.7.4 and the dead-state conditions in
Equations 2.7.1 and 2.7.2.
For the secondary HP evaporator, ammonia was used as refrigerant, and the evaporation tem-
perature was assumed to be 5 K below the cold-storage temperature (after charging), with 5
K superheating at the evaporator outlet, since this was used in the CoolPack-model (see App.
37
==PAGE:44==
A.3). For a common vapor-compression HP the refrigerant (ammonia) entering the evaporator
should be a mixture of liquid and vapor, ie. a two-phase condition, and a vapor-quality of 0.4
at the evaporator inlet was assumed:
Tevap,sec = T2,cs −5 K
(2.7.6)
∆TSH,sec = 5 K
(2.7.7)
x1,sec = 0.4
(2.7.8)
For all k components, an exergy balance was written on the general form shown in Equation
2.7.9, in which ˙EF,k is the exergy fuel, ˙EP,k is the exergy product and ˙ED,k is the exergy destruc-
tion.
˙EF,k −˙EP,k −˙ED,k = 0
(2.7.9)
The exergy balances are shown for all components in Equations 2.7.10 - 2.7.19, with exergy
destruction on the left hand side and terms for the exergy fuel and product rates on the right-
hand side pointed out for clariﬁcation. Note that the notation of all state-points used in these
exergy balances can be found in the appendix (see A.5 in App. A.4).
HP Compressor :
˙ED,comp.,HP = ˙Wcomp.,HP
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mHP(e2,c −e1,c)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.10)
HP Condenser :
˙ED,cond.,HP = ˙mHP(e2,c −e3,c)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mhs(e2,hs −e1,hs)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.11)
HP Expander :
˙ED,exp.,HP = ˙mHP(e3,c −e4,c)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙Wexp.,HP
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.12)
HP Evaporator :
˙ED,evap.,HP = ˙mHP(e4,c −e1,c)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mcs(e1b,cs −e1,cs)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.13)
ORC Pump :
˙ED,pump,ORC = ˙Wpump,ORC
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mORC(e2,d −e1,d)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.14)
ORC Evaporator :
˙ED,evap.,ORC = ˙mhs(e2,hs −e1,hs)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mORC(e3,d −e2,d)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.15)
ORC Expander :
˙ED,exp.,ORC = ˙mORC(e3,d −e4,d)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙Wexp.,ORC
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.16)
ORC AHEX
˙ED,AHEX,ORC = ˙mORC(e4,d −e4b,d)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mamb(e2,amb −e1,amb)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.17)
ORC Condenser :
˙ED,Cond.,ORC = ˙mcs(e2,cs −e1,cs)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mORC(e1,d −e4b,d)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.18)
Sec. HP. Evap. :
˙ED,Evap.,sec.HP = ˙msec(e2,sec −e1,sec)
|
{z
}
fuel
−˙mcs(e2,cs −e1b,cs)
|
{z
}
product
(2.7.19)
Using the shown terms of exergy fuel and product rates for the components, the exergy efﬁ-
ciency of any component k is deﬁned as:
ηex,k =
˙EP,k
˙EF,k
(2.7.20)
38
==PAGE:45==
The two exergy destruction ratios yD and y∗
D were for each component k deﬁned as:
yD = ED,k
EF,sys
(2.7.21)
y∗
D =
ED,k
∑
k
ED,k
(2.7.22)
The system exergy fuel, ˙EF,sys in Equation 2.7.21, was deﬁned as the net power consumption of
the charging cycle and the secondary heat pump:
˙EF,sys = ˙Wnet,HP + ˙Wsec
(2.7.23)
It can be mentioned, that the Gouy-Stodola theorem, presented in Equation 2.7.25, is another way
to evaluate the exergy destruction in a component k from the entropy generation ˙Sgen,k:
˙Sgen,k = ∑
out,k
˙ms −∑
in,k
˙ms
(2.7.24)
˙ED,k = T0 ˙Sgen,k
(2.7.25)
This is useful since the destruction rates from the exergy balances and the Gouy-Stodola-
theorem should be equal, which was also found to be the case.
2.8
Economic analysis
A simple economic analysis was performed using a tool developed by B. Elmegaard et al [33].
The tool, built in Python, uses dynamic programming with data for electricity spot market
prices to ﬁnd the optimal market participation strategy (optimal in terms of net income), orig-
inally for a CAES study. The data contains hourly prices of Nordpool electricity spot market
prices [34]. Data was used for both 2003 and 2005 market prices.
The general working principle of the tool was originally to evaluate four different market op-
tions at each hour: (1) no operation at all, (2) charging of storage, at a net monetary expense,
(3) discharging of storage, at a net monetary income, and (4) simultaneous use of charge and
discharge for no change in storage level. The latter was meant to have the option of net sale
of electricity and purchase of gas for a turbine, which might yield a net income depending
on electricity price (ﬂuctuating) and gas price (constant). In case the storage is either full or
empty, options (2) and (3), respectively, are not possible. A ﬁnite storage size was imposed by
discretizing to 11 levels (0-10) and letting an hour of operation change the storage level by one,
increasing for charge and decreasing for discharge.
This yields different paths of market participation through the year, and it is sought to ﬁnd the
one generating the greatest net income.
The tool does not contain a thermodynamic model but simply uses energy ﬂows of electric-
ity consumption/generation and storage charge/discharge obtained from a thermodynamic
model.
The tool was modiﬁed to match possible market participation strategies for a PTES plant. The
initial modiﬁcation corresponded to the presented model with cold and hot storages and con-
nection to the electricity grid. This led to three different market options for each hour: (1) no
operation, (2) charging storages, at a net expense of money on electricity, and (3) discharging
39
==PAGE:46==
storages, at a net income of money from electricity.
A second case was implemented in which the district heating network was used as hot storage.
This would have the advantage of no investment in hot storage. The market options then
become: (1) no operation, (2) buying electricity and selling heat to DH network, and (3) buying
heat from the DH network and selling electricity. Since it was found that high hot storage
temperatures was needed for decent ORC efﬁciency, it was assumed that a high-temperature
DH network would be available, perhaps for industrial purposes. In practice the DH network
temperatures could signiﬁcantly affect the ORC performance.
Since a cold storage should still be necessary, the limitations of empty or full storage were kept
in use.
The heat delivered to the network and extracted from it for the two market options were as-
sumed to be equal. It was chosen to let the DH price ﬂuctuate slightly along with the electricity
price. This could be a reasonable assumption when considering the increasing usage of heat
pumps for electriﬁcation of the heat production. The general idea behind this was to let DH
price be affected by the electricity price but with lower ﬂuctuations relative to the mean price.
This was implemented by using the mean electricity price from the data, cel, and the hourly
electricity price, cel, and assuming both a mean DH price, cDH and a ratio of normalized price
deviation from mean price, rn, deﬁned with the relation in Equation 2.8.1:
cDH −cDH
cDH
= rn
cel −cel
cel
(2.8.1)
A ratio of rn = 0.1 was used; this means that the DH price deviation from its mean price,
relative to its mean, is a tenth of the electricity price deviation from its mean relative to its cor-
responding mean price. Thus, as an illustrative example, should an hourly electricity price be
twice the mean, the normalized price deviation is one, and the normalized DH price deviation
would then be 0.1, yielding a DH price equal to cDH = cDH(1 + 0.1).
A mean DH price of cDH = 150 DKK/MWh was assumed.
The resulting DH price with this method is shown compared to electricity price for a period of
30 days in Figure 2.15, along with full-year mean values from which the normalized deviations
are calculated. It can be seen that the ﬂuctuations in DH price are similar to those of the elec-
tricity price but smaller in amplitude.
A third case was also implemented, combining the two previously stated. This would corre-
spond to a system with both storages and connection to the DH network. This yields 5 market
participation options: (1) no operation, (2) charging the storages, (3) discharging the storages,
(4) buying electricity to sell DH, and (5) buying DH to sell electricity.
For this case it was necessary to add the cold storage to the economic model in order to keep
track of the energy level in this, since the second and the third mentioned market options will
have heat transfer to/from the hot and cold storages, while the fourth and ﬁfth will only have
heat transfer to/from the cold storage, as the DH network is used instead of the hot storage.
In order to investigate the potential economy in the near-future with the expected penetration
of renewables in the danish power grid, a ’hypothetical’ time-series of electricity spot market
prices for 2030 was used, generated by the Danish Energy Agency [35] with the expected trends
40
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.15: Electricity price (in blue) [34] and modeled DH price (in red) for a period of 30
days. Mean values (of the full year) are shown as dashed lines using the same color-coding.
for the future electricity prices. Note that the 2030-’pseudodata’ is a predicted example of what
the electricity prices for a full year could look like, and this was not made by the author of this
thesis. It is not clearly stated how the predictions were made.
The predicted time series is shown with the data from 2005 in Figure 2.16.
The results of the economic analysis can be seen in Section 3.4.
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 2.16: Electricity price with data from 2005 (in red) [34] and example prediction for 2030
(in blue) from the Danish Energy Agency [35]. Mean values (of the full year) are shown as
dashed lines using the same color-coding.
42
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3
Results
This chapter presents results obtained with the model. In Section 3.1 the initial method of
surplus heat rejection was used, ie. by using the secondary HP during discharge operation,
while Section 3.2 shows results using the updated method as presented in Section 2.6.
3.1
Initial method
3.1.1
Simple example of system results
To provide the reader with an understanding of the model results, an example will be presented
here. For this CO2 was used as refrigerant, and all machinery isentropic efﬁciencies were ηs =
0.85 while all HEX pinch-temperature differences were ∆Tp = 5 K. The hot storage was deﬁned
to be heated from 30 ◦C to 150 ◦C, while the cold storage was cooled from 5 ◦C to 0 ◦C. The HP
evaporator superheating ∆TSH,HP was set to 5 K. The plant capacity was deﬁned with ˙Qhs = 50
MW.
These input deﬁnitions and conditions are summarized in Table 3.1.
Ths [◦C]
∆Ths [K]
Tcs [◦C]
∆Tcs [K]
ηs
∆Tp [K]
∆TSH,HP [K]
˙Qhs [MW]
150
120
0
5
0.85
5
5
50
Table 3.1: Inputs for example run with results presented in Figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3.
A mapping of energy ﬂows is presented in Figure 3.1. The sign convention for the presented
energy ﬂows is positive for energy into the refrigerant – ie. an increase of enthalpy of the CO2
– and negative for energy extraction – ie. a decreasing enthalpy of the CO2. This is simply to
make the energy ﬂows clear for the reader.
ph- and Ts-diagrams of respectively the charging and discharging processes are presented in
Figure 3.2 and a TQ-diagrams is shown in Figure 3.3.
With the results in Figure 3.1, it can be seen that the round-trip efﬁciency is:
ηRT =
˙Wexp.,ORC −( ˙Wpump,ORC + ˙Wsec)
˙Wcomp.,HP −˙Wexp.,HP
= 11.3 MW −(4.0 MW + 1.4 MW)
19.3 MW −3.5 MW
= 37.3 %
(3.1.1)
The ORC net power is ˙Wnet,ORC =
˙Wexp.,ORC −˙Wpump,ORC = 11.3 MW −4.0 MW = 7.3 MW,
and so the secondary HP power consumption of 1.4 MW is almost 20 % of the ORC net power.
43
==PAGE:50==
Not accounting for the secondary HP yields a round-trip efﬁciency of around 46.2 %, ie. a
penalization of 9 %p by including the secondary HP.
Figure 3.1: Mapping of energy ﬂows for an example model run with CO2 as refrigerant. The
sign convention presented here is positive for processes increasing the CO2 enthalpy and neg-
ative for processes decreasing the CO2 enthalpy. MWe is electric energy ﬂow while MWt is
thermal energy ﬂow. Inputs and conditions for the results are shown in Table 3.1. See other
results related to the same example run in Figures 3.2 and 3.3.
(a) Charging
(b) Discharging
Figure 3.2: System processes of example run: (a) Charging cycle in a ph-diagram (b) Discharg-
ing cycle in a Ts-diagram. These results are related to the same example run as Figures 3.1 and
3.3.
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.3: TQ-diagram of example run. This result is related to the same example run as
Figures 3.1 and 3.2.
3.1.2
Study of temperature conditions
One of the main purposes of this thesis was an investigation into what round-trip efﬁciencies
could reasonably be expected from different temperatures. This was initially conducted by
varying the cold-storage temperature (after charging) from -20 ◦C to 5 ◦C while varying the
hot-storage temperature (after charging) from 75 ◦C to 180 ◦C. These temperatures were cho-
sen from both considerations of realistic values, since temperatures delivered by heat pumps
are limited, and also simply from limitations due to convergence issues. The hot-storage was
assumed to be 30 ◦C before charging / after discharging, and the cold-storage was assumed to
have a 5 K temperature glide for all purposes. The HP evaporator superheating was 5 K for all
results.
These input deﬁnitions and conditions are the same as those presented for the previous exam-
ple run in Table 3.1, with the exceptions that Ths,charged and Tcs,charged are varied in the following
analysis.
The contour-plots shown with these temperature-variations will be denoted temperature maps.
Figure 3.4 show Lorenz COP and thermal efﬁciency from the temperature conditions. These
follow the deﬁnitions presented in Equations 1.2.7, 1.2.8 and 1.2.10 and are simply functions
of the storage temperature conditions. The Lorenz efﬁciencies of the charging and discharg-
ing processes in the temperature maps were evaluated by dividing the HP COP and the ORC
thermal efﬁciency, respectively, by the corresponding Lorenz version.
As it was explained in Section 2.3, when CO2 is used as refrigerant pinch inside the ORC evapo-
rator is limited to certain temperature conditions, since the discharged hot storage temperature
was ﬁxed in this analysis. Using an optimization for the hot storage temperature glide it should
be possible to ensure pinch inside the evaporator with lower values of cold storage tempera-
ture.
The COP and thermal efﬁciency of the charging and discharging processes, respectively, are
shown in Figures 3.5 and 3.6, along with cycle Lorenz efﬁciencies, for CO2 (R744). Note that
the ORC Lorenz efﬁciency is denoted ηth/Lorenz to illustrate that this is calculated as
ηth
ηLorenz .
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.4: Lorenz COP and Lorenz thermal efﬁciency from temperature conditions. The two
temperature axes denote the charged temperatures. The discharged hot-storage temperature
used was 30 ◦C while the cold-storage temperature glide was deﬁned as 5 K. These results are
used for the Lorenz cycle efﬁciencies shown in many ﬁgures.
Finally the round-trip efﬁciency is shown in Figure 3.7. This shows both the ”ideal” efﬁciency,
by not including the secondary HP power consumption (denoted ηRT,ideal), and the ’real’ efﬁ-
ciency by including the secondary HP (denoted ηRT,real).
The temperature maps shown here for CO2 will show a smaller variation in temperature con-
ditions than those presented previously. In these (Figures 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7) pinch is obtained
both inside the ORC evaporator and at the outlet. In the appendix similar temperature maps
can be found using the full variation of temperature conditions presented earlier. However,
for these the pinch inside the ORC evaporator was not enforced, and hence it is not clear at
what conditions this appears and which it does not, and no optimization was used. For these
’extended’ temperature maps with CO2, see App. A.5, Figures A.6-A.8.
Note that the temperature maps for ’real’ round-trip efﬁciency presented this far were obtained
with the initial method of surplus heat rejection, ie. using the secondary HP during discharge
operation. It was largely due to observations from these that it was chosen to implement a
different method of surplus heat rejection.
The CO2 charging cycle is seen to obtain a Lorenz efﬁciency of up to 76 % while the discharging
cycle only reaches slightly more than 63 %. This is most likely caused by two factors: one is
that the 5 K pinch-point temperature difference becomes less signiﬁcant at larger temperature
lifts, ie. larger temperature-difference between hot storage and cold storage.
Another point is that the pressure in the HP condenser is higher than in the ORC evaporator,
since the HP condenser must have higher temperatures than the hot storage for heat exchange
while the opposite is true for the ORC evaporator. This reduces the variation in heat capacity
46
==PAGE:53==
for the HP condenser and thus allows for better matching of the temperature proﬁles.
The ’ideal’ round-trip efﬁciency can be seen to reach more than 48 %, but more than 10 %p are
’lost’ when taking into account the secondary HP (see ηRT,ideal and ηRT,real in Figure 3.7).
These results show that the secondary heat pump has a large impact on the round-trip efﬁ-
ciency since it lowers the output electric power. This led to the conclusion that another method
should be used for the surplus heat rejection, and hence the updated method was implemented.
Figure 3.5: Temperature map of charging cycle COP and and Lorenz efﬁciency with CO2. For
inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are
varied here.
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.6: Temperature map of discharging cycle thermal and Lorenz efﬁciencies with CO2.
For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are
varied here.
Figure 3.7: Temperature map of the PTES system round-trip efﬁciency using CO2 both without
accounting for the secondary HP power consumption (etaRT,ideal) and accounting for it (ηRT,real).
For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are
varied here.
48
==PAGE:55==
3.2
Updated method for surplus heat rejection
In this section results obtained with the changed surplus heat rejection methodology described
in Section 2.6 are presented.
3.2.1
Simple example of system results
Similarly to the example run presented in Section 3.1 (see Figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3), an example
run using the same inputs and conditions are shown with with the updated methodology in
Figures 3.8 and 3.9.
Noting the results presented in Figure 3.8, it can be seen that the round-trip efﬁciency is:
ηRT =
˙Wexp.,ORC −˙Wpump,ORC
˙Wcomp.,HP −˙Wexp.,HP + ˙Wsec
=
11.3 MW −4.0 MW
19.3 MW −3.5 MW + 1.7 MW = 41.8 %
(3.2.1)
By comparing Figure 3.8 with Figure 3.1 and the corresponding round-trip efﬁciencies in Equa-
tions 3.2.1 and 3.1.1 it can be seen that the only change in electric energy ﬂows from the compo-
nents is that the secondary HP power consumption has increased from 1.40 MWe to 1.7 MWe,
due to the decreased evaporation temperature of the secondary HP leading to the COP of the
secondary HP dropping from around 6.0 to 5.0.
The round-trip efﬁciency is increased from around 37.3 % to around 41.8 %, ie. an increase of
4.5 %p.
From the analytical investigation in Section 2.6.1 it was concluded that an increase in round-trip
efﬁciency of 3 %p - 8 %p could be expected only from the change in secondary HP placement,
without accounting for the change in COPsec (see Figures 2.13 and 2.14). Thus the increase of
4.5 %p complies very well with this conclusion.
The system processes are the same as those presented in Figure 3.2, since the temperature con-
ditions are the same, but the TQ-diagrams show the changes in heat ﬂows; the secondary HP
evaporation curve is now ’below’ the cold storage curve since the cold storage is now cooled
by the secondary HP, and heat exchange with the ambient is inserted.
For the example case the mass ﬂow rate of the hot storage water was found to 99.1 kg/s, and
the hot storage energy density is 135 kWh/m3.
The exergy destruction ratios yD and y∗
D are shown in Figure 3.10 and the component exergy
efﬁciencies are shown in Figure 3.11. The HP compressor causes the largest part of the exergy
destruction with the ORC expander causes nearly as much. The AHEX has a very low exergy
efﬁciency, due to the assumption of low temperature glide of ambient air, but its contribution
to the exergy destruction is very small due to the small energy ﬂow in the component.
Interestingly the HP condenser has a low contribution to the exergy destruction considering
the large energy ﬂow in this component. However, it also shows the highest exergy efﬁciency.
Conversely the ORC evaporator has a lower exergy efﬁciency and a larger exergy destruction
contribution. This is caused by the better matching of the HP condenser temperature proﬁle
with the hot storage media than the matching the ORC evaporator temperature proﬁle with the
hot storage, which in turn is explained by the higher pressure in the HP condenser resulting in
lower variation in heat capacity.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.8: Mapping of energy ﬂows for an example model run with CO2 as refrigerant. The
sign convention presented here is positive for processes increasing the CO2 enthalpy and neg-
ative for processes decreasing the CO2 enthalpy. MWe is electric energy ﬂow while MWt is
thermal energy ﬂow. Inputs and conditions for the results are shown in Table 3.1. See other
results related to the same example run in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: TQ-diagram of example run. This result is related to the same example run as Figure
3.1.
50
==PAGE:57==
The HP evaporator and the ORC condenser have fairly large exergy destruction contributions
when considering the lower energy ﬂows across these components compared to the corre-
sponding high-pressure heat exchangers.
Figure 3.10: Exergy destruction ratios of components of example run. The HP compressor and
the ORC expander show the largest exergy destructions. See Section 2.7 for deﬁnitions of yD
and y∗
D.
Figure 3.11: Exergy efﬁciencies of components of example run. The HP condenser show the
highest exergy efﬁciency, hence providing a relatively small exergy destruction. This is due
to the high pressure allowing a very good matching of the temperature proﬁle with the hot
storage as seen in Figure 3.9. See Section 2.7 for the component exergy efﬁciency deﬁnitions.
3.2.2
Study of temperature conditions
An analysis similar to the one presented in Section 3.1.2 was conducted with the updated
method. Temperature maps with round-trip efﬁciencies as well as improvement in round-
trip efﬁciency by methodology change are shown in Figures 3.12 and 3.13. The improvements,
51
==PAGE:58==
∆ηRT, were evaluated by comparing with those obtained with the initial method in the same
way as in the analytical investigation in Section 2.6.1, ie. as: ∆ηRT = ηRT,new −ηRT,initial.
Note that ηRT,initial was denoted ηRT,real in the results in Section 3.1.2 (see Figure 3.7).
This approach of comparison means that the temperature maps of ∆ηRT are in percentage
points (%p).
Note that the temperature map with CO2 is shown for the same temperature conditions as in
Figure 3.7. The more extended temperature map with CO2 can be found in the appendix (see
Figure A.9), again with lack of optimization for conditions without pinch inside the ORC evap-
orator.
More temperature maps like those in Figures 3.12 and 3.13 can be found in the appendix (see
App. A.6) with other refrigerants.
From Figures 3.12 and 3.13 it can be seen that CO2 performs better than R1234ze(E) at low
hot storage temperatures while for higher hot-storage temperatures R1234ze(E) shows equal
or even higher efﬁciencies.
This shows a more rapid increase in round-trip efﬁciency for
R1234ze(E) with increasing hot storage temperature. This is likely caused by the R1234ze(E)
cycle changing from subcritical, giving relatively poor performance, to a transcritical cycle,
drastically increasing the performance, while the CO2-cycle is transcritical in all cases, thus
never seeing this drastic increase in performance.
In general the improvement ∆ηRT is seen to be from 4 %p in the areas with high ηRT and up
to 12 %p in the very low ηRT areas. This complies very well with the expectations from the
conclusions drawn analytically in Section 2.6.1.
Figure 3.12: Temperature map of PTES system round-trip efﬁciency with CO2 using the new
method of surplus heat rejection, and the improvement in round-trip efﬁciency from the
methodology change. For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged
and Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.13: Temperature map of PTES system round-trip efﬁciency with R1234ze(E) using
the new method of surplus heat rejection, and the improvement in round-trip efﬁciency from
methodology change. For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged
and Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
3.2.3
Further investigation of temperature conditions
Since one of the main ﬁndings of the temperature maps presented was that higher hot storage
temperatures tend to yield better performance in terms of round-trip efﬁciency, an investigation
into this was conducted.
Figure 3.14 shows TQ-diagrams of three systems, all using R1234ze(E) as refrigerant and with
the hot storage media heated from 25 ◦C, but with increasing hot storage temperature, using
Ths,charged = 120 ◦C, 150 ◦C and 180 ◦C.
It can be seen how the matching of the high-pressure temperature curves improves with higher
hot storage temperature, leading to signiﬁcant increase in round-trip efﬁciency. The charging
HP cycle is transcritical for all three shown cases, and the higher temperatures lead to higher
pressures, resulting in lower variation in the heat capacity, hence the more ’straight’ curves of
the HP condenser, yielding better temperature-matching in the HP condenser. The discharging
ORC is subcritical for Ths = 120 ◦C and 150 ◦C and transcritical for Ths = 180 ◦C. It is also
observed that the increased hot storage temperature leads to better temperature-matching in
the ORC evaporator.
This also appears for CO2, as shown in Figure 3.15, in which the same procedure was used,
showing TQ-diagrams for Ths,charged = 120 ◦C and 180 ◦C are shown.
The exergy efﬁciencies of all components are shown in Figure 3.16 for the two cases in Figure
3.15. It is seen that the HP condenser shows the greatest improvement in exergy efﬁciency
by increasing Ths from 120 ◦C to 180 ◦C. This is recognized by the very good matching of
the HP condenser temperature proﬁle in Figure 3.15b. The temperature matching of the ORC
evaporator does not achieve the same improvement, and so the exergy efﬁciency of it does not
53
==PAGE:60==
(a) Ths = 120 ◦C, ηRT ≈22 %
(b) Ths = 150 ◦C, ηRT ≈37 %
(c) Ths = 180 ◦C, ηRT ≈47 %
Figure 3.14: TQ-diagrams of PTES systems using R1234ze(E) with increasing hot storage tem-
perature. The hot storage is heated from 25 ◦C in all cases. It can be seen that the increased hot
storage temperature yields better matching of temperature proﬁles, resulting in signiﬁcantly
increased round-trip efﬁciency. The assumption pertaining entropy at the ORC evaporator
outlet was used for the case in (c) with Ths = 180 ◦C.
54
==PAGE:61==
(a) ηRT = 37.3 %
(b) ηRT = 45.1 %
Figure 3.15: TQ-diagrams of PTES systems using CO2 with increasing hot storage temperature.
The hot storage is heated from 25 ◦C in both cases. It can be seen that the increased hot storage
temperature yields better matching of temperature proﬁles, resulting in signiﬁcantly increased
round-trip efﬁciency, thus showing the same trend as with R1234ze(E) in Figure 3.14. For color-
legend see Figure 3.9.
improve as much.
The only component experiencing a decreasing exergy efﬁciency from the increase in Ths is
the ambient HEX (denoted ORC AHEX). This is because the ORC expander outlet temperature
increases signiﬁcantly, while the ambient does not, and so the temperature difference across the
AHEX is considerably larger. This can be seen in Figure 3.15 by the larger difference between
the ambient (in gray) and the desuperheating refrigerant (in red).
Figure 3.16: Comparison of component exergy efﬁciencies using Ths = 120 ◦C and Ths = 180 ◦C.
These correspond to the two system results presented in 3.15.
In the presented temperature maps the cold storage temperature glide was assumed to be 5
K. Although this was not subject to any optimization, it should be expected that a small tem-
perature glide would be beneﬁcial, since only subcritical and transcritical systems have been
investigated, and 5 K superheating in the HP cycle was used. However, it was also assumed
that the discharged hot storage temperature was 30 ◦C, and this might not be the optimum,
55
==PAGE:62==
and some analysis into this should be conducted.
Figure 3.17 shows two cases using R1234ze(E), both with a hot storage temperature of 150
◦C. In Figure 3.17a the hot storage is heated from a discharged temperature of 25 ◦C while in
Figure 3.17b the hot storage is heated from 30 ◦C. The two cases yield round-trip efﬁciencies
of 37.2 % and 41.9 %, respectively. This fairly large improvement is caused by the signiﬁcantly
higher ORC evaporator pressure that can be obtained by the increased discharged hot storage
temperature, as the temperature difference during evaporation is signiﬁcantly smaller.
It seems fairly intuitive that if Ths,discharged becomes too high the temperature difference across
the ORC evaporator in the region with subcooled refrigerant will become large and result in
a lower efﬁciency. This is shown in Figure 3.18, in which the Ths,discharged is further increased,
and the round-trip efﬁciency ηRT is shown to be maximized at around Ths,discharged = 35 ◦C. The
exergy efﬁciencies of the HP condenser and the ORC evaporator are also shown. The HP con-
denser exergy efﬁciency increases, although only increasing very insigniﬁcantly at Ths,discharged
above 35 ◦C. The exergy efﬁciency of the ORC evaporator is seen to have a maximum at around
35 ◦C, thus resulting in the optimum of ηRT.
This indicates that cases with a given hot storage temperature should be subject to some kind
of optimization of the temperature glide.
For comparison with Figure 3.17, the same two cases with CO2 will yield round-trip efﬁciencies
of 42.8 % and 41.8 %, respectively - thus showing a decrease in round-trip efﬁciency. Increasing
Ths,discharged from 25 ◦C to 30 ◦C increases the ORC evaporator exergy efﬁciency from 86.0 %
to 90.7 %, thus indicating a better temperature matching with the hot storage. However, the
case with Ths,discharged = 25 ◦C yields a temperature after the ORC expander of 42 ◦C while the
Ths,discharged = 30 ◦C yields an ORC expander outlet temperature of 23 ◦C. The lower ORC
expander outlet temperature decreases the amount of surplus heat that can be rejected to the
ambient freely through the HEX. Since the temperature becomes becomes lower than 25 ◦C, the
heat rejected freely to the ambient decreases from 4035 kW to 0 kW, and hence more heat must
be rejected through the secondary HP. As a result, the round-trip efﬁciency decreases.
That was a lot of numbers, so these are summarized in Table 3.2.
This is particularly interesting because the higher superheating after the ORC expander would
intuitively be expected to worsen the temperature-matching of especially the ORC condenser
and thus decrease the efﬁciency, but in practice it allows for more free surplus heat rejection
and thus actually increases the efﬁciency. This indicates that some optimization taking this into
account should be conducted.
∆Ths,discharged [◦C]
ηex,evap,ORC [%]
Tout,exp.,ORC [◦C]
˙Qamb [kW]
ηRT [%]
25
86.0
42.2
4035
42.8
30
90.7
23.3
0
41.8
Table 3.2: The same cases as in Figure 3.17, but using CO2 as refrigerant. Although the tem-
perature matching of the ORC evaporator with the hot storage improves when Ths,discharged is
increased from 25 ◦C to 30 ◦C – this can be recognized by the increasing ηex,evap,ORC – the share
of surplus heat rejected freely to the ambient decreases to zero, and as a result the round-trip
efﬁciency decreases slightly.
A small note should also be added both in continuation of the analysis shown in Figure 3.18
and to ’tie up a loose end’ of the bold statement in Section 2.3 that too high values of Ths,discharged
56
==PAGE:63==
(a) Ths,discharged = 25 ◦C, ηRT = 37.2 %
(b) Ths,discharged = 30 ◦C, ηRT = 41.9 %
Figure 3.17:
TQ-diagrams of two cases of R1234ze(E) systems with Ths
=
150 ◦C. (a)
Ths,discharged = 25 ◦C, yielding ηRT = 37.2 % (b) Ths,discharged = 30 ◦C, yielding ηRT = 41.9
%.
Figure 3.18: Round-trip efﬁciency and exergy efﬁciencies of the two high-pressure HEX vs.
discharged hot storage temperature, continuing the analysis shown in Figure 3.17, using
R1234ze(E) and Ths = 150 ◦C.
57
==PAGE:64==
– or too low values of Tcs,charged – should be avoided for CO2-systems, since its beneﬁcial to have
pinch inside the evaporator.
A CO2 system with cold storage cooled from 5 ◦C to 0 ◦C and Ths = 150 ◦C cannot have pinch
inside the ORC evaporator if the hot storage temperature glide is 100 K (ie. Ths,discharged = 50 ◦C).
A CO2 system cannot have pinch inside the ORC evaporator if the cold storage is cooled from 5
◦C to 0 ◦C and a hot storage heated is from 50 ◦C to 150 ◦C. Hence the pressure cannot converge
as presented in Section 2.3. By manually setting the ORC evaporator pressure with variation,
the obtained round-trip efﬁciency is plotted in Figure 3.19. It can be noted that the highest
possible round-trip efﬁciency is around 37.4 %. The same system with Ths,discharged = 25 ◦C has
a round-trip efﬁciency of 42.8 %. Among the investigated refrigerants only CO2 shows this at
the temperatures used in this project due to its low critical temperature.
Figure 3.19: Round-trip efﬁciency vs. ORC evaporator pressure for case with CO2, where pinch
inside the ORC evaporator cannot occur. The hot storage was heated from 50 ◦C to 150 ◦C. The
highest possible round-trip efﬁciency is well below that obtainable by instead heating the hot
storage from eg. 25 ◦C, allowing pinch inside the evaporator.
3.2.4
Volumetric ﬂow
An important detail which was mentioned from MAN Energy Solutions pertaining their plans
for the Esbjerg ETES plant is the usage of CO2 due to the low volumetric ﬂow yielding smaller
components required.
The example case presented in Section 3.2.1 was implemented with different refrigerants, al-
though with adjusted discharged hot storage temperatures to increase the round-trip efﬁciency,
as for instance shown in Figure 3.17. It was found to be necessary to use 10 K of HP evaporator
superheating with isobutane in order to avoid the compression entering the two-phase region.
The compressor suction line volumetric ﬂow was evaluated and is shown in Figure 3.20 along
with round-trip efﬁciencies obtained with the refrigerants.
58
==PAGE:65==
It is clear that CO2 shows signiﬁcantly lower volumetric ﬂow than the other refrigerants in-
vestigated while showing an efﬁciency among the best. This is a clear indication that it could
be economically advantageous to use CO2 due to the smaller components’ potentially much
lower investment prices. Isobutane shows very high volumetric ﬂow.
The HP compressor discharge line, however, appears to show much more equal volumetric
ﬂows, as the three cases shown in Figure 3.20 have volumetric ﬂows at the HP compressor
outlet of 0.56 m3/s, 0.6 m3/s, and 0.52 m3/s, respectively.
Figure 3.20: HP compressor suction volumetric ﬂow, ˙V, in m3/s, and system round-trip efﬁ-
ciency, for some selected refrigerants using the example case from Section 3.2.1, although with
adjusted values of discharged hot storage temperature. Using CO2 as refrigerant results in sig-
niﬁcantly lower volumetric ﬂow, dramatically reducing the required compressor size and thus
required capital expenses.
3.2.5
Sensitivity Analysis
For mathematical models it is relevant to investigate which parameters are highly inﬂuential
on the model output through a sensitivity analysis. A ﬁrst-order (or local) sensitivity analysis
was conducted by using a base-case and varying parameters individually and evaluating the
obtained round-trip efﬁciencies.
Following the results regarding the volumetric ﬂow rate (see Section 3.2.4 it was chosen to do
this for a CO2-based system.
The base-case values are presented in Table 3.3, in which both the nominal value for the pa-
rameters as well as the variation used is presented. In Table 3.3, HS denotes the hot storage
temperatures (ie. both discharged and charged) and CS denotes the cold storage temperatures
(discharged and charged). The isentropic efﬁciencies ηs were all varied from 0.75 to 0.95, ie. in
the interval of the nominal value (0.85) ± 0.1. Similarly the pinch-temperature differences ∆Tp
59
==PAGE:66==
were varied from 2 K to 8 K, ie. in the interval of the nominal value (5 K) ± 3 K, and the same
for the HP evaporator superheating (∆TSH,HP).
For the variation of ∆TSH,HP two methods were used: once only varying this parameter, and
another also simultaneously varying the cold storage temperature glide, ensuring pinch at HP
evaporator outlet and as close to pinch at the inlet. This will be elaborated later.
Due to the analyses of temperature variation presented previously it was chosen not to vary
the temperature conditions for this part for simpliﬁcation and hence only vary the component-
speciﬁc parameters.
The results are shown as spider-plots in Figure 3.21, with the left plot showing ∆Tp and ∆TSH,HP
and the right plot showing ηs. The y-axes on the two plots are shared for easier comparison.
It can be seen that the two pinch-temperature differences with the largest impacts are the ORC
condenser and evaporator. This is most likely caused by the slightly smaller lift in the ORC
than in the HP cycle in order to have pinch temperature differences, meaning that a pinch-
temperature difference of eg. 5 K has a relatively larger impact on the ORC than on the HP,
yielding higher Lorenz efﬁciencies of the HP than the ORC. As discussed previously, the lower
impact of the pinch-temperature difference at higher lifts is also one of the reasons it is ad-
vantageous to have high hot storage temperatures. It is also seen that the ORC condenser has
a higher impact on the efﬁciency than the ORC evaporator, and similarly the HP evaporator
has a higher impact than the HP condenser. The reason the two low-pressure HEX ∆Tp are
more inﬂuential than the high-pressure HEX could be that the supercritical ﬂuid has a fairly
good temperature-proﬁle matching with the hot-storage, while the low-pressure HEX has poor
temperature-proﬁle matching due to the phase change. This complies very well with the ex-
ergy results pertaining the example run (see Figure 3.10) that the exergy destruction in the
low-pressure HEX of each process (charging/discharging) is larger than the exergy destruction
in the high-pressure HEX of the corresponding process.
It can be seen that reducing ∆TSH,HP without reducing the cold storage temperature glide (de-
noted ∆Tsh in Figure 3.21) actually yields slightly lower round-trip efﬁciency, while increasing
the ∆TSH,HP yields a more signiﬁcant decrease in efﬁciency. This is because the base-case has
a cold-storage glide of 5 K and a ∆TSH,HP of 5 K, yielding pinch in both HP evaporator outlet
and close to pinch at the inlet. ”Close to pinch” refers to the temperature glide in the cold-
storage media caused by the secondary HP. Due to this it is not possible to have pinch at both
HP evaporator outlet and inlet when the value of HP evaporator superheating and the cold-
storage temperature glide are equal. Changing both simultaneously – such that the value of
HP evaporator superheating and the cold-storage temperature glide are equal – can be seen
in Figure 3.21, denoted as ∆Tsh,alternative, to yield higher performance for lower superheating.
This should also be expected as it is generally advantageous to reduce superheating into the
compressor to reduce the speciﬁc work required for compression.
Interestingly, the machinery-components show that the HP compressor, which showed the
largest exergy-destruction, is not the most inﬂuential, as the ORC expander shows a larger
impact. This could be connected to the lower exergy efﬁciency of the ORC expander than the
HP compressor seen in Figure 3.11 of the example case.
The HP expander and the ORC pump show lower impacts on the efﬁciency, which seems in-
60
==PAGE:67==
tuitive as they provide much lower power generation/production than the other machinery
counterparts.
The ORC pump is seen to show more inﬂuence than the HP expander. This should not be
surprising, due to two reasons. Firstly, it was found in the example case that the ORC pump
had a slightly larger electric energy consumption than the HP expander than the work-recovery
of the HP expander. Secondly, it was concluded from the change in secondary HP placement
that reducing the ORC energy output had a larger impact on the round-trip efﬁciency than an
equal increase in the HP energy input.
HS [◦C]
CS [◦C]
All ηs [-]
All ∆Tp [K]
∆TSH,HP [K]
Nominal value
25 ◦C, 150 ◦C
5 ◦C, 0 ◦C
0.85
5
5
Variation
None
None
(2 ◦C - 8 ◦C), 0 ◦C
0.75-0.95
2-8
2-8
Table 3.3: Nominal values and variations of parameters for the local sensitivity analysis. HS
denotes hot storage temperatures (discharged and charged), while CS similarly denotes cold
storage temperatures (discharged and charged). ηs represents all machinery isentropic efﬁcien-
cies while ∆Tp represents all HEX pinch temperature differences. ∆TSH,HP is the HP evaporator
superheating. In the case denoted ∆Tsh,alternative in Figure 3.21 the ∆TSH,HP was varied while the
cold storage temperature glide was also varied accordingly, yielding pinch in HP evaporator
inlet and outlet.
Figure 3.21: Spider plot (local sensitivity analysis) of PTES model. Base-case with nominal val-
ues and variations can be found in 3.3. Note that the line denoted Tsh,alternative varies the cold
storage temperature glide as well as the ∆TSH,HP.
61
==PAGE:68==
3.2.6
Brief summary of some case results
With the results of the analyses regarding temperature conditions and component parameters,
a few ’case’ results will be presented simply to present examples of what efﬁciencies could be
expected from cases of refrigerants and temperatures. For these it was used that a low amount
of HP evaporator superheating and correspondingly low cold-storage temperature glide is ben-
eﬁcial, as seen in the sensitivity analysis in Section 3.2.5. It was chosen to use 2 K for both
∆TSH,HP and ∆TCS, with the exception of isobutane, for which ∆TSH,HP = 10 K was used to
avoid the HP compression entering the two-phase region. This decreases the efﬁciency.
It was also found previously that an optimum hot-storage temperature glide can be found, and
so for the cases shown in Table 3.4 the hot-storage temperature glide was varied to manually
ﬁnd a near-optimum value.
The case results include those that could be obtainable in the near future by assuming that the
hot storage is heated to 150 ◦C. Since currently a lot of research is being conducted on high-
temperature heat pumps, some potentially obtainable cases are also shown by assuming a hot
storage temperature of 180 ◦C.
It should be noted that transcritical isobutane cycles showed unresolved issues with the ORC
expansion process crossing the two-phase region, and so the case with Ths = 180 ◦C is not
shown in Table 3.4 for this reason.
R744 (CO2)
R600a (Isobutane)
R1234ze(E)
Ths = 150 ◦C
42.8
38.8
45.7
Ths = 180 ◦C
46.1
–
47.4
Table 3.4: Round-trip efﬁciencies for some examples of possible results with the model. In-
puts for these were: ∆TSH,HP = 2 K, ∆Tcs = 2 K, ∆Tp = 5 K, ηs = 0.85. Note that the hot
storage temperature glide ∆Ths was varied manually to ﬁnd well-performing solutions. For
the isobutane-case with 150 ◦C the HP evaporator superheating was 10 K to avoid droplets
forming during compression. The isobutane-case with 180 ◦C, for which the ORC should be
transcritical, is not shown due to unresolved issues with the ORC expansion going through
two-phase region.
3.3
Comparison with others
At this point some results from the model have been presented. It is relevant to investigate
how well these correspond to results of some others. Some veriﬁcation will be presented by
comparing the results with those from a similar model in Section 3.3.1, and the expectations of
the planned MAN Energy Solutions ETES system will be assessed in Section 3.3.2.
3.3.1
Veriﬁcation with Bachelor thesis model results
A project pertaining Carnot-batteries has previously been conducted with a model generated
in EES. In order to evaluate how well the results of the current project correspond to the results
of the previous study, the two models were used with similar inputs to evaluate output differ-
ences.
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure 3.22 shows a screenshot of the model that was used for veriﬁcation. A cold-storage tem-
perature of 0 ◦C and a hot-storage heated from 23.03 ◦C to 132.7 ◦C were used. All machinery
isentropic efﬁciencies are shown to be 0.85 and pinch-temperature differences are 4 K. One vis-
ible difference is that the CO2 refrigerant is seen to be -4 ◦C on both sides of the HP evaporator.
This indicates that an assumption of saturated vapor at the evaporator outlet was used.
These inputs were used for the model made in this project. The indicated assumption of satu-
rated vapor at the HP evaporator outlet was accommodated by assuming 0.5 K superheating
in the HP evaporator and 0.5 K temperature-glide of the cold-storage.
A mapping of the energy streams from the model result can be found in Figure 3.23. This can
be used to compare the component energy ﬂows with those in Figure 3.22.
To aid the reader, certain values of both temperature, pressure and (electric) power streams are
presented from both models for easier comparison in Table 3.5. The notation used in the table
is the same as the one presented in this thesis.
It is clear that the models converge to very similar solutions. The HP high-pressure (p2,c) de-
viates with 1.7 bar, corresponding to around 0.9 %. Similar orders of magnitude are found in
deviations of ORC high pressure (p2,d) and mass ﬂow rates ( ˙mHP and ˙mORC).
The EES model printed a Th-diagram of the HP condenser, the ORC evaporator and the hot
storage (with water as media). For comparison, a TQ-diagram of these are shown with the
results from this project’s model in Figure 3.25.
It is also clear from these ﬁgures that the results are very similar.
Figure 3.22: Output of model made for a Bachelor’s project [36]. This was used to generate
similar results for veriﬁcation of model made for this project. Some numbers are extracted for
reader’s ease in Table 3.5.
Using the energy ﬂows shown in Figure 3.23 the round-trip efﬁciency can be calculated as
ηRT = 45.1 %. However, it can be seen in Figure 3.22 that surplus heat is assumed to be freely
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure 3.23: Map of energy ﬂows for a case similar to that in Figure 3.22. Some values are
extracted for comparison in Table 3.5.
T2,c [◦C]
p1,c [bar]
p2,c [bar]
˙mHP [kg/s]
˙Wcomp,HP [kW]
˙Wexp,HP [kW]
[36] (Figure 3.22)
149.9
31.3
187.8
12.63
1207
207
Current project
149.9
31.3
186.1
12.56
1200
203
T3,d [◦C]
p1,d [bar]
p2,d [bar]
˙morc [kg/s]
˙Wexp.,ORC [kW]
˙Wpump.,ORC [kW]
[36] (Figure 3.22)
128.7
38.69
183.7
13.2
745
243
Current project
128.7
39.69
182.3
13.1
731
238
Table 3.5: Comparison of outputs from another project [36] and the current project.
64
==PAGE:71==
Figure 3.24: Output TQ-diagram of model made for a Bachelor’s project [36]. This was used go
generate similar results for veriﬁcation of model made for this project.
Figure 3.25: TQ-diagram of heat transfer to/from hot storage, presented for comparison with
Figure 3.24 for model veriﬁcation.
65
==PAGE:72==
rejected to the ambient. Hence without accounting for work required for the secondary HP, the
round-trip efﬁciency obtained is 49.5 %. In Figure 3.22 it can be seen that the corresponding
round-trip efﬁciency obtained is 50.18 %. This is a deviation of approximately 1.4 %.
The obtained hot storage mass ﬂow rate is 7.64 kg/s, which is very close to the mass ﬂow rate
of 7.62 kg/s shown in Figure 3.22, ie. a deviation of less than 0.3 %.
The energy density obtained is 124 kWh/m3.
3.3.2
Comparison with MAN Energy Solutions ETES plant expectations
From correspondence with MAN Energy Solutions it was told that some of the expectations for
the planned ETES plant in Esbjerg [20] were CO2 as refrigerant, around 150 ◦C hot storage and
0 ◦C cold storage, yielding a round-trip efﬁciency between 45 % and 50 %.
Knowing these expectations can be used in the model to investigate what is required to achieve
this, and whether this could be realistic according to the new model.
A system with CO2, heating the hot storage from 25 ◦C to 150 ◦C was investigated with some
variation of parameters.
Assuming that the machinery isentropic efﬁciencies cannot exceed 85 % it is possible to reach
46.2 % round-trip efﬁciency by assuming that pinch-temperature differences of 4 K in all HEXs.
Low values of ∆Tp can be obtained by having large heat transfer areas, thus simply representing
a larger HEX, which should be assumed to more costly in purchase. The 46.2 % efﬁciency was
obtained using ∆TSH,HP = 1 K and ∆Tsc = 1 K.
By using the same conditions with an isentropic efﬁciency for all machinery at 87 %, the round-
trip efﬁciency is increased to 49.7 %.
Since the HP evaporator superheating is often used in practice to avoid droplets appearing
in the HP compressor, it is relevant to assume that ∆TSH,HP must be 5 K. Using isentropic
efﬁciencies of 87 % can yield 48 % round-trip efﬁciency by using ∆Tp = 4 K and 45.6 % by
using ∆Tp = 5 K.
From these results it could be considered fairly realistic to achieve at least 45 % round-trip
efﬁciency, although it does seem to require relatively high component-speciﬁc performance
parameters, which could yield high equipment cost.
3.4
Economic analysis
The dynamic programming model presented in the Methods Section 2.8 was run with the out-
puts of a thermodynamic model run, in which the hot storage was heated from 25 ◦C to 150 ◦C,
the cold storage was cooled from 2 ◦C to 0 ◦C, all pinch temperature differences were 4 K and
all isentropic efﬁciencies were 0.85, and 2 K superheating after the HP evaporator was used.
The heat transfer to and from the hot storage in both processes was 50 MW. The HP net power
consumption was 15.2 MW, the secondary HP power consumption was 1.46 MW, and the ORC
net power output was thus 7.64 MW, yielding a round-trip efﬁciency of 45.8 %.
The main outputs were net income in a year and the hourly operating modes during the year.
The net income was calculated as the income in the year from which electricity data was used.
66
==PAGE:73==
An example of the hourly operating modes is shown in a time-series of the hourly electricity
prices for the ﬁrst case in Figure 3.26 using electricity prices from 2003. The operating modes
are shown with color-coding.
Similar time-series of electricity prices with color-coded operating modes can be found in Ap-
pendix A.7, also using the 2003 data. Note that the 2003 data-set contained 8784 data-points,
ie. an ’extra day’ compared to the 8760 hours in a normal year. 2003 was not a leap year (by the
Gregorian calendar). It was not known whether these 24 ’surplus’ hours were from the 31/12
of 2002 or from 1/1 of 2004. This was assumed to be insigniﬁcant for the results and the 24
’surplus’ hours were not removed from the data.
An important result obtained is that the plant is non-operational for the far majority of the time.
This is signiﬁcant since it could prove difﬁcult for a plant to generate sufﬁcient income to be
economically feasible when operating very little.
The net annual income and the number of non-operating hours are shown for the years 2003,
2005, and 2030 using cases 1, 2, and 3 in Table 3.6. The second case shows signiﬁcantly lower
income than the ﬁrst case. This is likely due to the DH price ﬂuctuating slightly with the elec-
tricity price, imposing an economic penalization. For the second case, electricity is generally
sold at times of high prices, the hence heat needed for electricity generation is bought at high
prices. Conversely, heat is supplied to the DH network at an expense of electricity at times of
low electricity, but also a correspondingly low DH price. Even though the DH price ﬂuctua-
tions were small, this still provides a large impact, possibly much greater than what could be
saved by not investing in storage tanks.
The third case yields exactly the same results as the ﬁrst case, both in terms of income and op-
erating modes. The electricity prices with color-coded operating modes in Figure A.12 in App.
A.7 show that the plant never uses the DH network because of the small ﬂuctuations in DH
price. This agrees with the result of case 1 genrating a larger income than case 2.
The highest shown income generated in one year is approximate one million DKK. Although
this project will not study the expenses on a PTES plant, it could seem infeasible to make such a
plant within a budget that would result from annual incomes on the order of one million DKK.
Common for the cases is that 2003 data yields the highest income and the 2005 data yields the
lowest income. Some simple statistical measures of the data is shown in Table 3.7: the mean
electricity price (cel), the standard deviation (σ) and their ratio σ
cel . From this it is seen that the
mean price increases while the standard deviation decreases.
The reason for the higher income using 2003 data than using 2005 data could be the signiﬁcantly
higher ratio of standard deviation and mean price in 2003 than in 2005, since this effectively
means that the relative electricity price ﬂuctuations in general were considerably smaller in
2005 than those in 2003. However, with the 2030 data it is seen that a larger income is generated
than in 2005 even though the ratio of standard deviation to mean price is even smaller than in
2005. This shows that this measure should not be overly used do draw conclusions regarding
potential proﬁtability of the Carnot-battery.
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure 3.26: Time-series of electricity price data and operating modes from the dynamic pro-
gramming model of the ﬁrst economic case using electricity price data from 2003.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Income
Non-op. hours
Income
Non-op. hours
Income
Non-op. hours
2003 data
1.02·106
7282
470·103
7704
1.02·106
7282
2005 data
456·103
7656
162·103
8234
456·103
7656
2030 pred.
651·103
7402
346·103
7640
651·103
7402
Table 3.6: Net income in a year and number of non-operating hours of the plant for cases 1, 2,
and 3, for years 2003, 2005, and 2030. See Figure 3.26 in Section 3.4 and Figures A.11 and A.12
in App. A.7 for electricity prices and operating modes through the year 2003.
Year
cel [DKK/MWh]
σ [DKK/MWh]
σ
cel
2003
250
160
0.64
2005
277
127
0.46
2030
363
119
0.33
Table 3.7: Statistical measures of electricity price data for years 2003, 2005 and 2030. cel is the
mean electricity price while σ is the standard deviation, both in DKK/MWh. Data for 2003
and 2005 were obtained from Energinet [34] while the prediction for 2030 data was obtained
from the Danish Energy Agency [35]. The trend shows increasing mean price and decreasing
standard deviation.
68
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 4
Discussion
In this section some comparison of results with those from other literature will be presented,
as well as some reﬂections on the results. Lastly some considerations for looking forwards will
be discussed.
4.1
Comparison of results with literature
A general review article by Dumont et al [12] shows that round-trip efﬁciencies of a Rankine-
based PTES with a reversible HP/ORC conﬁguration in general will have a round-trip efﬁ-
ciency of 30 % - 73 %. The round-trip efﬁciencies found in this project are generally between 40
% and 50 % and thus lie within this range, although closer to the bottom limit than the top.
Energy densities are mentioned in the article to generally be 0.2 kWh/m3 - 207 kWh/m3, al-
though the deﬁnition of the system energy density is not explicitly presented. However, using
either the hot storage energy density – with shown values of 124 kWh/m3 and 135 kWh/m3 in
this project – or simply using the ORC net power instead of the hot storage heat ﬂow – resulting
in 17 kWh/m3 and 20 kWh/m3 for the two cases, respectively – will all result well within this
presented range.
In Steinmann et al [22] it is presented that a PTES using transcritical CO2 cycles achieves a
round-trip efﬁciency in the range of 45 % with a hot storage around 160 ◦C. This is fairly com-
parable to the results of this project shown in the case of a hot storage at 150 ◦C and 4 K pinch-
temperature difference in all heat exchangers obtaining 45.6 % round-trip efﬁciency. A notable
model difference is that Steinmann et al assumed a constant temperature difference across HP
condenser and ORC evaporator of 5 K, effectively corresponding to a variable mass ﬂow rate
throughout the heat exchange by an inﬁnite number of storage tanks at different temperatures.
An interesting difference in model results is a signiﬁcantly smaller variation in ηRT when all
machinery isentropic efﬁciencies are varied.
Morandin et al [11] also use the concept of multiple hot water storage tanks at different tem-
peratures for temperature matching, although using a ﬁnite number. Through an optimization
procedure it was here found that up to 60 % round-trip efﬁciency could be obtained. This re-
sult was obtained by assuming 6 hot water storage tanks for temperature-matching, different
isentropic efﬁciencies ranging between 85 % and 88 %, pinch-temperatures of 4 K, no ORC con-
69
==PAGE:76==
denser subcooling and no HP evaporator superheating. An optimization was then conducted
with 8 variable parameters, which were all bounded with ﬁnite boundaries. The result from
the optimization made use of the maximum (upper limit) ORC evaporator temperature, with a
maximum hot water storage temperature above 180 ◦C. Considering these details the obtained
round-trip efﬁciency of 60 % might be in fairly decent accordance with the results from this
project, showing up to 50 % round-trip efﬁciency with considerably ’less optimal’ conditions.
The use of multiple hot water storage tanks at different temperatures make it possible to have
very good temperature matching, resulting in more equal pressures of the charging and dis-
charging cycles and thus a higher round-trip efﬁciency.
As mentioned the optimization for the results in the article made use of the upper limit of
the ORC evaporator temperature, hence also maximizing the hot storage temperature, which
agrees well with the result from this project that high hot storage temperatures are advanta-
geous due to better temperature matching.
As shown in Section 3.3.1 a comparison was conducted with results from Schiøler and Forn´e
[36]. Some of the main points found was that the pressures obtained were very similar, with
deviations from around 0.9 % to 2.5 %. The deviations in electric energy streams of machinery
components varied from around 0.6 % to around 2.1 %. The round-trip efﬁciency obtained
without accounting for surplus heat rejection work deviated with around 1.4 % from Schiøler
and Forn´e, or around 0.7 %p. This shows very well agreeing thermodynamic models of a PTES
plant.
In a project report for the CHESTER project by Kowalska et al [37] a methodology of economic
investigation is presented which is quite comparable to the one used in this project. Hourly
electricity prices were used for a system which will either charge, discharge, or do nothing, as
in this project. An important difference, however, is that the plant was assumed to be thermally
integrated and uses waste heat at 80 ◦C during the charging phase. Due to this assumption the
round-trip efﬁciency becomes around 81 %, signiﬁcantly higher than those in this project.
In an example showcased for a single month, the charging and discharging can be seen with
a time-series of the energy-level in the storage. For the showcased month, with more than 720
hours, it is noted that 28 are used for HP operation. This indicates that the plant does not
operate during the far majority of the time, which agrees very well with the result from the
economic investigation in this project show very little operating time of the plant. However,
in the CHESTER report signiﬁcantly larger income is generated – more than 500,000 € in a
month – from a plant of similar size to that investigated here. This could be explained by the
much higher round-trip efﬁciency due to the thermal integration, yielding lower expenses on
electricity during charging operation.
4.2
Reﬂections on the project model and results
One of the major issues of the project was found to be optimization procedures. As men-
tioned in Section 2.3, it was attempted to use an optimization procedure to maximize the ORC
thermal efﬁciency with a variable ORC evaporator pressure and outlet temperature. This pro-
cedure should be constrained, in terms of mathematical optimization, by the pinch-temperature
conditions. A further constraint on two-phase refrigerant in the expander should in practice
70
==PAGE:77==
also be imposed, although an attempt of this this was never implemented in this project. The
minimize-function from the optimize-module of the SciPy-package for Python was used, using
the Sequential Least Squares Programming-method [38, 39]. This uses an initial guess, just like
the equation-solving procedure, and seeks to minimize an objective function – implemented
simply by the negative of the thermal efﬁciency, which is a common method of using opti-
mization procedures for objectives that should be maximized. However, this optimization was
performed with very limited success, with two main issues appearing: ﬁrstly, the optimiza-
tion often had convergence issues, and secondly, the outcome was sometimes not the actual
optimum solution, as it was possible to ﬁnd a better solution manually.
These issues might be explained either by (lack of) smoothness of the solution space, or due to
many local minima of the objective function, making it difﬁcult for the algorithm to ﬁnd the
’correct’ optimum with the constraints.
It was instead necessary to implement an assumption pertaining pinch-temperature difference
for the ORC evaporator and use the equation-solving algorithm, similarly to how other cycle
pressures were determined. An issue regarding this was that for some conditions – of both cycle
ﬂuid and storage temperatures – it might be possible to obtain pinch temperature difference at
two locations in the ORC evaporator, while for other conditions it is not. For instance, should
the discharged hot storage temperature be signiﬁcantly higher than the charged cold storage
temperature, a CO2 cycle will not be able to have pinch inside the ORC evaporator, and an
optimization of the pressure is required. These conditions were avoided for the CO2 analysis.
Another possibility is that it is not possible to have pinch both inside the ORC evaporator and at
the outlet, and a larger temperature difference across at the outlet should be used. This occurs
for instance using R1234ze(E) with high hot storage temperatures. It was attempted to deﬁne
a sufﬁciently large temperature difference at the ORC evaporator outlet (in Kelvin) such that
pinch could occur inside the evaporator. However, this was susceptible to obtaining a solution
in which the ORC expansion enters the two-phase region and obtains a low vapor-quality at
the expander outlet. Droplet erosion of turbine blades have been discussed by eg. Smith et al
[40], and the subject has been investigated thoroughly in materials science since this can limit
turbine performance in eg. steam turbines. One major advantage of ORCs compared to steam
turbine cycles is actually avoidance of droplet erosion by using dry ﬂuids. [41] This advantage
is, however, mostly related to subcritical cycles.
As also mentioned in the Methods chapter, the expansion into the two-phase region was avoided
for these ﬂuids by setting the ORC evaporator outlet entropy equal to the entropy of saturated
vapor at the ORC condensing pressure. Assuming the entropy of a state point is a fairly un-
orthodox method and could be avoided by implementing an optimization of both the ORC
evaporator refrigerant pressure and outlet temperature.
As an interesting note, it was shown by Dai et al [42] that for ﬂuids with non-negative slopes of
saturated vapor lines it is optimal for a subcritical ORC to have saturated vapor at the turbine
inlet. As this is not possible for a transcritical cycle, the aforementioned assumption on turbine
inlet entropy could be considered an approximated equivalent of saturated vapor at the turbine
inlet.
However, it should be noted that this assumption was never implemented for any model runs
with CO2, since this should have pinch at the evaporator outlet for the temperature conditions
investigated, but not necessarily inside it.
71
==PAGE:78==
An important consequence of this is that the temperature maps presented were not determined
with optimization, which would be preferable.
Isobutane showed expansion through the two-phase region for many transcritical discharging
cycles, including with the mentioned assumption of entropy due to the very positive slope of
its saturated vapor curve in a Ts-diagram. For this reason the cases with isobutane in this re-
port used a subcritical discharging cycle. It was found that isobutane cycles showed very high
volumetric ﬂows into the HP compressor, as shown in Section 3.2.4, and high HP evaporator
superheating was necessary to avoid the compression entering the two-phase region, again
due to the slope of the saturated vapor curve, and this limited the round-trip efﬁciency, also
noted in Sections 3.2.4 and 3.2.6. This is why little focus was on the use of isobutane and no
temperature-maps are shown for isobutane.
An objective sought in the project was to make a single PTES model that would accept a broad
range of temperature-conditions and ﬂuids. Learning that different conditions will not lead
always lead to the same options regarding pinch means that some optimization might be re-
quired for such a model.
In addition, since the model will need guess values, either for equation-solving purposes or for
optimization, an ambition – and indeed a major reason for implementing the model in Python
at all – was to make a function for guess values based on the input temperature conditions
and the ﬂuid. This was also found to pose a signiﬁcant challenge. In short, the main method
for attempting this was to manually pass guess values to the model that would converge to a
solution, and note the converged solution with the input conditions. This was done a number
of times to create a ’data-set’ which was used for a multi-variate least-squares ﬁt for ﬁnding
proper guess-values from the inputs. Without going into detail the reader should know that
this method was fairly tedious and time-consuming and not very effective, possibly due to the
differences in ﬂuid critical pressures and temperatures. It was ultimately found to be more
effective to manually pass guess-values to the model.
An important simpliﬁcation used was that the low pressure was converged with pinch assum-
ing the total temperature-glide of the cold storage. Regarding this two issues are especially
noteworthy. Firstly, the main consequence of this with the initial method of surplus heat re-
jection is that the pinch-point in the ORC condenser, appearing at the point of saturated vapor
refrigerant, will have a temperature-difference slightly larger than the pinch temperature dif-
ference used as input, ie. some error, as it should then actually be possible to have a ORC con-
densing temperature slightly lower than the one used. Through some study it was concluded
that this error was small and thus fairly insigniﬁcant, albeit present. However, the second issue
was that with the updated method of surplus heat rejection, the heat rejection in the AHEX
was not accounted for in this. A consequence of this is that the temperature-difference in the
ORC condenser at saturated vapor refrigerant is slightly smaller than the pinch temperature
difference used. This has no inﬂuence on the uses of R1234ze(E) as this never yielded usage of
the AHEX, and for many cases of CO2 the heat transfer through the AHEX is very small, also
yielding low signiﬁcance of this. However, for very high hot storage temperatures, CO2 cycles
showed large heat transfer through the AHEX, and this becomes important. An example of
this is shown in Figure 3.15b. The ORC condensing temperature should in this case be slightly
72
==PAGE:79==
higher, as the temperature difference in question has been numerically evaluated to around 4.25
K while it should be 5 K. Adjusting this might lower the round-trip efﬁciency with around 0.5
%p from looking at the impact of the ORC condenser pinch temperature difference in the sensi-
tivity analysis (see Figure 3.21). This also likely explains the increase in ORC condenser exergy
efﬁciency in Figure 3.16. Due to lack of time the model was not adjusted to accommodate this.
This represents the greatest regret of the author for this project.
Another major model assumption was constant cp for both the hot and the cold storage. The
hot storage was assumed to be water heated and cooled only in liquid phase, and a constant cp
is fairly commonly assumed for this case. However, the cold storage should in reality consist
of some freezing of water, yielding a phase change, and for this reason the assumption of a
constant cp is expected to be signiﬁcantly less accurate for the cold storage than for the hot
storage.
If a saltwater brine is used for cold storage, a thermal proﬁle of freezing brine with a changing
freezing temperature is needed. If instead pure water should be used, the freezing should be
isothermal, which might be more easily implemented. Both cases might be possible to match
better with the phase-changes in the low-pressure heat exchangers of a PTES. However, the
superheating and desuperheating processes could yield worse temperature-matching.
It was also assumed that no heat loss would occur from the hot storage. In Technology Data for
Energy Storages by the Danish Energy Agency the energy loss from large-scale hot water tanks
are presented as 0.2 %/day [43], and for this reason it was chosen to neglect this. However,
this is for heat storages at lower temperatures than those used in this project. Heat storages
at the highest temperatures investigated in this project will require a very signiﬁcant thermal
insulation to reduce heat losses to negligible orders of magnitude.
Another note-worthy source of simpliﬁcation is the method for inclusion of the secondary heat
pump, since it essentially consists of an approximation of what its COP would be.
The secondary HP evaporation temperature was set to ensure a pinch-temperature difference
at the evaporator inlet, ie. the inlet for the secondary HP refrigerant, ammonia. This should
ensure that the evaporation temperature was below the temperature of the media being cooled
(initially the primary refrigerant, but later changed to the cold storage water). However, pinch
was not further used for the evaporation process of the ammonia, and some superheating
should be assumed after the evaporator, which could affect the evaporation temperature of
the secondary HP. In the CoolPack-model 5 K superheating was assumed, which is shown for
illustrative purposes in TQ-diagrams for the secondary HP evaporation processes, although
this is not accounted for in the determination of the actual evaporation pressure. Since the
CoolPack-model assumed a condensing temperature of 30 ◦C, the approximation of the sec-
ondary HP COP should be somewhat realistic and a bit conservative.
In the context of this, it should also be noted that in many geographical locations (including
Denmark), the ambient temperatures can allow a secondary HP condensing temperature signif-
icantly lower than 30 ◦C during much of the year. In the winter it might not even be necessary
to use a secondary HP. This could allow higher round-trip efﬁciencies.
For this reason it is believed that the penalization of surplus heat rejection is realistic in spite of
the simple methodology.
Should a more detailed inclusion of the secondary HP be sought, it should be necessary to not
73
==PAGE:80==
only set the evaporation pressure through pinch considerations, but also the condensing pres-
sure, requiring assumptions regarding heating of the ambient media in the condenser or some
more detailed heat transfer considerations.
When assessing the model and its results it is also important to point out that little regard was
given to technical feasibility and constraints of components.
This is for instance seen in the assumptions of adiabatic compression and expansion processes
as well as isobaric heat exchanges. In reality machinery will have some heat loss that should
be accounted for, and heat exchangers will induce a pressure loss on the ﬂow.
Similarly, the cycle pressures could have some practical limitations. The HP condenser and
ORC evaporator might both have pressures on the order of 180 bars while the hot storage media
is at a pressure on the order of 5 bars to 10 bars. This is for instance seen in the veriﬁcation
case in Section 3.3.1. Such a pressure difference across a HEX could make it very expensive in
manufacturing. This makes a thermo-economic optimization relevant, especially if the pressure
losses in such a HEX is also accounted for.
It was seen that decent round-trip efﬁciencies could be achieved with some natural refrigerants
such as eg. propane at very high temperatures. However, refrigerants as these should be used
at high temperatures with caution due to their ﬂammability, which it is not accounted for in
this project. A solution to this is in practice to use a mixture of the refrigerant in which an
added ﬂuid makes the mixture non-ﬂammable [44]. This could potentially have an inﬂuence
on temperature-matching in HEXs due to possible zeotropic mixtures.
Another point of technical feasibility of components that should be discussed is the expansion
devices and the possibility of wet expansion. From the correspondence with MAN Energy
Solutions on their Esbjerg plant it was mentioned that the ORC expander would be a turbine.
For this reason it was in this project chosen to avoid wet expansion due to droplet erosion of
turbine blades.
However, the HP expander was never subject to any constraints regarding wet expansion, and
wet expansion should be considered necessary for work-recovering HP expanders. In his Ph.D.
from 2017 [45], Dumont investigates a reversible HP/ORC unit, including reversible volumet-
ric machinery. The wet expansion ability of different types of volumetric machinery is dis-
cussed, and it is noted that screw- and scroll-type machinery performs this best. The exper-
iments generally pertain reversible machinery that should act alternately as compressor and
expander, which generally show isentropic efﬁciencies lower than the 0.85 which has generally
been used in this project. For this project it was assumed that reversible machinery would not
be necessary.
Wet expansion in the HP expander thus limits the possible expansion device types and might
affect the possible isentropic efﬁciencies, and technical limitations on eg. pressure-ratios of the
relevant expander types were not included in this project.
4.3
Future work
From the considerations presented in this chapter, some ideas emanate for what could be done
in the future with relevance to this project.
First and foremost a model should be made in which an optimization of the ORC evapora-
tor pressure and outlet temperature is conducted. This is relevant because, depending on the
74
==PAGE:81==
working ﬂuid and the temperature conditions, these can have different limitations. It might
be relevant to limit the investigations to refrigerants showing good round-trip efﬁciencies, eg.
CO2, R1234ze(E), and maybe propane. It could also be chosen to focus solely on CO2 due to
the low volumetric ﬂows obtained with this.
Since it was also found that a there is an optimum temperature glide of the hot storage, this
could also be included in the optimization.
Using a range of different refrigerants make it relevant to conduct a thermo-economic investi-
gation due to the very high pressures obtained with CO2 and signiﬁcantly higher volumetric
ﬂows obtained with many other refrigerants.
The second investigation that would be relevant to conduct is a more drastic change in the
surplus heat rejection, by intercooling the ORC turbine. Through the correspondence with
MAN Energy Solutions this has been told to be a potential method of surplus heat rejection
for the Esbjerg Plant [21]. This would allow all the surplus heat to be rejected to the ambient
without a secondary HP required. However, it should also be expected to lower the speciﬁc
work by the turbine, since this is deﬁned as w = R
p dv and the speciﬁc volume v would be
reduced by the intercooling. [46]
It was shown in this project that the penalization of surplus heat rejection should occur during
the charging process instead of the discharging process. This has both the advantage of higher
round-trip efﬁciency and the additional economic beneﬁt of spending energy on surplus heat
rejection during periods of low electricity price. Following this, it could also be investigated
whether it is possible to use intercooling of the compressor during the charging process. An
advantage of this would be avoiding the reduction in discharging turbine power, and should
it be possible to use this to reduce the speciﬁc compression work this could prove a signiﬁcant
improvement.
Another possible investigation to continue the work on Carnot-batteries could be the use of
working ﬂuid mixtures. These could both serve the purpose of reducing the ﬂammability of
natural refrigerants and, should saltwater ice slurry be used for non-isothermal freezing in the
cold storage, an azeotropic mixture could potentially lead to better temperature-matching in
the low-pressure heat exchangers.
Another interesting result obtained was that, depending on the ﬂuid and the temperature con-
ditions, some amount of desuperheating above the ambient temperature could take place in the
discharging process condenser. The implementation of the AHEX meant that conditions that
might lead to slightly worse temperature-matching in the discharging evaporator actually led
to free rejection of large parts of the surplus heat through the AHEX, beneﬁting the round-trip
efﬁciency. This essentially adds non-linearity to the model.
In this project a local sensitivity analysis was performed, but non-linear models are best inves-
tigated with a global sensitivity analysis due to interactions of the parameters.
To provide an example, it could be that the importance of a certain heat exchanger is different
if another isentropic efﬁciency of a certain piece of machinery is used. It might for instance
be expected that the importance of the ORC expander isentropic efﬁciency is connected with
the importance of the ORC evaporator pinch-temperature difference. In a global sensitivity
analysis the interactions can be accounted for, eg. in Sobol analysis with the total sensitivity
75
==PAGE:82==
indices [47]. However, in order to account for this, a global sensitivity analysis often require
many model runs, maybe multiple thousands. In order to cut computational expenses some
assumptions are often imposed. In Sobol analysis a Monte-Carlo method is used, assuming a
normal-distribution of the parameters [47]. The Extended Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test
(eFAST) uses assumptions on smoothness and could impose some bias [48, 49] [50]. Metamod-
els, or emulators, such as polynomial chaos expansion, can be very computationally efﬁcient
but impose some model simpliﬁcation [51, 52].
It was in this project found that a PTES plant in practice will have many hours without oper-
ation, which leads to relatively low incomes generated. This is due to the fact that, in order to
make a proﬁt, the ratio of electricity selling and buying price must be larger than the inverse
of the round-trip efﬁciency. With the electriﬁcation of the heating sector large heat pumps are
expected to become more widespread, and due to the ﬂuctuations in electricity price it might
be beneﬁcial to include a thermal storage for these. When it is planned to invest in a large
HP and a thermal storage, it could be interesting to investigate whether further investment in
machinery and extra thermal energy storage for PTES usage could be proﬁtable.
Technology such as heat pump components often shows economy of scale represented with in-
vestment cost increasing with an increase in a nominal sizing parameter raised to an exponent
below one. In fact, economy-of-scale exponents are often shown in the range 0.6 - 0.7 [32, 53].
The income generated by a PTES plant should, however, increase linearly with the size, since
the plant size would simply increase the electric power consumption and generation during
charge and discharge. Increasing a PTES plant size ten-fold should increase the income gener-
ated ten-fold but perhaps only increase the investment cost at a factor of ten to the power of 0.7,
which is around 5. These considerations are clearly overly simpliﬁed, and increasing the plant
size ten-fold should be expected to have other consequences on expenses of eg. construction
site, insurance and interest rate. However, the notion of economy of scale is highly relevant for
a more detailed economic analysis.
76
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In order to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases it is sought to replace power plants us-
ing combustible fuels with sustainable energy sources such as eg. wind and solar power. The
ﬂuctuating nature of these makes grid-scsale energy storage necessary. A PTES plant for this
purpose has been investigated in this thesis to ﬁnd possible and feasible round-trip efﬁciencies
of such a plant and to assess its economic feasibility.
The plant was modeled with two processes: a charging heat pump cycle and a discharging
organic Rankine cycle. The charging cycle should receive heat from a cold storage while de-
livering heat to a hot storage. In turn, the discharging ORC would receive heat from the hot
storage and deliver heat to the cold storage.
It was assumed that all heat transferred to the hot storage during charge would be transferred
to the discharging cycle. This leads to surplus heat caused by irreversibilities which must be
rejected to the ambient. As a result the condenser heat transfer in the discharging cycle is
greater than the charging cycle evaporator heat transfer. Since the cold storage was assumed to
be at a lower temperature than the ambient, a secondary heat pump was utilized for the surplus
heat rejection. This was initially set to be run during the discharging process, but it was later
changed to being run during the charging cycle by removing heat from the cold storage and
not from the working ﬂuid, since this was found to yield a higher round-trip efﬁciency of the
PTES plant.
For an economic analysis a dynamic programming tool, previously made by others for inves-
tigation of CAES, was implemented. For this a full year of hourly electricity spot market data
was used to simulate possible market participation.
One key result was the signiﬁcant reduction in round-trip efﬁciency that seen by using the
secondary heat pump during the discharge, ie. removing heat from the working ﬂuid. This
reduced the round-trip efﬁciency with up to almost 10 %p for most usable cases. It was changed
to let the secondary heat pump remove heat from the cold storage during charge such that the
total heat removed from the cold storage by the charging cycle and the secondary HP would be
equal to the heat transferred to the cold storage during discharge. This was found to increase
the round-trip efﬁciency generally with around 5 %p compared to the previous method, and
hence this was used for the following analyses.
Another key result was that the round-trip efﬁciency was in general found to increase with
higher hot-storage temperatures.
77
==PAGE:84==
One simple reason for this is that, since a pinch-temperature difference of 5 K was used for
all heat exchangers in the temperature variations, this has a larger relative impact for low
temperature lifts than for high temperature lifts. Another very important factor is that high
hot-storage temperatures allow transcritical cycles – although, for CO2, all hot-storage temper-
atures investigated yielded transcritical cycles. For transcritical cycles it was found that higher
hot-storage temperatures allow signiﬁcantly better matching of the temperature-proﬁles dur-
ing high-pressure heat transfer. This is explained by smaller variations in heat capacity cp of
supercritical refrigerant with increasing pressure, and the hot storage was modelled with a
constant heat capacity cp. It could be seen that the exergy efﬁciency of especially the high-
pressure HEXs – ie. the HP condenser and the ORC evaporator – was found to increase with
an increasing temperature of the hot storage.
It was also found that, while the temperature of the hot storage should be high, the temperature
glide of the hot storage should be optimized, since too high temperature glides limit the ORC
evaporator pressure while too small temperature glides yield large temperature differences
near the ORC evaporator inlet. The result of this is an optimum in ORC evaporator exergy
efﬁciency at the optimum temperature glide.
It was also seen that the option of releasing parts of the surplus heat to the ambient freely,
due to high superheating temperature after the ORC turbine, could improve the round-trip
efﬁciency due to the less required heat transfer to the ambient by the secondary HP, even from
system set-ups that might yield lower round-trip efﬁciencies when not including the secondary
HP power consumption.
The system round-trip efﬁciency showed greatest sensitivity towards the isentropic efﬁciencies
of the charging cycle compressor and the discharging cycle expander. These components were
also found to be the largest sources of exergy destruction.
The main result from the economic analysis was that the plant was found to be operating very
little. This is most likely caused by insufﬁcient ﬂuctuation in the electricity price, since, in or-
der to make a proﬁt, the ratio of the selling and buying price of electricity must be at least the
inverse of the round-trip efﬁciency
1
ηRT . It was also investigated whether using a connection to
the district heating (DH) network instead of a hot storage could be beneﬁcial. The DH price
was modelled to show small ﬂuctuations following the electricity price. It was found that these
small ﬂuctuations led to a signiﬁcantly smaller income. The income generated throughout a
year was found to be on the order of 500,000 DKK - 1,000,000 DKK using the hot storage and
less than 500,000 DKK using the DH network. It might be expected that larger incomes are
required to make the investigated PTES plant economically viable.
Lastly, one important result was that, depending on the used working ﬂuid and the tempera-
ture conditions, the discharging process evaporator for transcritical cases can either have pinch
both inside and at the outlet or at only one of the two. Since three different cases can be possible,
a complete mapping of the round-trip efﬁciency with varying temperature conditions should
require an optimization of the ORC evaporator pressure. However, the attempted implemen-
tation of this was unsuccessful, and due to the lack of optimization the temperature variations
at especially low cold storage temperatures might not be the best obtainable. Furthermore,
the aforementioned optimization of hot storage temperature glide was not conducted either
during the temperature variations.
By comparing the results of the model it was found to be in decent accordance with other
78
==PAGE:85==
projects, by comparing both round-trip efﬁciencies and also the number of operating hours of
a plant through a similar economic analysis in another project.
For future work on PTES plants a model with optimization of ORC evaporator pressure and
ORC evaporator outlet temperature should be used. It should also be investigated to freely
reject the surplus heat through intercooling of the ORC turbine. Since intercooling the turbine
should be expected to lower its power generation, a comparison of the round-trip efﬁciencies
from this project (with this ’secondary HP method’) and from the intercooling could be inter-
esting. Since it was found that the secondary HP was best used during the charging process,
a possible ’intercooling counterpart’ of this could be intercooling the HP compressor instead,
which should also be investigated.
Due to very high pressures obtained when using CO2, but signiﬁcantly higher volumetric ﬂows
in the compressor suction line when using other refrigerants, a thermo-economic comparison
of the refrigerants could also be interesting.
79
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
[1]
Woods Hole. Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientiﬁc Assessment Report of an Ad Hoc Study
Group on Carbon Dioxide and Climate. Tech. rep. 1979.
[2]
United Nations. Paris Agreement. 2015.
[3]
Climate Energi- Klima- og Forsyningsministeriet (Danish Ministry of Energy and Utili-
ties). Energiaftale. June 20, 2018. URL: https://kefm.dk/media/6646/energiaftale2018.
pdf.
[4]
EnergiFyn. Hvor kommer strømmen fra? URL: https://www.energifyn.dk/privat/el/
vaerd-at-vide-om-el/hvor-kommer-strommen-fra/.
[5]
Data & Statistics - IEA. URL: https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics (visited on
03/28/2021).
[6]
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency). “Renewables and electricity storage -
A technology roadmap for REmap 2030”. In: (2015).
[7]
Qingchun Hou et al. “Probabilistic duck curve in high PV penetration power system:
Concept, modeling, and empirical analysis in China”. In: Applied Energy 242.February
(2019), pp. 205–215. ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.067. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.067.
[8]
Haisheng Chen et al. “Progress in electrical energy storage system: A critical review”. In:
Progress in Natural Science 19.3 (2009), pp. 291–312. DOI: 10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.07.014.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.07.014.
[9]
Frank R Mclarnon and Elton J Cairns. “Energy storage”. In: Annual Review of Energy 14
(1989), pp. 241–271.
[10]
Marcos Gimeno-Guti´errez and Roberto Lacal-Ar´antegui. “Assessment of the European
potential for pumped hydropower energy storage based on two existing reservoirs”. In:
Renewable Energy 75 (2015), pp. 856–868. ISSN: 18790682. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2014.
10.068.
[11]
Matteo Morandin et al. “Conceptual design of a thermo-electrical energy storage sys-
tem based on heat integration of thermodynamic cycles - Part A: Methodology and base
case”. In: Energy 45.1 (2012), pp. 375–385. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2012.03.031.
[12]
Olivier Dumont et al. “Carnot battery technology: A state-of-the-art review”. In: Journal
of Energy Storage 32 (Dec. 2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2020.101756.
80
==PAGE:87==
[13]
Ioannis Hadjipaschalis, Andreas Poullikkas, and Venizelos Efthimiou. “Overview of cur-
rent and future energy storage technologies for electric power applications”. In: Renew-
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews 13.6-7 (2009), pp. 1513–1522. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.
2008.09.028.
[14]
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) and IEA-ETSAP (International Energy
Agency - Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program). “Thermal energy storage. Tech-
nology brief”. In: (2013).
[15]
A. Lorenz. “Beitr¨age zur beurteilung von k¨uhlmaschinen”. In: Z VDI (1894).
[16]
M Schulz and D Kourkoulas. “Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on ﬂuorinated greenhouse gases and repealing
Regulation (EC) No 842/2006”. In: Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union 2014.517 (2014),
pp. L150/195–230. URL: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2014/517/oj.
[17]
F-Chart Software. Engineering Equation Solver (EES). URL: http://fchartsoftware.com/
ees/.
[18]
Michael J. D. Powell. “A Hybrid Method for Nonlinear Equations”. In: Numerical Methods
for Nonlinear Algebraic Equations (1970).
[19]
Ian Bell. “CoolProp Documentation Release 4.0.0”. In: (2013). URL: https : / / media .
readthedocs.org/pdf/coolprop/latest/coolprop.pdf.
[20]
MAN Energy Solutions. MAN Energy Solutions to deliver ﬁrst cross-sectoral ETES Heat-
Pump system. Feb. 4, 2021. URL: https://www.man-es.com/company/press-releases/
press- details/2021/02/04/man- energy- solutions- liefert- erstes- sektor-
%C3%BCbergreifendes-etes-w%C3%A4rmepumpensystem.
[21]
Emmanuel Jacquemoud. Technical Project Manager at MAN Energy Solutions Schweiz
AG (personal communication).
[22]
Wolf Dieter Steinmann, Henning Jockenh¨ofer, and Dan Bauer. “Thermodynamic Analy-
sis of High-Temperature Carnot Battery Concepts”. In: Energy Technology 8.3 (Mar. 2020).
DOI: 10.1002/ente.201900895.
[23]
O. Dumont and V. Lemort. “Mapping of performance of pumped thermal energy storage
(Carnot battery) using waste heat recovery”. In: Energy 211 (Nov. 2020). DOI: 10.1016/j.
energy.2020.118963.
[24]
Young Min Kim et al. “Isothermal transcritical CO2 cycles with TES (thermal energy
storage) for electricity storage”. In: Energy 49.1 (2013), pp. 484–501. DOI: 10.1016/j.
energy.2012.09.057. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.09.057.
[25]
Isentropic - Press Ofﬁce - Newcastle University. Nov. 2017. URL: https://www.ncl.ac.uk/
press/articles/archive/2017/11/isentropic/ (visited on 03/26/2021).
[26]
Matteo Morandin et al. “Conceptual design of a thermo-electrical energy storage system
based on heat integration of thermodynamic cycles - Part B: Alternative system conﬁgu-
rations”. In: Energy 45.1 (2012), pp. 386–396. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2012.03.033.
[27]
Matteo Morandin et al. “Thermoeconomic design optimization of a thermo-electric en-
ergy storage system based on transcritical CO2 cycles”. In: Energy 58 (2013), pp. 571–587.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2013.05.038. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.
2013.05.038.
81
==PAGE:88==
[28]
Michael Karl L¨ofﬂer and Niklas Griessbaum. “Storage devices for heat exchangers with
phase change”. In: International Journal of Refrigeration 44 (2014), pp. 189–196. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ijrefrig.2014.04.016.
[29]
IPU and Technical University of Denmark Department of Mechanical Engineering. Cool-
Pack. Computer Software. Version 1.50. URL: www.ipu.dk.
[30]
NumPy. Version 1.19.2. URL: https://numpy.org.
[31]
Charles R. Harris et al. “Array programming with NumPy”. In: Nature 585.7825 (2020),
pp. 357–362. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. arXiv: 2006.10256. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
[32]
Adrian Bejan, George Tsatsaronis, and Michael Moran. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.
[33]
Henrik Lund et al. “Optimal operation strategies of compressed air energy storage (CAES)
on electricity spot markets with ﬂuctuating prices”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 29.5-
6 (2009), pp. 799–806. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2008.05.020. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2008.05.020.
[34]
Energinet web-site. URL: www.energinet.dk.
[35]
Energistyrelsen (The Danish Energy Agency). Basisfremskrivninger (Basic projections). URL:
https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/basisfremskrivninger.
[36]
Morten Emmanuel Schiøler and Peter Forn´e. Termoelektrisk energilagring med transkritisk
CO2. Bachelor’s thesis. June 24, 2014.
[37]
Magdalena Kowalska, Caroline Nørreg˚ard Potter, and Federico Bava. Business cases deﬁni-
tion and baseline for business models. Sept. 12, 2019. URL: https://www.chester-project.
eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/CHESTER_D6.2_Business-cases-definition-and-
baseline-for-Business-models.pdf.
[38]
SciPy. Version 1.6.2. URL: https://www.scipy.org.
[39]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientiﬁc computing in Python”.
In: Nature Methods 17.3 (2020), pp. 261–272. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2. arXiv:
1907.10121.
[40]
Allen Smith, R. P. Kent, and R. L. Armstrong. “Erosion of steam turbine shield materials”.
In: Erosion by cavitation or impingement, ASTM STP 408 (1967).
[41]
Leonardo Pierobon et al. “Multi-objective optimization of organic Rankine cycles for
waste heat recovery: Application in an offshore platform”. In: Energy 58 (2013), pp. 538–
549. ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2013.05.039.
[42]
Yiping Dai, Jiangfeng Wang, and Lin Gao. “Parametric optimization and comparative
study of organic Rankine cycle (ORC) for low grade waste heat recovery”. In: Energy
Conversion and Management 50.3 (2009), pp. 576–582. ISSN: 01968904. DOI: 10.1016/j.
enconman.2008.10.018.
[43]
Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology data – Energy storage. Tech. rep. Ver-
sion 0007. 2018.
[44]
Eric Granryd et al. Refrigerating Engineering. Royal Institue of Technology (KTH), Stock-
holm, 2011.
82
==PAGE:89==
[45]
Olivier Dumont. “Investigation of a heat pump reversible into an organic Rankine cycle
and its application in the building sector”. Ph.D. thesis. University of Li`ege, Aerospace
and Mechanical Engineering Department, Sept. 2017.
[46]
Michael J. Moran et al. Principles of engineering thermodynamics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2012.
[47]
I.M. Sobol’. “Sensitivity analysis for non-linear mathematical models”. In: Mathematical
Modelling and Computational Experiment 1 (1993), pp. 407–414.
[48]
A. Saltelli, S. Tarantola, and K. P.S. Chan. “A quantitative model-independent method
for global sensitivity analysis of model output”. In: Technometrics 41.1 (1999), pp. 39–56.
ISSN: 15372723. DOI: 10.1080/00401706.1999.10485594.
[49]
Chonggang Xu and George Gertner. “Understanding and comparisons of different sam-
pling approaches for the Fourier Amplitudes Sensitivity Test (FAST)”. In: Computational
Statistics and Data Analysis 55.1 (2011), pp. 184–198. ISSN: 01679473. DOI: 10.1016/j.
csda.2010.06.028. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2010.06.028.
[50]
Andrea Saltelli et al. Global Sensitivity Analysis. The Primer. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2008.
ISBN: 9780470059975. DOI: 10.1002/9780470725184.
[51]
Bruno Sudret. “Global sensitivity analysis using polynomial chaos expansions”. In: Re-
liability Engineering and System Safety 93.7 (2008), pp. 964–979. ISSN: 09518320. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ress.2007.04.002.
[52]
UQLab. URL: https://www.uqlab.com.
[53]
Donald R. Woods. Rules of thumb in engineering practice. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co., 2007. ISBN: 978-3-527-31220-7.
83
==PAGE:90==
Appendix A
A.1
Temperature difference at HP condenser outlet
In Section 2.2 an analyses was shown pertaining possible assumptions for pinch inside the HP
condenser, by varying the condenser outlet temperature difference. In the presented case the
heat sink – ie. the hot storage – was heated from 30 ◦C to 100 ◦C. The same analyses was
conducted with the hot storage heated from 70 ◦C to 140 ◦C, ie. the same temperature glide but
at higher temperatures. Since the temperature of maximum cp changes with pressure, this case
was also implemented to investigate the potential impact of this. The results can be seen in
a TQ-diagram in Figure A.1 and a corresponding ph-diagram in Figure A.2. The same trends
that were seen for the conditions in Section 2.2 are also observed for this case. For maximizing
the HP COP, the condenser outlet should have as small a temperature difference as possible in
order to lower the enthalpy at the evaporator inlet, such that the heat transfer in the evaporator
can be maximized.
In the TQ-diagram, the heat is shown in increments (hundredths) for ﬁgure simplicity, since the
different cases will yield different amounts of heat transfer in the evaporator (if the condenser
heat transfer is constant).
The values of COP from this analysis is also shown in Figure 2.4 in Section 2.2, summarizing
COP versus the condenser outlet temperature difference.
Figure A.1: TQ-diagram of the same analysis as was shown in Figure 2.2 in Section 2.2. In this
case the hot storage was assumed heated from 70 ◦C to 140 ◦C.
84
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.2: ph-diagram of the same analysis as was shown in Figure 2.3 in Section 2.2. In this
case the hot storage was assumed heated from 70 ◦C to 140 ◦C.
A.2
Case with ORC expansion process entering the two-phase region
It was mentioned in Section 2.3 that a discharging cycle was implemented in which the temper-
ature difference at the ORC evaporator outlet was variable, since it is not necessarily possible to
obtain pinch both inside the ORC evaporator and at the outlet. However, as also mentioned, it
was found that this would lead to cases with expansion into the two-phase region. An example
of such a case is provided with a TQ-diagram in Figure A.3 and a Ts-diagram in Figure A.4.
From the TQ-diagram it can be seen that pinch of the ORC evaporator is obtained inside but
not at the outlet. However, the Ts-diagram shows that the ORC evaporator outlet – equivalent
to the expander inlet – is at nearly the same entropy as the critical point, and expansion into
the two-phase area appears.
Using this method it was thus not known from the temperature maps to what extent two-phase
expansion of the ORC turbine appeared. Wet expansion in a turbine can damage the turbine
blades due to droplet erosion, as also discussed in Section 4.2.
From this issue came the idea of using an assumption on entropy, as mentioned in Section 2.3.
85
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.3: TQ-diagram of example case using R1234ze(E) with a variable ORC evaporator
outlet temperature. Fairly good temperature matching is obtained in the ORC evaporator. Note
that the ORC condenser shows no desuperheating.
Figure A.4: Ts-diagram of the same example case as Figure A.3, using R1234ze(E) with a vari-
able ORC evaporator outlet temperature. It can be seen that wet expansion appears in the ORC
turbine, which could damage turbine blades.
86
==PAGE:93==
A.3
Inputs for CoolPack-model
As mentioned in Section 2.4, a model in the CoolPack-software tool was used to generate a data-
ﬁt of COP-values for the secondary HP in order to evaluate the power consumption related to
the surplus heat rejection.
The inputs used in the CoolPack cycle model were a combination of user-deﬁned inputs and
program default values. The input values are listed below:
• Ammonia (R717) as refrigerant
• the varied evaporation temperature, Te,sec was varied from -20 ◦C to 15 ◦C
• the condensing temperature, Tc,sec = 30 ◦C
• the superheating (in Kelvin) at the evaporator output, ∆TSH,sec = 5 K
• the subcooling (in Kelvin) at the condenser outlet, ∆TSC,sec = 2 K
• the pressure loss in both heat exchangers (in Kelvin of saturation temperature), ∆P = 0.5 K
• the compressor isentropic efﬁciency, ηs,comp.,sec = 0.8
• the unuseful suction line superheating (in Kelvin), ∆TSH,SL = 1 K
The cycle model used an expansion valve, ie. an expander with an isentropic efﬁciency of zero.
A.4
System state-point notation for exergy balances
A system drawing with the same set-up as in Figure 2.12 but showing all state-points is pre-
sented in Figure A.5. The added state-points are shown here in squares, while those that were
also presented in 2.12 are shown in circles. These added state-points are used in the exergy
analysis presented in Section 2.7.
87
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.5: System drawing of the same system set-up as in Figure 2.12, but here showing all
state-point notation used for the exergy balances in Equations 2.7.10-2.7.19.
88
==PAGE:95==
A.5
Extended temperature maps of CO2 – initial method
It was mentioned that low values of cold storage temperature can make pinch inside the ORC
evaporator unavailable when CO2 is used. For this reason a more limited temperature variation
was shown for CO2 in the results (Sec. 3.1 and 3.2). More extended temperature maps are
shown with the initial method of surplus heat rejection in Figures A.6-A.8. Note that pinch
inside the ORC evaporator is not ensured and the ORC evaporator pressure was not subject to
optimization.
Figures A.6 and A.7 show COP and thermal efﬁciency of the charging and discharging cycles,
respectively. These follow the trends that should be expected, ie. larger difference of stor-
age temperatures yielding lower COP and higher thermal efﬁciency. The Lorenz efﬁciencies,
however, which are also presented in the ﬁgures, are seen to be higher when the temperature
difference of the storages are higher. This is most likely because the constant pinch-temperature
difference of 5 K, which was used for all HEXs, has relatively less signiﬁcance at higher storage
temperature differences. As a result round-trip efﬁciency in A.8 is higher when the hot storage
temperature is higher. Low cold storage temperatures are not advantageous since these require
larger secondary HP power consumption.
Figure A.6: Temperature map of charging cycle with CO2. For inputs and conditions see Table
3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
89
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.7: Temperature map of discharging cycle with CO2. For inputs and conditions see
Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
Figure A.8: Temperature map of the PTES system with CO2. For inputs and conditions see
Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
90
==PAGE:97==
A.6
Extended temperature maps - updated method
Similarly to the previously shown ’extended’ temperature maps in App. A.5 (see Figures A.6-
A.8), the round-trip efﬁciency obtained with the updated method of surplus heat rejection is
shown for the extended temperature variation in Figure A.9. The round-trip efﬁciency is again
seen to increase with the hot storage temperature. The round-trip efﬁciency improvement,
∆ηRT, is seen to be around 5 %p for the most usable cases (Ths,charged ≥150 ◦C and Tcs,charged ≈
0◦C).
Figure A.9: Temperature map of PTES system with CO2 using the new method of surplus heat
rejection. For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and Tcs,charged,
which are varied here.
A temperature map of the round-trip efﬁciency with the new method as well as the improve-
ment is also shown for propane in Figure A.10. It can be seen that round-trip efﬁciencies similar
to those with CO2 and maybe even slightly higher can be obtained at very high temperatures of
the hot storage. Low values of hot storage temperatures, however, show lower efﬁciency than
CO2, most likely because these do not yield transcritical discharging cycles with this ﬂuid.
91
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.10: Temperature map of PTES system with propane using the new method of surplus
heat rejection. For inputs and conditions see Table 3.1, with the exception of Ths,charged and
Tcs,charged, which are varied here.
A.7
Results from economic analysis
Time-series of electricity prices with operating modes are shown for cases 2 and 3, as presented
in Section 2.8, for 2003 data. It can be seen that during most hours, the plant shows no opera-
tion.
From Figure A.12 it is seen that the connection to the district heating grid is not used at all.
These results are also summarized in Table 3.6 in the results (see Section 3.4).
Figure A.11: Time-series of electricity price data and operating modes from the dynamic pro-
gramming model of the second economic case using electricity price data from 2003.
92
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.12: Time-series of electricity price data and operating modes from the dynamic pro-
gramming model of the third economic case using electricity price data from 2003.
93
==PAGE:100==
