==PAGE:1==
Cellular Network Coverage for
Smart Agriculture
Saadman Haq s160081
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Technological advancements in the ﬁeld of agricultural technology using
Internet-of-Things means that the cellular network coverage in Denmark
must be able to support safety-critical applications in this regard to justify
the massive investments in the industry.
The goal of the thesis is hence to design, implement and assess a methodol-
ogy, developed for the purpose of investigating and quantifying the current
cell phone coverage in Denmark using a measurement campaign where the
focus will be on two Quality-of-Service metrics, throughput and latency.
These will be measured every 30 seconds at three locations - a rural,
suburban, and urban location where the network conditions are vastly
diﬀerent. Two of the biggest mobile network operators in Scandinavia
are used for this purpose by using SIM cards from Telia and TDC. The
OpenCelliD visualization map indicates that the cell tower placement in
Denmark is dense, which should signify suﬃcient coverage in the country,
hence one of the goals of the project is to assess whether this assumption
holds true or not. Since support of safety-critical applications in agricul-
tural context are imperative, an assessment of the worst case throughput
measurements in the aforementioned areas will be evaluated.
==PAGE:4==
ii
First, a background on cellular technology is given along with a literature
review, followed up by the description of the methodology and its imple-
mentation at design level. Three scenarios will be tested at the locations:
baseline, geographic orientation, and mobility. The baseline scenario will
be used to compare the measurements to the coverage map, while the
purpose of the second is to evaluate the importance of cardinal direction
of the phone relative to the nearest cell tower. Lastly, measurements via
drive tests are conducted to evaluate the eﬀect of mobility on coverage.
The ﬁndings show that there is a large deviation between the measured
throughput and the listed speed on the coverage maps. The results on
the geographic orientation scenario are inconclusive and requires further
research. Lastly, based on the methodology, the current cellular network
coverage quality is found to be suﬃcient enough to support safety-critical
applications for agricultural technology.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis deals with the investigation of cellular network coverage in
Denmark in order to assess its performance and gain insight to whether
the current state of mobile broadband is viable enough to support tech-
nological advancements within agricultural machinery.
The thesis consists of an introduction to the problem at hand, followed by
a brief overview of theoretical concepts behind cellular technology. Cur-
rent literature in the ﬁeld is then reviewed, which provides motivation
for the methodology utilized in the project. The design and implemen-
tation of the measurement campaign is then described, followed by an
evaluation of the results. Finally, these results are discussed and a con-
clusion is reached, that emphasizes that while the results are promising
and beneﬁcial, further research is required.
The project was carried out from January 25th 2021 to June 25th 2021,
and corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Lyngby, 25-June-2021
Saadman Haq s160081
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Associate Professor Xenofon Fafoutis
and Postdoc Charalampos Orfanidis of the Technical University of Den-
mark, for their help, guidance, and feedback throughout the entire project
period.
I would also like to thank my family for their love and support my entire
life. They mean the world to me.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Study limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Cellular Network Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
1G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
2G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
3G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
4G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.5
5G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Related works
9
3.1
Related projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Current literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Methodology
41
4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.1
Baseline scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4.2
Geographic orientation scenario . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.3
Mobility scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Evaluation
53
5.1
Description of datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Results from baseline scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Results from geographic orientation scenario . . . . . . . .
58
5.4
Results from mobility scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Discussion
73
7
Conclusion
77
A Speedtest script
79
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Nowadays, the massive progression in technological advancement can be
taken for granted. About a half a century ago, humanity was able to
execute a successful manned mission to the moon using a computer with
a RAM of 4 KB and a 32 KB hard disk [1], and now even a TI-84 pocket
calculator is 350 times faster, contains 32 times more RAM, and 14,500
times more ROM [2]. An iPhone 6 is in comparison 32,600 times faster
than the utilized Apollo computers on the mission, and as of June 2021,
the amount of smartphone users worldwide has reached 3.8 billion, cor-
responding to 48.33% of the world’s population [3].
This fact speaks
volumes of how far technological innovation has come. About 30 years,
people could hardly fathom the idea of moving away from landline tele-
phony.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In order to support the intensive applications that these powerful smart-
phone device are capable of running, an equally impressive cellular net-
work topology has to be in place to provide the wireless communications
and extremely fast downlink and uplink data rates. Urban regions are
usually well-provisioned in this regard, as the majority of governments
typically invest in areas with high population density to accommodate
as many users as possible. As a result, rural regions get left behind in
many countries worldwide[4]. Especially at a time where a pandemic in
the shape of COVID-19 shut down the world for period of time, applica-
tions like online learning, work-at-home, and telemedicine became more
popular than previously. As a consequence, it becomes diﬃcult for people
living in these areas to keep up with this trend. In addition to this, the
advancements made in technology has aﬀected ﬁelds like medicine, auto-
motive industry, sports, etc. due to the conception of Internet-of-Things
(IoT). Agriculture has not been bereft in this regard, as reports show that
the demand for agricultural technology is escalating and investments in
the ﬁeld hit an astounding amount of $22.3 billion in 2020 [5]. These ap-
plications are intended to be autonomous, which means safety-criticality
is of utmost importance in this context.
1.2
Problem statement
Considering these technological advancements in agriculture, the invest-
ments in the ﬁeld, and the state of cellular network coverage in rural
regions, it would be interesting to investigate, quantify and assess the
current cellular network coverage quality in Denmark. The study is car-
ried out by the means of a measurement campaign where throughput
measurements will be conducted in diﬀerent regions of Denmark. Mo-
bile network operators often provide coverage maps as a way to ensure
their customers of the throughput they promise to deliver on through
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Study limitations
3
marketing and advertisements. For this reason, the measurements will
be compared to the speeds on the coverage maps to see whether these
can be trusted or not. Finally, it would be fascinating to see whether the
worst case throughput is able to support safety-critical applications such
as video streaming.
1.3
Study limitations
In this thesis, several limitations have been encountered for the conducted
study which must be acknowledged before delving further into the matter.
The ﬁrst limitation is the lack of detailed information about cellular cover-
age data provided by the providers. Currently, coverage maps are publicly
available on the website for each of the providers, though only estimates
within a given range are given. Emails were sent to both TDC and Telia,
but to no avail. However, this is understandable, as the data is in all
likelihood considered sensitive and conﬁdential to the companies.
As for the second limitation, there is no publicly available data regarding
the number of subscribers for a given provider as well as the number
of cell towers in Denmark. There are also no openly available data for
how many subscribers of a speciﬁc provider is found in a given area. For
this reason, data from a community-driven open source project called
OpenCellID is used for the location of cell towers in Denmark and based
on these locations, assumptions are made about the congestion at any
given time.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter of the report seeks to provide the reader an overview of the
imperative concepts and technologies associated with the central topic at
hand. Among the concepts will be cellular technology, the fundamentals
of it, and its network topology.
2.1
Cellular Network Technology
2.1.1
1G
Fundamentally, all cell phone devices function as radios. About a quarter
of a century ago, before the rise of said phones, some luxury cars would
have a radio telephone along with a large transmitter installed inside
them. During this time, each city would have just one central antenna
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
tower which could provide 25 channels, hence the need for a transmitter
strong enough to transmit signals over distances of around 70 km. Once
the technology began to evolve, an infrastructure of small cells started to
emerge in which frequency reuse became prevalent. This allowed a vast
amount of users to utilize cell phones concurrently. In the US, a common
carrier is given about 800 frequencies to utilize across the city. These are
then divided into said cells. A single cell is about 26 km2 in size and has
the shape of a hexagon [6]. They are in most cases lined up in a grid, as
shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Hexagonal grid of cells
A base station resides in each of these cells in the form of a tower. The
grid makes it possible for these systems to utilize the same channel fre-
quencies often, since the radio spectrum was limited at the time. While
this solution seemed promising, the First Generation mobile networks had
its drawbacks. For one, the cellular networks were incapable of interoper-
ate between countries, which would limit their expansion. Another is the
lack of security in the voice calls, as they were played back in the towers,
making it possible for malicious actors to intercept calls [7].
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Cellular Network Technology
7
2.1.2
2G
However, this changed with 2G. Cell phone users were now able to send
and receive text messages, pictures, and MMS without having to worry
about malicious interception. The transmission of these messages were
digitally encrypted. 2G systems made use of digital mobile access tech-
nology in the form of TDMA and CDMA. The former splits a signal up
into time slots, whereas CDMA assigns each user a special code, which
is used for communication by the way of a multiplex physical channel.
Before the rise of 3G, an extension to 2G networks was made such that
they were capable of supporting packet based services in the shape of
GPRS. This technology was able to handle data rates of 56-384 Kbps as
well as applications like WAP access, e-mail and Internet access.
2.1.3
3G
In order to take the next step within cellular network technology, the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) set out a challenge of im-
plementing a global frequency band in the 2000 MHz range that was ca-
pable of supporting a worldwide wireless communication standard. This
change made it possible for carriers to oﬀer users more advanced services
like improved audio and video streaming, video conferencing, and Internet
Protocol Television (IPTV).
2.1.4
4G
The concept of 4G started out as an idea in R&D labs, in order to poten-
tially overcome the challenges that 3G started to face such as deployment
diﬃculties along with trouble living up to its expected throughput and
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
performance. Once developed, the expectations for 4G were a range of
revolutionary features such as delivering a download speed of 100 Mbps,
greater frequency band usage eﬃciency due to CDMA, IPv6, and the
capability of supporting LTE.
2.1.5
5G
The idea behind 5G wireless networks lies in the usage of mm-Wave fre-
quency bands, which has already been used in airport communications,
radars, and other military applications [8].
In the spectrum of about
3-300 GHz, only 57-64 GHz and 81-86 GHz is considered unsuitable for
communications. Thus, a small fraction of the available mm-wave spec-
trum is able to support high-performance data rates and capacity over
the current spectrum [9]. The expectation is that the technology is able
to support applications like Internet of Vehicles (IoV), Device to Device
(D2D) communications, e-healthcare, and Machine to Machine (M2M)
communications in the near future.
Furthermore, the round-trip time
(RTT) latency and energy consumption is likely going to be massively re-
duced. An overview of what is to come for 5G wireless networks is shown
on Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Possible future applications of 5G. Taken from [8]
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Related works
3.1
Related projects
Before delving into the matter of research papers with an emphasis on
assessment of cellular network coverage, it is worth mentioning the open-
source and community-driven projects around the world that have in-
spired and sparked numerous research papers about this topic.
One of the biggest open-source projects within the wireless communi-
cation ﬁeld is OpenCellID [10]. According to OpenStreetMap, the site
contains the biggest open-source database of cell towers and their respec-
tive worldwide geolocations [11]. More than 40 million unique cells have
been registered by 49,000+ contributors. The locations of these cell tow-
ers have been visualized using OpenStreetMap on their website as well as
individual contributors using the Leaﬂet map library [12].
==PAGE:20==
10
Related works
Other projects include the creation of a cellular signal heat map using
a Raspberry Pi Pico and GPS equipment. The creator drives around to
diﬀerent locations and environments to build said map [13].
A once promising project was Project Loon, owned by Alphabet Inc. The
aim of this project was to create a network using stratospheric balloons
in order to provide rural and remote environments with Internet access
[14]. As of January 2021 however, the company is shutting down.
3.2
Current literature
In this section, the current literature with relevance to this study is re-
viewed. Papers with performance assessments of cellular network cover-
age or wireless communication are of signiﬁcant interest.
The cost, coverage and rollout implications of 5G infras-
tructure in Britain
Edward J. Oughton, Zoraida Frias [15]
This paper investigates the possible ramiﬁcations regarding cost, cover-
age and rollout of 5G infrastructure in the UK. This is done by following
a sequential methodology consisting of geotype segmentation, exploring
rollout strategies in the form of spectrum integration and network densi-
ﬁcation and lastly, a cost model. The results indicate that continuing the
5G rollout using the business-as-usual strategy would be the most cost
eﬃcient approach.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Current literature
11
Approach
The following ﬁgure describes the methodology utilized in this paper:
Figure 3.1: Methodology divided into steps. Taken from [15]
The paper makes use of a method known as geotype segmentation where
postcode sections across Britain are divided into geotypes that are cate-
gorized based oﬀof the population density in urban, suburban and rural
areas. From here, certain assumptions are made regarding estimated pop-
ulation coverage for 4G, including that it is expected that the sections
with 100% coverage will have 4G in all of their sites.
For the second step in the methodology, two strategies were explored.
The ﬁrst possibility is the usage of spectrum integration into existing
macrocells. This entails taking advantage of two frequency bands (700
==PAGE:22==
12
Related works
MHz and 3400-3600 MHz, respectively) for the purpose of expanding the
4G networks presently in place to next generation 5G networks. These
two bands have been chosen, as they have been allocated to mobile com-
munications systems and therefore not occupied by legacy systems such
as 2G and 3G. The former band was found to have the best propagation
properties out of the allotted to the aforementioned communications sys-
tems. The second strategy encompasses a greenﬁeld 5G small cell rollout
that would be deployed on the latter spectrum, since it is undergoing a
refarming process.
In the ﬁnal step of the methodology, it revolves around a cost model which
is used to estimate the potential costs of the 5G infrastructure rollout.
The total capital expenditure is deﬁned as follows:
Capex5GNeti = CMacro celli + CSmall celli + CBackhauli + CCorei
Where Capex5GNeti is the sum of capital expenditure costs of brown-
ﬁeld macrocell upgrades (CMacro celli), greenﬁeld small cell deployments
(CSmall celli), ﬁbre backhaul (CBackhauli) and core upgrade costs (CCorei).
At the point the paper was written, the costs of 5G equipment were
not known to the government. Nevertheless, prior research shows that
the future generations of network equipment with increased performance
have a tendency to resemble the prices of the equipment from previous
generations.
Evaluation
To make an assessment of the 5G infrastructure rollout, the authors fol-
lowed the outlined methodology using business-as-usual conditions. The
results show that 98% of the population in England will have near-
ubiquitous coverage by 2030, while Wales and Scotland will have 90% and
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Current literature
13
86% coverage, respectively, by sharing small cell infrastructure. However,
the total cost of the rollout will increase threefold if the remaining part of
the populations are to receive 5G coverage which might not be alluring for
the companies involved or government. Ensuring 10 Mbps in rural areas
will not require exponential capital investment, as the integration of the
new spectrum on the existing macrocells satisﬁes the end-user demand of
10 Mbps in rural areas. This is possible because of the low population
density in those areas.
Comments
Overall, the authors manage to make some quite accurate approximations
using their sequential methodology. Among the described steps in the
methodology, it was particularly the geotype segmentation that will be
of interest in this study.
The method divided the population up into
groups with similar geographical characteristics. As for the cost model,
the approach would make sense in Danish context, however there is a lack
of reliable information about Danish prices for such equipment, since it is
likely company sensitive data. For this reason, it would be troublesome
to make accurate estimations, and it is therefore considered out of scope
for this project.
Performance Analysis of Mobile Broadband Networks with
5G Trends and Beyond: Rural Areas Scope in Malaysia
Ibraheem Shayea, Mustafa Ergen, Marwan Hadri Azmi, Dalia Nandi, Ay-
man A. El-Salah, Abdulhamid Zahedi [16]
This paper describes comprehensive performance tests of the existing
Mobile Broadband (MBB), 3G, and 4G networks in the rural parts of
==PAGE:24==
14
Related works
Malaysia. The authors obtain the measurement data through the usage
of in-vehicle Drive Tests (DT), where the authors conducted outdoor tests
in selected rural areas using Samsung Galaxy S6 handsets. The authors
tested two MBB services: web browsing and video streaming. These tests
were later assessed using four distinct performance metrics: coverage, la-
tency, satisfaction, and speed. The results show that the cellular network
coverage is better for 4G services than 3G services. Regarding latency,
the 4G coverage of the MBB MNOs in question have been measured to
have a lower minimum on the web ping average RTT latency than 3G.
For the satisfaction performance metric, the outdoor drive tests scored
higher on the scale for 4G technology for both MBB services compared
to 3G coverage which scored lower on average on the vMOS indicator.
Lastly, with regard to speed, the analysis showed that the 4G technology
was better than 3G by a signiﬁcant factor for both web browsing and
video streaming.
Approach
The following test methodology was used for the test process:
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Current literature
15
Figure 3.2: Structure of test process. Taken from [16]
In this paper, the authors have developed a test methodology that aims
to measure the four aforementioned performance metrics which are rele-
vant for consumers during MBB usage. For the data collection part, they
utilized two proprietary software testing applications in the form of MBB
explorer for web browsing and Speedvideo for video streaming - both of
these apps were supplied by Huawei Technology (Huawei mLab) to test
the MBB performance in the rural areas reliably. For the former appli-
cation, the test cycle consisted of accessing nad browsing three webpages
that are diﬀerent with regard to their substance and access speeds. The
three websites were:
• www.google.com
• www.instagram.com
• www.mstar.com.my
The ﬁrst webpage is considered light-weight, as Google’s home page does
==PAGE:26==
16
Related works
not contain load-heavy content whereas the second on the list is regarded
as a medium-sized webpage due to Instagram loading pictures and videos.
The last website is categorized as heavy-sized, as it is news site that loads
elements like texts, photos, and videos. The app is set to run 100 cycles of
tests. As for the latter application, the test cycles consisted of streaming
YouTube videos with two diﬀerent resolutions: 720p and 1080p.
The
authors can set this app to run any number of user input cycles.
As part of the research, the authors benchmarked the network perfor-
mance of three major MNO networks in Malaysia. These are labeled X,
Y, and Z in Figure 3.2. Due to there being two types of tests, two SIM
cards were bought from each MNO.
With regard to the test environment, the authors successfully completed
the measurements in an outdoor environment. As noted earlier, DTs were
conducted where the goal was to cover the main roads, inter-town roads
and highways in the cities and towns of the rural states. The drive speed
was set to be less than 60 km/h, and 80 km/h for the highway. For the
data collection part, the authors made sure to pre-test the equipment and
that the measurements are saved to the database.
Evaluation
The authors propose using Key Performance Indicators (KPI) to assess
the discoveries of this research paper. These are the aforementioned per-
formance metrics: coverage, latency, satisfaction, and speed. The cov-
erage metric concerns the received signal strength in the given network
coverage area. When the signal is strong, it makes for a better consumer
experience when using the MBB services. With regard to latency, the in-
dicator represents the time delay between a signal being sent from source
to destination along with the time it takes to send a response to the
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Current literature
17
source. Low latency means a better consumer experience in the form of
faster web browsing and seamless video streaming. The third metric is
satisfaction which is based on the ratio between two factors: the amount
of attempts to successfully load a webpage and stream a video without
interruptions. This indicator illustrates the network performance on a
scale from 1 to 5 where the higher the vMOS number is, the better the
performance is. Lastly, the speed metric is described as the download
speed (or throughput) which is the data transfer rate from the internet
to the user’s device.
The network coverage results show that 80% of the coverage in the test
areas is better than the given cellular signal strength on the web. The
authors observed stronger coverage with 4G networks compared to 3G
networks. Pertaining to the latency, the results show that a minimum of
42.4 ms was achieved on the ping average RTT latency for 4G, whereas 3G
attained a minimum of 69.9 ms. In the matter of the satisfaction metric,
4G technology scored larger than 3 on both web browsing and video
streaming than 3G which scored less than 3 in comparison. Concerning
speed, the 4G technology performed better than 3G by a factor of 4.2
and 1.6 for web browsing and video streaming, respectively.
Comments
The authors made use of interesting approaches to assess the network
coverage in the rural morphology of Malaysia, though it was not without
its weaknesses.
It is in particular the satisfaction performance metric
that seems ﬂawed and unclear. From a user’s perspective, it can be very
subjective when it comes to deeming a web page to be successfully loaded.
The authors do not state a criteria for this matter. If a frame or some
elements are not loaded completely, but the rest of the page is, would
that page be seen as loaded successfully?
That part is not addressed
==PAGE:28==
18
Related works
at all in the paper. However, there are also some intriguing ideas like
the conducted drive tests that could be useful in this study. From an
agricultural technological point of view, it would be interesting to see
how the coverage in rural areas is for devices in a mobile state.
Performance Measurements of IEEE 802.15.4g Wireless Net-
works
Francesca Righetti, Carlo Vallati, Daniela Comola, Giuseppe Anastas [17]
This group conducts performance assessment experiments in a real out-
door environments. In the experiments, the authors made use of Zoleria
remote sensor nodes in diﬀerent scenarios, speciﬁcally rural, semi-rural,
and urban environments.
Approach
The aim of the authors with these experiments is to study the commu-
nication range allowed by the technology of IEEE 802.15.4g. Two sensor
nodes were utilized - one acting as a transmitter and the other acting as
a receiver. The former transmits packets periodically (every 30 seconds).
In order to measure the communication range, the transmitter was placed
in a ﬁxed position while the receiver was moved to diﬀerent locations
where each location is further away from the previous. The Packet Deliv-
ery Rate (PDR) was measured for each distance. This rate represents the
percentage of received packets by the receiver with respect to the total
number of transmitted packets. Afterwards, the communication range as
the distance where the PDR is greater than or equal to the pre-deﬁned
threshold of 30%. The duration for each experiment was set to 10 minutes,
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Current literature
19
which allowed the transmission of a considerable amount of packets. The
authors speculate that the packet transmission might be heavily inﬂu-
enced by obstacles in the environment where the experiments are taking
place. For this reason, three diﬀerent environments are considered: rural,
semi-rural and urban. The points of interest in these locations can be
observed in the images below:
Figure 3.3: Points of interest (urban environment). Taken from [17]
==PAGE:30==
20
Related works
Figure 3.4: Points of interest (semirural environment). Taken from [17]
Figure 3.5: Points of interest (rural environment). Taken from [17]
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Current literature
21
In Figure 3.3, the points of interest in the urban scenario are depicted.
The sender and the receiver are both located on buildings. Due to this, the
other buildings and trees in the area might aﬀect the packet transmission
path. As for Figure 3.4 which shows the points of interest in a semirural
area, the group does not expect the transmission path to be aﬀected by
the buildings, since the points are connected in a line-of-sight manner. In
Figure 3.5, which depicts the points of interest in the rural environment,
the transmission path should not be aﬀected by obstacles at any point,
given the open and free space in the area.
In the experiments, the authors made use of Zolertia remote sensor nodes
coupled with omni-directional antennas with 2 dB gain. The sensor nodes
are derived from the ARM Cortex-M3 system on chip which runs the Con-
tiki OS. Pertaining to wireless communication, the remote sensor nodes
utilize the radio interface provided by the Texas Instruments CC1120
transceiver, which has been set to operate in the bands 863-950 MHz.
Evaluation
Overall, the authors expected vastly varying results from the three diﬀer-
ent scenarios. With regard to the urban environment, the PDR in path
1 increases from 60% to 90% when the distance increases from 100m to
120m. The group assume it is likely due the receiver being placed at a
higher point than compared to where it was located when the distance
was 100m. Being located at a higher point equals greater signal strength,
as there are fewer obstacles in the path. However, the PDR drops sig-
niﬁcantly when the distance is increased to 200m due to the presence of
buildings which impacts the signal propagation. The other two paths in
the same scenario shares similar trends because of the obstacles in the
form of trees and buildings. As for the rural scenario, the outdoor envi-
ronment was uniform which means a lot of open space without obstacles.
==PAGE:32==
22
Related works
For this reason, the receiver was able to receive a considerable percentage
of packets at large distances, e.g. 800m. Since the terrain was irregular
due to the hills in the area, it meant that the PDR had inconsistent per-
centages at certain distances, for instance a PDR of 65% was reached at a
distance of 700m, but at 500m it was 30%. Lastly, in the semi-rural sce-
nario, the PDR decreased slowly up until a distance of 250m was reached.
At longer distances, the PDR falls to zero. It should be noted that the
transmitter and receiver was placed in a practically open area, despite
the presence of small buildings and trees nearby.
Comments
While this paper does not deal with cellular network coverage, it does
deal with wireless communication between devices in interesting scenarios.
Like the authors in [16], the group carried out their experiments in a rural
morphology as well. The intriguing part in this paper is their methodology
of testing in diﬀerent operating environments. For this study, it would be
meaningful to investigate the cellular network coverage in rural, suburban
and urban morphologies.
Evaluating the Real-World Performance of 5G Fixed Wire-
less Broadband in Rural Areas
Raouf Abozariba, Eleanor Davies, Matthew Broadbent, Nicholas Race [18]
This group assesses the performance of two emerging 5G networking tech-
nologies in rural environments. The analysis is based on deployments of
TV White Space (TVWS) and millimetre wave (mmWave) technologies
across rural areas in the UK.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Current literature
23
Approach
In order to observe the 5G networks in the rural parts of the UK, the
authors developed their own monitoring framework. This framework is
divided into three layers: the application layer, the network layer and
the physical layer. The ﬁrst tow layers generate statistics collected using
monitoring devices that have been placed within the network. Concerning
the physical layer, it gathers data through monitoring protocols which
have been built into the network infrastructure.
In principal, the physical layer utilizes the Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP) for the data collection part as well as display of key
statistics. In the event that the protocol is not available at all times, the
authors developed an API which has the purpose of communicating with
the base station via JSON. The information that can be obtained includes
current channel usage, channel bandwidth utilization, modulation scheme
and received signal strength indicator. These metrics are used to assess
the health of a network by network operators and will be collected once
every minute. As for the network layer, three metrics will be measured
between the customer LAN and a remote server - these are latency, jitter
and throughput. Latency in this context refers to the round trip time
it takes for packets to traverse the network to a remote server. Jitter is
deﬁned as the variation of latency over time. The throughput is measured
as the bits per second that can traverse the network after taking buﬀer
and processing overheads into account which will provide the available
bandwidth for the consumer to take advantage of. Throughput is heavily
aﬀected by congestion. In relation to the application layer, the authors
focus on the Quality of Experience (QoE) detected at consumer level by
emphasizing the real-world beneﬁts of the system by real-world users.
==PAGE:34==
24
Related works
Evaluation
The results of the throughput measured shows that TVWS technology
is able to support internet speed of 20-30 Mbps on two bonded 8 MHz
channels. The ﬁndings also show that this technology is stable, as there
were no outages detected during the monitoring period. In addition to
this, the performances were all relatively similar despite the diversity of
the deployed wireless network locations.
(a) ECDF of download throughput
(b) Throughput recorded over two weeks
Figure 3.6: Throughput ﬁgures. Taken from [18]
What is also worth noticing in Figure 3.6a is the throughput generated
by network in Auckley which uses the mmWave technology. The obtained
speed in this instance is 4-5 times faster than the networks using TVWS
technology.
However, this type of technology requires good backhaul
connection in order to able to provide viable service.
With regard to
latency, values below 40ms were achieved across the board which the
group considers acceptable with respect to video, voice and data traﬃc.
As for jitter, all of the recorded values were below 25ms which is adequate
for most applications.
However, some of the challenges encountered with the TVWS technology
is the limited channel availability. The technology operates on a narrow
spectrum bandwidth, making it hardly suitable for rural environments.
Additionally, there is a vast number of transmitters within TVWS which
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Current literature
25
results in a lot of interference for numerous locations in the UK. Pertaining
to mmWave technology, the results indicate that the technology has low
range - a mere 1.5km is the maximum transmission range in this testbed.
Furthermore, the pairing of transmitters and receivers require line-of-sight
in order to obtain the measured high speeds, which may not always be
possible due to the diversity of the customer’s home structure.
Comments
There are some weaknesses in this study. The authors do not state the
conditions for the conducted tests in terms of the number of obstacles
or the state of the weather, since rain can inﬂuence the measurements.
However, the group does cover some interesting parts with respect to their
monitoring framework, as its setup measures important statistics in each
of the three layers. The framework is able to capture measurements every
minute, thus generating enough sample size for meaningful insight when
ran long enough.
Investigation into Oﬀ-Body Links for Wrist Mounted An-
tennas in Bluetooth Systems
Mohammad Waris Abdullah, Xenofon Fafoutis, Evangelos Mellios, Maciej
Klemm, Geoﬀrey S. Hilton [19]
This paper delves into the investigation of oﬀ-body links for wrist mounted
Bluetooth Low Energy devices in an indoor environment. Three low pro-
ﬁle antennas will be the emphasis - microstrip patch, printed monopole
and external monopole.
Here, the aim is to study the received signal
strength in connection with diﬀerent usage scenarios and obstructions,
==PAGE:36==
26
Related works
e.g. body shadow, wall and ceiling with the help of measurements cam-
paigns in a 2-storey house.
Approach
The authors want to measure the RSSI by deploying a wearable device
in a terrace house and placing numerous access points in diﬀerent rooms
of the house. This device utilizes a nRF51822 SoC that takes advantage
of BLE for wireless communication where the chip is programmed to
act as a BLE broadcaster by transmitting packets periodically with the
transmission power set to 4dBm.
The receivers are Raspberry Pi B+
microcomputers connected to two nRF51822 radios. These were placed
in the living room, the study room, and the bedroom, respectively. The
human subject held the wearable device in front of the chest and carried
out experiments in diﬀerent usage scenarios where the subject is facing
the access point (without body shadowing) and facing away from the
access point (with body shadowing).
Evaluation
The results show that the RSSI average hardly varies and remains close
to the mean despite the carrying out the measurements in diﬀerent rooms
in the aforementioned scenarios. The ﬁndings indicate that the eﬀect of
movement barely aﬀects on RSSI. However, the outcome illustrates that
body shadowing has more of an eﬀect on the results in the case when
the obstruction is a wall rather than a ceiling. For this reason, the ideal
position for the access point is therefore the ceiling when the antenna is
the microstrip patch variant. All in all, the study shows that the external
monopole antenna as well as the microstrip patch antenna perform better
than the printed monopole in all the aforementioned scenarios.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Current literature
27
Comments
The group proposes an interesting approach to evaluate the performance
of antennas in connection with wireless communication in various likely
usage scenarios, as users will most certainly experience their signal to be
inﬂuenced by obstructions in an indoor environment. A lot of consider-
ations have been made about the indoor environment, even down to the
material of the walls and ceiling, since it can aﬀect the signal strength
negatively which is a major strength for this paper. However, the scenar-
ios only diﬀer in locations within the house. While that is certainly on
purpose due to the aim of the article, it hardly changes the scenario, thus
the results hardly vary.
Oﬀ-body Channel Measurements at 2.4 GHz and 868 MHz
in an indoor environment
Evangelos Mellios, Angelos A. Goulianos, Sema Dumanli, Geoﬀrey S.
Hilton, Robert J. Piechocki, Ian Craddock [20]
This article demonstrates a measurement campaign for oﬀ-body wireless
channel at 2.4 GHz and 868 MHz in an indoor laboratory environment.
The authors assess the performance of diﬀerent antennas where they com-
pare the signal propagation at 2.4 GHz and at 868 MHz.
Approach
The authors have constructed a measurement campaign in order to eval-
uate the wireless communication of diﬀerent antennas in the 2.4 GHz
frequency band for healthcare monitoring. For the access point, two or-
thogonal dipoles were employed for the side, i.e. one vertical and one
==PAGE:38==
28
Related works
horizontal. To conduct the measurements, the group made use of an in-
door laboratory in the form of an anechoic chamber such the experiments
are as realistically as possible. To mimic the human body for which the
on-body receiver is going to be placed on, a human-shaped plastic torso
covered with absorbing material Eccosorb was put in the chamber along
with the antennas attached to the phantom. The reason for this was to
account for the body shadowing and the absorption of the human body
in real-life scenarios.
Evaluation
The results show that the directional patch chest-mounted on-body anten-
nas achieved an average of 4 dB higher channel gain horizontally polarized
omnidirectional antennas if aligned in polarization with the access point
ones. The authors come to the conclusion that the directional patches
can be recommended in the event that they can be polarization aligned
with the access points. Following this, the group also compared the sig-
nal propagation between the 2.4 GHz and the 868 MHz frequency bands.
Here, the latter had an average of 5 dB higher channel gain for the chest-
mounted horizontally polarized omnidirectional antennas. However, in
the case of the directional patches being used in the 2.4 GHz band, the
results showed the lower frequency band only had a higher channel gain of
1 dB. Thus, for rather insigniﬁcantly worse connection, the higher band
comes out on top due to the ﬂexibility in antenna design it can oﬀer.
Comments
Overall, the article proposed a creative method of performance assessing
antennas with diﬀerent frequency bands. The group accounts for body
shadowing in their measurements, similar to [19]. One of the minor weak-
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Current literature
29
nesses of this paper is that the authors do fail to state the diﬀerence in
body shadowing which the use of a human-shaped plastic torso covered
in absorption material may have compared to an actual human being in a
real-life scenario. A major strength is, however, how the group accounts
for orientation in their measurements which can prove to be useful for
this study.
BLE or IEEE 802.15.4: Which Home IoT Communication
Solution is more Energy-Eﬃcient?
Xenofon Fafoutis, Evgeny Tsimbalo, Wenrui Zhao, Haowen Chen, Evan-
gelos Mellios, William Harwin, Robert Piechocki, Ian Craddock [21]
The aim of this paper is to compare the physical layer of the two pro-
tocols, BLE and IEEE 802.15.4. The performance metrics used in this
case are energy eﬃciency and wireless coverage. These are measured in
transmission power (dBm) and RSSI, respectively. The performance of
these two protocols is quantiﬁed by combining the two metrics.
Approach
The hardware used to compare the two protocols is two evaluation mod-
ules, TI CC2650 SoC, which acts as a transmitter and receiver.
The
reason for utilizing this SoC is because it supports both BLE and IEEE
802.15.4 oﬀ-the-shelf. This makes for a fair testbed, as both technologies
will be compared on the same hardware. The authors make note here that
the measurements are conducted in a real environment devoid of evident
interference. The comparison starts oﬀwith the energy consumption tests
where the group notes how much transmission power is needed for each
of the protocols to transmit a single frame for the same payload sizes in
==PAGE:40==
30
Related works
the physical layer, L = 21 and L = 39 bytes. To assess the wireless per-
formance, a known payload is transmitted in which the PER is measured
for diﬀerent RSSI levels. In this experiment, the receiver was coupled
with a computer, while the transmitter was placed at diﬀerent locations
around it. The group made sure to take precautions in order to reduce
the corruption of frame because of interference in a real environment.
With regard to energy eﬃciency, the authors deﬁne a variable η which
represents the long-term energy eﬃciency and is calculated by dividing
the total energy needed for a frame transmission by the long-term average
number of correctly received bytes. Thus:
η =
EL.Ptx
L(1 −p(r))
Following this, the authors also tested the mobility of the technologies
in focus by testing in a real residential environment. In this case, the
emphasis was on two application scenarios, the ﬁrst being applications
that require single-room coverage and the second being applications that
require full-house coverage. The receiver is placed in one of the rooms
of the house, and then for the former scenario, the transmitter is put in
the same room. For the latter however, the transmitter is positioned in
a diﬀerent room with at least two walls of separation. The test in both
situations is conducted by the user by performing random walks for about
5 minutes.
Lastly, the group performs an interference test to see which of the proto-
cols is most resilient. This was done by performing the test in an anechoic
chamber where a sender node and an interferer node was placed at a 1-
meter distance from the receiver. It is worth noting here that BLE splits
the band into 40 channels and the IEEE 802.15.4 splits it in 16 channels.
The sender node is then set to transmit packets at a constant rate of 10
Hz to the receiver on a speciﬁc channel, while the interferer node trans-
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Current literature
31
mits traﬃc to the adjacent channels at the exact same rate. Both the
sender and the interferer transmit at maximum transmission power.
Evaluation
The ﬁndings show that the energy consumption of BLE is less than that
of IEEE 802.15.4 for the transmission of a single frame, since the latter
consumes about 3 times more energy compared to the former. Pertaining
to the wireless coverage test however, IEEE 802.15.4 evidently provides
wider wireless coverage than BLE. In these conditions, the technology
has also been proven to yield a higher energy eﬃciency per correctly
received byte than BLE in the case when the average RSSI is less than or
equal to -97 dBm, and vice versa when the signal strength is above the
threshold. As for the mobile indoor scenarios, BLE is shown to be more
energy-eﬃcient than IEEE 802.15.4 on average in both cases.
Lastly,
regarding the interference test, BLE is evidently more resilient due to the
large number of channels it oﬀers compared to the alternative, and the
experiments verify that the protocol is not inﬂuenced by adjacent channel
interference.
Comments
In this paper, the authors achieve intriguing results in their comparison
of the two protocols. The major strength of this article lies in that the
technologies have been tested using the same hardware in order to ensure
fairness and their methodology used to compare them.
However, one
of the minor disadvantages is the lack of reasoning when choosing the
payload sizes in the energy consumption test. It is not stated whether
these are arbitrarily chosen and whether diﬀerent sized payloads would
have any eﬀect on the outcome.
==PAGE:42==
32
Related works
Coverage is Not Binary: Quantifying Mobile Broadband
Quality in Urban, Rural, and Tribal Contexts
Vivek Ardash, Michael Nekrasov, Udit Paul, Tarun Mangla, Arpit Gupta,
Morgan Vigil-Hayes, Ellen Zegura, Elizabeth Belding [22]
In this article, the authors carry out a targeted measurement campaign
to assess the cellular network coverage in tribal, rural, congested urban
and uncongested urban regions. To this end, a measurement suite has
been developed to evaluate the coverage provided by four major mobile
network operators.
Approach
The group carries out measurements in the aforementioned regions using
a custom-built measurement suite that collects both network-level and
application-level metrics. These metrics can be divided into two cate-
gories: Quality-of-Service (QoS) and Quality-of-Experience (QoE).
The former concerns the metrics Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP),
throughput, latency, and packet loss. RSRP represents the linear aver-
age over the power contributions (in Watts) of the resources that bear
cell-speciﬁc reference signals inside the measurement frequency band-
width. The monitoring suite has been setup to automate the gathering of
throughput measurements with the assistance of fetching a pre-speciﬁed
500 MB ﬁle from an AWS instance. To ensure consistency throughout
the data collection, the same instance is used for all of the measurement
tests. The throughput is calculated by the client initiating iPerf threads
over TCP to download the ﬁle. The packet traces are logged at the client
during the iPerf tests in order to sample throughput. The test interval is
set to one second for each location. As for latency, the round-trip times
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Current literature
33
are measured through pings by using the tool Hping3. The same AWS
server is pinged for these measurements. Hping3 was conﬁgured to use
TCP packets rather than ICMP, since the latter were dropped at the
server sporadically. With regard to packet loss, the synchronous packet
traces from both the client and server are analyzed during the throughput
tests such that the packet loss can be computed using tshark CLI.
Pertaining to the QoE metrics, these are start-up delay, video quality,
resolution switching, rebuﬀering percentage, buﬀer size, and page load
time.
Thus, the focus will be on video streaming and web browsing.
For the former, the application level metrics are measured by streaming
YouTube videos, whereas for the latter, the researchers use the Tranco
ranking list due to it addressing common stability and responsiveness
issues.
The measurement suite was run on Lenovo Thinkpad W550s laptops
where each of them are tethered to its own Motorola G7 Power (run-
ning Android 9) via USB to measure the cellular network performance.
Each of the smartphones have unlimited hotspot data enabled in order to
get as close to achieving the same throughput as any other user would on
the device. For the purpose of collecting video QoE metrics, the authors
run a 3-minute clip of a Looney Tunes video thrice for each provider at
each location. To grab the page load time measurements, Selenium is
used to automate the loading of the webpages. During the measurement
campaign, the group collected 16 datasets from 12 locations across the
Southwestern part of the USA.
Evaluation
The analysis shows that there is a large gap in LTE performance in the
diﬀerent regions and network conditions. The ﬁndings demonstrate that
==PAGE:44==
34
Related works
the rural and tribal regions experience the worst mobile broadband perfor-
mance out of all of the test locations, even worse than the urban networks
under heavy congestion. This was the expected outcome, as it aligns with
the conclusions reached in prior research. Due to sparse deployment and
ineﬃcient backhaul caused by lack of investment, it becomes troublesome
meet the minimum recommended QoS needed to support applications like
video streaming and video chat.
Pertaining to the QoE metrics, the analysis reveals the user experience
is aﬀected negatively in the same aforementioned regions. The networks
are simply unable to provide usable internet speed for video streaming.
Furthermore, the results show that the worst case experience in an urban
cellular network is, in most instances, still better than the average case
experience in rural/tribal region. Regarding the web browsing, the re-
sults were more two times worse in the studied rural or tribal areas than
compared to urban environments.
Comments
The authors of this paper achieved very impressive results and based their
conclusions on large datasets. However, they do not specify at any point
where the exact locations are which may be of interest for anyone who
would replicate their experiments. Another strength is the way the group
manages to quantify user experience metrics. In [16] for instance, the
metric can be aﬀected by bias, which is not the case here.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Current literature
35
An In-depth Study of LTE: Eﬀect of Network Protocol and
Application Behavior on Performance
Junxian Huang, Feng Qian, Yihua Guo, Yuanyuan Zhou, Qiang Xu, Z.
Morley Mao, Subharata Sen, Oliver Spatscheck [23]
This paper aims to conduct an in-depth study of 4G LTE through active
and passive measurements. In addition to this, the authors developed a
lightweight passive bandwidth estimation technique for LTE networks.
Approach
The group uses a measurement testbed in their laboratory to conduct
controlled experiments. The user equipment in this instance is Samsung
Galaxy S3 running Android 4.0.4, connected to an LTE network. The
networks of two major mobile network operators are tested in this ex-
periment, and it also happens to be the case that the phones are bought
from these two carriers. A server with the speciﬁcations 2GB memory
and 2.4 GHz Intel Core 2 CPU running Ubuntu 12.04 is conﬁgured. Both
the phones and the server use TCP CUBIC. The measurement of TCP
and RTT happens when one of the phones initiates TCP connection to
the server. After initiation, the phone transfers randomized data bereft
of any interruption. The ﬁrst 10 seconds are ignored for the throughput
measurement, as this period of time contains the slow start phase of the
connection. Following this, the throughput is calculated every 500 ms
from the continuous stream of data from the user equipment. The mea-
surement of the RTT is done by calculating the gap between timestamps
of data packet transmissions and receiving the corresponding acknowl-
edgment from the sender trace, which is kept track of by the tcpdump
tool.
==PAGE:46==
36
Related works
After gathering the necessary data, the authors start the process of traﬃc
characterization.
There are three characteristics that the group ﬁnds
interesting. These are size, duration, and rate. Size refers to the total
number of payload bytes within the data ﬂow whereas duration is deﬁned
as the time span between the ﬁrst and last packet of a data stream,
while the ﬂow rate is calculated by dividing the ﬂow size by the ﬂow
duration.
Each of these metrics are then grouped into downlink and
uplink categories. Afterwards, the authors construct a passive bandwidth
estimation algorithm such that the available bandwidth coming from the
TCP ﬂow can be utilized more optimally than it is currently.
Evaluation
The ﬁndings show that LTE networks can suﬀer from performance issues
in the event that a packet loss occurs, since the RTT estimation has
not been updated to use duplicate ACKs.
The bandwidth estimation
algorithm shows that out of the 71.3% of the large ﬂows, the bandwidth
utilization ratio is less than 50%. Furthermore, the available bandwidth
is shown to have high variation which makes it challenging for TCP to
make use of it, since the congestion is unable to adapt quickly enough to
the variation. In addition to this, the limited receive window acts as a
bottleneck and therefore aﬀects the TCP performance for 52.6% of the
downlink streams.
Comments
The authors make use of an interesting approach to study LTE networks
by focusing on the performance analysis of the network as well as the traf-
ﬁc characterization, however in their methodology, they fail to account for
performance across varying population densities as well as region types.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Current literature
37
Mobile Network Performance from User Devices: A Lon-
gitudinal, Multidimensional Analysis
Ashkan Nikravesh, David R. Choﬀnes, Ethan Katz-Bassett, Z. Morley
Mao, Matt Welsh [24]
The group investigates cellular network performance in relation to factors
such as signal strength, geographical location, and time.
In order to
address this problem, the authors conduct large-scale measurements by
collecting data for 17 months across the globe.
Approach
The authors aim to study the cellular network performance through the
use of a broad longitudinal view of the network behavior aﬀecting user-
perceived performance. The performance metrics are HTTP GET through-
put, RTT latency from ping, and DNS lookup time. The performance
from smartphone devices to Google is the emphasis, as it is highly avail-
able and well-provisioned.
The data is collected by the use of two Android apps named Speedometer
and Mobiperf. On the former, the number of measurements amounted
to 1.7M HTTP GET requests, 0.4M burst samples for packet loss rate
measurement, 0.8M DNS resolutions to Google’s homepage, and 0.8M
traceroute from 144 carriers and 9 network technologies. The number
of data points collected by Speedometer is expanded with the addition
of 11 months of data gathered by Mobiperf where the latter adds signal
strength information to the data set.
==PAGE:48==
38
Related works
Evaluation
The ﬁndings show that there are signiﬁcant performance diﬀerences when
it comes to carriers, access technologies, geographic regions, and over
time. However, the variations in this regard are not consistent, which
makes it diﬃcult to assess the network performance accurately. All in
all, the authors ﬁnd that cell network performance is hardly improving
on average, thus more observation and diagnosis is needed.
Comments
Overall, it is impressive and important work done by the authors. How-
ever, they face diﬃculties in assessing the network performance, citing
high variance in their results. For the same reason as [23], the group
fails to take varying population densities and region types into account.
Adding this to their approach would have helped gain more insight into
their large data sets.
3.3
Contribution
After having reviewed the current literature on the topic of assessing
cellular network coverage, it is evident that there is a vast amount of
methodologies and performance metrics that can be employed. Most of
the approaches can be categorized into two groups: active measurements
and passive measurements. The former either requires or simulates user
participation, since it is often used to assess diﬀerent application scenar-
ios where factors like functionality, availability, and response time mea-
sures. On the other hand, passive monitoring refers to the analysis of the
existing network traﬃc over a period of time and the report on these re-
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Contribution
39
sults. These are the most common approaches taken by MNOs. However,
there are also other methodologies that ﬁt neither category entirely which
take inspiration from both approaches in order to quantify the broadband
quality in speciﬁc geographical regions.
With this and the research papers in mind, the contribution of this project
has been to design and carry out a viable method of assessing the cel-
lular network coverage in Denmark in order to gain insight into whether
the current infrastructure is suﬃcient enough to support safety-critical
applications for smart agricultural technology. This will be done through
a measurement campaign in diﬀerent environmental contexts which will
be elaborated further upon in the next chapter. The results will be used
to possibly identify regions that need further upgrades, along with an
assessment of whether the current network coverage quality is adequate
enough to support applications like video streaming for agricultural use.
==PAGE:50==
40
Related works
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Methodology
4.1
Design
The methodology of this project has been heavily inspired by the work
conducted in [15], [16], [17], and [22] where a large part of the emphasis
has been put on assessing the cellular network coverage and performance
in diﬀerent regions and environments. This is particularly essential in an
agricultural and rural context in connection with this project, since the
aim of the project is to gain an understanding of the current mobile net-
work coverage in Denmark and whether it is adequate enough to support
safety-critical applications in rural areas. To this end, a transportable
measurement testbed is required. A diagram of the constructed is shown
on Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:52==
42
Methodology
Figure 4.1: Experimental setup for throughput measurements
The experimental setup consisted of a MacBook Pro 2019, connected via
an Ethernet cable to a Raspberry Pi 3 Model B microcomputer which
uses a Sandstrøm S6PQC2021 Powerbank as power source. The micro-
computer is further connected to a Samsung Galaxy S8 (TDC) or a Mo-
torola Moto e6 plus (Telia) smartphone, both phones running Android 9
via WiFi tethering. The setup in practice is displayed on Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Testbed with WiFi tethering
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Evaluation metrics
43
4.2
Evaluation metrics
The most common notion regarding the concept of cellular coverage is
a binary one: does the area have mobile coverage or not, i.e. However,
as reviewed in section 3.2, the answer is not that simple and it requires
further investigation in order to characterize the networked services suf-
ﬁciently. As shown in the visualization of cell towers using OpenCelliD
[12], the towers in general are signiﬁcantly much more densely placed in
Europe than compared to other parts of the world like the rural parts of
the US as well as the inland sections of Africa. In theory, this should en-
sure suﬃcient coverage for most applications. Whether this assumption
holds true or not cannot be veriﬁed entirely in this study, as the answer
depends on many factors, but the goal is to gain a better understanding
in this regard.
For the reasons stated above, the primary focus will be on QoS perfor-
mance metrics such as throughput and latency. These metrics will be
measured at application level using Ookla’s Speedtest command line in-
terface. Other internet speed measurement applications were under con-
sideration such as iPerf and Opensignal, but these options got discarded in
the end. The former was dropped as a possible option since it requires an
iPerf server to be setup in order to measure the throughput from client to
server which would be more useful for testing the throughput in one’s own
internal network. As for the latter, no command line interface is publicly
available which could be used to automate the measurement tests, since
running them manually quickly becomes time consuming and ineﬃcient.
These disadvantages do not apply to Ookla’s Speedtest command line in-
terface application, seeing that it does not require a server to be setup to
test the throughput, since the tool uses a high-performance server found
in the Speedtest Server Network for the measurement [25]. This global
network is comprised of more than 14,000 servers in over 190 countries.
==PAGE:54==
44
Methodology
Furthermore, since the command line interface is publicly available, it is
possible to develop extensions or scripts that can automate the process
of conducting measurement tests.
In this case, throughput refers to both the download speed as well as the
upload speed. The download speed is the rate of how much data is pulled
from the server on the internet to the client device over time. Typical
applications in this context is web browsing, video streaming, and down-
loading of ﬁles. The upload speed represents the rate of how quickly the
client is able to transfer from their own device to the internet over time.
A high upload speed for a device is desired when dealing with ﬁle trans-
fers over email, video chatting and feeding video to a surveillance camera.
Lastly, the latency is deﬁned as the round-trip time of the connection, i.e.
the time it takes for the device to receive an acknowledgment response
after a request has been sent. An overview of the metrics to be measured
is given in Table 4.1.
Type
Metric
Test Interval
Tools
QoS
Throughput
30 seconds
Speedtest-cli
QoS
Latency
30 seconds
Speedtest-cli
Table 4.1: Overview of QoS metrics to be measured along with test
interval time and tool used
4.3
Tools
It is important to note here that the Raspberry Pi 3 supports wireless
communication in the form of BLE and 2.4 GHz 802.11n wireless. In
order to gain remote access to the microcomputer outside in the ﬁeld,
a Virtual Network Computing (VNC) client is needed. To this end, the
tool VNC Viewer is utilized. In this case, the Raspberry Pi 3 is set to
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Experiments
45
be the VNC server which the client connects to via the port 5900, thus
gaining remote desktop access to the microcomputer from the laptop.
In order to run and log the measurement tests, a Python script was devel-
oped which was heavily inspired by the GitHub project Speedtest-logger
was utilized to capture throughput results and saves it to csv ﬁle [26]. Fun-
damentally, it is a script written in Python 3.9 that uses the speedtest-cli
Python library. It is setup to measure download speed (Mbps), upload
speed (Mbps), and latency (ms) for a single measurement. Once the re-
sult has been calculated, it is logged as an entry to a .csv ﬁle along with
the timestamp. The script can be found in Appendix A.
4.4
Experiments
The design of the experiments is heavily inspired by the work of [15],
[16], [17], and [22].
In [15], the group identiﬁed regions and areas of
diﬀerent geotypes for their network rollout assessment. Using the knowl-
edge gained from that article and [17], three vastly diﬀerent areas have
been selected as test sites for the measurement campaign. The baseline
measurements will be conducted in rural, suburban, and urban environ-
ment. The latter setting also matters in an agricultural context, as urban
rooftop farms have started to take hold in cities like Paris [27]. These
areas will have a varying amount of obstacles that can aﬀect the results.
In this scenario, the testbed will remain stationary. In these same ar-
eas, mobility tests will be conducted, similar to the ones in [16]. Finally,
taking [19] and [24] into account, geographic orientation measurements
will be conducted in order to gain an understanding about its impact on
network performance, also in the same locations.
The ﬁrst two scenarios have the following parameters in common: carrier,
time of day, weather, and location. The last parameter is not ﬁxed for the
==PAGE:56==
46
Methodology
mobility tests, however. The scenario also has an additional parameter
in the form of vehicular speed. The geographic orientation scenario also
has all of these parameters, along with said orientation. For all of the
measurements, the carriers are Telia and TDC.
Two of the biggest mobile network carriers in Denmark are Telia and
TDC. Both mobile network operators have publicly available coverage
maps on their websites in which they display the throughput range that
their users can expect on the map. To make sure that other devices than
the test phone did not occupy available bandwidth in the same frequency
band, other phones in the proximity were put on airplane mode. One of
the goals of this project is to compare the measured throughput with the
given speeds on the coverage maps to see whether the claims of the mobile
network operators hold true or not, as stated in the problem statement.
When carriers perform their measurements, it is often the best-case speeds
under ideal conditions that they end up posting on their coverage maps,
which is why investigating this matter can lead to interesting conclusions.
Furthermore, as stated in the problem statement (section 1.2), one of the
goals of the project is to evaluate whether the current state of cellular net-
work coverage in Denmark is able to support safety-critical applications
like video streaming. For this reason, it is desirable to opt for WiFi tether-
ing in the experiments, as it is considered more useful in some agricultural
applications. For instance, an IoT device that constantly keeps track of
parameteres like soil moisture, temperature, and relative humidity [28].
While this approach would mimic some applications, it is important to
stress here that since the connection between phone and microcomputer
is wireless, the link will likely face interference by other signals, aﬀecting
the Internet connectivity as a whole. Both throughput and latency will
presumably be aﬀected by this factor, as the WiFi tethering connection
itself also adds latency to the measurements. Benchmarking exactly how
much is considered a future extension for this project.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Experiments
47
4.4.1
Baseline scenario
As detailed above, the baseline scenario consists of conducting station-
ary throughput measurements in three locations, each diﬀering vastly in
environment. These locations are in the vicinity of Lille Skensved (Ru-
ral), Hvidvovre (Suburban), and Vesterbro (Urban). Each location has
diﬀerent network conditions. The rural region for instance, is expected to
have good coverage considering how dense the cellular towers are placed
in Denmark as well as the lack of obstacles in the open environment.
Also, the low population density in the remote areas lessens the chances
of straining the network. As for the suburban area, similar coverage is
expected, however the population density is higher, making it entirely
possible for traﬃc congestion to occur during peak hours. In addition
to this, the signal transmission path is not void of obstacles.
Lastly,
the network coverage quality of the urban region entirely depends on the
presence of obstacles at the location along with the current strain on the
network. During peak hours, congestion is expected, making it likely for
high variance in throughput measurements. Each location is marked on
Google Maps along with the street view in the ﬁgures below.
(a) Rural location marked on Google Maps
(b) Street view of rural location
Figure 4.3: Rural location details
==PAGE:58==
48
Methodology
(a) Suburban location marked on Google Maps
(b) Street view of suburban location
Figure 4.4: Suburban location details
(a) Urban location marked on Google Maps
(b) Street view of urban location
Figure 4.5: Urban location details
It is important to note here that these exact same locations are used
for the geographic orientation measurements.
An overview of the ex-
periment parameters are given in Table 4.2. As these are the baseline
measurements, the test duration was increased to 30 minutes to collect
more data points.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Experiments
49
Location
Carriers
Test duration
Weather
Time of day
Rural
Telia
30 minutes
Rainy
14-15
Rural
TDC
30 minutes
Rainy
14-15
Suburban
Telia
30 minutes
Cloudy
16-17
Suburban
TDC
30 minutes
Cloudy
16-17
Urban
Telia
30 minutes
Cloudy
17-18
Urban
TDC
30 minutes
Cloudy
17-18
Table 4.2: Experiment variables for the baseline scenario
==PAGE:60==
50
Methodology
4.4.2
Geographic orientation scenario
As mentioned in section 4.4, the purpose of this scenario is to investigate
whether the geographic orientation of the device attenuates the cellular
network coverage. This is done by orienting the device such that it faces
north, east, south and west during the measurement tests.
The test
duration for each test was reduced to 15 minutes for each orientation. See
Table 4.2 for the experiment parameters, as they share almost identical
conditions with the exception for test duration and orientation.
4.4.3
Mobility scenario
In this scenario, the measurements were carried out inside a moving car to
mimic the possible application of autonomous agricultural vehicles. Each
test duration was reduced to 15 minutes for all routes. These routes are
given in the ﬁgures below:
Figure 4.6: Route taken for rural mobility test
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Experiments
51
The car was moving at a practically constant speed of 40 km/h with
basically no stops and no traﬃc which is to be expected due to the low
population density in the region. The throughput measurements were
likely aﬀected by the weather, as it was raining during the drive. The
measurements were conducted in the afternoon.
(a) Route taken for suburban mobility test
(b) Route taken for urban mobility test
Figure 4.7: Mobility test routes for suburban and urban setting
For the route in Figure 4.7a, there were more stops encountered than
compared to the rural area, since the population density is larger and
therefore has more traﬃc signals. The maximum vehicular speed was 40
km/h. The weather in this case happened to be rainy too, and the tests
were run in the afternoon. In the urban mobility test, plenty of stops hap-
pened as a result of increased amount of traﬃc signals, large population
density causes traﬃc congestion, and the tests were conducted during the
afternoon rush hour, thus the vehicular speed barely reached 40 km/h
at any point. The weather was cloudy during the time of measurements.
Thus, the experiment parameters can be summarized as follows:
==PAGE:62==
52
Methodology
Location
(Route)
Carrier
Test duration
Weather
Time of day
Vehicular speed
Rural
Telia
15 minutes
Rainy
14-15
Steady 40 km/h
Rural
TDC
15 minutes
Rainy
14-15
Steady 40 km/h
Suburban
Telia
15 minutes
Cloudy
16-17
30-40 km/h
Suburban
TDC
15 minutes
Cloudy
16-17
30-40 km/h
Urban
Telia
15 minutes
Cloudy
17-18
Approx. 30 km/h,
many stops
Urban
TDC
15 minutes
Cloudy
17-18
Approx. 30 km/h,
many stops
Table 4.3: Experiment variables for the mobility scenario
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
5.1
Description of datasets
A total of 36 datasets from three locations across the eastern part of
Denmark was collected, whereas 6 of those datasets were from ﬂuctuating
locations due to the measurements conducted in the mobility scenario.
A common factor for all of the measurements except for the baseline
scenario is that they were all conducted during peak hours of internet
usage, which is late afternoon and evenings, such that the networks are
strained due to network traﬃc congestion and put their robustness to a
test. It is assumed that these factors will impact the network performance
greatly, such that worst case performance can be assessed in relation to
whether the coverage can handle safety-critical applications under these
conditions. The designation of each location is one of three categories:
rural, suburban, or urban.
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation
Before the results are illustrated and analyzed, it is important to note
that the measurements are in all likelihood aﬀected by the WiFi tethering
link itself, as the connection is wireless and therefore invites interference.
Uninterrupted signal transmission can be achieved via USB tethering,
however that would not be considered a common usage scenario in the
context of agricultural technology. The diﬀerence in performance between
WiFi tethering and USB tethering has not been tested - this aspect is
considered possible future work for this project.
5.2
Results from baseline scenario
Telia
(a) Measured download speed in rural, subur-
ban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.1: Throughput measurements for baseline scenario (Telia)
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Results from baseline scenario
55
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural,
suburban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.2: CDF of throughput measurements for baseline scenario
(Telia)
The plots on Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 compares throughput measurement
across all locations. What is interesting to note here is the high variability
in the throughput distributions, with values ranging from less than 1
Mbps to more than 30 Mbps. In the baseline scenario for Telia, it was
the rural location which reported the highest median throughput for both
downlink and uplink data rate. However, it was also the location with
most outliers. With regard to performance, it was the rural location that
reported the most consistent performance on both parts.
Pertaining to Figure 5.2, it shows the throughput distribution captured
during the measurement sessions. The CDF of the baseline measurements
also attest to the rural location performing the best in both cases among
the three regions. The worst performing location appears to be the urban
location overall.
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation
TDC
(a) Measured download speed in rural, subur-
ban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.3: Throughput measurements for baseline scenario (TDC)
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural,
suburban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.4: CDF of throughput measurements for baseline scenario
(TDC)
Concerning the performance of TDC in these three locations, they all
report the almost exact same median downlink throughput. Consistency
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Results from baseline scenario
57
wise, it is the suburban location performed the best when it comes to
download speed, although it was again the rural area that reported the
highest speed in both cases. However, for the upload speed, both the
rural and suburban locations had high variance.
(a) Measured latency in rural, suburban, urban
contexts
(b) Measured latency in rural, suburban, urban
contexts
Figure 5.5: Latency measurements for baseline scenario
Figure 5.5 compares the latency of Telia with the ping of TDC. The most
noteworthy takeaway from this is the latency of the urban location with
Telia as carrier due to the high variance in ping measurements. For both
Telia and TDC, the urban location appears to have the highest median
in the baseline scenario.
==PAGE:68==
58
Evaluation
5.3
Results from geographic orientation scenario
Rural
(a) Measured download speed in rural context
(b) Measured upload speed in rural context
Figure 5.6: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (Telia)
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural
context
(b) Measured upload speed in rural context
Figure 5.7: CDF of Throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (Telia)
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Results from geographic orientation scenario
59
Figure 5.6 shows the average throughput across all orientations in rural
environment with Telia as carrier. The most consistent performer of the
cardinal directions in this setting is South. East and West both recorded
outliers, which may indicate possible body shadowing have had an inﬂu-
ence in the measurements. Overall, high speeds are recorded which bodes
well for future agricultural applications. The uplink throughput for East
performed slightly worse than the others while North reported the highest
speeds despite the increased variance compared to West.
(a) Measured download speed in rural context
(b) Measured upload speed in rural context
Figure 5.8: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (TDC)
==PAGE:70==
60
Evaluation
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural
context
(b) CDF of measured upload speed in rural con-
text
Figure 5.9: CDF of throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (TDC)
In this case however, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were measured when ac-
counting for orientation. This is also apparent in the generated CDFs,
as they only diﬀer slightly in Figure 5.9a. Only when it came to uplink
data rate does the measurements diﬀer somewhat, as East posted a higher
median throughput.
(a) Measured latency in rural context
(b) Measured latency in rural context
Figure 5.10: Latency measurements for geographic orientation scenario
(rural)
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Results from geographic orientation scenario
61
These ﬁgures show that both carriers have varying levels of ping in these
conditions. Particularly, the western direction for Telia has high variance,
compared to the others.
Suburban
(a) Measured download speed in suburban con-
text
(b) Measured upload speed in suburban context
Figure 5.11: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (Telia)
==PAGE:72==
62
Evaluation
(a) CDF of measured download speed in subur-
ban context
(b) CDF of measured upload speed in suburban
context
Figure 5.12: CDF of throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (Telia)
In Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.17, the plots reveal that the southern cardinal
direction had the highest mean throughput wise, both downlink and up-
link. However, all directions struggled to perform when it came to uplink
data rate. Looking at the location of the cell towers using OpenCelliD, it
shows a 4G cell tower in the vicinity of the area, which may indicate why
South had highest measurements. As the weather was cloudy, it should
be ruled as a factor on these measurements.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Results from geographic orientation scenario
63
(a) Measured download speed in suburban con-
text
(b) Measured upload speed in suburban context
Figure 5.13: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (TDC)
(a) CDF of measured download speed in subur-
ban context
(b) CDF of measured upload speed in suburban
context
Figure 5.14: CDF of throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (TDC)
These plots reveal some interesting ﬁndings. Out of all the measurements
so far, this is the ﬁrst time where the average uplink throughput is higher
than the average download speed. This could indicate that during the
time of testing, the downlink signal transmission path was congested.
==PAGE:74==
64
Evaluation
Despite the nearest cell tower being located to the West relative to the
test position, it was the eastern cardinal direction reporting the best
throughput in this regard.
(a) Measured latency in suburban context
(b) Measured latency in suburban context
Figure 5.15: Latency measurements for geographic orientation scenario
(suburban)
Despite the congestion on the download side for TDC, the latency mea-
surements are still within an exceptional ping range. This is especially
important in online gaming. According to Speedtest.net, having a ping
between 0-59 ms is as ideal as you can get [29].
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Results from geographic orientation scenario
65
Urban
(a) Measured download speed in urban context(b) Measured upload speed in suburban context
Figure 5.16: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (Telia)
(a) CDF of measured download speed in subur-
ban context
(b) CDF of measured upload speed in suburban
context
Figure 5.17: CDF of throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (Telia)
Apart from some outliers in both graphs, it is apparent that there are
barely any ﬂuctuations in the measurements despite the diﬀerent cardinal
==PAGE:76==
66
Evaluation
directions. This will be discussed further in the discussion section.
(a) Measured download speed in urban context (b) Measured upload speed in urban context
Figure 5.18: Throughput measurements for geographic orientation sce-
nario (TDC)
(a) CDF of measured download speed in urban
context
(b) CDF of measured upload speed in urban
context
Figure 5.19: CDF of throughput measurements for geographic orienta-
tion scenario (TDC)
For TDC in this part of the experiment, it seems likely that geographic
orientation of the phone inﬂuenced the results, but as the experiments
took place in an urban environment, it is just as probable that the pres-
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Results from geographic orientation scenario
67
ence of obstacles in the form of buildings and trees had an eﬀect. As
the measurements were being taken during the evening, it is also possible
that network traﬃc congestion occurred.
(a) Measured latency in urban context
(b) Measured latency in urban context
Figure 5.20: Latency measurements for geographic orientation scenario
(urban)
Despite the change in cardinal direction, it does not seem to aﬀect the
latency metric at all. This is likely due to many reasons, one of the major
ones being the large placement density of the cell towers in the inner city
of Copenhagen. This will result in short round-trip time for signals.
==PAGE:78==
68
Evaluation
5.4
Results from mobility scenario
Telia
(a) Measured download speed in rural, subur-
ban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.21: Throughput measurements for mobility scenario
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural,
suburban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.22: CDF of throughput measurements for mobility scenario
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Results from mobility scenario
69
It is evident that there is a high variance in the measurements in the
suburban and rural environments, ranging from as low as about 2 Mbps
to 35 Mbps for the download speed. Despite this, the median throughput
for the mobility scenario is roughly equal.
TDC
(a) Measured download speed in rural, subur-
ban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.23: Throughput measurements for mobility scenario
==PAGE:80==
70
Evaluation
(a) CDF of measured download speed in rural,
suburban, urban contexts
(b) Measured upload speed in rural, suburban,
urban contexts
Figure 5.24: CDF of throughput measurements for mobility scenario
These plots are void of any outliers and have reduced variance compared
to Telia’s. The median throughput is roughly equal for all routes, though
the values still range from having almost no coverage to excellent quality
broadband.
(a) Measured latency in rural, suburban, urban
contexts
(b) Measured latency in rural, suburban, urban
contexts
Figure 5.25: Latency measurements for mobility scenario
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Results from mobility scenario
71
It appears to be the rural routes with the highest variance in ping for
both carriers, along with the highest medians. Only in this scenario does
the ping reach as high as 70 ms.
==PAGE:82==
72
Evaluation
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This section seeks to discuss the achieved results in further detail, re-
view design choices for the methodology, and ﬁnally assess whether the
cellular network coverage is suﬃcient enough to support safety-critical
applications for agricultural technology.
Location
Expected throughput
on coverage map
(Mbps)
Measured downlink
throughput (Mbps)
Mean deviation
Rural
4G+: 30-50
4G: 10-20
22
4G+: 27%-56%
4G: 20%-10%
Suburban
4G+: 30-50
4G: 10-20
11.5
4G+: 63%-78%
4G: 10%-45%
Urban
4G+: 100-200
4G: 50-100
16.5
4G+: 83%-92%
4G: 67%-83%
Table 6.1: Comparison with Telia coverage map [30] at test locations
==PAGE:84==
74
Discussion
The table compares the actual, measured downlink median throughput
in the baseline scenario with the given download speed range on the cov-
erage map. The rural median throughput was the highest among these,
which is hardly surprising due to the cell tower density placement in Den-
mark. Evidently, the measured throughput does not live up to the listed
ranges, in fact it deviates signiﬁcantly in most cases. However, this can
be due to a myriad of reasons.
One of these is the amount of cover-
age quality that gets lost due to the WiFi tethering connection, since
the wireless connection can face interference. This aspect has not been
tested, and benchmarking this by comparison with USB tethering is con-
sidered a possible extension to this project. Secondly, it is a possibility
that the network was strained due to congestion around the time of mea-
surement. During peak hours, it is challenging for carriers to provide the
throughput that they claim they have. However, these speeds also tend
to be measured under ideal conditions, which hardly reﬂects real-life sce-
narios. Moreover, the presence of obstacles and the lack of line-of-sight
connection can also aﬀect this heavily.
Location
Expected throughput
on coverage map
(Mbps)
Measured downlink
throughput (Mbps)
Mean deviation
Rural
4G+: 30-50
4G: 30-50
16
4G+: 63%-68%
4G: 63%-68%
Suburban
4G+: 100-200
4G: 20-30
16
4G+: 84%-92%
4G: 20%-63%
Urban
4G+: 100-200
4G: 100-200
16
4G+: 84%-92%
4G: 84%-92%
Table 6.2: Comparison with TDC coverage map [31] at test locations
A similar comparison is made in Table 6.2. TDC are seemingly claiming
higher speeds than Telia at the given locations, but when measured, the
==PAGE:85==
75
deviations are signiﬁcant, with smallest deviation being 20% for 4G in a
suburban environment. As stated in the comparison with Telia’s coverage
map, many factors play a role in this outcome. It is entirely possible that
the networks in the suburban and urban locations were facing congestion
at the time of measurement.
It should be noted that the purpose with this comparison is to give the
reader an idea of the current state of network coverage in Denmark. A
more apt comparison with signiﬁcantly more data points is needed in
order to draw any meaningful conclusions from this. As stated in the
literature review section, one of the papers conducted an extensive mea-
surement campaign spanning for 17 months with continuous monitoring
[24]. Measurement campaigns are time-consuming processes, and without
proper resources to carry out the measurements, it can be vexing for the
group behind them.
Pertaining to the results of the geographic orientation experiments, they
do not point toward any conclusions, which brings the methodology for
this part of the measurements into question. As the measurements were
conducted inside the car, body shadowing and obstacles could have had
an eﬀect on the outcome. Ensuring a line-of-sight connection from the
phone to a 4G tower before the measurements could have improved the
end results.
In relation to the tests revolving around mobility, all throughput mea-
surements were inconsistent, ranging from as low as 2 Mbps to above
35 Mbps.
This is partly due to the Doppler eﬀect, which aﬀects the
packet emissions. Fundamentally, if a transmitting object is moving rel-
atively closer to the receiving object, the return signal will have a higher
frequency than the one transmitted, and result in a positive Doppler
frequency shift. Conversely, if the transmitter is moving relatively far-
ther away from the receiver, then the frequency will be lower, and hence
==PAGE:86==
76
Discussion
cause the Doppler frequency shift to be negative [32]. Design wise, this
methodology could be altered. One could request to borrow a tractor,
and conduct the experiment in the same vein. The Doppler eﬀect would
in this case in all likelihood be lower, due to the speed of the tractor.
All of the box plots covering latency in the scenarios do not at any point
cross the threshold for unacceptable latency, despite the varying mea-
surement results. Using this methodology, RTT latency should not be
considered a concern for mobile network operators.
According to OpenCelliD, every location during the measurement cam-
paign had cell towers within a 2 km radius [10]. This goes to show the
quantity and closeness of cell towers in Denmark, which in theory should
be enough to support future safety-critical applications. As stated in the
problem statement, it would be interesting to see if the worst case mea-
surement can support video streaming. According to Netﬂix’s guidelines,
at least 3 Mbps, both uplink and downlink, is needed to either host or
stream standard deﬁnition (SD) videos [33]. In general, the throughput
in all of the locations are able to support this requirement, however con-
sistent video streaming might be an issue, since the upload speed for the
urban location has many outliers for both providers. However, as the topic
at hand is about support for safety-critical applications for agricultural
technology, the emphasis should be on the rural location throughput, and
to base future application ideas on the worst case throughput rather than
the average case, as congestion and weather can aﬀect this heavily. The
results using this methodology indicate that the infrastructure is in place
to support such applications in all scenarios, however further research on
the matter is required where more QoS and QoE performance metrics
like signal strength and rebuﬀering, respectively, can be introduced. The
group behind [22] introduced metrics like these, and many others that
could prove to be useful for possible extensions of this project.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
A methodology to quantify and assess the current cellular network cover-
age in Denmark has been developed and carried out successfully. The per-
formance metrics used in this context were uplink and downlink through-
put as well as latency to make sense of the QoS of the network. The results
suggest that even the worst case measured throughput result is capable of
supporting video streaming in HD/SD, as the minimum requirement for
that is a bitrate of 3 Mbps, which the rural tests all meet. Comparing the
measurements with the listed speeds on the coverage maps for both Telia
and TDC signiﬁed a substantial deviation between the measured through-
put and the listed bitrates on the coverage maps. Finally, the ﬁndings on
the cardinal directions scenario were inconclusive and requires a review
of the methodology.
Possible extensions for this project include developing a measurement
suite to minimize the manual work as much as possible and introducing
==PAGE:88==
78
Conclusion
more QoS performance metrics in order to assess the quality of a network
[22]. Such metrics encompass Signal Strength (dBm) and Packet Loss
Rate (%) for instance. To consider user experience as well, QoE metrics
should also be taken into consideration, i.e. Start-up Delay, Rebuﬀering,
and Page Load Time. Rethinking the approach regarding mobility test
is worth contemplating, since the current iteration of it in this project
would not scale well. A possibility is to make use of an unmanned aerial
vehicle, however the elevation aspect is a potential problem, since most
usage scenarios will be based on ground level where obstacles might aﬀect
the coverage, while the aerial elevation will cause the UAV to have no
obstacles and line-of-sight connection with the cell towers more often than
not. Another future plan for this project is to benchmark the connection
quality between WiFi tethering, USB tethering, and Bluetooth tethering.
While wireless communications have improved massively over the years
performance wise, a wired connection has always fared better. To what
degree would be the question in this case.
Some of the major limitation in this study has been how time-consuming
the methodology is, despite making an attempt at automating it as much
as possible, given the time and resources. In addition to this, identifying
possible gaps in coverage would require years of work, in a similar vein
to [24] where the authors spent 17 months gathering data compared to
about two to three months in this project. Identifying more locations and
setting up a method to gather 24 hours worth of measurements in each
region would have been feasible, given more time.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Speedtest script
import speedtest
import csv
import time
def log_test_to_csv():
st = speedtest.Speedtest()
# get download speed in bits per second
download = st.download()
# get download speed in bits per second
upload = st.upload()
# convert both to Mbps
download_mbs = round(download / (10 ** 6), 1)
==PAGE:90==
80
Speedtest script
upload_mbs = round(upload / (10 ** 6), 1)
#get latency
st.get_servers([])
ping = st.results.ping
#write to csv and reoeat test
row = [time.ctime(), download_mbs, upload_mbs, ping]
with open(’/Users/saad/Desktop/test_csv.csv’, ’a’) as f:
w = csv.writer(f)
w.writerow(row)
time.sleep(5.0)
while True:
log_test_to_csv()
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
NASA. Computers in Spaceﬂight: The NASA Experience. url: https:
//history.nasa.gov/computers/Ch2-5.html. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[2]
Tibi Puiu. Your smartphone is millions of times more powerful than
the Apollo 11 guidance computers. url: https://www.zmescience.
com/science/news-science/smartphone-power-compared-to-
apollo-432/. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[3]
Statista. Number of smartphone users worldwide from 2016 to 2026.
url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/330695/number-
of-smartphone-users-worldwide/. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[4]
Government Accountability Oﬃce. Broadband Internet: FCC’s Data
Overstate Access on Tribal Lands. url: https://www.gao.gov/
products/gao-18-630. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[5]
Finistere Ventures. 2020 Agrifood Tech Investment Review. url:
https://finistere.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/Finistere-
Ventures-2020-AgriFood-Tech-Investment-Review.pdf. (ac-
cessed: 11.06.2021).
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[6]
George Legrady. The Cell Phone Technology. url: https://www.
mat.ucsb.edu/~g.legrady/academic/courses/03w200a/projects/
wireless/cell_technology.htm. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[7]
Mohammad Meraj and Sumit Kumar. “Evolution of Mobile Wire-
less Technology from 0 G to 5 G”. In: 2015.
[8]
Mamta Agiwal, Abhishek Roy, and Navrati Saxena. “Next Gener-
ation 5G Wireless Networks: A Comprehensive Survey”. In: IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials 18.3 (2016), pp. 1617–1655. doi: 10 .
1109/COMST.2016.2532458. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/
COMST.2016.2532458.
[9]
Farooq Khan, Zhouyue Pi, and Sridhar Rajagopal. “Millimeter-
wave mobile broadband with large scale spatial processing for 5G
mobile communication”. In: 50th Annual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton 2012, Allerton
Park & Retreat Center, Monticello, IL, USA, October 1-5, 2012.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1517–1523. doi: 10.1109/Allerton.2012.6483399.
url: https://doi.org/10.1109/Allerton.2012.6483399.
[10]
Unwired Labs. OpenCelliD - Largest Open Database of Cell Tow-
ers and Geolocation. url: https://opencellid.org/. (accessed:
25.05.2021).
[11]
OpenStreetMap. OpenCelliD - OpenStreetMap Wiki. url: https:
//wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/OpenCellID. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[12]
Alper Cinar. OpenCelliD - OpenStreetMap Wiki. url: https://
alpercinar.com/open-cell-id/. (accessed: 25.05.2021).
[13]
Rob Lauer. Cellular Signal Heatmap with Raspberry Pi Pico and
GPS. url: https://www.hackster.io/rob-lauer/cellular-
signal-heatmap-with-raspberry-pi-pico-and-gps-1e16df.
(accessed: 26.05.2021).
[14]
Project Loon. Loon. url: https://loon.com/. (accessed: 26.05.2021).
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[15]
Edward J. Oughton and Zoraida Frias. “The cost, coverage and
rollout implications of 5G infrastructure in Britain”. In: Telecom-
munications Policy 42.8 (2018). The implications of 5G networks:
Paving the way for mobile innovation?, pp. 636–652. issn: 0308-
5961. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2017.07.009.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0308596117302781.
[16]
Ibraheem Shayea et al. “Performance Analysis of Mobile Broad-
band Networks With 5G Trends and Beyond: Rural Areas Scope
in Malaysia”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 65211–65229. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2978048. url: https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.2978048.
[17]
Francesca Righetti et al. “Performance Measurements of IEEE 802.15.4g
Wireless Networks”. In: 20th IEEE International Symposium on "A
World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks", WoWMoM
2019, Washington, DC, USA, June 10-12, 2019. IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–
6. doi: 10.1109/WoWMoM.2019.8793051. url: https://doi.org/
10.1109/WoWMoM.2019.8793051.
[18]
Raouf Abozariba et al. “Evaluating the Real-World Performance
of 5G Fixed Wireless Broadband in Rural Areas”. In: 2nd IEEE
5G World Forum, 5GWF 2019, Dresden, Germany, September 30
- October 2, 2019. IEEE, 2019, pp. 465–470. doi: 10.1109/5GWF.
2019.8911655. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/5GWF.2019.
8911655.
[19]
Mohammad Abdullah et al. “Investigation into Oﬀ-Body Links for
Wrist Mounted Antennas in Bluetooth Systems”. In: Nov. 2015.
doi: 10.1109/LAPC.2015.7366050.
[20]
Evangelos Mellios et al. “Oﬀ-body Channel Measurements at 2.4
GHz and 868 MHz in an Indoor Environment”. In: 9th International
Conference on Body Area Networks, BODYNETS 2014, London,
UK, September 29 - October 1, 2014. Ed. by Giancarlo Fortino et
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
al. ICST, 2014. doi: 10.4108/icst.bodynets.2014.257000. url:
https://doi.org/10.4108/icst.bodynets.2014.257000.
[21]
Xenofon Fafoutis et al. “BLE or IEEE 802.15.4: Which Home IoT
Communication Solution is more Energy-Eﬃcient?” In: EAI En-
dorsed Transactions on Internet of Things 2 (May 2016). doi: 10.
4108/eai.1-12-2016.151713.
[22]
Vivek Adarsh et al. “Coverage is Not Binary: Quantifying Mobile
Broadband Quality in Urban, Rural, and Tribal Contexts”. In: ().
[23]
Junxian Huang et al. “An in-depth study of LTE: eﬀect of network
protocol and application behavior on performance”. In: ACM SIG-
COMM 2013 Conference, SIGCOMM 2013, Hong Kong, August
12-16, 2013. Ed. by Dah Ming Chiu et al. ACM, 2013, pp. 363–374.
doi: 10.1145/2486001.2486006. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/2486001.2486006.
[24]
Ashkan Nikravesh et al. “Mobile Network Performance from User
Devices: A Longitudinal, Multidimensional Analysis”. In: Passive
and Active Measurement - 15th International Conference, PAM
2014, Los Angeles, CA, USA, March 10-11, 2014, Proceedings. Ed.
by Michalis Faloutsos and Aleksandar Kuzmanovic. Vol. 8362. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2014, pp. 12–22. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-04918-2\_2. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-04918-2%5C_2.
[25]
Ookla’s Speedtest. How the Speedtest Server Network ensures ac-
curacy. url: https : / / www . speedtest . net / insights / blog /
how-ookla-ensures-accurate-reliable-data-2021/#server-
network. (accessed: 27.05.2021).
[26]
Mike Bifulco. Speedtest-logger. url: https://github.com/mbifulco/
speedtest-logger. (accessed: 06.03.2021, modiﬁed: 04.04.2021).
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[27]
Jon Henley. The future of food: inside the world’s largest urban
farm - built on a rooftop. url: https://www.theguardian.com/
cities / 2020 / jul / 08 / the - future - of - food - inside - the -
worlds-largest-urban-farm-built-on-a-rooftop. (accessed:
01.06.2021).
[28]
Manishkumar Dholu and K.A. Ghodinde. “Internet of Things (IoT)
for Precision Agriculture Application”. In: 2018 2nd International
Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI). 2018,
pp. 339–342. doi: 10.1109/ICOEI.2018.8553720.
[29]
Speedtest.net. What’s an acceptable ping (or latency) for online
gaming? url: https://www.speedtest.net/about/knowledge/
faq#ping. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[30]
Telia. Dækningskort - se Telias Netværksdækning. url: https://
www.telia.dk/kundeservice/dakning-og-drift/dakningskort/.
(accessed: 06.03.2021).
[31]
TDC. TDC - Dækning - Tjek dækning og driftstatus for mobilnet-
tet. url: https://daekning.tdc.dk/tdcnetmap_ext_tile2/.
(accessed: 06.03.2021).
[32]
Michael Parker. Digital Signal Processing 101. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/doppler-frequency-
shift. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
[33]
Lightning Broadband. Video Streaming - Broadband Speed And Band-
width Requirements. url: https : / / www . lightningbroadband .
com.au/about/video-streaming-speed/. (accessed: 11.06.2021).
