==PAGE:1==
An audiotactile art installation for hearing
impaired people
Master Thesis
Miguel Cuadrado Sierra
DTU Health Tech
Department of Hearing Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Miguel Cuadrado Sierra
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Hearing Systems, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Hearing Systems,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Egnineering Acoustics, MSc Eng.
Miguel Cuadrado Sierra ­ s193504
Signature
Date
ii
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis covers the design and development processes of a prototype for an audio­
tactile installation with the aim of enhancing the music experience of hearing impaired
people. The prototype consists of a wooden structure with cantilevered beams, globally
excited with two tactile transducers, so a person lying on the prototype can feel different
vibrating bars at different positions of their body. The installation is meant to be exhibited
in the Museum of Art and History of Geneva, Switzerland.
In order to optimize the music perception through vibration sensing, the frequency re­
sponse of the prototype was designed using COMSOL. Three prototypes were built: the
first one serving as a proof of concept for the cantilever system; the second one, includ­
ing human dimensions and ergonomic considerations; and the third and final one as an
improved version of the second prototype. Once built, vibration measurements were per­
formed in the final version as well as a perception test with participants.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jonas and Jeremy, to the technicians in 352 Henrik
and Andy, and to the staff in Skylab for their big help in the elaboration of this Master
Thesis. I would like to thank my friends, my flatmates and friends Nuria and Matthieu, my
family and Lucía for their big support during this five months.
Thank you very much.
iv
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Previous works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Audio­tactile perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Linear Elasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
FEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Vibration Isolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
The Kalimba Model
13
3.1
Initial considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Cantilever design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Tuning of the bars
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
COMSOL simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
First prototype
19
4.1
Building process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Tuning of wooden bars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Measuring the wood properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
COMSOL model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Final considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Development of the second prototype
29
5.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Springs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
Building process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.4
Evaluation of the prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Final Prototype
35
6.1
Building process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Conclusions
45
8
Further investigations and improvements
47
Bibliography
48
A SOLIDWORKS plans for second prototype
51
B Perception test sheets
55
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Aim of the project
In 2020, the Hearing Systems department at DTU started a collaboration with two Swiss
musicians and artists from Geneva to create new forms of inclusive musical expressions,
using new musical language accessible to people with handicaps. Within this collabora­
tion, an audio­tactile art installation was developed to be presented as part of a temporary
exhibition in the Museum of Art and Histoy (MAH) of Geneva during the called ’inclusion
week’, in October 2020. The installation was based on six wooden podiums that where
excited with tactors (vibrating transducers) at the time different musicians were perform­
ing their pieces. The audience, that included people with different handicaps, could lie on
the vibrating platforms while listening the music, that was sent through loudspeakers and
partly through the tactors too.
Due to the very positive response of the audience, the collaboration with the museum has
been extended, with the aim of taking the art installation to a next level. The project in­
clude the construction of two audio­tactile chairs where people sitting can feel a combined
perception of hearing and feeling music. One of the requisites of the museum included to
reduce the loudness of the installation.
In this context, the optimization of a prototype for the proposed audio­tactile chair is pre­
sented in this Master Thesis, including its vibration and music perception properties. For
this purpose, an iterative process involving the crafting of a prototype together with FEA
simulation is used to try to find the best vibration response. Subsequently, vibration mea­
surements are performed to compare with the simulation.
1.2
Motivation
Hearing plays a key role in people’s lives. It helps us to avoid potential dangers and allows
us to communicate with each other through speech and music. By means of the auditory
system, we are able to perceive sound waves arriving to our ear and interpret them as
words, a saxophone playing a piece of music or a telephone call. Despite this, hearing is
not our first priority when we think about taking care of our health, and according to WHO
[1] hearing loss is present in 5% of world’s population. Among all the aspects hearing loss
implies in everyday life, music is missed very much by hearing impaired people. Music
is a very important element in people’s lives: it helps to express feelings, communicate
without words, or unwind ourselves. Despite the difficulties, cochlear implant users claims
to listen to music regularly, showing that hearing impaired people are still able to enjoy
music [2][3].
Everyone has experienced how it is possible to ”feel the bass” when standing in a big
concert or in a night club, and it is clear that this affects to the overall perception of the
music we are hearing. Recent studies like [4][5], have shown that a perceptive substitution
of hearing using tactile devices improves the experience of music in deaf and hard of
hearing people. The main goal of these audio­tactile devices is to allow people to feel
the music through vibrations using the tactile receptors in the skin. While hearing spans
a range of audible frequencies from 20 Hz to 20 kHz, the tactile perception range of
vibrations that can be felt is limited from 5 Hz to 1 kHz [6]. This implies that the multimodal
perception of audio­tactile stimuli happens only in the low and middle frequency range.
Some examples of these type of devices are found as vibrotactile feedback systems in
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
1
==PAGE:10==
digital musical instruments [7], cell phones or as tactile transducers found in gaming or
home cinemas [8].
1.3
Previous works
As a starting point, several examples of already existing audio­tactile installations where
analyzed, specially those involving chairs or beds in order to fulfill the MAH requirements.
Due to the aim of the project was to build an installation to be exhibited in a museum, both
research and artistic projects could be of interest.
Among the first group, the projects of the Haptic Chair and the Emoti Chair were found
relevant. The Haptic Chair [4] was developed by Nanayakkara et al., in the context of a
experiment addressing whether a combination of tactile and visual information could be
used to enhance the experience of music by the hearing impaired people [4]. In this case,
the chair was a standard wooden model available in any furniture shop, incorporating
contact speakers in the backrest, the feet and the arms, that were driven with the music
signal. A skect is shown in section 1.3
The Emoti Chair [9] was developed in by Karam et al., as a sensory substitution sys­
tem that brought an audio­tactile version of music to the body, with the aim of enhancing
the music experience in deaf and hard of hearing people. A canvas chair was embedded
with voice coils in the backrest that produced the vibratory feedback, separating the audio
signal into frequency bands and allocating them into different voice coils, see section 1.3.
One of the ideas behind the Emoti Chair is the substitution of the place and time coding
of frequencies in the hair cells of the cochlea by the coding of vibratory signals at different
positions in the back, as it was proposed in other works by Karam et al. like [10].
Regarding the artistic projects, Alessandro Perini is an artist that combines technology and
music within his works, and some of is projects are inspired by audio­tactile perception.
For example, the so called Audiotactile chair, was presented in the Darmstadt Summer
School for New Music [11]. This chair was excited in eight different positions using contact
speakers, with music compositions based only on pure tones [12]. A picture of it can be
seen in section 1.3.
The same artist conceived as well an installation called ”Wooden Waves” [13], in which
the big wooden planks of the floor of an old windmill were excited with contact speakers,
so a person lying on them could feel the vibrations at different positions of the body, see
section 1.3. This installation was exhibit in BZZZ! International Sound Art Festival of
Harplinge, Sweden [14].
2
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:11==
(a) Emoti chair [5].
(b) Wooden waves project [13]
(c) Haptic chair [4]
(d) Wooden waves project [13]
Figure 1.1: Some audiotactile installations that inspired the present work.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
3
==PAGE:12==
4
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Audio­tactile perception
2.1.1
Tactile perception
The sense of touch allow us to interact physically with the world by touching. Assesing
characteristics of the objects like their temperature or roughness, as well as if they are
vibrating or in rest, allows us to carry out our everyday actions, even if other senses like
vision are not avaliable. These abilities are included in the tactile or cutaneous funcionality,
that provides information through direct stimulation of the skin. Besides, the sense of
touch includes the kinesthesis, the perception of the static and dynamic body posture.
The stimulation of the skin is captured by receptors embedded in the skin. They are nerve
cells sensitive to stimuli that act like sensors sensors of temperature, pain or pressure,
and rely the information to the brain. The receptors are located close to the surface of
the skin, and density is higher in the glabrous (non­hairy) skin. They are divided in three
different groups [6]:
• Mechanoreceptors: sensitive to pressure, vibration and the surface characteristics
of objects like roughness, bumps, etc.
• Nociceptors: sensitive to pain.
• Thermoreceptors: Sensitive to temperature.
Due to their role in the perception of vibration, only mechanoreceptors will be analyzed in
more detailed.
2.1.2
Vibration Mechanoreceptors in the skin
As it was already stated, the sensitivity of skin to vibration is frequency dependant, span­
ning a range from 5 Hz to 1 kHz. This fact relates to the performance of the mechanore­
ceptors embedded in the skin dedicated to measure vibratory stimuli.
Mechanoreceptors are nerve cells that transduce mechanical energy from external stimuli
into neural activity. Transduction is carried out by the generation of action potentials when
the receptor experience a mechanical stress induced by the stimuli. The sum of potentials
produced by the receptor results in an electrical current that is interpreted by the central
nervous system [15]. In the case of the skin, the mechanoreceptors are activated through
the coupling between the mechanical stimuli and their cell membrane. A deformation in
this exterior membrane produces the opening of ion channels that triggers the production
of action potential. A schematic of skin receptors of touch is shown in figure 2.1.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
5
==PAGE:14==
Type
Location
Frequency range
Adaptability
Merkel disks
Upper dermis
5­15 Hz
Slow
Meissner corpuscle
Upper dermis
20­50 Hz
Rapid
Pacinian corpuscle
Deep dermis
60­400 Hz
Slow
Table 2.1: Characteristics of skin mechanoreceptors dedicated to perception of vibration
[15] [17][18].
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of the organization of cutaneous mechanoreceptors
in skin [16].
Mechanoreceptors are of two types depending on how fast their response to stimuli is:
rapidly adapting (RA) or slowly adapting (SA). The SA are specially dedicated to perceive
the magnitude of stimuli presented for a long time, while the RA fire at the beginning and
the end of the stimuli, providing information about the velocity and acceleration
Three are the mechanoreceptors present in the skin that provide information about vi­
brations: the Pacinian corpuscle, the Meissner corpuscle and the Merkel discs [6], see
Table 2.1.
Meissner corpuscles are SA receptors located directly below the grooves of epidermis.
They are sensitive to low frequency vibrations, in the range of 10­60 Hz and are RA
mechanoreceptors.
Merkel discs are focused on the pressure sensation, and are located as well a Meissner
corpucles, close to the epidermis. They are SA and are seensitive in the frequency range
20­50 Hz.
Pacinian corpuscles are the biggest and best­studied receptors. They are RA receptors
located in the deepest part of dermis. Composed by a multi layer membrane that cov­
ers the end of a neuron axon, they are sensitive to high frequency stimuli (50­1000 Hz)
[6][17][18].
2.1.3
Similarities between hearing and touch senses
Important similarities can be found between how vibration and sound are sensed in the
skin and in the auditory system, respectively. Just as the Paccinian corpuscles, hair cells
6
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:15==
present in the cochlea are mechanoreceptors. The movement in the basilar membrane
induced by a sound stimulus produces a change in the shape of the hair cells, activating
ion channels and so electrical current in the nerve system that travels to the brain.
Both types of receptors present the phase locking mechanism, that allows to code the
frequency of the stimulus at low frequencies. In contrast, skin receptors have not been
shown to present different frequency sensitivities at different positions of the body, just as
the hair cells along the basilar membrane [19][18].
2.2
Linear Elasticity
The theory of elasticity deals with stress and stress relation in solid deformations. Elastic­
ity refers to the fact that, if a certain deformation is produced in a solid by external loads,
this deformation disappears when the external loads are removed [20].
Some assumptions must be fulfilled to describe a solid as a linear elastic material. These
assumptions are [21]:
1. Deformations are small
2. The relation between stress and strain is linear
3. Dynamic effects are neglected
4. The solid does not crash or break during the deformation
The equation for an linear material in 3D, in equilibrium wih external forces is
∇· σ + F v = 0,
(2.1)
where σ represents the stress in the solid and F v the external volumetric load. The stress
can be expressed, using the Hooke’s law as
σ = C : ϵ,
(2.2)
where ϵ is the strain and C the elasticity matrix. The strain it is written in terms of the
displacement vector u as
ϵ = 1
2
h
(∇u)T + (∇u)
i
.
(2.3)
These equations are sufficient to analyze the behaviour of a linear material subject to
external forces. The boundary conditions that are considered in this thesis are of two
kinds: contact forces and prescribed displacements over the surface of the domain ∂Ω.
2.2.1
Orthotropy
The elasticity matrix of a isotropic material depends only on the Young’s Modulus E and
Poisson’s ratio ν of the material. In the case of an orthotropic material, like the case of
the wood, the mechanical properties are different in the direction of three perpendicular
axes, called longitudinal (L), tangential (T) and radial (R). In the wood, the L axis is parallel
to the fiber, the R is perpendicular to the growth of the rings and the T is tangent to the
growth rings but perpendicular to the fiber drection, see figure 2.2.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Schematic of a wooden plank, showing the three perpedicular axes of the
orthotropic material. Picture taken from [22].
The elasticity matrix of an orthotropic material is given by
C =


C11
C22
C31
0
0
0
C12
C22
C32
0
0
0
C13
C22
C33
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
C55
0
0
0
0
0
0
C66


(2.4)
where the components are as follows:
C11 = E2
x(Ezν2
yz −Ey)
Cden
,
C12 = −ExEy(Ezνyzνxz + Eyνxy)
Cden
C13 = −ExEyEz(νxyνyz + νxz)
Cden
,
C22 = E2
y(Ezν2
xz −Ex)
Cden
C23 = −EyEz(Eyνxyνxz + Exνyz)
Cden
,
C33 = EyEz(Eyν2
xy −Ex)
Cden
C44 = Gxy,
C55 = Gyz,
C66 = Gxz
Cden = EyEzν2
xz −ExEy + 2νxyνyzνxzEyEz + ExEzν2
yz + E2
yν2
xy
Ei refers to the Young’s modulus or modulus of elasticity in the i direction; Gij refers to
the shear modulus, in the plane ij; and νij refers to the Poisson’s ratio in the plane ij.
2.3
FEM
FEM (Finite Elements Method) is a numerical method that allows to obtain an approxi­
mated solution to a physical problem, by means of solving the differential equations that
govern the problem using finite elements. This finite elements represent a discretization
of the system geometry.
8
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:17==
FEM is a very powerful tool used in structural mechanics, acoustics or heat transfer, and
COMSOL Multiphysics [23] is one of the most used FEM­based softwares in the market.
In this section, a small overview of the FEM procedure will be presented, specially focused
on the structural vibrations problems.
2.3.1
Integral formulation
The finite element method starts by defining an integral formulation of the physical prob­
lem. Given a domain Ω, the solution u of the system is determined by a set of differential
equations in the domain and its boundary:
 L(u) = fv in Ω
C(u) = fs in ∂Ω,
(2.5)
where L and C represents differential operators and fv and fs the load terms inside the
domain and on the surface, respectively, i.e. the case of fv = fs = 0 would correspond
to an eigenvalue problem in Ω.
In the case of a linear material, the u would correspond to the displacement of a point of
the solid with respect to the origin, and the differential equation to solve would be equa­
tion (2.1).
The solution u can be approximated in terms of a set of N trial functions [ϕt,i] that must
satisfy the boundary conditions, and a set of N unknowns [ui] that need to be determined,
in the form
u ≃
N
X
i=1
uiϕt,i.
(2.6)
The residual error that arises when 2.5 is written in the form 2.6 is given by
R(u) ≡R(ϕt,i, ui) = (L(ϕt,i, ui)) −fv.
(2.7)
The best approximation for u will be that for which R(ϕt,i, ui) = 0. The Weighted residuals
method solves this by integrating R(u) to the domain Ω, weighted by a set of N arbitrary
integrable functions ψw,i:
Z
Ω
ψw,iR(ϕt,i, ui)dV = 0.
(2.8)
This is the so called Strong integral formulation, that consists of solving for u the system
of N equations 2.9. The Weak integral formulation goes a step forward, and consists of
distributing the maximum order of derivatives in the integrand of equation (2.9) between
ψw,i and u, and then integrate applying natural and essential boundary conditions to u
and ψw,i, respectively. After this, it is possible to solve for u.
2.3.2
Meshing and approximated solution
Once the weak integral form of the governing differential equations is written, the domain
Ωneeds to be discretised into a mesh, a set of ne subdomains Ωe, which are callled the
elements, such that
Ω=
ne
[
e=1
Ωe
e = 1, ..., ne.
(2.9)
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
9
==PAGE:18==
These elements can be of different shapes, and normally geometrical primitives are cho­
sen. Depending on the dimension of the problem, there are normally lines in 1D, squares
or rectangles in 2D, and tetrahedrons in 3D. Each element is defined by a number of
nodes, nne.
Subsequently, an aprroximated solution ue can be defined in each element. Normally
ue is written in terms of its value in the nodes, using interpolation functions to cover the
rest of the element. The number of nodes determines the order of the interpolation, given
by nne −1. When ue is evaluated in the weak integral it is written in a matricial form,
in terms of the so called elementary matrices. The boundary conditions and constraints
must be imposed to express the loads in terms of the interpolation functions.
2.3.3
Boundary conditions and solution
The elementary matrices are part of a reformulation of the weak integral form at each
element Ωe. They can be combined to form global matrices in Ω, obtaining a matricial
equation for the whole domain.
Once the final matrices are assembled, the system can be solved to obtain the final solu­
tion.
2.4
Vibration Isolation
The vibration isolation consists of reducing the transmitted force to a receiver system from
a vibrating source. Let’s consider a disturbing source with mass M, that injects a harmonic
force F0 = F0ejωt.
Figure 2.3: Schematic of a disturbing source with mass M that injects an harmonic per­
turbation F0, attached to a spring with constant k.
When the source is connected to a spring of stiffness k the displacement can be expressed
as:
x(t) = F0/k
1 −ω2
ω2n
(2.10)
where ωn =
q
k
M is the resonance frequency of the spring, see figure 2.3 [24]. The force
transmitted to the floor where the spring is attached to it is FT = kx. The ratio between
the transmitted force FT and the input force F0 is called the transmissibility T. If damping
in the spring is neglected, it can be written
10
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:19==
T =

FT
F0
 =
1
|1 −r2|,
r = ω
ωn
.
(2.11)
Hence, how much force is transmitted to the floor is frequency dependent, and will be
determined by the stiffness of the spring and the mass of the source. At frequencies
above the maximum of T that happens at ω = ωn, the isolation starts to be effective,
and the force transmitted is reduced. Inf the damping is introduced, the height of the
resonance is diminished, but the transmissibility above it becomes less steep and hence
the isolation is reduced.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
11
==PAGE:20==
12
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:21==
3
The Kalimba Model
3.1
Initial considerations
It has been shown in section 1.3 that the existing audio­tactile installations aim to ex­
cite different positions of the body. For this purpose, they use several surface speakers,
shakers or voice coils to induce the vibratory signal that would be felt by the user. In the
Emoti Chair, based on the natural conception of the pitch height, high frequencies excited
the upper back, whereas the lower back was excited by low frequencies. In the case of
the Wooden Waves project, the wooden planks of a floor were directly excited with pure
tones, activating different regions of a subject body lying on them.
These preliminary analysis of other audiotactile installations (and maybe as well the hu­
man body vibration) led to looking for a structure that could activate different parts of the
body at different frequencies when excited with an audio signal. Therefore, the different
frequency components of the input signal would be segregated into different sections of
the structure, providing a combined audio tactile perception in which different frequency
components could be felt in different positions of the body.
Using several excitation points was previously considered, in the same way as the projects
already mentioned. However, this solution would imply a multichannel processing system
to filter the audio signal and the acquisition of the surface speakers. Due to the installa­
tion was meant to be part of a permanent exhibition with more than one audiotactile chair,
these approach was considered not very suitable. First, it would become a delicate sys­
tem for an interactive installation like this. Secondly, it would require high maintenance.
Alternatively, the approach followed was to use one/two audio­tactile transducer(s) that
would induce the vibration of the whole system, getting rid of multi channel processing
devices. Hence, the goal was to build such a structure whose vibratory modes could
generate noticeable vibratory stimulus for a person lying on it, at different parts of his/her
body.
It was decided to use wood as the construction material. Firsly, it is a relatively cheap,
light and easy to manipulate material. Secondly, a big amount of construction wood was
available and free to use within DTU facilities. Furthermore, in the previous collaboration
with the artists, the vibrotactile podiums were built in wood, with satisfactory results in
terms of vibration response.
3.2
Cantilever design
When a structure is excited with a frequency dependant source, its global behaviour is a
combination of its natural modes. The number of natural modes of a structure is equal to
the number of degrees of freedom of the given structure, meaning that a system with a
high number of degrees of freedom can show a very complex response as a combination
of a lot of modes. Hence, controlling a vibrating structure to show a desired movement
can be challenging.
However, it is possible to include ad hoc degrees of freedom in a structure that can be
independently controlled if their natural frequencies are known. An example of such be­
haviour are the sympathetic strings present in a lot of traditional music instruments, like
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
13
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: a) Schematic of the thought kalimba chair, consisting of a set of cantilevered
bars attached to a common frame that would be excited with the audiotactile transducers.
b) Picture of a Kalimba, an inspiration for the name of the prototype due to the similar
configuration of cantilevered beams.
the sitar, the sarangi or the hurdy­gurdy. These strings are tuned to vibrate when the main
strings of the instrument are excited, resulting in a characteristic sound [25].
A similar behaviour was aimed to build the first prototype. In this case, a structure con­
sisting of a rectangular frame with embedded wooden bars was thought, in the way of a
bed base, though the bars would be fixed at the frame and free to move at the other, i.e
cantilevered beams, see figure 3.1a.
The project was named ”Kalimba chair”, after the african traditional instrument Kalimba,
in which metal beams of different lengths clamped at one end are plucked producing dif­
ferent notes, see figure 3.1b.
3.3
Tuning of the bars
When the frame is excited by a shaker from below with an audio signal, the whole structure
would be driven into vibration, and each cantilever would present a resonance according
to its geometrical and material properties as follows:
fn =
Kn
2πL2
r
EI
m ,
(3.1)
where L is the length of the beam, see section 3.3. E, I and m are the Young’s Modulus of
the beam, its area’s moment of inertia and its mass per unit length. Finally, the constants
Kn ≃π2(n −1/2)2 are parameters referred to the n­th mode of vibration [26].
According to equation (3.1) the resonance frequency of a cantilever can be modified by
changing m, L, E and I . This would allow to tune the Kalimba chair to present a resonat­
ing beam at the desired position, so a person lying on it would be touched at a certain
point of his/her back when a given frequency is in the signal. Hence it would be achieved
to feel different frequencies at different positions of the body.
14
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Representation of a cantilevered beam, fixed at one end and free at the other.
[16].
3.4
COMSOL simulation
A very simple COMSOL model was developed with the goal of verifying numerically the
equation equation (3.1) in a system of cantilevers with different thicknesses, when excited
with a shaker at a common frame that support them. The simulation should show different
resonances for each bar depending on their thickness.
The COMSOL 5.6 version was used, released in 2020, an [23]. The Structural Mechanics
module was selected due it is suited for solid and structural problems. A 3D geometrical
model of the prototype was built using the COMSOL geometry framework, see figure 3.3.
Five bars of L = 28 cm and width w = 10 cm but different thickness where embedded in
a frame, so they stay clamped at one end and free to move at the other. The thickness of
each bar is shown in the Table table 3.1.
Figure 3.3: Model of a system of cantilevers generated with COMSOL.
Table 3.1: Thicknesses of the five cantilevered bars in the COMSOL model.
Bar
h (mm)
1
50
2
40
3
30
4
20
5
10
3.4.1
Materials
The material used in the simulation was pine, defined in the COMSOL material library.,
with a density of 532 kg/m3. To take into account that wood is an orthotropic material
(see section 2.2.1), it is necessary to include as well the Young’s moduli, shear moduli
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
15
==PAGE:24==
and Poisson’s ratios in the three perpendicular directions L,T and R. These values where
taken from [22], and are reported in tables 3.2 and 3.3.
Table 3.2: Young’s moduli and Shear moduli of the pine used in the COMSOL model.
Obtained from EL using the relations found in [22].
Material
EL (GPa)
ER (GPa)
ET (GPa)
GLR (GPa)
GLT (GPa)
GRT (GPa)
Pine
11.2
0.98
0.493
1.08
0.91
0.124
Table 3.3: Poisson’s ratio of the pine used in the COMSOL model. Found in [22].
Material
νLR
νLT
νRT
Pine
0.347
0.315
0.408
3.4.2
Equations and boundary conditions
The assumption of small displacement from equilibrium position under excitation in the
whole domain was made, allowing to use the Linear Elastic Material theory, see sec­
tion 2.2. The equation that relates the external volumetric force with the stress, and there­
for with the displacement, is equation (2.1). In this case, the system is being excited with
a point load, and the differential equation becomes
−ρω2u = ∇· σ + F vejϕ.
(3.2)
The volumetric forces Fv included just the gravity. To simulate the action of a shaker, a
boundary load was included in a circle of radius 2 mm, situated in the middle point of the
wooden frame that supported the cantilevers. This solved some convergence problems
with the point load boundary condition. The cantilevers were introduced 2mm inside of
the frame, and in each inner surface a fixed constrained condition was included.
Finally, a spring foundation with high stiffness (k = 108 N/m) was included in the whole
surface, to allow the system to move when excited by the shaker.
A frequency sweep was applied, from 10 Hz to 100 Hz.
3.4.3
Results
The transfer velocity in the Z direction between each bar tip and a position close to the
point load, computed with the COMSOL model, are shown in figure 3.4. Clear resonances
can be seen for each bar, increasing in frequency with the thickness of the bar. Besides,
the amplitude of each bar decreases with the thickness of the bar, something that could
be explained with inertia, i.e. less movement is produced for higher mass with the same
input force.
The resonances of each bar can be well explained with the equation equation (3.1) if the
stiffness used is ET , see table 3.4. This implies that, if the orthotropy is defined in COM­
SOL using a global system of coordinates, the assignation of the transversal, radial and
longitudinal directions might be wrongly describing the material properties. After coming
to this conclusion, the COMSOL models made for the first and final prototypes included
the orthotropy in a more rigorous way, attending to the principal directions of the wood
used.
Although these results were obtained in an idealized model, it is shown that a system of
cantilevers could be made and tuned at desired frequencies. However, the practicalities
of building such a system in real life and the technical solutions used for it would imply
the final result to show rather different behaviours in the same frequency range.
16
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:25==
10
50
100
f (Hz)
40
60
80
100
120
140
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Figure 3.4: Results obtained with COMSOL of a frequency domain analysis of the can­
tilever model being excited with a point load, in the middle point of the frame that supports
the bars. Resonances frequency increases with the thickness of the bar, whereas the
magnitude decreases.
Table 3.4: Comparison between the resonances of the bars obtained with COMSOL and
those expected using the vibration theory of beams.
Bar
fCOMSOL (Hz)
fcant (Hz)
1
99
99.16
2
82
79.33
3
57
59.49
4
40
39.67
5
20
19.83
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
17
==PAGE:26==
18
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:27==
4
First prototype
Although the variable thickness was proved to work for tuning the bars at different fre­
quencies, it was considered that building a big prototype with a high number of bars with
different thicknesses would be technically challenging. Among the rest of parameters that
could be changed according to equation (3.1), the mass per unit length seemed the most
reliable, due to it would allow to make a given number of equal bars which could be tuned
by means of adding mass in their tips.
In order to analyze this approach, a first prototype in woood was built. Furthermore, a
COMSOL model of the prototype was developed in order to analyze its frequency re­
sponse through simulation. A qualitative comparison between the prototype and the sim­
ulation was made as well.
4.1
Building process
It was decided to aim for an easy to build structure, consisting of a rectangular frame with
wooden bars clamped as cantilevers in one side. The construction was done in the wood
workshop of the building 352, at DTU.
The rectangular wooden frame consisted of four wooden bars of 9 mm x 43 mm, clamped
between each other through metal brackets and screws, making a rectangle of 785 x 585
mm. Five rectangular bars of 460 mm where clamped in one side of the frame using metal
brackets as well, see section 4.3.2. The exact dimensions are summarized in the Table
table 4.1.
Finally, the frame was mounted on top of four legs of 590 mm height, clamped using metal
brackets. Between the the legs and the frame,
The frame and the legs are built with regular construction wood, that was estimated to be
spruce, and the bars were made out of pine. The wood was found in the storage room of
building 355 at DTU and the different bars where cut using a table saw and a drop saw.
Table 4.1: Dimensions of the cantilever beams of the first prototype. The length are
considered of the whole bar, and the cantilever length should be corrected with the width
of the frame, 43 mm, where the bars are hanging from.
Bar
L (mm)
H (mm)
W (mm)
1
460
19
70
2
460
13
45
3
460
4
70
4
460
19
70
5
460
19
70
4.2
Tuning of wooden bars
4.2.1
Experimental setup
Once built, a Clark Synthesis TS329 Gold [27] tactile transducer was connected to one of
the long sides of the first prototype, see section 4.2.1 .This transducer presents a tactile
frequency range from 10 Hz to 800 Hz, and an audible frequency range from 20 Hz to
17 kHz. The mounting was done by means of a hanger bolt screwed in the frame and
directly connected to the shaker.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: Figures of the first prototype. It was built using construction wood for the
frame and legs, and pine for the cantilevered bars. The construction took place in the
wood workshop of buiding 352, at DTU. All the pieces were assembled and clamped
together using rectangular metal brackets.
The signal was sent to the shaker through the computer, connected through a Focusrite
Scarlet 2i2 soundcard. A Pure Data patch allowed to control the frequency of a pure tone
with a MIDI device, in this case, a Evolution MK­249 keyboard. Finally, the signal of the
computer was amplified using a SAMSON Servo 300 amplifier.
The procedure followed consisted on exciting the prototype with a pure tone signal, and
increase the frequency gradually until one of the bars showed a resonance. Once the
resonance was found, a small mass was added at the end of the bar and a new resonance
was seeked by means of reducing the frequency. A plastic sticker marker was sticked at
the end of each bar in order to make the resonances more visible.
During this process, it was noticed that the bars that were close to each other could be
interacting. Looking for reducing this potential effect, it was decided to leave only two bars
in the frame, the bar 2 and the bar 4.
4.2.2
Results and discussion
The results of the experiment are shown in the table 4.2. A mass probe of 36 g and
another of 130 g where used. Another probe with a mass value in the middle of these two
was also tried, but no resonance was found.
Table 4.2: Results of the tuning experiment carried out in the first prototype.
Bar 2
Bar 4
∆m (kg)
fexp (Hz)
fexp (Hz)
0
34
39
0.036
27.5
38
0.13
23
32
The first aspect to highlight is that the resonances of each bar without extra mass hap­
pens at a lower value that the one expected by the cantilever theory, 51 Hz for the Bar 2
and 75 Hz for the bar 4. This could indicate that the movement of the frame presents a
20
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: a) Prototype with the TS329 tactile transducer connected in one the long sides
of the frame. b) Equipment set up for tuning the cantilevered bars.
rocking component that deviates the excitation of the cantilever from the expected vertical
movement.
Regarding the effect off the mass, it is clear that the resonance frequency is shifted down
when an increment of mass is added to the end of the bar. The effect however is different
in both bars, being the shift in frequency larger at the thinner bar compared to the thicker.
This might show that the relative difference between ∆m and the mass of the bar plays a
role in the change of resonance frequency.
This results implies that not only the tuning of the bars needs to be precise to make them
resonate as desired, but also the frame needs to move up and down coherently. For this
purpose, including springs between the frame and the legs could help to achieve a closer
to vertical movement of the frame.
4.3
Measuring the wood properties
4.3.1
Method
In order to develop a COMSOL model as similar as possible to the real prototype, it was
necessary to obtain the mechanical properties of the wood used, mainly its modulus of
elasticity, its density and its loss factor.
The density can be easily measured by simply weighting the wooden bars and diving by
its volume. Regarding elasticity and loss factor, the method used was to measure the
frequency response of a beam of each different wood. To do this, a simply supported
wooden bar is excited in the middle using a force transducer, and the response velocity
of the bar in the point directly above the excitation point is measure, using an accelerom­
eter. The input mobility is obtained as the frequency response between the velocity in
the input and the force injected, and from its resonances, the modulus of elasticity can be
estimated. In a rectangular bar of length L, width w, height h and mass per unit length
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
21
==PAGE:30==
m′, an estimation of the Young’s modulus can be obtained from the equation:
E = m′L4
I
 fn
Cn
2
,
(4.1)
where fn is the n­th resonance frequency. The area moment of inertia I can be expressed
as I = wh3/12 for a rectangular beam, and the constants Cn depend upon the boundary
conditions of the problem. In this case, due to the bar is excited from the centre, only
the modes 1, 3 and 5 are excited in the bar, that correspond with the values C1 = 3.561,
C3 = 19.244 and C5 = 47.518.
The loss factor can be measured using the formula
ηn = fn,up −fn,low
fn
,
(4.2)
where fn,up and fn,low are the two endpoints of a half­power­point bandwidth at the reso­
nance fn [28].
Only the first resonance will be considered for the estimation of η and E, due to only the
low frequency range will be of interest in the COMSOL simulation.
It should be highligthed that, due to the orthotropy of wood, the geometry of the setup
allows to compute the Young’s modulus in the longitudinal direction, i.e. the direction
parallel to the wood fibers.
4.3.2
Experimental Setup
The setup used for the measurement is shown in section 4.3.2. The following elements
were used:
• B&K Mini Shaker Type 4810
• B&K Accelerometer Type 4393
• B&K Nexus type 2692
• B&K PULSE signal analyzer
• PC Windows 7
• B&K electrodynamic vibration calibrator
• Mass probe of 101.54 g
• Precision scale PB3002 DeltaRange®
• Two wooden beams: Pine and Spruce
• Beewax
The signals from the force transducer and the accelerometer where analyzed with a B&K
PULSE signal analyzer system, using computer with Windows 7. Both signals where
preamplified with a B&K Nexus type 2692. The accelerometer was attached to the bars
using beewax.
A hole was drilled in the center of the bars, where a nut was introduced, allowing to connect
the wooden bars to the force transducer using a small piece of metal with a screw. The
mass of this piece was considered negligible. The dimensions of the used bars are shown
in the table 4.3.
22
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.3: Dimensions of the wooden beams used to measure their mechanical proper­
ties. Length, thickness, width and mass.
Bar
L (mm)
H (mm)
W (mm)
M (g)
Pine
488
19
68
373
Spruce
500
24
95
475
4.3.3
Procedure
The first step was to calibrate both the force transducer and the accelerometer, for which a
B&K electrodynamic vibration calibrator and a mass probe with known mass were used.
The procedure followed to obtain the imput mobility was to create an excitation signal
with pulse that was sent to the force transducer. The response velocity of the bar was
measured with the accelerometer, and the frequency response between both velocity and
force signals was saved in PULSE. A broadband excitation (fmax = 10 kHz) was used to
obtain the frequency response. Subsequently, each resonance was analyzed with higher
resolution, checking with the Nyquist plot if it was optimal for the 3­dB bandwidth method.
A Hanning window weighting was used in the FFT analyzer.
4.3.4
Results
The frequency response for each bar can be seen in figure 4.4, and the computed values
of Young’s moduli, denities and loss factors are reported in the table 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Input mmobility measured using the bending waves method in two different
types of wood present in the first prototype. Top: Magnitude. Bottom: Phase.
4.4
COMSOL model
The effect of the tuning method of adding mass was further investigated with a COMSOL
model. For this purpose, a CAD model was developed based on the first prototype ge­
ometry. Three bars of equal dimensions as the bar 4 (see table 4.1) where placed in the
frame, and the effect of the addition of two ∆m equal to the mass probes used in the
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 4.4: Values of Young’s modulus in direction of the fibers, density and loss factor for
both wooden bars. The pine correspond to the cantilevered beams in the first prototype,
and the spruce to the frame and legs.
Bar
EL (GPa)
ρ (kg/m3)
η
Pine
15.59
590.88
0.012
Spruce
6.06
416.81
0.010
experiment was analyzed. The figure 4.5 shows the geometry of the COMSOL model
developed of the first prototype.
Figure 4.5: COMSOL model developed of the first prototype. The geometry building
framework of COMSOL was used.
4.4.1
Materials
The mechanical properties measured for the two types of wood where used to character­
ize the materials in the model: the pine for the beams and the spruce for the frame and
legs. The measurements of shear modulus G, Poisson’s ratio ν and elasticity out of the
longitudinal axis ER,ET were not carried out. The values used were obtained from the
reference [22], and are reported in tables 4.5 and 4.6 for both pine and spruce.
Table 4.5: Young’s moduli and Shear moduli of the two types of wood used in the COMSOL
model. Obtained from EL using the relations found in [22].
Material
EL (GPa)
ER (GPa)
ET (GPa)
GLR (GPa)
GLT (GPa)
GRT (GPa)
Pine
15.59
0.78
1.56
0.99
0.95
0.047
Spruce
6.06
0.30
0.61
0.39
0.37
0.02
Table 4.6: Poisson’s ratio of the two types of wood used in the COMSOL model. Found
from [22].
Material
νLR
νLT
νRT
Pine
0.35
0.41
0.32
Spruce
0.37
0.47
0.44
24
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:33==
4.4.2
Equations and boundary conditions
Following the assumption made in the previous COMSOL model section 3.4, linear elastic
material theory was applied, see section 2.2. The orthotropy was treated attending to
principal directions of each wooden plank used. Cylindrical coordinate systems where
defined, assigning their z axis to the direction of the fibers of the wood. The symmetry of
the structure allowed to characterize all planks with only three coordinate systems: one
for the legs, another one for the long sides of the frame and the last one for the beams
and the short sides of the frame. The mechanical parameters of each component was
taken according to its material definition.
The volumetric forces are only the gravity, that acted on the whole structure. The mass
probes values were 130 g and 36 g, and they were placed in a 7 cm x 7 cm squared area
at the end of the bars. The shaker was simulated in the same way as in the previous
model, a boundary load inside of a circle of radius 2 mm, situated in the middle point of
the side that supported the cantilevers. At a first attempt it was considered to simulate
the action of the shake as a lumped element system, dividing it into an electrical and a
mechanical part. However, it was disregarded due to this approach required to measure
the impedance of the shaker.
A spring foundation with a high stiffness (k = 108 N/m) was included to try to account for
a solid floor. Finally, a fixed constraint was included in the surface between the cantilevers
and the frame that supported them.
4.4.3
Results
The results of the simulation are shown in the figure 4.6. A frequency domain analysis
was carried out, within a range of 5 Hz to 70 Hz. Besides, the magnitude of the velocity
in the z direction is shown in a 3D plot for each resonance in section 4.4.3
10
30
50
f (Hz)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Figure 4.6: Transfer velocity between the load position and the tip of each of the bars of
the first prototype. A different mass probe was included in the end of each bar.
The resonance for the unloaded beam (∆m = 0) obtained with COMSOL happens at a
lower value than the one expected by the equation (3.1), in agreement with the resonance
found in the tuning experiment. Furthermore, at low frequencies an oscillation around the
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
25
==PAGE:34==
constant behaviour can be seen, that was identified using a 3D plot of the velocity as rock­
ing movement, see section 4.4.3. This reinforces the possible effect of the resonances of
the cantilevers being shifted down due to a not perfectly vertical movement of the frame.
The fact that the resonances in the simulation and in the experiment do not match could
be explained due to the differences in some boundary conditions. Firstly, the brackets
and screws used in the real prototype were not included, meaning that the joints between
the parts of the prototype do not perfectly correspond with those assumed in the simula­
tion. Secondly, the spring foundation is not the best approximation for a solid floor. Even
though, the tuning through mass addition was reproduced. A shift down of 10 Hz can
be seen from an unloaded bar when 130 g are placed on top of the bar. In contrast, the
experiment showed a shift of 7 Hz in the bar with equal dimensions.
4.5
Final considerations
The analysis of the first prototype showed the reliability of tuning a system of cantilevers
by adding mass probes to them. However, this presents technical complications with re­
gard to building a structure where people can lie on and feel vibrations.
Firstly, according to the results, a mass probe of 130 g shifted down a resonance 7 Hz in
bar 4 and 11 in the bar 2, showing that the mass ratio between the probe and the bar plays
a role. This might entail an issue, when very thin bars would need high ∆m to see their
resonance highly reduced , producing big shape deformations that could affect their linear
behaviour. On the other side, thick bars will need even higher ∆m, potentially making the
system very heavy.
Secondly, the only presence of a person lying on the bars would change their resonant
behaviour, not only by shifting the frequency down, but probably damping the local motion
of the the cantilevers. This implies that the bars should be placed at a certain distance
from the back of the subject so they are not damped by its presence, but at the same time
they should be close enough to be felt when resonating.
Thirdly, a movement of the frame as vertical as possible is desired to have cantilevers
with resonances predicted by the equation (3.1). A system of springs can be introduced
between the frame and the legs in order to enhance this vertical motion and avoid rocking
movements.
This problems were faced in the design of the second prototype of the Kalimba chair.
26
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.3: Setup used to measure the mechanical properties of the wood used to build
the first prototype. a) Pine bar simply supported on the force transducer, with the ac­
celerometer placed to measure the input velocity response. b) Scale used to weight the
beams and obtain their density. c) Computer connected to a PULSE signal analyzer. This
is connected to the NEXUS amplifier.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
27
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.7: Mode shapes of the the three cantilevered bars in the first prototype, happeing
at 19 Hz (a), 24.5 Hz (b) and 29 Hz (c). Besides, rocking movement is shown at 6 Hz (d)
28
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:37==
5
Development of the second prototype
The goal of the second prototype was to build a structure with human dimensions where
different parts of the body were excited by the system of cantilevers. The geometry fol­
lowed is the one of figure 3.1a, a rectangular frame with beams inserted along both of its
long sides. A first version was made in regular construction wood, and an improved and
last version was made with better quality wood, concretely in oak and beech.
5.1
Design
As it was stated in the conclusions obtained from the first prototype, the contact of the
body with the cantilever should be small so the vibration can be felt in the body but not
damped. The initial plan to face this problem was to include thick wooden bars at specific
positions from side to side of the frame that would concentrate the load of the weight of
the subject, allowing the cantilevers to vibrate unloaded. As for the distribution of loads
of a person when lying, three bars for supporting were designed: one for the shoulders,
one for the butt area and the last one for the feet. A schematic is shown in section 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Schematic of the first plan for the second prototype, including the initial sup­
portive bars in darker brown, and the cantilevered bars and frame in lighter brown. The
left side corresponds to the upper part of the body.
Regarding the cantilevered beams, the variable thickness approach was chosen for the
tuning, since the mass addition method was found technically more complicated. Ten
bars were accounted to be a good balance between work load and excitation positions.
Six of them were placed on the upper part of the structure, thought to excite the back of
the lying person, and the four remaining were placed to excite the legs. The tuning of the
bars will be explained in detail later.
In order to obtain cantilevers fixed on the frame, very tight connections were needed. The
solution proposed for this was to divide the bars in two sections: one at one end with
a fixed thickness, and another one with the thickness chosen for the tuning in the other
end. Additionally, the bars were embedded in the frame in rectangular cavities of the same
width of the bars. With this approach, a good clamping could be achieved by placing an
upper wood plank on top. A schematic of this approach can be seen in figure 5.2.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2: 3D schematic of the cantilever bars joint used in the second prototype.
A frame of 175 cm x 62 cm was initially designed. The position of each supportive bar
was decided taking into account standard ergonomic data [29], and the cantilevers were
disposed to fit inside the space in between. The length of the bars was accounted to
be coincident with the spine of a person lying, so the maximum displacement position in
resonance would touch in the middle of the back. SOLIDWORKS plans were made for
being used in the building process, can be seen in appendix A.
5.2
Springs
As it was concluded from the investigation of the first prototype in section 4.5, in order
to achieve resonances in the cantilevers at desired frequencies, a vertical and uniform
movement of the frame was desired. A system of springs was designed for this purpose.
Considering the dimensions of the structure, using four springs was found a good num­
ber. The displacement of the frame when excited by the shaker should be small to avoid
potential motion out of the vertical axis, and because of this, the resonance frequency of
the system of springs plus the structure, fS, should happen at very low frequencies.
In addition, the vibration isolation was included in the analysis, since this was a require­
ment from the museum for the installation.
The springs would need to be made ad hoc for the project, for the sake of saving time,
they were designed and ordered before the structure was built.
An estimation of the mass of the structure with a lying person was needed. For this
purpose, the density of the construction wood was used. The quantity of wood was based
on the initial dimensions of the frame, and assuming a total of 18 bars. Then, a combined
mass of 15.7 kg was estimated for the frame plus bars. For the subject mass, a standard
weight of 75 kg was assumed, resulting in a total mass MT of 90.7 kg.
Once the mass was estimated, a compromise was needed to obtain a low value of fS with
a realistic value of the stiffness. A value within the standards for vibration isolation was
chosen [30], taking into account the equivalent stiffness of a system of springs 1. In this
way, four springs with stiffness k = 8.5 · 103 N/m would present a resonance frequency:
fS = 1
2π
r
4k
m = 3 Hz
(5.1)
1The stiffness of a group of N springs connected in parallel is keq = ∑N
i ki
30
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:39==
Regarding vibration isolation, the transmissibility of such system was computed, showing
a value of T = 0.01 at 30 Hz.
Finally, the fabrication of six springs with the estimated stiffness were ordered to fabri­
cated in Fredeirksberg Fjederfabrik A/S [31]. The two extra springs were included as a
contingency planning.
5.3
Building process
5.3.1
Frame
The wood used was taken from the storage room of building 355, DTU, and the building
was carried out in the wood workshop of Skylab, DTU.
The frame bars were cut using a drop saw and a table saw, and the holes for the can­
tilevers where made with a hand saw. The bar ends of the frame components were shaped
so they could be joint together, and a long screw was introduced all along the joint to make
it more rigid, see section 5.3.1. The middle bar was jointed using four L­shaped metal
brackets.
Once the frame was assembled, it was found that it was slightly narrow, i.e. the inner
surface of the frame was only 50 cm wide, something that could affect the comfort of the
structure in some cases. Because of this, the total width of the frame was increased to
80 cm.
With the middle bar it was found that, although the middle bar was good for the butt, the
distance to the shoulders and feet depends on the person, and so the supports would not
work for everyone. Hence, a different support method was needed that both fulfilled the
requirement of small contact with the bars and that fitted for every person dimensions.
Three approaches were tried:
1. Create an extra frame lined with fabric so the subject could lie on it, placed on top of
the already built frame. This, vibrating beams would be disposed below this frame
and could be felt through the fabric. This solution was disregarded, due to it was not
possible to tighten the fabric enough, making the deflection too big when a person
lied on top.
2. Substitute the fabric with a net, and use a foldable metal frame that would tighten the
net. This idea was discarded as well due to the folding system would be supporting
the whole load of the body in the position of the joints. This, plus the tension of the
tightened net, could cause the frame to break.
3. Create a supporting net using ratchet straps, commonly used in cars transporta­
tion. They would be tightened within the wooden frame, and the middle bar would
reinforce the structure from collapsing due the tension introduced. With the frame
thick enough and the straps well tighten, the small contact with the bars might be
ensured, and besides it was a relatively easy to set up system. This was the chosen
approach for the prototype.
5.3.1.1
Bars
Ten rectangular bars of 36cm x 5cm x 2cm where made using a drop saw and a table saw.
The tuning was considered to be made by means of measuring the response of each bar
to an excitation in their tip while clamped at the other. Then, the bar could be sanded
or cut in order to obtain the desired resonance frequency. However, this approach was
found unpractical due to the big amount of modification that would be required for all the
bars.
Finally, due to the goal of the prototype was to check the effect on the body of the system
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
31
==PAGE:40==
of cantilevers, it was decided to craft the ten bars at different thicknesses with no aim for
specific resonance frequency, and analyze their effect once placed in the frame.
A belt sanding machine was used for the thickness modification of the bars.
The bars where screwed to the frame in the holes made for it. To ensure they were well
clamped, an upper frame with the dimensions of the bed was disposed and screwed to
the lower frame. Pictures of the final result can be seen in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Bars inserted in the frame, screwed and clamped with the top frame.
5.3.2
Mounting of the springs
The six springs were finally used in order to increase the stability of the whole structure.
The decision was made after noting that the resonance frequency of the system was
increased only to 3.4 Hz. Two sets of three springs where mounted between agglomerate
plates with the width of the frame, and these were placed below the upper and lower ends
of the frame, clamped together using bar clamps, see figure 5.5 .
Figure 5.5: Profile of the second prototype. The frame is clamped to the two sets of
springs using bar clamps.
5.4
Evaluation of the prototype
For the evaluation of the prototype, two Clark Sythesis TS329 Gold were used to excite
it. They were connected to the middle point of each long side of the frame, and the input
audio signal was sent with a computer trough a Focusrite Scarlet 2i2 soundcard. Again,
the signals were amplified using a SAMSON Servo 300 amplifier.
32
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:41==
In order to qualitatively analyze the behaviour of the prototype, a small group of partic­
ipants were asked for their subjective evaluation of the experience of lying on the bed
when exciting the prototype with different types of signals. Different types of music were
used and a frequency sweep of 30 seconds in the range [30Hz­100Hz], including sections
of amplitude modulation.
Overall, the feedback was positive in terms of enhancing the musical experience while
lying on it, but the majority of answers referred to the main vibratory sensation being felt
in the butt, close to where the transducers were placed, and they could not feel the action
of the bars at specific positions of the body. Regarding the sweeps, the participants could
feel the vibration starting in the lower part of their body and traveling up as long as the
frequency increased.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: a) A subject lying on the second prototype of the Kalimba while being excited
with an audio signal. b) Clark Synthesis connected to one of the frame sides.
Despite having found interesting results regarding the combined perception of sound and
vibration, the response of the system was difficult to evaluate due to the resonance fre­
quency of each bar was unknown. Besides, the system used to clamp the bars was far
from precise in order to reproduce the cantilever boundary condition. Because of this, it
was decided to move on to build an improved version of the prototype, with which a more
precise evaluation could be carried out.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
33
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3: Different parts of building process of the second prototype. a) One of the long
sides of the frame, showing the holes made for cantievers. b) Corner joint of the frame,
using a long screw. c) Frame built with middle bar.
34
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:43==
6
Final Prototype
6.1
Building process
Good quality wood was acquired to build the final prototype. The frame and top frame
were made out of beech and oak was used for the bars oak. The wood was bought in
Københavns Listefabrik [32].
In this case, the bars were crafted at a desired thickness using a turret milling machine.
The tuning and disposition of each bar in the bed was done considering two main refer­
ences. First, the article of Brétéché Sylvain [33], in which four classifications of human
resonance frequencies of different parts of the body, found in previous investigations, are
reported. Although the values presented in these article show some deviation, this was
considered a good starting point. These classifications refers to the chest having a reso­
nance frequency between 50 and 100 Hz, and the legs having a resonance frequency at
around 20 Hz. The second reference was the Model Human Cochlea design by Karam
et al. [10]. Here, different voice coils are placed in the back of a subject following a linear
spatial order that tries to simulate the cochlea functionality. Following the natural spatial
perception of pitch height [34], they placed the high frequencies in the upper back and the
low frequencies in the lower back.
The thickness was chosen to span the frequency range [30 Hz ­ 100 Hz], using the equa­
tion (3.1) and assuming a density of the oak of 700 kg/m3 and a Young’s modulus of 11
GPa. With this parameters, a bar length of 36 cm was needed. However, it was found
in the previous prototype evaluation that the participants could hardly feel the bars at dif­
ferent positions. Because of this, it was decided to preliminary go for a length of 46 cm
in order to increase the potential contact surface. Once the prototype was evaluated in
this terms, it could be possible to reduce the length of the bars down to the initial plan.
The final disposition and thicknesses of the bars, and their expected resonances based
on equation (3.1) with 36 cm and 46 cm, are reported in the table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Relation of bars and thicknesses, and expected resonance frequency accord­
ing to equation (3.1), for both the initial designed length (360 mm) and the final length of
the bars built in the prototype (460 mm). The values and ρ =700 kg/m3 and E = 11 GPa
were assumed [22]. The numbering of the bars starts to count from the upper part of the
bed.
Bar
h (mm)
fcant (Hz)
L = 460 mm
fcant (Hz)
L = 360 mm
1
2
61
105
2
1.86
56
97
3
1.71
52
89
4
1.57
47
82
5
1.42
43
74
6
1.28
39
67
7
1.13
34
59
8
1
30
52
9
0.84
26
44
10
0.7
21
37
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
35
==PAGE:44==
Regarding the frame, two main aspects were improved. First, circular dowels and wood
glue were used to reinforce the corner joints between the bars, in order to make them more
solid an reduce the rocking movement. Secondly, the holes for the cantilever were made
more precisely in order to increase the contact surface with the bars and the tightness of
the clamping. For this purpose, the table saw was used to make thin parallel cuts that
were cleaned later with a chisel and a sander. The bars were clamped to the holes using
two screws. In this sense, it was important that the bars were not protruding beyond the
lower frame height to reduce as much as possible the gap between the lower and top
frames. The top frame was glued using wood glue to the lower frame, see figure 6.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1: Lower and the top frames (a) View from the inside of the prototype. (b) View
from the outside of the prototype.
A middle bar thicker and wider than the one used in the previous prototype was included,
that was joint using L­shaped metal brackets.
Finally, the springs sets used in the second prototype were included in the final one as
well. In this case, they were drilled to the frame from below, and the springs were tacked
to the agglomerate planks using pin hooks.
6.2
Evaluation
The evaluation of the behaviour of the final prototype was divided in two steps: the mea­
surement of the frequency response of each bar, and the performance of a perception
test with subjects lying on the kalimba bed.
6.2.1
Vibration Measurements
In order to asses if the behaviour of the bars in the Kalimba bed was the one designed
and shown in table 6.1, their frequency response was measured under excitation. In
addition, it was of interest to asses the effect of a person lying on the bars to their frequency
response, since, as it was stated, the resonance frequencies could appear damped and
so not being felt. To do this, the response of the bars was measured in two situations:
one with unloaded bars, and one with a mock body loading them.
6.2.1.1
Experimental setup
The Kalimba bed was excited with two Clark Synthesis TS329 Gold at the middle point of
each long side of the frame. They were driven with low­pass filtered (fl = 300 Hz) white
noise, since the response of interest was in the low frequency range. The input signals
were amplified with a SAMSON amplifier. The vibrational acceleration at a point of the
frame directly on top of one of the transducer was measured with an accelerometer, and
36
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.2: (a) Springs were pinned to the wood planks to increase stability. (b) The
corners and the top frame were glued using wood glue. (c) The assembling in the corners
was reinforced making carpentry dowels. (d)Final prototype with a mock body load on
top, based on black cushions and heavy bags with screws, used to asses the effect of
the body on the frequency response of the bars. The total mass estimated was of 43 kg.
The charge amplifiers Type 2635 connected to the accelerometers are also shown in the
picture.
so it was done with the acceleration at the tip of each cantilevered bar. In both cases, they
were stick to the surface using bee wax. Each of the acceleromenters was connected to a
B&K charge amplifier Type 2635, where the charge sensitivity of the accelerometers was
introduced. A Matlab script controlled a Focusrite Scarlet 2i2 soundcard that handled the
input signals, the measurement of transfer function between the two vibrational acceler­
ations and the FFT analysis.
The frequency response measurement of the loaded bars was arranged by using a mock
body load, based on four cushions with heavy loads placed on top. The total mock body
was weighted with a regular scale and found to be 43 kg, that were equally distributed
along the bars, see figure 6.2d. The accelerometer in the loaded case was placed in the
lower side of the bars.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
37
==PAGE:46==
6.2.1.2
Results
The results of the vibrational measurements are shown in the figure 6.3. A dip at 50 Hz
can be seen in all the bars response that can be related to electric noise. Clear peaks
can be seen in each bar response in the unloaded case. If we compare them with the
expected values shown in table 6.1 there is a general agreement in the bars from 4 to 10,
where an increase of the resonance frequency can be seen with ticker bars in the range of
the expected values from the theory. However, the first three bars show lower values than
those predicted. Trying to predict this discrepancy, two remaining oak bars that had been
left over in the construction were used to measure their mechanical properties, following
the same procedure shown in section 4.3.
The results found for each bar, labelled as OAK A and OAK B are reported in the table 6.2,
and show a big discrepancy of properties between them, in spite of being the same type
of wood. The expected resonance frequency of the cantilevers was recomputed for both
pairs of EL and ρ, and compared with the measured resonances. The results are reported
in table 6.3.
Table 6.2: Values of Young’s modulus in direction of the fibers, density and loss factor for
both oak bars. They show different values of stiffness and density ins spite of being the
same type of wood.
Bar
EL (GPa)
ρ (kg/m3)
η
OAK A
6.40
857.8
0.03
OAK B
17.30
892.40
0.01
The fact that wood with different values of elasticity and density was found, taking into
account that all the wood was bought together, shows that deviations of material properties
can appear within the same species of wood, making it challenging to make predictions. I
this case, a better approach would have been to compute the thickness of the bars based
on measured mechanical properties of the wood. Nevertheless, it can be seen that a
better agreement can be seen in the upper bars (1 to 3) with the oak A.
Still, the agreement is not perfect, and some other factors might be influencing the be­
haviour of the bars. One possible factor is the orthotropy. Bending waves in beams are
characterised by a transverse motion displacement and an angular motion of the differen­
tial elements of the beam, meaning that the elasticity and shear modulus in the other two
Table 6.3: Resonance frequencies meassured for each bar in the unloaded situation,
compared with the resonance frequency predicted by \cref{eq:cantilever} for the two types
of oak used.
Bar
fmeas (Hz)
fOAKA (Hz)
fOAKB (Hz)
1
47
42
67
2
44
39
62
3
43
36
58
4
50
33
53
5
47
30
48
6
36
27
43
7
34
24
38
8
36
21
33
9
22
18
28
10
21
15
24
38
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:47==
natural directions of the wood play a role that is not included in equation (3.1). Another
possible reason for the disagreement could be the imperfections and natural defects of
wood, i.e knots. Finally, the potential effect of the straps could be considered, adding
external shear tensions that can affect as well to the bending motion in the longitudinal
direction.
Regarding the loaded case, it is clear that the resonance behaviour is highly reduced in
the majority of the bars. In contrast, the bar 1 presents almost the same response than in
the unloaded situation. In a similar way, the bar 10 shows a slightly lower reduction effect
than the rest of the bars. This can be explained by the position of the bars, that could be
less affected by the presence of the cushions and loads.
Above 70 Hz the effect of the load seems to disappear, and the behaviour of the bars
is similar. This can be related with modal behaviour of the frame, that seems to be not
affected by the load. Thus, at higher frequencies, the structure will present modes that
can be potentially felt and so can affect to the vibration perception. The challenge arises
when the goal is to control and tune the frequency of this modes.
6.2.2
Perception Test
A test was conducted in which participants subjectively assessed their experience when
lying on the bed. The experiment was divided into two parts. In the first part, the bed
was excited with pure tones with the resonance frequencies measured for each bar (see
the column fmeas in table 6.3), and the participants were asked where in their body the
stimulus was mainly felt. To do this, a sheet with ten body outlines was made, and the
participants were told to draw a circle around the perceived position of the stimulus. They
were told to draw more than one circle if needed, but as few as possible. The sheets used
can be seen in appendix B. Since two tactile transducers were used, it was decided to
analyze the effect in the perception of presenting the two signals out of phase. Therefore,
the experiment was run twice, and the participants were asked to draw a stimulus once
with one pen and subsequently with a different coloured one.
The second part of the experiment was thought of as a proof of concept. The bed was
excited with two different pieces of music, and the participants were told to assess if they
could feel different instruments of the track at different positions of their body. The idea
behind the experiment comes from the fact that cochlear implants listeners find it more
difficult to identify different instruments [35] than normal hearing listeners, mainly because
of their difficulty in perceiving timbre. In this respect, it could be beneficial if additional cues
are brought with vibration perception. The two music tracks were chosen because both
have an initial section with few instruments, and more are progressively joining to the
piece. This was thought to be an easy way to segregate different instruments even for a
participant with no musical knowledge.
6.2.2.1
Experimental setup
The experiment was carried out in a IEC listening room of Building 355, DTU, a room
designed in accordance with the IEC 268­13 standard that is suitable for subjective evalu­
ations with loudspeakers. The equipment used included the two Clark Synthesis TS329,
the SAMSON amplifier and a soundcard Focusrite and computer. The first part of the
experiment was run with a Matlab script that generated the pure tone signals, and the
second part was run with Spotify. A cylindrical pillow was placed on the top part of the
bed, between the top frame and the first bar, in order to increase comfort.
A set of 10 normal hearing participants was used, and their weight and height was asked.
The tallest subject was 185 cm, and the shortest 155 cm, and the range of weights went
from 57 kg to 90 kg. As the middle bar was fixed, the shortest participants were not able
to reach the first bar of the bed, and the pillow had to be placed between bars one and
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
39
==PAGE:48==
two. At the same time, not all participants could rest their feet in the frame.
Pictures of the setup and a participant taking the test can be seen figure 6.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4: The perception experiment was conducted in the IEC listening room of building
355 at DTU. (a) Experimental setup. (b) Subject taking part in the perception experiment.
6.2.2.2
Results
The results of the first part of the experiment are shown in figure 6.5. In order to analyze
the answers obtained in this experiment, the body was divided in six sections: Head,
Upper Back, Lower Back, Butt, Upper Legs and Lower Legs. Every circle drawn for each
stimulus was included in one of these subdivisions according to their position, and the
histograms were plotted with the answers. The fact that the total number of answers for
each stimulus is not always ten is due to the participants being allowed to draw more
than one circle per stimulus. This analysis was done for both in phase and out of phase
signals.
For subjects tall enough to be lying with their feet resting on the lower part of the frame, and
with their head on the cushion between the upper part of the frame and the first bar, the
body positions expected to be activated by each bar of the body is shown in table 6.4. As
it was stated before, participants with very different heights participated in the experiment,
and this clearly affected the results.
Table 6.4: Positions in the body expected to be activated by each bar, assuming a subject
tall enough to be lying with the feet resting on the lower frame and the head on the cushion
between the upper frame and the first bar.
Bars
Position
1 ­ 3
Upper Back
4 ­ 6
Lower Back
7 ­ 8
Upper Legs
9 ­ 10
Lower Legs
Regarding the case of in phase signals, it can be seen that the majority of the stimulus
were felt in the butt by at least one participant. This indicates that mainly the input stimulus
40
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:49==
Table 6.5: Instruments identified by the participants and summarized positions where they
could be felt.
Instruments
Position
Bass
Strongly felt in the butt
Drums
Back. Shoulders. Arms. Head
Horns
Felt in the upper back. Feeling of playback.
Tambourine
Travelling along the spine.
Cymbals
Behind the head.
Guitar
Upper back. Head. Chest.
Keys
Upper part
Voice
Feet
is felt in this case, and not the resonant movement of the bar excited. Two reasons can be
argued in this respect. First, the dimensions of the subject could have avoided the contact
with the bar. Second, the contact existed but was too strong that the bar motion was
damped by the presence of the body. This last effect was already seen in the comparison
between loaded and unloaded measurements in section 6.2.1.2.
The load distribution of a lying body is mainly centered in the upper back, the butt and the
feet. This implies that the positions the bars could be more easily felt are the lower back
and the upper legs. However, the contact must exist, which is not always possible due to
the dimensions of the participant body. If we attend Bar 5, 3 out of 9 participants could
feel a stimulus in the lower back that could be related with the resonance of the bar. On
the other hand, bar 4 shows a clear effect of damping or bad positioning. Bar 7 shows
this behaviour strongly as well, though 1 out of 7 circles indicated a hit in the upper legs,
and bar 8 shows 3 out of 10 hits in this position. Bars 9 and 10 were mainly felt in the
lower part of the body by all the participants.
Regarding the case of out of phase signals, the results are more diffused. Although the
frequency is the same for each stimulus, the two situations were clearly felt as different.
This shows that the effect of the phase introduces a cue in the perception of the vibratory
signals. While the previous case showed a relatively clear difference between stimulus felt
in the butt and the head, and those with potential effect of the bars for some participants,
in the out of phase situation, the answers of the participants are more diffuse. Still, the
excitation in the back is present in almost all the stimuli.
The second part of the experiment was qualitatively analyzed by the comments of the
different participants. table 6.5 summarizes the different instruments that were identified
by the participants, and the positions where they could feel them. It is important to highlight
that the signal produced by the transducers is audio­tactile, meaning that the perception
will be a combination between hearing and touch.
Overall, all the participants could separate different instruments at different positions.
Mainly all found the bass line being stronger in the butt, and the rest of instruments with
more high frequency components were felt in the upper part of the body. The low fre­
quency components, as it was seen in the first part of the experiment, are mainly felt in the
butt, which could explain the strong perception of the bass line there. Some participants
argued that they could hear some instruments, specially horns, coming from different po­
sitions, even as if they were play backed. This could suggest that some sound is radiated
from the structure, and could explain that this happens for instruments with strong high
frequency components.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.3: Transfer accelerations between the input position of the transducer and each
bar. The numbering of the bars starts to count from the upper part of the bed.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar1
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar2
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar3
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar4
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar5
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar6
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar7
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar8
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar9
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
10
20
30
40
50
60
70 80 90100
f (Hz)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
H1 - Magnitude (dB)
Transfer function Bar10
Experimental No Load
Experimental Load
42
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:51==
Bar 1
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Counts
In Phase
Bar 2
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 3
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 4
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 5
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 6
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Counts
Bar 7
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 8
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 9
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 10
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
(a)
Bar 1
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Counts
Out Phase
Bar 2
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 3
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 4
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 5
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 6
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Counts
Bar 7
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 8
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 9
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
Bar 10
Head
Up. back
L. back
Butt
Up. legs
L. legs
0
2
4
6
8
(b)
Figure 6.5: Results summarized of the first part of the perception test. The title of each
bar plot indicates wich bar of the bed was excited. The y­axis shows the number of times
the participants drew a circle in one of the six divisions of the body: Head, Upper back,
Lower back, Butt, Upper legs and Lower legs. (a) Signals from transducers in phase. (b)
Signals from transducers out of phase.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
43
==PAGE:52==
44
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:53==
7
Conclusions
Several audiotactile installations have been built recently as a way of combining the sense
of hearing and the sense of touch in a multimodal perception. One of the aims behind this
installations is to try to enhance the music experience of hearing impaired people, based
on the idea of modal substitution. In this thesis, an audiotactile installation was built, the
so­called Kalimba bed, based on the analysis of the local frequency selectivity of a system
of cantilevers with different geometries.
The reliability of an such installation was analyzed by means of building three prototypes.
The first one had the purpose of verifying the local frequency selectivity of a system of
cantilevers and the tuning method. It was compared with a COMSOL model, pointing out
the necessity of including a system of springs to enhance the shaker performance.
The second prototype included the human dimensions, ergonomic and support consider­
ations, and the springs system. The evaluation carried out by subjects lying on it led to the
conclusion that a more precise prototype was needed for the bars to show the expected
frequency response and to be felt more easily.
The final prototype was an improved version of the second one, with good quality wood
and a better finish. The measurement of the mechanical properties before the building of
the prototype would have helped to design the length of the bars in a smarter way. An
evaluation based on vibration frequency response of the bars and a perception test with
normal hearing participants showed that the effect of the body shape of the subject has
a big effect in the frequency response of some bars, compromising the performance of
the Kalimba at the affected bars. Besides, the participants could assess the perception of
different musical instruments at different positions of their body when the Kalimba was ex­
cited with music tracks. Larger samples of participants would help to obtain more robust
conclusions.
Further investigations should focus on reducing this dependency of the body shape of the
subject, in order to build an audiotactile installation inclusive and reliable for everyone.
Besides, the development of simulations should be used as a tool to make decisions in
the design and building process.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
45
==PAGE:54==
46
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:55==
8
Further investigations and
improvements
Once the results obtained from the evaluation of the final prototype are analyzed, it is
time to set the direction for the next steps of the project, as it was done with the first and
second prototypes.
As it was highlighted in the vibration measurement and the perception test of the final
prototype, the body load has an important effect in the frequency response of the bars.
In addition to this, it has been shown that, even when the frequency response could be
the desired one, a bad positioning or a specific body shape can diminish the Kalimba
performance. In an ideal design, the frequency response and the perception should be
the least dependent possible on height, weight or body shape of the subject.
Making the bars shorter would produce higher resonance frequencies and would reduce
the excessive contact at some points. However, the effect of different body shapes would
not be solved. A potential way to avoid this might be to choose a frame shape where the
body load is more equally distributed, e.g. an S­shape, in the way of a garden chair or a
street bench. The decoupling of the vibrating structure with the bars from the body of the
person could lead to good results as well. This path is being investigated by three first
year students as part of a special course that will finish in July 2021. In their design, a
lounge­shape wooden structure is connected from behind of the back rest to a wooden
frame where the bars are embedded. This structure would be excited with the tactile
transducers while a person is sitting in the chair, and the bars would resonate without
being affected by the body load. The contact with the body could be achieved by tilting
the bars towards the subject. This model is being supported by a COMSOL simulation.
Once the problem of the weight is fixed, such an installation opens a broad range of
possible applications. Other works, like the master thesis of Ali Borhan­Azad, analyzes
the effect of amplitude modulation vibratory signals in the perception of tension in music. In
the Kalimba, if the the resonance frequency of the bars are known, they could be combined
to create complex vibratory signals such as amplitude modulation, and so try to replicate
the tension of music. Moreover, it has been analyed the possibility of creating a software
embedded system connected to a real Kalimba that could control the vibration of each
bar.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. World report on Hearing. 2021, pp. 1–272. ISBN: 9789240020481.
[2]
Jérémy Marozeau. “Why People with a Cochlear Implant Listen to Music”. In: Lec­
ture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial In­
telligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 12631 LNCS (2021), pp. 409–421.
ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-70210-6_27.
[3]
Jérémy Marozeau. “Why People with a Cochlear Implant Listen to Music”. In: Lec­
ture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial In­
telligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 12631 LNCS (2021), pp. 409–421.
ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-70210-6_27.
[4]
Suranga Nanayakkara et al. “Enhancing Musical Experience for the Hearing­Impaired
Using Visual and Haptic Displays”. In: Human­computer Interaction 28 (Jan. 2012).
DOI: 10.1080/07370024.2012.697006.
[5]
Anant Baijal et al. “Composing vibrotactile music: A multisensory experience with
the Emoti­chair”. In: Mar. 2012. DOI: 10.1109/HAPTIC.2012.6183839.
[6]
Rahul Chaudhari, Ercan Altinsoy, and Eckehard Steinbach. “Haptics”. In: (), pp. 261–
276. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-02681-7.
[7]
David Birnbaum and Marcelo Wanderley. “A systematic approach to musical vibro­
tactile feedback”. In: International Computer Music Conference, ICMC 2007 (Apr.
2011).
[8]
Clark Synthesis. Clark Synthesis. URL: https://clarksynthesis.com/.
[9]
Maria Karam et al. “The emoti­chair: An interactive tactile music exhibit”. In: Con­
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ­ Proceedings January (2010),
pp. 3069–3074. DOI: 10.1145/1753846.1753919.
[10]
Maria Karam, Frank A. Russo, and Deborah I. Fels. “Designing the model human
cochlea: An ambient crossmodal audio­tactile display”. In: 2.3 (2009), pp. 160–169.
DOI: 10.1109/TOH.2009.32.
[11]
Darmstad School. Darmstad. URL: https : / / internationales - musikinstitut . de / de /
ferienkurse/ueber/info/.
[12]
Alessandro Perini. audiotactilechair. URL: https://alessandroperini.com/2014/08/
06/audiotactile-chair/.
[13]
Alessandro Perini. woodenwaves. URL: https://alessandroperini.com/2015/07/02/
wooden-waves/.
[14]
HarpArtLab. harpartlab. URL: https://www.harpartlab.se/index.html.
[15]
Catherine L Reed. “Tactile Perception”. In: 4 (2002), p. 2002.
[16]
Victoria E. Abraira and David D. Ginty. “The sensory neurons of touch”. In: Neuron
79.4 (2013), pp. 618–639. ISSN: 08966273. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.051.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.051.
[17]
Vincent Hayward. “A Brief Overview of the Human Somatosensory System”. In: Mu­
sical Haptics. Ed. by Papetti S. and Saitis C. Vol. 1. 2000. Chap. 3. ISBN: 9783319583150.
DOI: 10.1109/nnsp.2000.889365.
[18]
Caroline Malamud­Kessler et al. “Fisiología de la vibración”. In: Revista Mexicana
de Neurociencia 15.3 (2014), pp. 163–170. ISSN: 16655044.
[19]
C.J. Plack. The Sense of Hearing. 2nd Edition. English. 3rd ed. United Kingdom:
Psychology Press Ltd, 2013.
[20]
S. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier. Theory of Elasticity. 1967. DOI: 10.2307/3613011.
48
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:57==
[21]
Jacob Fish and Ted Belytschko. Finite Element Formulation for One­Dimensional
Problems. 2007, pp. 93–129. ISBN: 9780470035801. DOI: 10.1002/9780470510858.
ch5.
[22]
Wood handbook: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Forest Products Labo­
ratory, 2010.
[23]
COMSOL Multiphysics. “Introduction to COMSOL multiphysics®”. In: COMSOL Mul­
tiphysics, Burlington, MA, accessed Feb 9 (2020), p. 2018.
[24]
J. S. Lamancusa. Vibration Isolation Lecture. 2002.
[25]
Jean Loïc Le Carrou et al. “Modelling of sympathetic string vibrations”. In: Acta
Acustica united with Acustica 91.2 (2005), pp. 277–288. ISSN: 16101928.
[26]
Raymond J. Roark and Ali M. Sadegh. Roarks formulas for stress and strain. McGraw­
Hill Education, 2020.
[27]
Clark Synthesis. TS329. URL: https://clarksynthesis.com/tst329-gold-transducer/.
[28]
M. Ohlrich. Structure­Borne Sound and Vibration. 7022. 2011.
[29]
Allsteel Scott Openshaw and Allsteel Erin Taylor. “Ergonomics and Design A Ref­
erence Guide”. In: Allsteel design to work build to last (2006), pp. 1–2.
[30]
Isotechinc. Vibration Isolation. URL: https://www.isotechinc.com/.
[31]
Frederiksberg Fjedrerfabrik. Springs factory. URL: https://www.frederiksbergfjederfabrik.
dk/.
[32]
Københavns Listefabrik. Wood factory. URL: https://www.kbhlistefabrik.dk/.
[33]
Brétéché Sylvain. The Deaf Musical Experience.: Bodily And Visual Specificities:
Corpaurality And Vusicality. Jan. 2021.
[34]
Elena Rusconi et al. “Spatial representation of pitch height: the SMARC effect”. In:
Cognition 99.2 (2006), pp. 113–129. ISSN: 0010­0277. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cognition.2005.01.004.
[35]
H Innes­Brown et al. “New music for the Bionic Ear: An assessment of the enjoyment
of six new works composed for cochlear implant recipients”. In: May 2014 (2012),
pp. 482–491.
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
49
==PAGE:58==
50
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
==PAGE:59==
A
SOLIDWORKS plans for second
prototype
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
51
==PAGE:60==
 0,09 
 0,09 
 0,05 
 0,02 
 0,30 
COMPLETE MODEL
 0,08 
 0,13 
 0,62 
 0,04 
 0,21 
 0,14 
 0,10 
 0,30 
 0,13 
 1,80 
 0,05 
 0,05 
 0,13 
 0,10 
 1,65 
 0,25 
 0,21 
 0,23 
 0,50 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
==PAGE:61==
 1,80 
 0,09 
 0,05 
FRAME 1: LEFT SIDE
 1,69 
 0,47 
 0,42 
 0,08 
 1,80 
 0,18 
 1,30 
 0,28 
 0,62 
 0,23 
 0,81 
 0,94 
 1,04 
 1,09 
 0,67 
 1,35 
 1,56 
 0,06 
==PAGE:62==
FRAME 2 RIGHT SIDE
 0,08 
 0,18 
 0,32 
 0,76 
 0,37 
 1,16 
 1,80 
 0,57 
 0,71 
 1,60 
 0,80 
 0,93 
 1,47 
 0,52 
 1,42 
 1,21 
 1,73 
 0,06 
 0,05 
 0,09 
 1,80 
==PAGE:63==
B
Perception test sheets
An audiotactile art installation for hearing impaired people
55
==PAGE:64==
KALIMBA BED - Perception test 
 
Task 1: Draw in the picture a circle where the presented stimulus is mainly 
felt. Note that the orientation of the picture corresponds to a person lying 
face up. You can draw more than one circle if desired. 
Example: If the third stimulus was felt mainly in the right shoulder, draw a 
circle in the right shoulder of the body outline:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example 
 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:65==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
