==PAGE:1==
Oxford Nanopore Sequencing as a
Tool to Study Methylation Levels in
Data Obtained from Patients with My­
otonic Dystrophy Type 1
Astrid Rasmussen s193254
Technical University of Denmark
Spring 2021
MSc Thesis (30 ECTS)
Supervisors:
Zeynep Tümer
Anders Gorm Pedersen
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder. The symp­
toms are highly variable and include delayed relaxation of the skeletal muscles after contrac­
tion (myotonia), muscle degeneration and weakness, and cataracts. It is caused by an un­
stable expanded CTG repeat in the 3’ UTR of DMPK which leads to the expression of a toxic
gain­of­function RNA that affects splicing of a wide range of genes. The unstable repeat has
a bias towards expansion in both the germline and soma which results in earlier disease on­
set in successive generations as repeat length has been loosely correlated with age of onset.
Interruptions in the repeat have been correlated with less somatic instability and slower dis­
ease progression over time. Previous studies have found hypermethylation both upstream and
downstream of the repeat with higher levels in patients with a maternally inherited disease allele.
Hypermethylation has been associated with altered transcription levels of DMPK and nearby
genes and earlier age of onset. Diagnosis of DM1 usually only involves the detection of an
expanded repeat which makes disease prognosis difficult. Furthermore, current methods to
determine repeat length are time consuming and expensive. New developments in long­read
sequencing has made it possible to study previously inaccessible genomic regions and detect
epigenetic modifications simultaneously.
In this study Cas9­targeted nanopore sequencing was used to simultaneously detect aberrant
blood methylation levels surrounding the CTG repeat and determine the progenitor and modal
repeat lengths, the degree of somatic instability and repeat interruptions in four non­congenital
DM1 patients.
==PAGE:3==
Resume
Dystrofia myotonica type 1 (DM1) er en autosomal dominant multisystemisk sygdom. Symp­
tomerne er varierende og inkluderer forsinket afslapning af skeletmusklerne efter sammen­
trækning (myotoni), muskeldegeneration og svaghed, samt grå stær. Sygdommen er forårsaget
ef en ustabil ekspanderet CTG­repetition i 3’ UTR af DMPK hvilket leder til ekspression af et
toksisk gain­of­function RNA der påvirker splejsning af en lang række gener. Den ustabile CTG­
repetition har tendens til at ekspandere i både kønsceller og somatiske celler hvilket resulterer
i tidligere sygdomsudbrud fra generation til generation da længden af CTG­repetitionen er løst
korreleret med alder ved sygdomsdebut. Afbrydelser i repetitionen er korreleret med mindre
somatisk ustabilitet og langsommere sygdomprogression.
I tidligere studier er der fundet hypermetylering både opstrøms og nedstrøms for repetitionen
med mere metylering hos patienter med en maternel nedarvet sygdomsallel. Hypermetylering
er associeret med ændret transkription af DMPK og nærliggende gener samt tidligere syg­
domsdebut. Diagnose af DM1 involverer typisk påvisning af en ekspanderet repetition hvilket
gør sygdomsprognosen vanskelig. Derudover er nuværende metoder til at bestemme længden
af en repetition både tidskrævende og dyre. Ny udvikling indenfor sekventering af lange DNA
sekvenser har gjort det muligt at undersøge tidligere utilgængelige genomiske regioner og sam­
tidigt detektere epigenetiske modifikationer.
I dette studie blev Cas9­targeteret nanopore sekventering brugt til at detektere atypisk metyler­
ing i området omkring CTG­repetitionen samt bestemme længden på den nedarvede repetition,
graden af somatisk ustabilitet og afbrydelser i repetitionen hos fire patienter med klassisk DM1.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
iii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s thesis has been prepared over five months and is the final project of the Mas­
ter of Science in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology conducted at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). The project was carried out at the Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Rigshospitalet and the research was supervised by Zeynep Tümer and Anders Gorm
Pedersen.
I would like to thank my supervisors for their help and guidance throughout the project. I would
also like to thank Ulf Birkedal for guidance in the lab and introduction to Nanopore sequencing
along with useful inputs and proofreading of the project and Ph.D student Mathis Hildonen for
sharing his knowledge of DM1, helping in the lab and proofreading the project.
I would also like to thank John Vissing for referring the DM1 patients and Morten Dunø for
supplying the DNA obtained from the DM1 patients used in this study.
Astrid Rasmussen ­ s193254
Signature
Date
iv
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
25.06.2021
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of abbrevations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Myotonic Dystrophy type 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Oxford Nanopore Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Aim of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Materials and methods
7
2.1
Patient group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Library preparation and Cas9 targeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Oxford Nanopore Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Nanopore data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
12
3.1
Repeat length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Methylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Discussion and conclusion
23
4.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Outlook
27
A Sequencing statistics
33
B Repeat length
57
C Methylation
60
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
v
==PAGE:6==
List of abbrevations
DM1
Myotonic dystrophy type 1
UTR
Untranslated region
DMPK
Dystrophia myotonica protein kinase
DMWD
DM1 locus, WD repeat containing
SIX5
SIX Homeobox 5
CUG­BP
CUG­binding protein 1
MBNL1
Muscleblind­like 1
DNMT
DNA methyltransferase
5­mC
5­methylcytosine
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
TP­PCR
Triplet­primed PCR
TGS
Third generation sequencing
ONT
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
PacBIO
Pacific Biosciences
SMRT
Single­molecule, real­time sequencing
nCATS
Nanopore Cas9­targeted sequencing
CRISPR
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
crRNA
CRISPR RNA
tracrRNA
trans­activating crRNA
PAM
Protospacer adjacent motif
Roi
Region of interest
KCl
Potassium chloride
HDF5
Hierarchical data format
BRNN
Bidirectional recurrent neural network
STRique
Short tandem repeat identification, quantification and evaluation
Tsv
Tab­seperated values
HMM
Hidden markow model
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
CNN
Convolutional neural network
vi
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Myotonic Dystrophy type 1
1.1.1
Clinical presentation
Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1, [OMIM 160900]) is a highly variable multisystem neuromus­
cular disease. It is estimated to affect 1 in 8000 [1] and is the most common form of adult onset
muscular dystrophies. DM1 is caused by an unstable expanded CTG repeat in the 3’ untrans­
lated region (UTR) of the dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) gene [2] [3] and the
length of the CTG repeat has to a certain extent been shown to correlate with how severely an
individual is affected by the disease and the age of onset [4]. The phenotype is typically divided
into three grades; severe, classic and mild, and five categories; congenital, infantile, juvenile,
adult, and late­onset with the extreme heterogeneity of the disease causing significant overlaps
between the groups (Table 1.1).
Category
Age of onset
Typical
repeat size
Typical symptoms
Congenital
< 1 month
>1000
Preterm delivery,
Respiratory difficulties,
Hypotonia, Hyporeflexia,
High mortality [5]
Infantile
1 month ­ 10
years
500­1000
Intellectual impairment,
Deficits in social skills [6]
Juvenile
10 ­ 20 years
400­700
Facial dysmorphisms,
Myotonia [4]
Adult
20 ­ 40 years
200­600
Myotonia, Cataracts,
Cardiac conduction
defects, Obesity [4]
Late­onset
> 40 years
50­500
Mild weakness, Myotonia,
Cataracts [7]
Table 1.1: The size of the CTG repeat is roughly correlated with age of onset and symptoms.
1.1.2
Genetic background
The elongated repeat is transcribed into mRNA and due to the high GC content it forms a hairpin
structure that is retained in nuclear foci thereby reducing DMPK protein levels [8]. The elongated
repeat also alters adjacent chromatin structure which affects transcription of the DMPK flanking
genes DMWD and SIX5 [9]. In addition to this the elongated repeat cause pathogenicity through
an RNA gain­of­function mechanism [10] that leads to splicing defects through increased levels
of CUG­binding protein 1 (CUG­BP1) and decreased levels of Muscleblind­like 1 (MBNL1) [11]
Figure 1.1.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: RNA gain­of­function model for DM1. The CTG expansion in the 3’ UTR of the DMPK
gene is transcribed into a mutant RNA that forms a stable hairpin structure. The RNA­binding
protein MBNL1 binds to the double­stranded hairpin structure and is co­localized to nuclear foci
causing its concentration to drop below a functional threshold [11]. The stability of CUG­BP1
is increased through hyperphosphorylation which increases the half­life and steady state levels
of the protein. MBNL1 and CUGBP1 are both regulators of alternative splicing explaining why
more than 24 splicing events are mis­regulated in DM1 [12]. Figure created with BioRender.com
Repeat instability
The expanded repeat is unstable in both the germline and the soma with a bias for expansion
in both [13] [14]. Germline instability explains the observed inter­generational worsening of
symptoms (anticipation) while somatic instability, which is both repeat size and age dependent,
explains some of the discrepancies between genotype and phenotype. A proposed mechanism
for the instability of the repeat is polymerase slippage. The expanded CTG repeat folds into
hairpin structures that are more stable the longer the repeat is and these secondary structures
are thought to cause the DNA polymerase to slip during replication [15] [16].
Interruptions
Interruptions in the CTG repeat containing CCG, GGC, CTC or CAG motifs are estimated to
appear in 3­5 % of DM1 patients [17] [18]. Repeat interruptions have been shown to correlate
with a milder phenotype and a later age of onset than expected, possibly caused by alteration of
the mRNA hairpin structure causing decreased affinity for MBNL1. Furthermore, patients with
2
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:9==
repeat interruptions show increased stability of the repeat in both the germline and the soma
due to protecting against slippage by the interruptions [19] [20].
Methylation
Several recent studies have reported increased methylation levels surrounding the CTG repeat
in DM1 patients [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25]. Methylation is an epigenetic modification of the
genome that is essential for normal development, disease control and aging through regulation
of gene expression and alternative splicing [26]. It is facilitated by the DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT) family and is usually found at CpG dineucleotides where the most common base mod­
ification is the addition of a methyl group to the 5­position of cytosine, making 5­methylcytosine
(5­mC) [27]. Up to 70­80% of CpG dineucleotides in mammals are methylated and although
they are generally underrepresented in the genome they are sometimes found clustered to­
gether into CpG islands which, in contrast, tend to be unmethylated. CpG islands are generally
associated with promoters and methylation of them will silence gene expression through re­
cruitment of proteins that interfere with the binding of transcription factors or stabilize chromatin
structure [28].
The CTG repeat is located in a 3.5 kb CpG island and expansion of the repeat leads to hy­
permethylation [20] which is thought to influence DM1 phenotype through reduction in SIX5
expression [29]. There is a positive correlation between methylation levels and repeat length
in addition to between hypermethylation and maternal transmission of the disease. Further­
more, differential methylation patterns have been observed in DM1 patients with uninterrupted
repeats and those with repeat interruptions. For interrupted alleles higher levels of methylation
were found downstream of the repeat [21] [20].
1.1.3
Current diagnostic methods
Instability of the CTG repeat and the fact that it can be several thousand nucleotides long makes
exact determination of the length difficult. Currently several techniques are being used to detect
expanded repeats and quantify their length with varying results [30]. Genetic testing for DM1
was traditionally performed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Southern blotting to find
the length of the CTG repeat. If two alleles with a low (< 37) number of repeats were detected
using standard PCR then DM1 was ruled out. If, however, only one allele length was detected
then subsequent techniques including Southern blotting, long­range PCR and/or triplet­primed
PCR (TP­PCR) can be emplyed. Standard PCR can detect the lower range of CTG expansions
but nothing over ~150 repeats and the technique has a tendency to preferentially amplify smaller
alleles(allelic dropout) which can lead to false negatives. Long­range PCR account for some of
this allelic dropout by using primers that generate larger amplicons [31]. TP­PCR was developed
specifically for Myotonic dystrophy but since used in a wide range of triplet repeat diseases. TP­
PCR amplifies the DM1 locus from a primer flanking the repeat and multiple priming sites within
the repeat. This creates a characteristic ladder that can be used to detect if there is an expanded
repeat [32]. TP­PCR has widely replaced Southern blotting but to determine the exact length of
the repeat, Southern blotting which requires high concentrations of DNA and is labor intensive,
expensive, and time consuming still needs to be used. Southern blotting of DNA from a DM1
patient will usually present as a smear due to the somatic instability [31].
Although the presence of repeat interruptions can be detected with TP­PCR they are not cur­
rently part of the clinical diagnosis of DM1. Methylation levels are likewise not part of the di­
agnosis. The current gold standard to detect methylation is bisulfite conversion where bisulfite
is used to deaminate unmethylated cytosines into uracil while methylated cytosines remain un­
changed. Bisulfite converted DNA can be analyzed with The infinium methylation EPIC array
that covers more than 850,000 sites in the genome [33] or pyrosequencing where the light emit­
ted during the addition of nucleotides when synthesizing a complementary strand is measured
and returned as a sequence [34].
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
3
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Third generation sequencing (TGS) is characterized by the ability to sequence long reads in
real time and it is currently provided by Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) and Pacific Bio­
sciences (PacBIO). TGS is based on single­molecule sequencing which is amplification free
and allows for direct identification of base modifications [35].
PacBIO offers single­molecule, real­time (SMRT) sequencing that can sequence reads up to
40­70 kb and detect DNA methylation through polymerase kinetics. SMRT sequencing has a
relatively high error rate that can reach 10­15% but because the errors are random the con­
sensus accuracy can reach 99.999%. However, to confidently detect methylated bases SMRT
requires a coverage of ~250x per strand which makes it expensive and impractical [36].
ONT entered the market in 2014 with the release of the MinION sequencing device and the
technique is based on the measurement of ionic current fluctuations when a single­stranded
molecule is passed through a nanopore (Figure 1.2). The electric signals are sensitive to base
modifications and DNA methylation can be detected at down to ~10x coverage [37]. The MinION
sequencing device functions as a dock for a consumable flow cell and the error rate depends on
the type of flow cell used. The most commonly used flow cell is the R9.4 that has an error rate
of 5% which is relatively high when compared to the ~0.1­1% error rates of short­read platforms
[38]. The longest read length sequenced with ONT is 2.3 Mb [39].
Figure 1.2:
Oxford Nanopore
Technologies
sequencing
de­
vices
contain
thousands
of
nanopores.
Each nanopore is
placed in a lipid bilayer between
two
compartments
with
salt
solution. When a bias voltage is
applied it will drive ions from the
negative compartment, through
the nanopore and into the pos­
itive compartment producing a
steady ionic current that can
be measured.
If DNA or RNA
is added their negative charge
will
likewise
translocate
them
through the nanopore creating
changes in the electrical current
which can be used to identify
the specific nucleotides passing
through at any one time. As soon
as the transcript has passed
through the pore it is written
to the disk allowing for real­
time analysis of the data [40].
Figure from Oxford Nanopore
Technologies.
ONT currently manufactures three different sequencing devices; MinION which can sequence
one sample at a time and is portable, GridION, a scale up of MinION that can sequence five
4
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:11==
samples in parallel, and PromethION for large scale sequencing. With the pocket sized MinION
sequencing device it is possible to sequence at remote sites such as the rainforest [41] or even
in space on the International Space Station [42]. It is approximately the size of cell phone,
weighs less than 100 g and can sequence more than 25 Gb per flow cell at a relatively low cost.
Long reads makes it possible to sequence whole repetitive regions in the genome and resolve
problems with phasing in regions that are low in single nucleotide polymorphisms which is other­
wise challenging [37] [43]. Moreover, the process is amplification­free resulting in preservation
of base modifications such as 5­mC which can be detected in a high number of CpG sites.
In several studies base modifications have successfully been called from the electrical signals
produced by nanopore [44] [45] [46].
The data from Oxford Nanopore Technology’s sequencers is stored as fast5 files. Instead of
storing every single read in its own fast5 file the current standard is now multifast5 files where
thousands of reads are stored in the same fast5 file. This concatenation of data makes the files
more space­efficient by for example decreasing the amount of metadata and allows them to
be processed faster than single read fast5 files. The raw fast5 files contain information about
the electrical current output, also called the squiggle which is decoded by a machine learning
algorithm to produce basecalls.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
5
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Aim of the study
In this thesis Oxford Nanopore sequencing will be used to investigate the length of the triplet
repeat in patients with Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) along with possible repeat interruptions
and methylation levels surrounding the disease causing triplet repeat.
The following hypotheses will be investigated:
• It is hypothesized that nanopore Cas9­targeted sequencing will provide sufficient cover­
age to study methylation levels in DNA from DM1 patients and controls.
• It is hypothesized that DM1 patients will have a different methylation profile surrounding
the disease causing triplet repeat compared to controls as have been shown with pyrose­
quencing and EPIC array.
The ultimate goal is to use nanopore sequencing as a tool to investigate how methylation, repeat
length and interruptions affect disease progression and age of onset.
6
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:13==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Patient group
DNA extracted from peripheral blood samples from four non­congenital DM1 patients and four
controls was sequenced using nanopore Cas9­targeted sequencing (nCATS).
The patients were chosen from a larger cohort (n=68) used in a study where pyrosequencing
was used to measure methylation levels at 14 sites surrounding the disease causing CTG re­
peat. [21]. Further studies were made prior to the present project, where EPIC array was used
to investigate the global methylation levels including 22 sites surrounding the repeat. The four
patients selected from the cohort, showed the highest methylation levels in the pyrosequencing
results, and TP­PCR revealed repeat interruptions in one of the patients. The patients are all
male and have a maternally inherited disease allele and the controls were chosen to match the
patients in age and sex (Table 2.1).
ID
Sex
Age at time of sample
DNA sampling time
Repeat interruptions
Patient 1
Male
16
2003
Yes
Patient 2
Male
43
2004
No
Patient 3
Male
23
2012
No
Patient 4
Male
40
2013
No
Control 1
Male
16
2018
­
Control 2
Male
43
2017
­
Control 3
Male
23
2018
­
Control 4
Male
40
2018
­
Table 2.1: Overview of patients and controls used in the study.
2.2
Library preparation and Cas9 targeting
The DNA libraries were prepared according to the nanopore protocol ’Cas9 Sequencing Kit
(SQK­CS9109)’ [47]. In line with protocol recommendations approximately 5 µg of genomic
DNA was used to make each library.
nCATS is a method that combines targeted excision of a region of interest by the CRISPR­
Cas system and long­read nanopore sequencing [48]. Clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR) is a defence mechanism utilized by archaea and bacteria to
fight invading viruses and phages by cleaving them with nucleases [49]. The Cas9 nuclease
is part of the type II CRISPR system along with two non­coding RNAs; a 20­bp CRISPR RNA
(crRNA) and a trans­activating crRNA (tracrRNA). The crRNA determines where Cas9 cleaves
and together with the tracrRNA it forms short guide RNA which is then combined with the Cas9
enzyme to form Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) [50]. Specific sites in the genome
can be targeted by designing crRNA oligoes that are identical to the target site. When an RNP
binds to the target site, the double stranded DNA is locally denatured and the crRNA hybridizes
to the non­target strand. For the RNP to bind and to create directionality which is critical when
performing Cas9­targeted sequencing, the target strand must contain a protospacer adjacent
motif (PAM). PAM consists of three nucleotides (5’­NGG­3’) and should be directly downstream
of the target sequence. Cas9 cuts the DNA 3 bp upstream of PAM and will in most cases stay
bound to the PAM­distal end of the DNA [51].
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
7
==PAGE:14==
To reduce off­target sequencing, native DNA ends were dephosphorylated prior to Cas9 cleav­
ing, leaving only the newly Cas9 cleaved ends phosphorylated. dATP and Taq polymerase
were added for dA­tailing of free 3’ ends to prepare blunt ends for adapter ligation. Sequencing
adapters which will preferentially ligate to ends that are both phosphorylated and dA­tailed were
added. The Cas9 enzyme largely remains bound to the non­target side of the cut, only allowing
adaptor ligation to defined ends, and is with the dephosphorylation prior to Cas9 cleavage the
basis for the selectivity of Cas9­targeted sequencing.
After adapter ligation the samples were incubated with AMPure XP beads and washed twice with
a proprietary short fragment buffer to remove unligated adapters, other short DNA fragments,
concentrates and buffer­exchanges. Lastly, the DNA library was resuspended in Elution buffer
for subsequent loading on flow cells.
For this study, four sites in the genome were selected for Cas9 guided cleavage; two upstream
and two downstream of the CpG island downstream of the DMPK gene on chromosome 19
(Figure 2.1). The four Cas9 oligos were pooled with an additional 18 for a small sequencing
panel, but these are not related to the present project and will not be discussed further. By
using an excision approach with redundancy; two cut sites upstream of the region of interest
(roi) targeting the + strand and two cut sites downstream targeting the ­ strand, the coverage of
target­sites is improved compared to using a single guide RNA panel. Furthermore, enrichment
of the roi is ensured even if one of the crRNAs fails to bind and cleave [48].
The crRNAs were designed using the crRNA probe design tool CHOPCHOP which will find
all possible target sites based on available PAM sequences [52] and the IDT tool ’CRISPR­
Cas9 guide RNA design checker’ which scores crRNAs based on their targeting potential [53].
The crRNA were selected based on highest predicted on­target potential and lowest predicted
off­target potential.
Figure 2.1: Image from the UCSC genome browser showing the location of the SIX5 gene in
dark blue, the location of the DMPK gene in green, the location of the CpG island in the 3’ end
of the DMPK gene in red. The locations of the Cas9 cleavage sites upstream the CpG island
are shown in blue and the locations of the Cas9 cleavage sites downstream the CpG island are
shown in black.(http://genome.ucsc.edu)
2.3
Oxford Nanopore Sequencing
The DNA libraries were sequenced using the Oxford Nanopore Technologies sequencing in­
strument MinION Mk1B and SpotON R9.4.1 flow cells. The sequencing runs were operated
using the MinKNOW software.
2.3.1
Flow Cell Check
Prior to sequencing, a flow cell check was performed according to the nanopore protocol ’Flow
Cell Check’ [54] to assess the number of active pores in the flow cell. A SpotON R9.4.1 flow
cell can have up to 2048 active pores and the minimum number of active pores should be 800.
All flow cells are shipped with a QC molecule in the buffer which is used to give an estimate of
the number of active pores. The MinION device with the flow cell is connected to the computer
8
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:15==
through a USB­3 port and the flow cell check is performed using the MinKNOW software.
2.3.2
Priming flow cell and loading DNA library
The flow cell was primed and the DNA library was loaded according to the Nanopore protocol
’Cas9 Sequencing Kit (SQK­CS9109)’ [47]. In this step it is imperative to avoid introducing air
bubbles into the array of nanopores as this can cause irreversible damage. First a small amount
of buffer was slowly pipetted out from the priming port to ensure the continuous presence of
buffer from the priming port and across the sensor array. Priming buffer was then loaded into
the priming port and after a 5 min wait the sample port was lifted and more priming buffer was
added through the priming port. The DNA library was mixed with sequencing buffer and loading
beads and added in a dropwise fashion through the sample port. Lastly, both the sample port
and priming port were closed to complete the preparation.
2.3.3
Sequencing
For sequencing ONT makes use of pore­forming proteins which are ubiquitous in biologi where
they play key roles in a lot of cellular processes. One example of such a protein is the alpha­
hemolysin toxin produced by Staphylococcus aureus which is highly stable and has an inner
diameter equal to the diameter of single­stranded DNA [55]. When alpha­hemolysin subunits
are introduced into a solution of 1.0 M KCl that is separated into two compartments by a lipid
bilayer they will self­assemble to form a nanopore in the bilayer that carries a distinct ionic
current when a voltage is applied. Nucleic acids are negatively charged and will be driven
through the pore from the cis to the trans side of the membrane causing a transient blockade
of ionic current which can be quantified and stored [55]. In the R9.4.1 pore model used in this
project the instantaneous current measured when a strand of DNA passes through the pore
depends on 5­6 contiguous bases as it is this number of bases that can fit into the narrowest
part of the nanopore at any given time. The sequencing was allowed to run between 24 and 72
h.
MinKNOW divides the measured current, also called the raw signal, into reads where one read
corresponds to one strand of DNA and stores it as fast5 files. The fast5 format is based on
the hierarchical data format (HDF5). It has a predetermined structure and contains three main
branches of data; Analysis, Raw, and UniqueGlobalKey. Analysis contain information such as
basecalls, signal correction, and segmentation information, Raw stores the raw signal levels
and the UniqueGlobalKey group contains all information needed to identify the run and the
read. MinKNOW will by default produce multi­fast5 files with 4000 reads in each file.
2.4
Nanopore data analysis
Basecalling, where the raw signal is translated into nucleotide sequences, was performed with
Guppy(v.4.0.11) which uses a Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network (BRNN) where both pre­
vious and future bases in the sequence are used to predict the current base, and a flip­flop
algorithm to generate FASTQ files from the raw reads. Long runs of the same base can either
be a true homopolymer or it can arise from the pore ’stalling’ and to distinguish between these
the flip­flop basecaller algorithm uses the Viterbi algorithm to decode the raw signal and pro­
duce the likelihood of a transition from one base to the next (flip) and the likelihood of staying
on the same base (flop) which are then assigned to each base transition [56]. A fast Flip­flop
model can provide read accuracies of 95% which, with a high enough read depth, can lead
to consensus accuracies of >99.9% [57]. Adapters were trimmed and the reads were filtered
based on a minimum quality score of 7.0.
To align the basecalled reads to the human reference genome (Hg38), minimap2 (v.2.17) was
used. Minimap2 is a sequence alignment program that can find overlaps between long reads
with high error rates [58]. First a minimized index for the reference genome was created and
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
9
==PAGE:16==
then the FASTQ file generated by Guppy was used as input to create an output of the mapped
reads in SAM format.
The quality of the Cas9 targeting and the sequencing was assessed using the ’Cas9 targeted
sequencing’ workflow from EPI2ME Labs which is an extension on the Jupyter Notebook frame­
work. This is used to check how well the Cas9 targeting worked based on the quantity of
on­target reads and off­target reads. Off­target reads can be caused by 1. crRNAs with low
specificity that binds to the genomic DNA at unintentional sites leading to cleavage by Cas9, 2.
incomplete dephosphorylation of endogenous DNA ends prior to Cas9 guided cleavage, or 3.
random shearing of the DNA after the dephosphorylation step. The workflow also shows the
sequencing depth for targeted regions along with coverage plots for all targeteted regions and
a summary of the sequencing quality (Appendix A).
2.4.1
Repeats
Currently, tandem DNA repeats are recognized as the reason for more than 30 diseases [59].
Repetitive regions in DNA can be difficult to quantify but with third generation sequencing tech­
niques longer reads can be sequenced and one read can therefore encompass an entire ex­
panded region. With nanopore sequencing the read­length is only limited by the length of the
input DNA which allows for sequencing of genomic regions that were previously hard to get
information on such as repetitive regions.
STRique
Patients with DM1 has a triplet repeat size above 37 in the 3’ UTR of the DMPK gene on
chromosome 19. To determine the repeat size a command line tool termed STRique, for short
tandem repeat identification, quantification and evaluation, was used. STRique was developed
to analyze repeat expansions in ONT long read sequencing data [43]. First an index file was
made that contains the relative paths to the raw reads to allow for extraction of single reads.
The tool takes a tab­separated (tsv) file with information about the repeat, the indexed raw reads
and the alignment of the reads as input. The tsv file should contain genomic coordinates of the
repeat, the name of the repeat, the repeat itself, a prefix sequence and a suffix sequence. The
file can contain information from several different repeats. First, STRique identifies the reads
spanning a tandem repeat region through signal alignment, then the prefix/suffix sequences
are used to map the upstream and downstream boundaries of each repeat more precisely and
lastly a compound profile hidden Markov model (HMM) is used to assign each signal value with
either a prefix, repeat or suffix label.
The output provided by STRique contains read ID, the repeat name, + or ­ strand, a repeat count
in number of occurrences, a prefix score and a suffix score indicating how well they mapped
and a HMM log­likelihood over the repeat. STRique can also provide information about the
methylation state of the repeat.
2.4.2
Methylation
Some patients with DM1 have hypermethylation around the CTG repeat which can influence the
phenotype and how the disease develops. An array of bioinformatic tools have been developed
to assess the amount of methylation in Nanopore sequencing data. In this project four differ­
ent command line tools were used and compared and also compared with previous data from
EPIC array and pyrosequencing. The bioinformatic tools used were Megalodon, Nanopolish,
DeepSignal, and Tombo.
Megalodon
Megalodon takes the raw data produced by sequencing and a reference genome as input. The
command line tool uses Guppy to basecall; the raw signal is normalized, chunked, processed
with a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and decoded using Viterbi decoding. The intermediate
output from the basecall neural network is then anchored to a reference sequence through
10 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:17==
standard read mapping which is processed to match each basecall with a reference position.
At bases that might be modified Megalodon performs a forward­backward algorithm and Viterbi
decoding over the neural network output to produce a score for the modified base and the
unmodified base. The version of the base with the highest score is considered true. Megalodon
can be used to produce both highly accurate modified base and sequence variant calls. The
tested locations can be restricted to a relevant motif and in this study modified bases were only
tested in CpG locations.
Nanopolish
Detection of modified bases with Nanopolish requires fast5 files with the raw sequencing data,
a FASTQ file with the basecalled data and a reference genome as input. The method has three
overall steps; first the read IDs from the FASTQ file is linked with their signal level data in the
fast5 files. Then the reads are aligned to the reference genome and sorted using Minimap2 and
Samtools and lastly, to call methylation, Nanopolish uses a HMM that computes the probability
of observing a methylated base based on the differences in event distribution of methylated and
unmethylated DNA. Each event represents a current level measured in picoamperes over an
interval of time. The probability is given as a log­likelyhood ratio where a positive log­likelihood
ratio indicates that a site is methylated.
Tombo
As input Tombo takes single­read fast5 files annotated with basecall information from the FASTQ
file and a reference sequence. The first step when identifying modified bases with Tombo is to
re­squiggle the fast5 files by first mapping the individual reads to a reference genome and then
resolving the differences by re­segmenting the raw signal at insertions and deletions to match
the known bases.
Tombo provides three methods to identify non­standard bases: the de novo approach for un­
known modification motif detection where a hypothesis test is performed by statistically com­
paring the signals to a genomic sequence; the canonical sample comparison method where a
set of control reads is used to adjust the canonical model for local effects which is then used to
detect deviations from the expected level; and the alternative model which is used to detect a
specific non­canonical base by computing a statistic using a scaled log­likelihood ratio for each
possible modified site. Positive values indicate unmodified bases and negative values indicate
modified bases. In this project the alternative model specific for CpG sites was used with the
default cutoff values of 2.5 for unmodified bases and ­1.5 for modified bases.
DeepSignal
DeepSignal is a deep learning method that is made of four modules: In the first module the
raw signal is base called, then re­squiggled using the method from Tombo and lastly mapped
to a reference. Then two modules are used; the signal feature module which uses convolu­
tional neural network (CNN) to construct features directly from the raw electrical signals and the
sequence feature module which uses a BRNN to construct features from sequences of signal
information. In the last module features from the two previous modules are tied together in a
neural network to predict methylation states.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
11
==PAGE:18==
3
Results
In this thesis nanopore Cas9­targeted sequencing was used to study CpG methylation levels
and CTG repeat length including repeat interruptions and progenitor repeat length in DNA from
peripheral blood samples from 4 patients and 4 controls.
A CpG island surrounding the CTG repeat in the 3’ UTR of the DMPK gene on chromosome 19
was enriched for with Cas9­targeting and the resulting libraries were sequenced on a MinION
sequencing device with an R9.4.1 flow cell. The amount of data produced from each sequencing
run varied and is presented in Table 3.1 along with percentage of reads on target, the number
of reads overlapping the region of interest to this study and the average coverage.
The four patients investigated here have all been part of a larger study (n=68) where bisulfite
pyrosequencing was used to quantify the degree of methylation in 14 CpG sites surrounding the
tandem repeat [21]. The four patients with the highest degree of methylation were chosen for
further global DNA methylation analysis using EPIC array where 22 of the explored CpG sites
spanned the CpG island.
For two of the patients, information about repeat length had previously been obtained through
Southern blotting while bidirectional TP­PCR had been used to check for repeat interruptions
[21].
ID
Total
throughput
(MB)
Reads on target
(%)
Number of reads
on roi
Average
cover­
age of roi
Patient 1
459.6
1.2
429
215
Patient 2
202
1.1
159
87
Patient 3
1000
0.4548
478
212
Patient 4
224.7
0.1058
69
38
Control 1
2200
0.0196
136
50
Control 2
76.8
2.5
107
46
Control 3
268
0.8184
247
116
Control 4
421.9
1.3
299
159
Table 3.1: Quality check of sequencing runs. Total throughput is the amount of data produced
and Reads on target is the percentage of reads overlapping one of the 6 target sites. Number of
reads on roi is the number of reads overlapping the DMPK target and average coverage of roi is
the average coverage of the DMPK target site. For more detailed information on the sequencing
runs see Appendix A.
3.1
Repeat length
To find information about the repeat length and possible repeat interruptions, the command line
tool STRique was used. A prefix/suffix length of 150 bp was used to mark the borders of the
triplet repeat. Repeat lengths of zero are an indication that the analyzed read did not cover
either prefix or suffix and these were discarded. The results come with signal alignment scores
for both suffix and prefix indicating how well they mapped and all signal alignment scores below
3 or 4 depending on the quality of the sequencing were filtered out.
12 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:19==
Non DM1­affected individuals are expected to have repeat counts below 37 on both parental al­
leles. Repeat counts between 37 and 50 are unstable and prone to expand while DM1­affected
individuals will have one allele with repeat counts above 50. In DM1­affected individuals somatic
instability can cause the range of repeat lengths to be considerable and Southern blotting results
will present as smears making it difficult to precisely assess the repeat lengths. The analysis
by STRique of long reads generated with nanopore sequencing gives information about repeat
length on a single read level making it possible to more precisely assess the range of repeat
lengths including the progenitor repeat length. The progenitor repeat length is the repeat length
inherited form the disease carrying parent and it is generally considered the same as the short­
est found repeat length. Even though the unstable repeat has been known to contract in some
instances it is far more likely to expand. STRique outputs the read ID along with the number of
repeats found and this can be used to manually check the read for repeat interruptions. In con­
trast to bidirectional TP­PCR which can be used to check an expanded repeat for interruptions
this method will also give information about which nucleotides the interruptions are comprised
of.
3.1.1
Controls
The four controls all had two healthy alleles characterized by repeat lengths of less than 37.
Figure 3.1: Repeat lengths for all four controls. DNA from blood samples from four controls
was sequenced using Oxford Nanopore sequencing and the resulting reads were analyzed
with STRique to find the length of the CTG repeat. STRique results for Control 1 were filtered
to exclude signal alignment scores below 3. Results for Control 2, Control 3 and Control 4 were
filtered to exclude signal alignment scores below 4.
3.1.2
Patients
The four patients all had one healthy allele and one disease allele. For each patient the repeat
lengths of the disease allele showed a high degree of variation which is consistent with the
somatic instability observed in DM1 patients. The results obtained from STRique clearly reflects
the quality of the targeting and sequencing. Sourthern blotting had previously been used to
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
13
==PAGE:20==
estimate the repeat length for Patient 1 to ~400 and the repeat length for Patient 2 to ~600
while the repeat lengths for Patient 3 and 4 had only been determined to be >80. Furthermore,
bidirectional TP­PCR had shown interruptions in the 3’ UTR of the repeat in Patient 1 and no
interruptions in the three other patients [21].
Figure 3.2: Patient 1 had a progenitor allele with 292 repeats and the lowest observed degree
of somatic mosaicism. Patient 2 had a progenitor allele with 620 repeat which was the longest
in the group. Patient 3 had a progenitor allele with 142 repeats which was the shortest in
the group and with repeat lengths spanning from 142 to 934 this patient displayed the highest
degree of somatic mosaicism. Patient 4 had a progenitor allele with 517 repeats. Importantly,
the sequencing coverage for Patient 2 and Patient 4 was in the low end which reduces the
number of reads covering the region of interest and thereby the observed somatic mosaicism.
The boxplots indicate medians and quartiles and the dots represent outliers. The results are
summarized in Table 3.2. (See Appendix B for repeat length distributions including healthy
repeat lengths)
ID
Progenitor repeat length
Median repeat length
Longest repeat length
Patient 1
292
380
434
Patient 2
620
1100
1353
Patient 3
142
650
934
Patient 4
517
800
1228
Table 3.2: Summary of progenitor repeat length, median repeat length and longest repeat length
for the four patients.
Repeat interruptions
Patient 1 has previously been shown to have repeat interruptions towards the 3’ end of the re­
peat [21]. To find out more about these interruptions the reads containing the expanded repeats
14 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:21==
were studied and some were found to contain CAA and CAG interruptions mainly located in the
3’ end of the repeat. No repeat interruptions were found in the expanded repeats from the three
other patients.
3.2
Methylation
Four different bioinformatic tools were used to detect CpG methylation in the area surround­
ing the CTG repeat. The four methods employ different algorithms and as such the results they
generate are different. New methods to detect modified bases from raw nanopore data are con­
tinuously being developed and there is currently no standard recommended method. By using
four of the methods most commonly mentioned in literature and combining their results it was at­
tempted to achieve a reliable consensus based methylation pattern upstream and downstream
of the CTG repeat. The area of interest spans 4466 bases and contains 400 CpG sites where
22 of them are covered by EPIC array. 14 CpG sites were measured with pyrosequencing and
these were all within 300 bps upstream or downstream from the repeat.
The methods, Megalodon, Nanopolish, DeepSignal and Tombo, were compared to each other
and to results obtained previously through EPIC array and bisulfite pyrosequencing. The CpG
island surrounding the CTG repeat covers the SIX5 promoter region and methylation can affect
binding of transcription factors resulting in decreased expression levels. Healthy individuals are
expected to have a largely unmethylated CpG island with methylation at the ends and this was
supported by EPIC array and pyrosequencing results for the controls used in this study. The idea
to use several tools to create a consensus based result is based on previous studies showing
that individually the methods either have a tendency to call false negatives or false positives
[60]. We used correlation analysis on the control results and found good correlation between
the command line tools Megalodon, Nanopolish and DeepSignal and previously obtained EPIC
array results. The correlation between the command line tool Tombo and the other methods was
between 60 and 80% and the tool appeared to give a high rate of false positives methylation
calls based on previous studies showing that methylation in the CpG island leads to decreased
SIX5 transcription which would have caused symptoms in the controls [29]. An example is
provided in Figure 3.3 where the results from Control 1 are showed along with EPIC array and
pyrosequencing results.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: Methylation level results from all four command line tools used to analyze the
nanopore sequencing data for Control 1. The results from Megalodon (A), Nanopolish (B) and
DeepSignal (C) show no or little methylation around the repeat and in the central part of the CpG
island and high levels of methylation at the ends of the CpG island which is in concordance with
EPIC array(blue) and pyrosequencing(red) results. Tombo (D) showed a different pattern of
methylation with general high levels in the CpG island. The blue stippled line marks the position
of the CTG repeat and the positions of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plots.
Figure 3.4:
Heatmap showing
the correlation between EPIC ar­
ray results and the results ob­
tained with the four different tools
used in this study for all four con­
trols. The correlation is based on
methylation levels in the 22 EPIC
array CpG sites located in the re­
gion of interest. The correlations
between EPIC array results and
the command line tools Mega­
lodon, Nanopolish and DeepSig­
nal were >90% while the corre­
lations between Tombo and the
other methods were between 60
and 80%.
16 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:23==
Based on the low correlation between Tombo and the other three command line tools and EPIC
array results is was decided not to use Tombo in the further investigation of methylation lev­
els. Instead the results from Megalodon, Nanopolish and DeepSignal were combined and an
average was used in an attempt to compensate for any potential errors in the methods. All sub­
sequent methylation levels shown are an average of Megalodon, Nanopolish and DeepSignal.
With the consensus based results all controls displayed expected methylation patterns; no or
little methylation in the central part of the CpG island.
Figure 3.5: Methylation levels for Control 1 (A) Control 2 (B), Control 3 (C) and Control 4 (D).
The plots show an average of the three methods Megalodon, Nanopolish and DeepSignal is
plotted along with EPIC array results and pyrosequencing results. All controls show no or little
methylation in the central part of the CpG island while CpG sites towards the ends of the island
are methylated. The blue stippled line marks the position of the CTG repeat and the positions
of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plots.
The results obtained using nanopore sequencing are presented for each patient individually and
compared with previously obtained EPIC array and bisulfite pyrosequencing results. To study
the allele specific methylation the nanopore reads covering the CTG repeat were divided into
reads with an expanded allele or into reads with a healthy allele and the command line tool
Nanopolish was used to detect methylation.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Patient 1
Figure 3.6: CpG methylation profile for Patient 1. The top plot shows the entire region of interest
and the bottom plot is zoomed in on the region around the CTG repeat which is marked with a
blue stippled line. The positions of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plot. The methy­
lation levels obtained from nanopore sequencing are plotted along with EPIC array results(blue
squares) and pyrosequencing results(orange triangles). Patient 1 has elevated methylation
levels immediately downstream of the repeat and normal levels upstream of the repeat and the
nanopore sequencing results are consistent with EPIC array and pyrosequencing results.
Figure 3.7: Allele specific methy­
lation profile for Patient 1.
The
blue stippled line indicate the po­
sition of the CTG repeat and the
positions of nearby genes are in­
dicated at the top of the plot.
The healthy allele has a normal
methylation profile while the dis­
ease allele display high methy­
lation levels downstream the re­
peat and, to a lesser degree, up­
stream of the repeat.
18 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:25==
3.2.2
Patient 2
Figure 3.8: CpG methylation profile for Patient 2. The top plot shows the entire region of interest
and the bottom plot is zoomed in on the region around the CTG repeat which is marked with a
blue stippled line. The positions of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plot. The methy­
lation levels obtained from nanopore sequencing are plotted along with EPIC array results(blue
squares) and pyrosequencing results(orange triangles). Patient 2 has elevated methylation lev­
els both upstream and downstream of the repeat. The EPIC array and pyrosequencing results
follow the same trend as the nanopore sequencing results but are generally higher.
Figure 3.9: Allele specific methy­
lation profile for Patient 2.
The
blue stippled line indicate the po­
sition of the CTG repeat and the
positions of nearby genes are in­
dicated at the top of the plot. The
disease allele display increased
methylation levels upstream and
downstream of the repeat while
the healthy allele has a normal
methylation profile.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
19
==PAGE:26==
3.2.3
Patient 3
Figure 3.10: CpG methylation profile for Patient 3. The top plot shows the entire region of
interest and the bottom plot is zoomed in on the region around the CTG repeat which is marked
with a blue stippled line. The positions of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plot.
The methylation levels obtained from nanopore sequencing are plotted along with EPIC array
results(blue squares) and pyrosequencing results(orange triangles). Patient 3 display aberrant
methylation levels in CpG sites more than 1300 bps downstream of the repeat and 1200 bps
upstream of the repeat.
Figure
3.11:
Allele
specific
methylation profile for Patient 3.
The blue stippled line indicate the
position of the CTG repeat and
the positions of nearby genes
are indicated at the top of the
plot.
The healthy allele has a
normal methylation patterns as
observed in the controls.
Most
(>90%) reads with an expanded
repeat
were
methylated
up­
stream and downstream of the
repeat.
20 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:27==
3.2.4
Patient 4
Figure 3.12: CpG methylation profile for Patient 4. The top plot shows the entire region of
interest and the bottom plot is zoomed in on the region around the CTG repeat which is marked
with a blue stippled line. The positions of nearby genes are indicated at the top of the plot.
The methylation levels obtained from nanopore sequencing are plotted along with EPIC array
results(blue squares) and pyrosequencing results(orange triangles). The results obtained with
nanopore sequencing suggest lower methylation levels both upstream and downstream of the
repeat in Patient 4 than previously detected with EPIC array and pyrosequencing. Patient 4 has
normal methylation levels directly upstream of the repeat while the levels are higher between
200 and 750 bps further upstream of the repeat.
Figure
3.13:
Allele
specific
methylation profile for Patient 4.
The blue stippled line indicate the
position of the CTG repeat and
the positions of nearby genes
are indicated at the top of the
plot.
The healthy allele has a
normal methylation pattern. The
disease allele is methylated up­
stream of the repeat while some
single reads are also methylated
downstream of the repeat.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
21
==PAGE:28==
3.2.5
DNA methylation and repeat lengths
Two CpG sites were chosen to see if the length of a repeat in a patient is correlated with the
level of methylation. One CpG site is upstream of the repeat(457701767) and the other is down­
stream of the repeat(45770016). Patient 1 and Patient 3 were chosen because the amount of
reads on target were highest for these two samples. Nanopolish generates a log­likelihood
of methylation for each CpG site where a positive log­likelihood indicates that a site is methy­
lated and a negative log­likelihood indicates that a site is unmethylated [46]. In Figure 3.14 the
log­likelihood is plotted against repeat length and Pearson’s correlation was used to check for
correlation between the expanded repeat length and the methylation level in a single patient.
The normal repeats were generally unmethylated while the expanded repeats were more likely
to be methylated in the CpG site downstream of the repeat for both patient 1 and patient 3.
Figure 3.14: The log­likelihood that a CpG site is methylated plotted against the repeat length.
Patient 1 has increased methylation levels of some of the expanded repeats downstream of the
repeat but there is no significant correlation between repeat length and methylation at this site
(p­value = 0.1713) (A) while the CpG site upstream of the repeat is also methylated the log­
likelihood of this site being methylated is lower and there is no significant correlation at this site
either (p­value = 0.7391) (B). Patient 3 has a wider dispersion in repeat lengths compared to
patient 1. Most of the reads with an expanded repeat are methylated in the CpG site downstream
of the repeat (C) while the methylation profile is more unclear upstream of the repeat (D) the
correlations between repeat length at methylation at these sites are not significant (p­value =
0.1962 and 0.1384).
22 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:29==
4
Discussion and conclusion
4.1
Discussion
In this study Cas9­targeted nanopore sequencing was used to find progenitor and modal repeat
lengths, repeat interruptions and DNA methylation levels in four patients with non­congenital
DM1 with the goal of assessing if a single method can be used to investigate these four factors
known to influence age of onset and disease progression in DM1 patients. Predicting the dis­
ease progress of patients with DM1 is difficult and currently only the detection of an expanded
CTG repeat is used in the diagnosis of DM1. Several studies have described the importance
of including the other factors that can influence phenotype and earlier this year Mangin et al.
described the use of SMRT sequencing to detect repeat interruptions and estimate the level
of somatic mosaicism in DM1 patients [61]. However, they did not explore methylation levels
which requires 250x coverage to detect with SMRT sequencing [36].
A total of 8 samples were sequenced; four patients and four controls. The average coverage
of the roi for the patients ranged from 38x to 215x while the average coverage for the controls
ranged from 46x to 159x. According to the Nanopore protocol a well­designed Cas9 targeted
experiment should have around 200x coverage and the coverage is mostly dependent on the
probe design and input DNA [62]. The patient DNA used in this study had been sampled be­
tween 7 and 17 years ago and been frozen and thawed a number of times which can influence
the quality. The control DNA was between 3 and 4 years old and had been kept at a steady
temperature. None of the samples had been extracted with specific methods to acquire high
molecular weight DNA, and with these limitations in mind, the data throughput is satisfying.
Control 1 had a high total throughput of 2.2 GB and an average coverage of 50x while Control
2 had a low total throughput of 76.8 MB and an average coverage of 46x exemplifying how tar­
geting efficiency can differ between experiments. High throughput and low coverage can have
been caused by an ineffective dephosphorylation step or degradation or shearing of the input
DNA after Cas9 guided cleavage.
4.1.1
Repeat length
Repeat length has been observed to correlate with disease phenotype and age of onset but the
accurate determination of repeat length has traditionally been complicated due to the somatic
instability of the repeat. Additionally, the commonly used methods; PCR, Southern blotting
and small­pool PCR have been shown to produce variable results when applied to the same
sample [63]. The main factors thought to influence age of onset are progenitor repeat length
and somatic instability with the latter one being highly influenced by interruptions in the repeat.
We used the command line tool STRique to analyze data produced with nanopore sequencing
to gain insight into these three factors.
We observed modal repeat lengths of 380 and 620 in Patient 1 and 2 respectively which is in line
with the diagnostic Southern blot results from these patients, where the modal repeat lengths
were found to be around 400 and 600. We observed CAA and CAG interruptions in the 3’ UTR
of some of the repeats from Patient 1 which corresponds to bidirectional TP­PCR results from
an earlier study where interruptions were observed in the 3’ UTR of the repeat in Patient 1 [21].
We looked at the frequency distribution of the CTG repeat and found that the level of somatic
mosaicism is lowest in Patient 1, who has repeat interruptions and is 7 years younger than Pa­
tient 3, despite a progenitor repeat length that is more than twice as long as observed for Patient
3. This corresponds to previous studies where the length of the progenitor allele and the age
of the patient are positively correlated with the degree of somatic instability while interruptions
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
23
==PAGE:30==
stabilize the repeat [19] [24]. Patient 3 who was 23 at the sampling time exhibited the highest
degree of somatic mosaicism with a difference of 792 triplets between the shortest and longest
repeat length. Patient 4, 40 years old, had a span of 711 triplets while Patient 2, 43 years old,
had a span of 733 triplets. These results are not in line with previous studies that found a pos­
itive correlation between the degree of somatic mosaicism an the progenitor allele length and
age of the patient [24] [19] and it is possible that Patients 2 and 4 would exhibit more somatic
variation if more reads had covered the region of interest.
The controls all had repeat lengths within the normal range (5­37) but interestingly we observed
a distribution in repeat lengths for all controls instead of just one length for each allele. The
observed distribution could be an artefact either from nanopore sequencing errors (we obtained
mean read accuracies between 91.8% and 93.7% for the controls) or from counting errors in
STRique and this should be investigated further. However, though repeat lengths below 37
are generally considered stable, it is possible that even healthy individuals have some somatic
mosaicism which should be investigated further.
4.1.2
Methylation
Three different command line tools were used to call methylation from nanopore sequencing
data, and an average of the results was used with the aim of achieving more accurate con­
sensus based results. Four command line tools were initially used; Megalodon, Nanopolish,
DeepSignal and Tombo and the command line tool Tombo appeared to call a high number of
false positives. The considerable differences we observed between the results from Tombo and
results obtained with the other tools had not previously been observed in the few other studies
comparing the tools. Yuen et al. had, when comparing several tools to detect methylation from
nanopore data, found that Nanopolish and Tombo had a high rate of false positives at unmethy­
lated sites while Megalodon had a high rate of false negatives and DeepSignal correlated well
with results from whole genome bisulfite sequencing [60]. Pai et al. had found that Nanopol­
ish, DeepSignal and Tombo performed equally well in calling methylation at CpG sites but that
Tombo generally reported a higher frequency of methylation than the other tools. [64]. Liu et al.
used both Nanopolish and Tombo to detect methylation levels in nanopore data and found that
Tombo had a higher rate of true positive calls compared to Nanopolish but also a much higher
rate of false positives [65].
The patients all had a maternally inherited disease allele which has been correlated with higher
methylation levels [21] and in agreement with this we found higher methylation levels both up­
stream and downstream of the repeat in all patients compared to controls. The allele specific
analysis showed that all patients had an unmethylated healthy allele (Figures 3.7, 3.9, 3.11 and
3.13) which is in line with results from a previous study by Santoro et al. where 66 DM1 patients
were investigated [20].
In Patient 1 we observed the highest levels of methylation directly downstream of the repeat (Fig­
ure 3.6) which is in line with results from both bisulfite pyrosequencing and EPIC array and with
previous studies where a correlation between repeat interruptions and increased downstream
methylation has been found [21] [20] [22]. The allele specific methylation analysis revealed
some methylation of the expanded allele upstream of the repeat which had not been reported
for this patient before (Figure 3.7). Previous studies have found that CpG sites downstream of
the repeat tend to be methylated in a wider range of DM1 patients than CpG sites upstream of
the repeat [24] [20] which could be because less sensitive methods than nanopore sequencing
have been used to detect methylation.
We observed the highest methylation levels for Patient 2 around 200 bps downstream of the
repeat with lower levels immediately downstream of the repeat (Figure 3.8). The patient also
displayed elevated methylation levels upstream of the repeat with a general rise in methylation
24 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:31==
levels from directly upstream of the repeat and to the end of the CpG island. Although the previ­
ous results from bisulfite pyrosequencing and EPIC array generally showed higher methylation
levels than we observed, the pattern was similar.
Patient 3 had the highest number of methylated CpG sites both upstream and downstream of the
repeat compared to the other patients (Figure 3.10). The methylation levels were higher than
what had previously been observed with bisulfite pyrosequencing results. The allele specific
methylation analysis showed that >75% of the expanded reads from Patient 3 were methylated
upstream of the repeat and between 200 and 700 bps downstream of the repeat (Figure 3.11).
Patient 4 only displayed methylation between 500 and 1000 bps upstream of the repeat which is
in contrast to what was observed with bisulfite pyrosequencing where downstream methylation
was also observed (Figure 3.12). Interestingly, one of the command line tools, Megalodon,
detected some increased methylation downstream of the repeat indicating that this method is
more sensitive in some cases (Appendix C). The allele specific methylation analysis showed
increased methylation in some reads with expanded repeats with increased methylation levels
downstream of the repeat (Figure 3.13).
A general correlation between repeat length and methylation levels has previously been ob­
served in several studies [20] [21] [22] [24]. To assess whether there was a single molecule­
level correlation between repeat length and methylation levels, we looked at two CpG sites for
patients 1 and 3 and plotted the repeat length against the log­likelihood that the individual reads
were methylated from Nanopolish. Although reads with non­expanded repeats were generally
unmethylated we could not determine a significant correlation between repeat length and methy­
lation level of the expanded allele. The patients selected for this study all have fully expanded
disease repeats and generally show high methylation levels. For future studies it would be in­
teresting to investigate the effect in patients with shorter repeats and lower overall methylation
levels.
4.2
Conclusion
Nanopore sequencing is a relatively new sequencing technology, which offers a range of fea­
tures that are currently transforming genetic research. In the present study we utilized the long
read­length to sequence complete repetitive genomic regions, and thereby provide a much
more detailed representation of the repeat count than obtainable with Southern blot and PCR
based methods. Thus, we were able to make an estimation of the modal repeat lengths for
Patient 1 and 2 that were consistent with previous results obtained with Southern blot, indi­
cating that a coverage of ≥87x is enough to estimate the modal repeat length. Though two
patient samples failed to produce adequate coverage for a complete analysis due to low DNA
quality, we conclude that nanopore sequencing is a valuable tool to investigate repeat expan­
sions in line with previous findings [43]. Another feature of direct DNA nanopore sequencing is
the ability to detect base modifications which we used to study the most prominent one; 5mC.
This method obviates the need for bisulfite DNA conversion which is laborious and often pro­
duce low­quality sequencing data [66]. We found that by combining three command line tools
to assess methylation levels from data made with nanopore sequencing we achieved results
consistent with previous patterns observed with bisulfite pyrosequencing and EPIC array. We
observed methylation levels consistent with previous results in a sample with just 38x coverage.
The most prominent improvements of the nanopore based experiments carried out in this study
over the previous work with conventional methods, is however the combination of long reads
and methylation data. This enabled us to provide allele specific mapping of the methylation
pattern, directly linking hypermethylation to expanded repeat alleles, rather than an average of
both alleles. Furthermore, we even extended the methylation analysis to single molecule level,
highlighting the improvements in analysis detail provided by nanopore sequencing. In conclu­
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
25
==PAGE:32==
sion, we have demonstrated that Cas9­targeted nanopore sequencing is an excellent tool to
study repeat length, somatic mosaicism, repeat interruptions and methylation levels in blood
samples from DM1 patients and controls.
26 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:33==
5
Outlook
To further investigate genetic and epigenetic factors that influence DM1 phenotype and age of
onset, a larger cohort should be studied. Sequencing coverage could be improved by taking new
samples and extracting the DNA specifically to acquire high genomic weight DNA. An interesting
aspect is how the repeat and the methylation surrounding the repeat changes over time and to
study these longitudinal changes further samples should be taken 5­10 years after the first
sample. Furthermore, clinical information such as phenotype and age of onset is necessary to
investigate how they are affected by DNA methylation, repeat length and interruptions.
An alternative targeting technique, adaptive sequencing can be used to reduce the laboratory
element is a technique where enrichment for targets is based on the Read Until Method. The
strands are basecalled and mapped in real­time and if the first few hundred basepairs do not
match a predefined target region then the voltage through the nanopore is reversed, rejecting
the strand and the nanopore can start sequencing a new strand. This technique eliminates much
of the laboratory work associated with nanopore sequencing and thereby the risk of laboratory
errors affecting the quality of the sequencing.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
27
==PAGE:34==
Bibliography
[1]
Nuno André Faustino and Thomas A. Cooper. Pre­mRNA splicing and human disease.
Feb. 2003. DOI: 10.1101/gad.1048803.
[2]
J. David Brook et al. “Molecular basis of myotonic dystrophy: Expansion of a trinucleotide
(CTG) repeat at the 3′ end of a transcript encoding a protein kinase family member”. In:
Cell 68.4 (1992), pp. 799–808. ISSN: 00928674. DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90154-5.
[3]
Y.­H. Fu et al. “An Unstable Triplet Repeat in a Gene Related to Myotonic Muscular Dys­
trophy”. In: Science 255.5049 (1992), pp. 1256–1258. ISSN: 1098­6596.
[4]
De Antonio M et al. “Unravelling the myotonic dystrophy type 1 clinical spectrum: A sys­
tematic registry­based study with implications for disease classification.” In: Rev Neurol
(Paris) 172.10 (2016), pp. 572–580. DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2016.08.003.
[5]
M. Zaki et al. “Congenital myotonic dystrophy: Prenatal ultrasound findings and pregnancy
outcome”. In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 29.3 (2007), pp. 284–288. ISSN:
09607692. DOI: 10.1002/uog.3859.
[6]
Anne Berit Ekström et al. “Cognition and adaptive skills in myotonic dystrophy type 1: A
study of 55 individuals with congenital and childhood forms”. In: Developmental Medicine
and Child Neurology 51.12 (2009), pp. 982–990. ISSN: 00121622. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-
8749.2009.03300.x.
[7]
Charles A. Thornton. “Myotonic Dystrophy”. In: Neurologic Clinics 32.3 (2014), pp. 705–
719. ISSN: 15401413. DOI: doi:10.1016/j.ncl.2014.04.011.
[8]
Brigid M Davis et al. Expansion of a CUG trinucleotide repeat in the 3 untranslated region
of myotonic dystrophy protein kinase transcripts results in nuclear retention of transcripts.
Tech. rep. 1997, pp. 7388–7393. URL: www.pnas.org..
[9]
A D Otten, S J TAPscorr, and Communicated by Harold Weintraub. Triplet repeat ex­
pansion in myotonic dystrophy alters the adjacent chromatin structure. Tech. rep. 1995,
pp. 5465–5469.
[10]
N Muge Kuyumcu­Martinez and Thomas A Cooper. Misregulation of Alternative Splicing
Causes Pathogenesis in Myotonic Dystrophy. Tech. rep. 2014.
[11]
Johanna E. Lee and Thomas A. Cooper. “Pathogenic mechanisms of myotonic dystro­
phy”. In: Biochemical Society Transactions 37.6 (2009), pp. 1281–1286. ISSN: 03005127.
DOI: 10.1042/BST0371281.
[12]
Laura P W Ranum and Thomas A Cooper. “RNA­Mediated Neuromuscular Disorders”.
In: 8 (2006). DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113014.
[13]
T. Ashizawa et al. “Anticipation in myotonic dystrophy. I. Statistical verification based on
clinical and haplotype findings”. In: Neurology 42.10 (1992), pp. 1871–1877. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1212/wnl.42.10.1871.
[14]
M Anvret et al. “Larger expansions of the CTG repeat in muscle compared to lymphocytes
from patients with myotonic dystrophy”. In: Hum Mol Genet. 2.9 (1993), pp. 1397–400.
DOI: 10.1093/hmg/2.9.1397.
[15]
A. Marquis Gacy et al. “Trinucleotide repeats that expand in human disease form hairpin
structures in vitro”. In: Cell 81.4 (1995), pp. 533–540. ISSN: 00928674. DOI: 10.1016/
0092-8674(95)90074-8.
28 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:35==
[16]
Robert I Richards and Grant R Sutherland. “Simple repeat DNA is not replicated simply”.
In: 6.february (1994), pp. 114–116.
[17]
Claudia Braida et al. “Variant CCG and GGC repeats within the CTG expansion dra­
matically modify mutational dynamics and likely contribute toward unusual symptoms in
some myotonic dystrophy type 1 patients”. In: Human Molecular Genetics 19.8 (2010),
pp. 1399–1412. ISSN: 09646906. DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq015.
[18]
Zuzana Musova et al. “Highly unstable sequence interruptions of the CTG repeat in the
myotonic dystrophy gene”. In: American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part A 149.7 (2009),
pp. 1365–1374. ISSN: 15524833. DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32987.
[19]
Sarah A. Cumming et al. “De novo repeat interruptions are associated with reduced so­
matic instability and mild or absent clinical features in myotonic dystrophy type 1”. In:
European Journal of Human Genetics 26.11 (2018), pp. 1635–1647. ISSN: 14765438.
DOI: 10.1038/s41431-018-0156-9. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0156-9.
[20]
Massimo Santoro et al. “Expansion size and presence of CCG/CTC/CGG sequence inter­
ruptions in the expanded CTG array are independently associated to hypermethylation at
the DMPK locus in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1)”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
­ Molecular Basis of Disease 1852.12 (2015), pp. 2645–2652. ISSN: 1879260X. DOI:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.09.007. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.09.007.
[21]
Mathis Hildonen et al. “Stable Longitudinal Methylation Levels at the CpG Sites Flanking
the CTG Repeat of DMPK in Patients with Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1”. In: (), pp. 1–13.
[22]
Cécilia Légaré et al. “DMPK gene DNA methylation levels are associated with muscular
and respiratory profiles in DM1”. In: Neurology: Genetics 5.3 (2019). ISSN: 23767839.
DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000338.
[23]
Judith Rixt Brouwer et al. “Transcriptionally repressive chromatin remodelling and CpG
methylation in the presence of expanded CTG­repeats at the DM1 locus”. In: Journal of
Nucleic Acids 2013 (2013). ISSN: 20900201. DOI: 10.1155/2013/567435.
[24]
Lise Barbé et al. “CpG Methylation, a Parent­of­Origin Effect for Maternal­Biased Trans­
mission of Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy”. In: American Journal of Human Genetics
100.3 (2017), pp. 488–505. ISSN: 15376605. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.01.033.
[25]
Arturo López Castel et al. “Expanded CTG repeat demarcates a boundary for abnormal
CpG methylation in myotonic dystrophy patient tissues”. In: Human Molecular Genetics
20.1 (2011), pp. 1–15. ISSN: 09646906. DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq427.
[26]
Maxim V.C. Greenberg and Deborah Bourc’his. “The diverse roles of DNA methylation in
mammalian development and disease”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 20.10
(2019), pp. 590–607. ISSN: 14710080. DOI: 10.1038/s41580- 019- 0159- 6. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41580-019-0159-6.
[27]
Keith D. Robertson. DNA methylation and human disease. Aug. 2005. DOI: 10.1038/
nrg1655.
[28]
John Newell­Price, Adrian J.L. Clark, and Peter King. “DNA methylation and silencing of
gene expression”. In: Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 11.4 (2000), pp. 142–148.
ISSN: 10432760. DOI: 10.1016/S1043-2760(00)00248-4.
[29]
Shira Yanovsky­Dagan et al. “Uncovering the Role of Hypermethylation by CTG Expan­
sion in Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1 Using Mutant Human Embryonic Stem Cells”. In: Stem
Cell Reports 5.2 (2015), pp. 221–231. ISSN: 22136711. DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.06.
003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.06.003.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
29
==PAGE:36==
[30]
Alfonsina Ballester­Lopez et al. A DM1 family with interruptions associated with atypical
symptoms and late onset but not with a milder phenotype. Vol. 41. 2. 2020, pp. 420–431.
ISBN: 0000000274142. DOI: 10.1002/humu.23932.
[31]
Erik Jan Kamsteeg et al. “Best practice guidelines and recommendations on the molecular
diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy types 1 and 2”. In: European Journal of Human Genetics
20.12 (2012), pp. 1203–1208. ISSN: 10184813. DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.108. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2012.108.
[32]
Jon P. Warner et al. “A general method for the detection of large GAG repeat expansions
by fluorescent PCR”. In: Journal of Medical Genetics 33.12 (1996), pp. 1022–1026. ISSN:
00222593. DOI: 10.1136/jmg.33.12.1022.
[33]
Alexandra J. Noble et al. “A validation of Illumina EPIC array system with bisulfite­based
amplicon sequencing”. In: PeerJ 9 (2021), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 21678359. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.
10762.
[34]
Jörg Tost and Ivo G. Gut. “DNA methylation analysis by pyrosequencing”. In: Nature Pro­
tocols 2.9 (2007), pp. 2265–2275. ISSN: 17542189. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2007.314.
[35]
Adam Ameur, Wigard P. Kloosterman, and Matthew S. Hestand. Single­Molecule Se­
quencing: Towards Clinical Applications. Jan. 2019. DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.07.013.
[36]
Pacific Biosciences. Detecting DNA Base Modifications Using Single Molecule, Real­Time
Sequencing. Tech. rep. URL: www.pacb.com/basemods.
[37]
Vahid Akbari et al. “Megabase­scale methylation phasing using nanopore long reads and
NanoMethPhase”. In: Genome Biology 22.1 (Dec. 2021). ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/
s13059-021-02283-5.
[38]
Franka J. Rang, Wigard P. Kloosterman, and Jeroen de Ridder. “From squiggle to base­
pair: Computational approaches for improving nanopore sequencing read accuracy”. In:
Genome Biology 19.1 (2018), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-018-1462-
9.
[39]
Alexander Payne et al. “Whale watching with BulkVis: A graphical viewer for Oxford
Nanopore bulk fast5 files”. In: 74.4 (2018), pp. 1135–1140.
[40]
Matthew Loose, Sunir Malla, and Michael Stout. “Europe PMC Funders Group Real­
time selective sequencing using nanopore technology”. In: Nature Methods 13.9 (2017),
pp. 751–754. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3930.Real-time.
[41]
Aaron Pomerantz et al. “Real­time DNA barcoding in a rainforest using nanopore se­
quencing: Opportunities for rapid biodiversity assessments and local capacity building”.
In: GigaScience 7.4 (2018), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 2047217X. DOI: 10.1093/gigascience/giy033.
[42]
Aaron S. Burton et al. “Off earth identification of bacterial populations using 16S rDNA
nanopore sequencing”. In: Genes 11.1 (2020), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 20734425. DOI: 10.3390/
genes11010076.
[43]
Pay Giesselmann et al. “Analysis of short tandem repeat expansions and their methylation
state with nanopore sequencing”. In: Nature Biotechnology 37.12 (2019), pp. 1478–1481.
ISSN: 15461696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-019-0293-x. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
s41587-019-0293-x.
[44]
Andrew H. Laszlo et al. “Detection and mapping of 5­methylcytosine and 5­hydroxymethylcytosine
with nanopore MspA”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110.47 (2013), pp. 18904–18909. ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1310240110.
30 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:37==
[45]
Jacob Schreiber et al. “Error rates for nanopore discrimination among cytosine, methylcy­
tosine, and hydroxymethylcytosine along individual DNA strands”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110.47 (2013), pp. 18910–
18915. ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1310615110.
[46]
Jared T. Simpson et al. “Detecting DNA cytosine methylation using nanopore sequencing”.
In: Nature Methods 14.4 (2017), pp. 407–410. ISSN: 15487105. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.4184.
[47]
Nanopore Protocol. “Introduction to the protocol Overview of the protocol”. In: 24.05386273
(2017), pp. 2–17.
[48]
Timothy Gilpatrick et al. “Targeted nanopore sequencing with Cas9­guided adapter liga­
tion”. In: Nature Biotechnology (). ISSN: 1546­1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-020-0407-5.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0407-5.
[49]
Mojica FJ et al. “Biological significance of a family of regularly spacedrepeats in the
genomes of Archaea, Bacteria andmitochondria”. In: Mol Microbiol. 36.1 (2000), pp. 244–
246. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01838.x..
[50]
Enbo Ma et al. “Single­Stranded DNA Cleavage by Divergent CRISPR­Cas9 Enzymes”.
In: Molecular Cell 60.3 (Nov. 2015), pp. 398–407. ISSN: 10974164. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.
2015.10.030.
[51]
Samuel H. Sternberg et al. “DNA interrogation by the CRISPR RNA­guided endonucle­
ase Cas9”. In: Nature 507.7490 (2014), pp. 62–67. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
nature13011.
[52]
Kornel Labun et al. “CHOPCHOP v3: Expanding the CRISPR web toolbox beyond genome
editing”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.W1 (July 2019), W171–W174. ISSN: 13624962.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz365.
[53]
Richard Owczarzy et al. “IDT SciTools: a suite for analysis and design of nucleic acid
oligomers.” In: Nucleic acids research 36.Web Server issue (2008). ISSN: 13624962.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn198.
[54]
Protocol N. Flow cell check. Tech. rep. 2008.
[55]
David W. Deamer and Daniel Branton. “Characterization of nucleic acids by nanopore
analysis”. In: Accounts of Chemical Research 35.10 (2002), pp. 817–825. ISSN: 00014842.
DOI: 10.1021/ar000138m.
[56]
Oxford Nanopore Technologies and Science Park. “Data analysis Overview Basecall­
ing overview Data analysis Basecalling algorithms Basecalling algorithms”. In: 05386273
(2017), pp. 2–14.
[57]
Ryan R. Wick, Louise M. Judd, and Kathryn E. Holt. “Performance of neural network
basecalling tools for Oxford Nanopore sequencing”. In: bioRxiv (2019), pp. 1–10. DOI:
10.1101/543439.
[58]
Heng Li. “Minimap2: Pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences”. In: Bioinformatics
34.18 (2018), pp. 3094–3100. ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191.
[59]
Haibao Tang et al. “Profiling of Short­Tandem­Repeat Disease Alleles in 12,632 Human
Whole Genomes”. In: American Journal of Human Genetics 101.5 (Nov. 2017), pp. 700–
715. ISSN: 15376605. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.013.
[60]
Zaka Wing­Sze Yuen et al. “Systematic benchmarking of tools for CpG methylation de­
tection from Nanopore sequencing”. In: bioRxiv (2020), pp. 340315–2020. DOI: 10.1101/
2020.10.14.340315. URL: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2020/10/15/2020.10.14.340315.
1.abstract.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
31
==PAGE:38==
[61]
Antoine Mangin et al. “Robust detection of somatic mosaicism and repeat interruptions
by long­read targeted sequencing in myotonic dystrophy type 1”. In: International Jour­
nal of Molecular Sciences 22.5 (Mar. 2021), pp. 1–24. ISSN: 14220067. DOI: 10.3390/
ijms22052616.
[62]
Nanopore Protocol. “Targeted, amplification­free DNA sequencing using CRISPR/Cas”.
In: (2018). DOI: 10.1201/b12908-7.
[63]
Alfonsina Ballester­Lopez et al. “The need for establishing a universal CTG sizing method
in myotonic dystrophy type 1”. In: Genes 11.7 (2020), pp. 1–9. ISSN: 20734425. DOI:
10.3390/genes11070757.
[64]
“A comparative analysis of computational tools for the prediction of epigenetic DNA methy­
lation from long­read sequencing data”. In: (2021), pp. 293–297.
[65]
Yibin Liu et al. “Accurate targeted long­read DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation
sequencing with TAPS”. In: Genome Biology 21.1 (Mar. 2020). ISSN: 1474760X. DOI:
10.1186/s13059-020-01969-6.
[66]
Amanda Raine, Ulrika Liljedahl, and Jessica Nordlund. “Data quality of whole genome
bisulfite sequencing on Illumina platforms”. In: PLoS ONE 13.4 (Apr. 2018). ISSN: 19326203.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195972.
32 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:39==
A
Sequencing statistics
A.0.1
Control 1
Figure A.1: Control 1. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.2: Control 1. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one of
the targets.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure A.3: Control 1. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.4: Control 1. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases). kbases
­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average read
depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read length
of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias ­
proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.5: Control 1. Coverage plots for all regions.
34 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:41==
Figure A.6: Control 1. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.7: Control 1. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
35
==PAGE:42==
A.0.2
Control 2
Figure A.8: Control 2. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.9: Control 2. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one of
the targets.
36 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:43==
Figure A.10: Control 2. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.11: Control 2. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.12: Control 2. Coverage plots for all regions.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure A.13: Control 2. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.14: Control 2. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
38 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:45==
A.0.3
Control 3
Figure A.15: Control 3. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.16: Control 3. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure A.17: Control 3. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.18: Control 3. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.19: Control 3. Coverage plots for all regions.
40 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.20: Control 3. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.21: Control 3. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
41
==PAGE:48==
A.0.4
Control 4
Figure A.22: Control 4. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.23: Control 4. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
42 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.24: Control 4. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.25: Control 4. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.26: Control 4. Coverage plots for all regions.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.27: Control 4. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.28: Control 4. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
44 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:51==
A.0.5
Patient 1
Figure A.29: Patient 1. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.30: Patient 1. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.31: Patient 1. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.32: Patient 1. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.33: Patient 1. Coverage plots for all regions.
46 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.34: Patient 1. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.35: Patient 1. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
47
==PAGE:54==
A.0.6
Patient 2
Figure A.36: Patient 2. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.37: Patient 2. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
48 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.38: Patient 2. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.39: Patient 2. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.40: Patient 2. Coverage plots for all regions.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.41: Patient 2. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.42: Patient 2. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
50 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:57==
A.0.7
Patient 3
Figure A.43: Patient 3. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.44: Patient 3. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.45: Patient 3. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.46: Patient 3. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.47: Patient 3. Coverage plots for all regions.
52 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.48: Patient 3. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.49: Patient 3. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
53
==PAGE:60==
A.0.8
Patient 4
Figure A.50: Patient 4. The accuracy of the read with respect to the reference
Figure A.51: Patient 4. The table above summaries the number of times a read overlaps one
of the targets.
54 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.52: Patient 4. On­target and non­target bases. Non­target bases are defined as any
base not belonging to a target region.
Figure A.53: Patient 4. tname ­the target name. tsize ­the length of the target (in bases).
kbases ­approximate number of bases in reads overlapping target. median­coverage ­average
read depth across target. nreads ­number of reads aligning. mean­read­length ­average read
length of reads aligning. mean­accuracy ­average base accuracy of reads aligning. strand­bias
­proportional difference of reads aligning to each strand. A value or +1 or ­1 indicates complete
bias to the forward or reverse strand respectively.
Figure A.54: Patient 4. Coverage plots for all regions.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.55: Patient 4. Histogram of the number of genome tiles with defined coverage.
Figure A.56: Patient 4. Headline numbers captured through the course of the analysis.
56 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:63==
B
Repeat length
B.0.1
Patient 1
Figure B.1: Patient 1 repeat lengths.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
57
==PAGE:64==
B.0.2
Patient 2
Figure B.2: Patient 2 repeat lengths.
B.0.3
Patient 3
Figure B.3: Patient 3 repeat lengths.
58 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:65==
B.0.4
Patient 4
Figure B.4: Patient 4 repeat lenghs.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
59
==PAGE:66==
C
Methylation
C.0.1
Patient 1
Figure C.1: Patient 1. Results from Megalodon, Nanopolish, DeepSignal and Tombo individu­
ally.
60 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:67==
C.0.2
Patient 2
Figure C.2: Patient 2. Results from Megalodon, Nanopolish, DeepSignal and Tombo individu­
ally.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
61
==PAGE:68==
C.0.3
Patient 3
Figure C.3: Patient 3. Results from Megalodon, Nanopolish, DeepSignal and Tombo individu­
ally.
62 Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
==PAGE:69==
C.0.4
Patient 4
Figure C.4: Patient 4. Results from Megalodon, Nanopolish, DeepSignal and Tombo individu­
ally.
Oxford Nanopore sequencing as a tool to study methylation levels in data obtained from patients with myotonic
dystrophy type 1 (DM1)
63
