==PAGE:1==
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection
in manufacturing processes
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Yucheng Ren
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Computer Science and
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Techni­
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Yucheng Ren ­ s192188
Signature
Date
ii
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis focus on investigating issues in manufacturing production environments and
eventually build a solution that could yield a meaningful result.
A manufacturing production procedure usually consists of many steps or operations and
each of them has an input and an output. They generally follow a plan to perform the
production. Sometimes there is a deviation between the plan and the actual output. The
goal is to explore the data to try to find the pattern of this deviation. In other words, whether
there are one or more factors that potentially affect the deviation.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to Xiufeng Liu who is my supervisor. Thanks for giving me tremendous
help from the very beginning till the end. This project wouldn’t be successfully finished
without help from him.
I would also like to give a special thanks to my manager Abhishek Ghosh at Microsoft who
helped a lot on the project. Including discuss the idea of the project, contact customers
to get experiment data.
Yucheng Ren, MSc in Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
iv
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Motivation
1
1.1
Background Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Goal
3
2.1
Deviation Pattern Detection System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Real­time Anomaly Pattern Detection System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Related Work
5
4
Theories
7
4.1
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Clustering Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Imbalanced Data Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Performance Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.5
Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Method
19
5.1
Data Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Anomaly Pattern Detection System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3
Deviation Pattern Detection System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Results
37
7
Discussion and Future Work
41
Bibliography
43
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:9==
1
Motivation
The motivation of this thesis comes from a desire to solve a business problem. In any
business activity, the more you understand your data, the better chance you have to make
wise and effective decisions.
1.1
Background Information
This project was conducted along with the company I work for. The product is called
Microsoft Dynamics 365 (Wikipedia 2021) which is a product line of enterprise resource
planning (ERP) and customer relationship management (CRM) intelligent business appli­
cations. The ERP system consists of two parts, Finance and Supply Chain Management.
In this project, we mainly focus on the supply chain management module.
The supply chain management allows the user to efficiently manage their manufacturing
production process by using different tools offered in this module. One of the important
features is planning. The Planning feature has many functions such as optimize sup­
ply and distribution planning and resource scheduling, machine time planning, and so
on. Supply and distribution planning means correctly schedule and allocate different raw
materials to different machines or inventories, so the whole production process can be
executed in order. In other words, base on the history data or manual setting, the plan­
ning program can generate a list of orders so that a certain amount of raw materials can
be delivered to the corresponding location(could be a machine or an inventory) at right
time. Machine time planning is similar but rather than calculating the consumption of the
raw materials, it schedules the time usage of a certain machine for a given production
task by performing all types of maintenance—predictive, corrective, condition­based, and
preventative so that the usage of the machine can be maximized.
1.2
Problems
In the actual manufacturing production process, however, things are not always going as
it was planned. The following sections provide detailed information about the problems
we focus on in this thesis.
1.2.1
Deviation Pattern
When looking back at the transaction logs that were generated from the production pro­
cess, we found that there’s usually a deviation between the planning and the actual con­
sumption. This deviation happened in both supply/distribution planning and machine time
planning which could potentially cause the waste of raw materials and low up­time of
business­critical equipment.
An intuitive idea is that whether there’s a pattern of this kind of deviation and how can
we find it. In other words, whether some factors could potentially have a large impact
on the deviation. For example, When producing items, is there a worker who lacks the
experience that always makes mistakes? Is there a particular machine that was out of
date and needs to be upgraded? Or is there a certain type of item that might always hard
to operate and produce? If we have the answer to these questions, then the business
holders could have a more clear picture of what exactly happening in their factory and
certain actions can be applied to alleviate the problem.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2.2
Anomaly Deviation
By investigating the transaction logs afterward, we are aiming to find the cause of the
deviation. But sometimes receiving notifications on unexpected situations can be more
valuable. Whether there’s a machine that always consumes more materials than others
or Whether there’s a job that takes more time than usual. Essentially we want to be aware
of any anomaly record that different from others as soon as possible.
The ability to report any anomalies in real­time or near real­time would save a lot of re­
sources and minimize the damage.
2
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:11==
2
Goal
The goal of this thesis is to build a solution that could solve the problems mentioned in
the motivation section.
2.1
Deviation Pattern Detection System
For the deviation pattern problem, we want to build a system that could analyze a period
of historical data and generate a report which gives deep insight into the deviation.
Figure 2.1 shows the process of building the system.
The transaction logs store in a relational database. In order to use and explore the data
set, a preprocessing and feature engineering step is needed. Tasks in this phase include
data encoding, categorical columns will be encoded to numerical. Data balancing, re­
balance the data set so that the minority classes(also usually be the classes that we
interested in) could have the same impact on the model during the training phase. To
sum up, the responsibility of this process is to make the data set ready for the training
stage.
The model training stage receive the data from last step and aim to build a machine
learning model that could predict the deviation pattern. We could use several features like
item type, worker Id, machine Id as the input of the model and set the target as material
consumption, time usage or product error rate. Then the task here is to tuning the model,
so we could have a reasonable predict accuracy on whatever target we set. The goal of
this phase is not trying to find a perfect model with high accuracy, because eventually we
want to find out what input feature or maybe what group of features that contribute most
to the model. In other words, what features play the most important role on deciding the
deviation.
Following the model training phase is the performance validating process. In this phase,
we want to make sure the model is good enough for the next step. A validate method will
be applied on the model and if the performance is not good enough, then a tuning and
re­training stage is needed.
After we satisfy with the performance of the model, then the next step would be going back
to investigate what feature or group of features that contribute the most to the model. The
final report shall contain the importance rank of the features and potentially reveal whether
there exists a correlation among several features that affect the model together.
Figure 2.1: Deviation Pattern Detection Process
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Real­time Anomaly Pattern Detection System
For the anomaly detection problem, a real­time or near real­time detection system is re­
quired. The core of this system is the pre­trained machine learning detection model. The
system consists of two parts, the offline and the online module. The responsibility of the
offline module is to build a machine learning model that could effectively detect anomaly
data. On the other hand, the online module will use the model from the offline module
and doing online detecting.
2.2.1
Offline Module
In order to build this model up, a similar offline process as the deviation pattern detection
system is required. Figure 2.2 shows the workflow of this process.
First, feed the raw data into the preprocessing and feature engineering section to make
the data set ready for training. Then focus on tuning the model and try to get as bet­
ter performance as possible. The model should be accurate and generalized enough to
have a good understanding of complete unseen data, but in the meantime, it also avoids
overfitting.
Figure 2.2: Anomaly Pattern Detection Offline Process
2.2.2
Online Module
With the high­quality detection model from the offline training process, the next step is
to build a stream pipeline that can be used to do online real­time detection. Figure 2.3
shows the structure of this module. Similar to the offline module, a preprocessing step
is also required. The input data will be transformed to a proper format, then send to the
model for detection.
Figure 2.3: Anomaly Pattern Detection Online Process
4
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:13==
3
Related Work
Two main topics that are addressed in this thesis are deviation detection and anomaly
detection. Essentially they can be classified as one single problem which is isolating the
outlier points out of the majority ones.
The importance of detecting deviations (or exceptions) in data has been recognized in the
fields of Databases and Machine Learning for a long time (Arning, Agrawal, and Raghavan
1996). Regarding deviation detection, there has been work in statistics on identifying
deviations (Stuart 1984). There has been work in extending learning algorithms to cope
with a small amount of noise (Aha, Kibler, and Albert 1991). Moreover, some work has
been done to determine the impact of erroneous examples on the learning results (Quinlan
1986).
Due to the experiment environment and purpose, the deviation detection problem can be
considered as a more general problem. For example, it can be solved by a clustering
algorithm (Pamula, Deka, and Nandi 2011) in which the deviations are in one cluster and
the non­deviations are in another. Or it can also be treated as a classification problem (Jia
et al. 2018) in which the different deviation patterns are classified as different classes.
Anomaly detection has applicable in a variety of domains, such as intrusion detection,
fraud detection, fault detection, and so on. It is often used as a preprocessing step to re­
move anomalous data from the data set. In supervised learning, removing the anomalous
data from the data set often results in a statistically significant increase inaccuracy (Smith
and Martinez 2011).
Several anomaly detection techniques has been proposed in literature (Zimek and Filz­
moser 2018). Density­based techniques which are proved to be efficient when dealing
with high dimensional data set, includes K­nearest neighbor (Knorr, Ng, and Tucakov
2000), local outlier factor (Breunig et al. 2000), isolation forest (Liu, Ting, and Zhou 2008).
Deep learning approaches includes replicator Neural Networks (Hawkins et al. 2002), vari­
ational autoencoders (An and Cho 2015), long short term memory networks (Malhotra et
al. 2015). Base on the shape of the data set He, Xu, and Deng 2003 proposed a cluster
analysis­based outlier detection algorithm, Pareek et al. 2010 proposed a deviation­based
outlier detection algorithm.
The performance of different methods depends a lot on the data set and parameters, and
methods have little systematic advantages over another when compared across many
data sets and parameters (Campos et al. 2016).
Due to the nature of the data set used in this thesis as well as the goal of the system, the
classification­based algorithm is used in the deviation pattern detection system and the
density­based methods are used for the anomaly detection system.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:15==
4
Theories
In this chapter, a list of theories that are related to this thesis is introduced.
4.1
Machine Learning
The core frameworks of the systems are based on different machine learning algorithms
(Wikipedia contributors 2021a).
Machine learning (ML) is the study of computer algorithms that are sometimes mixed with
statistical methods to understand data. It is usually seen as part of artificial intelligence
(AI) (Wikipedia contributors 2021b). The machine learning algorithms use the sample data
sometimes refer as training data to build a model that could be used to do classification,
regression ,or clustering on unseen data.
4.1.1
Classification
One important branch of machine learning is performing classification on data sets which
is also the key part of the deviation pattern detection system. Classification is the problem
of identifying candidates to which of a set of groups they belong. In the deviation pattern
detection system, the key idea is to use the classification algorithm to classify different
records with the patterns they belong to. Figure 4.1 shows how the process works.
Figure 4.1: Classify Data into Different Groups
Support­Vector Machine
The machine learning algorithm used for classification in deviation pattern detection sys­
tem is support­vector machine(SVM) (Wikipedia contributors 2021c). A support vector
machine constructs a hyperplane or set of hyperplanes in a high or infinite­dimensional
space, which can be used for classification, regression, or other tasks like outliers de­
tection. Intuitively, a good separation is achieved by the hyperplane that has the largest
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
7
==PAGE:16==
distance to the nearest training­data point of any class (so­called functional margin), since
in general the larger the margin, the lower the generalization error of the classifier (Hastie,
Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009).
Given training vectors xi ∈Rp i=1,...,n in two classes, and a vector y ∈{1, −1}n, the goal
is to find w ∈Rp and b ∈R such that the prediction given by sign(wT ϕ(x) + b) is correct
for most samples.
SVC solves the following primal problem:
min
w,b,ζ
1
2wT w + C
n
∑
i=1
ζi
subject to
yi(wT ϕ(xi) + b) ≥1 −ζi, ζi ≥0, i = 1, ..., n
SVM has many advantages over other methods, for example, SVM is effective in high
dimensional spaces and it uses a subset of training points in the decision function (called
support vectors), so it is also memory efficient.
4.1.2
Clustering
One of the major changes of the deviation pattern detection system is that the data set is
unlabeled. No matter it’s the error rate or the time consumption of the machines. Before
feeding the data into any supervised machine learning algorithm to detect patterns, one
should first assign pattern labels to the data set.
An intuitive way of doing this is to use some unsupervised methods like clustering al­
gorithms (Wikipedia contributors 2021d) to firstly cluster the data into different groups.
Assuming there exist some patterns in the error rate or time consumption deviation, then
records within the same pattern should share a certain extent of similarity, for example,
similar distribution.
Several popular clustering algorithms are introduced below, and their performance will be
evaluated in the next chapter.
K­means
The K­means algorithm clusters the data by attempting to separate the samples into n
groups of equal variance, minimizing a criterion known as the inertia or within­cluster
sum­of­squares. This algorithm requires that the number of groups is specified. It scales
well to a large number of samples and has been used in a wide range of applications in
many different fields.
The k­means algorithm divides a set of N samples X into Kdisjoint clusters C, each
described by the mean µj of the samples in the cluster. The means are commonly called
the cluster “centroids”; Although they live in the same space, they are not points from the
clusters.
n
∑
i=0
min
µj∈C(||xi −µj||2)
The basic terms of K­means have three steps. The first step chooses the initial centroids,
with the most basic method being to choose k samples from the data set X. After initial­
ization, K­means consists of looping between the two other steps. The first step assigns
each sample to its nearest centroid. The second step creates new centroids by taking
8
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:17==
the mean value of all of the samples assigned to each previous centroid. The difference
between the old and the new centroids are computed and the algorithm repeats these
last two steps until this value is less than a threshold. In other words, it repeats until the
centroids do not move significantly.
Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN)
Density­based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) is a data clustering
algorithm proposed by (Ester et al. 1996). It is a density­based clustering non­parametric
algorithm. Given a set of points in a space, it groups points that are closely packed to­
gether, marking them as outliers points that lie alone in low­density regions.
The DBSCAN algorithm considers clusters as areas of high density separated by areas
of low density. Because of this rather generic view, the clusters found by DBSCAN can
have any shape. The central element of DBSCAN is the concept of core samples, which
are samples located in areas of high density. A cluster is thus a set of central samples, all
close to each other (measured by a certain distance) and a set of non­central samples that
are close to a central sample (but are not themselves central samples). The algorithm has
two parameters, min_samples and eps, which formally define what we mean by ”dense”.
Higher min_samples or lower eps indicate a greater density needed to form a cluster.
The DBSCAN algorithm can be abstracted into the following steps:
1. Find the points in the ε (eps) neighborhood of every point, and identify the core
points with more than min_samples neighbors.
2. Find the connected components of core points on the neighbor graph, ignoring all
non­core points.
3. Assign each non­core point to a nearby cluster if the cluster is an ε (eps) neighbor,
otherwise assign it to noise.
Gaussian Mixture Model
A Gaussian mixture model is a probabilistic model that assumes that all data points are
generated from a mixture of a finite number of Gaussian distributions with unknown pa­
rameters. Mixture models can be thought of as a generalization of k­means clustering to
include information about the covariance structure of the data as well as the centers of
the latent Gaussian distributions.
The Gaussian mixture model uses an expectation–maximization (Wikipedia contributors
2021e) approach which qualitatively does the following:
1. Choose starting guesses for the location and shape
2. Repeat until converged:
(a) E­step: for each point, find weights encoding the probability of membership in
each cluster
(b) M­step: for each cluster, update its location, normalization, and shape based
on all data points, making use of the weights
4.2
Clustering Performance Evaluation
In this section, several clustering evaluation methods will be introduced. Since the data
set for clustering is unlabeled, the clustering results need to be evaluated without any
awareness of ground truth. This is different from evaluating the classification algorithm
which will be introduced in the following sections.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
9
==PAGE:18==
4.2.1
Silhouette Coefficient
Silhouette (Rousseeuw 1987) refers to a method of interpretation and validation of con­
sistency within­cluster data.
The silhouette value is a measure of how similar an object is to its own cluster (cohesion)
compared to other clusters (separation). The silhouette ranges from −1 to +1, where a
high value indicates that the object is well matched to its own cluster and poorly matched
to neighboring clusters.
The Silhouette Coefficient is defined for each sample and is composed of two scores:
a: The mean distance between a sample and all other points in the same class.
b: The mean distance between a sample and all other points in the next nearest cluster.
The Silhouette Coefficient s for a single sample is then given as:
s =
b −a
max(a, b)
The Silhouette Coefficient for a set of samples is given as the mean of the Silhouette
Coefficient for each sample.
4.2.2
Calinski­Harabasz Index
When the ground truth is unknown, the Calinski­Harabasz index (Caliński and JA 1974)
also known as the Variance Ratio Criterion, can be used to evaluate the model, where a
higher Calinski­Harabasz score relates to a model with better­defined clusters.
For a set of data E of size nE which has been clustered into k clusters, the Calinski­
Harabasz score s is defined as the ratio of the between­clusters dispersion mean and the
within­cluster dispersion:
s = tr(Bk)
tr(Wk) × nE −k
k −1
where tr(Bk) is trace of the between group dispersion matrix and tr(Wk) is the trace of the
within­cluster dispersion matrix defined by:
Wk =
k
∑
q=1
∑
x∈Cq
(x −cq)(x −cq)T
Bk =
k
∑
q=1
nq(cq −cE)(cq −cE)T
with Cq the set of points in cluster q, cq the center of cluster q, cE the center of E, and nq
the number of points in cluster q.
4.2.3
Davies­Bouldin Index
Without knowing the ground truth, the Davies­Bouldin index (Davies and Bouldin 1979)
can also be used to evaluate the model, where a lower Davies­Bouldin index relates to a
model with better separation between the clusters.
10
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:19==
This index signifies the average ‘similarity’ between clusters, where the similarity is a mea­
sure that compares the distance between clusters with the size of the clusters themselves.
Zero is the lowest possible score. Values closer to zero indicate a better partition.
The index is defined as the average similarity between each cluster Ci for i = 1, ..., k and
its most similar one Cj. In the context of this index, similarity is defined as a measure Rij
that trades off:
­ si, the average distance between each point of cluster i and the centroid of that cluster
– also know as cluster diameter.
­ dij, the distance between cluster centroids i and j.
A simple choice to construct Rij so that it is nonnegative and symmetric is:
Rij = si + sj
dij
Then the Davies­Bouldin index is defined as:
DB = 1
k
k
∑
i=1
max
i̸=j Rij
4.3
Imbalanced Data Augmentation
Classification algorithm as one of the most important machine learning method is widely
used in many areas. In this thesis, it’s also part of the key algorithm in the system.
Traditional classification algorithms assume the data set is well balanced which means
each class has a similar number of records. In the real world, however, data sets are
generally imbalanced, one or two classes are in a dominant place and others only take a
small portion Figure 4.2 shows an example. Moreover, in reality, researchers are usually
more interested in the minority classes. For example, doctors would be happy if the model
can correctly recognize malignant cell pictures out of benign ones and not the other way
around.
The data set used in this thesis is also a high imbalanced data set.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.2: Imbalanced Data Set
During the training process, the dominant classes usually have a larger impact on the
model than the others which makes the global classification accuracy bias towards the
majority classes. In order to deal with this issue, many approaches have been proposed.
4.3.1
Oversampling
One of the techniques of dealing with imbalanced data set during the data preprocessing
stage is to oversampling the minority classes so that the number of different classes can
reach the same magnitude. Figure 4.3 shows a example data set after oversampling. The
blue dots represent the majority class, and the red dots represent the minority class. After
oversampling (the orange dots) the minority class contains roughly the same number as
the majority class.
Figure 4.3: Oversampling Minority Class
Random Oversampling
One of the simplest oversampling techniques is random oversampling, without applying
any additional process to the original data set, random oversampling applies a random se­
lection on the minority class to over select minority data samples. However, even though
12
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:21==
the algorithm is easy to implement and perform, by simply random copy the data, it doesn’t
introduce any additional information for the minority data set, also this method increases
the possibility of over­fitting.
Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique, SMOTE
In order to solve the problems from random oversampling, a classic oversampling method
Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique(SMOTE) (Chawla et al. 2002) was proposed.
SMOTE doesn’t simply duplicate the existing data records, but synthetic new records
based on exist ones. It works by selecting examples that are close in the feature space
and drawing a line between the examples in the feature space and drawing a new sample
at a point along that line.
The approach is effective because new synthetic examples from the minority class are
created that are plausible, that is, are relatively close in feature space to existing examples
from the minority class.
4.3.2
Undersampling
Another widely used method of solving the imbalanced data problem is undersampling.
Unlike the oversampling method which try to increase the minority classes, the undersam­
pling method is trying to reduce the number of majority class records. Figure 4.4 shows
an undersampling example. After undersampling the majority class, the two classes are
reaching to a balanced state.
Figure 4.4: Undersampling Majority Class
Random Undersampling
Similar to the random oversampling technique. The simplest undersampling method is
random undersampling. By randomly choosing and removing records from the majority
class, the number of records in different classes tends to become equal.
The major disadvantage of random undersampling is that randomly removing data from
the majority class could potentially damage the feature space. In other words, during
the random undersampling, some informative data records might be discarded and the
distribution information of the data set might also get lost.
Clustering­based Undersampling
To overcome the weak point of random undersampling, more advanced and heuristic­
based methods have been proposed. One of the classic techniques is clustering­based
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
13
==PAGE:22==
undersampling (Lin et al. 2017).
Clustering­based undersampling based on K­neighbors algorithm to cluster the majority
classes and select records that close to the center of each class. This way will help to
preserve the distribution information of the data set after undersampling.
4.3.3
Mixed Sampling
Both oversampling and undersampling have their advantages and disadvantages. To
achieve a good data preprocessing effect, usually researchers are combining the over­
sampling and undersampling which is called mixed sampling. Figure 4.5 shows an exam­
ple of mixed sampling process.
Figure 4.5: Mixed Sampling
4.4
Performance Validation
In order to measure the performance of a given model, a validation procedure is required.
Learning a set of parameters of a prediction function and test it on the same data is a
methodological mistake. Test a model with the data it just saw would yield a perfect score
but will fail to predict anything useful for any unseen data. This is called overfitting. A
common way to avoid this situation is to split the data into two sets, one is called train­
ing data, another is called test data. In the learning stage, the model will only be feed
with training data. And in the validation stage, the test data will be used for testing the
performance of the model. Figure 4.6 shows the general procedure of this process.
14
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.6: Typical Training Validating Process
When tuning a different set of hyperparameters, there’s a risk of overfitting the test set be­
cause the parameters can be tweaked until the estimator performs optimally. The knowl­
edge of the test set makes the evaluation no longer reports generalization performance.
One solution to this problem is to have another isolate data set called a validation set. In
each iteration, using the training set to train the model and use the validation set to eval­
uate the model and twist the parameters. Finally, after constructing a satisfactory model,
the final evaluation can be done on the test data. Figure 4.7 shows an example of this
process.
Figure 4.7: Typical Training Validating Process with Validation set
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
15
==PAGE:24==
4.4.1
Cross­Validation
However, by partitioning the data into three sets, we significantly reduce the amount of
data that can be used for learning.
An alternative solution is called cross­validation(CV) (Wikipedia contributors 2021f). A
test set should still be held out for final evaluation, but the validation set is no longer
needed when doing CV. In the basic approach, called k­fold CV, the training set is split
into k smaller sets (other approaches are described below, but generally follow the same
principles). The following procedure is followed for each of the k “folds”:
1. A model is trained using k­1 of the folds as training data.
2. the resulting model is validated on the remaining part of the data (i.e., it is used as
a test set to compute a performance measure such as accuracy).
The performance measure reported by k­fold cross­validation is then the average of the
values computed in the loop. This approach can be computationally expensive but does
not waste too much data, which is a major advantage in problems where the number of
samples is very small. Figure 4.8 shows how this procedure works.
Figure 4.8: K folds Cross­Validation
4.4.2
Stratified k­folds
As mentioned in the previous section, an imbalanced data set is quite usual in the real
world. When applying the regular k­folds directly to a data set, the subset could potentially
be imbalanced. Since we split the data set randomly to build the folds. An alternative way
of doing this is a method called stratified k­folds. This means assigning the same ratio
between the target classes in each fold as it is in the full data set.
Let’s look at an example. If we are building a model to classify images of cats and dogs
16
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:25==
and we have a data set that’s comprised of 75% cat images and 25% dog images, using
stratified k­folds cross valuation will mean that each fold we create remains close to this
75/25 ratio. Figure 4.9 shows how this example works.
Figure 4.9: Stratified k­folds
By using stratified k­folds cross­validation on a re­balanced data set, one can make sure
that classes in different folds can remain balanced.
4.5
Anomaly Detection
In data analysis, anomaly detection (also known as outlier detection) is the identification
of rare items, events, or observations that raise suspicions by differing significantly from
the majority of the data (Zimek and Schubert 2017). Anomalies are also referred to as
outliers, novelties, noise, deviations, and exceptions (Hodge and Austin 2004).
Base on the characteristic of the data set. the anomaly detection can be classified as
supervised detection and unsupervised detection. In supervised anomaly detection, the
outliers and normal points are well defined. In other words, we know the ground truth of
which set of points are anomalous and which are not. Unsupervised anomaly detection,
on the other hand, deals with unlabeled data sets and tries to differentiate the anomalous
out of normal points.
The unsupervised algorithm is used in the anomaly detection system in this thesis since
the data set is unlabeled.
4.5.1
Local Outlier Factor
In anomaly detection, the local outlier factor (LOF) (Breunig et al. 2000) is an algorithm
for finding anomalous data points by measuring the local deviation of a given data point
concerning to its neighbors.
The local outlier factor is based on a concept called local density, where locality is given
by k nearest neighbors whose distances is used to estimate the density. By comparing
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
17
==PAGE:26==
the local density of an object with its k nearest neighbors, one can identify regions of
similar density, and points that have a substantially lower density than their neighbors,
these points are anomaly points, also known as outliers.
In practice, the local density is obtained from the k­nearest neighbors. The LOF score of
observation is equal to the ratio of the average local density of his k­nearest neighbors,
and its own local density: a normal instance is expected to have a local density similar
to that of its neighbors, while abnormal data are expected to have much smaller local
density.
The strength of the LOF algorithm is that it takes both local and global properties of data
sets into consideration: it can perform well even in data sets where abnormal samples
have different underlying densities. The question is not, how isolated the sample is, but
how isolated it is with respect to the surrounding neighborhood.
The LOT has advantages over other anomaly detection methods in several ways, because
of the local approach, LOF is able to identify outliers in one data set that would not be
outliers in another area of the data set. For example, a point located at a ”small” distance
from a very dense cluster is an outlier, while a point located in a sparse cluster might have
similar distances to its neighbors.
While the geometric intuition of LOF is only applicable to low­dimensional vector spaces,
the algorithm can be applied in any context a dissimilarity function can be defined. It has
experimentally been shown to work very well in numerous setups, often outperforming
the competitors.
18
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:27==
5
Method
This chapter provides an introduction to each part of the system, including challenges and
solutions when designing and implementing the module.
5.1
Data Profile
In order to have a better understanding of how the system works, an introduction of the
data set is necessary. In this section, we’ll go through the structure of the data and showing
some basic statistic investigation on the data set.
Table 5.1 shows part of the content of the data set used in this project. The OprID column
represents the operation in the production. WrkCtrID is the machine ID and Amount indi­
cates the number of items that were produced in the current step. Hours and CalcHours
represent the actual hours and planned hours used in the production procedure, respec­
tively. QTYERROR and QTYGOOD indicate the number of unqualified and qualified items
that were produced in the current procedure.
Table 5.1: Content of the data set
OprID
WrkCtrID
Amount
Hours
CalcHours
QTYERROR
QTYGOOD
Extr Lab
LAB01
0.0
0.000000
0.000000
0
640.0
Setup Lab
LAB01
5145.0
171.500000
24.500000
0
15120.0
Setup Lab
LAB01
5880.0
196.000000
28.000000
0
69440.0
Line Setup
BPK1
720.0
8.000000
4.000000
0
11520.0
Setup Lab
LAB01
120.0
4.000000
2.000000
0
2040.0
Packing
BPK1
1680.0
18.666666
18.666668
0
3200.0
Line Setup
BPK1
720.0
8.000000
6.000000
0
9660.0
Line Setup
CPKA
1440.0
32.000000
8.000000
0
17920.0
Extra Lab
LAB01
0.0
0.000000
0.000000
0
1344.0
Line Setup
MPK1
630.0
3.500000
3.500000
0
432.0
Table 5.2 shows the basic statistic values of the data set on the numeric columns which
give a better idea of the shape of the data. From table 5.2, one can observe that the total
number of the records is 34561, to be noticed this is the cleaned data set that has been
removed anomaly ones. The original data set has over 40000 records. The production
hours lie between 0 to 504. The average production hours is roughly 25. The profile of the
planned production hours has a similar statistic characteristic with the actual production
hours.
From the QTYERROR column, one can observe that the values are all zero which indi­
cates that this data set doesn’t include any error item records. So the following experi­
ments and research will be focused on the time deviation pattern.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 5.2: Statistics of numeric columns of the data set
Metrics
Amount
Hours
CalcHours
QTYERROR
QTYGOOD
count
34561.000000
34561.000000
34561.000000
34561.0
3.456100e+04
mean
1282.218865
25.849262
13.311165
0.0
1.364883e+04
std
2891.005706
50.289173
17.110742
0.0
6.719824e+04
min
0.000000
0.000000
0.000000
0.0
0.000000e+00
25%
50.000000
2.472727
2.000000
0.0
1.344000e+03
50%
360.000000
7.000000
9.000000
0.0
3.072000e+03
75%
1314.780000
21.701390
18.000000
0.0
6.720000e+03
max
45360.000000
504.000000
444.439992
0.0
4.400000e+06
5.2
Anomaly Pattern Detection System
The overall structure of the anomaly pattern detection system shows in Figure 2.2 and
Figure 2.3.
The goal of the system is to quickly detect and report abnormal patterns in specific man­
ufacturing areas. For example, some machines may have problems during production,
causing more raw materials to be consumed than others. Or workers may follow the
wrong construction guidelines, resulting in an increased product error rate.
A general manufacturing production procedure usually consists of many steps. Each step
has its own input and output. Using a traditional threshold method to detect the anomaly
pattern will be inefficient and requires too much work of manual operation. On the other
hand, using a machine learning model to automatically monitor and detect unexpected
patterns by learning from the historical data can really speed up the whole process and
save resources.
In the following section, an anomaly detection system is introduced and the time deviation
is the target data column that was analyzed by the system. The value in the time devia­
tion column is retrieved by calculating the subtraction between the Hours and CalcHours
column that was shown in Table 5.1.
5.2.1
Comparing anomaly detection algorithms for outlier detection
In order to choose the algorithm that fits the best to the data set. A comparison experiment
among several anomaly detection algorithms is conducted in this section.
Since the training data set only has one dimension. In order to create an easier under­
standing visualization graph. A random value will be added to the y­axis for each record.
Figure 5.1 shows an example.
Local outlier factor
Figure 5.1 shows the result of using LOF algorithm to detect the outlier points. The yellow
ones indicate anomaly points and the blue ones indicate normal points. In this algorithm, a
neighbor value of 10 is used which means that the algorithm will take each point’s nearest
10 neighbors to calculate the distance value, and the evaluation of whether the point is
an anomaly or not is based on this value. Different neighbor parameters lead to different
results. One of the changes in building the anomaly detection system in this project is that
there’s no ground truth for the data set. One has to decide by observing the experiment
results.
20
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5.1: Anomaly detection using LOF
In order to have a better observation on the detection result, Figure 5.2 shows the same
experiment with the zoomed­in graph. From 5.2 one can observe that the LOF success­
fully isolate the outliers and keep the points as regular even they are in different groups
with different density property.
Figure 5.2: Anomaly detection using LOF(Zoom in)
One­class SVM
One­class SVM is another algorithm that can be used for anomaly detection. Figure 5.3
shows the full­scale detection result of applying the one­class SVM algorithm. From the
graph, one can observe, the algorithm fail to keep many regular points with different distri­
bution density. The one­class SVM is known to be sensitive to outliers and thus does not
perform very well for outlier detection. This estimator is best suited for novelty detection
when the training set is not contaminated by outliers.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.3: Anomaly detection using SVM one class
Figure 5.4 shows a zoomed­in version of the one­class SVM experiment result. From
the figure 5.4, one can observe that most of the data points are assigned to the anomaly
class.
Figure 5.4: Anomaly detection using SVM one class(Zoom in)
Elliptic Envelope
Elliptic Envelope is the third algorithm that was tested in anomaly detection in the exper­
iment. Figure 5.5 shows the result of applying the elliptic envelope to the data set. The
full­scale view shows a similar outlook as one­class SVM.
The elliptic envelope assumes the data is Gaussian and learns an ellipse. It thus degrades
when the data is not unimodal.
22
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.5: Anomaly detection using elliptic envelope
Figure 5.6 shows a zoomed­in version of the elliptic envelope experiment result. Compare
to one­class SVM it successfully includes more regular point, but also classify too many
normal ones to the anomaly class.
Figure 5.6: Anomaly detection using elliptic envelope(Zoom in)
Isolation Forest
The last algorithm that was tested in the experiment is the isolation forest algorithm. Figure
5.7 shows the result of the isolation forest algorithm in full scale. The isolation forest
‘isolates’ observations by randomly selecting a feature and then randomly selecting a
split value between the maximum and minimum values of the selected feature. Thus it
usually has a better performance when applying to high­dimensional data set. Given the
fact that the test data set has only one dimension, it didn’t yield a satisfactory result.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.7: Anomaly detection using isolation forest
Figure 5.8 shows a zoomed­in version of the isolation forest experiment result. Similar to
the one­class SVM and elliptic envelope algorithm, it also exclude to many normal points
from the class.
Figure 5.8: Anomaly detection using isolation forest(Zoom in)
Running time performance
Another aspect that needs to be taken into consideration is the running time of each algo­
rithm. Since this algorithm is planned to put in a real­time system, one of the goals should
be minimizing the overall running time.
Table 5.3 shows the running time of each algorithm that was consumed during the test.
The LOF and isolation forest have a similar performance in terms of running time. The
Elliptic envelope yielded the best performance and one­class SVM took too much time to
get the result.
Table 5.3: Running time of algorithms (in seconds)
LOF
One­class SVM
Elliptic envelope
Isolation forest
1.5607929229736328
216.38415622711182
0.01805257797241211
1.5951974391937256
24
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:33==
5.2.2
Review the result
Base on the result of the experiment, the LOF is chosen to be the anomaly detection algo­
rithm used in the system. Since it fits the best for the data set and has a good performance
in terms of running time.
5.3
Deviation Pattern Detection System
The overall structure of deviation pattern detection system shows in Figure 2.1.
The goal of this system is to try to detect if there is a pattern that determines several
important indices in the manufacturing production process by exploring the production
data, and if there is such a pattern, the system should be able to find it efficiently. For
example, is there a specific machine that always takes more time to produce the same
amount of products compare to others? Is there one type of item that has a higher error
product rate than others?
There are two steps to achieve the goal. Firstly, build a reasonable accurate machine
learning model that could understand the data and provide a satisfactory forecast. Sec­
ondly, with a good model on hand, Investigating the model to figure out what input feature
plays the most important role in the prediction.
The following sections will dive into each part of the system with a detailed description.
5.3.1
Data Preprocessing
Due to the unique character of the data set(unbalanced data set), a preprocessing step
is required before applying any machine learning algorithms on the data set, Figure Fig­
ure 5.9 shows the structure of the data preprocessing pipeline.
Figure 5.9: Data preprocessing pipeline
One­Hot Encoding
Firstly, the input data will go through an encoding process in which the categorical features
will be translated to numerical.
Many machine learning algorithms cannot directly use label data, that’s why an encoding
step is usually required in the most preprocessing phase.
The commonly used method includes integer encoding and one­hot encoding. In integer
encoding also known as label encoding, each unique value of a category will be assigned
to an integer value. Table 5.4 shows an example of integer encoding. The drawback of this
method is that the integer values have a natural ordered relationship between each other
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
25
==PAGE:34==
and machine learning algorithms may be able to understand and harness this relationship
which may result in poor performance or unexpected results.
Table 5.4: Integer Encoding Example
cat
dog
frog
1
2
3
On the other hand, One­hot encoding can be applied to the integer representation to
relieve this problem. In One­hot encoding, the integer values will be removed and a new
binary variable is added for each unique category value. Table 5.5 shows an example of
One­hot encoding.
Table 5.5: One­hot Encoding Example
cat
dog
frog
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
Oversampling
The next step of data preprocessing is oversampling. As mentioned in the previous sec­
tions, the major problem of the data set is that the high imbalanced feature of different
classes. Oversampling makes the minority classes be able to contribute equally to the
model like the majority class.
The method used for oversampling is Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique(SMOTE)
(Chawla et al. 2002). The advantage of using SMOTE rather than other methods is that
the new samples are ”synthetic” base on a cluster of points in the feature space rather
than simply oversampling with replacement.
The key parameter of SMOTE is the sample rate which determines how many samples
will be generated for the minority class. The sample rate here means the portion of the
number of the majority class. For example, the sample rate is 0.5 means that each of the
minority classes will be oversampling to half of the number of the majority class.
Table 5.6 shows an experiment result of how the sample rate affects the performance of
a machine learning model. The algorithm used here is a support vector machine, and for
experiment purposes, all of the other parameters are fixed.
26
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:35==
Table 5.6: Model Performance with Different Oversampling Rate
Sample rate
Accuracy
0.1
0.786
0.2
0.797
0.3
0.802
0.4
0.804
0.5
0.804
0.6
0.805
0.7
0.807
0.8
0.807
0.9
0.807
1.0
0.807
From table 5.6, one can easily observe that the accuracy of the model grows along with
the sample rate, and reach a peak at around 0.7 sample rate, which means that a more
balanced version of the data set can yield a better prediction result.
Undersampling
In order to further balance the contribution of all classes, an undersampling process is
applied right after the oversampling step.
The combination of SMOTE and under­sampling performs better than plain
under­sampling.
SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over­sampling Technique, (Chawla et al. 2002).
In the oversampling step, the number of newly generated samples of minority classes is
controlled by the sample rate. From the last section, we observe that the accuracy of the
model grows along with the sample rate. But the majority class still has more samples
than other classes in most cases. A random undersampling process is to randomly select
and remove samples from the majority class to make the number of samples in each class
reach equal. table 5.7 shows the result of the same experiment but with an extra random
undersampling step follows the oversampling step. Compared to the last experiment that
does not include an undersampling step, a significant improvement in accuracy can be
observed with different undersampling rates in this experiment.
Table 5.7: Model Performance with Different Oversampling Rate and Undersampling
Sample rate
Accuracy
0.1
0.807
0.2
0.811
0.3
0.813
0.4
0.816
0.5
0.818
0.6
0.824
0.7
0.831
0.8
0.841
0.9
0.855
1.0
0.851
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
27
==PAGE:36==
5.3.2
Clustering Target Features
In order to recognize patterns, one should first build patterns up. One of the major chal­
lenges of this system is that the data set is all unlabeled. No matter it’s the error rate
or the time consumption of the machines. Before feeding the data into any supervised
machine learning algorithm to detect patterns, one should first assign pattern labels to the
data set. An intuitive way of doing this is to use some unsupervised models like clustering
algorithms to firstly cluster the data into different groups. The records inside the same
groups share a certain extent of the similarity.
Figure 5.10 shows the density distribution of the time deviation, from the graph one can
observe that most of the deviation values lie around 0, and there are also several bumps
lie on the left side. Given the distribution of the deviation, an intuitive idea of clustering
the data is using the distribution information to split the data on each trough.
Figure 5.10: Time deviation density distribution
The following section shows the performance of different clustering algorithm that applied
to the data set.
Comparing clustering algorithms
In order to decide which clustering algorithm should be used in the system. An experiment
with different performance metrics that used to test the algorithms is conducted.
Since the data set is unlabeled, all the metrics chosen for evaluating the algorithms can
be used without knowing the ground truth. Table 5.8 shows the evaluation result of four
clustering algorithms under different metrics.
Silhouette Coefficient is one of the metrics where the score is bounded between ­1 for
incorrect clustering and +1 for highly dense clustering. Scores around zero indicate over­
lapping clusters.
28
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:37==
Calinski­Harabasz Index is the ratio of the sum of between­clusters dispersion and of
within­cluster dispersion for all clusters. The score is higher when clusters are dense and
well separated, which relates to a standard concept of a cluster.
Davies­Bouldin Index signifies the average ‘similarity’ between clusters, where the similar­
ity is a measure that compares the distance between clusters with the size of the clusters
themselves. Zero is the lowest possible score. Values closer to zero indicate a better
partition.
Table 5.8: Clustering algorithms performance under different metrics
Metrics
DBSCAN
OPTICS
Gaussian mixtures
K­means
Silhouette Coefficient
0.761563
0.103406
0.695353
0.851984
Calinski­Harabasz Index
9084.323205
592.732257
76428.461187
434009.548
Davies­Bouldin Index
2.047136
1.363357
0.518545
0.380579
Figure 5.11 shows the same result from the table with a highlight of the best algorithm.
The experiment result shows that the K­means algorithm performs the best when applying
to the data set.
Figure 5.11: Clustering algorithm evaluation
Clustering result visualization
Base on the experiment results from the last section, K­means is chosen to be the cluster­
ing algorithm for the pattern define task. Same as the anomaly detection, to create a clear
visualization, random values are added to the y­axis, the values on the x­axis represent
the time deviation. Figure 5.12 shows the visualization of the clustering result.
From figure 5.12, one can observe that there are 6 clusters, each of them is marked by
a unique color. One of the drawbacks of using the K­means algorithm is that the number
of clusters is pre­defined. Unlike other clustering algorithms like DBSCAN or OPTICS
which can automatically find the clusters by themselves. The K­means use the number of
clusters as an input parameter to do the calculation. To get the best cluster number, one
has to run the algorithm several times to decide which number fits the best to the data
set.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.12: Clusters
5.3.3
Model Building and Training
After completing the data processing procedure, the next step comes to build up the ma­
chine learning model. The general procedure shows in Figure 5.13.
Start with an initial default parameter setting, the model fits the data and gets validated by a
cross­validation function (Wikipedia contributors 2021f). Using the validation score as the
criterion, a hyper­parameter tuning function will try a different combination of parameters
aiming to improve the performance of the model.
Figure 5.13: The Process of Building Prediction Model
Tuning Hyper Parameters
The tuning process explores a parameter space and finds the best set of parameters
measured by the performance of the model.
First, define a parameter space for the algorithm to explore. The machine learning algo­
rithm used in the deviation pattern system is the support vector machine (SVM). Several
important parameters of SVM are C, gamma, and kernel. The parameter space is defined
in the below code snippet.
1
parameter_space = [
2
{'kernel ': ['rbf'], 'gamma ': [1e-3, 1e-4],'C': [1, 10, 100, 1000]},
30
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:39==
3
{'kernel ': ['linear '], 'C': [1, 10, 100, 1000]}
4
]
The algorithm used for searching the best set of parameters is Grid Search in which every
combination of the parameters will be tested and the best one will be reported.
The code snippet below shows the searching history and evaluation report. The value on
the left side of each parameter set indicates the average accuracy score with a standard
deviation of the current parameter combination. One can observe that the best parameter
set is ′C′ : 100,′ kernel′ :′ linear′
1
Best parameters set found on development set:
2
3
{'C': 100, 'kernel ': 'linear '}
4
5
Grid scores on development set:
6
7
0.827 (+/-0.000) for {'C': 1, 'gamma ': 0.001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
8
0.827 (+/-0.000) for {'C': 1, 'gamma ': 0.0001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
9
0.905 (+/-0.004) for {'C': 10, 'gamma ': 0.001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
10
0.827 (+/-0.000) for {'C': 10, 'gamma ': 0.0001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
11
0.919 (+/-0.004) for {'C': 100, 'gamma ': 0.001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
12
0.905 (+/-0.004) for {'C': 100, 'gamma ': 0.0001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
13
0.923 (+/-0.003) for {'C': 1000, 'gamma ': 0.001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
14
0.919 (+/-0.005) for {'C': 1000, 'gamma ': 0.0001, 'kernel ': 'rbf'}
15
0.923 (+/-0.004) for {'C': 1, 'kernel ': 'linear '}
16
0.923 (+/-0.007) for {'C': 10, 'kernel ': 'linear '}
17
0.924 (+/-0.006) for {'C': 100, 'kernel ': 'linear '}
18
0.924 (+/-0.006) for {'C': 1000, 'kernel ': 'linear '}
19
20
Detailed classification report:
21
22
The model is trained on the full development set.
23
The scores are computed on the full evaluation set.
24
25
precision
recall
f1-score
support
26
27
0
0.99
0.97
0.98
7400
28
1
0.83
1.00
0.91
48
29
2
0.50
0.63
0.56
337
30
3
0.58
0.56
0.57
195
31
4
0.75
0.78
0.77
986
32
5
0.00
0.00
0.00
6
33
34
accuracy
0.93
8972
35
macro avg
0.61
0.66
0.63
8972
36
weighted avg
0.93
0.93
0.93
8972
At the end of the code snippet, is the evaluation report which includes four columns,
precision, recall, f1­score and support.
The precision is the ratio tp/(tp + fp) where tp is the number of true positives and fp the
number of false positives. The precision is intuitively the ability of the classifier not to label
as positive a sample that is negative.
The recall is the ratio tp/(tp + fn) where tp is the number of true positives and fn the
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
31
==PAGE:40==
number of false negatives. The recall is intuitively the ability of the classifier to find all the
positive samples.
The F­beta score can be interpreted as a weighted harmonic mean of the precision and
recall, where an F­beta score reaches its best value at 1 and worst score at 0.
The F­beta score weights recall more than precision by a factor of beta. beta == 1.0
means recall and precision are equally important.
The support is the number of occurrences of each class in y_true.
Since the K­means clustering algorithm defines 6 patterns (each pattern represents a
cluster). In the evaluation report, each row shows the performance of the model on each
cluster.
Performance Validation
After getting the best parameter from the Grid search algorithm, the next step comes to
the validation part.
To validate the performance of the model, a cross­validation algorithm is used. Given a
fine­tuned model and the data set, the cross­validation algorithm will run several times
with different splits of the data set to test the performance of the model. In the end, the
average accuracy score from all the test runs will return.
Using the model from the last section, the performance of the model yields an overall
accuracy score of 0.9093104473175805.
5.3.4
Feature Importance and Correlation Analysis
Having the fine­tuned model on hand, the next step is looking into the model and find out
which feature or set of features contribute the most to the model.
In this step, permutation feature importance is used. The algorithm runs several rounds,
for each round, it will take a feature and permute it, then record the change of performance
of the model. So if the chosen feature is an important one then the performance should
drop significantly. To have a reasonable evaluation for all the features, the permutation
test for each feature will run several times, so the performance drop for each feature will
lie in a range. Figure 5.14 shows the permutation importance test result of the top 15 most
important features. Each feature has a box plot to represent the performance change after
permutation, and the overall ranking is based on the average performance dropping.
32
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.14: Permutation importance score of the top 15 features
From figure 5.14, one can observe that the most important feature can affect the perfor­
mance of the model by roughly 30%. Along the way down, features’ importance drops
accordingly. When reaching the end, the model performance doesn’t change much with
the permutation of the features.
Everything looks good at this point, but another thing one must take into consideration
is that the system should also check whether some features are strongly related to each
other. In other words, whether there exists a group of features that have a strong cor­
relation among each other. For example, suppose there’s a strong correlation between
feature A and feature B, then if we permute feature A, feature B could still contribute to
the performance of the model which makes the result looks like feature A doesn’t matter
to the model. The same effect will also apply to feature B where feature A replaces it to
support the model.
To exclude the impact of such a scenario, one has to group features that have a strong
correlation and remove unnecessary features. For example, feature A, B, C are strongly
related to each other, then only one of them should be kept. Only in this way, one can
make sure that there are no features that hiding under the hood.
Figure 5.15 shows the correlation among parts of the features. On the left side, a dendro­
gram graph shows the group relation among features in a tree, the lower the connection
means the stronger correlation between the two features. The heat map on the right side
shows the correlation in a more intuitive way. The more bright color of the two blocks in
the graph means a stronger correlation of the two features. One can easily observe that
there’s a yellow diagonal across the graph from the top left to the right bottom. Because
each feature is strongly correlated with itself. Along the diagonal, some areas show a
more bright color than the other place of the graph which means that the correspond­
ing features are more related to each other. For example, feature WrkCtrID_LAB01 and
feature OprID_Setup Lab has a strong correlation.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.15: Feature correlation
5.3.5
Remove Correlation Features
In the previous section, we have a conclusion that there exist some features that share a
strong correlation, to have a clear vision of the feature importance, some of the features
need to be removed.
The rule is that given a group of features that are strongly related to each other, only one
of the features can be kept.
Table 5.9 shows the feature number changed after removing step.
Table 5.9: The number of features changed after removing correlated features
Feature Count(Before)
Features Count(After)
179
172
Before moving to the next step, one has to validate the performance of the model. Given
the same model with the date set that removed correlation features, the accuracy score is
0.9094404814979938. Comparing to the accuracy score from the previous section, One
can observe that the performance doesn’t change much which means that we can use
the model and the remain data set to reevaluate the feature importance.
5.3.6
Reevaluate Feature Importance
After removing the effect of correlation features, the model now is able to unveil the im­
portance of every potential feature.
Figure 5.16 shows the permutation feature importance on the remain features. One can
observe that the top 5 features have the most impact on the performance of the model.
34
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.16: Permutation importance score of the re­selected top 15 features
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:45==
6
Results
After building the system and having the result from the experiment. In this chapter, a
review of the result is conducted and the performance in terms of realistic usage is given.
From the last chapter, the pattern deviation system yielded the top 5 most important fea­
tures from the calculation which are OprID_Setup Lab, ITEMID_100231, WrkCtrID_LAB07,
ITEMID_100343, and WrkCtrID_LAB01.
Now we need to evaluate how important they are. An intuitive idea is that using the feature
to query the data set and see how many records are covered by each of them. Because
if most of the records are covered by a feature, then most likely the feature is the cause
of the deviation.
Figure 6.1 shows the occurrence of feature OprID_Setup Lab in each cluster. This feature
takes roughly 10% of cluster 1 and 100% of cluster 2. And quite a large share of cluster
3, 4, and 5. From a realistic perspective to interpret this phenomenon could be that this
operation (Setup Lab) tends to cost more time during the production procedure. Because
only 10% of the time (cluster 1 is the pattern that closes to 0) it performs well and for the
other time, it usually costs more time (falls into patterns that have a large time deviation).
Figure 6.1: Feature OprID_Setup Lab
Figure 6.2 shows the occurrence of feature ITEMID_100231 in each cluster. One can
observe that this feature takes most of the share in cluster 2 and cluster 6. One can inter­
pret this as when producing this item, for most of the time it works fine, but occasionally
it cost a significant amount of time. Something could be wrong, a closer investigation is
required.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.2: Feature ITEMID_100231
Figure 6.3 shows the occurrence of feature WrkCtrID_LAB07 in each cluster. One can
observe that it takes a large share in cluster 3 and over 10% in cluster 5. It could be
interpreted that the running time of this machine regularly deviates a certain amount of
time from the plan. And occasionally cost even more time than usual.
Figure 6.3: Feature WrkCtrID_LAB07
Figure 6.4 shows the occurrence of feature ITEMID_100343 in each cluster. Most of the
shares lie in cluster 2 which means that it works fine at most of the time. But once in a
38
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:47==
while, it also deviates quite large (7.51% in cluster 4).
Figure 6.4: Feature ITEMID_100343
Figure 6.5 shows the occurrence of feature WrkCtrID_LAB01 in each cluster. One can
observe that this feature takes a large share in almost every cluster except the last one. An
explanation could be that the running time of this machine varies widely. Half of the time
it works as expected, but for the other time, it takes a significantly long time to complete
the task.
Figure 6.5: Feature WrkCtrID_LAB01
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.6 shows the overall share of the top 5 features occupied in the whole data set.
56% of the records are covered by the top 5 features and the remaining features only take
44%.
Figure 6.6: Top 5 features’ Share
40
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion and Future Work
In this thesis, two systems were built, one is an anomaly detection system, another is a
deviation pattern detection system. Base on the experiment result, we can say that the
goal defined in Chapter 2 has been mostly achieved.
Regarding the anomaly detection system, several algorithms have been tested and com­
pared. Due to the ability to detect outlier under different local densities, the local outlier
factor(LOF) algorithm is selected as the core engine of the system. One of the challenges
of building the anomaly detection system is that the data set is unlabeled which makes
the evaluation of the system very difficult. Another thing that needs to be noticed is that
in the original goal, this system is aiming to handle real­time or near real­time requests.
During the experiment, however, it didn’t meet the performance requirement. Given a
large amount of data(more than 50000 records), it took over 3 seconds to respond. And
this amount of time didn’t even include the preprocessing time. One part of the future
work of the anomaly system will be focusing on improving the performance of the system.
For the deviation pattern detection system, most goals have been achieved. Since it
was planned to be an offline system, so there’s no performance limitation. During the
experiment, the system first runs a clustering algorithm to identify the patterns in the data
set. then it encoded the raw data and performed over sampling followed by an under­
sampling action to balanced the classes in the data set. In the following step, the system
checked the feature correlation of the data set and removed unnecessary features. Then
a permutation feature importance algorithm is performed and a list of the most important
features is extracted. In the evaluation part, the selected features are examined, from
the result one can conclude that the system is effective enough to obtain a meaningful
inspection from the data set.
Several things can be done to further improve the pattern deviation system, one of them is
to automate the clustering procedure, currently, the system requires manual intervention
during the clustering, because the K­means algorithm needs a pre­define parameter to
decide how many clusters to generate. Other algorithms or a combination of algorithms
could potentially solve the problem. The DBSCAN algorithm is fully automated, but one
has to bear with the performance issue with it. Another thing is to automate the procedure
of selecting the best re­sampling ratio. The current implementation takes the re­sampling
ratio as an input parameter. An evaluation algorithm base on the performance change
can be conducted to automatically select the best re­sampling ratio. This algorithm could
be a sub­system of the pattern deviation system.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[Wik]
Dynamics Wikipedia. Microsoft Dynamics 365. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Microsoft_Dynamics_365 (visited on 02/12/2021).
[AAR96]
Andreas Arning, Rakesh Agrawal, and Prabhakar Raghavan. “A Linear Method
for Deviation Detection in Large Databases.” In: KDD. Vol. 1141. 50. 1996,
pp. 972–981.
[Stu84]
Michael Stuart. Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. 1984.
[AKA91]
David W Aha, Dennis Kibler, and Marc K Albert. “Instance­based learning
algorithms”. In: Machine learning 6.1 (1991), pp. 37–66.
[Qui86]
J. Ross Quinlan. “Induction of decision trees”. In: Machine learning 1.1 (1986),
pp. 81–106.
[PDN11]
Rajendra Pamula, Jatindra Kumar Deka, and Sukumar Nandi. “An outlier
detection method based on clustering”. In: 2011 Second International Con­
ference on Emerging Applications of Information Technology. IEEE. 2011,
pp. 253–256.
[Jia+18]
Xiaodong Jia et al. “A deviation based assessment methodology for multi­
ple machine health patterns classification and fault detection”. In: Mechanical
Systems and Signal Processing 99 (2018), pp. 244–261.
[SM11]
M. Smith and T. Martinez. “Improving classification accuracy by identifying
and removing instances that should be misclassified”. In: The 2011 Interna­
tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks (2011), pp. 2690–2697.
[ZF18]
Arthur Zimek and Peter Filzmoser. “There and back again: Outlier detection
between statistical reasoning and data mining algorithms”. In: WIREs Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 8.6 (2018), e1280. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/widm.1280. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
widm.1280. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/widm.1280.
[KNT00]
E. Knorr, R. Ng, and V. Tucakov. “Distance­based outliers: algorithms and
applications”. In: The VLDB Journal 8 (2000), pp. 237–253.
[Bre+00]
Markus M. Breunig et al. “LOF: Identifying Density­Based Local Outliers”. In:
SIGMOD Rec. 29.2 (May 2000), pp. 93–104. ISSN: 0163­5808. DOI: 10.1145/
335191.335388. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/335191.335388.
[LTZ08]
F. Liu, K. Ting, and Z. Zhou. “Isolation Forest”. In: 2008 Eighth IEEE Interna­
tional Conference on Data Mining (2008), pp. 413–422.
[Haw+02]
Simon Hawkins et al. “Outlier Detection Using Replicator Neural Networks”.
In: In Proc. of the Fifth Int. Conf. and Data Warehousing and Knowledge Dis­
covery (DaWaK02. 2002, pp. 170–180.
[AC15]
Jinwon An and S. Cho. “Variational Autoencoder based Anomaly Detection
using Reconstruction Probability”. In: 2015.
[Mal+15]
Pankaj Malhotra et al. “Long Short Term Memory Networks for Anomaly De­
tection in Time Series”. In: Apr. 2015.
[HXD03]
Zengyou He, Xiaofei Xu, and Shengchun Deng. “Discovering Cluster Based
Local Outliers”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 2003 (2003), pp. 9–10.
[Par+10]
Vikas Pareek et al. “A deviation based outlier intrusion detection system”.
In: International Conference on Network Security and Applications. Springer.
2010, pp. 395–401.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
43
==PAGE:52==
[Cam+16]
Guilherme O Campos et al. “On the evaluation of unsupervised outlier de­
tection: measures, datasets, and an empirical study”. In: Data mining and
knowledge discovery 30.4 (2016), pp. 891–927.
[Wik21a]
Wikipedia contributors. Machine learning — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope­
dia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Machine_learning&oldid=
1014655485. [Online; accessed 10­April­2021]. 2021.
[Wik21b]
Wikipedia contributors. Artificial intelligence — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo­
pedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artificial_intelligence&
oldid=1016869480. [Online; accessed 10­April­2021]. 2021.
[Wik21c]
Wikipedia contributors. Support­vector machine — Wikipedia, The Free En­
cyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Support- vector_
machine&oldid=1011597404. [Online; accessed 7­April­2021]. 2021.
[HTF09]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The elements of sta­
tistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2009.
[Wik21d]
Wikipedia contributors. Cluster analysis — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope­
dia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cluster_analysis&oldid=
1014086807. [Online; accessed 9­April­2021]. 2021.
[Est+96]
Martin Ester et al. “A Density­Based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in
Large Spatial Databases with Noise”. In: Proceedings of the Second Interna­
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD’96. Port­
land, Oregon: AAAI Press, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[Wik21e]
Wikipedia contributors. Expectation–maximization algorithm — Wikipedia, The
Free Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed 12­April­2021]. 2021. URL: https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Expectation%5C%E2%5C%80%5C%
93maximization_algorithm&oldid=1014869678.
[Rou87]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and
validation of cluster analysis”. In: Journal of Computational and Applied Math­
ematics 20 (1987), pp. 53–65. ISSN: 0377­0427. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0377042787901257.
[CJ74]
Tadeusz Caliński and Harabasz JA. “A Dendrite Method for Cluster Analysis”.
In: Communications in Statistics ­ Theory and Methods 3 (Jan. 1974), pp. 1–
27. DOI: 10.1080/03610927408827101.
[DB79]
D. L. Davies and D. W. Bouldin. “A Cluster Separation Measure”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI­1.2 (Apr.
1979), pp. 224–227. ISSN: 1939­3539. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909.
[Cha+02]
N. V. Chawla et al. “SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over­sampling Technique”. In:
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 16 (June 2002), pp. 321–357. ISSN:
1076­9757. DOI: 10.1613/jair.953. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1613/jair.953.
[Lin+17]
Wei­Chao Lin et al. “Clustering­based undersampling in class­imbalanced
data”. In: Information Sciences 409­410 (2017), pp. 17–26. ISSN: 0020­0255.
DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ins . 2017 . 05 . 008. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025517307235.
[Wik21f]
Wikipedia contributors. Cross­validation (statistics) — Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cross-validation_
(statistics)&oldid=1012087730. [Online; accessed 8­April­2021]. 2021.
[ZS17]
Arthur Zimek and Erich Schubert. “Outlier Detection”. In: Encyclopedia of
Database Systems. Ed. by Ling Liu and M. Tamer Özsu. New York, NY:
Springer New York, 2017, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978­1­4899­7993­3. DOI: 10.1007/
44
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
==PAGE:53==
978-1-4899-7993-3_80719-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7993-
3_80719-1.
[HA04]
Victoria J. Hodge and Jim Austin. “A survey of outlier detection methodolo­
gies”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review (2004), pp. 85–126.
Data­driven methods for Deviation Detection in manufacturing processes
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
