==PAGE:1==
Graph Theoretical Methods in Strategic Asset Allocation
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Graph Theoretical Methods in Strategic Asset Allocation
June, 2021
By
Idriss El Quassimi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Manage-
ment and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It corresponds to 30 ECTS
credits and was conducted under the supervision of Associate Professor Kourosh Marjani
Rasmussen.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics and
finance.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis is part of the continuation of a project started last year which aims
at developing a Robo-Advisor capable of offering alternatives to the mutual funds that
are favored by many in Denmark. This thesis in particular deals with a sub-problem of
automated asset allocation, more precisely how to reduce the asset universe fed to an opti-
misation model and how does that reduction affects the resulting portfolios performances.
It starts with a review of the existing universe reduction method, which relies on the Min-
imum Spanning Tree, as well as the metric, called Portfolio Diversification Index, used
to evaluate how much diversification is retained post-reduction. A supplementary metric
based on the Eﬀicient Frontier concept of Modern Portfolio Theory is then introduced to
account for the assets past performances too.
The graph-theoretical notion of cut and its application to portfolios, which takes the form
of two new clustering algorithms, are then presented. Based on the two previous metrics,
those methods are tuned to produce subsets of similar sizes to the ones of the MST ap-
proach.
Those subsets and the ones formed by the MST are then run through the funnel and their
performances analysed. It appeared that one of the new methods, Spectral Clustering
which relies on normalized cuts, offers better performances than the existing MST: taking
the average Sharpe Ratio from 1.6 to 2. It is also seen that the reduction of parameter
uncertainty is not the only reason for the performance gain associated with universe re-
duction and that those methods also perform a universe filtration by removing assets at
greater risk of lower out-of-sample performances.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen for introducing me
to this project when I contacted him for a master thesis as well as for his help throughout
the project and his suggestions. I would also like to thank Petr Vaněk for his assistance
especially with the code and notions of the last year theses.
Finally,I want to thank my parents for their support during all my university years.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Litterature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Baseline Model and data
5
2.1
Modern Portfolio Theory overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The baseline MST method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Diversification Metrics
17
3.1
Portfolio Diversification Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Frontier Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Universe reduction methods
27
4.1
Graph Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Portfolio Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Effect on Funnel Performances
41
5.1
The test set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
How to assess performances ?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Performances of the selected subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Subset and performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Limitations and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix - Code Files
55
A.1 Subset creation Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Visualisation Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.3 Miscellaneous Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This master thesis is a continuation of a project started last year with 3 MSc thesis
[Jónsdóttir 2020 ,Vanek 2020 , Kristjánsson 2020 ] which aims at developing a Robo-
Advisor capable of offering alternatives to the mutual funds that are favored by many in
Denmark. [Collective investments: Market developments 2016 ]
Robo-Advisors are a pretty new approach with the first one being developed in 2010
by the company Betterment. They are meant to offer unbiased and cheap investment
advices compared to traditional funds thanks to their algorithm-driven approach. In our
particular case, the Robo-Advisor will invest primarily in Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)
which offers exposure to most of the market with low expenses in accordance with our
strategy of gaining a competitive advantage through lower fees.
Indeed, the fees are much lower than for mutual funds and can be as low as 0.03% for
passive ETFs tracking common indexes. ETFs also have the key advantage of being traded
like stocks i.e. throughout the day on stock exchanges and thus being compatible with the
same mathematical approaches. On the other hand, mutual funds have a management fee
of around 1 to 2 % of the invested amount and may add to that a variety of shareholder
fees that have to be payed under certain circumstances when selling or buying shares of
the fund. This Robo-Advisor will rely on a funnel approach, whose implementation is
depicted below, to pick which ETFs it will invest in:
Figure 1.1: The funnel approach
The numbers above show an order of magnitude for the ETFs entering each stage and this
thesis will focus on the second part i.e. reducing the post-screening asset universe from
hundreds to dozens so that the optimization model performs better thanks to reduced
parameter uncertainty.
In the previous thesis, this was done through two possible approaches: hierarchical cluster-
ing and minimum spanning trees. The goal of this thesis is not only to find new methods
based on graph theory but also metrics to compare them. First, we shall look at the
state of the funnel at the start of this thesis. We will introduce the basic notations and
theory of the modern portfolio theory as well as the dataset used. The existing methods
1
==PAGE:10==
taken from the previous thesis such as the minimum spanning tree (MST) will also be
explained here. Secondly, we will discuss the notion of diversification and investigate the
reliability of the existing diversification metric. In this part, a new supplementary metric
will also be introduced and explained. In the third part, the focus will be on two new
graph-theoretical clustering methods which are based on the notion of graph cuts. The
fourth part will be dedicated to the tuning of the asset selection methods based on the
selected metrics. Finally, they will be backtested and compared in terms of out-of-sample
performances in order to pick which one will be integrated in the Robo-Advisor. The
limitations of our work will also be discussed at this point.
1.1
Litterature Review
The first paper in the history of graph theory is considered to be Euler’s one on the Seven
Bridges of Königsberg problem in 1736. But it was not yet regarded as a full-fledged
branch of mathematics and it took over a century for just the word graph to be used, in
a publication of 1878 [Sylvester 1878] At this point, graph theory was mostly applied to
theoretical chemistry from which it actually took some of its standard terminology. This
association was partly permitted by the apparition of some key concepts such as trees and
graph enumeration. [Cayley n.d.] Then, the first half of the XXth century saw a steady
growth of the field with the first textbook in 1936 but it is during the second half that
graph theory truly became an interdisciplinary field with electrical engineers, social scien-
tists and industrial engineers discovering new applications for it. Those applications soon
became a field of their own, called network science and defined as ”the study of network
representations of physical, biological, and social phenomena leading to predictive models
of these phenomena.”.[Council 2005]
Within the last decades, growing computational power and data availability allowed re-
searchers to investigate the topology of an ever-growing number of networks and in 1998
a paper by Rosario N. Mantegna suggested an application of network science to economic
taxonomy.[Mantegna 1998]
He suggested to build a graph where the nodes are the stocks of a given market and the
distances are based on the correlation of the difference of the logarithm of stock price
computed at a selected time horizon.
The MST can then be extracted with the Kruskal algorithm and its nodes clustered with
the nearest neighbor single linkage clustering algorithm. The corresponding hierarchy was
found to be economically meaningful as it mostly matched stocks by industry. Albeit it
provided some insight, for example ores companies respond to quite different economic
factors compared with aluminum or copper despite all being in the nonferrous metal
subindustry, it was mostly a progress in methodology. Indeed financial networks are just
a type of correlation-based networks, a subset of networks that can be used in a variety
of field such as network medicine [Toubiana et al. 2016] and that stands out by their
fully-connected nature, due to which filtration is often required.
In 2004 Bonanno et al. investigated the use of the MST to filter correlation-based networks
and focused on network of equities in the continuation of Mantegna’work. [Bonanno et al.
2004] This paper introduced a new distance dij =
√
2(1 −ρij) which contrary to Mon-
tegna’s one takes the correlation sign into account and that is since often used. Various
time horizons, all shorter than the usual day, were also tested and were shown to reduce
the MST height thus also reducing its use for stock picking.
The possibility of using volatility times series instead of returns was also investigated and
showed the necessity of using Spearman rank-order correlation when probability density
functions are very different from Gaussian ones. But as no quantifiable topological dif-
2
==PAGE:11==
ferences were found between the return and volatility networks, further studies choose to
focus on return networks, especially for purpose of portfolio creation as in our case.
In the same period, a series of studies by Onnela et al. [Onnela, Chakraborti, et al. 2003]
investigated the properties of the MST as well as a new concept called the asset graph.
The idea behind the asset graph is that the connectivity condition on the MST causes
it to take edges that are not optimal. Therefore, the asset graph is simply made of the
N-1 shortest edges with N being the number of assets considered. In both cases, a time
dimension was also introduced with a sliding window of data considered. This allowed to
look at the survival rate of edges in either case to make sure they were indeed capturing
an underlying structure. The asset graph was found out to be more stable than the MST
over the course of a few years and thus believed to highlight more economically meaningful
connections.
As a network scientist, Onnela also looked at the scale-free nature of those two constructs.
A scale-free network is one that has a power-law degree distribution which means that
it will have a non negligible amount of nodes, referred to as hubs, which a degree much
higher than the average one. [Barabasi 2009] He found out that the asset trees but not
graphs do display such behavior.
But the most import finding for our project was the notion of mean occupation layer and
its links with diversification. The mean occupation layer is defined as the average distance
between any node and the central one which is often defined as the highest degree one.
It was shown that assets with the most potential for diversification according to Modern
Portfolio theory, i.e. the ones found in the minimal variance portfolio, had an average
occupation layer superior by 1 to 1.5 to the tree mean one.
This idea that diversified portfolios tend to contain assets located away from the MST
center was confirmed in several papers about graph-based asset allocation. [ Danko and
Soltes 2018, Li et al. 2018 , Peralta and Zareei 2016] In particular, a paper by Esfahanipour
and Zamanzadeh 2015 used this fact to perform an asset universe reduction on 3 different
stock markets ( the New York, German and Toronto Stock Exchanges) by keeping only
the ends of the MST i.e. vertices with a degree of one. The resulting asset subsets were
roughly half the size of the original asset universe and were found through mean-variance
optimisation to offer a similar optimal portfolio with regards to the Sharpe Ratio. More-
over, the difference in terms of Herfindahl–Hirschman Index, a metric of diversification
based on how equally weighted the assets are, was of less than 10% between the two op-
timal portfolios and that for all 3 stock martkets.
Another important paper regarding the use of the MST is the one by Peralta and Zareei
2016 which highlighted the compatibility between modern portfolio theory and the MST
approach. It showed how the weights in Markowitz’s optimal portfolios had a negative
relationship with the security’s centrality in the MST and a positive one with its own
Sharpe ratio. Contrary to many others, it included not only empirical but also theoretical
results on this question. His investment rule based on asset centrality within the MST
also showed significant out-of-sample performance.
As seen before, the filtration of correlation-based network is a key problematic and has
,at least for finance networks, started with the use of the MST. This method remains
popular and has seen several variations. [Sensoy and Tabak 2014, Danko and Soltes 2018
]. But the underlying idea remains that a very small fraction of the edges ( N −1 out of
N(N−1)
2
for the MST) carries most of the information. This assumption was supported by
both work on random matrix theory [Plerou et al. 2002] and a study of clustering in the
asset graph compared to a random graph. [Onnela, Kaski, and Kertész 2003] which both
estimate roughly 10% of the edges to contain most of the information.
3
==PAGE:12==
But as most stock markets studies contained hundreds of stocks, this shows that the
MST causes a non negligible loss of information even with this assumption. This lead to
a variety of approach aimed at preserving a larger share of edges, one being thresholds
networks with a low threshold value and another being the Planar Maximally Filtered
Graph (PMFG) which contains 3(N −2) edges including all the ones from the MST.
But for our purpose, there is another completely different approach possible which is to
perform node clustering on the fully-connected graph and then pick representative(s) for
each cluster. This clustering may be realised through a variety of approaches [ Micciche,
Lillo, and Mantegna 2005] including some based on graph theory.
Especially, Minimum cut based vertex clustering was applied to financial network with
the intent of forming cluster of assets whose weight in the final portfolio would depend
on the number of cuts required to create them.
[Scalzo Dees et al. 2019] The results
obtained for the cut-based portfolios were significantly better than the minimum-variance
portfolio and the equally-weighted one. This approach was also shown to be less affected
by ill-conditioned matrix compared to the portfolios created through mean-variance opti-
misation.
4
==PAGE:13==
2
Baseline Model and data
2.1
Modern Portfolio Theory overview
In this part, we will introduce some notions and notations of quantitative finance that will
be reused throughout the thesis.
2.1.1
Return and risk
First is the notion of return, it is defined as the difference in price for a security over a
given period of time divided by the initial price :
Rt = Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1
(2.1)
Where Pt is the price at time t and Rt the return at time t. If ones wants to look at average
returns over a time period, the geometric mean is used as it accounts for compounding:
¯R = (
N
∏
i=1
(1 + Ri))1/N −1
(2.2)
The time unit used are usually days,weeks or years and the corresponding returns can be
converted into one another through the following equation:
¯Ryear = (1 + ¯Rweek)52 −1 = (1 + ¯Rday)252 −1
(2.3)
with the 252 corresponding to the number of trading days in a year.
Albeit people usually quote yearly returns in their conversations, the choice of the time
format within a mathematical approach is a trickier question as one wants to minimize
noise in the return time serie while keeping a decent amount of records. Moreover, picking
longer time steps usually leads to a better fit for Gaussian distributions [Borowski 2018]
which is an assumption in some approaches. But if the number of records is not high
enough compared to the number of securities then the correlation matrix is dominated by
noise.[Li et al. 2018]. Thus a balance need to be found when choosing the time step.
As this thesis deals with over 200 assets and has only 6 years of data available, the choice
is between daily and weekly time steps. Given that our approach will be centered on
filtering the correlation matrix, noise in the correlation matrix would be less of a nuisance
thus we would prefer the use of weekly returns which was the choice made in the previous
thesis as well. [Jónsdóttir 2020]
It is quite common in the literature [ Mantegna 1998 Li et al. 2018] to use logarithmic
returns, which are defined below, when the return distribution seems log-normal so that
the resulting distribution is normal.
Rlog = ln( Pt
Pt−1
)
(2.4)
The results of regular and logarithmic weekly returns on Pearson’s ￿2-squared test for a
normal distribution can be found below:
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: P-values for the normality test on weekly returns
Figure 2.2: P-values for the normality test on logarithmic weekly returns
The 1st bin corresponds to the 0-0.05 range meaning that if we set the significance level
at 0.05 then for all the assets it contains the null hypothesis, i.e. coming from a normal
distribution, can be rejected. As we can see, that is the case of the vast majority (160
for the regulars and 167 for the logarithmic). Therefore, we will use the regular prices as
the other advantage of the logarithmic returns like keeping normality when compounding
returns are thus irrelevant when already non-normal.
Also, in our case, the weekly returns will be from Wednesday to Wednesday.
Another important and complementary notion is that of risk. Within the MPT paradigm,
the portfolio’s standard deviation is used as a proxy for risk. But due to some limitations
when the return distribution is not normal[Fama, 1963], different risk metrics may be
6
==PAGE:15==
used in the optimisation stage of the funnel. But as the asset selection stage relies on the
correlation matrix, the risk metric will mainly be used for informative purposes and thus
standard deviation will be used for its simplicity. Its formula can be found below:
σ =
√
wTΣw
(2.5)
Where Σ is the covariance matrix of the returns and s is the weight vector that gives the
fraction invested in each asset.
As investment strategies try to increase returns and/or reduce risk, a popular investment
performance metric is the Sharpe ratio which is defined below:
Sharpe Ratio = Rp −Rf
σp
(2.6)
Where Rp is the return of the portfolio, Rf the risk-free rate and σp the standard deviation
of the portfolio’s excess return. In our case, we will assume the risk-free rate to be zero
to make the computations easier.
2.1.2
Theoretical foundations
In 1952, Markowitz introduced in an essay a new mathematical framework for asset allo-
cation which aimed at formalizing the idea of diversification. His work on it would later
earn him a Nobel Prize which shows how influential this theory, referred to as Modern
Portfolio Theory (MPT), has become.
One of the reason why MPT is regarded as the foundation of modern asset allocation is
because it does not consider assets alone but instead the portfolios they can form. And
because it uses portfolio variance as a proxy for risk, this leads to the the key idea of
diversification i.e.reducing risk by holding a variety of assets. Indeed, portfolio variance
can be reduced by using non perfectly correlated assets which means that idiosyncratic
risk can be mitigated if the assets have low correlation between one another.
This theory is also build on the assumption that investors are risk-averse and rational
which means that for a given level of return they will always invest in the less risky port-
folio. This assumption was new as it goes against the rational choice theory which says
that investors will pick the portfolio that returns the most money on average while MPT
may recommend picking a different one because it suits more one’s risk aversion.
It also means that for a given return, there exists an optimal portfolio whose risk is mini-
mal and which is formalized by the following mathematical programming model :
min wTΣw
s.t.t wTµ = µp
wT1 = 1
Where w =
[
w1
w2
..
wn
]′ is a vector representing the fraction invested in each of the
n assets, µ =
[
µ1
µ2
..
µn
]′ is the vector of the expected future returns for each asset
and Σ is the covariance matrix of the returns.
From the above equation, we can see how MPT relies on the statistical estimate of the
first- and second-order moments of the asset return. This mean-variance optimisation does
however produce very different portfolios for small changes in the estimates. [Chopra and
Ziemba 1993] Therefore, the µ term is often dropped for lack of a suﬀiciently accurate
7
==PAGE:16==
estimate which leads to the minimum-variance portfolio ( min wTΣw with wT1 = 1 ) but
this solution has both the issue of overinvesting in low risk/low return asset and requiring
the inversion of Σ which is again problematic for ill-conditionned matrix. [Scalzo Dees
et al. 2019]
Overall, the core ideas of MPT are still very relevant and the challenge lays more in its
implementation.
2.2
The dataset
In this part, we will look at the post-screening dataset. The initial pre-screening list of
ETFs was made during last year thesis and contains 1,866 ETFs from the 09-12-1999 to
30-04-2020 found on Alpha Vantage [Jónsdóttir 2020]. The screening process was then
conducted based on the 3 following conditions:
• Available for at least 5 years considered and traded every week during that period.
(1075)
• The daily traded volume is of at least 1 million USD. (687)
• The expense ratio must be lower than 0.7% (537)
Further due diligence reduced the asset universe to 216 ETFs between the 23-09-2015 to
the 30-04-2020 and whose distribution by region and type can be found in the two following
tables:
Region
Number of ETFs
North America
129
Europe
14
Asia-Pacific
16
Latin America
3
Africa
1
Developed Markets
3
Developed Markets excluding the US
8
Global
27
Global excluding the US
6
Emerging Markets
5
Table 2.1: ETFs by Region
In this table, nation-focused ETFs such as EDEN (iShares MSCI Denmark ETF) were
counted in the corresponding regions. Moreover, commodities ETFs such as IAU (iShares
Gold Trust) were counted as global due to them tracking commodity prices which are
affected by a variety of factor across the world.
8
==PAGE:17==
ETF Type
Number
Equity
167
Fixed Income
32
Commodities
9
Currencies
7
Alternatives
1
Table 2.2: ETFs by type
The ’Alternative’ category contains only one ETF which is PowerShares DBG10 Currency
Harvest Fund (DBV). It is tracing an index with long exposure to developed-market
currencies if they have high interest rates and short exposure if they have low rates. It
seeks to achieve absolute returns i.e. positive no matter the market situation.
Overall, it was shown in last year thesis that those ETFs provided a market exposure quite
similar to the one of danish mutual funds except for some funds that seemed to have no
correlation with any index. This was not the case for any of our ETFs which is not that
surprising, considering that the vast majority of ETFs are index funds i.e. they track an
index.
We can also see that our ETF universe seems to overrepresent the North American region,
specifically the US, as well as the equity type.
But the proportion are actually quite
similar to those of the US-listed ETFs. As ETFs initially appeared in the US market in
1993, it is now one of the most mature market for them thus the special consideration for
it.[Visual Capitalist 2020]
For reference purposes, the list of all 216 post-screening ETFs can be found below. In italic
are the currency ETF, in bold the alternative, in both the fixed income and in neither the
equity.
Figure 2.3: List of all 216 post-screening ETFs
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3
The baseline MST method
2.3.1
Choosing the correlation
Before extracting the MST, it is necessary to build the correlation-based network. This
requires to choose a correlation metric based on which the distances will be computed.
The returns Ri are time series and in this thesis we will only be interested in their syn-
chronous correlation, just as in most of the literature reviewed [Mantegna 1998; Onnela,
A. Chakraborti, et al. 2002; Onnela, Chakraborti, et al. 2003].
A commonly used metric for that is the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient which is used to
measure linear relationships.
Its formula for a pair of return time series (Ri, Rj) is :
ρij =
< RiRj > −< Ri >< Rj >
√
(< R2
i > −< Ri >2)(< R2
j > −< Rj >2)
(2.7)
where i and j are numerical labels of the assets and < . > is the temporal average over all
the dataset trading days.
An issue with this coeﬀicient is that is very sensible to outliers and return time series have
a non-negligible amount of them, partly due to crises when the returns plummet then
recover together.
To confirm it, we can look at the z-scores, which are the number of standard deviation by
which a value is above or below the mean, for the dataset’s 50760 weekly return values.
The usual rule is that z-scores greater than 3 or smaller than -3 are outliers which gives
us 819 outliers in our weekly returns i.e. 1.6% of the total compared to 0.3% for a normal
distribution. Moreover, if we look at the number of weekly outliers throughout the dataset
which is plotted below, we notice a very sharp rise from February 2020 until the end of
our dataset in late April with 722 i.e. 88% of all outliers happening from the 20/02/20
to the 29/04/20 during the Covid crisis thus confirming that crises are the main origin of
outliers.
Figure 2.4: Number of outliers in the weekly returns by date
10
==PAGE:19==
A possible alternative is the Spearman rank correlation which was used in last year thesis.
It is a nonparametric measure of rank correlation which evaluates how well the relationship
between two variables can be described using a monotonic function. As the observations
weight is equal to their rank and not value, outliers do not have the important impact
they have in Pearson’s.
Spearman correlation is simply defined as Pearson correlation between the rank variables
which means that its formula is :
rs = ρrgX,rgY = cov(rgX, rgY )
σrgXσrgY
,
(2.8)
where ρ is the Pearson correlation coeﬀicients, cov(rgX, rgY ) is the covariance of the rank
variables, σrgX and σrgY are the standard deviations of the rank variables.
If all ranks are different, this formula can be rewritten as:
rs = 1 −
6 ∑d2
i
n(n2 −1),
(2.9)
where di = rg(Xi) −rg(Yi)di = rg(Xi) −rg(Yi) is the difference in rank of the two obser-
vations and n is the number of observations.
Another consideration, independently of the chosen correlation, is whether its absolute
value should be taken as it is done in some papers[Scalzo Dees et al. 2019]. The intuition
behind this choice is that two assets with a correlation of 0.05 should, in the eyes of many,
not be considered as less diversified than two assets with a correlation of -1. An example
when dealing with ETFs would be two ETFs that are one long one short on the same
underlying index. For a portfolio manager, having access to one of those ETFS and an-
other uncorrelated asset is more interesting than having those two perfectly anti-correlated
ETFs.
In our case, we will observe the distribution of correlations, plotted below, to see if such
a problem can arise:
Figure 2.5: Distribution of the pairwise correlation Spearman correlation
11
==PAGE:20==
It appears that strong anti-correlations are quite rare with the highest one being -0.837
and only 6 out of the 46656 pairwise correlations being lower than -0.7 thus we decide
against taking the absolute value.
Overall, we have decided to choose the the Spearman correlation due to its reduced
sensibility to outliers and from here on, correlation is meant in the sense of Spearman
correlation unless specified otherwise.
2.3.2
Choosing the distance
In order to create a graph, the correlation matrix has to be turned in a distance matrix.
Indeed the correlation coeﬀicients cannot be directly used as we want two assets to be
close if they are strongly correlated. Another desired characteristic for this distance is
that it verifies the 3 axioms of a metric:
• the identity of indiscernibles : d(x, y) = 0 ⇔x = y
• symmetry: d(x, y) = d(y, x)
• the triangle inequality: d(x, y) ≤d(x, z) + d(z, y)d(x, y) ≤d(x, z) + d(z, y)
The first one can be tricky with ETFs dataset as two ETFs could be holding the same
portfolio to track the same index and thus have a correlation of 1 which would mean a
distance of 0 between two distinct nodes. But in out dataset, the highest pairwise corre-
lation achieved is 0.996 so we will not have any indiscernibles.
The second one is straightforward for any undirected graph such as ours and the third one
was verified numerically for all the ETFs of our dataset.
The advantage of our distance being a metric is that as our graph is fully connected, the
shortest path between any ETFs is always the edge connecting them because otherwise
the triangle inequality would be violated.
To achieve this,the commonly used transformation function is the following one:
dij =
√
2(1 −ρij)
(2.10)
which will map the correlations into [0, 2] and verifies the 3 required axioms to be a metric
[Gower 1966] Its plot can be found below:
Figure 2.6: The distance function
12
==PAGE:21==
With the correlation matrix converted to a distance one, the graph can now be constructed.
It will be noted G(V,E) with V being the set of nodes (in our case the ETFs) and E the
set of edges whose weight will be the corresponding distance dij.
2.3.3
The MST extraction
A Minimum Spanning Tree M(V,E’) is defined as a subset of edges of a connected and
weighted undirected graph that connects all vertices together without any cycle and with
a minimal total weight(=∑
(i,j)∈E′ dij).
To obtain it, we use Kruskal’s algorithm which is a greedy algorithm that finds an MST
for any undirected connected weighted graph by adding at each step the lowest-weight
edge that does not create a cycle.
The uniqueness of the resulting MST is obvious if the edges have unique weights. How-
ever, that is not the case in our graph as it contains 29 pairs of duplicate weights such as
(VBK,BKLN) and (BKLN,XLE).
But as none of the corresponding 58 edges are part of the tree T found by Kruskal’s algo-
rithm, it proves that T is the unique MST because the algorithm looked at each edge in
ascending order to check if it could be added without forming a cycle so if they are not in
T it means they were rejected for forming a cycle at a point where only shorter edges were
present thus meaning that a tree containing them would need the removal of one of those
shorter edges to avoid cycles but that would cause its total weight to exceed the one of T.
If this method was put in production, it would be necessary to proceed to this uniqueness
check at each update of the dataset and, if there are several distinct MSTs, to run our
methods on each distinct MST then merge the resulting subsets.
2.3.4
From the MST to the subset
As in Esfahanipour and Zamanzadeh 2015, the MST is used for universe reduction by
selecting its dangling ends i.e. nodes with a degree of one. But we want to investigate how
drastic this reduction can be so we will perform this whole process again on the resulting
subset. This means that after computing the MST of G, called T1, we define the first
reduced asset universe as the subset V1 of V formed by the nodes with a degree of one
in T1 and the method is then reused on the subgraph induced by V1 to form V2. The
process is redone until the resulting subset is made of about a dozen or two assets.
The iterative process is illustrated below with the 4 first MSTs which brought the asset
universe from 214 to 18 ETFs:
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.7: First MST with 109 assets of degree 1 in red
Figure 2.8: Second MST with 59 assets of degree 1 in red
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.9: Third MST with 36 assets of degree 1 in red
Figure 2.10: Fourth MST with 18 assets of degree 1 in red
We can see from the above plots how the asset universe is reduced by roughly a half at each
iteration of the MST. But as the reduced universe offers less diversification, an equilibrium
must be reached between size and diversification.
For that purpose,it is necessary to
measure how diversified an asset universe is and such metrics will be the subject of the
next chapter.
15
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
3
Diversification Metrics
As seen in last chapter, there is a need to assess how diversified the various asset subsets
are.And because we want to measure the diversification offered by an asset universe and
not the one of a particular portfolio, many of the usual metrics cannot be used as they
rely on weights.
But if the MPT framework did not provide a metric for diversification, it did show its
effect on portfolios i.e. reducing risk. Indeed, the variance of a portfolio of assets that
are not perfectly correlated is smaller than the weighted sum of their variance. And this
effect is greater for smaller correlation which leads to a fairly intuitive metric: the average
Pearson correlation between asset returns.
Indeed the smaller the average correlation, the greater on average the effect of diversi-
fication on portfolio risk. But albeit useful this metric has several issues such as being
inappropriate for comparing sets of different sizes.
Moreover, it was shown than other metrics could have higher correlation with the diver-
sification effect on risk in MPT [ Onnela, Chakraborti, et al. 2003] therefore two of those
metrics will be introduced and compared in this part.
3.1
Portfolio Diversification Index
The Portfolio Diversification Index (PDI) was introduced in 2006 [Rudin and Morgan
2006].It relies on principal component analysis to assess and like all metrics introduced in
this part, it does not rely on weights and thus can be used on asset universes.
3.1.1
Principal component analysis
PCA was invented in 1901 by Karl Pearson[Pearson, 1901], but has been re-discovered
numerous times in other fields [Kosambi, 1943 & Hotteling,1933 ].
Its goal is to find
a lower-dimensional representation of a dataset. In some case, this can actually be the
”true” dimension of the dataset when no information is lost in the process.
To do so, PCA will find a new basis whose axis, numbering N for a N-dimensional dataset,
are ordered by variance explained. This means that by taking the first k axis we obtain
the best k-dimensional projection of our original dataset in term of information retained.
Those axis are actually the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, they can also be obtained
through the singular decomposition of the data matrix which is the most popular method.
The correspond relation can be found below:
X = USV T and Σ = XT X
n −1 so Σ = V SU T USV T
n −1
= V
S2
n −1V T
(3.1)
where X is the data matrix, Σ the covariance one, S the diagonal matrix of singular values
, U and V two orthogonal matrices and n is the dataset size.
It shows that the eigendecomposition of the correlation matrix (Σ = V LV T as it a real
symmetric matrix) can be replaced by the singular value decomposition which is more
stable numerically , a feature especially useful for machine learning.
The correlation matrix eigenvalues give the variance explained by the corresponding prin-
cipal component through the following formula:
17
==PAGE:26==
Wk =
λk
∑N
j=1 λj
(=
σ2
k
∑N
i=1 σ2
i
)
(3.2)
where Wk is the variance explained by the k-th principal component, λk the k-th eigenvalue
of Σ, σk the k-th singular value of X
As this method relies on variances, it is important to standardise the date so that differ-
ences in scale do not cause some variables to dominate others.
3.1.2
Basic properties
The PDI relies on the variance explained by each principal component to assess how many
uncorrelated investments are necessary to achieve the same diversification as the consid-
ered assets. Indeed, the idea is that each principal components (sometimes called principal
portfolios ) is uncorrelated with the others and thus represent a different investment op-
portunity (sometime called market bet). Therefore,the spread of the data along those axis
shows how much weight is given to each of those uncorrelated investments. As they are
N axis, the PDI can take values between 1 and N as they can only be so many different
investments as they are assets.
The PDI value can be computed with the following formula:
PDI = 2
N
∑
i=1
kWi −1
(3.3)
Based on this, we can see that it is maximal if the N assets are uncorrelated and minimal
if they are perfectly correlated or anticorrelated.
It also appears that the PDI can decrease if the assets added to the universe are heavily
correlated with existing ones and thus reinforce the share of variance explained by the
first principal components. This means that the PDI do not only measure the quantity of
diversification but also its quality by penalizing the presence of ”useless” assets.
A limitation of this metric however arises if the multi-variate distribution is not normal
as all distributional information is no longer contained in just the covariance matrix.
[Kirchner and Zunckel 2011] This is our case as even marginal normality was shown to be
lacking for our dataset.
3.1.3
A case study of PDI on our dataset
We are going to investigate how well PDI works within our dataset. For that, we will start
by looking at the 10 highest and lowest PDI for an asset triplet in our dataset to see if
the metric is satisfactory in this simple situation.
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Top 10 PDIs in the dataset
It appears that the top 10 triplets are extremely close to the max PDI for a triplet i.e. 3
and they show a lot of variety in term of asset class with none of them containing only
one asset class. However, there seems to be some lack of geographical diversity as well as
some risky combinations such as the 3rd triplet who in crisis period such as 2008 would
be quite vulnerable.
Another possible issue could be an over-representation of niche sectors but the screening
conducted beforehand should prevent the section of rarely traded ETFs.
Figure 3.2: Top 10 PDIs in the dataset
As expected, the bottom 10 PDIs are ETFs that have very similar holdings and thus ex-
tremely strong correlation.
Based on that, it seems that the PDI interpretation is more debatable for its top value
than its bottom ones so this could be an issue when comparing small asset subsets whereas
for large one, where all assets removed can be quasi-duplicates, it should be less of a prob-
lem. This makes sense as PDI and MPT differ in how they consider negative correlation
not positive ones.
As we have obtained several subsets by using the MST in the last part, we will compare
their PDI against results from the literature:
19
==PAGE:28==
Name
Size
PDI
Complete ETF dataset
216
12
Ends of the 1st MST
109
12.5
Ends of the 2nd MST
59
11.2
Ends of the 3rd MST
36
10
Ends of the 4th MST
18
7.7
S&P 100 [Rudin and Morgan (2006)]
100
40
40 random in S&P 100 [idem]
40
20
40 randoms in the ETF universe
40
5.8
Table 3.1: Litterature and dataset PDIs
It appears that the ETF dataset scores significantly less than the S&P100. As the paper
used dates back to 2006, the process was redone for our period with the 88 stocks which
were at this time and are still in the S&P100. Their PDI is of 21.8 , a decrease that could
be explained by the fact that our dataset contains a crisis period where correlation are
known to increase thus driving the PDI down.
But it is still a lot more than the ETF universe, a result that is not that surprising if we
look at the average correlation in our ETF dataset, around 0.5[Jónsdóttir 2020], compared
to the S&P500 ,around 0.2. [ n.d.] Indeed ETFs are themselves portfolios tracking indexes
consisting of dozens if not hundreds of securities so they tend to be more correlated with
one another than individual securites. Moreover, the PDI actually considers the assets to
form an equally weighted portfolio which is too strong of an assumption on large asset
universes.
Another question arises concerning the PDI of the MST subsets. It appears that they
decreases quite slowly and even increased in the case of the 1st MST. This means that,
to a certain extent, the initial PDI is not low due to a lack of diversified assets but rather
because of an abundance of highly similar ones.Thus removing them was able to increase
the PDI even if no new investment possibility was added. This is further confirmed by
the large gap between the 3rd MST and a random subset of same size.
As we have seen, our larger subsets tend to perform poorly PDI-wise. But if this indeed
due to duplicates then it should be possible to achieve similar if not better PDI scores
with less assets. To do so, we will investigate different picking orders for the 36 assets
of the 3rd MST round. For each asset number from 1 to 36 (the whole 3rd round MST
subset), we computed the PDI and plotted below the maximum and minimum:
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Maximal and minimal PDI for 10.000 samples
It appears indeed that the final PDI can be matched and even exceeded with less assets.
But this approach is limited by the fact that the PDI treats correlation the same regardless
of its sign contrary to MPT and our graph. Therefore, maximizing PDI is done at the
expense of the minimum-variance portfolio assets after the first few assets.
3.2
Frontier Metric
As we have seen in the previous section, the difference between the PDI and MPT regard-
ing anticorrelation means that we cannot rely solely on PDI to assess our asset selection
methods. Moreover, the PDI do not take into account the subset past performances which
is why in this part, a metric based on MPT will be introduced.
It aims at aimed at
rewarding the subset ability to match the universe past optimums and penalizes subsets
that don’t cover our desired range of returns or have non-eﬀicient performances.
To do so, it computes, for our range of target returns, the distance between the subset
eﬀicient frontier and the whole universe eﬀicient frontier. The smaller it is, the better
for our subset because it means that the effect of diversification on risk was just slightly
reduced thus meaning that the diversification was mostly preserved .
3.2.1
Eﬀicient Frontier
The eﬀicient frontier is a concept coming from MPT. It consists in the set of all eﬀicient
portfolios i.e. whose return cannot be exceeded by portfolios with the same risk. It can
be computed by solving the following problem :
Minimize wT Σw with RT w = µtarget
(3.4)
21
==PAGE:30==
where R is the return matrix, w the weight vector and µtarget is a target return, within
[µmin; µmax] where µmin is the lowest return ever targeted by our strategy and µmax the
highest.
For our dataset, the eﬀicient frontier plot can be found below :
Figure 3.4: Eﬀicient frontier for the whole ETF dataset
3.2.2
Interpretation
This metric can be used visually by just plotting the various subset frontiers and observing
how close they are to the universe frontier in our return range. This was done for the 4
MST rounds and can be found below:
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: Eﬀicient frontier for the 4 MST subsets
The plot can be be interpreted to see, for example, that for low (4-8%) returns the 2nd
MST offers the best ratio of performance to size among our MST subsets. However for
returns closer to 0.2 the 3rd MST offers close performances for half its size and so could
be a better choice. But to evaluate the approach itself, those subsets have to be compared
to random ones of equal size. This can be done visually by plotting all frontiers as done
below:
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.6: 1st MST compared to 30 random subsets of the same size
Figure 3.7: 2nd MST compared to 30 random subsets of the same size
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.8: 3rd MST compared to 30 random subsets of the same size
Figure 3.9: 4th MST compared to 30 random subsets of the same size
25
==PAGE:34==
We can see that as we increase the number of MST rounds, the subset frontier worsens not
only in absolute compared to the universe frontier but also relatively to random subsets
of the same size. However for very low returns and risks, the loss in eﬀiciency is negligible
which actually makes sense as the MST method is meant to pick the main assets of the
minimum-variance MPT portfolio i.e. mostly very low risk assets.
And we can also observe that for the first round, the MST subset outperforms the vast
majority of the random ones showing that the filtering did remove some sort of quasi-
duplicates.
Later in this thesis, this metric will be used to evaluate various subsets in a more concise
way: the frontiers will be computed and we will count the amount of randoms ones which
are below the subset one for more than half of the target return range.
Another consideration is the significance of this metric, if we consider that the subset
tested actually belongs to the X-th percentile then the metric score follows a binomial
distribution of parameter p=X/100 and n=the number of random subsets used, in our
case 30.
This means that based on the metric score we can estimate p and then the corresponding
percentile as X = 100
Score
Nrandom where Nrandom is the number of random subsets used in the
metric computation.
The variance of this estimator based on the maximum likelihood is p(1−p)
n
as p = X/100
this means that the variance will be maximal for median performers and minimal for top
or bottom percentile ones. This also means that we will mostly rely on this metric to seek
top performers like the MST 1st round and not that much to separate 2 mediocre subsets
such as the MST 4th round.
Overall, this chapter introduced two metrics which both have a different ”vision” of diver-
sification but end up being supplementary rather than mutually exclusive. Indeed, PDI
allows us to see if we are removing quasi-duplicates by checking whether it diminishes
after a reduction of the asset universe. On the other hand, the metric frontiers allow us
to make sure that the assets we kept are relevant for our investment goals.
By combining both, we should be able to assess new methods and see if they can perform
an asset universe reduction that retains many if not most of its diversification.
26
==PAGE:35==
4
Universe reduction methods
In this chapter, we will introduce alternatives to our baseline universe reduction method.
Their objective is to offer more homogeneous universe reductions that do not focus on
min-var assets like the baseline MST did. To do so, they will rely on the graph theoretical
notion of cut which leads to two different approaches, one based on the number of nodes
per cluster and one based on the edges weight within each cluster which can also be seen
as a particular case of spectral clustering.
Both eventually leads to a clustering of the assets from which cluster representative(s) can
be picked to form the asset subset.Those clusterings will be done on the correlation-based
graph as it is based on its separability and we want clusters to group assets that are close
from one another i.e. are highly correlated.
4.1
Graph Cuts
A graph cut can be defined as a partition of the vertices of a graph into two disjoint sub-
sets. Any edge whose ends are not in the same subset is said to cross the cut and belongs
to the cut-set. For connected graphs such as ours, any cut-set defines a unique cut and
thus both can be used interchangeably to identify cuts.
The following figure shows an example of a graph cut:
Figure 4.1: Example of a graph cut
27
==PAGE:36==
As our graph is weighted, the size ( or weight ) of the cut is the sum of the weights of all
edges in the cut-set:
Cut(V1, V2) =
∑
i∈V1
∑
j∈V2
Wij
(4.1)
where Wij is the weight of the edge (i,j)
When the size of a cut is the smallest among all the others, this cut is called the minimum
cut. The problem of finding this minimum cut in an undirected weighted graph can be
solved in polynomial time by the Stoer-Wagner algorithm.
In the previous graph example, the cut was not the minimum one which is shown below:
Figure 4.2: The minimum cut in the previous graph
But if one wants both subset to be of similar size (cardinality of the subset) or volume
(total weight of the edges in the graph induced by the subset) then the problem becomes
NP-hard. And this harder version is actually the useful one as simply computing the min-
imum cut tend to simply remove nodes one by one from the graph, especially for complete
grah such as ours.
The volume or size constraints are enforced by modifying the cut weight so that discrep-
ancy in size/volume are penalized which means for 2 subsets:
Cut(V1, V2) = ( 1
N1
+ 1
N2
))
∑
i∈V1
∑
j∈V2
Wij
(4.2)
Where N1 and N2 are the cardinalities of the vertices subsets and is often called a ratio
cut.
Cut(V1, V2) = ( 1
V1
+ 1
V2
))
∑
i∈V1
∑
j∈V2
Wij
(4.3)
28
==PAGE:37==
Where V1 and V2 are the volumes of the vertices subsets i.e. the sum of the degrees of all
nodes in the subset and is called a normalized cut.
For a simple graph such as our example, it is straightforward and is shown below :
Figure 4.3: The normalized minimum cut in the previous graph which happens to also be
the ratio cut
But for our asset graph with 216 nodes, it cannot be done in a reasonable time as they are
2216−1−1 possible cuts. Therefore, there is a need for an approximate but computationally
feasible solution.
4.1.1
The minimum ratio cut
For the ratio cut, such solution can be found through a simple spectral approach based on
the eigenvector associated to the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of the graph Laplacian L ,
called the Fielder vector [Fiedler 1973], which gives a good approximation of the ratio cut
when used as an indicator vector ( the sign of its n-th coordinate give the half to which
the n-th node belongs) . [Scalzo Dees et al. 2019]
A code listing of our implementation of the spectral approximation of a ratio cut can be
found below:
1
def SpectralBissection(G):
2
SecondVector =nx.linalg.algebraicconnectivity.fiedler_vector(G,weight='
weight')
3
ListOfNode=list(G.nodes())
29
==PAGE:38==
4
i=0
5
Half1,Half2=[],[]
6
for x in SecondVector:
7
if x<0:
8
Half1.append(ListOfNode[i])
9
if x>0:
10
Half2.append(ListOfNode[i])
11
i+=1
12
return Half1,Half2
Listing 4.1: Ratio Bisection
However this method is ”just” a bisection i.e. it creates two clusters. Therefore, we must
repeat those bisections on the resulting clusters to obtain the desired amount of clusters.
But a better approach is to actually use the eigenvalue associated to the Fielder vector,
which is known as algebraic connectivity, and is a lower bound of the traditional vertex
connectivity. Indeed that would provide us a stopping criterion as this value measures the
separability of a graph i.e. the minimum ratio cut is bounded by the algebraic connectivity.
We also decided to normalize it by the size of the corresponding sub-graphs because all of
our graphs are complete so connectivity is too influenced by their size.
The following code listing shows the implementation of this approach:
1
2
def RatioCuts(G,TargetConnectivity ,MinSizeForSplit ,trainDataset):
3
SubGraphs=[G]
4
ListOfSubsets=[]
5
while len(SubGraphs)>0:
6
subG=SubGraphs.pop()
7
if len(subG.nodes)>MinSizeForSplit:
8
if (nx.linalg.algebraicconnectivity.algebraic_connectivity(subG)/
len(subG.nodes))< TargetConnectivity
:
9
Subsets=SpectralBissection(subG)
10
SubGraphs.append(AbsGraph(trainDataset[Subsets[0]]))
11
SubGraphs.append(AbsGraph(trainDataset[Subsets[1]]))
12
13
else:
14
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
15
else:
16
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
17
for subG in SubGraphs:
18
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
19
return ListOfSubsets
Listing 4.2: RatioCut
We can see that we can both tune the TargetConnectivity which indicates how similar assets
will be within each cluster and MinSizeForSplit which dictates when to stop splitting
clusters.
This second parameter is not the minimum size of a cluster as if a cluster
of size MinSizeForSplit+1 is bisected, it will usually results in 2 clusters smaller than
MinSizeForSplit unless one of the resulting cluster is a singleton.
4.1.2
The minimum normalized cut and Spectral Clustering
For normalized cuts, the same process can be used but with the normalized Laplacian
instead and the indicator vector is not directly its Fielder vector F but D−1
2 F where D
is the weighted degree matrix (zeroes outside of the diagonal which contains the weighted
degrees) and F is now the second generalized eigenvector instead of simply the second
eigenvector.
30
==PAGE:39==
This spectral approximation proved to be computationally harder and thus we will be
using sklearn.cluster.SpectralClustering which offers an optimised alternative to it.
Even though it relies on the same approach as normalized cut, this method, from hereon
referred to as Spectral Clustering, is different for K>2 clusters as it does not perform re-
peated bisections but instead a K-clustering based on other eigenvectors of the normalized
Laplacian than the second one used in bisections. This means that we can directly pick
the target number of cluster (which is not necessarily the actual one as this method allows
empty clusters).
Below we can see a difference between the two by looking at the share of clusters in com-
mon between two successive clustering (percent of cluster from the K-1 clusters found
in the K-clusters). For repeated bisections that produces K clusters, this share of ”old”
clusters is is known to be K−2
K .
Figure 4.4: Survival rate of clusters in spectral clustering and repeated bisections.
For very large numbers of cluster which are close to the actual number of assets, they
appear to be some stability for the Spectral Clustering but that it is just because at this
point a lot of cluster have to be singletons and thus can be found in the successives very
large clusterings. Other than that, the stability is extremely low meaning that the tuning
of this algorithm will need extra caution as it is not because a certain K was found to be
good that the surrounding ones will be too.
4.2
Portfolio Cuts
We have seen in the previous part a way to cluster vertices in a graph based on its cuts
and its Laplacian eigenvectors. An interpretation of those cuts is that they are equivalent
to ignoring some of the shortest edges. This means that we need the edge weight to be a
similarity metric and not a distance like it was in the rest of the thesis as we want to ignore
some of the weakest ties. Therefore, we will introduce a new graph called G2 where the
edge weights are simply the absolute value of the Spearman correlation as it was done in
the literature [Scalzo Dees et al. 2019]. This means that those weights are now similarity
31
==PAGE:40==
scores rather than distances.
We can now apply those 2 methods to our specific problem and tune them accordingly.
4.2.1
Picking representatives
As we want to perform an asset universe reduction, the clustering is only a mean to
an end as it does not reduce the number of assets by itself.
Indeed, we have to pick
representative(s) for each cluster to form the reduced universe, referred to as ”the asset
subset”.
For that, we can choose one or both of the following representatives :
• The medoid : It is the asset of the cluster whose distance to the others is minimised
i.e. the most similar on average to the rest of the cluster.
• The best Sharpe ratio: It is the asset that has the best Sharpe ratio i.e. the best
historical performances among the cluster.
4.2.2
Tuning the RatioCuts algorithm
In this part, we will focus on tuning the RatioCuts algorithm based on both metrics
introduced in the previous chapter. We will also use the Silhouette score albeit its interest
is limited for large graph clustering. [Almeida et al. 2011]
The idea is that we would like to produce for each algorithm up to 5 subsets of different
sizes, a choice based on the fact that the MST subsets size cannot be chosen so we would
like to oppose them to equally-sized subsets. We also want to have an ”optimal” subset
per algo whose size may not correspond to any MST rounds but who seems to offer the
best performance/size ratio based on the metrics.
From hereon, we will refer to those 4 sizes as respectively L ( Large - around 110 assets),
M ( Medium - around 60 assets), S ( Small - around 30 assets), XS ( Extra Small - around
15 assets) and to the best compromise as OPT.
The following plots show the performance in term of silhouette for the RatioCuts :
Figure 4.5: Silhouette per number of cluster for the RatioCut
32
==PAGE:41==
For less than 15 clusters, the silhouette score is around 0.2, the same order of magnitude
as the previous thesis clustering attempts. However beyond this point, the silhouette score
starts to exhibit a rather erratic behaviour, typical of larger networks whose cluster are
not clique-like. [Almeida et al. 2011]
This also makes sense as our graph is a complete one clustered by removing some weak links
but the silhouette rewards short average intra-cluster distance compared to the nearest-
cluster distance. However in complete graph, average distances tend to be inflated and
this is amplified by the fact that in our case the algorithm focused on inter-cluster edges.
Moreover, there is a growing number of singletons as the number of cluster gets larger and
they have a silhouette score of 0 which brings down the average.
Figure 4.6: Number of singletons for the RatioCut
The above plot confirms that the silhouette decrease coincides with the apparition and
then increase of singletons.
In terms of subset selection, this plot may support picking an XS subset before the sil-
houette plummet i.e. around 12 clusters but much more information are needed so the
following plots will show the algorithm performances in term of PDI and Frontier Metric.
The following plots are for subsets and not clusters metrics so we will compare the 2
possible asset selection methods (medoid and best Sharpe ratio):
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7: PDI per number of cluster for the RatioCut
The PDI plot shows great results for large numbers of clusters where the values reached
are above any observed for the MST (12.5) or the whole dataset (12), and the fact that the
maximum is reached around 80 assets seems to indicate that it could be the OPT subset
based on the elbow method. It is also worth noting that for small subsets, the PDIs are
lower than their MST equivalent ( 7.7 for 18 and 10 for 36) so the XS and S subsets could
suffer from that.
In terms of representatives, the Sharpe ratio seems to be slightly better but it is not a
decisive advantage yet.
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.8: RatioCut vs same-sized random subsets
For the eﬀicient frontier metric, the difference between the two representatives gets much
larger for less than 60 clusters meaning that the XS and S subset must be based on the
Sharpe ratio rather than the medoid as the latter selects suboptimal assets.We can see
also see that the medoid and Sharpe ratio selections performs quite closely with a slight
advantage for Sharpe ratio when it comes to small clusters which makes sense as when
they are a lot of clusters, many are singleton for whom the selection method does not
change anything.
Based on those considerations and the PDI results, we decide to use solely the Sharpe ratio
representative for RatioCuts as its performances were always comparable if not outright
better compared to the Medoid.
The previous plots were done for various values of the ConnectivityTarget which lead to
different sized clusters whose number was actually used in abscissa but there is another
parameter, namely the minimum size for a cluster to be split MinSizeForSplit, that can
be tuned and some values (2,5,10) were explored and their PDI measured as it is the
computationally simplest metric and large changes in its values are still indicative.
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.9: PDIs compared for various values of MinSizeForSplit
It seems that in our case, the natural limitation of MinSizeForSplit=1 performs best, the
others could make sense if our asset universe was much larger to the point of being a prob-
lem computationally so enforcing larger MinSizeForSplit would be needed to drastically
reduce the run time.
Overall, it appeared that the RatioCuts algorithm performed best when picking the best
Sharpe Ratio as cluster representative and without minimal size for the clusters
4.2.3
Tuning the Spectral Clustering method
In this part, we will investigate how the Spectral Clustering method performs for the
various sizes of subset we want to obtain.The only parameter we can tune on this method
that actually affects our results is the dimension of the projection subspace which is an
upper limit on the number of cluster rather than the actual number of clusters as this
method allows for empty clusters. Therefore, we will compute the actual number of cluster
to use as abscissa in the following plots.
Similarly to the RatioCuts, we start by looking at how the algorithm does in terms of
Silhouette score:
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.10: Silhouette scores for the Spectral Clustering
Albeit it starts around 0.2 then 0.1 similarly to the RatioCuts, the score quickly drop
to 0 and below between 40 and 70 clusters. Contrary to the RatioCuts, this cannot be
blamed on singletons as their score is always 0 and not negative. But similar results were
observed in the literature [Almeida et al. 2011] and could partly be due to the topology
of our network. Still, there seem to be sort of difference between the XS/S and M/L
subsets so we will investigate later in this part the possibility of picking 2 representatives
per cluster (the Medoid and the best Sharpe ratio) so that all our subsets are chosen from
well-distinct clusters.
Figure 4.11: PDI for the Spectral Clustering
As for the RatioCuts, the best Sharpe Ratio seems to outperform PDI-wise the Medoid.
However, the values remains lower than what could be observed for either the RatioCuts
or the MSTs. And they show a sharp decrease beyond 70 clusters which strongly support
37
==PAGE:46==
the previous assumption that the quality of the clustering decrease for very large number
of clusters and that it is necessary to form the M and L subsets by picking the two
representatives per cluster.
Figure 4.12: Spectral Clustering vs same-sized random subsets
The Sharpe Ratio again outperforms the Medoid and while in the case of the RatioCuts
both type of representatives showed very high performances for large numbers of cluster,
this time the Medoid remains significantly behind in many cases albeit it does reach decent
values of above 20 random subsets outperformed out of 30.
This plot may show a possible issue in combining both reprensatives as the medoid seems
to select poor performing assets in large clusters which actually make sense as the distance
decreases with correlation so in large clusters the medoid is an asset that is quite strongly
correlated to the others, a characteristic that reduces its diversification potential and thus
the quality of the eﬀicient frontier it produces.
To investigate the use of both representatives, we will plot the performances obtained
for PDI and the frontier metric by number of assets and not by number of cluster like
previously as the two are different for the double representative approach.
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.13: PDI for different representative in Spectral Clustering
Figure 4.14: Frontier Metric for different representative in Spectral Clustering
It seems that up to the M-sized subset, the best Sharpe ratio remains the representative
of choice but for the L subset, only the double representatives show no sudden fall of its
PDI and even an increase that leads to values closer to those achieved by the MST or the
RatioCuts thus appearing to be indeed a better alternative.
Overall, this means that for Spectral Clustering the parameters tuning was less straight-
forward than for the RatioCuts as two different approaches were selected depending on
39
==PAGE:48==
the subset size with the best Sharpe ratio representative being used for XS,S,M subsets
and the medoid being added for the L subset.
The following table recaps the various subset formed based on our selected and tuned
approaches:
Subset Type
Subset size
PDI
Frontier metric (30 randoms)
XS
18 - 21 - 21
7.7 - 6.5 - 6.
7 - 27 - 27
S
36 - 36 - 36
10 - 8.4 - 7.5
11 - 29 - 30
M
60 - 59 - 59
11.2 - 12.1 - 9.5
30 - 29 - 30
L
110 - 113 - 102
12.5 - 14.1 - 9.6
30 - 30 - 30
OPT (only RatioCuts)
86
14.1
29
Table 4.1: Table of the resulting subsets (values in the following order : MST - RatioCuts
- Spectral Clustering)
It is important to note that the subsets are also going to be compared against the default
asset universe which obviously contains them all. This means that it is not about subsets
containing better investments but rather them not containing the poor ones. Indeed as
explained in the introduction, the asset reduction seek to increase the performances of the
funnel by reducing parameters uncertainty in its optimisation part. This means that even
if the optimal result achievable with a given subset will most likely be smaller than the
one for the whole universe, the actual model performances will be closer to it thanks to
its reduced size and thus better than the unreduced universe.
And because we do not know the relationship for our model between parameter uncertainty
and subset size, we will investigate different sized subsets as shown in the previous table.
40
==PAGE:49==
5
Effect on Funnel Performances
In this chapter, we will assess the impact of the universe reduction on the end-of-funnel
performances. To do so, we will extend the dataset by adding a test set that has not been
used or seen by our methods during the previous chapters.
We will then see how to compare our various subsets given that the funnel outcome is not
fully stable. The resulting performances will be discussed as well the possible limitations
of our approach.
5.1
The test set
Test sets are used to obtain an unbiased evaluation of a final model i.e. one that has
already been tuned such as ours at the end of the previous chapter. The test set is inde-
pendent from the training one but it must come from the same distribution. This actually
raises a question in our case if we look at the plot below of the MSCI world ETF. This
ETF is of particular importance because it tracks equity in developed market and is thus
used by many as a benchmark, even the funnel CVar model uses it as a risk benchmark.
Figure 5.1: Daily price of the MSCI World in the training and test dataset
We can see how the dataset contains a single major crash which happens because of the
covid crisis in March 2020.
Because it is situated after the green bar that marks the
41
==PAGE:50==
shortest possible training set for our approach (based on the fact that we require more
weeks than assets to avoid issues on the PDI), we can decide to include it or not in the
training set.The training set would in all cases include the 2 corrections from early 2016
and late 2018/early 2019 which could contain some information on the securities ability to
resist negative trends and recovers from them.But it is still clear that the assumption on
the crash and regular returns coming from the same distribution does not hold and thus
including at least one crash in the training set is preferable to have more informations
about the different market regimes.
The same can be said of the rebound period that follows a crash and which moreover, if
used in the test set, presents the risk that poor performing assets which lost a lot of value
during the crash may appear as high performers in the test set because they regained some
of their lost value during the rebound. Therefore, we would like to include some of that
rebound too and decide to pick a split date when the MSCI World is roughly back at its
pre-covid level i.e. the 2020-07-31.
It is worth noting the performances of the MSCI world over the test period which are a
36.7% annual return with a 15.6% standard deviation ( meaning a Sharpe ratio of 2.36).
Those performances are very good compared to its historical ones and even to other
securities in general as Sharpe ratios of 1 are usually considered quite good and 2 very
good.
5.2
How to assess performances ?
The selected performances metrics for the portfolio produced by the funnel are the follow-
ing 3:
• The average annualised return over the period (measured by the geometric mean),
simply referred to as return from hereon.
• The standard deviation of the returns as it is a measure of risk in MPT,
• The Sharpe ratio which is the ratio of two aforementioned metrics and is meant to
show how good of a compromise the portfolio offers.
In the current version of the funnel, the preferred method for scenario generation is the
bootstrapping one and other students involved in the funnel project found that the perfor-
mance metrics showed some stability when ran with more than a few thousands scenarios.
We investigated it by running 10 times the funnel with 10000 scenarios, for the entire
asset universe (as if the reduction stage did not exist) and it appears that this stability is
somewhat limited as shown in the following table:
42
==PAGE:51==
Return
Standard Deviation
Sharpe ratio
0.201
0.229
0.88
0.141
0.232
0.61
0.156
0.214
0.73
0.199
0.21
0.95
0.145
0.212
0.68
0.123
0.199
0.62
0.151
0.212
0.71
0.228
0.211
1.08
0.187
0.208
0.90
0.042
0.229
0.18
0.143
0.214
0.67
Table 5.1: 10 runs of the funnel with 10000 scenarios and the whole asset universe
We can see that the standard deviation is the only one to be quite stable and this actually
makes sense as the CvaR model actively enforces a risk constraint based on the value
at risk for the benchmark in our case the MSCI world. However, the returns fluctuate
between 0.12 and 0.23 with even a run at 0.042 and this causes the Sharpe ratio also to
be unstable as it a ratio between the returns and the standard deviations.
If we look at the other end of the spectrum in term of subset size i.e. the fourth round
of the MST and its 18 assets, the following results were found for 10 runs in the same
condition:
Return
Standard Deviation
Sharpe ratio
0.201
0.197
1.02
0.391
0.203
1.93
0.205
0.177
1.16
0.193
0.179
1.08
0.153
0.162
0.94
0.400
0.218
1.83
0.299
0.191
1.56
0.236
0.175
1.35
0.256
0.182
1.41
0.311
0.199
1.56
0.297
0.194
1.53
Table 5.2: 10 runs of the funnel with 10000 scenarios and the 4th MST subset
Those runs show that instability also plagues smaller subsets. Indeed, the returns and
Sharpe ratios vary by up to a factor two depending on the run. This means that a single
computation cannot be used to get a good understanding of the funnel performances.
However, it appears that the performances are, on average, much better in this second
case with for example a standard deviation that was slightly but steadily reduced and
returns that do not drop as low while reaching much higher values.
Therefore, we will compare runs by looking at metrics averages (to see their performance)
and standard deviations (to see their stability). As the risk is computed as the standard
deviation of the returns, we would like to avoid confusion between the two and will there-
43
==PAGE:52==
fore call risk, the standard deviation of the returns for a run and instability, the standard
deviation of any performance metric (returns, risk,Sharpe ratio) over several runs.
We will now look graphically at the returns/risk achieved by the runs (the Sharpe ratio
is simply a ratio of the two and its remarkable values will be used as boundaries):
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the universe and the 1st MST round
This plot confirms that there is indeed an increase in funnel performances thanks to the
universe reduction performed by the 4 MST rounds. Increasing the number of scenarios
was found to be too computationally expensive compared to the increase stability : the in-
stability was reduced by 20% between 10 and 30 thousands scenarios but the running time
went from a dozen hours to nearly two days while the average increased by a mere 0.5%
and thus we will run the funnel 30 times with 10000 scenarios and average the returns,
risks and Sharpe ratio. This should ensure that we get fairly representative performances
for each subset while keeping in mind that should the funnel be put in production, they
would probably be moderately better thanks to greater computational power for scenarios.
5.3
Performances of the selected subsets
5.3.1
The MST subsets
As explained previously, we will make 30 runs with 10000 scenarios for each MST subsets
and analyse the performances they achieved:
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: Visualisation of the MST subsets performances
First of all, it appears that all subsets performs at least as well as the asset universe. This
shows that there is indeed an increase in performance thanks to the universe reduction
performed by the 4 MST rounds. As the MST is a biased reduction method ( it picks
assets that are heavily-weighted in the min-variance portfolio), we can not yet conclude if
this is solely due to a a reduction of the universe size or if the fact that the subsets are
”focusing” on certain assets makes the model more likely to pick them and thus increase
its performances. A possible issue is the instability of the MST-based funnel performances
which was observed to slowly diminish with increasing numbers of scenarios but we cannot
be sure that given even enough computational power it would properly stabilize.
A recap table can be found below:
Subset
Returns (%)
Risk (%)
Sharpe Ratio
Instability (for returns/risk/Sharpe)
Universe
14.2
21.8
0.65
4.5 / 1.2 / 0.20
1st round
25.2
21
1.21
7.7 / 1.0 / 0.38
2nd round
27.9
20.7
1.35
4.2 / 1.13 / 0.20
3rd round
32.6
19.6
1.67
4.1 / 1.05 / 0.23
4th round
32.1
19.8
1.60
7.4 / 1.1 / 0.30
Table 5.3: Performances of the MST subsets
It shows that the first MST round which causes , in absolute, the largest universe reduc-
tion is also the one that causes the largest performance increase but it also comes with a
rise of instability, the largest ones observed among the 5 subsets. The second one shows
45
==PAGE:54==
a minor but more stable improvement while the third one seems to be the optimal one
as all metrics reach their peaks in this round while the instability remains of the same
magnitude as with the whole universe.
5.3.2
RatioCuts
Figure 5.4: Visualisation of the the RatioCuts subsets performances
The RatioCuts performances are very different from the MST ones, not only because they
are much lower (yet still slightly better than the non-reduced universe) but also because
they show very little difference between the various subset sizes which seems to indicate
that reducing the subset size do not help if the selected assets are not good enough.
A recap table can be found below:
Subset
Returns (%)
Risk (%)
Sharpe Ratio
Instability (for returns/risk/Sharpe)
Universe
14.2
21.8
0.65
4.5 / 1.2 / 0.20
L
14.4
20.4
0.71
4.1 / 0.9 / 0.20
OPT
17.1
18.9
0.91
3.5 / 1.0 / 0.18
M
15.9
18.2
0.88
5.2 / 0.9 / 0.31
S
15.1
18.4
0.82
2.7 / 0.7 / 0.17
XS
15.1
18.1
0.84
2.8 / 0.7 / 0.16
Table 5.4: Performances of the RatioCuts subsets
We can see in the previous table that the OPT subset could possibly the best performer
46
==PAGE:55==
among the RatioCuts subsets but much more scenarios and runs would be needed to get
a clearer picture.
This would indicate that albeit good for tuning methods, our metrics cannot be used to
predict which method will have the best out-of-sample performances as the RatioCuts PDI
was the highest one observed, yet its actual performances are quite mediocre.
It is also worth noting that the instability observed are not particularly high which means
that the performances cannot be blamed on a lack of scenarios.
5.3.3
Spectral Clustering
Figure 5.5: Visualisation of the the Spectral Clustering subsets performances
For this method, the situation is again quite different. The performances differences are
clear from a subset to another and the increase as the subset grows smaller is substantial.
There is even a run of the S subset that outperformed the MSCI world with a Sharpe ratio
of 2.47. Similarly to the MST, the first reductions brings the largest performance increase
with the difference that even though reduced there is still a progression from the S to the
XS subset.
47
==PAGE:56==
Subset
Returns (%)
Risk (%)
Sharpe Ratio
Instability ( for returns/risk/Sharpe)
Universe
14.2
21.8
0.65
4.5 / 1.2 / 0.20
L
15.2
21.8
0.70
4.3 / 1.2 / 0.22
M
22.4
19.3
1.16
4.4 / 0.8 / 0.24
S
32.6
17.7
1.84
5.2 / 0.7 / 0.28
XS
32.9
16.2
2.02
3.5 / 0.6 / 0.19
Table 5.5: Performances of the Spectral Clustering subsets
It is worth noting that the risk levels of those subsets are lower than the ones achieved by
the MST despite the latter being biased towards assets found in the min-var portfolio. We
also do not observe a performance peak among the subsets such as the MST 3rd round as
the XS seems to beat the S subset (based on our scenarios).
5.4
Subset and performance analysis
We have seen very different behaviours and performances among the 3 methods so we
want to further investigate the extent and reasons of those differences.
Before investigating their performance differences, we want to take a look at the differ-
ences in term of subset composition and for that purpose introduce the similarity and the
inclusivity measures with the 2 following formulas :
Similiraty(A, B) =
Card(A ∩B)
max(Card(A), Card(B))
(5.1)
where Card(X) is the cardinality of the subset X.
Inclusivity(A, B) =
Card(A ∩B)
min(Card(A), Card(B))
(5.2)
For each subset size, we can compute the average similarity between the subset induced
by each method and it appears that RatioCuts and Spectral clustering have an average
similarity of 0.5, Spectral Clustering and MST average 0.3 and 0.4 for RatioCuts and
MST.
This means that even up to subsets of 100 assets, the method choice still has a sizable
impact on the subset composition.
The RatioCuts and Spectral Clustering similarity
,albeit the highest one observed, is not as high as expected because of an issue specific to
complete graphs.
Indeed, Spectral Clustering relies on normalized cuts which penalizes differences in volume
between the subsets instead of cardinality as in the RatioCuts. As our graph is complete
and the ETFs have an average correlation of over 0.5, this means that a subset of size n
will have a volume of roughly n(n−1)
2
meaning that the subset volume grows in n2 with n
being the subset size and therefore size disparities are more penalised in normalized cuts
and thus smaller in Spectral Clustering.
When looking at inclusivity, we can see that the best subset (XS Spectral clustering) and
the worst (L RatioCuts) have a 0.952 score which means that 20 out of the 21 assets in
the best subset can be found in the worst one. At this point, we cannot know if it is
because some extra assets ruined the performances or is it just the parameter uncertainty
resulting from the extra assets.
48
==PAGE:57==
5.4.1
Size vs quality: what matters the most ?
In the introduction of this thesis, we explained that our work was motivated by the intent
of decreasing parameter uncertainty in the optimisation stage and thus improve the funnel
performances. Yet, the previous results showed both performances unaffected by size in
the case of the RatioCuts and as initially expected performances inversely proportional to
the subset size for the two other methods.
This raises the question of whether we are not experiencing,instead or simultaneously,
another effect that we will call the filtration effect. The difference between the two is
that the reduction effect is a decrease in model error thanks to a reduced number of
parameters while the filtration effect is an increase in performance thanks to the selection
of good performers and the removal of ”traps” i.e. assets whose performances in the past
and thus in scenarios are good enough to warrant their selection at the start of a run
during which they will actually show poor performances. The removal of those ”traps”
can be done by relying on other asset characteristic than their past performances such
as their place in the MST, a characteristic that was shown to be quite stable [Onnela,
Chakraborti, et al. 2003]. In our case, the MST method features both effects while the
RatioCuts and Spectral Clustering are supposed to be reduction methods.
The ”traps” hypothesis would explain why the RatioCuts, which are nested subsets (
XS ⊂S ⊂M ⊂L), perform pretty much all the same as the whole universe because they
contain at least one ”trap” and why our worst-performing include our best-performing
one.
By looking at the portfolio composition, we can find an example with the ’RING’ ETF
which is present in all poor performing subset (all RatioCuts, the M and L Spectral
Clustering) and absent in all the good performers.
If we decide to add it to our best performing subset (the XS Spectral Clustering), we
observe a drop in performance with an average Sharpe Ratio reduced from 2.02 to 1.41
and see that in pretty much all runs it is included at the start and quickly phased out as
seen in the example below (’RING’ is in light blue) :
Figure 5.6: Visualisation of the the Spectral Clustering subsets performances
On the other side, removing this ETF from the Ratio-XS subset causes its average Sharpe
Ratio to rise from 0.9 to 1.5 which shows how filtration can have an important impact.
Even though this issue with the RING ETF is a good illustration of the impact of filtration,
49
==PAGE:58==
it does not dismiss the reduction effect. In fact, it is actually noticeable if we put together
3 of the best performing subsets ( the XS and S Spectral Clustering , the MST 3rd round).
We started with just the smallest one ( XS Spectral Clustering ) and added first the S
Spectral Clustering which shares some assets with it and thus only moderately increase
the resulting subset size. Then we added the MST 3rd round to reach 85 asset in our
merged subset. The performances of those successive mergers can be found below :
Subset
Size
Returns (%)
Risk (%)
Sharpe Ratio
Instability ( for returns/risk/Sharpe)
Spectral XS
21
32.9
16.2
2.02
3.5 / 0.6 / 0.19
Spectral XS + S
43
18.1
21
0.86
3.2 / 1.0 / 0.16
Spectral XS +S + MST 3rd round
85
20.1
22.0
0.91
4.7 / 0.4 / 0.23
Table 5.6: Performances of successive mergers
It appears that the drop in performance is significant between the ”good” subset and its
successive mergers but it also appears that performances do not drop any further past a
certain size which we could use to determine an optimal reduced universe size.
Overall, it appears that our high-performance subset benefit both from the reduction and
filtration effect. As the reduction effect is noticeable on susbets of a few dozens assets, it
could become the main performance factor if our dataset is expaned by adding more ETFs
or other type of assets.
5.5
Limitations and future work
A point on which there is much room for improvement is the scenario generation.
In
its current state, the lack of stability both affect the actual performances of the funnel
but also make its analysis harder as we have to make multiple runs and thus deal with
extremely long running times. Moreover, we have no certitude that the necessary number
of scenarios is computationally feasible.
Another issue is the dataset which is limited in size by the fact that many ETFs have been
on the market for less than a decade and in our case we had only 6 years of data for all our
ETFs. We also had to account for the Covid crisis and the following rebound which led
us to have a quite short test period (a little less than 11 months) and no holdout dataset.
Because of that, some further method development based on the performances analysed
in this chapter could not be done without the risk of overfitting. But given new data, it
would be interesting to investigate the combination of a filtering and a reduction method
such as conducting a Spectral Clustering on the graph made of all assets who belong to
the first MST round.
An tweaked version of the MST could also be developed if our model is stabilized by
running it on various subsets and observing the average level of the best performers in the
MST. This would allow us to adapt the MST filtration to our needs as the dangling end
criterion was chosen based on a slightly different situation in term of model and objectives.
It could also make sense later to investigate the performances with different benchmarks
than the MSCI World.
50
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, we focused on the universe reduction stage of the funnel. This part of the
funnel was introduced in a previous master thesis [Jónsdóttir 2020] and aims at increasing
its overall performances by reducing the parameter uncertainty in the latter optimisation
stage. Our goal was to both introduce new methods and metrics while studying and tuning
the existing ones. We also wanted to analyse the funnel performances to investigate the
link between the subset size and its performances as parameter uncertainty is not easily
quantifiable in our model .
First, we started by verifying the soundness of the existing model by successfully checking
that the necessary assumptions held true for our dataset. We then looked at the suitability
of our diversification metric, the PDI. Our analysis showed how the fact that it treated
negative correlations differently from MPT could be an issue in our case. And another
more serious issue was found in the fact that the PDI is meant for portfolios of ”simple”
assets but the ETFs are portfolios themselves which causes an unwanted drop of the PDI
in some situations.
We also introduced a supplementary metric based on the MPT concept of eﬀicient frontier
to avoid getting assets that do not complement each other well. Its analysis showed that
it was useful for small subsets as it scores poorly those which cannot historically reach our
targeted returns.
Now that we had metrics to evaluate them, two new universe reduction methods based
on the graph-theoretical notion of cuts were introduced : the RatioCuts and the Spectral
Clustering. A graph cut can be interpreted as ignoring some of the weakest ties between
assets in order to clusters similar ones together. And as we want to perform a universe
reduction and not just a clustering, we also had to compare the different ways of picking
representative(s) for each cluster and found that in all but one case, the most effective way
was to pick the highest Sharpe ratio asset for each cluster. Further tuning was conducted
based on the PDI and Frontier metric and led for each method to the creation of 4 subsets
whose size mirrored the one of the 4 MST-induced subsets. An additional subset was
included as it scored particularly well on our metrics.
Those subsets were then ran through the funnel and their out-of-sample performances
analysed to determine the impact of the universe reduction stage on the whole funnel. We
saw that all performed at least as well as the non-reduced universe but that they were big
differences between each method. The MST had the best performing M and L size subsets
while the Spectral Clustering showed greater performance gain from the subset shrinkage
and produced the best S and XS size subsets.
We showed that the reduction of the asset universe increased performances at the condition
of a proper universe ”filtration” i.e. removing assets whose out-of-sample performances
are expected to be lower because of some characteristic such being a central asset in the
MST. Both effects were shown to greatly impact the funnel performances which for the
best subset ( the XS Spectral Clustering ) reached on average a 33% return for a 16 %
standard deviation.
Those very good performances need to be put in perspective by remembering that the
market was doing very well during the test period with our benchmark, the MSCI World
ETF, achieving 36 % returns for a 16 % standard deviation.
They still represent an improvement compared to the previous MST-based approach which
offered similar returns but with a risk of nearly 20% which meant an average Sharpe ratio
of 1.6 compared to 2 for Spectral Clustering.
51
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Jónsdóttir, Auður Anna (2020). “Feature Selection in Asset Allocation”. MSc Thesis. DTU.
Vanek, Petr (2020). “Performance Analysis of the most traded Mutual Funds versus Op-
timal Portfolios of Exchange Traded Funds”. MSc Thesis. DTU.
Kristjánsson, Sveinn Heiðar (2020). “Optimizing Leveraged Asset Allocation Strategies”.
MSc Thesis. DTU.
Collective investments: Market developments (2016). url: https://www.finanstilsynet.dk/
~/media/Tal-og-fakta/2017/MU/Market-developmentin-2016-for-collective-investments-
pdf.pdf?la=en.
Sylvester, J. J. (Feb. 1878). “Chemistry and Algebra”. In: Nature 17. doi: 10 . 1038 /
017284a0.
Cayley, E. (n.d.). “Ueber die analytischen Figuren, welche in der Mathematik Bäume
genannt werden und ihre Anwendung auf die Theorie chemischer Verbindungen”. In:
European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry 8 (), pp. 1056–1059.
Council, National Research (2005). Network Science. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. isbn: 978-0-309-10026-7. doi: 10.17226/11516. url: https://www.
nap.edu/catalog/11516/network-science.
Mantegna, Rosario (Feb. 1998). “Hierarchical Structure in Financial Markets”. In: arXiv.org,
Quantitative Finance Papers 11. doi: 10.1007/s100510050929.
Toubiana, David et al. (July 2016). “Correlation-Based Network Analysis of Metabolite
and Enzyme Profiles Reveals a Role of Citrate Biosynthesis in Modulating N and C
Metabolism in Zea mays”. In: Frontiers in Plant Science 7. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01022.
Bonanno, G. et al. (Jan. 2004). “Networks of equities in financial markets”. In: The Eu-
ropean Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 38, pp. 363–371.
doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2004-00129-6.
Onnela, Jukka-Pekka, A Chakraborti, et al. (Dec. 2003). “Dynamics of Market Corre-
lations: Taxonomy and Portfolio Analysis”. In: Physical Review E 68, p. 056110. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.68.056110.
Barabasi, Albert-Laszlo (Aug. 2009). “Scale-Free Networks: A Decade and Beyond”. In:
Science (New York, N.Y.) 325, pp. 412–3. doi: 10.1126/science.1173299.
Danko, Jakub and Vincent Soltes (Feb. 2018). “Portfolio creation using graph character-
istics”. In: Investment Management and Financial Innovations 15, pp. 180–189. doi:
10.21511/imfi.15(1).2018.16.
Li, Yan et al. (Oct. 2018). “Portfolio optimization based on network topology”. In: Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 515. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2018.10.014.
Peralta, Gustavo and Abalfazl Zareei (June 2016). “A network approach to portfolio se-
lection”. In: Journal of Empirical Finance 38. doi: 10.1016/j.jempfin.2016.06.003.
Esfahanipour, A. and S. Zamanzadeh (2015). “A Stock Market Filtering Model Based on
Minimum Spanning Tree in Financial Networks”. In:
53
==PAGE:62==
Sensoy, Ahmet and Benjamin Tabak (Nov. 2014). “Dynamic spanning trees in stock mar-
ket networks: The case of Asia-Pacific”. In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications 414, pp. 387–402. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2014.07.067.
Plerou, Vasiliki et al. (July 2002). “A Random Matrix Approach to Cross-Correlations in
Financial Data”. In: Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics
65, p. 066126. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.65.066126.
Onnela, Jukka-Pekka, Kimmo Kaski, and János Kertész (Dec. 2003). “Clustering and
information in correlation based financial networks”. In: The European Physical Journal
B - Condensed Matter 38. doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2004-00128-7.
Micciche, Salvatore, Fabrizio Lillo, and Rosario Mantegna (Sept. 2005). “Correlation Based
Hierarchical Clustering in Financial Time Series”. In: doi: 10.1142/9789812701558_
0037.
Scalzo Dees, Bruno et al. (Oct. 2019). Portfolio Cuts: A Graph-Theoretic Framework to
Diversification.
Borowski, Krzysztof (Dec. 2018). “Testing 65 Equity Indexes for Normal Distribution of
Returns”. In: Journal of Economics and Management 34, pp. 5–38. doi: 10.22367/jem.
2018.34.01.
Chopra, V. K. and W. T. Ziemba (1993). In: Journal of Portfolio Management 19, pp. 6–
11.
Visual Capitalist (2020). url: https://www.visualcapitalist.com/the-26-year-history-of-etfs-
in-one-infographic/.
Onnela, Jukka-Pekka, A. Chakraborti, et al. (Dec. 2002). “Dynamic asset trees and portfo-
lio analysis”. In: Physics of Condensed Matter 30, pp. 285–288. doi: 10.1140/epjb/e2002-
00380-9.
Gower, J. C. (1966). “Some Distance Properties of Latent Root and Vector Methods Used
in Multivariate Analysis”. In: Biometrika 53.3/4, pp. 325–338. issn: 00063444. url:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2333639.
Rudin, Alexander and Jonathan Morgan (Dec. 2006). “A Portfolio Diversification Index”.
In: Journal of Portfolio Management - J PORTFOLIO MANAGE 32, pp. 81–89. doi:
10.3905/jpm.2006.611807.
Kirchner, Ulrich and Caroline Zunckel (Feb. 2011). “Measuring Portfolio Diversification”.
In:
(N.d.). url: https : / / www . spglobal . com / spdji / en / documents / performance - reports /
dashboard-dispersion-volatility-correlation.pdf.
Fiedler, Miroslav (Jan. 1973). “Algebraic Connectivity of Graphs”. In: Czechoslovak Math-
ematical Journal 23, pp. 298–305. doi: 10.21136/CMJ.1973.101168.
Almeida, Hélio et al. (Sept. 2011). “Is There a Best Quality Metric for Graph Clusters?”
In: pp. 44–59. isbn: 978-3-642-23779-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-23780-5_13.
54
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix - Code Files
A.1
Subset creation Scripts
1
2
def SpectralBissection(G): # a single bissection
3
SecondVector =nx.linalg.algebraicconnectivity.fiedler_vector(G,weight='
weight')
4
ListOfNode=list(G.nodes())
5
i=0
6
Half1,Half2=[],[]
7
for x in SecondVector:
8
if x<0:
9
Half1.append(ListOfNode[i])
10
if x>0:
11
Half2.append(ListOfNode[i])
12
i+=1
13
return Half1,Half2
14
15
16
def RatioCuts(G,TargetConnectivity ,MinSizeForSplit ,trainDataset):
17
SubGraphs=[G]
18
ListOfSubsets=[]
19
while len(SubGraphs)>0:
20
subG=SubGraphs.pop()
21
if len(subG.nodes)>MinSizeForSplit:
22
if (nx.linalg.algebraicconnectivity.algebraic_connectivity(subG)/
len(subG.nodes))< TargetConnectivity
:
23
Subsets=SpectralBissection(subG)
24
SubGraphs.append(AbsGraph(trainDataset[Subsets[0]]))
25
SubGraphs.append(AbsGraph(trainDataset[Subsets[1]]))
26
27
else:
28
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
29
else:
30
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
31
for subG in SubGraphs:
32
ListOfSubsets.append(list(subG.nodes()))
33
return ListOfSubsets
Listing A.1: RatioCut
1
from sklearn.cluster import SpectralClustering as SK_SC
2
3
def SpectralClustering(trainDataset ,NbOfClus ,BestSharpe):
4
affini=nx.to_numpy_matrix(G)
5
corr = trainDataset.corr(method="spearman")
#calculate the correlation
6
distance_corr2 = (2*(1-corr))**0.5
#calculate the distance
7
SK=SK_SC(NbOfClus ,affinity='precomputed',n_init=100, assign_labels='
discretize')
8
LL=SK.fit_predict(affini)
9
Subs=FromLabelToSubs(LL,G)
10
Subs=[sub for sub in Subs if sub!=[]]
11
if BestSharpe:
12
PCK=[ pickBest(sub,dataPlot) for sub in Subs]
13
else:
14
PCK= [pickMedoid(sub, distance_corr2) for sub in Subs]
15
return PCK
55
==PAGE:64==
Listing A.2: Spectral Clustering
A.2
Visualisation Scripts
1
2
3
def SubsetHighlighting(G,Subset): #plot the graph with all subset nodes
colored in red
4
GG=G.copy()
5
ColorDict={}
6
7
for x in GG.nodes():
8
if x in Subset:
9
ColorDict[x]='red'
10
else:
11
ColorDict[x]='grey'
12
13
nx.set_node_attributes(GG,ColorDict ,'NodeColor')
14
15
# Show with Bokeh
16
plot = Plot(height=1200,width=1900,aspect_scale=3,
17
x_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1), y_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1))
18
plot.title.text = "Subset in red"
19
20
node_hover_tool = HoverTool(tooltips=[("index", "@index") ])
21
plot.add_tools(node_hover_tool , BoxZoomTool(), ResetTool(), PanTool(
dimensions="both"))
22
23
graph_renderer = from_networkx(GG, nx.kamada_kawai_layout , scale=2, center
=(0, 0))
24
25
26
27
graph_renderer.node_renderer.glyph = Circle(size=15, fill_color='NodeColor
')
28
graph_renderer.edge_renderer.glyph = MultiLine(line_color="black",
line_alpha=0.8, line_width=1)
29
plot.renderers.append(graph_renderer)
30
31
output_file("interactive_graphs.html")
32
show(plot,browser="Chrome")
Listing A.3: Subset Highlighting
1
def SectorColoration(G,dataset ,CategoryDict):
2
GG=G.copy()
3
4
def replace_none_with_404(some_dict):
5
return { k: ('404' if v is None else v) for k, v in some_dict.items()
}
6
7
CategoryDict=replace_none_with_404(CategoryDict)
8
NbreMapping = dict([(y,x+1) for x,y in enumerate(sorted(set(CategoryDict.
values())))])
9
FinalDict={}
10
for ticker,cate in CategoryDict.items():
11
FinalDict[ticker]=NbreMapping[cate]
12
13
nx.set_node_attributes(GG, CategoryDict ,"Category")
56
==PAGE:65==
14
nx.set_node_attributes(GG, FinalDict ,"color")
15
16
17
18
19
# Show with Bokeh
20
plot = Plot(plot_width=1920, plot_height=1920,
21
x_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1), y_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1))
22
plot.title.text = "Category Map"
23
24
node_hover_tool = HoverTool(tooltips=[("index", "@index"), ("Category", "
@Category")])
25
plot.add_tools(TapTool(),node_hover_tool , BoxZoomTool(), ResetTool(),
PanTool(dimensions="both"),BoxSelectTool())
26
27
graph_renderer = from_networkx(GG, nx.kamada_kawai_layout , scale=1.6,
center=(0, 0))
28
29
graph_renderer.node_renderer.glyph = Circle(size=15, fill_color=
linear_cmap('color', 'Spectral8', min(FinalDict.values()), max(
FinalDict.values())))
30
graph_renderer.node_renderer.selection_glyph = Circle(size=15, fill_color=
Spectral4[2])
31
graph_renderer.edge_renderer.glyph = MultiLine(line_color="black",
line_alpha=0.8, line_width=1)
32
graph_renderer.edge_renderer.hover_glyph = MultiLine(line_color=Spectral4
[1], line_width=5)
33
34
graph_renderer.selection_policy = NodesAndLinkedEdges()
35
plot.renderers.append(graph_renderer)
36
37
output_file("interactive_graphs.html")
38
show(plot)
Listing A.4: Coloration by sector
1
def EccentricityMap(G): #plot the eccentricity map of a graph
2
GG=G.copy()
3
attrs = nx.eccentricity(GG)
4
nx.set_node_attributes(GG, attrs,"Eccentricity")
5
6
7
8
# Show with Bokeh
9
plot = Plot(plot_width=1920, plot_height=1920,
10
x_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1), y_range=Range1d(-1.1, 1.1))
11
plot.title.text = "Eccentricity Map"
12
13
node_hover_tool = HoverTool(tooltips=[("index", "@index"), ("Eccentricity"
, "@Eccentricity")])
14
plot.add_tools(TapTool(),node_hover_tool , BoxZoomTool(), ResetTool(),
PanTool(dimensions="both"),BoxSelectTool())
15
16
graph_renderer = from_networkx(GG, nx.kamada_kawai_layout , scale=1.6,
center=(0, 0))
17
18
ListOfEccentricityValues=[GG.nodes()[x]['Eccentricity'] for x in GG.nodes
()]
19
20
21
graph_renderer.node_renderer.glyph = Circle(size=15, fill_color=
linear_cmap('Eccentricity', 'Spectral8', min(ListOfEccentricityValues)
57
==PAGE:66==
, max(ListOfEccentricityValues)))
22
graph_renderer.node_renderer.selection_glyph = Circle(size=15, fill_color=
Spectral4[2])
23
graph_renderer.edge_renderer.glyph = MultiLine(line_color="black",
line_alpha=0.8, line_width=1)
24
graph_renderer.edge_renderer.hover_glyph = MultiLine(line_color=Spectral4
[1], line_width=5)
25
26
graph_renderer.selection_policy = NodesAndLinkedEdges()
27
plot.renderers.append(graph_renderer)
28
29
output_file("interactive_graphs.html")
30
show(plot)
Listing A.5: Eccentricity Map
1
2
def PDI_Lines(subset,data,n): #compute the PDI as a function of the number f
asset for number n of random picking orders
3
Matrix = [[0 for x in range(len(subset))] for y in range(n)]
4
for k in range(n):
5
currentSelection= []
6
random.shuffle(subset)
7
for kk in range(len(subset)):
8
currentSelection=subset[:kk+1]
9
Matrix[k][kk]=NewPDI(currentSelection ,data)
10
return Matrix
11
12
13
14
def TopLine(subset ,trainDataset ,nbreOfSample): #Plot the max/min PDI observed
in the previous lines
15
AA=PDI_Lines(subset,trainDataset ,int(nbreOfSample))
16
x=np.arange(len(AA[0]))
17
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
18
# plt.xlabel("X-axis")
19
# plt.ylabel("Y-axis")
20
# plt.title(str(nbreOfSample))
#put names of subset in ttile
21
# for i in range(len(AA)):
22
#
plt.plot(x,[pt for pt in AA[i]],label = 'id %s'%i)
23
24
maxiL,miniL,avgL=[],[],[]
25
for Nbre in range(len(subset)):
26
mini,maxi,avgi,tempMax ,tempMax=1e99,0,0,0,0
27
for row in AA:
28
if row[Nbre]>maxi:
29
maxi=row[Nbre]
30
tempMax=row[Nbre]
31
if row[Nbre]<mini:
32
mini=row[Nbre]
33
tempMini=row[Nbre]
34
maxiL.append(tempMax)
35
miniL.append(tempMini)
36
37
plt.plot(x,miniL,label='min')
38
plt.plot(x,maxiL,label='max')
39
plt.plot(x,avgi,label='avg')
40
plt.legend()
41
plt.show()
42
return miniL,maxiL
Listing A.6: PDI TopLines
58
==PAGE:67==
1
2
def display_Univfrontier(dailyPrices): #plot the efficient frontier of the
entire asset universe
3
DailyReturns=dailyPrices.pct_change()
4
DailyReturns=DailyReturns.dropna() #1st row is nan bc u need a previous
for the pct calculation
5
covar=DailyReturns.cov()
6
return_mean=DailyReturns.mean(axis=0)
7
target = np.linspace(0.01, 0.3, 50)
8
efficient_portfolios = efficient_frontier(return_mean , covar, target)
9
plt.plot([p['fun'] for p in efficient_portfolios], target , linestyle='-.',
color='black', label='Universe frontier')
10
plt.xlabel('annualised volatility')
11
plt.ylabel('annualised returns')
12
plt.legend(labelspacing=0.8)
13
14
15
def MultipleSubsPlot(dailyPrices ,Subs,Names,clrs): #plot the efficient
frontier of the listed subset with the corresponding color
16
DailyReturns=dailyPrices.pct_change()
17
DailyReturns=DailyReturns.dropna() #1st row is nan bc u need a previous
for the pct calculation
18
covar=DailyReturns.cov()
19
return_mean=DailyReturns.mean(axis=0)
20
target = np.linspace(0.05, 0.2, 50)
21
efficient_portfolios = efficient_frontier(return_mean , covar, target)
22
for sub in range(len(Subs)):
23
eff_port=efficient_frontier(DailyReturns[Subs[sub]].mean(axis=0),
DailyReturns[Subs[sub]].cov(), target)
24
plt.plot([p['fun'] for p in eff_port], target , linestyle='-.', color=
clrs[sub], label=Names[sub])
25
26
27
28
29
30
plt.plot([p['fun'] for p in efficient_portfolios], target , linestyle='-.',
color='black', label='Universe frontier')
31
plt.xlabel('annualised volatility')
32
plt.ylabel('annualised returns')
33
plt.legend(labelspacing=0.8)
34
35
36
37
def display_frontier_with_random(dailyPrices ,subset ,nbOfRand):
#Plot the
efficient frontiers of a subset and random ones of the same size
38
DailyReturns=dailyPrices.pct_change()
39
DailyReturns=DailyReturns.dropna() #1st row is nan bc u need a previous
for the pct calculation
40
covar=DailyReturns.cov()
41
return_mean=DailyReturns.mean(axis=0)
42
covarSubset=DailyReturns[subset].cov()
43
return_mean_subset=DailyReturns[subset].mean(axis=0)
44
45
target = np.linspace(0.01, 0.2, 30)
46
efficient_portfolios = efficient_frontier(return_mean , covar, target)
47
efficient_portfolios2= efficient_frontier(return_mean_subset , covarSubset ,
target)
48
49
random_efficient=[]
50
for n in range(nbOfRand):
59
==PAGE:68==
51
AvailableTickers=list(dailyPrices.columns)
52
random.shuffle(AvailableTickers)
53
subs=AvailableTickers[:28]
54
eff_port=efficient_frontier(DailyReturns[subs].mean(axis=0),
DailyReturns[subs].cov(), target)
55
random_efficient.append(eff_port)
56
57
for n in range(nbOfRand):
58
Fr=CleanFrontier([p['fun'] for p in random_efficient[n]])
59
plt.plot(Fr, target[:len(Fr)], linestyle='-.', color='grey')
60
61
plt.plot(CleanFrontier([p['fun'] for p in efficient_portfolios]), target ,
linestyle='-.', color='black', label='Universe frontier')
62
Fr=CleanFrontier([p['fun'] for p in efficient_portfolios2])
63
plt.plot([p['fun'] for p in efficient_portfolios2], target , linestyle='-.'
, color='red', label='Subset frontier ')
64
plt.xlabel('annualised volatility')
65
plt.ylabel('annualised returns')
66
plt.legend(labelspacing=0.8)
67
68
def CleanFrontier(liste): #Prevent the plot of unfeasible frontiers which go
straight up
69
for i in range(len(liste)):
70
if liste.count(i)>1:
71
return liste[:i]
72
return liste
Listing A.7: Various plots of the Eﬀicient Frontier metric
A.3
Miscellaneous Scripts
1
2
def PDI(subset,dataset):
3
4
Standardised=(StandardScaler().fit_transform(dataset))
5
StandardisedFrame=pd.DataFrame(data=Standardised , index=dataset.index,
columns=dataset.columns)
6
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
7
subset_df = StandardisedFrame.loc[:, StandardisedFrame.columns.isin(subset
)]
8
9
pca = PCA()
10
pca.fit(subset_df)
11
value = 0
12
for i in range(1, subset_df.shape[1]+1):
13
try:
14
value = value + i*pca.explained_variance_ratio_[i-1]
15
except:
16
continue
17
18
PDI = 2*value - 1
19
df = pd.DataFrame(pca.components_)
20
return PDI
Listing A.8: PDI Computation
1
def EccentricitySelection(G,Increment): #Select all nodes above a certain
eccentricity defined as the min one + an increment
2
GG=G.copy()
3
attrs = nx.eccentricity(GG)
4
nx.set_node_attributes(GG, attrs,"Eccentricity")
60
==PAGE:69==
5
ListOfEccentricityValues=[GG.nodes()[x]['Eccentricity'] for x in GG.nodes
()]
6
TargetValue=min(ListOfEccentricityValues)+Increment
7
subset=[]
8
9
for x in GG.nodes():
10
if GG.nodes()[x]["Eccentricity"]>=TargetValue:
11
subset.append(x)
12
return subset
Listing A.9: Eccentricity Selection
1
def FromLabelToSubs(LL,G):
2
Subs=[]
3
for label in set(LL):
4
Sub=[]
5
for i in range(len(LL)):
6
if LL[int(i)]==label:
7
Sub.append(list(G.nodes)[int(i)])
8
else:
9
pass
10
Subs.append(Sub)
11
return Subs
Listing A.10: Form subsets based on labels
1
def pickMedoid(cluster ,distMatrix):
2
distMatrix=distMatrix.loc[cluster ,cluster]
3
return cluster[np.argmin(distMatrix.sum(axis=0))]
4
5
def pickBest(cluster ,SharpeDF):
6
df=SharpeDF.loc[cluster]
7
return df.loc[df['Sharpe Ratio'].idxmax()]['Name']
8
9
def pickBests(cluster ,SharpeDF ,k):
10
df=SharpeDF.loc[cluster]
11
return list(df.sort_values(axis=0,by='Sharpe Ratio',ascending=False)[['
Sharpe Ratio','Name']].iloc[:k]['Name'])
Listing A.11: The cluster representatives selection method
1
def FindTheSector(tickers):
2
import yfinance as yf
3
yfin_tck={}
4
5
for tck in tickers:
6
try:
7
temp=yf.Ticker(tck)
8
yfin_tck[tck]=(temp.info['category'])
9
except:
10
continue
11
return yfin_tck
Listing A.12: Find the asset sector on Yahoo Finance
1
2
def MinVariance(n,mu,GT,NbDesired):
3
from mosek.fusion import *
4
import numpy as np
5
6
n = len(subsetMST)
61
==PAGE:70==
7
mu=trainDataset[subsetMST].mean().to_numpy()
8
Sigma_df=trainDataset[subsetMST].cov()
9
Sigma=Sigma_df.to_numpy()
10
GG=np.linalg.cholesky(Sigma)
11
GT=GG.transpose()
12
13
with Model("Efficient frontier") as M:
14
frontier = []
15
16
# Defines the variables (holdings). Shortselling is not allowed.
17
x = M.variable("x", n, Domain.greaterThan(0.0)) # Portfolio variables
18
s = M.variable("s", 1, Domain.unbounded())
# Variance variable
19
z=M.variable("z",n,Domain.binary())
20
21
# Total budget constraint
22
M.constraint('budget', Expr.sum(x), Domain.equalsTo(1))
23
24
# Computes the risk
25
M.constraint('variance', Expr.vstack(s, 0.5, Expr.mul(GT,x)), Domain.
inRotatedQCone())
26
27
# Imposes a cardinality contraint
28
M.constraint('number', Expr.sum(z),Domain.equalsTo(NbDesired))
29
30
# Define objective as a weighted combination of return and variance
31
M.objective('obj', ObjectiveSense.Minimize , s)
32
33
# Imposes a binary contraint
34
M.constraint('activated', Expr.sub(z,Expr.mul(x,NbDesired)),Domain.
greaterThan(0))
35
36
37
38
M.solve()
39
40
41
return x.level(),s.level(),np.dot(mu,x.level())
Listing A.13: Min Variance Portfolio
1
2
3
def AbsGraph(trainDataset):
4
corr = trainDataset.corr(method="spearman")
#calculate the correlation
5
distance_corr = abs(corr)
#calculate the distance
6
mask = np.triu(np.ones_like(corr, dtype=np.bool))
#get only the upper
half
7
#of the matrix
8
distance_corr = distance_corr*mask
9
10
#use the correlation matrix to create links
11
links = distance_corr.stack().reset_index(level=1)
12
links.columns=["var2","value"]
13
links = links.reset_index()
14
links = links.replace(0, np.nan)
#drop 0 values from the matrix
15
links = links.dropna(how='any', axis=0)
16
links.columns=["var1", "var2", "value"] #rename the columns
17
links_filtered=links.loc[(links["var1"] != links["var2"])]
#filter out
self
18
#correlations
19
20
#create the graph
62
==PAGE:71==
21
G = nx.Graph()
22
for i in range(len(corr)):
#add nodes
23
G.add_node(corr.index[i])
24
tuples = list(links_filtered.itertuples(index=False,name=None)) #add edges
25
#with
weight
26
G.add_weighted_edges_from(tuples)
27
return G
Listing A.14: Graph based on the absolute value of correlation
1
2
def GreaterThan(Subfrontier ,Randfrontier):
3
countOfGreat=0
4
for n in range(len(Randfrontier)):
5
if Randfrontier[n]['fun']>Subfrontier[n]['fun']: #the risk is worse
6
countOfGreat+=1
7
if countOfGreat >=(int(len(Randfrontier)/2)+1):
8
return True
9
10
11
12
def CounterOfRandomSubsetBeaten(dailyPrices ,subset ,nbOfRand):
13
NbOfBeaten=0
14
DailyReturns=dailyPrices.pct_change()
15
DailyReturns=DailyReturns.dropna() #1st row is nan bc u need a previous
for the pct calculation
16
covar=DailyReturns.cov()
17
return_mean=DailyReturns.mean(axis=0)
18
covarSubset=DailyReturns[subset].cov()
19
return_mean_subset=DailyReturns[subset].mean(axis=0)
20
21
target = np.linspace(0.01, 0.2, 30)
22
efficient_portfolios2= efficient_frontier(return_mean_subset , covarSubset ,
target)
23
24
random_efficient=[]
25
for n in range(nbOfRand):
26
AvailableTickers=list(dailyPrices.columns)
27
random.shuffle(AvailableTickers)
28
subs=AvailableTickers[:28]
29
eff_port=efficient_frontier(DailyReturns[subs].mean(axis=0),
DailyReturns[subs].cov(), target)
30
random_efficient.append(eff_port)
31
32
for n in range(nbOfRand):
33
if GreaterThan(efficient_portfolios2 ,random_efficient[n]):
34
NbOfBeaten+=1
35
36
return NbOfBeaten
Listing A.15: A numeric version of the Eﬀicient Froniter
1
def subsetSimilarity(Sub1,Sub2):
2
Len=max(len(Sub1),len(Sub2))
3
similar=0
4
for x in Sub1:
5
if x in Sub2:
6
similar+=1
7
return similar/Len
8
9
def subsetInclusion(Sub1,Sub2):
63
==PAGE:72==
10
Len=min(len(Sub1),len(Sub2))
11
similar=0
12
for x in Sub1:
13
if x in Sub2:
14
similar+=1
15
return similar/Len
Listing A.16: The Inclusivity and Similiarity measures
64
==PAGE:73==
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.man.dtu.dk
