==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Masters’ Thesis
Optimization of transfer baggage
in Copenhagen Airport
Supervisor: Professor David Pisinger
Emil Kristian Haugaard (s164154)
David Ajit Kirpekar-Sauer (s164332)
Company: Copenhagen International Airports A/S
Submission date: June 25th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
i
This thesis was written by
NAME: Emil Kristian Haugaard
STUDY ID: 164154
ADDRESS: Guldbergsgade 4, 3.mf, 2200 København N.
PHONE: +45 27923239
EMAIL: emil.kristian1@gmail.com
NAME: David Ajit Kirpekar-Sauer
STUDY ID: 164332
ADDRESS: Valdemarsgade 32, 4.tv, 1665 København V
PHONE: +45 26996070
EMAIL: david.kirpekarsauer@gmail.com
Project Info
Master′s Thesis
TITLE: Optimization of transfer baggagein Copenhagen Airport
SCHOOL: Technical University of Denmark
DEPARTMENT: DTU Management
CREDIT: 30 ECTS
PROJECT START: January 25th 2021
SUBMISSION DATE: June 25th 2021
SUPERVISOR Professor David Pisinger
Company Info
COMPANY NAME: Copenhagen Airports International A/S
CONTACT: Samuel ´ı Hjøllum
CONTACT: Malene Fangel Høgsvig
Student signatures
Emil K. Haugaard June 24th 2021
David A. K.-Sauer June 24th 2021
==PAGE:3==
ii
Abstract
The thesis presents two mathematical models for transfer baggage handling in CPH
Airport. Transfer baggage handling involves making decisions on where to bring
the transfer baggage when ﬂights arrive at the airport. In particular, the problem
investigated in this thesis is called the Transfer Baggage Problem where CPH Airport
assigns an infeed station to the arriving ﬂight.
Mixed Integer Programming models (MIP) are presented inspired by research in the
area of transfer baggage carried out at Frankfurt Airport. The main objective of the
project was to reduce the number of late bags in CPH Airport, such that the prob-
ability of bags missing their connecting ﬂights is decreased. The solution involves
an eﬃcient method for estimating airport operation times and a MIP model solving
the transfer baggage problem. A deterministic MIP model decreased the expected
number of missed bags signiﬁcantly. However, the airport operation times were ex-
posed to uncertainties thus creating impetus for the operation times to be portrayed
as stochastic variables. Hence, this thesis further presents a scenario-based stochas-
tic model to handle operation time uncertainties and to increase the robustness of
the solution. The stochastic model did not only oﬀer a more robust solution, but
the number of expected missed bags was further decreased in comparison with the
deterministic model. The stochastic model provided run-times below 2-minutes on
a standard 16GB ram laptop for suitable numbers of scenarios. The model pro-
vided in this thesis shows potential for improvement of the real life operations at
CPH Airport, but some further work is needed before an actual implementation is
realistic.
==PAGE:4==
iii
Acknowledgement
Firstly we would like to thank Samuel ´ı Hjøllum and Malene Fangel Høgsvig from
CPH Airport for providing us with vital inside knowledge, know-how and most
importantly data to use during the project. Without their help the project would
have proven to be very diﬃcult, if not impossible.
We also want to thank our supervisor Professor David Pisinger, DTU Management
for suggesting the project to us.
He helped us with vital counselling, especially
when the complex nature of the baggage operations confused us. Apart from his
formidable understanding of Operations Research, he helped to keep the spirits high
with great jokes, he also suggested alternative methods for writing and proofreading
the thesis, that turned out to be very enjoyable, but expensive.
We thank Oscar Rindel Peulicke, nBite Aps, for prioritising time to discuss the
results of this project. He was helpful when solving some of the challenging software
aspects of the research.
Last, but not least we would like to thank our families taking their time to proofread
the thesis.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Reading Guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Problem Analysis
6
2.1
Transfer baggage problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Related literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Short transfer baggage problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Transfer baggage handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Objective of transfer baggage handling (costs) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Current handling strategy and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Thesis problem deﬁnition in words
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Data Analysis
15
3.1
Transportation time distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Analysing BHS times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Analyzing ground handling times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Generating missing transportation times for optimisation . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Algorithm for missing BHS transportation times . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Algorithm for missing ground handling times . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Modelling the transfer baggage problem
26
4.1
Deterministic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Indices and sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.3
Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.4
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.5
Validation of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.6
Results of the deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Stochastic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.1
Indices and sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.4
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
0
4.2.5
Results of the stochastic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.6
Runtime analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Exploring model improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.1
Varying 5-minute capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.2
Multiple infeed station assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Closure
47
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
52
List of Tables
53
List of Figures
54
6.1
Appendix A: T-distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Appendix B: Bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Baggage handling is one of the key elements of an airports operations. Good and
eﬃcient baggage handling is an essential condition for delivering good service in
terms of punctuality and reliability.
It is one of the most inﬂuential factors on
passenger satisfaction and therefore a top priority in most airports [1]. Airports
focus on mishandled baggage has resulted in a long term decrease in the number
of mishandled bags, as depicted by the red line in ﬁgure 1.1. The relative rate of
mishandling declined with the increasing demand in air-travel, resulting in a yearly
total of 4.36 billion passengers and 25.8 million mishandled bags in 2018. Note that,
the tendencies seen in ﬁgure 1.1 would be vastly diﬀerent in 2020 in view of the
Covid-19 pandemic, but that is assumed to be temporary.
Figure 1.1: Number of total passengers (blue) in air travel from 2007-2018
illustrated along total number of bags mishandled (red). Data source: [2]
1
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
Despite substantial improvements in baggage handling over the past 10 years, a total
of 24.8 million bags were still mishandled in 2018, corresponding to 1 mishandling
per 200 bags [2]. Of those 24.8 million mishandled bags, delayed baggage accounted
for 77% [2], equivalent to 19 million bags. The remaining 23% consist of stolen bag-
gage and damage baggage at 5% and 18% respectively. A potential improvement
in tackling delayed baggage oﬀers a larger impact on decreasing mishandled bag-
gage. Hence investments in reducing delayed baggage is not uncommon for modern
airports.
A recent research project at Copenhagen Airport (CPH Airport) by Pisinger &
Hjøllum [3] exploits opportunities in using mathematical modelling to optimise the
baggage handling operations. Baggage ﬂows are split up into three categories: in-
bound baggage, transfer baggage and outbound baggage. Inbound baggage is baggage
that is at the ﬁnal destination and therefore is handed to the passenger. Transfer
baggage is baggage that is coming from an inbound aircraft and is leaving on an
outbound aircraft. Outbound baggage concerns baggage that is leaving the airport
on an aircraft. Figure 1.2 illustrates the three diﬀerent baggage ﬂows through the
airport. As the codependency of these three baggage handling processes is small, one
can consider them as separate and individual processes that can be optimised. The
Figure 1.2: The three diﬀerent baggage ﬂows in airport operations.
research of Pisinger & Hjøllum [3] looked at optimising the inbound and outbound
baggage operations. However, in large airports a large proportion of passengers are
in transfer, resulting in transfer baggage making up 46% of delayed bags in air travel
[2] in 2018.
This thesis examines the transfer baggage operation from the perspective of CPH
Airport. However, the baggage handling process as a whole involves operators from
CPH Airport and third-parties. The transportation of baggage from arriving air-
crafts to the airport terminal and transportation from the terminal to departing
aircrafts is handled by ground handlers. The controller of CPH Airport communi-
cates to the ground handlers where they are to bring the baggage. The goal of this
thesis is to investigate a new transfer baggage handling strategy for the controller.
The strategy will be based on mathematical modelling.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
Transfer baggage handling is particularly important, if CPH Airport wants to stay
competitive. Besides passenger satisfaction, transfer baggage handling highly aﬀects
relationships with airlines. Airlines tend to prioritise air hubs with eﬃcient transfer
baggage handling, in order to oﬀer passengers more attractive ﬂight times. In fact,
airports and airlines sign an agreement binding airports to handle bags within a
certain time frame. If the time frame is exceeded the airport is obligated to pay a ﬁne
to the airline company. The complexity of transfer baggage handling is increasing
as a result of the ever increasing air-travel demand, making it diﬃcult to comply
with the time frame.
Hence, airports often see a need to expand and improve
their infrastructure, which generally is a high cost investment. However, long-term
investments in airport expansion are very exposed to unforeseen events like the
Covid-19 pandemic. Therefore, the importance of using existing resources in CPH
Airport in the best possible way becomes even more clear.
Optimisation of the transfer baggage handling process is not presented in much lit-
erature compared to other airport operations [4]. This thesis will exploit possibilities
of optimising transfer baggage handling in CPH Airport using techniques within the
ﬁeld of Operations Research (OR).
1.1
Scope of this thesis
This thesis is a preliminary study exploring opportunities for optimising the transfer
baggage handling at CPH airport.
The study will use mathematical models to
support decisions for the transfer baggage problem presented in section 2.1. The
modelling approach will be based on known techniques within airport operations
research presented in literature. However, the models are tailored for the operations
at CPH Airport.
This study will not discuss the problems associated with using the models in the
daily operations at CPH Airport. The focus will solely be on presenting a viable
argument for investigating future implementations. Furthermore, the run time1 of
the model will be discussed for applicable operational purposes.
The above exclusions give this thesis more ﬂexible modelling options, however pre-
sented solutions will be tightly bound to the resources available at CPH airport.
Therefore, all presented models are evaluated on real-world data provided by CPH
airport. The major contribution of this thesis is thereby laying the groundwork for
future research in implementing a model that can fulﬁl the practical requirements.
1.2
Reading Guide
It is recommend to read the entire thesis, however the structure of the thesis allows
readers to read chapters separately. The remainder of this chapter provides a glos-
sary deﬁning central concepts within the professional language of airport operations.
Chapter 2 presents the transfer baggage problem. Relevant related literature con-
cerning transfer baggage operations is reviewed. Lastly the current handling ap-
proach and the input data from CPH Airport are introduced.
1The time for solving the problem to optimality
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
Chapter 3 presents the analysis and processing of the input data obtained from CPH
Airport. It presents the challenges encountered and how they were overcome.
Chapter 4 formulates two mathematical models2 for the transfer baggage problem.
It presents a deterministic and a stochastic model as well as the results obtained from
each of these and the pros and cons of each. Lastly it presents possible additions to
or improvements of the models.
Chapter 5 contains the discussion and an overview of what can be learned from the
results in chapter 4. Furthermore it reviews potential further work to be done.
Chapter 6 contains the conclusion to the thesis.
2MIP-models
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
1.3
Glossary
This section provides the central deﬁnitions used throughout this thesis.
Term
Description
Gate
A small area of the airport indicated with a unique num-
ber. The area connects an aircraft with its payload, such
as passengers and baggage.
BHS
Baggage handling system, a network of conveyor belts
controlled automatically.
Apron
Part of airport layout, where aircraft is parked, loaded,
fuelled and unloaded (exterior of gates)
Ground handler
A ground handler facilitates a wide range of services both
including passengers, security and aircraft preparation.
This thesis only considers the ground handler operations
of unloading/loading the aircraft and apron operations
such as transportation.
Infeed area
A number of stations in the airport, where baggage com-
ing from arriving aircrafts is loaded unto the BHS by
ground handlers.
Container
Either container with baggage from same arriving aircraft
On-block time (ONB)
When the braking blocks are under the wheels of the air-
craft and unloading of baggage and passengers can com-
mence.
Handling facility
A number of stations in the airport, where baggage is re-
moved from BHS and are packed unto trucks, that drive
the baggage to the departing ﬂights.
Inbound baggage
Baggage that is at the ﬁnal destination and should be
handed back to the passengers.
Transfer baggage
Baggage coming from inbound passengers and is sent to
an outbound aircraft.
Outbound baggage
Concerns the handling of baggage delivered by passengers
at the check-in desks and the transfer baggage.
Tail-to-tail
When baggage is handled without using the BHS, by
having personnel move it directly to the departing air-
craft.
Early Baggage Storage
(EBS)
A separate system within BHS for baggage that is
checked in hours before ﬂight time.
Quick Transfer Baggage
unload (QTBunload)
Term to use when baggage is put in a special container in
preparation for tail-to-tail handling.
Trip
Transportation of baggage from the aircraft to the infeed
area.
Table 1.1: Glossary of airport operations terms
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Problem Analysis
An overview of the problem is presented in this chapter. This includes a detailed
description of the transfer baggage problem, a review of related literature and a
description of the objective criteria for a good transfer baggage handling at CPH
airport. Moreover, the current strategy is described and analysed to identify opti-
misation possibilities. Lastly, the input data provided by CPH airport is presented.
2.1
Transfer baggage problem
A large part of baggage handling in an airport concerns passengers in transfer.
Transfer baggage is baggage coming from inbound passengers and leaving on an
outbound ﬂight. The Transfer Baggage Problem deals with transfer baggage, which
does not rely on any interaction with passengers. Figure 2.1 illustrates all operations
included in the transfer baggage handling process.
Figure 2.1: Process steps from the arriving to the departing aircraft for transfer
baggage. The location of the execution of each process step is given in the lower
part of the ﬁgure [5]
The transfer baggage handling illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1 can be summarised into 3
parts, each controlled by a diﬀerent actor.
• Unloading to infeeding (unloading, apron): Ground handlers
• Infeed station to depature gate (BHS): CPH Airport
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
7
• Baggage handling facility to departing ﬂight (apron): Ground handlers
A ground handler unloads the baggage from the aircraft into a number of containers,
usually two for a ﬂight. From the aircraft the containers are taken across the apron
to the infeed areas or infeed stations. This operation is referred to as trip in the
following. At the infeed station, the baggage is loaded into the Baggage Handling
System (BHS), where it is automatically scanned. Once the baggage is in the BHS,
the process is automatic, bringing the baggage to the baggage handling facility at the
departure gate. From here ground handlers transport the baggage to the departing
aircraft.
The core of the transfer baggage handling process is the BHS. The BHS consists of
multiple conveyor belts, automatically sending baggage to the selected destination1.
Noteably, BHS is the core for inbound and outbound baggage operations as well.
However, inbound baggage is separated into a diﬀerent conveyor belt at the infeed
and thus doesn’t intervene with the outbound baggage in the BHS. The separation
happens when unloading the baggage.
Not all operations in ﬁgure 2.1 are handled by CPH airport.
Other companies
are responsible for both unloading and apron transportation of baggage. However,
CPH is responsible for choosing an infeed station to the BHS. The choice of infeed
station signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the baggage process time, as it aﬀects both the ground
handling and BHS operation. Due to this, the ﬁnal decision has to be made by the
controller before the ﬂight is at its parking position.
Choosing the right infeed
station can make the diﬀerence between a bag being delayed or not. A delayed bag
is deﬁned as a bag that does not reach its departing gate before the ground handlers
close the containers that take the baggage to the departing aircraft2. Hence, the
Transfer Baggage Problem is to assign transfer baggage to a given infeed station in
order to minimise the number of delayed bags. In the rest of the thesis a delayed bag
is referred to as a late bag.
CPH airport has 6 diﬀerent infeed stations to the BHS, each with a diﬀerent location.
Figure 2.2 displays where each infeed station is located in the airport layout. The
infeed station names are tra, trb, trc, trd, tre and trf.
Baggage from an aircraft is only assigned to a single infeed station. Most aircrafts
only require a single trip to unload. Moreover, there is no control of in which trip
speciﬁc baggage ends up, if multiple trips are required. This create little incentive to
assign trips to diﬀerent infeed stations. The baggage from an aircraft will therefore
be handled as a single unit, as one can not predict in which container baggage ends
up.
1Baggage carousel for inbound baggage or departure gate for transfer baggage
2This is denoted as the cutoﬀ
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
8
Figure 2.2: Placement of infeed stations in CPH airport layout. The infeed station
names are tra, trb, trc, trd, tre and trf.
In some cases, where the connection time is particularly short, baggage can be
handled without using an infeed station. This is done by having personnel move
it directly to the departing plane, referred to as tail-to-tail. However, it is not an
operation that is preferred by the airport, as it is very expensive. Furthermore it
requires a higher number of personnel pr. piece of baggage.
In this thesis the objective is to minimise the number of delayed bags. The latter is
strongly correlated to the expected number of missed bags. Hence, minimising the
amount delayed baggage will minimise the number of missed bags as well. A detailed
description of the objective is given in section 2. Lastly, although six infeed stations
are available, only four are utilised for transfer baggage operations respectively tra,
trb, trc and trd.
2.2
Related literature
Extensive research is has been carried out in the ﬁeld of airport operation, how-
ever not much concerns baggage handling [5]. Furthermore, the transfer baggage
operation is even less studied in literature [4]. This review begins with the litera-
ture regarding the short transfer baggage problem, which tries to reduce mishandled
transfer baggage by identifying critical baggage. The short transfer baggage problem
uses a diﬀerent set of operations than presented in ﬁgure 2.1.
2.2.1
Short transfer baggage problem
Clausen & Pisinger studied a problem concerning short transfer baggage[6], baggage
that is taken directly from the arriving aircraft to the connecting departure or to a
handling station. Each transfer bag can be delivered either directly to its departing
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
9
ﬂight or to a handling facility. Every destination, departing ﬂight or handling facility,
has a time window [a, b], in which it is open. The handling facility has a longer
service time and therefore a bag is more likely to be delivered, if it is brought
directly to the ﬂight. In the speciﬁc problem handled in [6], the transportation is
handled by a company employing a ﬂeet of vehicles driving between the diﬀerent
gates and ﬂights. The number of bags missing the connecting ﬂight is minimised.
The problem in question is a variation on the standard Vehicle Routing Problem
(VRP), with added time windows, the possibility of delivering to multiple locations
and multiple depots. Clausen & Pisinger allowed each vehicle to undertake multiple
routes, mimicking a Vehicle Routing Problem with multiple trips (VRPM).
The algorithm introduced in [6] deﬁnes the following criteria for a good route.
• Flights with an imminent departure time should be handled ﬁrst.
• The route should deliver as many bags as possible.
• Routes should be as short as possible.
Clausen & Pisinger employed stochastic travel times between ﬂights and handling
stations as well as stochastic arrival times for each bag. The problem is solved using
a greedy algorithm choosing the cheapest outgoing edge for each node, until the
cheapest edge leads back to the depot. The edge cost depends on the time when
the bag is being delivered and the location of the previous stop on the route. These
penalty functions are deﬁned in compliance with the above three criteria of a good
route and their weights are used for parameter tuning of the algorithm.
σij(Sikr) = αLσL(i, j) + αRσR(Sikr + tij −S0kr) + αDσD(Sikr + tij −bjmodN) (2.1)
Sikr is the time bag i is served by vehicle k’s route r, σL concerns the possible
location change between bag i and j, σR concerns the length of the route of the
given vehicle and σD concerns the time between delivery of the bag and time of
departure. Clausen and Pisinger performed parameter tuning on the combination
of the weight parameters αL, αR, αD and shape of the penalty functions. Clausen
& Pisinger found that prioritising the route length penalty leads to the best results
and that the location penalty hardly inﬂuences the number of undelivered bags.
In [7] Barth & Pisinger investigated a similar short transfer baggage problem. Spe-
cial handling facilities for these short3 critical bags are used, where a number of
vehicles bring the bags directly to the departing ﬂight, bypassing the BHS. The
problem is modelled as a selection problem for each quick facility, maximizing the
sum of probabilities that the selected bags will make their connecting ﬂight. A quick
facility is separate infeed area, from which a ﬂeet of vehicles brings bags directly
to the parking position of the outgoing ﬂight. A set of bags is already assigned to
each quick facility and the algorithm then has to select additional bags, maximizing
the probability that all bags in the quick facility make their connection. Barth &
Pisinger [7] study a static problem, where each bag has a predeﬁned time of arrival
and 2 diﬀerent types of online problems, where the arrival time of each bag is uncer-
tain. In the online problems, bags arriving within a certain time are known, but not
the exact time of arrival. For each bag, arriving at an infeed station, a decision has
3Short connection time
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
10
to be made on whether it is to be handled in a quick facility or by the normal han-
dling facilities. Barth & Pisinger [7] studied 3 diﬀerent static algorithms, in which
the decision is purely based on the time until departure and buﬀer time between de-
parture and process time respectively. A criteria for these 3 algorithms is that every
infeed station can only be assigned to one quick facility. Furthermore they tested
two diﬀerent dynamic approaches to the selection algorithm, that both consider the
theoretical increase pimp
b,q in the probability, that a bag makes the connecting ﬂight.
Here the super-script imp stands for improvement and the subscripts b and q are
indexes for the bag and quick facility respectively. For both algorithms an accep-
tance level is set for the scaled improvement πb,qpimp
b,q , where the scaling factor πb,q
is set dynamically. The second dynamic algorithm also incorporates prognosis data
into the calculation of the scaling factor. The calculation of the scaling factor takes
the following into account
• Numbers of bags currently in the BHS
• Weighted number of bags at the quick facility in the last 5, 10 and 15 minutes
• Transportation capacity when the bag is added to the quick facility
• Weighted number of bags expected to arrive at the quick facility in the next
5, 10 and 15 minutes (only concerns the second dynamic algorithm)
• Weighted number of critical bags with buﬀer time less than 10, 20 and 30
minutes (only second dynamic algorithm)
The results showed that the dynamic approaches signiﬁcantly increase the number
of saved bags, where as the static algorithms considering the buﬀer time did not
improve the solution, in worst case increasing the number of bags missing their
connection.
The short transfer baggage problem was not considered as an option in this thesis,
as it is not a preferred way of handling baggage at CPH airport. The remainder
of this review will focus on literature handling the transfer baggage problem solely
using the operation steps depicted in ﬁgure 2.1.
2.2.2
Transfer baggage handling
In [8] Kiermaier & Kolisch studied the handling of transfer baggage of a typical
hub airport. Each arriving aircraft has an assigned baggage vehicle unto which the
baggage is unloaded when the aircraft is on-block. Kiermaier & Kolisch grouped the
infeed stations into subsystems each with their own capacities on the rate of infed
bags, as the capacity of an infeed station also depends on shared resources, such as
tubs into which the bags are placed. The number of consecutive timeslots where any
subset of infeed stations is working on overload is constrained. The model minimizes
the sum of priorities for all pieces of baggage. The priority of a bag increases as
it becomes more critical (closer to departure of connecting ﬂight) and therefore the
model will try to assign baggage vehicles to infeed stations as early as possible.
Kiermaier and Kolisch solved this model on data for operations at Munich Airport
using a genetic algorithm to optimality gaps of 3-7% within 20 seconds.
The applicability of Kiermaier and Kolisch’s research for this thesis is limited, al-
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
11
though the research focuses on the same problem. Firstly, the infeed stations are
grouped in clusters sharing a common capacity, where the capacities of infeed sta-
tions in CPH airport are seperate. Moreover, Kiermaier & Kolisch minimised bag-
gage buﬀer time, where this thesis focuses on late baggage alone. An approach more
similar to this thesis was studied by Barth et al. [4].
Barth et al. [4] investigated models for solving the transfer baggage problem at
Frankfurt airport. The outcome of the model should be assigning trips to speciﬁc
infeed areas, such that the number of missed bags is minimised. However, the main
objective of missed bags is separated into four auxiliary objectives in Barth et al.
[4], respectively:
• Minimize the number of late bags.
• Minimize transportation time from the aircraft to the infeed area at the apron.
• Minimize transportation time from the infeed area to the handling facility of
the outbound ﬂight through the BHS.
• Maximize capacity buﬀer for unforeseen events at the infeed areas.
Barth et al. [4] presented a deterministic model that weights each objective, result-
ing in minimising a probability of missing bags. The deterministic model has to
assign each trip for the given ﬂight before the ﬂight is on-block (the beginning of
the baggage handling operation). The data to support this model is arrival times,
departure times, transportation times etc. which is exposed to many uncertainties.
Hence the study presents a stochastic model to address this issue, by optimising
across multiple scenarios with varying on-block times. However, the number of sce-
narios highly increases the complexity of the model, and the study showed that only
10 scenarios could be considered within the given solution time limit of 2 minutes.
Lastly, Barth et al. [4] presented a semi-stochastic model combining the eﬃciency of
the deterministic model and the quality of the stochastic model. This model is rerun
approximately every 2nd minute. Hence the model only considers ﬂights that are
likely to be on-block within 5 minutes to be critical (a variable that can be tuned).
The critical ﬂights will be handled in a stochastic way, while the rest of the ﬂights
will be handled in a deterministic way.
There is a high complexity associated with ﬁnding the critical ﬂights, which limits
the possible number of scenarios to be considered in order to maintain the time
limit. Moreover all models gave ﬂuctuating results that are highly related to the
many uncertainties that an airport experiences. However, the semi-stochastic model
did improve the handling operations in Frankfurt airport signiﬁcantly, and it is in
use at the airport today.
The motivation behind Barth et al. [4] was highly the same as for this thesis. This
thesis will consider both deterministic and stochastic models. Moreover, Barth et al.
presented a method for handling capacity and queues in the infeed stations which
is adopted by this thesis.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
12
2.3
Objective of transfer baggage handling (costs)
The main objective of every airport is to minimise the cost of operations, while
maintaining a certain service level.
The biggest direct costs related to baggage
handling are personnel and ﬁnes paid to airlines, if a bag is late or missed. While
the former stems from increasing ﬂight activity, the cost from paid ﬁnes is dependent
on the transfer time from the arriving and departing aircraft. Moreover, the airport
desires the shortest possible transfer times as it makes the airport more attractive
to airlines.
The structure of the problem heavily depends on how the individual airport handles
its baggage operations. Moreover, what kind of agreement the airport has with the
airlines and how many uncertainties the baggage handling operations encounter.
• Fine for missed bag If a bag is delayed suﬃciently, so that it misses it’s
connecting ﬂight, CPH Airport is required to pay the airline in question a ﬁne
of roughly 100€. Apart from the actual cost stemming from the ﬁne, every
piece of missed baggage leads to a decrease of the CPH Airport’s reputation
with airlines, worsening their competitive standing
The cost stemming from ﬁnes is the only one, that is linked directly to the transfer
baggage process, apart from the tail-to-tail process, which will not be covered in
this thesis. The tail-to-tail process is expensive and therefor not desired by CPH
Airport. Moreover, the exclusion of this process in the presented strategy reduces the
complexity of the model. The strategy pursued in this thesis is simply to minimise
the number of missed baggage, using only the standard transfer baggage operations
illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1.
2.4
Current handling strategy and motivation
The current handling strategy in CPH airport is based on human judgement aided
by monitoring of the current operations. All infeed station assignments are made
by the airport controller, who possesses information about the current loads at the
infeed station and status of inbound ﬂights. The controller often applies a greedy
approach, selecting the nearest infeed station. This choice reduces the complexity
of the problem. However, this current procedure does not take into account the
transportation time in the BHS, meaning time saved before the infeed station can
easily be lost again on queuing at the infeed station or in the BHS. Moreover,
relying on human judgement can lead to signiﬁcant mistakes in busy moments. It is
both diﬃcult to foresee infeed station load and operation times. Hence, ﬁnding the
best infeed station for a given aircraft in a small time frame, with operation time
uncertainties and multiple available choices using solely the human brain is very
challenging.
A mathematical modelling based approach can handle the complete transfer baggage
process, incorporate queues and capacities at the infeed stations and even deal with
operation time uncertainties in more complex model designs. The simple assignment
used by the controller today may be very ineﬃcient compared to this approach.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
13
2.5
Input data
The input data for solving the transfer baggage problem at CPH airport includes
information about each individual piece of transfer baggage. The data is historic
and thus provides information throughout all operations in the handling. Every
piece of baggage has the information described in table 2.1 assigned. Baggage will
Input
Description
Last Seen Conv Result
Status when baggage arrives at the han-
dling facility (Late, Too Late, QTBunload,
Normal)
Departure Flight name
Name of the departing ﬂight
Std
Scheduled Time of Departure
Atd
Actual Time of Departure
On-block Time
The time the ﬂight was on-block
Departure Gate
The name of the departing gate
First Seen Time Stamp
The time the baggage is scanned at the
infeed station
Time of Last Discharge
The time the baggage is scanned at the
handling facility
Arrival Flight Name
The name of the arriving ﬂight
Sta
Scheduled Time of Arrival
Ata
Actual Time of Arrival
Arrival Gate
The name of the arriving gate
Infeed Station
The name of the infeed station
Was at EBS
If and only if 1 then the baggage has been
at EBS
Table 2.1: Information assigned to every piece of baggage in the input data.
be apportioned according to which date it was handled. CPH airport provided input
data across three diﬀerent days, which is distributed as:
• Dataset 1 (small day): 3281 pieces of baggage
• Dataset 2 (medium day): 5042 pieces of baggage
• Dataset 3 (big day): 8432 pieces of baggage
Note that all three of datasets 1, 2 and 3 only contain transfer baggage.
In short, table 2.1 provides the important timestamps indicating onblock time, time
it is scanned in the infeed station, time it arrives at the handling station and time
of expected departure. This information is used to estimate transportation times
from one point to another in the airport. The whole analysis is provided in chapter
3. Moreover each baggage has an indicator whether or not it was late. Baggage
is labelled ”Too Late” if it arrives at the handling facility after departure of the
ﬂight and it is labelled ”Late” if it arrives 20 min or less before departure. The
20 min stems from the agreement CPH Airport and the ground handlers have with
the airlines. The status ”Was at EBS” will be used to explained possible extended
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. PROBLEM ANALYSIS
14
transportation time. Early Baggage Storage (EBS) is a separate system within BHS
for baggage that is checked in hours before ﬂight time.
2.6
Thesis problem deﬁnition in words
The models introduced in this thesis will only directly concern the ﬁrst two parts
of the transfer baggage process. The decision to be made is the assignment of an
aircraft to an infeed station. This determines the following actions for the unloading
to infeeding and infeed station to departure gate subprocesses.
The goal is to assign infeed stations to arriving aircrafts, such that a maximum of
bags reach the departing aircaft in time. This can be summarised in the following
problem deﬁnition:
Given: A set of infeed stations I with given capacities, a set of gates G, a
set of baggage with arrival time and destination, transportation time from
all I to G through the BHS (if such connection is possible), transportation
time from all G to I through apron (if such connection is possible).
Return:
The total number of missed baggage and infeed station as-
signments for every aircraft.
Chapter 3 will provide the transportation times, where the rest is explicit given in
the input data in table 2.1.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Data Analysis
The layout of the airport highly aﬀects its operations that the model will interpret.
An analysis of the operations will help discover certain dynamics in the CPH Airport,
especially time estimates on each operation.
Expected transportation times in the BHS and ground handling time estimates are
important information for solving the transfer baggage problem presented in section
2.6. This particular information about transportation times is crucial in order to take
the best decisions. The time stamps on each piece of baggage provided by the input
data in section 2.5 permit a calculation of time estimates throughout the airport.
The estimates are expected to be non-deterministic, due to the many uncertainties in
airport operations. Therefore, this thesis seek to ﬁnd a distribution of transportation
times rather than a single estimate. Moreover, expected transportation times of an
operation can only be calculated if the timestamps for that operation are available in
the input data. All possible operations must be considered, in order to guarantee an
optimal solution. Thus a method to calculate missing transportation time estimates
must be provided.
This chapter studies transportation time distributions, as it is known beforehand,
that these operations can vary a lot in execution time. Moreover, is will present
an algorithm for calculating time estimates on operations not available in the input
data.
3.1
Transportation time distributions
The following analysis will give a basis for choosing the best method for estimating
the transportation times. The idea is to ﬁnd a pattern such that the model can
predict the transportation times more precisely. This analysis will not be dataset
dependent, thereby analysing across dataset 1, 2 and 3 at once.
A baggage transportation time may include a diﬀerent set of processes even for the
same destination. This includes extra security check, a QTBUnload handeling or a
retag of the baggage. Prior to this, the best way to estimate the transportation times
is to exclude special cases that do not solely use the BHS and standard unloading
operations. Moreover, the data does include some extreme outliers. The extreme
outliers will be removed from the dataset, as they most probably arise from human
15
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
16
error or erroneous measurements. For instance, if a transportation time of a given
baggage from infeed station x to gate y is measured to be 9 hours along with an
indicator that it was NOT on EBS. This extreme transportation time in the BHS is
impossible, and must be caused by an unknown error.
All in all, the ﬁltered data input for this section will be:
• Baggage with Last Seen Conv Result as Normal (see table 2.1)
• Baggage that was not on EBS
• Baggage that has a travel time less than 30 minutes (not considering extreme
outliers)
However, the unloading and ground handling times from an on-block ﬂight1 to an
infeed station is obviously not aﬀected by the EBS status, as the EBS status is only
related to the BHS. Yet to avoid further complexity, the baggage that was on EBS
is still excluded when analysing these estimates.
In the following, time stamps in the input data for each piece of baggage is used to
calculate transportation times. If a combination of gate and infeed station assign-
ment is present in the input data, it is referred to as having been explored.
3.1.1
Analysing BHS times
The following analysis will cover the transportation from an infeed station to the
baggage handling facility at the departure gate. This operation only concerns the
transportation time within the BHS, which is automatically handled. Yet many
factors inﬂuence the transportation time in BHS, arising from factors out of control
of the model, such as security checks. In order to investigate how transportation
times are distributed, a probability density function (PDF) is derived from every
transportation time in the BHS. However, a PDF will only be calculated for destina-
tions that have been explored more than 25 times to avoid imprecise distributions.
Instead of illustrating all PDF’s at once, a random sample of 5 is chosen to be inves-
tigate as it makes the visual analysis more clear. The ﬁgure 3.1 illustrated 4 plots
with this particular method.
Figure 3.1 shows how transportation times are distributed as a probability density
function. Note that all functions mostly cover the same time interval of 0 to 10
minutes. Besides, there is a very high probability of a transportation time less than
5 minutes no matter the infeed station nor the destination.
All functions have a tendency to be bimodal with a very dominant ﬁrst peak. The
tendency is especially clear in Figure 3.1(c).
A factor that signiﬁcantly extends
the transportation time in BHS is a security check. A security check is a separate
operation in BHS where only speciﬁc baggage is selected, hence creating a bimodal
tendency.
Security checks can be foreseen as it depends on factors such as the
origin of the baggage. However, the security check has several levels of inspection
depending on the suspension. The level of security check is often unforeseen, as it is
based on an x-ray scan of the individual baggage. It is not possible with the current
1When the braking blocks are under the wheels of the aircraft and unloading of baggage and
passengers can commence
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.1: Probability density function of a transportion time from an infeed
station to a departure gate. (a), (b), (c) and (d) are random samples of size 5
where the transportation path has been explored at least 25 times in the dataset.
data provided by CPH Airport to determine beforehand whether baggage ends in a
security check or which level of security check. Hence, this analysis tries to estimate
a single distribution on both baggage with or without security check. It is clear that
a more accurate estimate would incorporate possible security checks.
Figure 3.1 does not have a very clear distribution among all functions. However,
the data is ﬁtted to a t-distribution which is decribed in detail in Appendix A.
Notably, a t-distribution can represent larger tails and higher peaks than the normal
distribution, hence it is a better match for the tendencies in Figure 3.1 due to high
peaks and long tails. However, the t-distribution can not represent the bimodal
tendency.
A t-distribution is deﬁned by the parameters: degrees of freedom, a mean value and
a variance. The high peaks and long tails are better represented than the normal
distribution for smaller degrees of freedom. The mean of squared estimate of errors
(MSE) is used to discover discrepancy between the distributions and the actual
data. In this case, the MSE values range from the best of MSEbest = 0.00162 and
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
18
the worst of MSEworst = 2.544. Figure 3.2 illustrates a histogram of the actual
transportation times along with the tried ﬁtted t-distribution of the best and worst
ﬁt based on the MSE values.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: (a) and (b) both illustrate a histogram of the transportation times and
a ﬁtted t-distribution. (a) illustrates the best ﬁtted t-distribution with a MSE
value of 0.00162 and (b) illustrates the worst ﬁtted t-distribution with a MSE
value of 2.544.
Figure 3.2 shows that it is possible to approximate transportation times with a
t-distribution. The ﬁt of ﬁgure 3.2(b) is far from optimal, where the ﬁt of ﬁgure
3.2(a) is very acceptable. However, ﬁgure 3.2(b) seems to describe the transportation
times acceptable in lack of a better alternative due to the very unclear distribution.
Moreover, most of the t-distribution approximations have a similar ﬁt-quality to the
the one illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2(a). Figure 3.3 illustrates that most MSE values are
in the range between 0 and 0.5. The t-distribution illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2(b) is a
clear single outlier located to the far right in ﬁgure 3.3.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
19
Figure 3.3: Histogram illustrating the MSE values of the ﬁtted t-distributions.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the general quality of using t-distributions as a BHS trans-
portation time approximation method.
Both ﬁgure 3.2(a) and ﬁgure 3.2(b) are
found acceptable. Besides, most approximations tend to have the same favourable
quality of ﬁgure 3.2(a) illustrated by the high peak to left in ﬁgure 3.3.
Note, the t-distribution method is not applicable for destinations explored less than
25 times, despite acceptable ﬁts in ﬁgure 3.3. The rule of thumb is that a sample
size has to be at least 25 to use a t-distribution. A simple average will be used for
all destinations explored less than 25 times.
3.1.2
Analyzing ground handling times
The following analysis will cover the transportation time from a given parking spot
to an infeed station. The transportation time includes the unloading of the ﬂight,
driving from the ﬂight to the infeed station and unloading into the BHS. The whole
process is referred to as the ground handling for convenience.
Figure 3.4 shows how ground handling times for diﬀerent destinations are dis-
tributed. It only shows 4 random samples of size 5 with diﬀerent destinations from a
given parking spot. However, the random sample will only consider ground handling
times that have been explored more than 25 times, to avoid imprecise estimates.
The functions in ﬁgure 3.4 do not cover the same time interval. This is especially
clear in Figure 3.4(a) where the red and blue distributions are covering vastly diﬀer-
ent time intervals. Moreover, the distributions in Figure 3.4 do not follow as clear
a tendency as the distributions in Figure 3.1, varying from being bimodal to almost
perfect normal distributed. The red and blue function in ﬁgure 3.4(a) is almost
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
20
perfectly normal distributed, where the yellow, green and purple functions in ﬁgure
3.4(c) are very bimodal.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.4: Probability density function of ground handling times from the ﬂight
being on block to the baggage is in the BHS. This includes unloading the ﬂight,
driving to the infeed station and feeding the baggage into the BHS. (a), (b), (c)
and (d) are random samples of size 5 where the transportation path has been
explored at least 25 times in the dataset.
Ground handling times are not aﬀected by any additional security check, which
created the bimodal tendency in section 3.1.1. However, if the trucks used by the
ground handlers cannot ﬁt all containers of baggage they have to take multiple trips.
The transportation time is obviously highly aﬀected by the given trip it ends up in,
when multiple trips are necessary. The ground handlers can send multiple trucks
to the parking position to avoid the problem, but multiple trucks might not be
available. The availability of trucks might correlate with increased ﬂight activity
in a given time interval refered to as bottlenecks. Yet, the analysis in Appendix
B concludes that the presence of bottlenecks does not correlate with the bimodal
behaviour. Thus it is not possible to foresee if multiple trips are necessary with the
current data available. Hence, this analysis will try to estimate a single distribution
of ground handling times.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
21
A t-distribution is used to estimate the functions in ﬁgure 3.4. T-distributions can
estimate fatter tails, hence estimating small bimodal behaviours better. Moreover,
a t-distribution approaches the normal distribution when the number of degrees
of freedom increases thus ﬁtting the functions which tend to be normal distributed.
Similar to section 3.1.1, the mean of squared estimate of errors (MSE) is used to dis-
cover discrepancy between the distributions and the actual data. The best achieved
MSE value is MSEbest = 0.000438, where the worst is MSEworst = 0.138.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) and (b) both illustrate a histogram of the transportation times and
a ﬁtted t-distribution. (a) illustrates the best ﬁtted t-distribution with a MSE
value of 0.000438 and (b) illustrates the worst ﬁtted t-distribution with a MSE
value of 0.138.
The same tendencies of section 3.1.1 is present for the ground handling distributions.
Figure 3.5(b) achieves a far from optimal result, however it is accepted due to lack
of better ﬁt options. Noteably, ﬁgure 3.5(a) seems to ﬁt the transportation times
very well as it has a more normal distributed tendency.
Figure 3.6 illustrates the quality of using t-distribution estimates on ground handling
times. The majority of the t-distribution estimates seems to have a good quality
likewise ﬁgure 3.5(a) illustrated with the high peak to left of the histogram. The
less acceptable 3.5(b) distribution is a single outlier illustrated to the right of the
histogram in ﬁgure 3.6.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
22
Figure 3.6: Histogram illustrating the MSE values of the ﬁtted t-distributions.
Similar to section 3.1.1, not all destinations are given a t-distribution as the desti-
nation must be explored more than 25 times in the input data. For all destinations
that has been explored less than 25 times, a simple average is estimated as the
transportation time.
3.2
Generating missing transportation times for
optimisation
In order to optimise the choice of infeed station as described in section 2.1, all ground
handling and BHS transportation times must be known. However, section 3.1 only
explored time distributions for operations that were present in the input data across
the three days. E.g. if all aircraft’s arriving at gate A2 used the infeed station tra
across the three days, no time estimate of using another infeed station (trb, trc,
trd, tre, trf) will be calculated. The same problem is present when calculating
transportation times withing BHS. E.g. if not a single piece of baggage is sent from
tra to the departing gate B2, no time estimate of the BHS transportation will be
available.
An algorithm is used to generate missing transportation times for both BHS and
ground handling. The algorithm will use neighbouring gates that have been used,
to estimate the missing transportation time. It is convenient to separate gates into
clusters, as gates in CPH airport are distributed across diﬀerent areas. The gates
are adjacent to each other within the clusters, but the clusters are not necessarily
adjacent. This thesis deﬁnes the clusters in CPH airport as:
• Gates A2 - A17
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
23
• Gates A18 - A23
• Gates B2 - B19
• Gates C2 - C9
• Gate C10
• Gates C15 - C40
• Gates D1 - D6
• Gates E20 - E90
• Gates F1 - F10
In the following analysis, clusters will be worked with independently, hence the
following algorithm will be executed for each cluster separately.
3.2.1
Algorithm for missing BHS transportation times
The algorithm will look at each gate to see if any time estimates are missing. If a
transportation time estimate for an infeed station is missing for a given handling
facility at a certain departure gate, the algorithm will look at all neighbours to the
right and the left of the gate to ﬁnd an estimate of the transportation time for the
missing infeed station. The following scenarios can happen:
1. No estimates exist to the right or left of the gate
2. Only an estimate exists to the right of the gate
3. Only an estimate exists to the left of the gate
4. Estimates exist to the right and left of the gate
The transportation will remain not estimated if scenario 1 occurs. The new estimate
will be a direct copy of the found estimate if scenario 2 or 3 occurs. Finally, the
new estimate will be a weighted average between the two found estimates if scenario
4 occurs. The weight in the weighted average is based on the diﬀerence in gate
number, as it indicates a distance measure between the gates. Figure 3.7 illustrates
an example of scenario 4.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
24
Figure 3.7: Insertion of weighted time estimate z, if a time estimate to infeed
station trb is available both to the right and left of the gate.
Note, that a time estimate is given by a t-distribution, hence represented by the
three parameters sample mean (ˆµ), scale parameter (ˆσ2) and degrees of freedom
(ν) explained in Appendix A. Hence the value of x and y in ﬁgure 3.7 will be
x = (ˆµx, ˆσ2
x, νx) and y = (ˆµy, ˆσ2
y, νy). A weighted average on all three parameters is
calculated, to achieve the estimate z, resulting in computing z in ﬁgure 3.7 as:
z = (3ˆµx + 2ˆµy
2 + 3
, 3ˆσ2 + 2ˆσ2
2 + 3
, 3νx + 2νy
2 + 3
)
This method does not guarantee that all transportation time will be computed, as
scenario 1 can occur. Table 3.1 shows the results of using the algorithm on the
estimates in BHS. There is a signiﬁcant decrease in missing estimates after applying
the algorithm which meant going from 501 to 90 missing estimates. The quality
of this solution is justiﬁed by the number of gates with time estimates for multiple
infeed stations.
The probability of being able to optimise the transfer baggage
problem increases, when more gates have estimates for multiple infeed stations.
After applying the algorithm, only one gate remained, where the choice of infeed
station is limited to one.
Missing estimates before algorithm
Missing estimates after algorithm
501
90
Table 3.1: Results of using an estimation algorithm on the estimates in BHS
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
25
3.2.2
Algorithm for missing ground handling times
To estimate the missing ground handling, the exact same algorithm as described in
section 3.2 is applied. Yet, it is applied to estimates of ground handling times. This
includes the operations from a ﬂight on-block in a speciﬁc gate until it is scanned at
a given infeed station. The algorithm is used to estimate operations from a arriving
gate to an infeed station that is not explored in input data. The results of applying
the algorithm are provided in table 3.2.
Missing estimates before algorithm
Missing estimates after algorithm
565
4
Table 3.2: Results of using an estimation algorithm on the estimates for ground
handling
The algorithm reduced the number of missing estimates from 565 to 4. Just like
section 3.2, the quality of the solution is justiﬁed by the number of gates with
only one choice of infeed station. The probability of being able to optimise the
transfer baggage problem increases, when more gates have estimates to multiple
infeed stations. Only 1 gate is restricted to a single infeed station.
3.3
Summary
In order to model the transfer baggage problem, it is crucial to know the trans-
portion times within BHS along with the unloading and ground handling trans-
portation times. Not all of these estimates were available at CPH Airport. An
analysis showed that both operations could be acceptably approximated by a t-
distribution. But both operations had bimodal tendencies. Transportation time
within the BHS is signiﬁcanly extended in case of extra security checks. Moreover,
the need of multiple trips for ground handlers signiﬁcantly extends the time of the
unloading and ground handling operation. Future work would include foreseeing
security checks in the BHS and the need of multiple trips. This can not be foreseen
with the current information available.
The t-distribution estimates are calculated on historic data, only computing esti-
mates of previously used choices of infeed stations. An algorithm was designed to
estimate possible operations not present in the historic input data. The algorithm
signiﬁcantly reduced the number of missing estimates, signiﬁcantly increasing the
optimisation possibilities.
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Modelling the transfer baggage
problem
This chapter investigates mathematical models to solve the transfer baggage prob-
lem, section 2.6. To model the transfer baggage problem at CPH Airport a de-
terministic general assignment model and a stochastic model are introduced. Both
the deterministic and the stochastic models are Mixed Integer Programming (MIP)
models. The motivation behind a deterministic model is its simplicity and ease of
implementation. However, as further explored in chapter 3, transportation times
are non-deterministic. Hence a stochastic model can oﬀer more robust results in
dealing with the uncertainties of time estimates. This chapter will formulate both
models and a detailed description of the objective function, parameters, variables
and constraints is provided. Moreover the results of the models will be compared to
the current handling strategy described in section 2.4 as benchmark.
4.1
Deterministic model
This approach is similar to [4] and the implication of such a model being implemented
at Frankfurt Airport makes it an obvious candidate for potential improvement of
the transfer baggage handling process at CPH Airports.
A deterministic LP model is formulated for the transfer baggage problem.
The
model utilizes time discretization, by dividing a full day of operations into 5-minute
timeslots. The capacity restriction on infeed stations is handled in these 5-minute
timeslots in order to mimic the constantly ﬂowing nature of the BHS. The belts in
the BHS run at a constant speed and therefore an increase in capacity, even with
additional workers at the infeed stations is not plausible. The maximum capacity,
working capacity, is the theoretical capacity achieved if the ﬂow of baggage was
continuous, without larger gaps.
The working capacity of the infeed stations at
CPH airport is 20 bags pr. min. The actual capacity used in the model is set to
75% of the working capacity, as a continuous baggage ﬂow is not realistic. This
parameter of 75% was chosen in cooperation with CPH Airport. Baggage arriving
at the infeed station in excess of the capacity will cause a queue in the current time
slot. An eventual queue will decrease the capacity in the subsequent time slot.
26
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
27
The model seeks to minimise the number of bags missing their connecting ﬂight, as
well as bags in queue. Minimising late baggage is the main objective of CPH airport
as described in section 2.3. In this simple model, a bag is considered late if it arrives
at the departing gate after the expected time of departure. The diﬀerence between
time of arrival at the baggage handling facility and the expected departure of ﬂight
is called the buﬀer time. An additional minimisation of bags in queue is chosen to
avoid extreme scenarios. It is hard to model the extension of transportation time
for baggage ending up in large queues. Hence, the minimisation of bags in queue
will maintain the models simplicity.
The model bundles all baggage from a ﬂight and assigns it to a single infeed station.
The choice of an infeed station for a given ﬂight will be the only decision the model
has to take.
Recall from section 2.1 that the transfer baggage problem consist
of three main steps: unloading to infeed station, BHS transportation from infeed
station to departure gate and from baggage handling facility to departing ﬂight.
4.1.1
Indices and sets
The following table 4.1 contains an overview of the indices and sets used for the
variables and parameters in the deterministic model.
Index
Set
Description
b
B
Set of all bags
i
I
Set of infeed stations
f
F
Set of ﬂights
t
T
Set of 5-minute timeslots
Table 4.1: Indices and sets in deterministic model
4.1.2
Parameters
The following table 4.2 contains an overview of the parameters used in the deter-
ministic model.
The penalty pr. late bag, wB, and the penalty pr. bag in queue, wy, are both set
to 1. Note, the high penalty of the queue is important as time estimates become
inaccurate when queues are present. The travel time from the outgoing baggage
handling facilities to the outgoing ﬂight is set to 20 minutes, as the containers with
baggage are closed 20 minutes before scheduled time of departure(std). In reality
bags arriving at the baggage handling facility later than 20 minutes before std can
still be brought out to the ﬂight individually, but this process is expensive and will
therefore not be considered.
4.1.3
Variables
The following table 4.3 contains an overview of the decision variables that appear
in the deterministic model. The subscripts are deﬁned in table 4.1.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
28
Parameter
Description
wB
Penalty pr. late bag (set to 1)
wy
Penalty pr. bag in queue (set to 1)
BHS
Matrix with travel times from infeed station
to departure gates (time in BHS)
GHT
Matrix with travel times from arrival gates
to infeed stations (Ground handling time)
cap
Infeed capacity in 5-minute time slots
uibt
Binary coeﬃcient for bag b using capacity
at infeed station i in timeslot t
fb
Flight on which bag b arrives on
I
Set of infeed stations
B
Set of bags
F
Set of ﬂights
T
Set of 5-minute timeslots
DEPTIMEb
Expected time of departure for connecting
ﬂight for bag b
ONBf
On-block time for arriving ﬂight f
(time of unloading of baggage)
cut
Cutoﬀ-time at baggage handling facility
(set to 20 minutes)
Table 4.2: Parameters used in deterministic model
Variable
Domain
Description
aif
{0, 1}
Binary variable for assignment of
ﬂight f to infeed station i
xib
{0,1}
Binary variable for assignment of
bag b to infeed station i
zb
{0,1}
Binary variable for whether bag b makes the connection
yit
Z+
Integer variable keeping track
of queue at infeed station i in time slot t
Table 4.3: Variables in deterministic model
4.1.4
Model
The deterministic model is a variant of the general assignment model with capacity
constraints and queueing. Each ﬂight is assigned to a speciﬁc infeed station, which
assigns each bag to the same infeed station. Each bag is counted as a late bag if the
total travel time from on-block for the incoming ﬂight to the departure gate of the
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
29
outgoing ﬂight results in a negative buﬀer time.
min
X
b∈B
wBzb +
X
i∈I
X
t∈T
wyyit
(4.1)
X
i∈I
aif = 1
∀f ∈F (4.2)
xib = aifb
∀b ∈B, ∀i ∈I (4.3)
ONBfb +
X
i∈I
GHTarrb,ixib +
X
i∈I
BHSdepb,ixib + cut
≤DEPTIMEb + zbM
∀b ∈B (4.4)
X
b
xibuibt + yi,t−1 ≤cap + yit
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T \ {1} (4.5)
X
b
xibuib,1 ≤cap + yi,1
∀i ∈I (4.6)
xib ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀b ∈B (4.7)
zb ∈{0, 1}
∀b ∈B (4.8)
yit ∈Z+
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T (4.9)
aif ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀f ∈F
(4.10)
The objective (4.1) minimises the cost associated with late bags, stemming from
ﬁnes paid to airlines and the size of queues at the infeed stations. Constraint (4.2)
ensures that each ﬂight is only assigned to one infeed station.
Constraint (4.3)
ensures that all bags from one ﬂight are assigned to the same infeed station as the
ﬂight. Constraint (4.4) assigns the binary zb if bag b will miss the connecting ﬂight.
The sharp cutoﬀtime, cut is the time at which the baggage containers for departing
ﬂights are closed. The matrices GHT and BHS contain the transportation times
from arrival gate to infeed station and infeed station to departure gates in the BHS
respectively. The binary coeﬃcient uibt is deﬁned as follows
uibt =



1
if bag b takes capacity at infeed station i in time t
0
otherwise
Constraints (4.5) and (4.6) control the queues at each infeed station, for all timeslots
and for the ﬁrst timeslot respectively.
The model scales linearly with increasing number of infeed stations I and number
of bags B. The number of variables is O(I · (B + F)) and the number of constraints
is O(I + B).
The model is implemented and solved using the Gurobi plug-in for Julia1.
4.1.5
Validation of model
The characteristics of the model, should reﬂect the real world as best as possible.
This means, that the result (late bags) obtained from the model should be equivalent
to the results seen, when applying the assignment of ﬂights to infeed stations in real-
life. In order to determine how well the model reﬂects real-life, the number of late
1Easy and intuitive implementation and fast solution times
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
30
bags in a benchmark2 solution of the model is compared to the approximate number
of late bags in the input data using the same infeed station assignment. If these
numbers are of the same magnitude, the model is an appropriate representation of
the baggage handling infrastructure at CPH Airport. Table 4.4 shows the number
of late bags in the input data and the number of late bags in the model solution for
each day using the same assignment.
Method/Day
Small
Medium
Big
Total
Model
53
279
166
498
Observed data
40
144
241
425
Table 4.4: late bags in the input data vs. late bags in model
The infeed station assignment used in table 4.4 for a given day is the actual assign-
ment used in the input data. The calculated number of late bags in the input data
is an accumulation of bags with Last Seen Conv Result of either Late or Too Late
(see section 2.5).
For the small day the numbers are nearly identical. The diﬀerence for the medium
and big days however is more signiﬁcant. The diﬀerence stems from transportation
time accuracy especially when queues are present. Note, that even small transporta-
tion time inaccuracies can result in a bag being late due to the hard cutoﬀ. The
diﬀerence displayed in table 4.4 does not have a clear tendency to overestimate nor
underestimate late bags. This is especially clear when comparing the total diﬀerence
across all three days which is approximately 15%. This thesis accepts the diﬀerence
as it still creates good ground for a comparison of strategies. In conclusion, the
diﬀerence in table 4.4 indicates that the model reﬂects real-life in an acceptable
way.
4.1.6
Results of the deterministic model
In order to determine the quality of a solution obtained by the model, the optimal
solution of the deterministic model is compared to the benchmark introduced in sec-
tion 4.1.5. As the goal of the modelling is to explore whether the controller can be
aided by the mathematical model, it is important to look at the diﬀerence in assign-
ments between the benchmark and the optimal solution of the deterministic model.
The assignments in the optimal solution diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the assignments in
the benchmark, as can be seen in table 4.5.
Day
Small
Medium
Big
Assignments changed (%)
83.1
79.0
83.4
Table 4.5: Percentage of assignments of ﬂight to infeed stations changed from
current approach to deterministic model
The high percentage of table 4.5 further ampliﬁes the hypothesis that the nearest
infeed station (often the choice made by the controller) is not the most eﬃcient
choice.
2Introduced in section 2.4
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
31
The deterministic model achieves a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of late bags
across the three days in the input data. For each of the three days, the deterministic
model achieves 41.5%, 43.7% and 49.4% fewer late bags, respectively. Figure 4.1
shows the number of late bags for the benchmark and the deterministic model for
the three days.
Figure 4.1: Deterministic vs. current benchmark
It is important to point out, that the model treats a bag as late, if it arrives at the
gate after the scheduled departure time for the connecting ﬂight, i.e. that the bag has
a negative buﬀer time. In reality even bags with negative buﬀer times have a certain
probability of making the ﬂight and bags with positive buﬀer times can miss ﬂights.
Hence, it is diﬃcult to appropriately model a late bag. The choice of a hard cutoﬀ
for whether or not baggage is late, can be misleading. Very small transportation
time improvements can ﬂuctuate the results of the model, if the majority of baggage
has a buﬀer time close to the cutoﬀ. However, small improvements may not have
the same signiﬁcant results when used in practice. An investigation of buﬀer times
can help determine the signiﬁcance between the models optimal solution and the
benchmark.
Buﬀer time
As the objective of the model in section 4.1.4 does not consider the magnitude of
the buﬀer time, an analysis of a single bag’s buﬀer time would shed light on the
accuracy of the hard cutoﬀ. In the model a few seconds can determine whether a
bag is late or not due to the hard cutoﬀ. The buﬀer time has been calculated for
each bag across the three days in order to see eﬀect of applying the deterministic
model to the problem.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
32
The number of bags with buﬀer times less than 10 minutes3 is signiﬁcantly larger
for the benchmark than for the optimal solution to the deterministic model across
all three days in the input data. The deterministic model behaves as expected and
optimises the buﬀer times around the cutoﬀ4. I.e. the model chooses an infeed
station where bags with a slightly negative buﬀer time in the benchmark achieve a
buﬀer time just over zero in the optimal solution. A potential weakness of a model
with a hard cutoﬀ, is this focused optimisation, where an increase in buﬀer time of
mere seconds for a single bag, can lead to a better objective function. This could
mean, that bags that in reality have a certain probability of making the connection
are counted as late bags. As a result the model might sacriﬁce signiﬁcant amounts of
buﬀer time for other bags, in order to achieve a positive buﬀer time for a single bag,
which might not be desirable. See ﬁgure 4.2 for the distribution of buﬀer times for
the optimal solution to the deterministic model and the current benchmark across
all three days.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: Histogram of buﬀer times distribution for all three days in data set
(a=small, b=medium, c=big). The red line indicates the cutoﬀ.
The ﬁgures 4.2a), b) and c) show, that the overall distribution of buﬀer times does
not change signiﬁcantly, apart from the intervals around the cutoﬀ. This means that
small changes in buﬀer times for bags close to the cutoﬀdo not seem to signiﬁcantly
impact the general distribution of buﬀer times. It is hard to accurately determine
the value of optimisation of buﬀer times for bags close to the cutoﬀ.
3This includes negative buﬀer times as well
40 on the horizontal axis
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
33
It can be argued, that at least a part of the late bags would in reality make the
connection as baggage workers and supervisors would have an overview of bags
with short connection times. Conversely this also entails, that some bags with a
positive buﬀer time have a certain, although small, probability of not making the
connection.
This is not a decision process, that one can accurately model with
a simple LP formulation, but as the diﬀerence in the number of late bags is big,
the deterministic model can still be said to signiﬁcantly outperform the benchmark
currently in use at CPH Airport.
Furthermore the average buﬀer time is also improved, although the focus of the
optimisation is the hard cutoﬀ. The danger of modelling late bags with a hard cutoﬀ
is that small changes around the cutoﬀwould be desirable even at the expense of
signiﬁcant decreases in buﬀer times elsewhere. However, this seems to be avoided
in this solution, as the average buﬀer time increases, as can be seen in table 4.6.
Model/Day
Small
Medium
Big
Deterministic
67.91
67.20
73.63
Benchmark
66.41
64.77
71.51
Table 4.6: Average buﬀer times (minutes)
The potentially misleading results from the hard cutoﬀcan be further investigated
by transforming the buﬀer times into a probability function. An analysis performed
by Barth et. al [4] is used to assess the optimal solution’s buﬀer times eﬀect on
the single bag connecting probability.
According to [4] the buﬀer probability in
Frankfurt Airport (FRAPORT) follows logistic growth, and is approximated by a
piecewise linear function [4]
y =







0.003x + 0.91
x > 10.8
0.015x + 0.78100−x
100
6.5 ≤10.8
0.035x + 0.65
x < 6.5
(4.11)
y = min(1, max(0, y))
(4.12)
See ﬁgure 4.3 for a visualisation of the single bag connecting probability given in
4.11.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
34
Figure 4.3: Single bag connecting probability (y) dependency on buﬀer time (x),
ﬁgure from [4] (FRAPORT)
As ﬁgure 4.3 shows, even bags with a negative buﬀer time of 10 minutes roughly have
a 25% chance of connecting. The probability follows the S-curve of a logistic growth
function, approximated by a piecewise linear function. Looking at the distribution
of buﬀer times for all three days in the input data in ﬁgure 4.2, the majority of
late bags for the benchmark arrive within 20 minutes after the cutoﬀ. Therefore
part of these bags would most likely be sorted out of the BHS in time to reach the
outbound ﬂight. However the same goes for the optimal solution to the deterministic
model, meaning that the diﬀerence in late bags would most likely be maintained.
Furthermore the connecting probability function has a steep increase in the range
[−20; 20], where the model is able to optimise.
A further look into the connecting probabilities for the bags is made by running the
buﬀer times for all bags through the function given by 4.11. This yields the expected
number of missed bags for a given day. It is important to note, that the function
given by 4.11 is for the operations at FRAPORT. It is therefore not an accurate
representation of the actual expected number of missed bags at CPH Airport, but it
gives an further indication of the performance of the model. The optimal solution to
the deterministic model is shown to reduce the expected number of missed bags of
the benchmark by approximately 18%. See table 4.7 for an overview of the expected
number of missed bags for the deterministic model, the benchmark and the input
data.
Model/Day
Small
Medium
Big
Deterministic
68.12
207.54
179.45
Benchmark
86.56
241.74
225.65
Input data
90.31
311.82
438.07
Table 4.7: Expected number of missed bags using ﬁgure 4.3
The third row for the input data, can be somewhat misleading, as it takes input
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
35
data from CPH Airport and returns the expected number of missed bags using a
function derived for FRAPORT. It however gives us an impression of the potential
improvement achieved when using the deterministic model, which can be seen to be
quite substantial.
Run times
Apart from the actual reduction of late bags, it is also important to measure the
run time of the model in order to understand the applicability of such a tool at
CPH Airport. The run times are obtained from a standard 16 GB ram laptop. It
is therefore to be expected that the computers in use at CPH Airport could obtain
lower run times. As the size of the model is highly dependent on the number of
bags, one would expect a signiﬁcant increase in run time as the volume of baggage
increased. The runtime of the model for each of the three days lie around 26 seconds
The insigniﬁcant change in run-time is most likely due to the model being with a
very powerful solver, Gurobi and that the number of bags in the model is roughly of
the same magnitude for all three days. Furthermore the majority of the computation
time is in the computation of parameters, resulting in similar run times for all three
days. The run times for the deterministic model are shown in table 4.8.
Day
Small day
Medium day
Big day
Run time (seconds)
25.52
26.55
26.90
Table 4.8: Run time for deterministic model
4.1.7
Summary
The results show, that the deterministic model decreases number of late bags is
signiﬁcantly, as well as increasing the average buﬀer time for all three days tested.
For the small day the number of late bags is decreased by 41.5%, for the medium
day by 43.7% and for the big day by 49.4%. Furthermore the expected reduction
in missed bags at CPH Airport would be 18% on average. Additionally it can be
concluded that the size of the problem does not signiﬁcantly change the relative
improvement. However the substantial improvement may not accurately reﬂect the
real-life change. Further investigations, into buﬀer times, showed that although the
decrease in late bags is diﬃcult to accurately determine, the general process has
been improved.
All in all the deterministic model shows, that there is signiﬁcant potential for im-
proving the transfer baggage handling.
4.2
Stochastic model
Section 4.1 presented a deterministic model, that relied on average transportation
times. In reality uncertainty plays a signiﬁcant role. Several factors inﬂuence the
time it takes for the baggage trucks to arrive at the infeed stations as well as the
process in the BHS. In order to fully encompass these uncertainties and achieve
a more robust solution, a stochastic model is introduced. The model is scenario-
based, with the transportation times being stochastic variables. In each scenario
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
36
the ground handling- and BHS-times are sampled from the stochastic distribution5
obtained in section 3.1.2 and section 3.1.1 respectively.
The formulation of the stochastic model is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the deter-
ministic model in section 4.1.4. The deterministic model scales very badly, when
scenarios are introduced, causing the number of variables and constraints to ex-
plode. Instead of deﬁning the boundaries of a solution space to pass to a solver as
constraints, the results of assigning a ﬂight to an infeed station are precomputed
and used as parameters in the model. The model will chose the set of assignments
minimising the objective function. Each assignment will have 100 diﬀerent scenarios
computed. A result for a given assignment consists of late bags, the capacity use at
the infeed station and the time slot of arrival at the infeed station. This way many
calculations are done before solving the model, which is signiﬁcantly less computa-
tionally heavy. Each assignment is a pairing of a ﬂight to an infeed station. In the
stochastic model the number of late bags for an assignment is a parameter and is
calculated before the model is initialised. In the deterministic model the number of
late bags is a decision variable6 and thus is computed in the model.
4.2.1
Indices and sets
The following table 4.9 contains an overview of the indices and sets used for the
variables and parameters in the stochastic model.
Index
Set
Description
a
A
Set of assignments
a
Ai
Subset of assignments using a speciﬁc infeed station i
a
Af
Subset of assignments for a speciﬁc ﬂight f
i
I
Set of infeed stations
f
F
Set of ﬂights
t
T
Set of 5-minute timeslots
Table 4.9: Indices and sets in stochastic model
4.2.2
Parameters
The following table 4.10 shows the parameters used in the model
Parameter
Description
wm
Penalty pr. late bag (set to 1)
wy
Penalty pr. bag in queue (set to 1)
cap
Infeed capacity in 5-minute time slots
mas
Number of late bags for assignment a in scenario s
uat
Capacity use of assignment a in time slot t
Table 4.10: Parameters in stochastic model
5A truncated distribution is used to avoid outliers and negative times
6Binary variable for each bag
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
37
4.2.3
Variables
The following table 4.11 presents an overview of the decision variables used in the
stochastic model.
Variable
Domain
Description
xa
{0,1}
Binary variable controlling
whether assignment a is chosen
yit
Z+
Integer variable keeping track
of queue at infeed station i in time slot t
Table 4.11: Variables in stochastic model
4.2.4
Model
The stochastic model is a MIP-model and the formulation is shown below
min
X
a∈A
1
S
X
s∈S
wmmasxa +
X
i∈I
X
t∈T
wyyit
(4.13)
X
a∈Af
xa = 1
∀f ∈F
(4.14)
X
a∈Ai
uatxa + yi,t−1 ≤cap + yit
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T \ {1}
(4.15)
X
a∈Ai
ua,1xa ≤cap + yi,1
∀i ∈I
(4.16)
xa ∈{0, 1}
∀a ∈A
(4.17)
yit ∈Z+
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T
(4.18)
The objective function (4.11) minimises a linear combination of the average number
of late bags for all scenarios and the total number of bags in queue at the infeed
stations. The weight parameters are wm and wy. Constraint (4.12) ensures, that only
one assignment per ﬂight is chosen. Constraints (4.13)-(4.14) manage the capacity
at infeed stations. Constraints (4.15) and (4.16) deﬁne the domain of the decision
variables.
The number of variables in this model is O((|F|+|T|)|I|). The number of constraints
is O(|F| + |I| + |I||T|).
4.2.5
Results of the stochastic model
The stochastic model is compared with the results from the deterministic model
and the benchmark found in section 4.1.6. The stochastic modal oﬀers more robust
results dealing with uncertainties, as the high number of scenarios encompasses the
uncertain nature of the transportation times.
the stochastic model achieves an assignment resulting in signiﬁcantly fewer late bags
than the benchmark, as well as signiﬁcantly fewer than the deterministic model.
The stochastic model reduces the number of late bags from the deterministic model
by 57%, 15.5% and 27% on the small, medium and big days respectively. See ﬁgure
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
38
4.4 for the distribution of late bags in the deterministic, benchmark and stochastic
solutions across the three days.
Figure 4.4: Stochastic vs. Deterministic vs. Benchmark
The signiﬁcant decrease in late bags in the stochastic model is due to the way late
bags are counted in the two models. In the deterministic model a bag is either late
or not late, meaning that it can either contribute 1 or 0 to the objective7. In the
stochastic model a bag can contribute between 0 and 1 to the objective. For each
scenario in the stochastic model, a bag can either be late or not. The contribution
for a single bag is the average over all scenarios. So the binary ”decision” of a bag
being late or not is turned into a contribution in the range [0, 1]. If we consider a
speciﬁc assignment of a ﬂight to an infeed station in the deterministic model and
assume that this assignment contains Ba bags, of which x arrive at the handling
facilities after the cutoﬀ8. The remaining Ba −x arrive in time and are not counted
as late. Now we consider the same assignment in the stochastic model. We assume
that the number of bags arriving in time in all scenarios, Ba −x, stays the same.
Then if just one of the x bags, that were late in the deterministic model, is not late
in just one scenario, we will have decrease the objective function by
1
|S|. |S| being
the number of scenarios9
Figure 4.4 showed that the stochastic model obtains a signiﬁcantly lower number
of late bags than both the benchmark and the deterministic model. Furthermore
it can be showed, that the actual assignments used in the stochastic model diﬀer
7As the weight pr. late bag, wB = 1
8late bags
9Size of set of scenarios S
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
39
signiﬁcantly from the assignments chosen in the deterministic solution, see table
4.12.
Day
Small
Medium
Big
Assignments changed (%)
47.42
64.49
62.16
Table 4.12: Percentage of assignments changed from to deterministic optimal
solution to stochastic optimal solution
As it is shown, that the assignments chosen in the stochastic model diﬀer from the
deterministic model, it is interesting to see how the solution to the deterministic
model fares in the scenario-based stochastic model. In order to do this, the decision
variables in the stochastic model are ﬁxed accordingly to the assignments chosen in
the deterministic model. This resulted in a drastic increase in the number of late
bags, of 334%, 77.1% and 61.6% respectively. The actual number of late bags is
shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Using deterministic solution in stochastic model
Following table 4.13 shows the expected number of missed bags using the stochastic
model and the connecting probability function from ﬁgure 4.3.
Model/Day
Small
Medium
Big
Deterministic
68.12
207.54
179.45
Benchmark
86.56
241.74
225.65
Stochastic
37.03
142.58
105.09
Table 4.13: Expected number of missed bags for stochastic model using ﬁgure 4.3
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
40
Table 4.13 shows a similar picture as ﬁgure 4.4. The stochastic model achieves a
signiﬁcantly lower number of expected missed bags, than the deterministic model.
Once again it is important to point out that the single bag connecting probability
function used to compute these numbers is for FRAPORT, but it still gives us a
picture of the way the model performs. Using a stochastic model, CPH Airport can
be expected to reduce the number of missed bags by approximately 50%, see table
4.13.
4.2.6
Runtime analysis
The main advantage of a stochastic model is the robustness obtained by considering
multiple scenarios. However this comes at the cost of increased run-time for the
model. To ﬁnd a number of scenarios suitable for the operations at CPH Airport a
runtime-analysis of the stochastic model is performed. The run-time of the stochastic
model is shown to be linearly dependent on the number of scenarios for all three
days in the input data. Furthermore the run time for the big day is 2.4 times higher
than for the small day on average corresponding to the relative increase in baggage
ﬂow
|B|big
|B|small =
7205
2896 = 2.49. Similarly the run time for the big day is on average
1.86 times higher than for the medium day corresponding to
|B|big
|B|medium = 7205
3799 = 1.89.
Figure 4.6 shows the run time of the stochastic model for an increasing number of
scenarios.
Figure 4.6: Run-time of stochastic model as function of number of scenarios
It is shown that the run time for all three days with 100 scenarios is less than 2
minutes. Furthermore the run time only grows by a factor 4 for the big day with the
addition of the 100 scenarios, compared to the run time for the deterministic model
in table 4.8. Using 100 scenarios would obtain the desired level of robustness while
still maintaining a sub 2-minute run time for even the most busy days. It has to
be pointed out, that a model implemented in the real-life situation at CPH Airport
would not need to run through all baggage for a whole day, but rather baggage
aboard ﬂight arriving within a certain timespan.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
41
4.2.7
Summary
The introduced scenario-based stochastic model resulted in a lower expected number
of missed bags than the deterministic model. The motivation behind a stochastic
model was to achieve a more robust solution by handling every transportation time
stochastically. The model requires more computation than the deterministic model,
especially when a high number of scenarios was considered. However, the run-time
analysis showed that the run-time was less than 2 minutes for a desirable number
100 scenarios. All in all, using a stochastic model, CPH Airport can be expected
to reduce the number of missed bags by approximately 50% in comparison with the
current approach, compared with 18% for the deterministic model. The stochastic
model provides not only a more robust solution, but also signiﬁcantly decreases
the number of late bags as well as the expected number of missed bags, than the
deterministic model.
4.3
Exploring model improvements
The models presented in section 4.1 and section 4.2 are based on several assumptions
that potentially can aﬀect the results signiﬁcantly. E.g. assigning only a single infeed
station to a ﬂight may be very ineﬃcient when larger ﬂights arrive. The exploration
of capacity improvement and multiple infeed station assignments can help CPH
Airport further understand the major factors that aﬀect delayed baggage.
4.3.1
Varying 5-minute capacity
CPH Airport estimates the actual capacity of the infeed stations to 75% of the
working capacity, as a result of the constantly ﬂowing nature of the BHS. Figure
4.7 shows the deterministic model’s10 performance relative to the benchmark11 for
diﬀering capacities at the infeed stations.
10See section 4.1.4
11Introduced in section 4.1.5
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
42
Figure 4.7: Relative number of missed bags for varying capacity in 5-minute
timeslots and all three days of data
The model capacity is varied between 60% and 100% of the infeed stations working
capacities, to understand the eﬀect on the models performance. It is important to
note at this point, that a relative capacity of 100% is highly unrealistic due to the
constant ﬂowing baggage belts in the BHS. Figure 4.7 clearly shows, that the model
capacity at the infeed station does not inﬂuence the performance of the deterministic
relative to the benchmark. Furthermore it shows that the relative performance of
the deterministic model is not inﬂuenced by the amount of baggage handled.
4.3.2
Multiple infeed station assignments
Currently CPH Airport only assigns a single infeed station to each ﬂight. Although
this is appropriate, as it reduce the complexity for the ground handlers, larger
queues may occur as a result of large ﬂights being assigned to a single infeed station.
Moreover, ground handlers already unload the baggage into separate containers,
usually two, when unloading a regular size ﬂight. Hence, this section investigates a
model that assigns infeed stations to containers, instead of ﬂights.
The information about which bag ends up in which container is not present in the
input data. However, this thesis assumes that baggage which is scanned at the infeed
station within 20 seconds from each other (obviously only if the baggage is from the
same ﬂight) is in the same container. Implementing a container assignment method
in practice would require another way to determine in which container baggage ends
up.
Indices and sets
The following table 4.14 contains an overview of the sets and indices of the param-
eters and variables used in the container based model.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
43
Index
Set
Description
b
B
Set of all bags
i
I
Set of infeed stations
c
C
Set of containers
t
T
Set of 5-minute timeslots
Table 4.14: Indices and sets in deterministic model
Parameters
The following table 4.15 contains an overview of the parameters in the container
model
Parameter
Description
wB
Penalty pr. late bag (set to 1)
wy
Penalty pr. bag in queue (set to 1)
BHS
Matrix with travel times from infeed station
to departure gates (time in BHS)
AT
Matrix with travel times from arrival gates
to infeed stations (time on apron)
cap
Infeed capacity in 5-minute time slots
uibt
Binary coeﬃcient for bag b using capacity
at infeed station i in timeslot t
cb
Container into which bag b is put in
I
Set of infeed stations
B
Set of bags
F
Set of ﬂights
T
Set of 5-minute timeslots
DEPTIMEb
Expected time of departure for connecting
ﬂight for bag b
ONBf
On-block time for arriving ﬂight f
(time of unloading of baggage)
cut
Cutoﬀ-time at baggage handling facility
(set to 20 minutes)
Table 4.15: Parameters used in container model
Variables
The following table 4.16 contains an overview of the decision variables in the con-
tainer model.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
44
Variable
Domain
Description
aic
{0, 1}
Binary variable for assignment of
container c to infeed station i
xib
{0,1}
Binary variable for assignment of
bag b to infeed station i
zb
{0,1}
Binary variable for whether bag b makes the connection
yit
Z+
Integer variable keeping track
of queue at infeed station i in time slot t
Table 4.16: Variables in container model
Model
Presented below is the MIP formulation of the container based model. It is a vari-
ation of the deterministic model presented in section 4.1.4.
min
X
b∈B
wBzb +
X
i∈I
X
t∈T
wyyit
(4.19)
X
i∈I
aic = 1
∀c ∈C
(4.20)
xib = aicb
∀b ∈B, ∀i ∈I
(4.21)
ONBfb +
X
i∈I
ATarrb,ixib +
X
i∈I
BHSdepb,ixib + cut
≤DEPTIMEb + zbM
∀b ∈B
(4.22)
X
b
xibuibt + yi,t−1 ≤cap + yit
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T \ {1}
(4.23)
X
b
xibuib,1 ≤cap + yi,1
∀i ∈I
(4.24)
xib ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀b ∈B
(4.25)
zb ∈{0, 1}
∀b ∈B
(4.26)
yit ∈Z+
∀i ∈I, ∀t ∈T
(4.27)
aic ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀c ∈C
(4.28)
The objective function (4.17) minimises the number of late bags as well as the
number of bags in queue. The inclusion of bags in queue in the objective function is
a modelling choice, as too large queues can skew the actual processing time making
the estimates imprecise. Constraint (4.18) ensures that every container is assigned to
one and only one infeed station. Constraint (4.19) ensures that each bag is assigned
to the same infeed station as, the container it is in. Constraint (4.20) assigns bags as
late if they arrive at the handling facility after the cutoﬀ. Constraints (4.21)-(4.22)
control the capacities and queues at all infeed stations and all time slots.
Results
One should recall that the deterministic model presented in section 4.1.4 achieved
31 late bags on the small day, 157 late bags on the medium day and 84 late bags
on the big day. The container model achieves the same number of late bags for the
medium and small days as the deterministic model. It achieves a decrease in late
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
45
bags of 8.33% for the big day compared to the deterministic model, with 77 late
bags. The slight decrease in late bags on the big day might indicate that a very
large ﬂight was present in the input data solely on this day. Figure 4.8 shows the
number of late bags obtained with the container model for the three days in the
input data.
Figure 4.8: Distribution of late bags for the three days in input data
As the number of late bags is based purely on the hard cutoﬀ, the expected number
of missed bags is computed using the single bag connecting probability function
from ﬁgure 4.3. The expected number of missed bags for all three days is nearly
identical to the results from the deterministic model. They only vary on the ﬁrst or
second decimal, which in this case is insigniﬁcant. At least for the big day this is
due to buﬀer times varying by seconds, as the number of late bags decreases without
a signiﬁcant change in expected missed bags. Table 4.17 shows the distribution of
the expected number of missed bags for the three days in the input data.
Model/Day
Small
Medium
Big
Deterministic
68.03
207.93
178.98
Benchmark
86.56
241.74
225.65
Container
68.12
207.54
179.45
Table 4.17: Expected number of missed bags
The results show that there is no signiﬁcant improvement to obtain by using a
container based model instead of ﬂight based model. Taking the practical complexity
among operators into account, multiple infeed station assignment are redundant.
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING THE TRANSFER BAGGAGE PROBLEM
46
4.3.3
Summary
The changes in capacity at infeed stations did not have any signiﬁcant eﬀect on
the number of late bags for any of the three days in the input data. Partly this is
because a capacity decrease or increase would most likely result in a small queue
increase or decrease, rather than signiﬁcantly changing the number of late bags. It
could be useful to implement an upper bound on the size of queues to prevent this.
The addition of a container based model did not improve the number of late bags
and expected number of missed bags from the model.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Closure
This chapter will discuss the ﬁndings and provide a perspective on future work.
5.1
Discussion
The objective of this thesis was to improve the transfer baggage handling in CPH
airport, such that the total number of missed baggage was improved.
Chapter
4 showed that a mathematical model could improve the current strategy based on
human judgement. However, it is appropriate to discuss the challenges for a practical
implementation. First, the model has to provide a solution within an unknown time-
frame as the infeed station assignment needs to be assigned the moment the ﬂight
is on-block. Second, the comparison between the strategies is not taking any special
handling cases of baggage into account.
As mentioned before, ground handlers need to know which infeed station the ﬂight
is assigned to before the ﬂight is on-block. This creates a need for fast execution
time of the mathematical model. The model can not be too complex as the com-
pute power available is limited. However, the results of both the deterministic and
stochastic model showed very promising execution times, even when the stochastic
model considered a lot of transportation time scenarios. The execution times ob-
viously depend a lot on the computing power available, where these results were
calculated on a standard 16 GB ram laptop. The fast execution times derived from
the complexity of the transfer baggage problem of CPH airport being relatively low
with only four infeed stations to consider.
Note that only four is considered as
the last two infeed stations are not utilised for the transfer baggage in the input
data. The fast execution times gives the model very good practical implementation
possibilities at CPH Airport.
Special handling cases include security check, tail-to-tail delivery1 and special prior-
ity of bags at the infeed stations and handling facilities. The special priority covers
bags with very short connection times, that will be prioritised by controllers and
baggage handlers. As the process at the baggage handling facility is dynamic and
since the controller has a general overview of the baggage in the BHS, some of these
bags might not miss the connection in reality despite the model labels them late.
1marked as QTBUnload in input data
47
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5. CLOSURE
48
Moreover the baggage labelled as QTBUnload in the input data has been sorted out
of the transportation time estimation, as this handling process is not considered in
the current model. This will lead to a slightly smaller volume of baggage in the
model, but since the handling operation for these is so dissimilar, it is deemed to be
an appropriate method.
The results have shown that the stochastic model presents better solution than
the deterministic, while achieving a higher level of robustness. The run-time for
the stochastic model remains low even for large numbers of scenarios. Although the
run-time is under 2 minutes for up to 200 scenarios in some cases, the actual increase
in robustness is not signiﬁcant. It can be argued that 100 scenarios are enough to
cover the uncertainties in the transportation times.
It can be discussed whether sampling the transportation times is the right way to
formulate the stochastic model. If data on the distribution of expected and actual
arrival and departure times were available, these could also have been included in
the stochastic model, similarly to the approach in [4]. However this information is
not available at present. The use of stochastic travel times, especially the ground
handling times should fully encompass the uncertainties of the transfer baggage
handling operation.
Lastly, the size of the reductions in late bags and expected missed bags, that is
achieved with both models2, is to be taken with a pinch of salt. The deterministic
model achieved an expected reduction in missed bags of approximately 18% and
the stochastic model 50% respectively. However, there are several intricacies of the
transfer baggage handling process, that are challenging to accurately model. The
actual operation times is not clear when baggage queues are present. Furthermore
when a bag is prioritised during the loading into the BHS, it has an eﬀect on the
operation time of other bags. It is once again important to note, that the single
bag connecting probability3 used in analysing the expexted number of missed bags
is from FRAPORT and not CPH Airport. The numbers can be misleading from
reality as the connecting probability needs to be adjusted to CPH Airport. It is
however expected that an equivalent function for CPH Airport would have a similar
shape. Although there are several complexities of the operation, that are diﬃcult to
implement in the model, the stark reduction in late bags and expected missed bags
shows, that there still is potential for a signiﬁcant improvement of the operation as
a whole.
5.2
Lessons learned
The goal of CPH airport is to minimise missed baggage when handling transfer
baggage. This thesis showed that missed transfer baggage has potential to be signif-
icantly reduced by introducing a mathematical model for choosing an infeed station.
The choice of infeed station, currently made by the controller, is changed in approx-
imately 80% of cases on the tested days of operation. Hence, the optimal solution
of the mathematical model diﬀers a lot from the one chosen by the controller. This
results in a theoretical reduction of missed bags of up to almost 50% on some days.
2Deterministic and stochastic
3See ﬁgure 4.3
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. CLOSURE
49
However, the diﬃcult question is to prove if this reduction reﬂects the possible
real-life implementation.
This thesis explored that estimating the process time of an operation is non-trivial.
A lot of time during the thesis period was spent on ﬁnding appropriate operation
time estimates, to the extent that it could reﬂect the real world in the best possible
way. However, time estimates can vary a lot depending on factors outside of the
control of CPH Airport. Hence, the most stable mathematical model to apply for
this problem, is a stochastic model that optimises across multiple scenarios. This
creates some challenges when applying this model in a practical context. Firstly,
due to the complexity of estimating operation times, the most accurate would be
to update the estimates dynamically. This would require input data to be updated
whenever new timestamps occur. Secondly, to ensure a stable solution, one has to
consider a large set of scenarios, resulting in higher computation times. The right
balance between number of scenarios and computation times heavily depends on
the computing power available, which needs to be tested in practice. However, both
challenges are easy to overcome without large investments. Lastly, the presented
model is a tool for the controller and not a replacement.
Hence, the operation
where the controller communicates the choice of infeed station to a ground handler
will remain the same. This makes the mathematical model very applicable.
5.3
Future work
A possible extension to the model would be the inclusion of buﬀer time in the
objective function. The addition of buﬀer times would decrease the eﬀect of the
hard cutoﬀtime and could provide a more realistic output. Bags with buﬀer times
far from the cutoﬀwould still aﬀect the solution, such that baggage is not put
unnecessarily into risk.
Furthermore an analysis of the actual single bag connecting probability would shed
light on the correctness of using a hard cutoﬀ. This could be incorporated into the
objective function, so it minimises the expected number of missed bags instead of
the number of late bags. At the moment the data needed for such an analysis is not
available.
Lastly, a more accurate way of estimating the transportation times within the BHS
would include predicting security checks. This is theoretically possible, as some se-
curity checks are based on factors such as from which country the baggage originates.
At the moment the data needed for such an analysis is not available.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Mishandled baggage are still receiving a lot of attention by airports today. Continu-
ing the work of Pisinger & Hjøllum [3], the ambition of this thesis was to investigate
the opportunities of improving transfer baggage handling at CPH Airport. The main
decision regarding transfer baggage handling, is to inform ground handlers where
they are to send transfer baggage, a decision taken by the controller today. This the-
sis investigated the potential of a mathematical modelling technique to outperform
the decisions made by the controller.
The Transfer Baggage Problem was presented to be a variation of the General As-
signment Problem, where ﬂights are assigned to an infeed station. The main ob-
jective of the problem, is to reduce the number of late bags.
A Mixed Integer
Programming (MIP) model was formulated and used to solve the problem with the
aid of the Gurobi suite of solvers. The MIP model was implemented both with
deterministic and stochastic parameters.
The parameters in the MIP model were generated on the basis of historic data
for three diﬀerent days of operations provided by CPH Airport. Furthermore the
historic data was used to compare the objective of the MIP model with the results
obtained by using the decisions made the controller.
Both models, deterministic and stochastic, resulted in a signiﬁcantly reduced num-
ber of late bags compared to the decisions taken by the controller. The average
reduction in expected missed bags across the three days was approximately 18% for
the deterministic model and 50% for the stochastic model.
Possible extensions to the model of increased infeed station capacity and multiple
infeed station assignments were tested. However, none of these proposed extensions
resulted in an improved solution.
To conclude, the concept of using a mathematical model for transfer baggage han-
dling in CPH Airport shows great potential. The models presented in this thesis
both oﬀer a fast run-time and applicable output for daily operations. Future work
involves creating the best conditions for applying the model at CPH Airport. This
requires a stable implementation for giving the models the right parameters, pre-
sented in this thesis as monitoring and updating operation times continuously. All
in all, using a mathematical model to support transfer baggage decisions at CPH
50
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
51
Airport vastly reduces the number of late bags. Furthermore, as modern airports
share a lot of operations, one may assume that a similar method can improve other
airports operations as well. It is still to be expected that an implementation would
require further research.
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1] N. Ashford, H. P. M. Stanton, and C. Moore, Airport Operations. McGraw-Hill
Professional, 2nd ed., 1996.
[2] SITA, “Sita: Baggage it-insights report 2019,” 2019. https://www.sita.aero/
resources/surveys-reports/baggage-it-insights-2019/.
[3] D. Pisinger and S. i Hjøllum, “Advanced algorithms for improved baggage han-
dling,” Journal of Airport Management, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 280–290, 2020.
[4] T. C. Barth, J. T. Holm, J. L. Larsen, and D. Pisinger, “Optimization of transfer
baggage handling in a major transit airport,” SN Operations Research Forum,
vol. 2, no. 16, 2021.
[5] T. C. Barth, Optimization of baggage handling at airports. PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2013.
[6] T. Clausen and D. Pisinger, Dynamic Routing of Short Transfer Baggage. DTU
Management 2010 No. 15, DTU Management, Kgs. Lyngby, 2010.
[7] T. Barth and D. Pisinger, “Short transfer baggage handling in an airport.” In
PhD Thesis of Torben Barth: Optimization of baggage handling of airports,
2013.
[8] F. Kiermaier and R. Kolisch, “Planning the transfer baggage handling at air-
ports,” in International Conference on Airport Operations Management 2012,
pp. 23–26, 2012.
52
==PAGE:59==
List of Tables
1.1
Glossary of airport operations terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Information assigned to every piece of baggage in the input data.
. .
13
3.1
Results of using an estimation algorithm on the estimates in BHS . .
24
3.2
Results of using an estimation algorithm on the estimates for ground
handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Indices and sets in deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Parameters used in deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Variables in deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
late bags in the input data vs. late bags in model
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Percentage of assignments of ﬂight to infeed stations changed from
current approach to deterministic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Average buﬀer times (minutes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Expected number of missed bags using ﬁgure 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Run time for deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.9
Indices and sets in stochastic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.10 Parameters in stochastic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.11 Variables in stochastic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.12 Percentage of assignments changed from to deterministic optimal so-
lution to stochastic optimal solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.13 Expected number of missed bags for stochastic model using ﬁgure 4.3
39
4.14 Indices and sets in deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.15 Parameters used in container model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.16 Variables in container model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.17 Expected number of missed bags
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
53
==PAGE:60==
List of Figures
1.1
Number of total passengers (blue) in air travel from 2007-2018 illus-
trated along total number of bags mishandled (red). Data source:
[2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The three diﬀerent baggage ﬂows in airport operations. . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Process steps from the arriving to the departing aircraft for transfer
baggage. The location of the execution of each process step is given
in the lower part of the ﬁgure [5]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Placement of infeed stations in CPH airport layout. The infeed sta-
tion names are tra, trb, trc, trd, tre and trf. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Probability density function of a transportion time from an infeed
station to a departure gate. (a), (b), (c) and (d) are random samples
of size 5 where the transportation path has been explored at least 25
times in the dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
(a) and (b) both illustrate a histogram of the transportation times
and a ﬁtted t-distribution. (a) illustrates the best ﬁtted t-distribution
with a MSE value of 0.00162 and (b) illustrates the worst ﬁtted t-
distribution with a MSE value of 2.544. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Histogram illustrating the MSE values of the ﬁtted t-distributions. . .
19
3.4
Probability density function of ground handling times from the ﬂight
being on block to the baggage is in the BHS. This includes unloading
the ﬂight, driving to the infeed station and feeding the baggage into
the BHS. (a), (b), (c) and (d) are random samples of size 5 where the
transportation path has been explored at least 25 times in the dataset. 20
3.5
(a) and (b) both illustrate a histogram of the transportation times
and a ﬁtted t-distribution. (a) illustrates the best ﬁtted t-distribution
with a MSE value of 0.000438 and (b) illustrates the worst ﬁtted t-
distribution with a MSE value of 0.138. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Histogram illustrating the MSE values of the ﬁtted t-distributions. . .
22
3.7
Insertion of weighted time estimate z, if a time estimate to infeed
station trb is available both to the right and left of the gate. . . . . .
24
4.1
Deterministic vs. current benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Histogram of buﬀer times distribution for all three days in data set
(a=small, b=medium, c=big). The red line indicates the cutoﬀ. . . .
32
4.3
Single bag connecting probability (y) dependency on buﬀer time (x),
ﬁgure from [4] (FRAPORT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Stochastic vs. Deterministic vs. Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
54
==PAGE:61==
LIST OF FIGURES
55
4.5
Using deterministic solution in stochastic model . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Run-time of stochastic model as function of number of scenarios . . .
40
4.7
Relative number of missed bags for varying capacity in 5-minute
timeslots and all three days of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.8
Distribution of late bags for the three days in input data . . . . . . .
45
6.1
PDF for varying degrees of freedom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Number of baggage that is on block in a given time interval. Figure
(a) is based on a small day, Figure (b) is based on a medium day
and Figure (c) is based on a large day. The bars colored red are the
bottleneck time intervals, which are indiﬀerent intervals in Figure (a),
(b) and (c). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:62==
Appendix
6.1
Appendix A: T-distribution
The following section will explain the type of probability distribution referred to as
the t-distribution. The t-distribution is very close related to the normal distribution.
From a normal distribution a sample of size n is distributed as:
Z =
¯X −µ
σ
√n
where µ is the population mean, σ is the population standard deviation and ¯X
is the sample mean. However, the standard deviation σ for the population is often
unknown. Hence, the value of σ is estimated by using the sample standard deviation
s instead. The intrduction of s results in the formula for the t-distribution:
t =
¯X −µ
s
√n
The probability density function (PDF) of the t-distribution is given by:
f(t) =
Γ(ν+1
2 )
√
νπˆσ2Γ(ν
2)
(1 + (t −ˆµ)2
ν
)−ν+1
2
where Γ is a gamma-function and ν is the degrees of freedom deﬁned as n −1. The
details of the PDF will not be covered, as this report uses python software to solve
this function directly. However, the parameters given to solve the PDF is degrees of
freedom ν, the sample mean ˆµ and the scale-parameter ˆσ2. The degrees of freedom
determines the form of the bell curve of the t-distributions. To illustrate this, ﬁgure
REF shows how the form changes when the degrees of freedom increases.
56
==PAGE:63==
LIST OF FIGURES
57
Figure 6.1: PDF for varying degrees of freedom
The t-distribution can represent larger tails and higher peaks, compared to the
normal distribution. Notably, the t-distribution appaches the normal distribution
when ν →∞.
==PAGE:64==
LIST OF FIGURES
58
6.2
Appendix B: Bottlenecks
The objective of the model is in short to use the existing resources in CPH airport in
the best possible way. It is therefore important to take into account the capacities
of each ressource, which is aﬀected by many other factors than the transfer baggage.
However, the one factor that scales the usability of resources is ﬂight activity.
Bottlenecks exist when a lot of ﬂight activity happens within the same time interval,
and thereby disadvantages the resources available. The model will start using the
airports resources when the ﬂight is on block. It is therefore necessary to identify
potential bottlenecks which could aﬀect the variables of resources in the model.
Moreover, the model must be able to foresee future bottlenecks as it can not change
a decision once the baggage has reach on block.
The input data presented in Section 2.5 only contains information about transfer
baggage, and not overall ﬂight activity. However, it is assumed that the overall ﬂight
activity and the number of transfer baggage in a time interval is strongly correlated.
This is a fair assumption that CPH airport conﬁrmed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.2: Number of baggage that is on block in a given time interval. Figure (a)
is based on a small day, Figure (b) is based on a medium day and Figure (c) is
based on a large day. The bars colored red are the bottleneck time intervals, which
are indiﬀerent intervals in Figure (a), (b) and (c).
Figure 6.2 shows in which time intervals the individual transfer baggage is on block
during the day. The y-axis indicates the amount of transfer baggage that arrived
==PAGE:65==
LIST OF FIGURES
59
from ﬂights on-block in that given time interval. The x-axis is time intervals of 30
minutes. Moreover, Figure 6.2(a) is the distribution for the small day, Figure 6.2(b)
is the distribution for the medium day and Figure 6.2(c) is the distribution for the
large day.
Figure 6.2 clearly indicates a general pattern where speciﬁc time intervals will be
expected to have a higher demand of handling, marked with the color red in all three
ﬁgures. These time intervals will be referred to as bottlenecks, and can be read from
Figure 6.2 as: 06:30 - 07:30, 10:30 - 11:30, 12:30 - 13:30, 15:30 - 16:30 and 18:00
- 20:00. The clear tendency gives basis for modelling bottlenecks independently.
Besides, the presence of bottlenecks does not rely on the daily demand size, even if
the bottleneck handling demand is signiﬁcantly higher on certain days. The model
should be able to foresee the bottlenecks alone on the current time interval.
One idea of eliminating the bimodal nature of the transportation times discovered in
Section 3.1.1 and Section 3.1.2, is to ﬁnd a correlation between higher transportation
times and a given discrete variable. Such correlation would result in a possible split
of the estimates, achieving only normal distributed transportation times.
Section ?? provided insights of certain time intervals with a relative higher traﬃc
deﬁned as bottlenecks. The bottlenecks may aﬀect the transportation times of both
the BHS and the drive times, such that it will result in higher transportation time
if operations happens within a bottleneck time interval. However, Figure 6.3 shows
that there are no such correlation in BHS.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.3
