==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
MSc Thesis 
 
DTU Chemical Engineering 
 
 
Cascade Enzyme Immobilization on 
Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Membranes 
 
 
 
Author: 
Akshara Shridhar 
s192165 
Supervisors: 
Professor. Manuel Pinelo 
Sigyn Björk Sigurdardóttir 
 
 
 
 
June 25, 2021 
==PAGE:2==
Approval 
This thesis has been produced over five months under the Department of Chemical 
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, as 30 ECTS requirement for 
the fulfilment of the MSc in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, under the same 
institution. 
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of membrane and enzyme 
technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Akshara Shridhar Iyer - s192165 
 
Signature 
 
 
June 25, 2021 
 
Date 
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements 
 
My work alone on the project did not solely produce the results. Prof. Manuel Pinelo deserves 
my complete gratitude for the opportunity to work on the project and for the guidance I received 
during this process. 
 
My sincere thanks goes out to Sigyn Björk Sigurdardóttir, who has provided me with day-to- 
day support and shown me great patience and guidance throughout this project. 
 
As a result of their help and generosity, all the colleagues at 227 made the experience of the 
lab a very positive one. 
 
To conclude, I would like thank to my family and friends who have always supported me and 
encouraged me throughout my life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT 
 
Methanol (CH3OH) is an upcoming green fuel because of its high calorific value, low freezing 
point, and properties similar to gasoline and is gaining popularity in the field of sustainable 
development. CH3OH is mainly produced through the hydrogenation of syn-gas in the presence 
of a copper-based catalyst. However, an enzymatic route is proposed for the production of 
CH3OH from CO2 in a sustainable way possible. Three dehydrogenase enzymes are required for 
conversion of CO2 to CH3OH with the steps as follows: (i) CO2 to formate (HCOOH) by 
formate dehydrogenase (FateDH); (ii) Formate (HCOOH) to Formaldehyde (HCOH) by 
formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FaldDH); (iii) Formaldehyde (HCOH) to Methanol by alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH). In all the reactions NADH acts as a cofactor that is reduced to NAD+ 
by donating an electron and activates the enzyme to cater the reaction towards the desired 
direction.  
In this project, the main focus is to optimize immobilization of enzyme on a polyelectrolyte 
multilayer membrane (PEM) which is fabricated by Layer-by-Layer assembly of 
polyelectrolytes (PE) of cationic PEs PDADMAC, PAH, and PEI. Since PDADAMC is a 
stronger PE than the other two PE, the PEM membrane of 1.5 bilayers has a positive zeta 
potential of 30 mV which is suitable for adsorption of enzymes by the electrostatic force of 
attraction. ADH was immobilized on the positive surface for different amounts of time (0.5, 1, 
3, and 24 hours) followed by a reaction of HCHO to CH3OH in presence of NADH. The NADH 
conversion increased with an increase in immobilization time from 40 ± 5% for 0.5 hours and 
70 ± 5% for 24 hours.  
The comparison between co-and cascade immobilization is also carried out with the conclusion 
that the reaction is higher when the three enzymes are immobilized in cascade. However, when 
enzymes were immobilized in cascade, the reaction was higher when the immobilization time is 
less which is opposite to as seen when ADH was immobilized. There new results which  were 
interesting, that is,  
- 
The reaction with cascade immobilization with 0.5 hours was high even when there was 
a retention of NADH 
- 
Co-immobilization for 24 hours showed higher reaction than cascade immobilization 
got 24 hours 40 ± 5% and 25 ± 2% conversion respectively 
Therefore, cascade immobilization is better than the co-immobilization because of high 
production and high stability after 1 week. The above results could be sued for further 
immobilization by changing different factors such as the time, the number of bilayers with the 
increase in conversion keeping in mind. Moreover, optimization of FateDH and FaldDH could 
also be taken into consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. Introduction  ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
     1.1 Carbon Dioxide-A Greenhouse gas…………………………………………………………………………………………..2 
            1.1.1. Properties and uses……………………………………………………………………………………………………….2 
            1.1.2. Emissions and Control Strategies…………………………………………………………………..………………3 
1.2. Methanol ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………5 
         1.2.1. Properties and uses……………………………………………………………………………………………………….…6 
         1.2.2. Methanol Market………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…6 
         1.2.2. Production……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….7 
1.3. Membrane Technology…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…10 
        1.3.1. Types of membrane processes………………………………………………………………………………………..10 
        1.3.2. Ultrafiltration………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….12 
        1.3.3. Nanofiltration……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…12 
         1.3.4. Membrane Modification………………………………………………………………………………………………..13 
1.4. Enzyme Immobilization………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…20 
        1.4.1 Types of Immobilization Techniques……………………………………………………………………………..….21 
        1.4.2. Membrane Reactor…………………………………………………………………………………………………………26 
2. Material and Methods…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………28 
     2.1 Material required…………………………………………………………………………………………………….……………28 
     2.2 Procedure……………………………………………………………………………………..……………………………………..28 
           2.2.1. Layer-by-Layer assembly……………………………………………………………………………………………...28 
           2.2.2. Preparation of Buffer………………………………………………………………………………………..……….…29 
           2.2.3. Enzyme immobilization method………………………………………………..………………………………...29 
           2.2.4. Reaction……………………………………………………….……………………………………………………………...30 
           2.2.5. Free enzyme reactions………………………………….…………………………………………………….……..…31 
     2.3 Analytical methods……………………………………………………………………………………….……………………….31 
            2.3.1. Water Permeability………………………………………………………………………………………………………31 
            2.3.2. NADH Retention…………………………………………………………………………………………….………..…..31 
            2.3.3. Bradford assay…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…32 
            2.3.4. Zeta Potential…………………………………………………………………………………………………………......33 
3. Results and Discussion……………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…34 
     3.1. Enzyme Immobilization on PEM membrane with different cationic PE………………………………..34 
             3.1.1. Bradford Assay……………………………………………………………………………………………………….….34 
             3.1.2. NADH Conversion………………………………………………………………………………………………………35 
==PAGE:6==
            3.1.3. Flux of Permeates………………………………………………………………………………………………………41 
    3.2. Zeta Potential…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…42 
            3.2.1 For 1.5 bilayers……………………………………………………………………..…………………………………..….42 
           3.2.2 For 2.5 to 4.5 bilayer…………………………………………………………….…………………………………...….43 
           3.2.3. For 3.5 bilayer with new concentration……………………………..…………………;;………………..….44 
    3.3. Water Permeability and NADH Retention………………………………………………;;……………………..……45 
            3.3.1. Water Permeability ……………………………………………………………….…………………………………..45 
            3.3.2. NADH Retention…………………………………………………………………………………………………………46 
     3.4. Zeta Potential for new concentration…………………………………………………….…………………………...47 
     3.5. Free enzyme reactions………………………………………………………………………………………………………..48 
     3.6. ADH Immobilization…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….50 
     3.7. CO2 to CH3OH conversion……………………………………………………………………………………………….…..56 
4. Conclusion ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...59 
5. BIBLIOGRAPHY……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…..61 
5. Appendix…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….70 
A. Standard Curve…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..70 
B. Bradford assay for Enzyme Immobilization……………………………………………………………………………..….71 
C. NADH conversion……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….73 
D. Flux of permeates……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...78 
E. NADH consumption ………………………………………………………………………………………………………..………....82 
F. Zeta Potential …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….83 
G. Free Enzyme Reactions………………………………………………………………………………………………………………86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
NOMENCLATURE 
 
Abbreviations 
 
The following table displays commonly used abbreviations in this project: 
 
Table a: Commonly used Abbreviations and respective terms used in this project 
Abbreviations 
Terms 
GHG 
Green-house gas 
PE 
Polyelectrolyte 
PEM 
Polyelectrolyte Multilayer 
LbL 
Layer-by-layer 
PDADMAC 
Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride 
PAH 
poly(allylamine hydrochloride)  
PEI 
Polyethylenimine 
PSS 
poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) 
ADH 
Alcohol Dehydrogenase 
FaldDH 
Formaldehyde Dehydrogenase 
FateDH 
Formate Dehydrogenase 
CO2 
Carbon Dioxide 
HCHO 
Formaldehyde 
HCOOH 
Formic Acid 
CH3OH 
Methanol 
WP 
Water Permeability  
NADH 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide Hydrogen 
UF 
Ultrafiltration 
NF 
Nanofiltration  
MF 
Microfiltration 
==PAGE:8==
RO 
Reverse Osmosis 
MBR 
Membrane Bio-reactor 
EMR 
Enzyme membrane reactor 
 
Symbols 
The following table displays the common symbols used in this project 
 
Table b: Commonly used symbols and respective terms used in this project 
Symbols 
Terms 
Lp 
Water Permeability  
Jw 
Water Flux 
Js 
Solute flux 
Cp,f 
Concentration (permeate, feed) 
Af,d 
Absorbance (feed, discard) 
mV 
milliVolts  
µ 
Micro 
ΔP 
Trans-membrane pressure 
Am 
Area of the membrane  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
1 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Man-Made activities cause climate change by increasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
The most significant contributor to GHG emissions is fossil fuel use, which emits a lot of CO2s. 
The majority of industries use fossil fuels for various purposes, such as running turbines, 
generating power, etc. As a result, all government and non-government institutions have been 
striving to find clean fuels that can power economic growth. Among the clean alternatives to 
fossil fuels, renewable methanol stands out as an efficient, effective way to drastically cut 
emissions in power generation, public transportation, shipping, as well as industry. Methanol 
is one of the versatile compounds which is at the crossroads of environmentally conscious 
chemical and energy production.  
 
Compared to fossil fuels, renewable methanol as an electrofuel reduces carbon emissions by 
65 to 95% depending on the feedstock and conversion process. It is not just about cleaner fuels 
but also about finding fuel alternatives and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. With 
this being said, CO2 can be converted to methanol by enzymatic conversion on polymeric 
support. 
 
This project will explore the opportunity of producing methanol by employing enzymatic 
membrane reactors. Specifically, this project will explore the immobilization of the enzyme 
ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH onto the polyelectrolyte multilayer (PEM) ultrafiltration 
membrane. For immobilization, the appropriate polyelectrolyte is to be chosen from 
PDADMAC, PAH, and PEI as the cationic polyelectrolyte and PSS as the anionic 
polyelectrolyte.  
 
The objectives of this project are: 
- 
Finding appropriate polyelectrolyte and bilayer for layer-by-layer assembly 
with high surface charge 
- 
Appropriate conditions for enzyme immobilization for ADH, FaldDH, and 
FateDH 
- 
Appropriate conditions for Cascade immobilization and compariso with co-
immobilization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
2 
 
1.1. Carbon Dioxide – A Greenhouse gas 
One of the first gases to be described as a distinct substance from the air was carbon dioxide 
(CO2). The Flemish chemist Jan Bapist van Helmont, in the 17th century, observed that when 
charcoal was burned in a closed vessel, the mass of the resulting ash was much less than the 
original charcoal. From this experiment, it was concluded that charcoal transmuted into an 
invisible substance which was termed as "gas" or "wild spirit". From the 1750s to 1770s, the 
properties of CO2 were studied, for example, it was found that CO2 is denser than air and 
produced by animal respiration and microbial fermentation by Scottish physician Joseph Black. 
In 1823, CO2 was first liquefied by Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday followed by 
solidification of the gas in 1834 by Charles Thilorier who found a “snow” of solid CO2 
produced by rapid evaporation of liquid in the pressurized container1.  
1.1.1. Properties and uses 
CO2 is a toxic, odorless, colorless gas with a pungent and acid taste. It is an acidic oxide 
composed of two oxygen atoms covalently bonded to a single carbon atom. As stated earlier, 
it is denser than air, with a density of about 1.98
𝑘𝑔
𝑚3 which is roughly 1.5 times that of air. With 
two double bonds as seen in figure 1.1, it has no electric dipole and is fully oxidized. It is 
moderately reactive and non-flammable but aids the combustion of metals such as magnesium2.  
 
Figure 1.1: Representation of CO2 lewis structure3. 
The liquid form of CO2 only exists at pressures above 5.1 atm and −56.6𝑜𝐶 which is the triple 
point. Similarly, the solid form of CO2 which is the dry ice formed by the process of deposition 
which is the formation of solid-phase directly forms a gaseous phase and vice – versa called 
sublimation. Table 1.1 presents the general properties of CO2: 
Table 1.1: Properties of Carbon dioxide 
Molecular weight 
44.01
𝑘𝑔
𝑘𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 
Density 
1.98 𝑘𝑔
𝑚3  
Boiling Point 
−56.6𝑜 𝐶 
Melting Point 
−78.5𝑜 𝐶 
Viscosity 
1.37 ∗10−6 𝑃𝑎 𝑠 𝑎𝑡 3𝑜𝐶  
 
There are wide applications of CO2 in different industries for refrigeration and cooling, in the 
metal industry for manufacturing of moulds to enhance their hardness, used in construction as 
shield gas which protects the weld from oxidation, in the rubber and plastics industry for 
removal of flash by use of dry ice. It is also used in the healthcare and pharma industries as an 
additive to oxygen as a respiratory stimulant and for the production of methanol respectively. 
==PAGE:11==
3 
 
The other uses of CO2 include dry cleaning as a substitute for solvents. The first industrial use 
of CO2 can be traced back to the 1860s and 1870s with the production of Soda Solvay. The first 
catalytic conversion of CO2 was copolymerization with olefins such as propene. The biological 
utilization of CO2 comprises the fixation of CO2 into biomass under industrial conditions, for 
example, the cultivation of terrestrial biomass in greenhouses under a CO2 concentration of 
600 ppm, culturing aquatic biomass by sparging CO2 in water. 
1.1.2. Emissions and Control strategies          
As we know, all fossil fuels are a mixture of hydrocarbons with varying ratios of carbon and 
hydrogen which upon combustion, irreversibly are converted to carbon dioxide and water, 
respectively. Since fossil fuels are used in almost all day–to–day activities, the increase in CO2 
in the atmosphere is mostly man-made global warming. Apart from fossil fuels, CO2 is also 
released from thermoelectric power plants, refineries, cement plants, and steel mills. The global 
carbon dioxide emissions have reached a record high of 35.7 billion tons per year and are 
increasing by the year at the rate of 2.3 ppm approximately. The resulting concentrations of 
CO2, methane, and nitrous oxide are unprecedented in the last 800,000 years according to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The global atmospheric carbon dioxide in 2019 
reached a record high of 409.8 ppm with an increase of 2.5 ppm from the previous year. The 
annual increase of CO2 in the atmosphere over the past 60 years is 100 times faster than the 
natural increase4.  
 
Figure 1.2: Graphical representation of CO2 emission over 6 decades. 
Figure 1.2, represents the global CO2 emission for the past 60 years4. It can be seen that the 
emissions have increased gradually over the years. Therefore, the sustainable development of 
CO2 capture and reutilizations technologies has become necessary. This development mainly 
includes conversion of CO2 to chemicals and fuels with zero or even negative emissions, CO2 
can be scavenged directly from industrial greenhouse gas emission processes and converted to 
chemicals and fuel chemicals that otherwise are obtained from fossil fuel chemistry5,6  
CO2 can be captured from the atmosphere as well as industrial emissions through multiple 
methods based on its partial pressure, operating conditions, and composition of the gas mixture. 
==PAGE:12==
4 
 
The main emission of CO2 is from the combustion processes in thermal plants, biomass 
conversion, and many industrial processes which use fossil fuel as power house1–3. The main 
strategies for CO2 capture after the combustion are divided into the following categories: (i) 
Oxy-fuel combustion; (ii) Pre - combustion capture; (iii) Post-combustion capture7,3. Through 
oxy-fuel combustion, oxygen and nitrogen gas are separated from the oxidant stream, thereby 
producing purge steam rich in CO2/H2O during combustion and very low nitrogen. Pre - 
combustion capture is developed in two phases: (i) conversion of fuel in a mixture of H2 and 
CO through partial oxidation, steam reforming, or auto thermal reforming of hydrocarbons; (ii) 
separation of CO2 from H2 at high pressure (80 bar) and high temperature (300 − 700𝑜𝐶) 
which is then fed to turbines2,3. Post-combustion capture involves the separation of CO2 after 
combustion which is the hardest of all three categories because of the presence of SO2, NO2, 
and O2 in small amounts. The fact remains, though, that in terms of industrial sectors, post-
combustion capture methods correspond to the most widely applicable option2,3. 
In the post-combustion capture of CO2, the traditional techniques are as follows: absorption 
(with amines), adsorption, and cryogenic separation2–5. Cryogenic removal of CO2; a relatively 
novel capture technology and the introduction of the process in Carbon Capture and Storage 
(CCS) concept is fairly new. The main advantage of this process is no involvement of chemicals 
and that the process can be operated at atmospheric pressure. In addition, the system has some 
disadvantages, most notably the requirement that water content in the feed stream to the cooling 
units be kept at a minimum to prevent ice build-up or a sudden spike in pressure5. Therefore, 
several costly steps are required to remove water or moisture from the flue gas. Hence, this 
process for CO2 separation from flue gas is far from the application. On that account, membrane 
operations are considered to be advantageous over the above separation processes5.  
Membranes are low-cost candidates for post-combustion capture and gas separation strategies 
have gained popularity for CO2 capture. Several membrane properties impact its performance, 
including porosity, diffusivity, solubility, and fractional volume5.  For a membrane to be useful 
for CO2 capture, it should possess properties such as; high CO2 permeability, high CO2/N2 
selectivity, thermal and chemical stability, and many more. Since the membranes should have 
high selectivity, the captured CO2 should also have high purity. This high purity CO2 can be 
used to convert to many valuable chemicals such as ethanol and methanol4–7.  
Solar, wind, and geothermal energy sources have risen in popularity due to the demand for 
sustainable energy sources8–10. These sources have high potential but are being exploited and 
on a large scale, these do not act as a substitute for fossil fuels. Therefore, new sources for fuel 
are in increasing demand such as methanol. The long-range solution to mankind's hydrocarbon 
needs and storage of energy produced from non – fossil fuel sources, the usage of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide through its reduction to methanol offers a feasible new alternative. The total 
content of atmospheric CO2, however, is 0.037%6,10. Thus, a new efficient way to separate CO2, 
membrane gas separation is introduced as previously stated. The hydrogen for methanol 
production can be obtained by hydrolysis of water2,6,8,10,11. On the other hand, the 
electrochemical and photochemical reduction of CO2 can also produce methanol. The most 
popular recent method is hydrogenation of carbon dioxide by enzyme-catalyzed reduction, 
which produces formic acid and formaldehyde and further can be reduced to obtain methanol 
explained in detail in the further sections7–9.  
 
==PAGE:13==
5 
 
1.2. Methanol 
Methanol (CH3OH), also termed methyl alcohol or carbinol, is the primary aliphatic alcohol 
first discovered in 1661 by Sir Robert Boyle through the rectification of crude wood vinegar 
over milk of lime. Later on, the production of methanol involved dry distillation of wood, hence 
it was called wood alcohol due to the production process10. Methanol was first produced in the 
industry as a by-product during the production of ammonia from carbon monoxide in the 
presence of an iron oxide catalyst. 85% of industrially produced methanol is used as raw 
material or solvent for chemical syntheses such as formaldehyde (HCOH), methyl tert-butyl 
ether (MTBE), acetic acid, dimethyl ether, propene, methyl methacrylate, and dimethyl 
terephthalate (DMT) as seen in figure 1.39,10,12–14. The rest is used as an energy source in fuel 
applications either directly or in the form of methanol downstream products. The use of 
methanol as an energy source is emerging and many companies are leaning into the substitution 
of methanol for various sources such as petroleum. In the 1970s, there was an oil crisis which 
gave rise to many projects for the production of methanol from fossil fuels on the assumption 
that it would be more economical. Since then, there were many ups and downs for the usage of 
methanol as fuel but in the last decade, it has become one of the chemicals with the largest 
growth rate from 5 Mt in 2005 to more than 70 Mt in 201511.  
 
Figure 1.3: Uses of Methanol 
Methanol is also compared to conventional fuel such as gasoline because of its properties such 
as high heat of vaporization, relatively low calorific value. It is kept in higher regard than the 
stated conventional fuel because of low emissions of greenhouse gases. The low freezing point 
of methanol and its miscibility with water allows it to be used in refrigeration systems. It is 
also used as antifreeze in heating and cooling circuits. Other uses of methanol include; using it 
as an adsorption agent in gas scrubbers, to protect natural gas pipelines12–14.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
6 
 
1.2.1. Physical and Chemical Properties 
Methanol as the primary aliphatic alcohol represents this class of hydrocarbons. The reactivity 
is determined by the functional hydroxyl group. Due to the presence of the hydroxyl group, 
methanol can easily form intermolecular hydrogen bonds with hydrogen bond acceptors which 
can be seen in the structure in Figure 1.4. Although the formation of bonds is limited, there are 
many industrial applications of methanol such as dehydrogenation, carbonylation, 
esterification, addition to unsaturated bonds, replacement of hydroxyl group in addition to 
many more.  
 
Figure 1.4: Representation of Methanol molecule 
The following table 1.2 illustrates methanol's basic characteristics, which make it a promising 
chemical for use in various sectors: 
Table 1.2: Properties of Methanol 
Molecular 
weight 
32 
𝑘𝑔
𝑘𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 
 
Density 
792 𝑘𝑔
𝑚3 
Melting Point 
−97.6𝑜𝐶 
Boiling Point 
−64.7𝑜𝐶 
Viscosity 
0.544 𝑚𝑃𝑎 
 
1.2.2. Methanol Market 
Methanol has been the most widely used chemical since the 1800s with the annual production 
of 40 million tons and the production has increased at the rate of 4% per annum15. The main 
use of methanol is as feedstock for the production of DME (Di-methyl-ether) and olefins which 
consume about 200,000 tons of methanol per day. A large amount of use of methanol is catered 
by 90 methanol plants all over the world which have a combined capacity of 110 million metric 
tons or 138 billion litres per year out of which 2.3 billion litres are produced by reforming 
natural gas per year15,16. 
As of 2018, Asia Pacific is the dominant regional market of methanol with China at the top of 
consumption of 54% followed by North America and Europe with 11% and 10% respectively 
as seen in Figure 1.5. Northeast Asia acts as the major region of production of methanol with 
the Middle East being the low-cost region and highly competitive region10,13. 
The global market consists of a large number of multinational and domestic companies. The 
world's largest methanol producer is Methanex Corporation with a 14% market share. Some of 
the other global producers of methanol are Eastman Chemical Company, BASF, SE, SABIC, 
and Petronas17. As per the last data, in 2018 the global market of methanol was USD 31.76 
==PAGE:15==
7 
 
billion with computed annual growth of 9.8%, the market might grow up to 91 billion by the 
year 202617. With the increase in the demand for methanol, the industry generates 55 billion 
dollars in economic activity each year, while creating over 90,000 jobs around the world16,17. 
 
 
Figure 1.5: Distribution of Methanol market in various continents 
 
1.2.3. Production 
The methanol production is mainly from fossil-fuel-based syn-gas containing both CO2 and 
CO with the reaction being exothermic. The reaction is favoured by increasing the pressure and 
decreasing the temperature. However, the efficiency of the process is less. Therefore there are 
several other processes to convert syn-gas, mainly CO2 such as; electrochemical, 
photochemical, and photoelectrochemical conversions7–12.  
Chemical conversions are the catalytic hydrogenation of syn-gas (CO2 and H2) in presence of 
a catalyst. The most common catalyst system in the industrial production of methanol is Cu – 
ZnO – Al2O37. Both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts are used for the reaction, but 
the heterogeneous system has advantages such as high separation, stability, handling, cost, and 
recycling of the catalyst. The catalyst group used for the production of methanol via the syn-
gas route is Cu – ZnO – Al2O3. Each of the elements is considered necessary because of the 
overall performance, that is, activity, selectivity, and stability. The synthesis reaction by the 
system of catalyst is very complex with many paths and processes. There are also several by-
products produced from catalyst reactions which are higher alcohols, ether, asters, 
hydrocarbons, and ketones. Since the by-products produced are not favourable for methanol 
synthesis, additives such as ZrO2 and ZrO play an important role to improve the activity11,15,18.  
Electrochemical conversion of CO2 includes the reduction of CO2 on different metals and 
electrodes such as glass carbon for the production of various fuels. Different conditions of the 
system produce different chemicals such as methane, methanol, and CO to name a few. The 
main role in the production of the desired chemical is the selection of catalysts or enzymes such 
as oxoglutaric acid or methanol dehydrogenase15. The redox reaction was difficult to mediate 
as the electrochemical cells were corroded due to the presence of MV2+ which is methyl 
==PAGE:16==
8 
 
viologen that acts as a mediator for redox reaction. Therefore, the enzymatic conversion in the 
electrochemical process can be achieved if there is an appropriate mediator to enhance the 
enzyme in the reduction direction20–22. The main advantage is that this process allows the 
recycling of captured CO2 that could be used as renewable energy. Even though various 
chemicals can be produced by this method, it has only been used on a laboratory scale and has 
not been successfully used in industry because of the low selectivity and high cost7,8,14,15.  
Photochemical or photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is the process where the captured CO2 is 
converted to methanol or other fuels by the use of solar energy. This process is similar to 
electrochemical conversion as both processes use semiconductors. The most investigated 
semiconductors for photochemical conversion are titanium dioxide (TiO2). TiO2 is further 
doped with Cu/C for more effective reduction11. However, only 5% of the solar energy can be 
used by the semiconductor as it has a high bandgap. This process, similar to the electrochemical 
process, is limited to laboratory-scale because of the low quantum yield7,8,14.  
The main focus of CO2 conversion is the sustainability of the environment and energy. 
Therefore, the main strategy should be the utilization and recycling of the captured CO2 to save 
the carbon resources more sustainably6,16. The above processes for the methanol production 
from CO2 have their disadvantages which are the use of fossil fuels for chemical conversion, 
high costs for electro and photochemical processes. Hence, the biocatalyst or enzymatic 
conversion of CO2 to energy fuels such as formaldehyde and methanol is being studied7,19.  
The first enzymatic production of methanol from CO2 was proposed by Obert and Dave in 
199917 where NADH (Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide (NAD) + hydrogen (H)) uses the 
terminal electron donor for the catalyzed reduction. The reaction begins with the reduction of 
CO2 to Formate (CHOOH) by FateDH followed by reduction to formaldehyde (CHOH) by 
formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FaldDH) and finally to methanol (CH3OH) by alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH) as shown in Figure 1.6. 
 
Figure 1.6: Enzymatic route for the production of methanol from CO2 
The enzymes used as stated belong to a group called dehydrogenases. Dehydrogenases are one 
of the many categories of enzymes that involve a path of degradation which include hydrolases, 
oxygenases, oxidases, and dehalogenases18. Dehydrogenases catalyze the oxidation-reduction 
reaction with help of coenzymes such as NAD+/NADP+ or flavins as an electron acceptor. 
They are present in plants, microorganisms as well as human tissues and help in biochemical 
conversions. There are several dehydrogenases based on the active group such as aldehyde, 
alcohol, glucose, pyruvate, and glutamate to name a few. The main enzymes to be studied in 
this report are formate dehydrogenase, formaldehyde dehydrogenase, and alcohol 
dehydrogenase18. 
Formate dehydrogenases (FateDHs) are divided into two categories based on whether they 
require metal ions for their activity or not, i.e, metal-dependent and metal-independent. The 
latter, that is type-1, comprises NADH – dependent enzymes belonging to the specific 
==PAGE:17==
9 
 
dehydrogenases of the 2 – oxyacid family19–23. The function of the enzyme is by a direct 
hydride transfer from the C atom of Formate to the C4 atom of the pyridine ring of NAD+, 
with the hydride ion transfer being the rate-limiting step in the mechanism. The metal-
dependent category comprises prokaryotic enzymes that harbour one tungsten or molybdenum 
ion in their active sites. The mechanism of metal-dependent FateDHs is that the oxidation of 
formate takes place by the transfer of two electrons to the Molybdenum (Mo)/Tungsten (W) 
centers. The type-2 FateDH is the type employed for the conversion of CO2 to CHOOH with 
first reported use in 1976 with Candida boidinii19,21,24. The mechanism of this type of enzyme 
is not fully comprehended. There are many interpretations of the mechanism like coordination 
of the oxidized active site based on the crystal structure proposed by Raaijmakers et al25., sulfur 
shift mechanism, and many more. In dong et al26. it was seen that the formate substrate does 
not bind directly to the Mo ion but resides in the second coordination sphere which favours the 
two-(electron transfer for reduction of CO2. Apart from the wide use FateDH from Candida 
Boidinii, the FateDH from Clostridium carboxidivorans is reported to efficiently catalyze the 
conversion of CHOOH to CO2 with 10 – fold and 30-fold lower binding affinity for NAD+ and 
CHOOH respectively5,6,23.  
Formaldehyde dehydrogenase catalyzes the conversion of CHOH into CHOOH with the 
reduction of NAD+ to NADH. The most common FaldDH is the enzyme from Pseudomonas 
putida. There are many studies for the forward reaction but the mechanism for the reverse 
reaction has not yet been studied20,22,25. The apparent Michalis constant (Km) indicates the 
affinity of the enzyme for the substrate is higher for formate than for formaldehyde. This 
indicates that the reaction is more suitable for the oxidation of formaldehyde to formate than 
the reverse6,24.  
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) catalyzes the conversion of alcohol to ketone/aldehyde with 
the reduction of NAD+ to NADH. ADHs are a large group of enzymes that can be subdivided 
into at least three distinct enzyme superfamilies: medium-chain, short-chain dehydrogenases, 
and iron-activated ADHs22,27. The above superfamilies are subdivided into different families 
concerning the structural and functional relationships. The apparent Michaelis constant (Km) 
indicates the affinity of the enzyme for the substrate is higher for methanol than for 
formaldehyde. This indicates that the enzyme prefers the reverse reaction of aldehyde to 
alcohol rather than the favoured reaction of alcohol to aldehyde22,6,25.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
10 
 
1.3. Membrane Technology 
A membrane is a discrete, thin interface that moderates the permeation of chemical species in 
contact with it. The membrane phenomena can be traced back to the eighteenth century when 
systematic studies of the technology were developed by philosopher scientists, for instance, the 
word "osmosis" was coined by Abbe Nolet in 1748 to describe the permeation of water through 
a diaphragm28. The discovery that led to the transformation of the membrane separation from 
laboratory process to industrial process was the development of anisotropic reverse osmosis 
membranes with high flux in 1960 by Loeb – Sourirajan process28. The timeline of the 
development of membrane technology for half a century can be seen in figure 1.7 below: 
 
Figure 1.7: Timeline of the development of Membrane processes. OSW (Osmatic Separation of water), ED (Electrodialysis) 
The 19th and 20th centuries saw the development of membranes only in laboratory tools to 
develop chemical and physical theories and not in industrial and commercial uses. The first 
significant use of membranes was in the testing of drinking water at the end of World War II. 
The filters were tested for water safety sponsored by the US Army which led to the 
establishment of the first US microfiltration membrane producer Millipore Corporation26. The 
early 1970s was focused on the developments of the osmosis process to commercial membrane 
units and by the 1980s all the processes microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF), and reverse 
osmosis (RO) were established processes. The 1980s also saw the development of membranes 
for gas separation with the development of membranes for hydrogen separation by Monsanto 
Prism®. The economical and reliable development of micro and ultrafiltration systems began 
in the 1990s for the treatment of municipal water sources and sewage treatment plants. The 
next section shows the different membrane processes and the basis of the classification28–30.   
1.3.1. Types of membrane processes 
Industrial applications for membrane technology are widely divided into sub-groups: reverse 
osmosis (RO), microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF), and nanofiltration (NF). The above 
processes are pressure-driven which are classified according to the pore diameter and the size 
of the solute or impurities that can permeate as shown in Figure 1.828. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
11 
 
 
Figure 1.8: Classification of membrane processes according to the pore diameter in nanometer. 
Apart from the above processes, there is one more fully developed process which is 
electrodialysis. This process separates charged ions from an aqueous solution by using a 
charged membrane under electrical potential differences. The process is based on the principle 
of filter press which contains several individual cells formed by pairs of anionic and cationic 
exchange membranes. This process is used primarily in the desalination of brackish water. The 
industrial use of the process is increasing with its use in the food industry to deionize cheese 
whey and many more27,28. 
A typical membrane is described mostly by the pore size or the molecular weight cut–off 
(MWCO). The MWCO is defined as the molecular weight of the solute that has a retention 
coefficient of 90%31–34. The main properties of a membrane are selectivity, volumetric flux, 
pore size distribution, and several other membrane properties. The most distinguished property 
of the membrane is its ability to control the rate of the permeation of different chemical species. 
Initially, there were two models to describe this mechanism which are the pore flow model and 
solution diffusion model. Only after the 1940s, the solution diffusion model became popular 
which uses diffusion as the basis of transport of molecules with the concentration gradient. 
Diffusion based on the concentration gradient was first proposed by Fick in 1855 both 
theoretically and experimentally28,31,33,34. Now, it is called Fick's law of diffusion which is as 
follows: 
𝐽𝑖= −𝐷𝑖(𝑑𝑐𝑖
𝑑𝑥) 
Where Ji is the rate of transfer of component or flux (
𝑔
𝑐𝑚2.𝑠 )    
            
𝑑𝑐𝑖
𝑑𝑥 is the concentration gradient of component i. 
            Di is the diffusion coefficient of component i, 
The negative sign shows the diffusion direction is opposite to the concentration gradient.  
 
 
==PAGE:20==
12 
 
1.3.2. Ultrafiltration 
The membrane with a pore diameter of 10 – 1000 Angstrom or 10 to 100 nm is known as 
ultrafiltration (UF). It is widely used in the separation of water and micro solutes from 
macromolecules and colloids28. It was first prepared in the early 1900s by Bechhold from 
collodion nitrocellulose. The term ‘ultrafilter’ was also coined by Bechhold by measuring the 
membrane bubble points. The mid – 1920s saw the use of collodion UF and MF membranes in 
the laboratory but no industrial applications till the 1960s. The mid and late 1960s saw the 
fabrication of UF membranes from cellulose acetate and polymers including polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN) and its copolymers, aromatic polyamides, polysulfone(psf), and poly(vinylidene 
fluoride) which are still widely used at Amicon by Michaels and co-workers. The industrial 
use of UF membrane began in 1969 with installation in Abcor, a division of Koch industries to 
recover electrocoat pain from rinse water of paint shop. From here, the use of ultrafiltration in 
industries increased with the use for the separation of cheese whey in the 1970s. By the 1990s, 
UF membranes were used worldwide in different applications such as sewage treatment, 
separation of viruses and bacteria from drinking water, and many more26,29,30. 
Polysulfone ultrafiltration (UF) membranes are widely used in industrial processes such as 
purification, concentration in pharmaceuticals, food, and biotechnology industries due to their 
excellent properties; chemical inertness across a wide pH range, compressive strength, and 
thermal stability to name a few31. Polysulfone is an excellent polymer for membrane fabrication 
with high mechanical, electrical, and chemical resistant properties. Polymer concentrations 
affect the membrane performance and morphology32,34,35. An increase in the polymer 
concentration produces a denser membrane which leads to the reduction of flux34. But the two 
main obstacles faced by these membranes are high fouling tendency and low selectivity.   
 The main issue with membranes is their fouling as stated in the previous sections. Fouling 
occurs when pores are blocked, which prevents the passage of solutes through the membrane. 
The reversibility or irreversibility of a pore obstruction depends on whether it is permanent or 
not. Furthermore, fouling may also result from cake layering resulting in internal or external 
pore-blocking. Mitigation for the above obstacles is by developing hydrophilic surfaces to 
prevent hydrophobic interactions between membrane and fouler32,33. 
Rejection in UF membranes is based on the size exclusion and the selectivity of charged 
membranes against the charged solutes is also affected by charge interactions. The charged 
membranes have a high transmission for solutes around the isoelectric point of the membrane 
or the solute32,34. Charge attraction can enhance the transport of solutes through the membrane 
whereas the charge repulsion may prevent the solutes from passing through the membrane. In 
addition to this, dissociative charged groups of the membrane will improve the hydrophilicity 
of the membrane which contributes to improving the antifouling properties of the membrane. 
1.3.3. Nanofiltration (NF) 
As seen in figure 8, NF has separation characteristics between RO  and UF and finds application 
in many fields particularly wastewater treatment, pharmaceuticals biotechnology, and food 
engineering28. According to the National Nanotechnology Initiative, the term nanotechnology 
is defined as “working at the atomic, molecular and supramolecular levels, in the length scale 
of approximately 1 -10 nm range to understand and create materials, devices, and systems with 
fundamentally new properties and functions because of their small structure"31. NF has 
==PAGE:21==
13 
 
different applications in various fields of science. The main reason for the increase in the use 
of nanotechnology is the very large surface-to-volume ratio exhibited by nanoscale materials 
which find many novel possibilities in surface-based science36.  
NF was first discovered in the late 1980s with MWCO of 300 – 500 Da36,37. The distinguishing 
characteristics of NF are the low rejection of monovalent ions, high rejection of divalent ions, 
and higher flux compared to RO membranes38. Nanofiltration membranes typically have pores 
between 0.3-1nm in size and are negatively/positively charged. Therefore, they combine both 
Donnan exclusion effects and size effects to control solute transport. Since nanofiltration 
membranes possess intrinsic pores, steric exclusion accounts for the separation of solutes of 
different sizes39,40. Even though the application of NF is high, the disadvantages are similar to 
UF which has fouling, hydrophobicity, etc. Therefore, membrane modification is can be useful 
to obtain the membrane of desired characteristics. 
1.3.4. Membrane Modifications 
Membrane separation processes are used in biorefinery because of different advantages such 
as low energy consumption, high separation efficiency, and reduced number of steps28,33,41. The 
majority use of membrane processes: ultrafiltration and nanofiltration are in the downstream 
processes such as purification of products and water purification28,33. However, the process has 
drawbacks such as low stability at high temperature, fouling. Fouling is also caused due to the 
hydrophobicity of the membrane which is most common for polymeric membranes42–44. Hence 
membrane modifications are required to develop membranes according to the specific property 
such as pore size, increasing or decreasing hydrophilicity, adjusting roughness, and reducing 
fouling. Different modification strategies have been invented in the past few decades29,30.  
During the past twenty years, significant progress has been made in the development of tailor-
made polymeric membranes having higher selectivity and permeability than commercially 
available membrane materials45. There are different processes such as photo-irradiation, 
surface plasma irradiation, blending with suitable polymers, atomic layer deposition, and cross-
linking to name a few. Each of the processes contributes to one or more changes in properties 
of the membrane and makes it suitable for the desired process35,36,45–49. To widely divide the 
modifications process, it can be divided into two categories: Pre-synthesis/membrane 
preparation procedures happen when the membranes are being prepared and post-synthesis are 
the processes that are applied when the membranes are modified after their preparation36,40,47. 
Interfacial polymerization is one of the most popular pre–synthesis modification processes 
which uses monomers such as sulfone. The process involves the generation of thin active films 
for nanofiltration and reverse osmosis. The principle is the reaction of the monomers and the 
copolymerization of the two monomers35,36,39,45,47. In recent decades, this method has gained 
popularity because of its easy application and self-inhibiting reaction which can produce 
extremely thin layers within the 50 nm range. Figure 1.9 represents some of the modification 
methods11,36,40,43. 
==PAGE:22==
14 
 
 
Figure 1.9: Certain types of membrane fabrication. a. surface grafting; b. interfacial polymerization; c. layer-by-layer assembly 
The post-synthesis model of UV/photo–grafting includes bonding between the membrane 
substrate and the active layer without affecting the bulk polymer38,39,42,43,50. This method is a 
sub-group of grafting polymerization which includes electron beam irradiation, plasma 
treatment, LbL, and other grafting methods such as grignard grafting and phosphonic acid 
grafting or phosphorylation37,39,51. Electron beam irradiation focuses on the penetration of 
additives into the polymer layer which would form the active sites. Next process; plasma 
treatment is an effective way to increase the surface hydrophilicity as polar groups can be 
introduced on the surface35,36,47,52–54. This method can alter both the physical and chemical 
properties without changing the bulk properties. Lastly, LbL is the most widely used process 
to change the surface properties of the membrane. This process includes alternate deposition 
of positive and negatively charged polyelectrolytes (PEs) onto the membrane surface. In this 
project, we use LbL as the membrane modification and a detailed analysis of this process is as 
follows. 
The fabrication of functional materials onto the membrane has been a challenge for much of 
the 20th century55. The nanomaterials manufacturing was dominated by two types of 
assemblies: (i) the self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and (ii) the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) 
and Langmuir-Schaefer (LS) films49,55,56. The former are ordered molecular assemblies 
adsorbed onto the surfaces driven by chemical-specific interactions; whereas the latter occurs 
by transferring amphiphilic molecules from a water/vapor interface onto the surface55–58. 
However, these methods are limited to the fabrication of coatings onto flat macroscopic 
surfaces and have limited mechanical and thermal resistance. Therefore, the LbL method was 
introduced to overcome some of the limitations of the above assemblies. LbL assembly is a 
versatile mode for surface modification because of the different use of polyelectrolytes. The 
first membrane fabrication by the LbL method was performed by Dechar et al52., in 1991 where 
electrostatic force between the surface and the molecules acted as the medium for adsorption.  
The adsorption was initiated with a single monolayer of sodium dodecyl on the positively 
charged surface. The procedure used was immersion where the substrate is immersed in the 
solution for the ions to be adsorbed on the surface. Even though the thickness of the membrane 
increased as the layer increased, the stability was not prominent because the build-up dried 
during the significant multilayer deposition.  
==PAGE:23==
15 
 
The most popular method of LbL assembly is based on the electrostatic or intermolecular forces 
which form the supramolecular architectures. PE layers are commonly used for surface 
modification by alternating deposition of positively and negatively charged PEs on the active 
surface36.  LbL assembly is a promising way of depositing the polyelectrolyte on the active site 
of the membrane without causing any disruption to the membrane37. This process allows the 
gradual and controlled build-up of electrostatically linked layers on the surface of the 
membranes.  The sequential adsorption provides an environmentally–friendly way to control 
not only the molecular architecture but also the thickness and the porosity of the multilayer 
films deposited on the membrane38,36. The thickness and roughness, hence porosity and the 
permeability of the assembled layers can be finely tuned by various parameters such as the type 
of polyelectrolytes used and the dipping conditions employed: type of salts, pH, and ionic 
strength39,37,59,60.  
A PE is a repeating monomer unit with a charged group within it, either positively or 
negatively49,61.  The properties and structure of PEs determine the separation performance of 
the PE self-assembled membranes. PEs are chosen according to the properties required and the 
ability of the PE to modify according to the requirement. There is a wide range of PE that are 
being used and widely divided into organo-polyelectrolyte and metallo- polyelectrolyte. The 
former comprises polycations, polyanions, and polyzwitterion (equal amount of both cations 
and anions)49,61. This group of PEs is diverse and provides versatility but has poor stability. 
The Metallo-polyelectrolytes comprise mainly polycations but a disadvantage is the limited 
number of structure formation. Organo-polyelectrolytes are the prevalent category in 
constructing PE-based functional membranes62. To determine the strength of the interaction 
between cations and anions, salts such as sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium fluoride (NaF), 
cesium chloride (CsCl), and rubidium chloride (RbCl) among many others are added as a probe 
to break ion pairs. There are several strong and weak PEs, which can be paired according to 
the dissociation power studied by J. Fu et al62.  Figure 1.10 displays some of the 
polyelectrolytes. 
 
 
Figure 1.10: Structure of different PEs 
==PAGE:24==
16 
 
Figure 1.10 shows some of the commonly used PE; Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride 
(PDADMAC), Polyethylenimine (PEI), Poly(allylamine Hydrochloride) (PAH), poly(sodium 
styrene sulfonate) (PSS),  Polyacrylic acid (PAA). 
The ionic strength, as well as the charge density of the PEs, affect the PE structure and layer 
formation, which are referred to as intra- and inter-chain effects, respectively. The influence of 
these effects is divided into five different categories: (i) the PE structure, (ii) the entropy gain 
upon layer adsorption, (iii) the number of adsorption sites available, (iv) the type of charge 
compensation, and (v) the interdiffusion of oppositely charged PE layers. Several studies are 
analyzing the different effects of PE, the number of layers, and many more63,64. The main 
driving force of PE adsorption is the entropy gain accompanied by the release of counterions 
upon assembly of the PE layers63. The entropy gain increases for decreasing ionic strengths 
and increasing charge density65. Polyanions and polycations have different deposition velocity 
on the surface due to their different molecular weight, charge density, swelling degree, and 
diffusion velocity. The deposition velocity of a polyelectrolyte with high molecular weight is 
usually slower than that of low molecular weight under the same conditions62,65,66.   
 The self-assembled PEMs involves the use of surface/membrane, and as a result, the final 
separation ability of the PEMs is highly dependent on the surface property of the membrane. 
The substrate may play different roles in the static bonds that are formed between the 
polyelectrolytes by releasing the counterions in an LbL assembly such as ; (i) provides 
geometry and morphology to the assembled material, (ii) used as a template during the 
assembly process55,67. Some of the substrates which are used for the LbL assembly are 
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polysulfone (psf), polyether sulfone (PES), sulfonated PES (sPES), 
and anionic exchange membrane (AEM) to name a few.                                                                                     
Below are some properties that are affected by the PEs. 
• Thickness and Pore structure of membrane 
The thickness and the pore structure of PEM are analysed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) 
and hydrodynamic pore model respectively68. Any system of PE affects the bilayers which in 
turn affects the membrane properties. With each coating, the number of bilayers increases 
which increases the resistance of the membrane. The increase in salt concentration increases 
the resistance per bilayer with thicker bilayers formation because at higher ionic strength the 
polymer chains become more coiled and a greater amount of PE is adsorbed onto the 
membrane(RM) which reduces the pore size56,66,68. Alternatively, the saturation of ionic 
strength in the PE solution can cause the pore size to increase, thus, decreasing the thickness. 
The above pattern is also true for PE concentration39,68–70.  The increase in bilayer may not 
affect the increase in thickness as the PEs can penetrate the membrane, causing the thickness 
to be the same while increasing the bilayers37,39.  
 
The PAA/PEI system deposited in a PAN membrane showed more stability than PES 
membrane because of the surface charge on the PAN membrane which can form ionic bonds 
with the PE pair59. Consequently, the substrate bearing an ionic charge allows the PEM to 
attach more strongly to the membrane due to the electrostatic interactions between the substrate 
and the multilayer.  
 
==PAGE:25==
17 
 
Nanopores coated with PVBAC/PSS system also showed strong bilayers with an increase in 
thickness as the bilayers increased. It was concluded that the thickness also depends on the 
pore diameter in such a way both are directly proportional to each other at the low diameter 
and then progressively deviate from this relationship at diameters above 250 nm71.  
 
• Water permeability  
 
According to Mudler (1996), a membrane is characterized as a porous membrane if the 
permeability coefficient ranges from 20.8 𝑡𝑜 208 𝐿 𝑚−2 ℎ−2 𝑏𝑎𝑟−1. Higher permeability 
indicates high porosity and permeability with coating34,36,38. The permeability decreases with 
an increase in the coating on the surface52,72. 
 
Initially, the permeability of water decreases with the increase in the layer of deposition48. The 
first deposition of PEI/PDADAMC decreases the WP substantially because of the initial 
anchoring of the PE to membrane48,73.  A system of PDADMAC/PSS is strong compared to 
PAH/PSS but the water permeability of PEM membrane with PAH/PSS is high compared to 
PDADMAC/PSS because of more charge per C atom in PAA which results in the high ionic 
cross-link74,63,65,75,76. Permeance difference was also observed depending on the terminating 
layer, that is, the anionic terminating layer showed high permeance as compared to the cationic 
which is known as the odd-even effect, where the charge of the final layer influenced the 
swelling of the entire multilayer and thereby also the permeance of PEM37,39,57,64,66,70,76–78,72,80. 
PDADMAC as the terminating layer shows a higher swelling degree which even though leads 
to a thicker membrane the layers formed are less dense, therefore, resulting in high WP66,76,81. 
Alternatively, the PE concentration and ionic strength also affect WP. As stated in the above 
section, at certain ionic and PE strength the thickness increases which causes a decrease in WP, 
and after that point, thickness reduces causing high WP65,68,82.  
 
As stated, when the membrane is hydrophilic, the membrane is prone to less fouling. Hence, 
when PEs are applied onto the membrane the membrane becomes hydrophilic and therefore 
reduces fouling66.    
 
• Salt rejection  
 
The separation in PEM membranes is generally dominated by Donnan exclusion, similar to NF 
exclusion states that when charged particles are in close contact with a semi-permeable 
membrane, the even distribution of the charged particle does not occur on either side of the 
membrane38,83.  For PEM membranes with positive PE as terminating layer, positively charged 
particles should have high retention, which confirms that positive PEM follows a Donnan 
exclusion trend. In the case of negative PE as a terminating layer, the retention was higher for 
non-charged particles (NaCl) which was probably due to dielectric and size exclusion74,79.  
 
Retention decreases from MgCl2 to MgSO4 to Na2SO4 when terminated with a positive layer, 
and increases when terminated with a negative layer at low ionic strength. The rejection also 
==PAGE:26==
18 
 
depends on the salt concentration, for low concentration, that is thin layers, the rejection is high 
because the coiled formed by the PE is less and vice-versa66,76,81,82. As stated in the above 
section, the swelling behaviour of the PEMs also affects the rejection, as when there is swelling, 
the rejection of the salt/sugar is also minimal78.  
 
• Zeta potential  
 
The zeta potential is the surface charge of PEM membranes. The membrane support has an 
effect on the zeta potential, for example, sPES has a negative surface, the PEM membrane 
becomes more negative as the pH increases76. Whereas when PES, which is a positively 
charged surface, is deposited with PEs, the PEM becomes more positive53. Similarly, when 
PDADMAC/PSS is deposited on an AEM, a negatively charged surface, PEM enhances the 
negative charge making the zeta potential more negative84.  
The zeta potential is also affected by the terminating layer, ionic strength the number of 
bilayers, and the PE used. For PDADMAC/PSS system, the increase in ionic strength from 
10^-5 M to 10 M increases the zeta potential63,85. As a result of decreased ionic strength, 
minimal overcompensation of the PE layer is caused by the elongated PS structure and 
dominant intrinsic charge compensation. As the ionic strength increases, the interdiffusion of 
the PDADMAC and PSS layers increases, resulting in an overcompensation of the PDADMAC 
layer. As a result, surfaces become less negatively charged. Overcompensation occurs at 
surface level and diminishes as penetration approaches the inner region55,63,65,79.  
 
 
• Stability of PEM membrane 
 
The strong PE pair such as PDADMAC/PSS showed high stability after exposure to two 
extreme pH conditions even after 2 months retained the electrostatic forces and maintain their 
charges74,81. The weak PEs like PAA, PAH, lost their charge over this period and the coil does 
not retain the electrostatic force. Even though PDADMAC/PSS showed much stability, the 
stability lasted only when the support layer had an ionic charge74,81.  
 
Many other studies used crosslink to stabilize the PEM, such as glutaraldehyde or graphene 
oxide49,74,86. A system of PAH/PSS achieved with crosslinking glutaraldehyde produced a 
denser PEM membrane with an extreme decrease in permeability. This crosslinking allowed 
the PEM membranes to withstand harsh conditions and form thick bilayers. However, the use 
of crosslinkers have a disadvantage as the chemicals are not environment friendly. 
 
Apart from NaCl, several other salts are used such as NaF, CsCl, and RbCl. There are several 
studies that analyse different properties of PEs on different substrates/membranes such as 
different salt (NaF, CsCl, RbCl) with PDADMAC/PSS was tested on silicon wafers which 
concluded that strong salt has stronger binding functionality87. In another study, the PEMs with 
PDADMAC/PSS, PAH/PSS, PAH/PAA were exposed to extreme conditions. that is both high 
and low pH. The system of strong PEs, that is, PDADMAC/PSS showed more resistance and 
were stable even after 2 months than the weak systems of PAH/PAA74.  
==PAGE:27==
19 
 
The most investigated method for LbL assembly is adsorption of which is performed by 
immersion and rinsing the membrane in the selected electrolyte solution. Even though the most 
popular method of LbL is the deposition of polyions of opposite charges, many multitopic 
molecules can act as binding sites as follows: Polymers with hydrogen donor and acceptor 
moieties, stereoregular polymers,  pi-pi interactions of aromatic cycles and carbon nanotubes, 
covalent interactions55,74. Apart from the above conventional way of applying PE to the 
membrane, there are several other procedures by which Lbl assembly can be accomplished. 
Some of the processes are immersion, patterning, Dip-pen lithography, inorganic/organic 
hybrid, metal-organic frameworks, spray technology, and sedimentation-driven metal phenolic 
networks to name a few.  
The above studies show that LbL is useful to change the surface properties of membranes. 
These properties are usually increasing the hydrophilicity of the membrane, increasing the 
thickness so that the membrane properties are subdued, and decrease in flux. The above 
properties come in favor of enzymes as most enzymes are hydrophilic, decrease in flux which 
means that the reaction mixture can get more time for conversion. Therefore, LbL is used for 
the fabrication of PEM membranes, it can be suitable for enzyme immobilization which is 
discussed in the next section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
20 
 
1.4. Enzyme Immobilization 
In the field of bioprocess technology, the discovery of biocatalysts or enzymes is considered to 
be remarkable because of the ease of production, substrate specificity, and green chemistry to 
name a few in their vast sector41. The past two decades saw the increase in applications of 
enzymes in different industries such as in the food industry, textiles, pulp, and paper42. In 
modern industry, enzymes are also used in the preparation of biosensors and biofuels such as 
biodiesel, ethanol, and methanol. During enzyme synthesis, a single enzyme can catalyze a 
given reaction, or additional enzymes can act sequentially or simultaneously to synthesize more 
complex compounds88. This enzymatic synthesis can be carried out in single enzyme reactions 
or multi-enzyme reactions89.  
There are multitudes of enzyme cascades in nature, which make up different metabolic 
pathways inside cells. Multi-enzyme catalysis is an attractive alternative to produce different 
chemicals as it allows energy-efficient conversion because of mild conditions such as ambient 
temperature and low pressure88. The application of multi-enzymatic systems can be classified 
into four categories: (a) with the use of cofactor, (b) equilibrium shift (sequential reactions), 
(c) renewable biomass feedstock degradation (mixed reactions), and (d) sugar chemistry 
(mixed reactions). In the first type of multi-enzymatic application, cofactors such as 
NAD(P)(H), NTP, and others are required. Some advantages result from the use of cofactors, 
including (i) mild reaction conditions, (ii) effective catalysis, (iii) high selectivity, and (iv) ease 
of reaction monitoring89–91. Apart from the advantages, the use of cofactor has a major 
drawback of being expensive. Hence, there are many regeneration systems developed to 
overcome this difficulty. Since major enzymatic reactions have intermediates before the final 
product is achieved, the multi-enzymatic cascade can also be classified based on the types of 
intermediates that arise before the final product is formed. The categories according to four 
different designs: i) linear: single substrate transformed to a single product, ii) orthogonal: 
converts substrate to a product with additional steps, iii) parallel: two products from two 
substrates by two different reactions with the cofactors, iv) cyclic: converts a material to 
intermediate which is transferred back to starting material from a mixture which leads to 
accumulation of compound46. These classifications of enzymatic cascades are not strict, newly 
designed pathways can also be included. From the above classification, it can be said that the 
conversion of CO2 to methanol uses cofactor and is orthogonal in design91,92. 
Although there are many desirable properties and industrial applications of enzymes, these are 
often short-lived because of their lack of long-term – operational stability, shelf–storage life, 
and reusability of the enzymes. The maintenance of structural stability is of most challenge and 
immobilized enzymes with high functional efficiency come into play. Therefore, enzyme 
immobilization has been used to overcome the above drawbacks91,93.  
Enzyme immobilization is the confinement of enzymes to a phase (matrices/support) different 
from the one for substrates and products41,89. The matrices used are inert polymers and 
inorganic materials which act as ideal matrices because of characteristics like inertness, 
physical strength, stability, renewability, ability to increase enzyme specificity/activity, and 
reduce product inhibition41,43. The first discovery of immobilized enzymes was made in 1916. 
The experiment concluded that the enzyme invertase exhibited high activity when it was 
adsorbed on a solid surface which was charcoal and aluminium hydroxide. This result led to 
the development of current methods used for immobilization94. During the 1950s and 1960s, 
==PAGE:29==
21 
 
the enzyme was immobilized in accordance with the surface area available which resulted in 
low enzyme loadings. Therefore, different loading techniques were introduced such as covalent 
binding, affinity immobilization, physical entrapment, and bioconjugation to name a few from 
the growing list94–96. Figure 1.11 represents the four popular methods of immobilization 
pictorially. 
 
Figure 1.11: Various enzyme immobilization techniques43. 
 
1.4.1. Types of Immobilization Techniques 
An overview of the above-stated immobilization processes are as follows: 
Adsorption is one of the simplest techniques for immobilization which uses weak bonds such 
as Van der Waal’s forces, electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions93,97. The procedure 
involves dissolving the enzyme in solution and applying the solution on the solid support for 
desired time and conditions. The unadsorbed enzyme is then removed by wash. Adsorption is 
an economical process because it is reagent – free, and is not destructive to the enzyme activity. 
Nevertheless, this process has its drawbacks such as the weak physical bonds loosely bound 
the enzyme to the surface which can be weakened when there is a change in temperature, pH, 
or ionic strength. To overcome these difficulties, there are several methods introduced for 
membrane modification stated in the above section such as layer by layer assembly, grafting 
among many others95,96,98. 
Entrapment: In this immobilization method, the enzyme is not directly attached to the support 
surface but entrapped between the polymeric network which allows only substrate and product 
to traverse through but retains the enzyme. The procedure for entrapment is done in two steps: 
(i) mixing enzyme in the monomer solution, (ii) polymerization of the monomer solution by 
chemical reaction or by changing experimental conditions29,97,99,100. There are a variety of 
procedures for immobilization by entrapment depending upon the type of entrapment such as 
electropolymerization, photopolymerization, a sol-gel process for lattice or fiber type, and 
microencapsulation for microcapsule type. The advantages of this method include 
improvement in enzyme stability, decrease in leaching and denaturation, capability to optimize 
==PAGE:30==
22 
 
the microenvironment by modifying the encapsulating material to have optimal pH or polarity. 
The disadvantage is the difficulty in mass transfer because of the increase in thickness of the 
gel matrix making it difficult for the substrate to diffuse. Another drawback includes if the pore 
size is larger than the molecule then there might be leakage of the enzyme94–96. 
Cross-linking: Immobilization by cross-linking is an irreversible method performed by the 
formation of intermolecular cross-linkages between the enzyme molecules by a cross-linking 
chain over the surfaces. The process includes the use of multifunctional reagents which act as 
linkers to connect enzyme molecules into three–dimensional cross-linked aggregates101. There 
are two approaches for immobilization by this method which are cross-linking enzyme 
aggregate (CLEA) and cross-linking enzyme crystal (CLEC). In the CLEC method reagents 
are added to cross-linked enzyme crystals after crystallization. CLEA is an improved version 
of the CLEC method in which the addition of salts, organic solvents, or non – ionic polymers 
result in the formation of enzyme aggregates. The strong bonding ensures minimal leakage. 
This method widens the possibility to adjust the microenvironment by using stabilizing agents 
through surface complementarity42,43. 
Covalent Bonding: In this process, stable complexes between functional groups on enzyme 
molecules and a support matrix are formed through covalent bonding. The covalent bond 
formed between the support matrix and the enzyme should be with the non – functional group 
of the enzyme which usually involves binding via a side chain. The side-chain functional 
groups of enzymes that can be used for covalent bonding are amino group, carboxyl group, 
phenolic group, sulfhydryl group, thiol group, imidazole group, indole group, and a hydroxyl 
group. The procedure to bind the enzyme has two stages: initially to activate the surface with 
help of a linker such as carbodiimide followed by covalent coupling of the enzyme to the 
activated support. The linkers are multifunctional reagents that act as the bridge between 
surface and enzyme via covalent bonding. The formation of the activated surface using a linker 
is called a self–assembled monolayer (SAM). For different support materials, different linkers, 
and different immobilization protocols come into play. The advantages of this method include 
less leakage of enzymes because of the strong bonds, and the high uniformity of SAM provides 
good control over the enzyme. Apart from less leakage, the strong covalent bonds have a high 
risk of enzyme denaturation. In addition to the drawback, the ratio of enzyme immobilized to 
the amount of reagent required is low. There are several procedures among which the most 
used are activation of the carboxylic group in which the carbodiimide (RN=C=NR) functional 
group aids the linking of the carboxyl group of the support and the amino group of the 
enzyme94–96.  
The matrices in which the enzyme is immobilized play a major role in the activity and stability 
of the enzyme. In the past two decades, a large number of support materials, including 
polymeric 
materials, 
hydrogels, 
and 
nanoparticles, 
etc 
have 
been 
used 
for 
immobilization92,93,102.  One of the most important factors is the hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
nature of the matrice/support. Support with appropriate hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity 
should be selected based on the enzyme and matrix characteristics. For example, hydrophobic 
methacrylic support, such as octadecyl-activated, can offer lipase activity and stability in a 
hydrophobic microenvironment that is effective for the interaction of hydrophobic regions with 
lipophobic regions. Alternatively, enzymes immobilized close to hydrophobic surfaces can 
experience conformational changes that severely affect their stability and activity93,102. 
==PAGE:31==
23 
 
The production of methanol as stated in Section 2 is a multi-enzymatic process. As stated, the 
first enzymatic process for CO2 to methanol proposed by Dave et al17., experimented silica 
matrices with all the three enzymes ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH in the same space which is 
called co - immobilization. Soon after, Wang et al103. proposed the use of polystyrene particles 
for similar immobilization. The enzymatic reactions performed by Dave et al17., and Wang et 
al103., were successful but the enzyme dosage of these methods was large because the number 
of individual enzymes cannot be regulated and the equilibrium for each reaction was long 
because of high mass transfer. To make the multienzyme system desirable the system may bear 
the following features: (i) The ability to regulate enzyme amounts easily according to enzyme 
activity; (ii) orderly assembly of enzymes within nanometer distances for direct channelling 
and placement of intermediates between enzymes without equilibrating with the bulk fluid; (iii) 
fine-tuning of the scaffold pores to achieve low mass transfer resistance for the 
intermediates/products; (iv) enabling the easy recovery and recycling of immobilized 
enzyme91,92. 
When ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH were immobilized in silica-gel, the yield of methanol 
increased from 10% to 90%, then in the solution phase, that is, free enzyme. After this, there 
were many experiments carried out in similar gel such as alginate-silica (ALG-SiO2) 21,24,93, 
phospholipid-silica nanocapsules88, hollow nanofibers104, and mesoporous silica42 to name a 
few. Overview of immobilization in some above-stated matrices is shown in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3: Overview of conversion of CO2 to methanol for in some matrices 
Matrices used 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
References 
Silica sol-gel 
yield increased from 
10% to 90% compared 
to the free system 
High duration of the 
experiment, low 
concentration of 
methanol produced, 
enzyme leakage  
17, 100, 102 
Alginite-Silica (ALG-
SiO2)  
Swelling behaviour 
favourable for 
substrate and product 
diffusion 
Enzyme leakage 
21,24,93 
Phospholipid-silica 
nanocapsules 
Increase in activity of 
polyenzymattic system 
by 30 fold 
Accumulation of 
methanol; decrease in 
reaction rate 
88 
Hollow nanofibres 
High purity of 
methanol 
Leakage and 
denaturation of 
enzymes 
104 
Mesoporous silica gel 
Chemically and 
mechanically stable 
Denaturation of the 
enzyme because of the 
different pore size 
42 
ultrathin hybrid 
microcapsules 
High stability, good 
recyclability  
low enzyme efficiency 
92 
==PAGE:32==
24 
 
Mesoporous Cellular 
Foams 
Low cost, feasible 
the low specificity of 
ADH, Co-
immobilization of 
enzyme did not favour 
the reaction 
105,106 
 
Table 1.3 shows the further experiments carried out in the following years after Obert and 
Dave17 in 1999, using the same procedure.  Even though there were several advantages such as 
the system of sol-gel was thermodynamically feasible, the process became infeasible because 
of the duration of the reaction and low concentration of methanol. Sol-gel matrices, which 
contain rigid silica matrices and too small diameter, effectively cause the crowded effect, which 
decreases the enzyme's mobility, thus decreasing its bioactivity17,93,103. A negatively charged 
gel immobilized with enzymes would also decrease the conformational motion and dynamic 
properties of the enzymes107. Furthermore, the loose structure of alginate gel was found to 
significantly leak enzymes and deteriorate the mechanical, storage, and operational stability. 
Hence, because of the disadvantages of the use of the above matrices, the use of membranes 
for enzyme immobilization. In the past decade, biosensors and bioreactors based on 
biocatalytic membranes with enzymes immobilized have gained a lot of attention. A porous 
membrane can serve as both a select barrier and support for enzyme immobilization, allowing 
for improved enzyme stability, elimination of inhibitors, and continuous processing30,101.  
The use of polymeric membranes for the immobilization of enzymes has gained popularity in 
the past few years for the wide variety of barrier structures and properties. Membranes also 
have an advantage in that there is no phase change involved, which means that membranes 
require low maintenance93,108. Since membrane fouling however is commonly inevitable and 
detrimental to membrane performance, generally caused by physical adsorption, pore blocking, 
gel or cake formation, and biofuels. On the other hand, fouling is used as a strategy for 
immobilization of enzymes as membrane fouling and immobilization share some features like 
entrapment which can be considered as membrane fouling because of pore blocking109.  
There are two studies done by J. Luo et al44,110., first; “Fouling-induced enzyme immobilization 
for membrane reactors” uses the concept of different membrane orientation, that is, skin layer 
facing feed (normal mode) and support layer facing feed (reverse mode),  for immobilization 
of ADH and GDH. It is seen that the reverse mode shows high enzyme loading and better 
resume stability compared to the normal mode. But in both systems, there is enzyme leakage 
which declines the enzyme activity gradually. Similarly, in the second study110, in which 
different types of membranes are used to determine the effect membrane fouling has on the 
immobilization of ADH. The different types of ultrafiltration membrane used are PLGC (skin 
material: cellulose), GR61PP (skin material: polysulfone), PLTK, Biomax, GR51PP. The 
enzyme loading efficiency was high for GR61PP but the conversion was low mainly due to 
loss of chemical affinity between the ADH enzyme and membrane materials. Each membrane 
type shows high conversion initially but the conversion decreased with time. The main reason 
for the decrease in conversion is due to enzyme leakage and activity loss. Both the studies show 
enzyme leakage and can be rectified by modification or adding reagent for better use.  
The immobilization strategy for conversion of CO2 to methanol used in the polymer gel 
structures as seen in table 3 is co immobilization which is the mixing of all enzymes in a 
confined matrix91,111. Sequential/cascade immobilization is another method that may be used, 
==PAGE:33==
25 
 
in which each enzyme is immobilized separately so that each enzyme can work with a larger 
surface area17,26. One such study by J. Luo et. al112., compared both the immobilization 
mechanism, that is, co- and cascade immobilization of ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH. The study 
focused on the stated two immobilization strategies which are fouling-induced enzyme 
immobilization. The hypothesis is that the constant low substrate concentration could decrease 
the rate of the cascade reaction when enzymes are co-immobilized on the same membrane but 
the other hand, it is uncertain that the shorter mass transfer path for the product from one 
reaction to subsequent one which acts the substrate will be advantageous. For this, the setup 
was in vitro assembly of multi enzymatic polymeric membranes. The conclusion was that the 
co – immobilization did not improve the methanol production compared to sequential 
immobilization because of the trade-off between the mitigation of product inhibition and low 
substrate concentration. Hence sequential immobilization is very useful as it allows the reaction 
conditions for each step to be adjusted separately and the pressure-driven mass transfer can 
overcome the diffusion resistance between the enzymes.  
For the immobilization to be successful, membranes are required to have some specific 
properties such as the need to withstand certain mechanical stresses, temperatures, and extreme 
pH etc100. Modification techniques aim to introduce functional groups on the membrane surface 
making it easier to analyze its surface characteristics without actually affecting the bulk 
properties as explained in section 1.4.1. There are many modifications as stated in the section 
from which LbL is widely used because of the versatility of the process. The study by H. Zhang 
et al113., focused on an effective method for immobilization of Glucose oxidase (GOx) and 
Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP) by co-deposition of PDA and PEI. The experiments concluded 
that the activity of enzymes increased due to the deposition of PDA/PEI in the nanopores. The 
deposition ensured uniform immobilization of enzymes on the surface thus increasing the 
activity of the enzymes. Hence, it can be concluded that the membrane modification has a 
positive effect on the immobilization mechanism100,113. 
Hence from the above studies, it can be concluded that porous surfaces provide higher 
efficiency for immobilization such as membranes. The immobilization can be performed by 
different techniques under different conditions106. Isolating the three dehydrogenases in a small 
area should decrease the diffusion time of intermediate products to the next enzyme's active 
site, thus likely increasing the reaction rate. The immediate conversion, however, maintains the 
substrate levels at very low levels, thus reducing the rate of individual enzymes. Therefore, 
there are several strategies applied to improve the efficiency such as LbL modification of 
membrane before immobilization of enzyme using different techniques at different conditions. 
Hence, this report focuses on the cascade enzyme immobilization in polyelectrolytic fabricated 
ultrafiltration membrane for conversion of CO2 to methanol because of less knowledge of 
immobilization on PEM membrane.  
A system that uses a biocatalytic membrane for the production of chemicals is called 
Membrane Bioreactor (MBR). The scale-up of the biocatalytic membrane processes is 
relatively easy and critical operational parameters can be readily modified which was first 
demonstrated by Sepracor and Tanabe who worked on the production of diltiazem and 
implemented it on an industrial level108.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
26 
 
1.4.2. MEMBRANE REACTOR 
The industrial scene is not unfamiliar with the concept of membrane-based separation 
processes with wide use in the petrochemical, food, and pharmaceutical industries. The 
advantages of membrane-based processes over conventional processes such as distillation, 
adsorption, and absorption are the increase in energy savings and reduction in capital 
investment. The coupling of biological processes such as fermentation, enzymatic conversion 
with membrane separation has been studied since the 1970s. The two properties which gave 
rise to the use of membranes in industries are membrane as contactors and the second is 
membrane as reactors. The former finds application in a separation where the membrane acts 
as a medium of separation. The latter uses the separative properties of the membrane. 
Combining the above two properties gave rise to bioreactors in which the top layer acts as the 
reaction surface and then the porous media act as the separator which allows the product to 
permeate through97,98,115.  
According to the book “Catalytic membranes and membrane reactor”116, the MBR for 
biochemical synthesis is classified into whole-cell MBR and enzymatic MBR. The whole-cell 
MBR uses plant, mammalian cells, bacteria, or yeast biocatalyst with membranes for product 
synthesis. The earliest example of this process is the production of lactic acid from lactose. In 
recent years, the use of whole-cell MBR has seen applications industrially for the production 
of growth hormone from bacteria E. coli. The use of enzymes has increased in the industry like 
for the production of biofuels. However, the industrial use of enzymes in the batch reactor has 
drawbacks such as high labor costs, frequent start-up and shutdown procedures and loss of 
enzymatic activity, etc. Therefore, enzymatic MBRs are gaining industrial applications. The 
worldwide business has grown from 5 million dollars in 2005 to 2.7 billion dollars in 
2012114,117. This increase is mainly driven by the environmental factors for sustainable 
production methods. In the Enzymatic membrane reactor (EMR), the membrane governs the 
mass transport across it and retains the enzyme inside the reactor. Based on the retention 
method of the enzyme, EMR is divided into two categories: first, where the membrane is used 
as selective barriers also known as free enzyme EMR, and second, where the enzyme is 
immobilized on the membrane with chemical or physical interactions108.  
In free enzyme EMR or the reactor which uses membrane as a selective barrier, the principle 
behind the retention of the enzyme is size exclusion. The size of the enzyme is generally higher 
than that of membrane pores, but sometimes the enzyme size has to increase by the methods of 
creating cross-linked enzyme crystals or binding them onto the carrier. Another way of enzyme 
retention is by repelling charged enzyme molecules with the charged membrane of the same 
sign also known as electrostatic repulsion116.  
In an Immobilized Enzymatic Membrane reactor, the membrane acts as both a support and 
selective barrier for the enzyme. In these types of EMRs, there is generally a close contact 
between the enzyme and the membrane due to the enzyme immobilization. Immobilized 
enzymes offer increased enzyme usage, improved stability, reduced product inhibition, and the 
potential for continuous process designs.  There are several techniques for immobilizing an 
enzyme onto the membrane which determine the further activity of the enzyme. The different 
techniques as described in section 1.4.1. Apart from choosing an appropriate technique, a 
suitable membrane also has to be chosen so that the enzyme activity is not lost108. As seen in 
==PAGE:35==
27 
 
section 1.4.1., the method used in this project is the immobilization of enzymes by adsorption 
and cross-linking, that is, the immobilized EMR is used for the project.  
The next section focuses on the project and results performed to obtain a suitable PEM 
membrane for CO2 to CH3OH conversion. The first step is to develop suitable PEM membrane 
by LbL assembly of PEs. This method is used because of the versatility that can be accumulated 
in the process to make the desirable changes. Next step is to immobilize ADH, FaldDH and 
FateDH onto the PEM membranes and analyzing the reaction for each of the enzymes. The 
procedures and the results are explained in the following sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
28 
 
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
2.1.Materials Required 
 
The 
chemicals 
required 
for 
PEM 
fabrication 
are 
polyelctrolytes: 
Polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC), Poly(allylamine Hydrochloride) 
(PAH), Polyethylenimine (PEI), poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS); Sodium Chloride 
(NaCl), Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH), Hydrogen Chloride (HCl). 
For enzyme immobilization: Alcohol Dehydrogenase (ADH) EC 1.2.1.2, Formaldehyde 
Dehydrogenase (FaldDH) EC 1.2.1.46, Formate Dehydrogenase (FateDH) EC1.2.1.2, 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide Hydrogen (NADH) Glutaraldehyde (GA), Formaldehdye 
(HCOH), Sodium Formate, Formic Acid, CO2, 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid, -(N-
morpholino)ethanesulfonic potassium salt for MES buffer, Phosphate buffered saline (PBS 
buffer), Bovine Serum albumin (2mg/ml) (BSA), Bradford reagent, Milli-Q water. 
 
2.2.Procedure 
 
The procedure of this project is first layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of polyelectrolytes to create 
PEM membrane, followed by enzyme immobilization and concluded by the reaction of CO2 to 
Methanol (CH3OH). The procedure of each of the section in detail is as follows: 
 
2.2.1. Layer-by-layer Assembly  
The layer-by-layer assembly is started by cutting the GRP61PP polysulfone (psf) membrane in 
a 6.5 cm x 6.5 cm dimension. The cut membranes were then pre-treated with 0.1% of NaOH 
for 30 min in a rotary shaker at 30 rpm, followed by rinsing the membrane with deionized water 
for three 30 min cycles. The membranes are stored in deionized water until used further. 
For the fabrication, the aqueous solution of cationic and anionic PE was prepared by mixing 
the desired amount of PE and NaCl. Then, the cut membrane was placed in the polymeric frame 
with the active side facing outwards. This was then placed in a rotary shaker and was set at 30 
rpm. The fabrication was started by first applying 10 ml of cationic PE solution to the 
membrane for 10 min. This was followed by a two 5 min wash with 10 ml of NaCl to remove 
the PE which is not adsorbed from the surface. Next, 10 ml of anionic PE solution was applied 
for 10 mins. Then concluded with two 5 min wash with NaCl solution. This concludes the 
conjugation of one bilayer of cationic and anionic pairs. This can be repeated for X number of 
bilayers (bl).  
For an enzyme to be applied, the last layer of PEM has to be kept at a positive layer. Therefore, 
after the conjugation of 1 bl; one more layer of cationic PE is applied. Hence, the minimum 
PEM membrane fabricated is 1.5 bl as shown in the figure. 
==PAGE:37==
29 
 
 
Figure 2.1: LbL assembly of PE to form PEM membrane 
 
The PEM membrane is stored in deionized water till further use. 
2.2.2. Preparation of Buffer  
Two buffer solutions are prepared for this project which are MES at 6.5 and PBS at 6, 6.5, 7 
and 8. The concentration of each of the buffer is 40 mM.  
The buffer solution is needed to adjust the charge of the protein (BSA), enzymes and as a base 
for all the substrates used in the reaction. The calculations for the same are done using the 
Henderson – HasselBalch equation.  
𝑝𝐻= 𝑝𝑘𝑎+ log (
𝐴−
𝐻𝐴)…                        (i) 
Where, pka; the negative log of equilibrium rate constant (ka) 𝐴−; conjugate base, 𝐻𝐴; weak 
acid 
The pka for MES and PBS buffer are 6.16 and 7.21 respectively. 
 
2.2.3. Enzyme Immobilization  
 
2.2.3.1.  Single Enzyme Immobilization 
 
In this section, the immobilization technique mostly used is adsorption. However, 
glutaraldehyde (GA) is also used initially for the comparison of adsorption and crosslinking.  
The PEM membrane is fabricated with cationic PE as the last layer as stated in section 2.2.1. 
The rotary shaker is set at 50 rpm. 
 
i. 
For cross-linking: 10 ml of 2.5% glutaraldehyde is applied for 30 mins followed by 
2 washes for 2 mins with MilliQ water at 50 rpm. This is followed by 10 ml 
application of individual enzyme at 50 rpm for a particular time followed by 3 
washes for 2 mins with Buffer. The discard and wash are then analyzed by Bradford 
assay. 
ii. 
For adsorption: 10 ml of the enzyme is directly applied to the PEM membrane for 
the required amount of time followed by 3 washes for 2 mins with buffer at 50 rpm. 
The discard and wash are then analyzed by Bradford assay. 
 
2.2.3.2.  Co and Cascade Immobilization  
 
i. 
Co-immobilization: For this procedure, 10 ml of all three enzymes in total 
is applied on the PEM membrane fabricated from section 2.2.1 for the 
==PAGE:38==
30 
 
required amount of time at 50 rpm. After enzyme immobilization, PSS is 
applied followed by NaCl wash.  
ii. 
Cascade-immobilization: For this procedure, the first 10 ml of ADH is 
applied onto the PEM membrane followed by PSS and PDADMAC 
fabrication. After this, 10 ml of FaldDH is applied for the required time 
followed by PSS and PDADMAC fabrication. Lastly, FateDH is applied for 
the required time and PSS application.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2 displays the different immobilization technique as stated above 
 
Figure 2.2: Enzyme immobilization after PEM membrane fabrication: a) Immobilization by adsorption; b) Immobilization by 
Cross-linking; c) Co-immobilization; d) Cascade Immobilization 
 
2.2.4. Reaction  
 
The PEM membrane with immobilized enzyme is transferred to the Amicon 8050 cell. Then, 
the reaction mixture is added to the cell. The pressure for the reaction is 1 bar and at 100 rpm 
agitation. The reaction mixture for each of the different enzyme is as follows: 
 
a. ADH: which catalyzes formaldehyde to methanol 
- 
Substrate: Formaldehyde-30mM: prepared from 37% stock solution  
- 
Co-factor: NADH: stock solution 1g/l prepared with 30 mM formaldehyde 
b. FaldDH: which catalyzes formate to formaldehyde 
- 
Substrate: Sodium formate: 30 mM  
- 
Co-factor: NADH: stock solution 1g/l prepared with 30 mM Sodium formate 
c. FateDH: which catalyzes CO2 to formate 
- 
Substrate: CO2-bubbled in the buffer for 0.5/1hour 
- 
Co-factor: NADH: stock solution 1g/l prepared with CO2 bubbled buffer 
- 
 
The above concentration of substrate is for the individual reaction when single enzyme 
immobilization is carried out. For co and cascade immobilization, the substrate is the same as 
for CO2 to Formate (c) as the entire reaction is CO2 to CH3OH.  
 
After the reaction, the NADH conversion is calculated from the concentration of the feed and 
the permeate from the below equation calculated from the standard curve stated in section 2.3.1. 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 (%) = (1 −
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑝
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑓) ∗100..               (i) 
==PAGE:39==
31 
 
Where Concp and Concf is the concentration of NADH in permeate and feed respectively 
analyzed from the standard curve. 
Mass balance for the reaction is also calculated to analyze the consumption of NADH. The 
moles of NADH consumption is calculated according to the following equation of mass balance 
𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑑−𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑑= 𝑛𝑝1 + 𝑛𝑝2 + 𝑛𝑝3 + 𝑛𝑅 
𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑑= 𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑑−𝑛𝑝1 −𝑛𝑝2 −𝑛𝑝3 −𝑛𝑅….                      (ii) 
𝑛𝑥= 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛∗𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒  
 
Where nconsumed is the number of moles of NADH consumed during the reaction, nfeed is the 
number of moles of NADH in feed, and np(1,2,3) is number of moles in permeate 1, 2, and 3 
and nR is the number of moles of NADH in the retentate. 
The flux of each permeates collected is also calculated by the following equation  
𝐽𝑠=
𝑉𝑝
𝑡∗𝐴𝑀∗∆𝑃…                    (iii) 
Where Js is the flux of the solute, Vp (L) is the volume of the permeate, t (mins) is the time for 
the solute to permeate through, ∆𝑃 (bar) is the pressure applied for reaction, AM (m2) is the area 
of the membrane which is 0.00159 m2. 
2.2.5. Free Enzyme Reactions 
 
The free enzyme reaction is carried out so that the activity of each enzyme can be analyzed by 
changing the pH, temperature, and cofactor concentration. The reaction is carried out in micro 
in microplate at different pH: 6, 6.5, 7, 8 – buffer used PBS 
 
The substrate concentration for each of the reactions is as follows: 
a. ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH: 1g/l of stock solution in 
each pH of buffer solution 
b. Substrate: Formaldehyde-30mM: prepared from 37% 
stock solution  
c. Substrate: Sodium formate: 30 mM  
d. Substrate: CO2-bubbled in the buffer for 0.5/1hour 
e. Co-factor: NADH stock solution prepared with each 
buffer 
 
2.3. Analytical methods  
 
2.3.1. Water Permeability 
 
After the membrane is fabricated, the membrane was cut to a specific diameter and placed 
inside an Amicon 8050 cell. The membrane was compressed for 30-40 mins at 4 bar and then 
water permeability is calculated at 2, 3, and 4 bar respectively. The water permeability is 
calculated with the following equation  
 
==PAGE:40==
32 
 
𝐿𝑝=
𝐽𝑤
∆𝑃=
𝑉𝑝(𝑡)
𝑡∗𝐴𝑀∗∆𝑃…..             (iv) 
Where Lp is the water permeability. Jw is the water flux. ΔP is the trans-membrane pressure. 
Am is the area of the membrane which is 0.00159 m2.   
 
2.3.2. NADH Retention  
 
The NADH standard curve is to measures the concentration of NADH in a sample.  The 
standard is prepared with 200 µM (0.007094 g in 50 ml water) of NADH solution with the base 
as Buffer and dividing the solution as shown: 
                                                          Table 2.1: Different NADH concentration for Standard curve 
Concentration 
µM 
Buffer 
µ𝒍 
NADH 
µ𝒍 
 
0 
1000 
0 
40 
800 
200 
100 
500 
500 
160 
200 
800 
200 
0 
1000 
 
The absorbance is analyzed at 340 nm in UV/Vis Spectrophotometer with Shimadzu UV1280. 
The retention and conversion are calculated from the absorbance of permeate and feed using 
the following formula: 
 
𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (%) = (1 −
𝑐𝑝
𝑐𝑓) ∗100….          (v) 
Where cp and cf is concentration id permeate and feed respectively. 
 
2.3.3. Bradford Assay 
 
The Bradford assay is used to measure the concentration of total protein in a sample. The assay 
is dye-binding assay based on the different color changes of a dye in response to various 
concentrations of protein. The stock is prepared of 10 mg/l by using BSA solution of 2 mg/ml. 
The stock is then divided from 0 – 10 mg/ml. The dilution is done using Buffer solution 
prepared as shown in table 2. 
                                                          Table 2.2: Different BSA concentration for Bradford assay 
CONCENTRATION 
𝒎𝒈
𝒍 
BUFFER 
µ𝒍 
BSA µ𝒍 
0 
2000 
0 
1 
1800 
200 
2.5 
1750 
250 
5 
1500 
500 
==PAGE:41==
33 
 
7.5 
200 
1800 
10 
0 
2000 
 
The absorbance is calculated at 595 nm for the above concentrations and a standard curve is 
established by plotting a graph between absorbance and concentration. To calculate the amount 
of immobilized enzyme, absorbance of feed and discard is calculated and the amount 
immobilized is calculated from the below formula: 
𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝐼𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑 (%) = (1 −
𝐴𝑑
𝐴𝑓) ∗100…..             (vi) 
Where; Ad and Af are the absorbance of discard and feed respectively.  
 
2.3.4. Zeta Potential  
 
The zeta potential is calculated for a pH range of 4 to 9 for PEM membrane fabricated 
according to section 2.2.1. The zeta potential is calculated by SurPASS from Anton paar 
surface charge and zeta potential analyzer. The background electrolyte used is potassium 
chloride (KCl) of concentration 1 mM and temperature 25°C. The solution pH was adjusted 
using HCl and NaOH. The zeta potential charge is milliVolts (mV).  
 
The next section has results of the different experiments performed and the interpretation of 
the experiments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
34 
 
3. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
 
3.1.  Enzyme immobilization on PEM with different cationic PE 
In this experiment three cationic PE were used namely PDADMAC, PEI, and PAH to fabricate 
a PEM membrane of 1.5 bls. The PEM membrane is fabricated according to Section 2.2.1 with 
the initial cationic layer of PDADMAC and final layer of cationic layer of PDADMC, PAH 
and PEI respectively. Therefore, three system of PEM membranes of PDADMAC/PSS, 
PAH/PSS and PEI/PSS were fabricated with respect to the last layer. The concentration of the 
PEs and salt used is as follows: 
Table 3.1: PE and NaCl concentration 
Concentration 
Cationic PE (PDADMAC/PAH/PEI) 
8 mM 
Anionic PE (PSS) 
8 mM 
NaCl 
80mM 
 
After the LbL assembly, each of the enzymes was separately immobilized on the surface both 
adsorption and cross-linking strategies as stated in section 2.2.3.1 with buffer MES at 6.5 pH. 
The main aim of the experiment was to analyze the effect of different cationic PE on enzyme 
immobilization followed by the conversion of NADH for each reaction. 
3.1.1. Enzyme immobilization by Bradford assay 
The enzyme immobilization carried out according to section 2.2.3.1 is followed by analyzing 
the discard by Bradford assay to conclude the amount of enzymes immobilized on the 
membrane. The Bradford assay worked on FaldDH and FateDH and showed some 
immobilization as seen in Figure 3.1. However, the Bradford assay did not have any accurate 
conclusion for the ADH enzyme that can be seen in the Appendix B because of the impurities 
present in the enzyme that overcome during the assay. Therefore, the NADH conversion after 
the reaction for each of reaction is analyzed. 
Figure 3.1 represents the immobilization of FaldDH and FateDH with different PE as the last 
layer and with different immobilization strategies and calculated from equation (vi) calculated 
from the values represented in Appendix B. 
 
Figure 3.1: Percentage of enzyme immobilized by two strategies: Adsorption and Cross-linking for two enzymes a) FaldDH 
and b) FateDH 
a. 
b
==PAGE:43==
35 
 
Figure 3.1 represents the amount of immobilized enzyme in accordance with the feed of 
enzyme introduced to the PEM membrane. The amount of enzyme immobilized by the cross-
linking method is high because of cross-linkers formed between the enzyme and GA. Even 
though, FateDH showed more immobilization than FaldDH, the NADH conversion stated in 
the next section analyses more about the immobilization strategy. 
3.1.2. NADH conversion  
Each of the enzymes catalyzes a separate reaction, that is, ADH catalyzes HCOH to CH3OH; 
FaldDH catalyzes HCOOH to HCOH and FateDH catalyzes CO2 to HCOH. For each of the 
reaction cofactor NADH is needed which acts as an electron donor activates the enzyme 
towards the required direction17. The reaction for each of the enzymes is carried out with 
respect to the procedure as stated in section 2.2.4.  
a. For ADH (HCOH to CH3OH) 
ADH reduces HCOH to methanol in the presence of NADH as a cofactor which acts as an 
electron donor and converts to NAD+ by oxidation reaction17. Therefore, the reduction of 
NADH concentration is analyzed in each permeate and feed. 
 
Figure 3.2: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to Methanol at pH 6.5 MES buffer with different PEM membranes: a) 
and b) represent the concentration of NADH in permeates and feed with immobilization of adsorption and cross-linking 
respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed with immobilization for of adsorption and cross-
==PAGE:44==
36 
 
linking; e) Consumption of NADH for reaction in each of PEM membrane calculated by the mass balance. The error bar 
represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.2 displays five graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance calculated from equation 
(ii) of the entire reaction for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The 
NADH concentration in feed is approximately 50 µM. The permeates collected show the 
concentration of NADH rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH 
by the enzyme and catalyzes the reaction of formaldehyde to methanol.  
For enzymes immobilized with adsorption, the force between the surface and PE is the 
electrostatic force of attraction caused by the difference in charges. At pH 6.5, at which the 
reaction is carried out, the charge of ADH is negative because the isoelectric point is 5.4-5.8. 
The highest consumption of NADH with 4.2 ∗10−7 moles are seen when PEI is the last layer 
with about 80-85% conversion followed by PAH with 79-82% conversion and lastly 
PDADMAC with 70-80% conversion with consumption of about 4 −4.1 ∗10−7moles and 
3.7 ∗10−7 moles respectively for each cationic PEM membrane. The first layer in all PEM 
membranes fabricated in this experiment is PDADMAC. Even though PDADMAC is stronger 
PE than PEI and PAH, the conversion is higher when the cationic PE; PEI is the last layer in 
the PEM membrane.  As PEI is a branched polymer as seen in Figure 1.1056,59,118, the force of 
attraction between the PE and ADH is strong resulting in high enzyme content, therefore 
increasing the efficiency of the reaction.  In the PEM membrane with PDADMAC as the last 
PE, the enzyme adsorption might be less because of the pore blocking by PE and forming a 
dense membrane resulting in less adsorption of enzyme on the surface.  
For immobilization with crosslinking with glutaraldehyde (GA), there are cross-linkers formed 
between the enzyme and the PE94,99. This cross-linker formed blocks the pore which increases 
the resistance of the substrate and NADH, thus increasing the consumption of NADH by the 
enzyme. Hence the conversion and consumption for each PEM membrane increase as 
compared to immobilization by adsorption because of the high content of enzyme on the 
surface with high pore blocking and mass transfer resistance.  The GA cross-linkers have 
affected when the PE used is PDADMAC and PAH, but with PEI, the conversion of NADH 
does not increase and rather remains approximately the same because the reaction between 
amino-GA moieties prevents the chemical cross-linking to be formed. Hence decreasing the 
enzyme immobilization on the PEM membrane119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
37 
 
b. FaldDH (HCOOH to HCOH) 
FaldDH reduces Formate (HCOOH) to Formaldehyde (HCOH) in the presence of NADH as 
cofactor which is oxidized to NAD+ by donating an electron17. Therefore, the concentration of 
NADH is analyzed of the feed, permeates, and retentates.  
 
Figure 3.3: Reaction of FaldDH for conversion of HCOOH to HCOH at pH 6.5 MES buffer with different PEM membranes: a) 
and b) represent the concentration of NADH in permeates and feed with immobilization of adsorption and cross-linking 
respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed with immobilization for of adsorption and cross-
linking; e) Consumption of NADH for reaction in each of PEM membrane calculated by the mass balance. The error bar 
represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.3 displays five graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance calculated from equation 
(ii) of the entire reaction for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The 
NADH concentration in feed is approximately 50 µM. The permeates collected to show the 
concentration of NADH rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH 
by the enzyme and catalyzes the reaction of HCOOH to HCOH.  
For enzymes immobilized with adsorption, the force between the surface and PE is the 
electrostatic force of attraction caused by the difference in charges. At pH 6.5, at which the 
==PAGE:46==
38 
 
reaction is carried out, the charge of FaldDH is negative because the isoelectric point is 5.8-
6.220. The highest consumption of NADH with 0.4 ∗10−7 moles are seen when PDADMAC 
is the last layer with about 10-20% conversion followed by PAH with 2-15% conversion and 
lastly PDADMAC with 1-9% conversion with consumption of about 0.4 ∗10−7moles and 
0.2 ∗10−7moles respectively for each cationic PE PEM membrane. The first layer in all PEM 
membranes fabricated in this experiment is PDADMAC. Since PDADMAC is a strong PE, the 
force of attraction between FaldDH and the surface is charge comparatively high with respect 
to the other two cationic PE. Therefore,    
For immobilization with crosslinking with glutaraldehyde (GA), there are cross-linkers formed 
between the enzyme and the PE with high immobilization as seen in Figure 3.1. This cross-
linker formed blocks the pore which increases the resistance of the substrate and NADH, thus 
increasing the consumption of NADH by the enzyme. Hence the conversion and consumption 
for each of the PEM with cross-linking is high as compared to when FaldDH is immobilized 
by adsorption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
39 
 
c. FateDH (CO2 to HCOOH) 
FateDH reduces CO2 to HCOOH in the presence of NADH as a cofactor which is reduced to 
NAD+ by an electron donation. Therefore, the concentration of NADH is analyzed of the 
feed, permeates, and retentates. 
 
Figure 3.4: Reaction of FateDH for conversion of CO2 to HCOOH at pH 6.5 MES buffer with different PEM membranes: a) and 
b) represent the concentration of NADH in permeates and feed with immobilization of adsorption and cross-linking 
respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed with immobilization for of adsorption and cross-
linking; e) Consumption of NADH for reaction in each of PEM membrane calculated by the mass balance. The error bar 
represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.4 displays five graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance calculated from equation 
(ii) of the entire reaction for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The 
NADH concentration in feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected to show the 
concentration of NADH rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH 
by the enzyme and catalyzes the reaction of formaldehyde CO2 to HCOOH.  
 
==PAGE:48==
40 
 
For enzymes immobilized with adsorption, the force between the surface and PE is the 
electrostatic force of attraction caused by the difference in charges. At pH 6.5, at which the 
reaction is carried out, the charge of FateDH is negative because the isoelectric point is 6.219,25. 
The highest consumption of NADH with 0.05 moles is seen when PAH is the last layer with 
about 10-20% conversion followed by PDADMAC with 2-15% conversion and lastly 
PDADMAC with 1-9% conversion with consumption of about 1.2 ∗10−7  moles and 0.8 ∗
10−7  moles respectively for each cationic PE PEM membrane. The first layer in all PEM 
membranes fabricated in this experiment is PDADMAC. Since PDADMAC is a strong PE, the 
force of attraction between FateDH and the surface is comparatively high with respect to the 
other two cationic PE. Since the CO2 is bubbled into the buffer for absorption, there is a 
possibility of reduced absorption into the buffer leading to less reactant for the forward 
reaction.   
For immobilization with crosslinking with glutaraldehyde (GA), there are cross-linkers formed 
between the enzyme and the PE. However, with the FateDH, the cross-linker formed can be 
deactivated due to the high concentration of GA and thus making the bond weak120. Hence the 
reaction efficiency is decreased because of weak bonds between GA and enzyme, even though, 
the immobilization was high as seen in Figure 3.1. 
3.1.3. Flux of permeates  
The time of the collection of each of the permeates noted and flux for each of the permeate is 
analyzed by the equation (iii). In theory, the flux is inversely proportional to the conversion, 
that is, the lower the flux, the higher will be the conversion. This is because at low flux, the 
time for each permeate reaction is high providing more time for the reaction to take place. 
Therefore, at low flux, there is high conversion. The following figures represent the fluxes for 
each of the reaction in the above sections: 
 
Figure 3.5: Flux of permeates after the reaction for ADH immobilized by Adsorption and cross-linking 
 
Figure 3.6: Flux of permeates after the reaction for FaldDH immobilized by Adsorption and cross-linking 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
41 
 
 
Figure 3.7: Flux of permeates after the reaction for FateDH immobilized by Adsorption and cross-linking 
Figures 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 represent the flux of permeate after each of the reactions catalyzed by 
ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH respectively. The flux when enzymes are immobilized by cross-
linking is less as compared to the flux when immobilized through adsorption resulting in higher 
conversion when cross-linking is used. Hence the theory that the lower the flux, the higher the 
conversion is supported through the above conclusions.  
Since the NADH concentration in the reaction system of FaldDH and FateDH did not reduce 
at a high rate as compared to the reaction system of ADH as the reaction proceeded, the surface 
charge plays an important role in the electrostatic force of attraction. Therefore, in the next 
section zeta potential of the PEM membrane used in the above experiment is analyzed followed 
by the increasing number of bls and changing the concentration. 
3.2. Zeta Potential  
The zeta potential of PEM membranes is analyzed after LbL assembly of for PEM membrane 
stated in section 2.2.1. The zeta potential procedure is stated in section 2.3.4. 
3.2.1. For 1.5 bilayers: 
In this, the PEM membrane was fabricated with an initial layer of PDADMAC and the last 
layer of PDADMAC, PAH, and PEI respectively. The concentration is stated in Table 3.1 
stated in  Section 3.2. 
 
Figure 3.8: Zeta potential of PEM membrane with initial layer PDADMAC and final layer of PDADMAC, PAH, and PEI 
respectively. The error bar represents the standard deviation of four values from the experiment performed. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
42 
 
Figure 3.8 shows the zeta potential of PEM membranes with PDADMAC, PEI, and PAH as 
the last layer of PEM respectively. The initial cationic PE for all the PEM membranes used is 
PDADMAC same as done for Section 3.1.  
Initially, the zeta potential trend for the above PEM membrane is as follows: 
PAH<PDADMAC<PEI.  Even though PDADMAC is stronger than PEI, the zeta potential of 
PEM with PEI as the last layer is higher in comparison to the other two because of the branched 
structure of PE as seen in figure 1.262.  This confirms that the electrostatic attraction between 
the ADH and PEI was high, hence the conversion was high as stated in Section 3.1. An initial 
layer of PDADMAC, which reduces the property UF membrane making the surface 
hydrophilic. Therefore, the zeta potential of the PEM membrane increased with -80 mV of psf 
UF membrane to a minimum of at least -30 mV (PEI).  
This project aims to find a suitable cationic PE so that the immobilization of the enzyme is 
highest without the use of glutaraldehyde as it is harmful to the environment. As it can be seen 
from the above section, PEM membranes with PDADMAC and PAH respectively showed 
higher consumption and conversion than PEI for enzymes FaldDH and FateDH for the reasons 
stated in section 3.1.2/a and 3.1.2/b. Moreover, at pH 6-8, the zeta potential of PEI is less than 
that of PDADMAC and PAH. Since higher zeta potential is favorable for immobilization of 
enzyme by adsorption, PEI is eliminated and further reactions are carried with PDADMAC 
and PAH.  
3.2.2. For 2.5 to 4.5 bl  
The zeta potential is analyzed according to the procedure in Section 2.2.4 for bilayer 2.5 to 4.5 
bl for the same concentration as stated in section 3.1 and 3.2-a. The PEM membrane is prepared 
is uniform, that is, for each membrane only one cationic PE is used. 
 
Figure 3.9: Zeta potential of PEM membrane for bl for 2.5 to 5.5 with different cationic PE: a) with PDADMAC and b) PAH. 
The error bar represents the standard deviation of four values in the experiment performed. 
Figure 3.9 displays the zeta potential PEM membrane with PDADMAC and PAH as the 
cationic PE respectively. The last layer of the PEM is the respective cationic PE.  
For both PDADMAC and PAH as the cationic PE, the zeta potential increases as the number 
of bilayers increases. Since the concentration ratio of PE+ and NaCl is 1:10, the 
overcompensation of cationic PE results in positive zeta potential because of the interdiffusion 
of PSS and cationic PE63,67,121. Therefore, as number of bilayer increases the surface charge of 
the membrane increases. For PAH, the zeta potential for 3.5 bl and 4.5 bl is approximately 
a. 
b. 
==PAGE:51==
43 
 
same because it is a weak cationic PE and the intrinsic charge of PSS overpowers the 
membrane. 
Even though, the zeta potential increases with an increase in the bilayer, time for fabricating 
the PEM membrane increases. Therefore, PEM membrane with increasing the cationic PE 
concentration is fabricated and zeta potential is analyzed in the next section. 
3.2.3. For 3.5 bl 
The concentration of cationic PE is increased to 16 mM and 32 mM respectively and 
concentration of PSS and NaCl is kept constant at 8mM and 80 mM respectively as stated in 
Table 3.2. The LbL assembly and zeta potential procedure is followed by section 2.2.1 and 
2.2.4 respectively 
Table 3.2: PE and NaCl concentration 
Concentration 
Cationic PE (PDADMAC/PAH) 
16, 32 mM 
PSS 
8 mM 
NaCl 
80 mM 
 
 
Figure 3.10: Zeta potential of PEM membrane for bl for 3.5 at 16 mM and 32 mM concentration of cationic PE for a) with 
PDADMAC and b) PAH. The error bar represents the standard deviation of four values in the experiment performed.  
Figure 3.10 shows the zeta potential by increasing the concentration of cationic PE, that is 
PDADMAC and PAH. The two-concentration used is 16mM and 32 mM.  
For PEM membranes with PDADMAC as the last layer, the zeta potential increased 
considerably. In theory, as the PE concentration increases, the thickness increases with and 
therefore, the surface charge should increase. However, for PDADMAC, for both the 
concentration, the zeta potential is almost similar with about 5-10 mV difference. The ratio of 
cationic PE and NaCl is 1:5 and 1:2.5. When the ratio is 1:5, the ionic strength is 5 times that 
of PE which indicates that there is overcompensation of PDADAMC at the surface, whereas 
when the ratio is 1:2.5, the ionic strength is less, thereby increasing the dominant nature of 
PSS. Even though at 1:2.5 ratio, the PSS has dominance, the zeta potential does not fall to 
negative because PDADMAC is a strong cationic PE63.  
The same above reason applies to PAH as the cationic PE. As seen in Figure 3.10, the second 
graph, the overall zeta potential of PEM with 16 mM PAH concentration is high as compared 
to 32 mM PAH concentration. The reason is the same, that is, overcompensation of PAH at the 
a 
b
==PAGE:52==
44 
 
surface. Since PAH is a weak PE, at high concentration, the overcompensation of PAH 
diminishes74,122.  
Therefore, the concentration chosen for cationic PE is 16 mM. The next section focuses on the 
WP and NADH retention of the membrane. 
 
3.3.Water Permeability and NADH retention 
The WP and NADH retention are analyzed for the following concentration to choose the 
appropriate concentration for rection to be efficient. The concentration is as follows:  
Table 3.3: PE and NaCl concentration 
Concentration 1 
Concentration 2 
Concentration 3 
Cationic PE 
(PDADMAC/PAH) 
16 mM 
1.6 mM 
16 mM 
PSS 
8 mM 
0.8 mM 
8 mM 
NaCl 
80 mM 
80 mM 
8 mM 
 
 
 
The WP and NADH retention are calculated for the PEM membrane with 5 bls which are 
fabricated according to section 2.2.1. PEM membrane with 5 bls is chosen because during 
immobilization of enzymes, the layer increases, thus the maximum number of bilayers has to 
be taken into consideration. 
3.3.1. Water permeability  
The WP is done according to the procedure stated in section 2.3.1. 
 
Figure 3.11: Water permeability of each of the PEM membranes with PDADMAC and PAH cationic PE. a) WP at an initial 
concentration as seen in the table with concentration 1, b) WP at Concentration 2 (decreasing cationic PE conc), c) WP at 
Concentration 3 (decreasing NaCl conc) 
==PAGE:53==
45 
 
Figure 3.11 displays the WP of the PEM membrane of 5 bilayers of PDADMAC/PSS and 
PAH/PSS system respectively. The concentration of PE and NaCl is varied and WP is analyzed 
as stated in section 2.3.1.  
The WP of a UF membrane as stated in section 2.2.1 can be between 
20.8 𝑡𝑜 208 𝐿 𝑚−2 ℎ−1  𝑏𝑎𝑟−1. Hence the WP of the PEM membrane of 5 bl is less than 
20.8 𝐿 𝑚−2ℎ−1𝑏𝑎𝑟−1 with the minimum being 1.5 −2 𝐿 𝑚−2ℎ−1𝑏𝑎𝑟−1indicating the 
formation of dense PEM membrane34.  
When, PE concnetration is altered an ionic strength was kept constant, there was no change in 
the WP as seen in graph (a) and (b) in figure 3.11. This is because  at high ionic concentration, 
the PE structure is coiled forming a dense PEM memrbane and decreasing the WP. Contraririly, 
when ionic strength is decreases, the WP increases because eof less coiled PE structure and 
less dense PEM memrbane.  
3.3.2. NADH retention 
The NADH retention is analyzed according to the procedure in section 2.3.2   
 
Figure 3.12: NADH retention of each of the PEM membranes with PDADMAC and PAH cationic PE. a) at an initial 
concentration as seen in the table with concentration 1, b) at Concentration 2 (decreasing cationic PE conc), c) at 
Concentration 3 (decreasing NaCl conc) 
The NADH rejection is calculated according to section 2.3.3. The concentration of PE and 
NaCl is varied and the NADH rejection is calculated and represented in figure 3.12. 
The NADH retention of PEM membrane with initial concentration, that is, 16mM cationic PE, 
8 mM of PSS, and 80 mM NaCl is approximately 90-95% which is high. This high retention is 
resulted due to the formation of dense PEM because of coiled PE structure at high ionic 
strength53,66,82,123. Therefore, the NADH is high meaning there is no passage of NADH through 
the membrane indicating when the reaction has to take place the efficiency will be low.  
==PAGE:54==
46 
 
Similarly, when the concentration of cationic PE is decreased by 10-fold that is to 1.6 mM, and 
keeping the PSS and NaCl strength constant that is 8mM and 80 mM respectively the NADH 
retention is also high. The retention is about 85-90% for PDADMAC and 95-98% for PAH. 
The reason for high retention is the same as previous that is, the formation of dense PEM 
membrane because of the coiled structure of PE at high ionic strength51,53,55,66,76,82,123.  
On the other hand, when NaCl concentration is reduced 10-fold, that is, 8 mM and 
concentration of cationic PE and PSS is kept constant at 16 mM and 8 mM respectively, the 
NADH retention is reduced to about 10-30%. This means that there is NADH passage through 
the PEM membrane which is less dense due to the low NaCl concentration that leads to the 
formation of bilayers with low thickness37,51,53,55,66,74,76,82,123. Hence, the low retention will lead 
to high reaction efficiency. As PEM with 5 bilayer PEM membrane has low retention, the 
membrane with 1.5-2.5 bilayer will have even less retention. Therefore, the next section 
focuses on the zeta potential of 0.5-2.5 bl PEM membrane for the same concentration.  
3.4. Zeta potential  
The zeta potential is calculated for 0.5 bl to 2.5 bl for concentration stated in table 
Table 3.4: PE and NaCl concentration 
Concentration 
Cationic PE (PDADMAC/PAH) 
16 mM 
PSS 
8 mM 
NaCl 
8 mM 
 
 
 Figure 3.13: Zeta potential of PEM membrane for bl for 0.5 to 2.5 bl with different cationic PE: a) with PDADMAC and b) 
PAH. The error bar represents the standard deviation of four values in the experiment performed. 
Figure 3.13 shows the zeta potential for 0.5, 1.5, and 2.5 bl for the above-stated concentrations 
with PDADMAC and PAH as the last layer respectively.  
For PDADMAC as the last layer, the zeta potential is highest at 1.5 bl and decreases at 2.5 bl. 
The concentration ratio of PE+ and NaCl is 2:1. At initial bilayers, there is an increase in 
surface charge from 20 for 0.5 bl to 30-40 mV for 1.5 bl. This increase is because of the high 
concentration of PDADMAC compared to PSS. As the bilayers increase, the less ionic strength 
increases the elongation of PE and compensation by the dominant intrinsic charge, that is, 
PSS37,65,82,124.  
==PAGE:55==
47 
 
Contrarily, for PAH as the cationic PE, the zeta potential increases as the number of bilayers 
increases because of the overcompensation of PAH which increases the surface charge of the 
PEM79,81,87,122.  
Hence, among the PEM membrane, the membrane with PDADMAC as the last layer for 1.5 bl 
has the highest zeta potential for pH 6 to 8 which is between 20 – 10 mV. Therefore, this PEM 
membrane is taken forward for further experiments. 
Since the activity, FateDH and FaldDH are less as seen in section 3.1. The next section focuses 
on changing different factors and analyzing the activity in the free system.  
3.5. Free Enzyme Reactions 
The free enzyme reactions are carried out in several factors, such as changing the buffer 
solution, changing the substrate for FaldDH from Formate to Formic acid, increasing the 
enzyme concentration, etc. The reactions are only done for single experiments without any 
replicate. Therefore, the results can be found in the Appendix G.  
The change in buffer solution and increasing the enzyme concentration did not affect the 
enzyme FaldDH and FateDH. However, when Formate was changed to formic acid, there was 
a change in concentration of NADH with rapid reduction, but because of the acid nature of 
formic acid, there was instant degrading of NADH. The results of the above can be seen in 
Appendix G.  
Since the above changes did not show any accurate changes, the free enzyme reaction was 
carried with buffer PBS at a micro-scale as stated in section 2.2.5. The free enzyme reaction is 
performed to understand the effect of different factors on the enzyme and the substrate. The 
different factors analyzed were, at different pH, increasing the temperature and increasing the 
NADH concentration. 
The concentration of NADH has been calculated from the equation from the standard curve for 
micro-scale from the standard curve. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
48 
 
a. At different pH 
The concentration of NADH for the below reactions is started at 100 µM and reduction in 
concentration is analyzed for 120 minutes. The procedure for the same is stated in section 2.2.4. 
 
 Figure 3.14: Free enzyme reactions at pH 6, 6.5, 7, and 8 respectively for ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH. The graph represents 
the concentration of the NADH for each reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments 
performed. 
Figure 3.14 displays the free enzyme reaction for ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH by analyzing the 
decrease in the concentration of NADH. The blank solution refers to the NADH activity in the 
buffer.  
In all the pH conditions, the NADH concentration when in reaction for HCOH to CH3OH 
catalyzed by ADH which shows consumption of NADH.  
At pH 6, there is an instant reduction in the concentration of NADH in all three enzymes with 
maximum reduction in ADH enzyme. However, as time progresses, there is little to no change 
in concentration of NADH in FaldDH and FateDH indicating no conversion. Whereas in ADH, 
there was an instant reduction in NADH concentration. But this might be due to the fact that 
NADH is unstable at acidic pH as it can be seen in blank solution there is an instant decrease 
in NADH concentration. 
From pH 6.5 to 8, the NADH concentration when ADH is used as the enzyme decreases 
instantly from 100 µM to 5-7 µM, and then there is a gradual decrease in the concentration. 
For the other two enzymes, the NADH concentration does not decrease at pH 8, and at pH 6.5 
and 7 there is little decrease in concentration suggesting consumption of NADH by enzymes 
to catalyze the reaction. Since pH 6.5 shows a little stable reduction of all the enzymes without 
degrading NADH and is closer to the IEP of the enzymes is chosen for further reaction.  
==PAGE:57==
49 
 
The conversion of FaldDH and FateDH is not high eventhough, several factors have been 
changed. However, the reaction of ADH is high, therefore next section focuses on optimizing 
ADH immobilization on the PEM membrane.  
3.6.ADH immobilization and Conversion 
Section 3.3 and 3.4 indicate the appropriate concentration of PDADMAC and NaCl which is 
stated in Table 3.5. This concentration is chosen because of less NADH retention in the 
membrane so that reaction efficiency is high.  
Table 3.5 PE and NaCl concentration 
Concentration 
Cationic PE (PDADMAC/PAH) 16 mM 
PSS 
8 mM 
NaCl 
8 mM 
 
The number of bilayers for the PEM membrane is 1.5bl because of high positive zeta potential 
between pH 6-8 as at 6.5 pH ADH is negatively improving the electrostatic attraction between 
the PEM membrane and enzyme. The ADH is immobilized and analyzed for different factors. 
a. Time variation: 
ADH is immobilized by adsorption based on electrostatic attraction between the surface and 
enzyme for 0.5, 1, 3, and 24 hours respectively and reaction is performed for HCOH to CH3OH 
stated in section 2.2.4. 
   
Figure 3.15: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to CH3OH at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC PEM membrane with 
ADH immobilized for different time. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, permeates and retentate with 
and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed and consumption of NADH 
for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
==PAGE:58==
50 
 
Figure 3.15 displays four different graphs. Graph (a) and (c) displays the concentration of 
NADH in feed, permeates and retentates, and the respective % conversion respectively. Graph 
b displays the flux of each of the permeate. Lastly, graph (d) displays the consumption of moles 
of NADH calculated from the mass balance from equation (ii).  The NADH concentration for 
each reaction is approximately 100 µM. 
The Bradford assay for ADH did not show accurate value as discussed in section 3.1.1. 
Therefore, the conversion of NADH for each membrane indicates the immobilization of ADH. 
The time variation represents the amount of time ADH is immobilized using adsorption 
strategy of different charges of ADH and the PEM membrane surface which induces 
electrostatic force of attraction. For each reaction, the NADH concentration decreases 
representing the consumption of NADH to convert to NAD+ by ADH to catalyze the reaction 
of formaldehyde to methanol. As the immobilization time increases, the NADH concentration 
decreases indicating its conversion to NAD+, therefore increasing the consumption. When 
ADH is immobilized for 24 hours, the concentration of NADH decreases with the conversion 
of about 75-80% and consumption of NADH is about 0.52 ∗10−7 moles with respect to the 
feed concentration. Therefore, it can be stated that the immobilization of enzyme increases with 
an increase in time indication pore blocking by enzyme molecules thus there is higher mass 
transfer resistance making more contact between the substrate and enzyme, hence increasing 
the conversion of NADH to NAD+ and increasing the reaction efficiency. 
Graph (b) in Figure 3.18 represents the flux of the permeate for each of the time-variant 
reactions. It can be seen that when the flux is low, the NADH concentration is low in the 
permeate, which means, there is a conversion of NADH. As the time for immobilization of 
ADH increases, the flux of the reaction for permeates decreases indicating high conversion.  
The concentration of NADH in retentate is less than that of feed but higher than that of 
permeate concentration which indicates that there is conversion happening on the surface of 
the membrane but with accumulation and slow process.  
Even though the conversion when ADH is immobilized for 24 hours is high, it is not cross 
80%. So different strategies are applied so that the conversion of NADH increases to increase 
the efficiency of the reaction stated in next two sections, 
b. Adding an extra layer of ADH  
For this experiment, an extra layer of ADH is added after first immobilization by two methods, 
first by adding a new solution of ADH after fabrication PSS and PDADMAC (non-recycling) 
and second by adding the old discard of ADH after PSS and PDADMAC fabrication (recycling 
of ADH). For each immobilization step, the ADH is applied for 0.5 hours. The reaction 
procedure is stated in section 2.2.4. 
==PAGE:59==
51 
 
  
Figure 3.16: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to CH3OH at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC PEM membrane with 
ADH recycled and not recycled. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, permeates and retentate with and 
flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed and consumption of NADH for 
each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.16 displays four different graphs. Graph (a) and (c) displays the concentration of 
NADH in feed, permeates and retentates, and the respective % conversion respectively. Graph 
b displays the flux of each of the permeate. Lastly, graph (d) displays the consumption of moles 
of NADH calculated from the mass balance from equation (ii).  The NADH concentration for 
each reaction is approximately 100 µM. 
Comparing the two methods, when ADH is immobilized by adding a new enzyme solution, 
that by not recycling, the conversion is a little higher. The conversion when ADH is recycled 
is similar to that of when ADH was immobilized for 1 hour with conversion and consumption 
of NADH 60 ± 5% and 4 ∗10−7 moles respectively. On the other hand, when a new solution 
of ADH was added, the enzyme conversion is similar to that of when ADH is immobilized for 
3 hours with conversion and consumption of NADH 70 ± 5% and 4.5 ∗10−7 moles 
respectively as seen in the section 3.5-a. 
Therefore, this method is not efficient because there is no higher conversion compared to when 
enzyme is immobilized for 24 hours. Hence, wasting enzymes is not appropriate. 
c. Increasing bilayer and adding GA 
For this experiment, one set of PEM membranes is fabricated for 2.5 bl and ADH is 
immobilized by adsorption for 0.5 hours. The next set of PEM membranes is fabricated for 1.5 
bl and ADH is immobilized for 0.5 hours after cross-linking by GA.  
==PAGE:60==
52 
 
 
Figure 3.19: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to CH3OH at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC PEM membrane with 
ADH immobilized on 1.5 bl with GA and 2.5 bl with adsorption. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeates and retentate with and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect 
feed and consumption of NADH for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two 
experiments performed. 
Figure 3.19 displays four graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance of the entire reaction 
for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The NADH concentration in 
feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected to show the concentration of NADH 
rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH by the enzyme and 
catalyzes the reaction of formaldehyde to methanol. 
The conversion and consumption of NADH for cross-linked with GA was approximately 50% 
and 3.5 ∗10−7 moles respectively. Similarly, when the membrane was of 2.5 bl and ADH was 
immobilized by adsorption, the conversion and consumption of NADH was 40-45% and 2.5 ∗
10−7 moles respectively. The adsorption of ADH was low for 2.5 bl was because of the low 
zeta potential as concluded in section 3.5. The cross-linking with GA also did not have an effect 
on the conversion because of high positive surface of 1.5 bl which made the cross-linkers week. 
Hence, both the method did not have a much effect on increasing the conversion and 
consumption of NADH as compared to ADH immobilized for 3 and 24 hours respectively.  
When ADH was immobilized for 24 hours, the conversion of NADH was high, there was 
stability test was analysed followed by performing continuous reaction to see the effect 
conversion difference.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
53 
 
d. Stability and continuous reaction test 
i. 
Stability Test 
The stability of PEM membrane immobilized with ADH is stored in MES buffer and reaction 
is carried out after 1 and 2 weeks respectively. Since the conversion is high when ADH is 
immobilized for 24 hours, the stability is tested for this membrane. The reaction is carried out 
with as in section 2.2.4. 
 
Figure 3.20: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to Methanol after 1 and 2 week at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC 
PEM with ADH immobilized for 24 hours. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, permeates and retentate 
with and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed and consumption of 
NADH for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.20 displays four graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance of the entire reaction 
for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The NADH concentration in 
feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected to show the concentration of NADH 
rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH by the enzyme and 
catalyzes the reaction of formaldehyde to methanol. 
The stability of the membrane is decreases after one week as the conversion of NADH dropped 
from 80% as seen in section 3.5-a to 60% for 1st and 2nd week included. There is also high 
retention of NADH with little reaction suggesting that there is pore blockage and denaturation 
of enzyme. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
54 
 
ii. 
Continuous Reaction  
ADH was immobilized for 24 hour and three reactions were performed on a continuous basis 
to analyze the effect of on the immobilized PEM membrane. The reaction procedure is done 
by procedure in section 2.2.4. 
 
Figure 3.21: Reaction of ADH for conversion of HCOH to Methanol after 3 continuous reaction at pH 6.5 MES buffer with 
PDADAMAC PEM with ADH immobilized for 24 hours. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, permeates 
and retentate with and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed and 
consumption of NADH for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments 
performed. 
Figure 3.21 displays four graphs; the first two representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate, and retentate. The next two graphs represent the conversion % of NADH with respect 
to the NADH feed concentration. Lastly, the graph is the mass balance of the entire reaction 
for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The NADH concentration in 
feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected to show the concentration of NADH 
rapidly decreased, showing that there is the consumption of NADH by the enzyme and 
catalyzes the reaction of formaldehyde to methanol. 
The conversion and consumption of NADH decreases as the number of reactions for a 
particular PEM membrane increases. The conversion decreases from 80% to 60% for first 
reaction and 3rd reaction respectively. There is retention of NADH as the number of reactions 
increases as seen in graph (a) because of mass transfer resistance and pore blocking from 
previous reactions that increases the retention.  
Therefore, section 3.5 describes the immobilization of ADH and the factors affecting the 
immobilization with conclusion that ADH immobilization for 24 hours have high conversion 
but the stability decreases with increases in number of reaction and with increase in number of 
days after initial reaction and immobilization. 
==PAGE:63==
55 
 
 The next section focuses on the reaction system of CO2 to Methanol from the three enzymes 
which can be immobilized in two different manners that is explained in the section 2.2.3.2. 
3.7. CO2 to CH3OH 
The main aim of the project is to propose a PEM membrane for conversion of CO2 to methanol. 
Therefore, this section focuses on converting CO2 to CH3OH by two strategies, that is, co-
immobilization and cascade immobilization proposed by J. Luo et al112. The procedure for the 
above immobilization process is stated in section 2.2.3.2 
Table 3.5 PE and NaCl concentration 
 
 
  
The NADH conversion for the overall process was observed which is discussed as follows 
with reaction procedure from section 2.2.4 
 
Figure 3.22: Reaction of CO2 to Methanol at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC PEM membrane for co and cascade 
immobilization of enzymes for 24 hours and 0.5 hour-24 hour respectively. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH 
in feed, permeates and retentate with and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with 
respect feed and consumption of NADH for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two 
experiments performed. 
Figure 3.22 displays four graphs; the a and c representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate and retentate and the conversion percentage respectively. Graph b represents the flux 
of the permeate calculated from equation (ii). Lastly, the graph is the mass balance of the entire 
reaction for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The NADH 
concentration in feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected shows the 
PE 
Concentration 
Cationic PE (PDADMAC/PAH) 16 mM 
PSS 
8 mM 
NaCl 
8 mM 
==PAGE:64==
56 
 
concentration of NADH rapidly decreased, showing that there is consumption of NADH by the 
enzyme and catalyses the reaction of formaldehyde to methanol.  
According to J. Luo et al112., the co-immobilization is less efficient than cascade 
immobilization because of product inhibition as the trade-off between the each enzyme is less. 
When the reaction is done through co-immobilization, the conversion of NADH is 
approximately 40-45% for all the three permeates and consumption of NADH is 1.7 ∗10−7 
moles. The concentration of NADH in the retentate is higher than that of the feed might be the 
result of swelling of the membrane or retention of NADH because of pore blocking after 
exposure to the enzyme solution for 24 hours at room temperature which 10 ml of the mixed 
enzyme solution was immobilized for 24 hours.  
On the other hand, the lowest conversion of NADH from feed is when each of the enzyme is 
immobilized in cascade as shown in Figure 3.18 for 24 hours with about 30-35% conversion 
and the consumption of NADH is 0.15 moles.  When each of the enzyme was immobilized for 
24 hours, the enzyme evaporated at the end of 20-22 hour. This evaporation might have resulted 
in the drying up of the membrane, thus accounting for the denaturation of enzyme. The 
concentration of NADH is similar to that of feed indicating time for conversion and reaction is 
less. Therefore, if the pressure applied for reaction is reduced, the flux might be reduced 
increasing the reaction time, thus increasing the conversion. 
On the other hand, the concentration of NADH when cascade immobilization is followed for 
0.5 hour is high as compared to the above two processes with about 65-75% conversion. Even 
though, there is retentate of the conversion is high in this process as compared to the cascade 
immobilization for 24 hour because of not drying up of membrane as the enzymes does not 
evaporate in half an hour. However, there is high retention in the retentate indicating dense 
PEM membrane resulted by pore blocking caused by both PE and enzymes. Since last layer of 
anionic PE is applied, which can cause diffusion making the enzyme less active and hence not 
achieving the desired conversion.  
When the cascade immobilization is compared to the immobilization of ADH as in section 3.5 
which suggests that increasing the immobilization time increases the adsorption of enzyme on 
the surface. However, in this section there with increase in time for enzyme immobilization, 
there is decrease in conversion as stated because of the evaporation of enzyme and drying of 
membrane after all three enzymes are immobilized. 
For the entire system of CO2 to methanol when immobilized by co-immobilization, the 
bottleneck reaction is the first reaction catalyzed by FateDH as oxidation of Formate is 30 times 
faster than that of CO2 reduction112. This problem was reduced by cascade immobilization as 
there is continuous mass transfer through the layers so that the intermediates could reach the 
target in a sequential manner. However, the Km value for FaldDH for HCOH to HCOOH is 
higher as compared to reverse reaction which might be the bottleneck step for the entire 
process22,112. As the conversion of NADH when ADH is immobilized for 24 hour is 
approximately 80 ± 5% and consumption of about 5 ∗10−7 moles whereas for the co- and 
cascade immobilization the consumption of NADH is reduced by half suggesting that the 
limiting reaction might be of step catalyzed by FaldDH and FateDH. 
The next part analyses the stability of the membrane fabrication in this section after one week. 
 
==PAGE:65==
57 
 
 
• Stability Test 
The stability of PEM membrane for co-immobilized membrane and cascade immobilization 
is stored in buffer and reaction is carried out after 1 week.  
 
Figure 3.23: Reaction of CO2 to Methanol after 1 week at pH 6.5 MES buffer with PDADAMAC PEM membrane for co and 
cascade immobilization of enzymes. a) and b) represents the concentration of NADH in feed, permeates and retentate with 
and flux for permeates respectively; c) and d) represent % conversion of NADH with respect feed and consumption of NADH 
for each of the reaction. The error bar represents the standard deviation of two experiments performed. 
Figure 3.23 displays four graphs; the a and c representing the concentration of NADH in feed, 
permeate and retentate and the conversion percentage respectively. Graph b represents the flux 
of the permeate calculated with equation (ii). Lastly, the graph is the mass balance of the entire 
reaction for each membrane and displays the moles of NADH consumed. The NADH 
concentration in feed is approximately 100 µM. The permeates collected shows the 
concentration of NADH rapidly decreased, showing that there is consumption of NADH by the 
enzyme and catalyses the reaction of CO2 to CH3OH. 
The conversion of NADH when enzymes were co-immobilized reduced from the initial 
reaction as seen in figure 3.22. After a week, there is retention in the membrane which can be 
reason for less conversion of NADH. The same can be seen for the cascade immobilization 
with high retention of NADH. However, the membrane with co-immobilization of enzyme lost 
activity faster as compared to cascade immobilization because in cascade immobilization the 
adsorption of each of enzyme takes place on the surface causing high enzyme immobilization. 
Hence, it can be seen that cascade immobilization is more suitable for conversion of CO2 to 
CH3OH supporting the conclusion by J. Luo et al112.  
 
 
==PAGE:66==
58 
 
 
4. 
CONCLUSION  
The project focussed on optimizing immobilization of ADH, FaldDH, and FateDH on the PEM 
membrane fabricated through LbL assembly to produce methanol from CO2. Initially, two 
different immobilization strategies were used, that is, adsorption by electrostatic force and 
cross-linking by GA. The conversion of NADH was observed by spectrophotometer at 340 nm 
which is cofactor used for each of the reaction catalyzed by each enzyme. The reaction 
catalyzed by ADH showed highest conversion with both adsorption and cross-linking. 
However, the FaldDH and FateDH did not have much conversion of NADH rather there was 
retention which may have been the result of pore-blocking with PEs and high mass transfer 
resistance.  
In this study, immobilization by adsorption was taken into consideration because of high 
toxicity of GA and the non-reactive nature between of GA between PEI and FateDH 
respectively. The less conversion can also be the reason of less immobilization of enzymes. 
The zeta potential analysis of the PEM membrane displayed a negative surface charge for all 
the PEM membrane which his not suitable for immobilization of enzyme by electrostatic force 
of attraction since all the enzymes have negative charge at pH 6.5. Therefore, PEM membrane 
with high zeta potential and low NADH retention was developed with PDADMAC. PAH and 
PEI were eliminated because of the low surface charge of both the PEs when PEM membrane 
was developed.  
ADH was immobilized on the new developed PEM membrane with PDADMAC as the cationic 
PE with concentration of 16mM. Both PSS and NaCl concentration of was at 8 mM. Several 
factors were analyzed for increasing the conversion in ADH with main being time. As the time 
was increased for immobilization, the conversion of NADH also increased from 40 ± 5% for 
0.5 hours and 70 ± 5% for 24 hours. Neither the addition of GA nor the increase in bilayer 
increased the conversion because of the positive surface which reduces cross-linkers to be 
formed and at 2.5 bl the surface displayed less positive surface.  
Lastly, Co- and Cascade immobilization of all the three enzymes; that is; ADH, FaldDH and 
FateDH were carried out on 1.5 bilayer PDADMAC PEM membrane. One interesting outcome 
from experiment was high conversion with co-immobilization rather than cascade 
immobilization when the enzymes were immobilized for 24 hours. However, when cascade 
immobilization was carried out for 0.5 hours for each enzyme, the conversion was high as 
compared to co-immobilization even though the retentate was high. The membrane stability of 
co- and cascade immobilized membrane decreased after 1 week but the denaturation of co-
immobilized membrane was high. There was high retention of NADH which could be caused 
because of swelling of membrane which results in low mass transfer, that means high mass 
transfer resistance.  
The comparison of cascade immobilization and single enzyme immobilization of ADH showed 
that unlike for ADH when immobilization and conversion NADH increased as the 
immobilization time increased, this was not the case for cascade immobilization as the 
conversion was high when immobilization was done for 0.5 hours rather than 24 hours. The 
conversion of NADH was also high in the single immobilization system than the cascade for 
CO2 to CH3OH conversion which may be because of the low CO2 absorption onto the 
==PAGE:67==
59 
 
membrane or the km value for FaldDH is high for the forwards reaction of HCOH to HCOOH 
which can be the bottleneck or the limiting reaction for the system. Hence in cascade 
immobilization, both FateDH and FaldDH could have affected the overall conversion of 
NADH.  
The above results concluded that cascade immobilization is better for conversion of CO2 to 
CH3OH rather than co-immobilization. Moreover, the limiting step being reaction catalyzed by 
FateDH and FaldDH which affects the overall reaction as compared to ADH which shows 
maximum conversion. Hence the following strategies can be taken into consideration for future 
prospects: 
• New immobilization methods for FalDH and FateDH can be analyzed 
• Factors affecting the cascade immobilization such as different immobilization time and 
temperature 
• Improving the stability of the membrane after immobilization of enzyme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
60 
 
 
5. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
1.  
co2 emissions. https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-
change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide#:~:text=Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse,thermal 
infrared energy (heat).&text=Without this natural greenhouse effect,close to 60°F. 
2.  
Koytsoumpa EI, Bergins C, Kakaras E. The CO2 economy: Review of CO2 capture 
and reuse technologies. J Supercrit Fluids. 2018;132(July 2017):3-16. 
doi:10.1016/j.supflu.2017.07.029 
3.  
Aresta M, Dibenedetto A. Industrial utilization of carbon dioxide (CO2). Dev Innov 
Carbon Dioxide (Co. 2010;2:377-410. doi:10.1533/9781845699581.4.377 
4.  
Luis P, Van Gerven T, Van Der Bruggen B. Recent developments in membrane-based 
technologies for CO 2 capture. Prog Energy Combust Sci. 2012;38(3):419-448. 
doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2012.01.004 
5.  
Brunetti A, Scura F, Barbieri G, Drioli E. Membrane technologies for CO2 separation. 
J Memb Sci. 2010;359(1-2):115-125. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2009.11.040 
6.  
Future Fuel Stategies. Methanol: A Future-Proof Fuel. 2020;1072(February):42. 
7.  
Porosoff MD, Yan B, Chen JG. Catalytic reduction of CO2 by H2 for synthesis of CO, 
methanol and hydrocarbons: Challenges and opportunities. Energy Environ Sci. 
2016;9(1):62-73. doi:10.1039/c5ee02657a 
8.  
Boston DJ, Pachón YMF, Lezna RO, De Tacconi NR, MacDonnell FM. 
Electrocatalytic and photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to methanol using ruthenium 
complexes with internal pyridyl cocatalysts. Inorg Chem. 2014;53(13):6544-6553. 
doi:10.1021/ic500051m 
9.  
Nichols RJ. The methanol story: A sustainable fuel for the future. J Sci Ind Res (India). 
2003;62(1):97-105. 
10.  
Aasberg-petersen BK, Nielsen CS, Dybkjær I, Perregaard J. Large Scale Methanol 
Production from Natural Gas. 
11.  
Kavil YN, Shaban YA, Al Farawati RK, Orif MI, Zobidi M, Khan SUM. 
Photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into methanol over Cu-C/TiO2 nanoparticles under 
UV light and natural sunlight. J Photochem Photobiol A Chem. 2017;347:244-253. 
doi:10.1016/j.jphotochem.2017.07.046 
12.  
Methanol Institute. https://www.methanol.org/methanol-price-supply-demand/ 
13.  
Methanol Market. https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/methanol-
market 
14.  
Faberi S, Paolucci L. Methanol : A Future Transport Fuel Based on Hydrogen and 
Carbon Dioxide.; 2014. http://bookshop.europa.eu/en/methanol-
pbQA0114284/downloads/QA-01-14-284-EN-
C/QA0114284ENC_002.pdf?FileName=QA0114284ENC_002.pdf&SKU=QA011428
4ENC_PDF&CatalogueNumber=QA-01-14-284-EN-C 
==PAGE:69==
61 
 
15.  
Kuwabata S, Tsuda R, Yoneyama H. Electrochemical Conversion of Carbon Dioxide 
to Methanol with the Assistance of Formate Dehydrogenase and Methanol 
Dehydrogenase as Biocatalysts. J Am Chem Soc. 1994;116(12):5437-5443. 
doi:10.1021/ja00091a056 
16.  
Uniiiersiiy L. Met hano I Synthesis. Adv Catal. 1982;31:243-313. 
17.  
Obert R, Dave BC. Enzymatic conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol: Enhanced 
methanol production in silica sol-gel matrices [5]. J Am Chem Soc. 
1999;121(51):12192-12193. doi:10.1021/ja991899r 
18.  
Canuto RA. Dehydrogenases. 
19.  
RUSCHING U, MÜLLER U, WILLNOW P, HÖPNER T. CO2 Reduction to Formate 
by NADH Catalysed by Formate Dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas oxalaticus. Eur J 
Biochem. 1976;70(2):325-330. doi:10.1111/j.1432-1033.1976.tb11021.x 
20.  
Ando M, Yoshtmoto T, Ogushl S, Rikitake K, Shibata S, Tsuru D. Formaldehyde 
dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas putida: Purification and some properties. J 
Biochem. 1979;85(5):1165-1172. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a132440 
21.  
Lu Y, Jiang Z yi, Xu S wei, Wu H. Efficient conversion of CO2 to formic acid by 
formate dehydrogenase immobilized in a novel alginate-silica hybrid gel. Catal Today. 
2006;115(1-4):263-268. doi:10.1016/j.cattod.2006.02.056 
22.  
Marpani F, Pinelo M, Meyer AS. Enzymatic conversion of CO 2 to CH 3 OH via 
reverse dehydrogenase cascade biocatalysis : Quantitative comparison of efficiencies 
of immobilized enzyme systems. Biochem Eng J. 2017;127:217-228. 
doi:10.1016/j.bej.2017.08.011 
23.  
Marques Netto CGC, Andrade LH, Toma HE. Carbon dioxide/methanol conversion 
cycle based on cascade enzymatic reactions supported on superparamagnetic 
nanoparticles. An Acad Bras Cienc. 2018;90(1):593-606. doi:10.1590/0001-
3765201720170330 
24.  
Xu SW, Lu Y, Li J, Jiang ZY, Wu H. Efficient conversion of CO2 to methanol 
catalyzed by three dehydrogenases co-encapsulated in an alginate-silica (ALG-SiO2) 
hybrid gel. Ind Eng Chem Res. 2006;45(13):4567-4573. doi:10.1021/ie051407l 
25.  
Raaijmakers HCA, Romão MJ. Formate-reduced E. coli formate dehydrogenase H: 
The reinterpretation of the crystal structure suggests a new reaction mechanism. J Biol 
Inorg Chem. 2006;11(7):849-854. doi:10.1007/s00775-006-0129-2 
26.  
Dong G, Ryde U. Reaction mechanism of formate dehydrogenase studied by 
computational methods. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2018;23(8):1243-1254. 
doi:10.1007/s00775-018-1608-y 
27.  
De Smidt O, Du Preez JC, Albertyn J. The alcohol dehydrogenases of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae: A comprehensive review. FEMS Yeast Res. 2008;8(7):967-978. 
doi:10.1111/j.1567-1364.2008.00387.x 
28.  
Adhia JD. Membrane Technology. Vol 37.; 1986. doi:10.1002/9783527614974.ch10 
29.  
Seyed Dorraji MS, Vatanpour V. Organic-inorganic composite membrane preparation 
and characterization for biorefining. Membr Technol Biorefining. Published online 
2016:85-102. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-100451-7.00004-9 
==PAGE:70==
62 
 
30.  
Donato L, Garofalo A, Algieri C. Mixed-matrix membranes: Preparation and 
characterization for biorefining. Membr Technol Biorefining. Published online 
2016:61-84. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-100451-7.00003-7 
31.  
Applications M, Water I, Industry C, et al. CHAPTER 7 . MEMBRANES AND 
MEMBRANE PROCESSES CHAPTER 7 MEMBRANE AND MEMBRANE 
PROCESSES APPLICATIONS General considerations. :264-315. 
32.  
Zeman L, Wales M. Polymer Solute Rejection By Ultrafiltration Membranes. ACS 
Symp Ser. 1981;II:411-434. doi:10.1021/bk-1981-0154.ch023 
33.  
van Reis R, Zydney A. Bioprocess membrane technology. J Memb Sci. 2007;297(1-
2):16-50. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2007.02.045 
34.  
Hamzah S, Ali N, Ariffin MM, Ali A, Mohammad AW. High performance of 
polysulfone ultrafiltration membrane: Effect of polymer concentration. ARPN J Eng 
Appl Sci. 2014;9(12):2543-2550. 
35.  
Saljoughi E, Mousavi SM. Preparation and characterization of novel polysulfone 
nanofiltration membranes for removal of cadmium from contaminated water. Sep Purif 
Technol. 2012;90:22-30. doi:10.1016/j.seppur.2012.02.008 
36.  
Mohammad AW, Teow YH, Ang WL, Chung YT, Oatley-Radcliffe DL, Hilal N. 
Nanofiltration membranes review: Recent advances and future prospects. 
Desalination. 2015;356:226-254. doi:10.1016/j.desal.2014.10.043 
37.  
Ng LY, Mohammad AW, Ng CY, Leo CP, Rohani R. Development of nanofiltration 
membrane with high salt selectivity and performance stability using polyelectrolyte 
multilayers. Desalination. 2014;351:19-26. doi:10.1016/j.desal.2014.07.020 
38.  
Hilal N, Al-Zoubi H, Darwish NA, Mohammad AW, Abu Arabi M. A comprehensive 
review of nanofiltration membranes: Treatment, pretreatment, modelling, and atomic 
force microscopy. Desalination. 2004;170(3):281-308. 
doi:10.1016/j.desal.2004.01.007 
39.  
Ng LY, Mohammad AW, Ng CY. A review on nanofiltration membrane fabrication 
and modification using polyelectrolytes: Effective ways to develop membrane 
selective barriers and rejection capability. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2013;197-198:85-
107. doi:10.1016/j.cis.2013.04.004 
40.  
Xu H mei, Wei J fu, Wang X lei. Nanofiltration hollow fiber membranes with high 
charge density prepared by simultaneous electron beam radiation-induced graft 
polymerization for removal of Cr(VI). Desalination. 2014;346:122-130. 
doi:10.1016/j.desal.2014.05.017 
41.  
Giorno L, Drioli E. Biocatalytic membrane reactors: Applications and perspectives. 
Trends Biotechnol. 2000;18(8):339-349. doi:10.1016/S0167-7799(00)01472-4 
42.  
Díez B, Rosal R. A critical review of membrane modification techniques for fouling 
and biofouling control in pressure-driven membrane processes. Nanotechnol Environ 
Eng. 2020;5(2):1-21. doi:10.1007/s41204-020-00077-x 
43.  
Kochkodan V, Johnson DJ, Hilal N. Polymeric membranes: Surface modification for 
minimizing (bio)colloidal fouling. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2014;206:116-140. 
doi:10.1016/j.cis.2013.05.005 
==PAGE:71==
63 
 
44.  
Luo J, Meyer AS, Jonsson G, Pinelo M. Fouling-induced enzyme immobilization for 
membrane reactors. Bioresour Technol. 2013;147:260-268. 
doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2013.08.019 
45.  
Pinnau I, Freeman BD. Formation and modification of polymeric membranes: 
Overview. ACS Symp Ser. 1999;744:1-22. doi:10.1021/bk-2000-0744.ch001 
46.  
Peng F, Huang X, Jawor A, Hoek EMV. Transport, structural, and interfacial 
properties of poly(vinyl alcohol)-polysulfone composite nanofiltration membranes. J 
Memb Sci. 2010;353(1-2):169-176. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2010.02.044 
47.  
Hoffmann C, Silau H, Pinelo M, Woodley JM, Daugaard AE. Surface modification of 
polysulfone membranes applied for a membrane reactor with immobilized alcohol 
dehydrogenase. Mater Today Commun. 2018;14(January):160-168. 
doi:10.1016/j.mtcomm.2017.12.019 
48.  
Kochan J, Wintgens T, Wong JE, Melin T. Properties of polyethersulfone 
ultrafiltration membranes modified by polyelectrolytes. Desalination. 
2010;250(3):1008-1010. doi:10.1016/j.desal.2009.09.092 
49.  
Liu Y, Chen GQ, Yang X, Deng H. Preparation of layer-by-layer nanofiltration 
membranes by dynamic deposition and crosslinking. Membranes (Basel). 2019;9(2). 
doi:10.3390/membranes9020020 
50.  
Abu Seman MN, Khayet M, Hilal N. Development of antifouling properties and 
performance of nanofiltration membranes modified by interfacial polymerisation. 
Desalination. 2011;273(1):36-47. doi:10.1016/j.desal.2010.09.038 
51.  
Saqib J, Aljundi IH. Membrane fouling and modification using surface treatment and 
layer-by-layer assembly of polyelectrolytes: State-of-the-art review. J Water Process 
Eng. 2016;11:68-87. doi:10.1016/j.jwpe.2016.03.009 
52.  
Decher G, Hong J, Gutenberg-universitt J. Gero Decher* and Jong-Dal Hong Institut 
fur Physikalische Chemie; Johannes Gutenberg-Universitt Welder Weg 11; D-6500 
Maim; Fed. Rep. of Germany AbstraG. 1991;327:321-327. 
53.  
Liu C, Shi L, Wang R. Enhanced hollow fiber membrane performance via semi-
dynamic layer-by-layer polyelectrolyte inner surface deposition for nanofiltration and 
forward osmosis applications. React Funct Polym. 2015;86:154-160. 
doi:10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2014.07.018 
54.  
Ghernaout  et al. Membrane post-synthesis modifications and how it came about. Int J 
Adv Appl Sci. 2018;5(2):60-64. doi:10.21833/ijaas.2018.02.010 
55.  
Guzmán E, Rubio RG, Ortega F. A closer physico-chemical look to the Layer-by-
Layer electrostatic self-assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayers. Adv Colloid Interface 
Sci. 2020;282. doi:10.1016/j.cis.2020.102197 
56.  
Czerwieniec B, Strawski M, Granicka LH, Szklarczyk M. AFM study of adhesion and 
interactions between polyelectrolyte bilayers assembly. Colloids Surfaces A 
Physicochem Eng Asp. 2018;555(July):465-472. doi:10.1016/j.colsurfa.2018.07.006 
57.  
Menne D, Üzüm C, Koppelmann A, et al. Regenerable polymer/ceramic hybrid 
nanofiltration membrane based on polyelectrolyte assembly by layer-by-layer 
technique. J Memb Sci. 2016;520:924-932. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2016.08.048 
==PAGE:72==
64 
 
58.  
Michel M, Toniazzo V, Ruch D, Ball V. Deposition Mechanisms in Layer-by-Layer or 
Step-by-Step Deposition Methods: From Elastic and Impermeable Films to Soft 
Membranes with Ion Exchange Properties. ISRN Mater Sci. 2012;2012:1-13. 
doi:10.5402/2012/701695 
59.  
Zhang G, Yan H, Ji S, Liu Z. Self-assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayer 
pervaporation membranes by a dynamic layer-by-layer technique on a hydrolyzed 
polyacrylonitrile ultrafiltration membrane. J Memb Sci. 2007;292(1-2):1-8. 
doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2006.11.023 
60.  
Zhang Z, Muschiol J, Huang Y, et al. Efficient ionic liquid-based platform for multi-
enzymatic conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol. Green Chem. 2018;20(18):4339-
4348. doi:10.1039/c8gc02230e 
61.  
Ji YL, Gu BX, An QF, Gao CJ. Recent advances in the fabrication of membranes 
containing “ion pairs” for nanofiltration processes. Polymers (Basel). 2017;9(12):1-49. 
doi:10.3390/polym9120715 
62.  
Fu J, Fares HM, Schlenoff JB. Ion-Pairing Strength in Polyelectrolyte Complexes. 
Macromolecules. 2017;50(3):1066-1074. doi:10.1021/acs.macromol.6b02445 
63.  
Scheepers D, Chatillon B, Borneman Z, Nijmeijer K. Influence of charge density and 
ionic strength on diallyldimethylammonium chloride (DADMAC)-based 
polyelectrolyte multilayer membrane formation. J Memb Sci. 2021;617(August 2020). 
doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2020.118619 
64.  
Schönhoff M, Bieker P. Linear and exponential growth regimes of multilayers of weak 
polyelectrolytes in dependence on pH. Macromolecules. 2010;43(11):5052-5059. 
doi:10.1021/ma1007489 
65.  
SU B, Wang T, Wang Z, Gao X, Gao C. Preparation and performance of dynamic 
layer-by-layer PDADMAC/PSS nanofiltration membrane. J Memb Sci. 2012;423-
424:324-331. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2012.08.041 
66.  
de Grooth J, Oborný R, Potreck J, Nijmeijer K, de Vos WM. The role of ionic strength 
and odd-even effects on the properties of polyelectrolyte multilayer nanofiltration 
membranes. J Memb Sci. 2015;475:311-319. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2014.10.044 
67.  
Ouyang L, Malaisamy R, Bruening ML. Multilayer polyelectrolyte films as 
nanofiltration membranes for separating monovalent and divalent cations. J Memb Sci. 
2008;310(1-2):76-84. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2007.10.031 
68.  
Sigurdardottir SB, Duchanois RM, Epsztein R, Pinelo M, Elimelech M. Energy 
barriers to anion transport in polyelectrolyte multilayer nanofiltration membranes : 
Role of intra-pore diffusion. J Memb Sci. 2020;603(October 2019):117921. 
doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2020.117921 
69.  
Dubas ST, Schlenoff JB. Factors controlling the growth of polyelectrolyte multilayers. 
Macromolecules. 1999;32(24):8153-8160. doi:10.1021/ma981927a 
70.  
Menne D. Layer-by-Layer Design of Nanofiltration Membranes. Layer-by-Layer Des 
Nanofiltration Membr. Published online 2017:149. 
71.  
Alem H, Blondeau F, Glinel K, Demoustier-Champagne S, Jonas AM. Layer-by-layer 
assembly of polyelectrolytes in nanopores. Macromolecules. 2007;40(9):3366-3372. 
doi:10.1021/ma0703251 
==PAGE:73==
65 
 
72.  
Decher G. Fuzzy nanoassemblies: Toward layered polymeric multicomposites. Science 
(80- ). 1997;277(5330):1232-1237. doi:10.1126/science.277.5330.1232 
73.  
Kochan J, Wong JE, Nguyen LAT, Melin T, Wessling M. Ultrafiltration membranes 
modified using the layer-by-layer assembly of polyelectrolytes for enhanced 
performance. Procedia Eng. 2012;44:1624-1625. doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2012.08.889 
74.  
Elshof MG, de Vos WM, de Grooth J, Benes NE. On the long-term pH stability of 
polyelectrolyte multilayer nanofiltration membranes. J Memb Sci. 
2020;615(August):118532. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2020.118532 
75.  
Sánchez PA, Vögele M, Smiatek J, Qiao B, Sega M, Holm C. PDADMAC/PSS 
oligoelectrolyte multilayers: Internal structure and hydration properties at early growth 
stages from atomistic simulations. Molecules. 2020;25(8). 
doi:10.3390/molecules25081848 
76.  
Laakso T, Pihlajamäki A, Mänttäri M. Effect of polycation structure on the fabrication 
of polyelectrolyte multilayer hollow fiber membranes for loose nanofiltration 
applications. Sep Purif Technol. 2018;194(November 2017):141-148. 
doi:10.1016/j.seppur.2017.11.038 
77.  
Polymer_Lbl_Process. 
78.  
Miller MD, Bruening ML. Correlation of the swelling and permeability of 
polyelectrolyte multilayer films. Chem Mater. 2005;17(21):5375-5381. 
doi:10.1021/cm0512225 
79.  
Guo Y, Geng W, Sun J. Layer-by-layer deposition of polyelectrolyte-polyelectrolyte 
complexes for multilayer film fabrication. Langmuir. 2009;25(2):1004-1010. 
doi:10.1021/la803479a 
80.  
Persson KM, Gekas V, Trägårdh G. Study of membrane compaction and its influence 
on ultrafiltration water permeability. J Memb Sci. 1995;100(2):155-162. 
doi:10.1016/0376-7388(94)00263-X 
81.  
de Grooth J, Haakmeester B, Wever C, Potreck J, de Vos WM, Nijmeijer K. Long 
term physical and chemical stability of polyelectrolyte multilayer membranes. J Memb 
Sci. 2015;489:153-159. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2015.04.031 
82.  
Duchanois RM, Epsztein R, Trivedi JA, Elimelech M. Controlling pore structure of 
polyelectrolyte multilayer nanofiltration membranes by tuning polyelectrolyte-salt 
interactions. J Memb Sci. 2019;581(January):413-420. 
doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2019.03.077 
83.  
Van der Bruggen B, Mänttäri M, Nyström M. Drawbacks of applying nanofiltration 
and how to avoid them: A review. Sep Purif Technol. 2008;63(2):251-263. 
doi:10.1016/j.seppur.2008.05.010 
84.  
Zhao Z, Shi S, Cao H, Li Y, Van der Bruggen B. Layer-by-layer assembly of anion 
exchange membrane by electrodeposition of polyelectrolytes for improved antifouling 
performance. J Memb Sci. 2018;558(1):1-8. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2018.04.035 
85.  
V. Klitzing R. Internal structure of polyelectrolyte multilayer assemblies. Phys Chem 
Chem Phys. 2006;8(43):5012-5033. doi:10.1039/b607760a 
86.  
Saeki D, Imanishi M, Ohmukai Y, Maruyama T, Matsuyama H. Stabilization of layer-
==PAGE:74==
66 
 
by-layer assembled nanofiltration membranes by crosslinking via amide bond 
formation and siloxane bond formation. J Memb Sci. 2013;447:128-133. 
doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2013.07.022 
87.  
Salomäki M, Vinokurov IA, Kankare J. Effect of temperature on the buildup of 
polyelectrolyte multilayers. Langmuir. 2005;21(24):11232-11240. 
doi:10.1021/la051600k 
88.  
Cazelles R, Drone J, Fajula F, Ersen O, Moldovan S, Galarneau A. Reduction of CO2 
to methanol by a polyenzymatic system encapsulated in phospholipids-silica 
nanocapsules. New J Chem. 2013;37(11):3721-3730. doi:10.1039/c3nj00688c 
89.  
Carballares D, Morellon-sterlling R, Arana-pe S, Rodrigues RC. or not ? 
2020;(March). 
90.  
Xue R, Woodley JM. Process technology for multi-enzymatic reaction systems. 
Bioresour Technol. 2012;115:183-195. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2012.03.033 
91.  
Hwang ET, Lee S. Multienzymatic Cascade Reactions via Enzyme Complex by 
Immobilization. ACS Catal. 2019;9(5):4402-4425. doi:10.1021/acscatal.8b04921 
92.  
Wang X, Li Z, Shi J, et al. Bioinspired approach to multienzyme cascade system 
construction for efficient carbon dioxide reduction. ACS Catal. 2014;4(3):962-972. 
doi:10.1021/cs401096c 
93.  
Ren S, Wang Z, Bilal M, et al. Co-immobilization multienzyme nanoreactor with co-
factor regeneration for conversion of CO2. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020;155:110-118. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.03.177 
94.  
Homaei AA, Sariri R, Vianello F, Stevanato R. Enzyme immobilization: An update. J 
Chem Biol. 2013;6(4):185-205. doi:10.1007/s12154-013-0102-9 
95.  
Datta S, Christena LR, Rajaram YRS. Enzyme immobilization: an overview on 
techniques and support materials. 3 Biotech. 2013;3(1):1-9. doi:10.1007/s13205-012-
0071-7 
96.  
Nguyen HH, Kim M. An Overview of Techniques in Enzyme Immobilization. Appl 
Sci Converg Technol. 2017;26(6):157-163. doi:10.5757/asct.2017.26.6.157 
97.  
Zdarta J, Meyer AS, Jesionowski T, Pinelo M. Multi-faceted strategy based on enzyme 
immobilization with reactant adsorption and membrane technology for biocatalytic 
removal of pollutants: A critical review. Biotechnol Adv. 2019;37(7):107401. 
doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.05.007 
98.  
Characteristics I. A General Overview of Support Materials for Enzyme 
Immobilization: Characteristics, Properties, Practical Utility. Published online 2018. 
doi:10.3390/catal8020092 
99.  
Wahab RA, Elias N, Abdullah F, Ghoshal SK. On the taught new tricks of enzymes 
immobilization: An all-inclusive overview. React Funct Polym. 
2020;152(February):104613. doi:10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2020.104613 
100.  Sakr OS, Borchard G. Encapsulation of enzymes in layer-by-layer (LbL) structures: 
Latest advances and applications. Biomacromolecules. 2013;14(7):2117-2135. 
doi:10.1021/bm400198p 
==PAGE:75==
67 
 
101.  Cao L. Immobilized Enzymes. Vol 2. Second Edi. Elsevier B.V.; 2011. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-088504-9.00168-9 
102.  Orrego AH, Romero-Fernández M, Millán-Linares M del C, Pedroche J, Guisán JM, 
Rocha-Martin J. High stabilization of enzymes immobilized on rigid hydrophobic 
glyoxyl-supports: Generation of hydrophilic environments on support surfaces. 
Catalysts. 2020;10(6). doi:10.3390/catal10060676 
103.  El-Zahab B, Donnelly D, Wang P. Particle-tethered NADH for production of methanol 
from CO2 catalyzed by coimmobilized enzymes. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2008;99(3):508-
514. doi:10.1002/bit.21584 
104.  Ji X, Su Z, Wang P, Ma G, Zhang S. Tethering of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
inside hollow nanofibers for high-yield synthesis of methanol from carbon dioxide 
catalyzed by coencapsulated multienzymes. ACS Nano. 2015;9(4):4600-4610. 
doi:10.1021/acsnano.5b01278 
105.  Wu H, Huang S, Jiang Z. Effects of modification of silica gel and ADH on enzyme 
activity for enzymatic conversion of CO2 to methanol. Catal Today. 2004;98(4):545-
552. doi:10.1016/j.cattod.2004.09.018 
106.  Zezzi Do Valle Gomes M, Palmqvist AEC. Influence of operating conditions and 
immobilization on activity of alcohol dehydrogenase for the conversion of 
formaldehyde to methanol. New J Chem. 2017;41(19):11391-11397. 
doi:10.1039/c7nj02028g 
107.  Ren S, Li C, Jiao X, et al. Recent progress in multienzymes co-immobilization and 
multienzyme system applications. Chem Eng J. 2019;373(May):1254-1278. 
doi:10.1016/j.cej.2019.05.141 
108.  Jochems P, Satyawali Y, Diels L, Dejonghe W. Enzyme immobilization on/in 
polymeric membranes: Status, challenges and perspectives in biocatalytic membrane 
reactors (BMRs). Green Chem. 2011;13(7):1609-1623. doi:10.1039/c1gc15178a 
109.  Prazeres DMF, Cabral JMS. Enzymatic membrane bioreactors and their applications. 
Enzyme Microb Technol. 1994;16(9):738-750. doi:10.1016/0141-0229(94)90030-2 
110.  Luo J, Meyer AS, Jonsson G, Pinelo M. Enzyme immobilization by fouling in 
ultrafiltration membranes: Impact of membrane configuration and type on flux 
behavior and biocatalytic conversion efficacy. Biochem Eng J. 2014;83:79-89. 
doi:10.1016/j.bej.2013.12.007 
111.  Jesionowski T, Zdarta J, Krajewska B. Enzyme immobilization by adsorption: A 
review. Adsorption. 2014;20(5-6):801-821. doi:10.1007/s10450-014-9623-y 
112.  Luo J, Meyer AS, Mateiu R V, Pinelo M. Cascade catalysis in membranes with 
enzyme immobilization for multi- enzymatic conversion of CO 2 to methanol. N 
Biotechnol. 2015;32(3):319-327. doi:10.1016/j.nbt.2015.02.006 
113.  Zhang H, Zhang H, Luo J, Wan Y. Enzymatic Cascade Catalysis in a Nanofiltration 
Membrane: Engineering the Microenvironment by Synergism of Separation and 
Reaction. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2019;11(25):22419-22428. 
doi:10.1021/acsami.9b05371 
114.  Judd S. The status of membrane bioreactor technology. Trends Biotechnol. 
2008;26(2):109-116. doi:10.1016/j.tibtech.2007.11.005 
==PAGE:76==
68 
 
115.  Ανυφαντάκης Ε. Γάλα καλής ποιότητας ΈλεγχοςNo Title. Published online 1994:149-
167. 
116.  Marcano JGS. 
<ebooksclub.Org__Catalytic_Membranes__amp__Catalytic_Membrane_Reactors.Pdf
>.; 2002. 
117.  Dos Santos J, Lozano R, Friboulet A. Dynamic analysis of an enzymatic membrane 
reactor. Proc IEEE Conf Decis Control. Published online 2008:1864-1869. 
doi:10.1109/CDC.2008.4738954 
118.  Czerwieniec B, Strawski M, Granicka LH, Szklarczyk M. AFM study of adhesion and 
interactions between polyelectrolyte bilayers assembly. Colloids Surfaces A 
Physicochem Eng Asp. 2018;555(July):465-472. doi:10.1016/j.colsurfa.2018.07.006 
119.  Zaak H, Fernandez-Lopez L, Otero C, Sassi M, Fernandez-Lafuente R. Improved 
stability of immobilized lipases via modification with polyethylenimine and 
glutaraldehyde. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2017;106(May):67-74. 
doi:10.1016/j.enzmictec.2017.07.001 
120.  Kim MH, Park S, Kim YH, Won K, Lee SH. Immobilization of formate 
dehydrogenase from Candida boidinii through cross-linked enzyme aggregates. J Mol 
Catal B Enzym. 2013;97:209-214. doi:10.1016/j.molcatb.2013.08.020 
121.  Shi Q, Zhou Y, Sun Y. Influence of pH and ionic strength on the steric mass-action 
model parameters around the isoelectric point of protein. Biotechnol Prog. 
2005;21(2):516-523. doi:10.1021/bp049735o 
122.  Feldötö Z, Varga I, Blomberg E. Influence of salt and rinsing protocol on the structure 
of PAH/PSS polyelectrolyte multilayers. Langmuir. 2010;26(22):17048-17057. 
doi:10.1021/la102351f 
123.  Wang J, Yao Y, Yue Z, Economy J. Preparation of polyelectrolyte multilayer films 
consisting of sulfonated poly (ether ether ketone) alternating with selected anionic 
layers. J Memb Sci. 2009;337(1-2):200-207. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2009.03.044 
124.  Luo J, Wan Y. Effects of pH and salt on nanofiltration-a critical review. J Memb Sci. 
2013;438:18-28. doi:10.1016/j.memsci.2013.03.029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
69 
 
6. 
APPENDIX 
A. Standard curve 
 
i. 
Bradford standard curve  
                                                                          
Figure 5.2:Bradford standard curve  
 
ii. 
NADH standard Curve 
 
Figure 5.2: NADH Standard curve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y = 0.0062x - 0.0412
R² = 0.9892
y = 0.0071x + 0.0741
R² = 0.9999
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
50
100
150
200
250
Absorbance at 340 nm
Concnetration (µM )
NADH -Standard Curve
Macro-scale
Micro-scale
==PAGE:78==
70 
 
B. Enzyme immobilization  
 
i. Bradford assay for ADH immobilization 
 
- 
PDADMAC 
                          
Figure 5.3: Absorbance at 595 nm for ADH immobilization on PDADAMC PEM membrane by adsorption and cross-linking 
done by Bradford assay. 
- 
PEI 
                                    
Figure 5.4: Absorbance at 595 nm for ADH immobilization on PEI PEM membrane by adsorption and cross-linking done by 
Bradford assay. 
- 
PAH  
                       
Figure 5.5: Absorbance at 595 nm for ADH immobilization on PAH PEM membrane by adsorption and cross-linking done by 
Bradford assay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adsorption 
Absorbance (1) 
Absorbance(2) 
Feed 
0.5305 
0.4005 
Discard 
0.5745 
0.399 
Wash 1 
0.3505 
0.388 
Wash 2 
0.337 
0.3915 
Wash 3 
0.342 
0.392 
Cross-linking 
Absorbance (1) 
Absorbance (2) 
Feed 
0.5305 
0.4005 
Discard 
0.593 
0.4075 
Wash 1 
0.3525 
0.389 
Wash 2 
0.338 
0.4 
Wash 3 
0.3345 
0.394 
 
 
Adsorption Absorbance (1) 
Absorbance  (2)  
Feed 
0.5415 
0.4005 
Discard 
0.5365 
0.403 
Wash 1 
0.34 
0.3865 
Wash 2 
0.3275 
0.381 
Wash 3 
0.3255 
0.378 
Cross-linking Absorbance (1) 
Absorbance (1) 
Feed 
0.5305 
0.4005 
Discard 
0.593 
0.4085 
Wash 1 
0.3525 
0.3985 
Wash 2 
0.338 
0.3975 
Wash 3 
0.3345 
0.394 
Adsorption  Absorbance (1)  
Absorbance  (2) 
Feed 
0.39 
0.393 
Discard 
0.39 
0.3845 
Wash 1 
0.3765 
0.383 
Wash 2 
0.3755 
0.3785 
Wash 3 
0.375 
0.383 
Crosslinking Absorbance  (1) 
Absorbance  (2) 
Feed 
0.4005 
0.393 
Discard 
0.3885 
0.395 
Wash 1 
0.3805 
0.383 
Wash 2 
0.3765 
0.385 
Wash 3 
0.3775 
0.3835 
==PAGE:79==
71 
 
ii. Bradford assay for FaldDH immobilization  
                    
Figure 5.6: Absorbance at 595 nm for FaldDH immobilization on PDADAMC, PEI and PAH PEM membrane by adsorption and 
cross-linking done by Bradford assay. 
 
iii. Bradford assay for FateDH immobilization  
                      
Figure 5.7: Absorbance at 595 nm for FateDH immobilization on PDADAMC, PEI and PAH PEM membrane by adsorption and 
cross-linking done by Bradford assay. 
 
==PAGE:80==
72 
 
C. NADH conversion  
1. Immobilization by adsorption 
i. 
Reaction after ADH immobilization 
 
Figure 5.8: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively. 
 
ii. 
Reaction after FaldDH Immobilization 
                                
Figure 5.9: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively 
PDADMAC
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.297
0.286 54.54839 52.77419 53.66129 1.254544
Permeate 1
0.085
0.063 20.35484 16.80645 18.58065 2.509089
Permeate 2
0.088
0.071 20.83871 18.09677 19.46774 1.938841
Permeate 3
0.1
0.099 22.77419
22.6129 22.69355 0.114049
Retentate
0.04
0.035 13.09677 12.29032 12.69355 0.570247
PEI
Absorbacne (1) Absorbacne (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.277
0.286 51.32258 52.77419 52.04839 1.026445
Permeate 1
0.026
0.025 10.83871 10.67742 10.75806 0.114049
Permeate 2
0.01
0.006 8.258065 7.612903 7.935484 0.456198
Permeate 3
0.005
0.007 7.451613 7.774194 7.612903 0.228099
Retnetate
0.01
0.03 8.258065 11.48387 9.870968
2.28099
PAH
Absorbacne (1) Absorbacne (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.27
0.299 50.19355 54.87097 52.53226 3.307435
Permeate 1
0.045
0.07 13.90323 17.93548 15.91935 2.851237
Permeate 2
0.012
0.014 8.580645 8.903226 8.741935 0.228099
Permeate 3
0.007
0.016 7.774194 9.225806
8.5 1.026445
Retnetate
0.01
0.02 8.258065 9.870968 9.064516 1.140495
PDADMAC
Absorbacne (1) Absorbacne (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.259
0.263 48.41935 49.06452 48.74194 0.456198
Permeate 1
0.215
0.179 41.32258 35.51613 38.41935 4.105781
Permeate 2
0.228
0.212 43.41935 40.83871 42.12903 1.824792
Permeate 3
0.248
0.231 46.64516 43.90323 45.27419 1.938841
Retnetate
0.249
0.25 46.80645 46.96774
46.8871 0.114049
PEI
Absorbacne (1) Absorbacne (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.248
0.261 46.64516 48.74194 47.69355 1.482643
Permeate 1
0.229
0.234 43.58065
44.3871 43.98387 0.570247
Permeate 2
0.236
0.239 44.70968 45.19355 44.95161 0.342148
Permeate 3
0.24
0.25 45.35484 46.96774 46.16129 1.140495
Retnetate
0.24
0.26 45.35484 48.58065 46.96774
2.28099
PAH
Absorbacne (1) Absorbacne (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.27
0.224 50.19355 42.77419 46.48387 5.246276
Permeate 1
0.224
0.176 42.77419 35.03226 38.90323 5.474375
Permeate 2
0.241
0.212 45.51613 40.83871 43.17742 3.307435
Permeate 3
0.251
0.22 47.12903 42.12903 44.62903 3.535534
Retnetate
0.259
0.22 48.41935 42.12903 45.27419
4.44793
==PAGE:81==
73 
 
iii. 
Reaction after FateDH Immobilization 
              
Figure 5.10: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively 
2. Adsorption by cross-linking 
i. 
ADH 
       
Figure 5.11: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively 
PDADMAC
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.465
0.5 81.64516 87.29032 84.46774 3.991732
Permeate 1
0.401
0.436 71.32258 76.96774 74.14516 3.991732
Permeate 2
0.414
0.42 73.41935
74.3871 73.90323 0.684297
Permeate 3
0.416
0.42 73.74194
74.3871 74.06452 0.456198
Retnetate
0.442
0.48 77.93548 84.06452
81
4.33388
PEI
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.469
0.531 82.29032 92.29032 87.29032 7.071068
Permeate 1
0.425
0.483 75.19355 84.54839 79.87097
6.61487
Permeate 2
0.446
0.504 78.58065 87.93548 83.25806
6.61487
Permeate 3
0.44
0.498
77.6129 86.96774 82.29032
6.61487
Retnetate
0.444
0.502 78.25806
87.6129 82.93548
6.61487
PAH
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.6
0.591 103.4194 101.9677 102.6935 1.026445
Permeate 1
0.494
0.417 86.32258 73.90323
80.1129
8.78181
Permeate 2
0.528
0.55 91.80645 95.35484 93.58065 2.509089
Permeate 3
0.539
0.543 93.58065 94.22581 93.90323 0.456198
Retnetate
0.543
0.575 94.22581
99.3871 96.80645 3.649583
PDADMAC
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.297
0.278 54.54839 51.48387 53.01613 2.16694014
Permeate 1
0.043
0.049 13.58065 14.54839 14.06452 0.68429689
Permeate 2
0.034
0.034 12.12903 12.12903 12.12903
0
Permeate 3
0.024
0.012 10.51613 8.580645 9.548387 1.36859377
Retnetate
0.044
0.019 13.74194 9.709677 11.72581 2.85123702
PEI
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.277
0.278 51.32258 51.48387 51.40323 0.11404948
Permeate 1
0.038
0.038 12.77419 12.77419 12.77419
0
Permeate 2
0.026
0.021 10.83871 10.03226 10.43548
0.5702474
Permeate 3
0.009
0.021 8.096774 10.03226 9.064516 1.36859377
Retnetate
0.011
0.027 8.419355
11 9.709677 1.82479169
PAH
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc1 
Conc 2
Average Stdev
Feed
0.283
0.299 52.29032 54.87097 53.58065 1.82479169
Permeate 1
0.054
0.038 15.35484 12.77419 14.06452 1.82479169
Permeate 2
0.024
0.022 10.51613 10.19355 10.35484 0.22809896
Permeate 3
0.012
0.017 8.580645 9.387097 8.983871
0.5702474
Retnetate
0.022
0.028 10.19355 11.16129 10.67742 0.68429689
==PAGE:82==
74 
 
 
ii. 
FaldDH 
         
Figure 5.12: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively 
 
iii. 
FateDH 
                                
Figure 5.13: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC, PEI and PAH respectively 
 
PDADMAC
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.259
0.263 48.41935 49.06452 48.74194 0.45619792
Permeate 1
0.176
0.176 35.03226 35.03226 35.03226
0
Permeate 2
0.174
0.187 34.70968 36.80645 35.75806 1.48264325
Permeate 3
0.17
0.174 34.06452 34.70968
34.3871 0.45619792
Retnetate
0.239
0.243 45.19355 45.83871 45.51613 0.45619792
PEI
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.248
0.25 46.64516 46.96774 46.80645 0.22809896
Permeate 1
0.172
0.128
34.3871 27.29032 30.83871 5.01817716
Permeate 2
0.182
0.146
36 30.19355 33.09677 4.10578131
Permeate 3
0.164
0.158 33.09677 32.12903
32.6129 0.68429689
Retnetate
0.289
0.307 53.25806 56.16129 54.70968 2.05289066
PAH
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.27
0.224 50.19355 42.77419 46.48387 5.24627612
Permeate 1
0.166
0.134 33.41935 28.25806 30.83871 3.64958339
Permeate 2
0.176
0.14 35.03226 29.22581 32.12903 4.10578131
Permeate 3
0.181
0.139 35.83871 29.06452 32.45161
4.7900782
Retnetate
0.29
0.25 53.41935 46.96774 50.19355 4.56197923
PDADMAC
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.465
0.48 81.64516 84.06452 82.85484 1.71074221
Permeate 1
0.418
0.43 74.06452
76 75.03226 1.36859377
Permeate 2
0.439
0.45 77.45161 79.22581 78.33871 1.25454429
Permeate 3
0.451
0.461
79.3871
81 80.19355 1.14049481
Retnetate
0.46
0.475 80.83871 83.25806 82.04839 1.71074221
PEI
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.469
0.531 82.29032 92.29032 87.29032 7.07106781
Permeate 1
0.453
0.511 79.70968 89.06452
84.3871 6.61486989
Permeate 2
0.463
0.479 81.32258 83.90323
82.6129 1.82479169
Permeate 3
0.461
0.483
81 84.54839 82.77419 2.50908858
Retnetate
0.477
0.569 83.58065 98.41935
91 10.4925522
PAH
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)
Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stddev
Feed
0.6
0.591 103.4194 101.9677 102.6935 1.02644533
Permeate 1
0.52
0.467 90.51613 81.96774 86.24194 6.04462248
Permeate 2
0.477
0.458 83.58065 80.51613 82.04839 2.16694014
Permeate 3
0.5
0.495 87.29032 86.48387
86.8871
0.5702474
Retnetate
0.659
0.75 112.9355 127.6129 120.2742 10.3785028
==PAGE:83==
75 
 
3. Reaction after ADH Imobilization – Time Variation 
                    
Figure 5.13: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC for different immobilization time (0.5,  1, 3 and 24 hour) 
4. Reaction after ADH immobilization with two layers 
           
Figure 5.14: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC for different immobilization after 0.5 hour with two ADH layer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.5 hour
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)Conc 1 (µM) Conc 2 (µM) Average
Standard Deviation 
Feed
0.584
0.558
100.83871
96.645161 98.74194
2.965286502
Permeate 1
0.311
0.29
56.806452
53.419355
55.1129
2.395039098
Permeate 2
0.337
0.311
61
56.806452 58.90323
2.965286502
Permeate 3
0.361
0.321
64.870968
58.419355 61.64516
4.561979233
Retentate
0.45
0.428
79.225806
75.677419 77.45161
2.509088578
1 hour
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)Conc 1 (µM) Conc 2 (µM) Average
Standard Deviation 
Feed
0.584
0.558
100.83871
96.645161 98.74194
2.965286502
Permeate 1
0.355
0.312
63.903226
56.967742 60.43548
4.904127676
Permeate 2
0.355
0.298
63.903226
54.709677 59.30645
6.500820408
Permeate 3
0.336
0.321
60.83871
58.419355 59.62903
1.710742213
Retentate
0.403
0.428
71.645161
75.677419 73.66129
2.851237021
3 hour
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)Conc 1 (µM) Conc 2 (µM) Average
Standard Deviation 
Feed
0.584
0.575
100.83871
99.387097 100.1129
1.026445328
Permeate 1
0.222
0.223
42.451613
42.612903 42.53226
0.114049481
Permeate 2
0.198
0.199
38.580645
38.741935 38.66129
0.114049481
Permeate 3
0.173
0.189
34.548387
37.129032 35.83871
1.824791693
Retentate
0.31
0.428
56.645161
75.677419 66.16129
13.45783874
24 hour
Absorbance (1) Absorbance (2)Conc 1 (µM) Conc 2 (µM) Average
Standard Deviation 
Feed
0.632
0.631
108.58065
108.41935
108.5
0.114049481
Permeate 1
0.132
0.101
27.935484
22.935484 25.43548
3.535533906
Permeate 2
0.16
0.113
32.451613
24.870968 28.66129
5.360325599
Permeate 3
0.19
0.104
37.290323
23.419355 30.35484
9.808255352
Retentate
0.54
0.605
93.741935
104.22581 98.98387
7.413216254
==PAGE:84==
76 
 
 
5. Reaction after ADH Immobilization with changing bilayers 
 
               
Figure 5.15: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC for different immobilization after 0.5 hour.  
6. CO2 to CH3OH after cascade immobilization after 24 hours 
                              
Figure 5.25: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for each of the PEM membane with PDADMAC for different immobilization after 0.5 hour.  
7. CO2 to CH3OH after co-immobilization after 24 hours 
                         
Figure 5.16: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard 
curve for ADH, FaldDH and FateDH co-immobilized for 24 hour 
8. CO2 to CH3OH after cascade immobilization after 0.5 hours 
 
 
 
                                           
Figure 
Reaction Absorbance (1)Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stdev
Feed
0.646
0.577 110.8387 99.70968 105.2742 7.869414
Permeate 
0.5
0.365 87.29032 65.51613 76.40323 15.39668
Permeate 
0.512
0.396 89.22581 70.51613 79.87097 13.22974
Permeate 
0.5
0.41 87.29032 72.77419 80.03226 10.26445
Retentate
0.675
0.602 115.5161 103.7419
109.629 8.325612
Reaction Absorbance (1)Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stdev
Feed
0.76
0.6 129.2258 103.4194 116.3226 18.24792
Permeate 
0.41
0.278 72.77419 51.48387 62.12903 15.05453
Permeate 
0.48
0.241 84.06452 45.51613 64.79032 27.25783
Permeate 
0.503
0.249 87.77419 46.80645 67.29032 28.96857
Retentate
0.913
0.887 153.9032 149.7097 151.8065 2.965287
Reaction Absorbance (1)Absorbance (2) Conc 1
Conc 2
Average
Stdev
Feed
0.633
0.634 108.7419 108.9032 108.8226 0.114049
Permeate 
0.166
0.183 33.41935 36.16129 34.79032 1.938841
Permeate 
0.196
0.213 38.25806
41 39.62903 1.938841
Permeate 
0.21
0.239 40.51613 45.19355 42.85484 3.307435
Retentate
1.016
0.955 170.5161 160.6774 165.5968 6.957018
==PAGE:85==
77 
 
5.16: Absorbance at 340 nm followed by concentration of NADH concentration (µM) calculated from the standard curve for 
ADH, FaldDH and FateDH cascade immobilization for 0.5 hour 
 
 
D. Flux of Permeate 
1. Immobilization by adsorption  
i. 
ADH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii. 
FaldDH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.343889 0.379167 3.657756 3.317437
3.487596623 0.240642
Permeate2
0.229167 0.361944 5.488851 3.475289
4.482070009 1.423803
Permeate 3 0.242778 0.298333 5.181123 4.216296
4.698709712 0.682236
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.739444 0.720833
1.70109
1.74501
1.723050238 0.031056
Permeate2
0.484167 0.532222 2.597993 2.363414
2.480703698 0.165872
Permeate 3 0.525833 0.457222
2.39213 2.751095
2.5716123 0.253826
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.5075 0.556667 2.478545 2.259632
2.369088387 0.154795
Permeate2
0.331389 0.299444 3.795727 4.200651
3.998188873 0.286325
Permeate 3 0.333056 0.332222 3.776732 3.786206
3.781468887 0.006699
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.7675 0.633611 1.638908 1.985227
1.812067137 0.244884
Permeate2
0.512222 0.355556 2.455695 3.537736
2.996715508 0.765118
Permeate 3 0.558333 0.335278 2.252887
3.7517
3.00229325 1.059821
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.515833 0.466389 2.438504 2.697023
2.567763569 0.182801
Permeate2
0.321389 0.330278
3.91383 3.808496
3.861163309 0.074483
Permeate 3 0.463333 0.392222 2.714809 3.207013
2.960910976
0.34804
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.740278 0.471111 1.699175 2.669989
2.184582256 0.686469
Permeate2
0.583889 0.367778 2.154283 3.420168
2.787225061 0.895116
Permeate 3 0.463056 0.422222 2.716438 2.979146
2.847791911 0.185763
Figure 5.17: Flux for the reaction after ADH immobilization 
==PAGE:86==
78 
 
iii. 
FateDH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Immobilization by cross-linking 
i. 
ADH 
                                                 
Figure 5.17: Flux for the reaction after ADH immobilization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.457778 0.693056 2.747756 1.814951 2.281353 0.659593
Permeate2
0.356111 0.580556 3.532217 2.166652 2.849434
0.9656
Permeate 3
0.354444
0.5825 3.548826 2.159419 2.854123 0.982459
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.998611 0.992222 1.259611 1.267722 1.263666 0.005735
Permeate2
0.505556 0.720556 2.488078 1.745683 2.116881 0.524952
Permeate 3
0.519722 0.667222 2.420258 1.885221 2.152739 0.378328
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
1.159167 1.128889 1.085143 1.114248 1.099695
0.02058
Permeate2
0.934444 0.739167 1.346106 1.701729 1.523918 0.251463
Permeate 3
0.746944 0.679444
1.68401 1.851309 1.767659 0.118299
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.335556 0.379167 3.748594 3.317437
3.533015778 0.304874
Permeate2
0.233333 0.361944 5.390836 3.475289
4.433062412 1.354496
Permeate 3 0.224444 0.298333 5.604334 4.216296
4.910315001 0.981491
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.343889 0.498056 3.657756 2.525545
3.0916504 0.800594
Permeate2
0.229167
0.4975 5.488851 2.528365
4.008607934 2.093379
Permeate 3 0.242778 0.254167 5.181123 4.948964
5.065043625 0.164162
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2) 
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.529167 0.679722 2.377061 1.850552
2.113806912 0.372298
Permeate2
0.7825 0.488889 1.607491 2.572899
2.090194853 0.682646
Permeate 3 0.521667 0.765278 2.411236 1.643667
2.027451554 0.542754
==PAGE:87==
79 
 
ii. 
FaldDH 
                                            
Figure 5.18: Flux for the reaction after FaldDH immobilization 
 
iii. 
FateDH 
                                                  
Figure 5.19: Flux for the reaction after Fate immobilization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.917222 0.666944 1.371382 1.886007 1.628694 0.363895
Permeate2
0.555278 0.490556 2.265284 2.564157
2.41472 0.211336
Permeate 3
0.561389 0.536667 2.240624 2.343842 2.292233 0.072986
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.9425 0.915278 1.334601 1.374295 1.354448 0.028068
Permeate2
0.655556 0.640556 1.918772 1.963704 1.941238 0.031772
Permeate 3
0.691389 0.361944 1.819326 3.475289 2.647308 1.170943
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.684444 0.750833 1.837785 1.675287 1.756536 0.114903
Permeate2
0.473889 0.961944 2.654339 1.307624 1.980981 0.952271
Permeate 3
0.453889 0.667222 2.771299 1.885221
2.32826 0.626551
PDADMAC
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.6 0.992222 2.096436 1.267722 1.682079
0.58599
Permeate2
0.45 0.720556 2.795248 1.745683 2.270466 0.742155
Permeate 3
0.455 0.667222 2.764531 1.885221 2.324876 0.621766
PEI
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.998611
0.55 1.259611 2.287021 1.773316 0.726489
Permeate2
0.505556 0.445833 2.488078 2.821372 2.654725 0.235674
Permeate 3
0.519722 0.560278 2.420258 2.245068 2.332663 0.123878
PAH
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average FlStddev
Permeate1
0.750833
0.6575 1.675287 1.913098 1.794192 0.168157
Permeate2
0.495833 0.403611 2.536864 3.116519 2.826691 0.409878
Permeate 3
0.448611 0.469167 2.803902 2.681055 2.742479 0.086866
==PAGE:88==
80 
 
3. ADH immobilization – time variation 
                             
Figure 5.20: Flux for the reaction after ADH immobilization-time variation 
 
4. Increasing number of ADH layers 
                               
Figure 5.21: Flux for the reaction after ADH immobilization-increasing number of layers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.5 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.235556 0.523889 5.339979 2.401008
3.870493532 2.078166
Permeate2
0.178333 0.442222
7.05343 2.844411
4.948920232 2.976226
Permeate 3
0.186111 0.219444
6.75866 5.732028
6.245343619 0.725938
1 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.385556 0.523889 3.262465 2.401008
2.83173688 0.609142
Permeate2
0.294444 0.442222 4.271983 2.844411
3.558196822 1.009446
Permeate 3
0.303333 0.219444 4.146797 5.732028
4.939412152 1.120928
3 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.363889 0.523889 3.456719 2.401008
2.928863711
0.7465
Permeate2
0.258333 0.442222 4.869142 2.844411
3.856776273 1.431701
Permeate 3
0.223611 0.219444
5.62522 5.732028
5.67862372 0.075525
24 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.481667 0.399167 2.611477 3.151219
2.881348286 0.381655
Permeate2
0.352778 0.309167 3.565592 4.068555
3.817073596 0.355649
Permeate 3
0.338056 0.360833 3.720873 3.485991
3.60343161 0.166087
Recycled 
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2)
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.461667 0.523611
2.72461 2.402282
2.563446104
0.22792
Permeate2
0.336944 0.376944 3.733143 3.336995
3.535068643 0.280119
Permeate 3
0.328056 0.357222 3.834295
3.52123
3.677762326
0.22137
not recycled TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2)
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.484444 0.533333 2.596503 2.358491
2.477496971
0.1683
Permeate2
0.347778 0.416667 3.616855 3.018868
3.317861233
0.42284
Permeate 3
0.328889 0.408889 3.824579 3.076292
3.450435669 0.529119
==PAGE:89==
81 
 
5. Changing the bilayers 
                                         
Figure 5.22: Flux for the reaction after ADH immobilization 
 
6. CO2 to CH3OH 
 
                                           
Figure 5.23: Flux for the reaction for CO2 to CH3Oh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.5 bl - GA TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux Stddev
Permeate1
0.400278 0.388889 3.142472 3.234501 3.188486582 0.065075
Permeate2
0.308056 0.288056
4.08323 4.366733 4.224981304 0.200467
Permeate 3 0.258056 0.289444 4.874383 4.345779 4.610081124 0.373779
2.5 bl
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux
Flux
Average Flux Stddev
Permeate1
0.333333 0.332778 3.773585 3.779885
3.77673481 0.004455
Permeate2
0.225 0.218056 5.590496 5.768537 5.679516796 0.125894
Permeate 3
0.225 0.290278 5.590496 4.333303 4.961899699
0.88897
Co-immobilization-24 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2)
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.406944 0.523889 3.09099 2.401008 2.745999736 0.487891
Permeate2
0.288889 0.442222 4.35414 2.844411 3.599273581 1.067537
Permeate 3
0.336111 0.219444
3.7424 5.732028 4.737212979
1.40688
Cascade Immobilizaion-24 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2)
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.423333 0.523889 2.97133 2.401008
2.68616756 0.403276
Permeate2
0.290833 0.442222 4.32503 2.844411 3.584718206 1.046953
Permeate 3
0.385556 0.219444 3.26247 5.732028 4.497246521 1.746244
Cascade Immobilization-0.5 hour
TIME 1
Time 2
Flux (1)
Flux (2)
Average Flux
Stddev
Permeate1
0.483611 0.534722 2.60098 2.352365 2.476671075 0.175796
Permeate2
0.515833 1.016111
2.4385 1.237917 1.838210694 0.848943
Permeate 3
0.338611 1.435278 3.71477 0.876389 2.295578367 2.007037
==PAGE:90==
82 
 
E. NADH consumption  
i. 
ADH immobilization  
                                                                           
Figure 5.24: NADH consumption  
 
ii. 
FaldDH immobilization 
                                                            
Figure 5.25: NADH consumption  
 
iii. 
FateDH immobilization  
                                                              
Figure 5.26: NADH consumption  
 
 
 
 
Adsorption
x10^-7
Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (mstd
PDADMAC
3.651612903 3.6354839 3.643548 0.011405
PEI
4.270967742 4.2967742 4.283871 0.018248
PAH
0.901290323 0.6206452 0.760968 0.198446
Cross-linkin
x10^-7
Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (mstd
PDADMAC
4.180645161 4.0548387 4.117742 0.088959
PEI
4.161290323 4.0516129 4.106452 0.077554
PAH
4.132258065 4.3935484 4.262903
0.18476
Adsorption Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (moles) std
x10^-7
Consumtion
Average
std
PDADMAC
0.341935484 0.6225806
0.482258065 0.198446
PEI
0.901290323 0.6206452
0.760967742 0.198446
PAH
0.374193548 0.2322581
0.303225806 0.100364
Cross-linkin
x10^-7
Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (moles) std
PDADMAC
0.958064516 0.9419355
0.95 0.011405
PEI
0.046451613 0.0658065
0.056129032 0.013686
PAH
0.796774194 0.6677419
0.732258065
0.09124
Adsorption
x10^-7
Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (moles) std
PDADMAC
0.677419355 0.8516129
0.764516129 0.123173
PEI
0.470967742 0.5354839
0.503225806
0.04562
PAH
1.138709677 0.9516129
1.04516129 0.132297
Cross-linkin
x10^-7
Reaction 1
Reaction 2 Average (moles) std
PDADMAC
0.312903226 0.3516129
0.332258065 0.027372
PEI
0.04516129 0.1419355
0.093548387
0.06843
PAH
0.596774194 0.1129032
0.35483871 0.342148
==PAGE:91==
83 
 
iv. 
ADH immobilization -time variation 
                                                                      
Figure 5.27: NADH consumption  
v. 
Increasing number of ADH layer 
                                                          
Figure 5.28: NADH consumption  
 
vi. 
Changing the bilayers 
                                                                  
Figure 5.28: NADH consumption  
vii. 
CO2 to CH3OH 
                                         
Figure 5.29: NADH consumption  
 
 
 
F. Zeta Potential  
i. 
For 1.5 bilayers 
 
Figure 5.30: Zeta potential of 1.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC, PAH and PEI. 
(10^-7)
Reaction (1)
Reaction (2) Average (moles) Std dev
0.5 hour
3.261290323 3.26451613
3.262903226 0.002281
1 hour
3.44516129 3.23548387
3.340322581 0.148264
3 hour
5.506451613 4.54193548
5.024193548 0.682016
24 hour
5.15483871
5.2483871
5.201612903 0.066149
x10^-7
Reaction (1)
Reaction (2) Average (moles) Stdev
With recycling
3.89677419 4.00322581
3.95 0.075273
w/o recycling
4.38064516 4.40645161
4.393548387 0.018248
10^-7
Reaction (1)
Reaction (2)
Average (moles)
Stdev
Co-immo
1.874193548
1.47741935
1.675806452 0.280562
Cascade-24 hour
1.187096774
1.64516129
1.416129032 0.323901
Cascade-0.5 hour
1.809677419
2.01612903
1.912903226 0.145983
==PAGE:92==
84 
 
 
ii. 
For 2.5-5.5 bilayers 
• PDADMAC 
 
Figure 5.31: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC. 
 
• PAH 
 
Figure 5.32: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC 
iii. 
For 3.5 bilayers 
• PDADMAC 
        
Figure 5.33: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
85 
 
• PAH 
 
Figure 5.34: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC 
iv. 
For 0.5 to 2.5 bilayers 
• PDADMAC 
 
Figure 5.35: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
86 
 
• PAH 
 
Figure 5.36: Zeta potential of 2.5-4.5 bl PEM membrane from pH 4 to 9 for PEM membrane with PDADAMAC. 
 
G. Free Enzyme Reactions 
a. FaldDH free enzyme reaction (HCOOH to HCOH) 
i. 
Substrate with Formic acid 
 
Figure 5.37: Free enzyme reactions for FaldDH using Formic acid as substrate and different buffer.  
 
ii. 
Substrate with Formate 
==PAGE:95==
87 
 
 
Figure 5.38: Free enzyme reactions for FaldDH using Formate as substrate and different buffer.  
 
b. FateDH free enzyme reaction (CO2 to HCOOH) 
                                                                      
Figure 5.339: Free enzyme reactions for FateDH with CO2 bubbled for 1 hour in MES buffer at 6.5 pH.  
 
c. ADH free enzyme reaction (HCOH to CH3OH) 
==PAGE:96==
88 
 
                                                                             
Figure 5.40: Free enzyme reaction for ADH in MES buffer at 6.5 pH.  
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
Concentration (µM)
TIme (min)
MES Buffer: 6.5 pH
Blank
20 µM
