==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Performance analysis of decentralised
ventilation in renovated apartments
Præstationsanalyse af decentral ventilation i renoverede etageboliger
AUTHOR: Zhen An (s192215)
SUPERVISOR: Kevin Michael Smith - kevs@byg.dtu.dk
CO-SUPERVISOR: Jakub Kolarik - jakol@byg.dtu.dk
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Bygning 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project assessed the performance of a novel room-based demand-controlled venti-
lation (DCV) in a renovated apartment. The research is implemented by creating a
model in IDA ICE and using parametric runs to analyze the sensitivity of relevant pa-
rameters. A constant airflow volume (CAV) ventilation system, a return temperature
and a humidity controlled variable airflow volume (VAV) ventilation system and room-
based demand-controlled ventilation system without the supply manifold with individual
fans are simulated as comparisons. The sensitivities of fan power, average airflow, zone
heating and the total energy consumption with primary factors to the ventilation set-
point, use patterns, apartment properties are simulated to discuss the necessity and the
appropriateness of those settings.
The results indicate that the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system
and the return temperature and humidity-controlled variable airflow volume ventilation
reduce 60% of the fan power compared with the reference CAV system, while the room-
based DCV without the manifold reduces 40% of the fan power compared with the
reference CAV system. The two room-based DCV have similar indoor environment con-
trol quality that fulfills Category II stipulated in DE/EN16798-1, while the temperature
and humidity controlled VAV has up to 78.5% of the occupied time of CO2 concentra-
tion higher than it required in DE/EN 16798-1. The cooling set-point for airflow boost
is the main influence factor on the fan power, and one degree reduction on the cooling
set-point will increase the fan power by around 35%. Insuﬀicient leakage causes extra
heat loss and heat demand. Using natural ventilation before the AHU airflow boosting
reduces more than 165kWh of annual energy consumption.
Keywords: Decentralised ventilation; heat recovery ventilation; demand-controlled
room-based ventilation;
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master degree
in sustainable energy - energy savings. The whole research is based on the research of
the room-based demand-controlled ventilation by K.M. Smith.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Author: Zhen An (s192215)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to say thousands of thanks to my supervisor Kevin Michael Smith and Jakub
Kolarik, who are always here to help me with my confusion and guide me on this project.
Firstly, I need to say thanks to them to offer me such an interesting project and I enjoy
every step during working on this thesis. I can not finish this page of my life without
their selfless help. I can still remember all the silly mistakes I made and questions I had,
but they are always patient and ready to help. During this process of finishing my thesis,
a lot of unexpected and annoying things happened. I’m so lucky to have my supervisors
help and inspiration. They spent a lot of their own valuable time helping me with not
only my questions but also my troubles in my life. Words can not express my gratitude
to them. They are so kind, so nice and takes apart my unforgettable memory of my
master experience. I still believe that it is the people who you are working with that
makes your special experience, and I’m glad to have the opportunity to be supervised
by Kevin and Jakub. The concern and understanding of them always made my day.
Thanks to Vasileios Filis’s support on the advanced IDA-ICE. I’m so appreciate that he
helps me patiently and timely. He is a kind person and eager to help.
I also want to say thanks to my mom and dad, they support me on material and spirit.
I can always feel their love no matter where I am.
Thanks to my friend Jiatian Zhang, who inspires me to face all the troubles and to learn.
She is so kind and always brings me some cooking when I’m too tired to do anything.
She also helps me with my heavy luggage. I’m so lucky to have such a beautiful, clever
and concerned friend. My friend Yue Jiang is also always eager to help, she helps me
with a lot of troubles and always brings me delicious snacks. I love all my friends.
It’s time to say goodbye to some habitual things, but I hope everyone lives better in the
following life trip.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
4
2.1
Ventilation system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Energy requirement and indoor environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
7
4
IDA ICE model
9
4.1
The geometry of building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Modelling of leakages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Ventilation system description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Occupants and internal gains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6
Parametric runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Simulation results of the IDA ICE model
26
5.1
Simulation results of the energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Simulation results of the indoor environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
The effect of different human behaviors on energy consumption . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
42
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
6.1
Research limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
4.1
Floor plan of the renovated apartment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Surrounding buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Overflow vent [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Windows Opening Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Ventilation system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.6
Fan performance curves and fan system curve[1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.7
Return temperature and humidity controlled AHU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.8
Schematic diagram of the ventilation control system in the ID-ICE model . .
20
4.9
Schematic diagram of the return temperature control in the ID-ICE model[1]
21
4.10 Control strategy of the room-based demand-controlled ventilation without the
manifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Energy consumption of the three ventilation system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Sensitivity of the fan power to the ventilation set-point . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Sensitivity of the fan power to the cooling set-point for windows opening . .
34
5.4
Sensitivity of the fan power to the doors’ leakage area . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Sensitivity of the average airflow to the ventilation set-point . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Sensitivity of the average airflow to the cooling set-point for windows opening 35
5.7
Sensitivity of the average airflow to the doors’ leakage area . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.8
Sensitivity of the zone heating to the ventilation set-point
. . . . . . . . . .
37
5.9
Sensitivity of the zone heating to the cooling set-point for windows opening .
37
5.10 Sensitivity of the zone heating to the doors’ leakage area . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.11 Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the ventilation set-point . . . . . . .
39
5.12 Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the cooling set-point for windows
opening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.13 Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the doors’ leakage area . . . . . . .
40
5.14 Energy consumption of different use patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Ventilation design parameters in DS/EN 16798-1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Indoor environment quality parameters in DS/EN16798-1 . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1
Room dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Heights of surrounding buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Windows properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Ventilation control set-point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Room airflow limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Internal gains and occupants’ schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7
Input parameters of parametric runs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1
Energy consumption with primary factors and average airflow . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Overheating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
The CO2 concentration of the three systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Set-point of different use patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Project background
The European Commission claims that the European Union is responsible for 10% of
global greenhouse gas, where 7.5% of the greenhouse emission comes from the energy
sector[2]. As stated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the EU has to
reduce emissions by 80-95% and achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions in 2050 [3].
According to the International Energy Agency, the residential sector accounts for 31%
of total energy consumption in Denmark [4]. In the meantime, the share of residential
space heating is 85% of the total energy consumption by residential, which means 26%
of the total energy is consumed by residential heating [5]. Consequently, it is reasonable
to commence the energy-saving and the greenhouse gas emission-reducing from saving
heating energy in buildings, which can be achieved by adding insulation thickness, us-
ing better insulation materials, changing ventilation system. Research on a renovated
apartment indicates that installing a decentralised mechanical ventilation system with
heat recovery is an effective measure to reduce energy using [6].
D.E. Saraga pointed that people in developed countries spend almost 90% of their time
indoors, where they experience their greatest exposures [7]. Modern buildings are more
airtight due to the concern of climate change, which degrades the indoor air quality
when improving building energy eﬀiciency [7]. Indoor air contaminants are a risk factor
for multiple respiratory tract diseases [8]. The indoor air of a home or building should
not contain contaminants at concentrations higher than those that can be detrimental
to health or cause malaise among its occupants [9]. According to the research from
Pawel et al., a higher ventilation rate caused significant and positive effects on the sleep
latency and on the subjects’ assessment of the freshness of the air, their ability to fall
asleep and nasal dryness [10]. The factors that affect indoor air quality are deficiencies
in ventilation, outdoor air quality and the presence of indoor contaminant sources [8].
Ventilation design is a key element in building design, it is necessary for the proper
oxygen and CO2 concentration and removing odour, moisture and pollution produced
internally [11]. Another study on the effect of the indoor thermal environment on sleep
shows that sleep eﬀiciency decreased by 3.2% per 1 ◦C increase in bedroom temperature
over 27.6 ◦C in summer, and by 0.3% per 1 ◦C below 13.0 ◦C in winter [12]. Ventilation
plays an important role in controlling indoor temperature. Therefore, the influence on
the indoor climate of the ventilation system is meaningful for humans’ living.
The European standard DS/EN 15251 brings together existing information about opti-
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Research aim
2
mising thermal, air quality, acoustic and visual comfort which impinge on energy use,
and it also indicates that occupants have different expectations of the thermal environ-
ment in mechanically and naturally ventilated buildings [13]. This standard will identify
parameters to be used for monitoring and displaying the indoor environment [14]. As
an updated version of DS/EN 15251, DS/EN 16798-1 includes a new section within the
annex that takes into consideration daylight factors and assumed occupant schedules,
and it takes into consideration the occupational expectation difference between persons
in a naturally or mechanically ventilated space, as well as a year-round evaluation of the
indoor thermal environment [15]. These two standards are used as the criteria for the
indoor climate evaluation of this project.
This project is conducted on K.M. Smith’s research: Simulations of a novel demand-
controlled room-based ventilation system for renovated apartments. The demand-controlled
ventilation system in the renovated apartment consisted of a centralized air-handling unit
at apartment level, a distribution manifold, three-way valves to control exhaust airflow,
acoustic-dampening overflow vents in each doorway, decentralized sensor modules in
each room and a room-based demand control module, which changed the airflow in each
room according to the demand of the airflow to maintain the indoor environment in a
certain level. With the designed control logic, the CO2, humidity and heat exceeded the
setpoints would be reduced and no superfluous ventilation would be sent to the room
when the indoor environment quality reached the set level [16].
1.2
Research aim
The purpose of this project is to analyze the performance of a room-based demand-
controlled ventilation system in renovated apartments in theory and in actual operation
to design and verify a ventilation solution for the renovated apartments. By measuring
the indoor temperature, CO2 concentration, relative humidity in the supply and exhaust
rooms and comparing those parameters with the set-point in the control module in the
air handling unit, the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system can adjust the
airflow sent to and vented from the target rooms, hence the airflow volume is changed
with the individual room demand. It is expected that the energy consumption of this
novel system would reduce as the fan speed reduces with the airflow reduction. Therefore,
this research aims at analyzing the reduction of energy consumption of this room-based
demand-controlled ventilation system as well as the influence of this system on the indoor
environment. To evaluate the energy consumption (especially the energy consumed by
the fan) and the effectiveness in contaminants and temperature control of the room-based
demand-controlled system, other reference systems such as a constant airflow ventilation
system and a variable airflow ventilation system controlled by humidity is simulated as
a comparison.
More specifically, the simulation results of a base scenario model which is built based on
the real properties of the building and the ventilation system are compared with other sce-
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Research aim
3
narios, where the control set-points, apartment properties and use patterns are changed,
for the purpose of evaluating the influence of those parameters. Establishing the relation
between the input parameters in the model and the output signals helps to predict how
the setting of the mechanical ventilation control set-points, apartment properties and
human’s behavior will infect the energy consumption and indoor environment-related
index in real operation. Moreover, a relative energy saving system can be designed with
the simulation results, and a solution drives to lower energy consumption and better
indoor environmental quality can be suggested to residents.
By comparing the simulation results from reference systems and the novel room-based
demand control ventilation system, the effectiveness of the novel system can be ver-
ified, which help to answer whether such ventilation should be widely used and will
there be any possibilities for improvement.
The optimal settings of the room-based
demand-controlled system should be brought to the forefront to guide the designing and
construction of such a ventilation system.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
2.1
Ventilation system
There are a lot of researches on ventilation systems in the aspects of energy consumption
and air circulation performance. The following research attached importance to the high
energy-saving potential of heat recovery ventilation and demand-controlled ventilation.
Based on the research of Morelli et, al., installing a decentralised mechanical ventilation
system with heat recovery in combination with other methods which can improve air-
tightness has the ability to reduce 68% of energy consumption [6]. This research also
indicated that demand-controlled ventilation had the highest potential in energy-saving
[6].
Guyot et, al. [17] systematically reviewed several aspects of smart ventilation, and they
hold the view that the purpose of smart ventilation is to reduce energy consumption
and cost while maintaining or improving indoor air quality.
The demand-controlled
ventilation (DCV) and the residential integrated ventilation-energy controller (RIVEC)
are two main subsets of smart ventilation.
Based on previous studies of the smart
ventilation system, they got the conclusion that CO2 and relative humidity are widely
used as control parameters in demand-controlled ventilation, and there is definitely a
potential to improve indoor air quality with smart ventilation strategies.
Research of a demand-controlled ventilation system in a bathroom shows that the de-
mand controlled ventilation system controlled by occupancy and relative humidity had
an improved energy performance and an improved indoor climate compared to the ven-
tilation system with a constant air change rate of 0.5h−1 [18].
Some research studied the influence factors on the control accuracy and timeliness of
demand-controlled ventilation systems.
Han et, al.
[19] found that sensor response
delays, air mixing and dispersion delays are challenges of control accuracy, which could
be improved by using more precise and sensitive sensor and optimizing air distribution.
Fan power energy consumption could be reduced by combining natural ventilation with
mechanical ventilation. Their research showed that occupant-based DCV is the most
effective control strategy among their control methods due to its instantaneity.
When it comes to the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system, the previous
research is limited. The existing research shows the superiority of room-based demand-
controlled ventilation system in indoor environment quality.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Energy requirement and indoor environment
5
In the paper [20] is marked that a room air handling unit with heat recovery ensures
a good indoor climate, and room high-level adjusting is necessary for the good indoor
climate.
2.2
Energy requirement and indoor
environment
The requirements for building energy consumption and indoor environment quality are
stipulated by Danish building regulation BR 18, Dansk Standard DS/EN 1525 and its
updated version Dansk Standard DS/EN 16798-1.
According to the Danish building regulation BR 18, the new dwelling’s total annual
need for supplied energy for heating, ventilation, cooling and domestic hot water per
m2 heated floor area should not exceed 27.0 kWh / m2 per year to meet the low energy
level[21]. For the renovation class 1, BR18 stipulates that the total annual need for
supplied energy for heating, ventilation, cooling and domestic hot water per m2 heated
floor area should not exceed 52.5 kWh / m2 per year added 1650 kWh per years divided
by the heated floor area [22]. When calculating the total energy demand supplied, the
primary energy factors of 0.85 for heat and 1.9 for electrical energy are used [22].
Besides the energy frame requirement, BR 18 also has requirements on hours of over-
heating. BR 18 formulates that the operative temperature in dwellings with operable
windows throughout the year should not exceed 27◦C for more than 100 hours, and it
should not exceed 28 ◦C for more than 25 hours [23].
What’s more, BR 18 requests a minimum fresh air supply of 0.3 liter/s m2 for residence
ventilation [24].
In DS/EN 15251, indoor environment qualities are divided into four categories are used
for different buildings, where Category II is a normal level of expectation for new build-
ings and renovation and Category III is an acceptable, moderate level of expectation for
existing buildings [14].
Table 2.1 shows design parameters of HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning)
systems and buildings in DS/EN 16798-1 (the updated version of DS/EN 15251). DS/EN
16798-1 also declares that the maximum design ventilation should correspond to the
concentration of contaminants, and the ventilation rate can vary from the specified
maximum and minimum ventilation rate in demand and controlled ventilation system
[15].
Table 2.2 shows indoor environment quality evaluation parameters in DS/EN 16798-1
[15], which can be used in evaluating the performance of the decentralised ventilation
system in renovated apartments.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Energy requirement and indoor environment
6
Table 2.1: Ventilation design parameters in DS/EN 16798-1
Category
Design operative
temperature of
buildings
and HVAC system
Total
ventilation
Supply
airflow
per person
Design exhaust
air flow rate
Design
relative
humidity for
dehumidifi-
cation,
%
Minimum
for
heating, ◦C
Maximum
for
cooling, ◦C
l/sm2
l/s
Kitchen,
l/s
Bathroom,
l/s
I
21
25.5
0.49
10
28
20
50
II
20
26
0.42
7
20
15
60
III
18
27
0.35
4
14
10
70
Table 2.2: Indoor environment quality parameters in DS/EN16798-1
Category
Temperature
range for heating,
◦C
Temperature
range for cooling,
◦C
Design CO2
concentration for
living rooms
(ppm above outdoors*)
Design CO2
concentration for
bedrooms
(ppm above outdoors*)
I
21.0 - 25.0
23.5 - 25.0
550
380
II
20.0 - 25.0
23.0 - 26.0
800
550
III
18.0 - 25.0
22.0 - 27.0
1350
950
*Outdoors CO2 concentration is assumed to be 400ppm.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The performance of the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system is determined
by comparisons between different scenarios with different ventilation control parameters
and use patterns, apartment properties. An apartment-based demand-controlled venti-
lation system is also compared as a reference case before renovation. The criteria are
described as the following:
• energy consumption (space heating, total fan power, etc.)
• thermal comfort (overheating)
• indoor air quality (operative temperature, CO2 concentration, relative humidity)
The research is carried out in the following steps:
i Prepare the IDA ICE model. The description of the model would be intro-
duced detailedly in Chapter 4: IDA ICE model.
ii Investigate the sensitivity of the performance to different control set-
points, apartment properties, and use patterns.
Different scenarios are tested in advanced IDA-ICE, where the connected compo-
nent models are defined by equations. Advanced IDA-ICE gives users the possibil-
ity to edit (reconnect) component diagrams and inspect, log variables and change
parameters [25]. In another word, advanced IDA ICE enables users to add com-
ponents to monitor the values such as total airflow and energy consumption of
individual fans, and the output can be recorded as digital form without saving the
entire model. Therefore, working on an advanced level in IDA-ICE brings more
detailed information. The summary in basic IDA ICE only contains the energy
consumption of the central AHU and lacks the energy consumed by the fans in sup-
ply rooms, and this deficiency can be made up by adding components in advanced
IDA ICE. At the same time, monitoring the duration of some parameters like CO2
concentration, temperature, relative humidity above a certain level also requires
component in advanced IDA ICE, otherwise, the generated model of simulations
must be saved to record those results, which requires a lot of storage capacity
in the computer. Based on the above-mentioned reasons, advanced IDA ICE is
adopted in this research.
* Do the parametric runs in Advanced IDA-ICE, analyze the sensitivity of
apartment properties such as doors leakage area, control set-points such as
==PAGE:17==
3 Methodology
8
cooling set-point, CO2 concentration set-point, relative humidity set-point of
ventilation boosting, use patterns like window opening schedule, etc.
* Find relatively optimal control indexes of the model referring to thermal
comfort and energy-saving.
iii Analyze the simulation results.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 4
IDA ICE model
The IDA ICE model is built based on the real demand- controlled room-based real heat
recovery ventilation system in an apartment in København.
4.1
The geometry of building
The floor area of the building is 710 m2, while the living area is 3933 m2 [26], and the
height of the building is approximately 16m. The simulated apartment located on the
first floor of the building. The average floor height is 2.6m.
4.1.1
Floor plan of the simulated apartment
The floor plan of the simulated apartment is shown in Figure 4.1. It is a typical residence
with the main bedroom and a child’s room, a living room, a kitchen, a bathroom and a
corridor. The total floor area of the apartment is 60.95 m2. The room dimensions are
shown in Table 4.1, all rooms have a height of 2.6 m.
Table 4.1: Room dimensions
Room
Area, m2
Bedroom1
16.47
Bedroom2
13.01
Livingroom
13.10
Kitchen
8.55
Bathroom
3.83
Corridor
5.99
==PAGE:19==
4.1 The geometry of building
10
Figure 4.1: Floor plan of the renovated apartment
4.1.2
Surrounding buildings
The surrounding buildings will have impacts on the simulated building’s energy consump-
tion and indoor temperature by influencing solar heat gains of the simulated building.
Therefore, it will give more reliable simulation results by adding surrounding buildings
beside the simulated building. In IDA-ICE, it can be realized by adding ”site shading”
to the model to simplify the model. The model with surrounding buildings is shown in
Figure 4.2a and Figure 4.2b. In the IDA-ICE model, the building bodies without zones
are ignored, hence a ”site shading” is added on an exterior wall which will influence
the solar gain of the simulated apartment in the simulated building. Table 4.2 shows
the heights of surrounding buildings. The distances between the surrounding buildings
and the simulated building are retrieved from the google map, and the height of the
surrounding buildings are estimated based on the number of floors.
==PAGE:20==
4.2 Modelling of leakages
11
(a) Surrounding buildings 2D view
(b) Surrounding buildings 3D view
(c) Surrounding buildings in Google map
Figure 4.2: Surrounding buildings
Table 4.2: Heights of surrounding buildings
Surrounding buildings
Height, m
a
11.00
b
13.00
c
8.00
d
5.20
e
16.00
f
16.00
4.2
Modelling of leakages
Though airtight doors can restrict noise transmission, they also obstruct ventilation. In-
suﬀicient leakage area will lead to the pressure difference between rooms, which drives
overflow or infiltration and brings extra heat loss.
More specifically, the demand-
controlled ventilation can lead to a high airflow rate (might even to the capacity of
the air handling unit) sometimes, if the leakage area of doors is not suﬀicient for air to
==PAGE:21==
4.2 Modelling of leakages
12
circulate freely between rooms, the supply rooms tend to have higher air pressure than
outdoors, and the warm air supplied by the ventilation system will overflow through
the leakage of the building envelopes and leakages of windows, which will increase the
heat loss. At the same time, the exhaust rooms with lower pressure than outdoors will
have cold air infiltrated through facades, as a result, more heat loss will be brought.
Therefore, the renovated apartment has an overflow vent in each room to create enough
doors’ leakage area, which can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Overflow vent [1]
According to Shah and Sekulic [27], the following equation eq. (4.1) can be used to
calculate the mass flow through an orifice.
˙mleak = CdAo
√
2ρ∆p
(4.1)
Where,
• Cd: The dimensionless coeﬀicient of discharge, 0.72 for slot flow through an acous-
tic vent.
• A0: The orifice flow area.
• ρ: The air density, 1.2 kg/m3
• ∆P: The pressure difference across the orifice at a certain airflow rate, 10 Pa for
the airflow rate of 15 (l/s)/m according to the manufacture data [16].
Therefore, the leakage area of the acoustic vents between zones in the IDA-ICE model
can be calculated as eq (4.2).
A0 =
˙mleak
Cd
√2ρ∆p =
1.2 kg
m3 × 0.015 m3/s
0.72
√
2 × 1.2 kg/m3 × 10 Pa
= 0.005 m2
(4.2)
==PAGE:22==
4.3 Windows
13
The calculated leakage area is 0.05 m2. However, as discussed before, the novel demand-
controlled ventilation can lead to a high airflow rate occasionally, and the insuﬀicient
leakage area will cause over-pressure or under-pressure, and the exfiltration and infil-
tration caused by the pressure difference between indoor and outdoor will bring extra
heat loss. Therefore, a larger leakage area than the technical design of the acoustic vent
is chosen to ensure the free air exchange between rooms. The default door’s leakage
area in IDA-ICE is 0.01 m2, which is double the required value. To ensure the suﬀicient
leakage area, 0.01 m2 was chosen for the door’s leakage area.
The IDA-ICE model requires infiltration input for building leakage. K.M. Smith got
the minimum air change rate in the apartment was roughly 0.16 h-1 (0.11 L/(s m2))
on a windless day by measuring the decay of CO2 concentrations during an unoccupied
period while the AHU was off for three consecutive days [16]. This value is gotten in the
situation that the windows are fully closed, but in the real situation people will open
windows for ventilation, and it will lead to higher infiltration. Therefore, an estimation
that the airtightness is 2 L/(s m2 floor area) at 50 Pa has been made by experience.
4.3
Windows
4.3.1
Windows properties
A high portion of heat exchange between the building and the exterior happens through
windows [28], hence the thermal performance of the window plays an important role in
the insulation of buildings. According to the technical report from Ekolab, the renovation
uses Dannebrog windows with coupled frames, 1 + 2 layers of glass (average U value of
0.9 W/(m2K)) [29]. The input parameters in the IDA-ICE model are shown in Table
4.3.
Table 4.3: Windows properties
Room
Floor area,
m2
Windows area,
m2
g
LT
Glazing U
value,
W/(m2K)
Frame
fraction
Frame U
value,
W/(m2K)
Bedroom1
16.47
3.83
0.49
0.71
0.6
0.25
1.8
Bedroom2
13.01
1.38
Livingroom
13.10
3.81
Kitchen
8.55
2.08
Bathroom
3.83
0.56
Corridor
5.99
-
-
-
-
-
-
The windows opening area influences natural ventilation, and then the demand for me-
chanical ventilation will be different. The larger the windows opening area is, the less
dependency on the mechanical ventilation will be. In the real situation, the windows
==PAGE:23==
4.4 Ventilation system description
14
can not open fully, and the area able to be opened varies from types of windows. In
the industry guidance for indoor climate calculation, it describes reduction factors for
calculation effective opening area for a typical opening, and the reduction factor for
side-open windows is expected to be 0.6 [30]. Therefore, the maximum relative opening
width of the windows in the renovation is defined as 60%.
4.3.2
Windows opening schedule
The residential user behaviours are diverse and it is hard to predict a common windows
opening schedule. Therefore, an estimation is made that the windows can be opened
only when people at home, which is from 16:00 pm to 8:30 am during working days and
all day during weekends. It is assumed that residents will open the windows when the
indoor temperature reaches a cooling set-point. The windows in the IDA-ICE model
adopts PI control, which means that the windows will be opened when the indoor tem-
perature reaches the cooling set-point (25 ◦C, a value that is lower than the upper cooling
temperature limit of 26 ◦C in Category II which defined in standard DS/EN16798 [15]).
The schedule input is shown in Figure 4.4, where 0 means closed and 1 means opened.
This simple assumption can not reflect diverse use patterns in real life, but for the model,
it can be a simplified starting-point input for the research.
Figure 4.4: Windows Opening Schedule
4.4
Ventilation system description
The demand-controlled ventilation system in the renovated apartment consists of a cen-
tralized air-handling unit at apartment level, distribution manifolds, three-way valves
to control exhaust airflow, acoustic-dampening overflow vents in each doorway, decen-
tralized sensor modules in each room and a control module [16]. The air handling unit
from Airmaster installed in the renovation has a ventilation capacity of 90l/s at external
resistance of 100 Pa, and its dry heat recovery reaches 80% [16].
==PAGE:24==
4.4 Ventilation system description
15
The innovation of this ventilation system is that the system adopts room-level demand
control, which means all signals are collected from rooms and controlled according to
room-level setting rather than collects signals and controls airflow according to building-
level setting, which gives more control flexibility and zone environment comfort. One
interesting investigation of this room-based demand-controlled ventilation system is that
the system uses a manifold with individual fans to control airflow to supply rooms,
rather than uses dampers, which has the possibility of unbalancing due to the non-linear
relationship between the frictional losses and different airflow rates.
There are sensors that detect temperature, relative humidity, CO2 concentration in all
supply and exhaust rooms as it showed in Figure 4.5a. The supply airflow from the air
handling unit is distributed through a manifold of fans with duct connections for each
supply line. The manifold produced by the company ebm-papstis is shown in Figure
4.5b. The detected signals from sensors in rooms are sent to the control system, as the
control system has set-points for temperature, relative humidity, CO2 concentration, the
control system will decide the total demand of airflow by a certain logic which will be
introduced in the following chapters. The sum of the airflow to the supply rooms are
calculated and required from the air handling unit (AHU), and the control signal to
each fan in the manifold decides the fan speed and airflow to each supply room. In that
way, the AHU provides pressure rise before the manifold, and the individual fans in the
manifold provide pressure rise from the manifold to the supply rooms.
(a) Sensors[1]
(b) Drawing of the distribution manifold [1]
Figure 4.5: Ventilation system
The real ventilation system uses a three-way valve to control the exhaust air to simplify
the system. In the IDA-ICE model, the same type of manifold is used for the exhaust
airflow control, where the fans pull air from the wet rooms.
4.4.1
Ventilation rate and fan power
The installer commissioned the AHU, the measured ventilation rate was 35 l/s on the
supply and exhaust sides, and the measured specific fan power ranged from 900 J/m3 to
==PAGE:25==
4.4 Ventilation system description
16
1100 J/m3 [16]. It is assumed that the specific fan power is 1000 J/m3 as the input to
the IDA-ICE simulation. According to the DE/EN 15251’s requirement on the design
airflow, the required boost exhaust airflow should be 35 l/s for Category II (the normally
expected level for new buildings and renovations) in DE/EN 15251[14]). IDA-ICE ad-
justs the SFP according to Appendix G of ASHRAE Standard 90.1 for the part-load [31].
According to the installer, the design maximum airflow of the air handling unit is 50 l/s
in the renovation, and the total specific fan power is 1870 J/m3 [16] due to the increase
of the pressure when the fan speed increases. In IDA-ICE, there are supply and exhaust
fans, both fans have SFP of 0.935 kW/(m3/s) (which is 935 J/m3) corresponding to an
electric to air eﬀiciency of 0.2 [16].
According to BR 18, the minimum fresh air supplied is 0.3 liter/s m2 for residence
ventilation [24]. The supply rooms have a minimum airflow of 0.1 liter/s m2 in the
IDA-ICE model, which is lower than the requirement in BR 18. Considers that the
demand-controlled ventilation system can limit the indoor environment to a comfortable
and healthy level, a lower minimum supply airflow can be used to verify the effect of
this system, hence the minimum airflow in supply is set as 0.1 liter/s m2.
The total consumption must include energy for the individual fans in the manifold.
According to the manufacture data, the fan power is 18 W when the airflow is 120 m3/h
[1] as shown in Figure 4.6.
Based on the fan aﬀinity laws, the actual fan power can be calculated as the eq. (4.3).
Power actual [W] =
( ˙Vactual
˙Vnominal
)3
× Power nominal =
(
˙Vactual
120 m3/h
)3
× 18 W
(4.3)
Figure 4.6: Fan performance curves and fan system curve[1]
==PAGE:26==
4.4 Ventilation system description
17
4.4.2
Control strategy of the two reference ventilation
systems
Two ventilation systems are used as references of the room-based demand controlled
ventilation system. One is a constant airflow volume (CAV) ventilation with airflow of
35 l/s as suggested in DE/EN 15251 [14], another one is a variable airflow volume (VAV)
ventilation system controlled by return temperature and humidity.
Different from the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system, this VAV sys-
tem supplies minimum airflow (0.3 l/m2s), as specified in BR 18 [24]), and the maximum
airflow is set to be 0.9 l/m2s (50 l/s), which is the airflow capacity of the AHU installed.
The AHU of the return temperature and humidity controlled VAV system sends the
return air humidity signals to a proportional controller to boost the airflow. The venti-
lation begins to boost when the return air humidity ratio reaches 0.008 kgH2O/kgAir and
keeps at a maximum airflow once the return air humidity ratio reaches 0.012 kgH2O/kgAir.
Besides, the humidity control only takes effect when the outdoor air humidity ratio is at
least 0.003 kgH2O/kgAir lower than the return air humidity to avoid useless ventilation
for dehumidification. The fan power is proportional to the third power of the speed of
the fan, hence an increase of airflow will greatly increase the fan’s energy consumption,
so it is more energy eﬀicient to bypass heat recovery than to boost ventilation rates
to control the high indoor temperature [16]. Therefore, the cooling set-point for heat
recovery bypass of the AHU is 25 ◦C. The control strategy of the return temperature
and humidity controlled VAV system is shown in Figure 4.7. The supply and exhaust
airflow are distributed according to the room areas.
Figure 4.7: Return temperature and humidity controlled AHU
==PAGE:27==
4.4 Ventilation system description
18
4.4.3
Control strategy of the novel room-based
demand-controlled ventilation system
The room-based demand-controlled ventilation system installs sensor modules in each
room, which measure indoor temperature, CO2 concentration, relative humidity of the
room. The signals from the sensors are sent to the control system and compared with the
control set-point, and then the airflow will be modified by proportional controllers based
on the control signals. The controller changes the airflow proportionally for measured
signals between the lower and upper limits. The airflow in each room boosts according
to the maximum demand in supply and exhaust sides. According to the individual room
demand signal, the individual fan in the manifold on the supply side adjusts the fan
speed to supply the required airflow, and the exhaust airflow is distributed into the
designed ratio through the three-way valve.
The control set-points of the ventilation system are shown in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Ventilation control set-point
Ventilation control set-point
Input value
Bounds
Unit
Cooling set-point for the airflow boost
26
25-27
℃
Cooling set-point for heat recovery bypass
25
-
℃
Humidity set-point for the airflow boost
0.01
0.008-0.012
kg/kg
CO2 set-point for the airflow boost
850
800-900
ppm
Minimum airflow in supply room
0.1
-
L/m2s
The cooling set-point for airflow boost indicates the lower temperature limit for mechan-
ical ventilation boost is 25 ◦C, which means the airflow will begin to boost when the
indoor temperature reaches 25 ◦C. As the heating set-point is 21 ◦C, the indoor tem-
perature will be kept around 21 ◦C during the heating season, and the cooling set-point
for airflow boost is 25 ◦C, which is much higher than the indoor temperature, hence the
airflow will not boost to reduce the indoor temperature during the heating period. The
upper limit for mechanical ventilation is 27 ◦C, which means the airflow will keep at the
highest flow rate once the indoor temperature reaches 27 ◦C to avoid overheating. The
cooling set-point input value for airflow boost in the IDA-ICE model is 26 ◦C, which
is the same value of the cooling design temperature recommended in DE/EN 16798-1
Category II as Table Table 2.1 shows, and the bounds of the cooling set-point for airflow
boost are set by taking energy-saving and thermal comfort into consideration at the same
time. The humidity set-point of the AHU has bounds of 0.008 to 0.012 kgH2O/kgAir,
which corresponds to roughly 52% and 77% relative humidity based on the assumption
that indoor temperature is 21 ◦C, and 41% and 60% when the indoor temperature is
25 ◦C. As the humidity limit stipulated in Category II in DE/EN 16798-1 is 60%, this
humidity control can be seen fulfill the comfort requirement. The CO2 bounds are 750
ppm and 850 ppm consider to a general CO2 concentration in residences.
==PAGE:28==
4.4 Ventilation system description
19
The outdoor air tends to have a lower CO2 concentration than the indoor air, hence
the ventilation system will always have the ability to reduce the indoor CO2 concen-
tration, whereas the outdoor air might not have enough capacity to reduce the indoor
temperature and humidity as the ambient conditions change with weathers. If no limita-
tions added, the ventilation system might work and consume energy without improving
indoor environment. Therefore, the additional control logic is added. Ventilation will
boost only when the outdoor air humidity is at least 0.003 kgH2O/kgAir less than the
indoor air humidity and the outdoor air temperature is at least 4 ◦C cooler than the
indoor air temperature.
Due to the rapid demand changes caused by the occupancy schedule, the ventilation may
have rapid oscillations when people get into or leave the rooms, and it will also occur
rapid oscillations when the outdoor air’s cooling and dehumidification capacity changes
rapidly. Therefore, another proportional band is adopted to avoid rapid oscillations.
The CO2 controller employs 100 ppm of smoothing, and the temperature controllers
for cooling and cooling capacity employ of 2◦C of smoothing [16]. The humidity-based
proportional bands for limiting rapid oscillations adopts 0.001 kgH2O/kgAir of smoothing,
while the humidity controller for cooling adopts 0.004 kgH2O/kgAir of smoothing.
The CO2 controllers are used in all supply rooms and exhaust rooms. The temperature
controllers are used in supply rooms and exhaust room except for the bathroom, as a
higher temperature is preferred in the bathroom [16]. Only the kitchen and the bathroom
have the possibility of extreme humidity variations due to the operation of moisture
sources in these rooms [32], hence the humidity-based proportional controllers are only
adopted in the kitchen and bathroom.
For each proportional controller, the low-limit and the high-limit are set to control the
minimum and maximum airflow in each room. The supply rooms have a minimum airflow
of 0.1 liter/s m2 in the IDA-ICE model to verify the effect of the demand-controlled
ventilation system as it mentioned in Chapter 4.4.1. The inputs of the low-limit and the
high-limit into the controllers in each room are fractions of the design max airflow of the
air handling unit, which are shown in Table 4.5. The ventilation demand of each room
is the maximum value among the demand according to temperature, CO2, humidity.
Table 4.5: Room airflow limitations
Room
Area, m2
low-limit
min-airflow (l/s)
high-limit
max-airflow (l/s)
Bedroom1
16.47
0.033
1.65
0.40
20
Bedroom2
13.01
0.026
1.30
0.40
20
Living room
13.10
0.026
1.31
0.40
20
Kitchen
8.55
0.017
0.86
0.60
30
Bathroom
3.83
0.008
0.38
0.40
20
Corridor
5.99
-
-
-
-
The total airflow to supply rooms is the sum of the airflow to the living room and
==PAGE:29==
4.4 Ventilation system description
20
two bedrooms, which equals the total airflow from exhaust rooms. Normally a smoke
exhaust ventilator is installed in the kitchen, hence an assumption that 60% of the
exhaust airflow extracts from the kitchen and 40% of the exhaust airflow extracts from
the bathroom is made. When it comes to the control module, the detected demand
from those two rooms are scaled up 1/0.6 and 1/0.4 respectively and the larger one will
be seen as the total demand of the exhaust airflow. In that way, the total demand in
supply rooms and the total demand in exhaust rooms are calculated respectively, and
the control system scales the lesser total demand to be equal to the larger one while
keeping the airflow proportions between rooms [16]. Therefore, the supply and exhaust
air can keep in balance. The schematic diagram of the control system in the IDA-ICE
model is shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Schematic diagram of the ventilation control system in the ID-ICE model
The control system has the ability to control the supply air temperature from the air
handling unit by controlling the flow rate of the supply air from outdoors and the heat
recovery bypass. The set-point of the return air temperature is set to be 25 ◦C [16],
which is slightly lower than the ventilation boost set-point, as it saves more energy by
heat recovery bypass than by boosting airflow to control the indoor temperature within a
comfortable level, and it can be explained by the fan power difference [16]. The fan power
is proportional to the third power of the speed of fan, hence an increase of airflow will
greatly increase the fan’s energy consumption. Differently, the heat exchange between
==PAGE:30==
4.4 Ventilation system description
21
the supply air and indoor air is a linear relationship, so reduce supply air temperature by
bypassing the return air is a relative energy-saving way to control the indoor temperature.
The schematic diagram of the return temperature control in the ID-ICE model is shown
in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Schematic diagram of the return temperature control in the ID-ICE model[1]
4.4.4
Control strategy of the room-based
demand-controlled ventilation system without
manifold
It will increase the cost to investigate a manifold with individual fans in the ventilation
system, so a new scenario is simulated where the total demand is gotten with the same
control system but the supply airflow to all supply rooms are distributed in proportion
according to the room area through a four-way valve. According to the room area, 40%
of the supply airflow will be sent to Bedroom1, and the other 60% of the airflow will
be sent to Bedroom2 and the living room equally. The control strategy is shown in
Figure 4.10. The AHU and all other control set-point are kept the same as the novel
room-based demand-controlled ventilation system.
==PAGE:31==
4.5 Occupants and internal gains
22
Figure 4.10: Control strategy of the room-based demand-controlled ventilation without
the manifold
4.5
Occupants and internal gains
The model considers a common occupancy of a family consists of two adults and one child.
The occupancy and load profiles follow the earlier setting in the room-based research
[32]. The heat, humidity, CO2 released by adults are set according to the requirement
on standard DS/EN 7730 [33]. Each child can be considered as 0.6 adults [16].
When it comes to the moisture gain from equipment, the moisture from cooking and
shower is considered while neglecting other moisture sources [16]. From previous research
from Hite et, al., moisture gains from breakfast, lunch, and dinner would be 0.17 kg,
0.25kg, and 0.58 kg, respectively [34].
Besides, the measured shows that the daily
moisture gain from each shower was 0.53 kg from the research of Yik et, al. [35]. As the
model can be considered to have 2.6 adults, the daily moisture gain from showering can
be seen as 1.4 kg. Therefore, the author keeps the moisture gains setting as the same as
the original model from K. M. Smith which are 0.2kg for breakfast, 0.2kg for lunch, 0.6
kg for dinner, 1.4kg for the shower. The inputs of internal gains and occupants’ schedule
==PAGE:32==
4.6 Parametric runs
23
are shown in Table 4.6, where the moisture gains are transferred into kg/s by dividing
by the operation time.
Table 4.6: Internal gains and occupants’ schedule
Bedroom1
Bedroom2
Living room
Kitchen
Bathroom
Occupancy
Number of people
2.00
0.60
1.60
-
1.00
Activity level, MET
0.90
0.90
1.00
-
1.20
Schedule
22-7:00
22-7:00
7-8:30,
16-22:00
-
7-8:30
Vapour
Moisture gains, kg/s
-
-
-
1.10E-04
2.60E-04
Schedule
-
-
-
7:30-8:00,
12:00-12:30,
18:00-19:30
7-8:30
Equipment heat
gains, W
30
20
40
50
-
Schedule
22-7:00
22-7:00
7-8:30, 16-22:00
0-24:00
-
4.6
Parametric runs
Learning the influence of the setting of the control set-point of the ventilation system,
human’s behaviour in residences, apartment properties helps to define the design param-
eters of the ventilation system and apartments, hence it is instructive to analyze different
scenarios where those parameters are changed based on requirements in standards. The
research presents the requirement to run a series of simulations with a variety of param-
eters, which relies on a tool named ”parametric runs” in IDA ICE. This tool allows the
user to modify several scalar parameters from the IDA-ICE system at the same time
and empowers the user to select variables reported in the results summary. Research-
ing different scenarios with different input parameters helps to answer whether parts
of the control are relevant to the indoor environment quality and can those parameters
be simplified in the demand control, and it can also indicate what is a relative optimal
set-point. The user-defined inputs and outputs of this renovation model are described
particularly in the following Chapters.
As all variables are modified and monitored in Advanced IDA-ICE, where users are
given a high degree of customization in editing components and logging variables, the
parametric runs are done in Advanced IDA-ICE by running ”model” simulation, through
which way the defined connections are kept during simulation.
==PAGE:33==
4.6 Parametric runs
24
4.6.1
Input parameters of parametric runs
The control set-point, user behaviours and apartment properties are the three main fac-
tors that have the potential to influence the indoor environment and energy consumption
significantly. Therefore, the inputs of parameters related to those three factors are added
into the parametric runs. The input values are shown in Table 4.7.
• Ventilation system parameter
The ventilation system uses proportional controllers for ventilation boost, hence the
input value is a middle value of the control bounds. The upper temperature limitation
for cooling in DS/EN 16798-1 is 25 ◦C, 26 ◦C, 27 ◦C for Category I, II, III respectively[15],
hence this research looks at the scenarios where the upper temperature limitations for
ventilation boost are 25 ◦C, 26 ◦C, 27 ◦C, which means the input values are 24 ◦C, 25
◦C, 26 ◦C respectively.
The cooling set-point for heat recovery bypass should always be lower than the cooling
set-point for ventilation boost for the purpose of energy saving, otherwise, the mechanical
ventilation will not have enough capacity for reducing the indoor temperature to the set-
point and extra energy consumption will be brought. A one ◦C of temperature difference
is considered between the heat recovery set-point and the ventilation cooling set-point.
Similarly, the DS/EN standard 16798-1 also requires that the upper limit of the indoor
CO2 concentration in bedrooms should be 380 ppm, 550 ppm above outdoors CO2
concentration for Category I and Category II, and the upper limitation of the indoor
CO2 concentration in living rooms should be 550 ppm, 800 ppm above outdoors CO2
concentration for Category I and Category II [15], and the outdoor CO2 concentration
is assumed to be 400 ppm. This research looks at the scenarios where the indoor CO2
limitation is set as the upper limit in Category I and II for bedroom and living room,
and Category III is ignored as it is far beyond the recommended level of 1000 ppm in
ASHRAE [9].
The humidity set-point is changed within a comfortable indoor environment range.
The minimum supply airflow ranges from 0.1 (as a minimum value to verify the effec-
tiveness of the ventilation system) to 0.3 liter/s m2 (as required in BR18 [24].
• Apartment properties
Scenarios with extremely small door leakage areas are analyzed to see the consequence
of the overflow and infiltration, and a relatively large door leakage area (0.02 m2) is also
analyzed as a comparison.
• Use patterns
Besides, scenarios with different cooling set-point for windows opening are simulated to
imitate the diverse use patterns in real situations. One thing that should be realized is
that though scenarios where residents open windows in relative low indoor temperature
or they rarely open windows are simulated, it is still far from the real situation that
==PAGE:34==
4.6 Parametric runs
25
people might not open all windows at the same time, instead, they just open some
windows and waiting for the indoor temperature to reduce. Therefore, the model is
simplified in residents’ behaviours.
Table 4.7: Input parameters of parametric runs
Input name
Original value
unit
range
resolution
Ventilation system parameter
Cooling set-point for ventilation boost
26
℃
24, 25, 26
3
Cooling set-point for heat recovery bypass
25
℃
23, 24, 25
3
CO2 reducing set-point
850
ppm
730, 850, 900
3
Humidity reducing set-point
0.01
kg/kg
0.008, 0.01, 0.012
3
Minimum supply airflow
0.1
L/m2s
0.1, 0.2, 0.3
3
Apartment properties
Door leakage area
0.01
m2
0.001, 0.002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.02
5
Use pattern
Cooling set-point for windows opening
25
℃
23, 24, 25, 26
4
4.6.2
Output parameters of parametric runs
The following results are output in the summary to evaluate the effectiveness of the
ventilation system:
• The total fan power: It contains the sum of the AHU fan power and the individual
fan power of supply rooms. This is the most important factor when considers the energy
performance of the ventilation system.
• Zone heating: This output indicates the influence of different control set-point,
apartment properties and use patterns on the heating demand. The zone heating and
total fan power can reflect the energy consumption of a certain scenario, which helps to
answer which input parameters can be adjusted to have less energy consumption.
• Max supply airflow and max return airflow, average airflow: These outputs
help to tell the operation conditions of the ventilation system.
• Max operative temperature, max relative humidity, max CO2 concentration:
These outputs can be compared with the requirements in the standard DE/EN 16798-
1 to answer whether the input helps to maintain the indoor environment quality at a
certain level.
• Hours of temperature above 27 ◦C and 28 ◦C: These outputs indicate whether
there is overheating in the simulated scenario.
• Total hours of relative humidity above 50% and 70%, total hours of CO2
above 750ppm, 960ppm, 1250ppm: As is shown in Table 2.2, DS/EN 16798-1
puts forward requirements on parameters that can indicate the indoor environment
quality. These outputs indicate the level that the indoor environment quality fulfills the
requirement in the standard DS/EN 16798-1.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Simulation results of the IDA
ICE model
There is two reference model simulated as a comparison. The reference constant air-
flow volume ventilation represents the widely used mechanical ventilation system in new
buildings and renovations, where no sensors and control module adopted. Another refer-
ence module is a common demand-controlled ventilation system that uses temperature
and humidity signals to control the airflow, this system is a reference variable airflow
volume ventilation system.
The base scenario is the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system, which
is the actual operating system in the renovated apartment. This system adopts room-
based control, which can respond to the demand of different kinds of rooms accurately,
and the design of the individual fan in the supply manifold can avoid the unbalance in
the normal system caused by non-linear frictional losses of airflow rates. The parametric
runs are implemented on this basis.
Another room-based demand-controlled ventilation system that removes the supply man-
ifold is simulated to see whether it is necessary to invest in the manifold with individual
fans.
5.1
Simulation results of the energy
consumption
The simulation results of energy consumption for the reference constant airflow volume
ventilation, the reference variable airflow volume ventilation system controlled by return
temperature and humidity, the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system
and the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system without the manifold are
shown in Figure 5.1. All results are calculated with the primary factors stipulated in
BR 18. The fan uses electricity, so according to BR18, the primary factor is 1.9 for the
fan power. The zone heating uses district heating, hence the primary factor is 0.85 as
stipulated in BR18 [22].
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Simulation results of the energy consumption
27
Figure 5.1: Energy consumption of the three ventilation system
The total annual energy in kWh/m2 of the four systems with primary factors of 1.9 for
electricity, 0.85 for district heating [22] are shown in Table 5.1, as well as the average
supply airflow.
The annual standard heating energy consumption of domestic hot water is 13 kWh/m2,
and the energy frame for renovated residences is 52.5 kWh/m2 per year added 1650 kWh
per years divided by the heated floor area which contains energy for heating, ventilation,
cooling and domestic hot water according to BR18 [22]. Therefore, the energy frame
of the stimulated building should be 52.9 kWh/m2 according to the estimation that the
living area (3933 m2) [26] can be approximately seen as the heating area.
Table 5.1: Energy consumption with primary factors and average airflow
Total energy,
kWh/m2year
Energy frame,
kWh/m2year
Average airflow,L/s
CAV
29.79
52.90
34.7
VAV
19.14
19.8
Room-based DCV
19.15
15.6
Room-based DCV without the manifold
23.53
21.7
5.1.1
Fan power
Fan power is highly attached to the airflow of the ventilation system, and it is a significant
factor in the evaluation of the energy performance of a ventilation system. The fan
power of the reference constant airflow volume ventilation, the reference variable airflow
volume ventilation controlled by return air temperature and humidity, the novel room-
based demand-controlled ventilation is the sum of the AHU fan power and the manifold’s
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Simulation results of the energy consumption
28
individual fans power, but the fan power of the room-based DCV without the manifold
ignores the fan power for the supply ducts as there are no individual fans to overcome
the resistance of the supply ducts. Compared with the energy needed to supply the air
into the room, the energy needed to overcome the resistance of the ducts from the AHU
to supply rooms is quite small. Therefore, this simplification is reasonable.
As figure 5.1 shows, the constant airflow volume ventilation system consumes the most
electricity, which is 2.5 times of the energy used by the variable airflow volume ventila-
tion controlled by return temperature and humidity and almost 2.7 times of the energy
consumed by the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system. Though the room-
based demand-controlled ventilation without the manifold consumes more fan power
than the other two VAV systems, it still saves more than 40% of the fan power than
the reference constant airflow volume ventilation. Compared with the novel room-based
demand-controlled ventilation system, the room-based DCV system without the mani-
fold consumes more fan energy, but still much less than the CAV system. The slightly
higher fan power consumption of the room-based DCV system without the manifold can
be explained by the airflow difference which will be discussed in the following part. In
total, these results indicate that the variable ventilation system has a big potential to
reduce the fan power of the AHU.
The room-based demand-controlled system reduces average airflow to 79% of the refer-
ence VAV system and 45% of the reference CAV system. The modified system without
the manifold has a relatively higher average airflow among the VAV ventilation sys-
tems, but it is still only 62% of the CAV airflow.
However, the fan power for the
temperature and humidity controlled variable airflow volume ventilation system and the
room-based demand-controlled system are similar. As the fan power is proportional to
the third power of the speed of the fan, an increase in airflow will greatly increase the
fan’s energy consumption. It means even a short period of high airflow will lead to
high energy consumption, which can explain the little difference between the fan power
of the reference temperature and humidity controlled VAV system and the room-based
demand-controlled system. More specifically, the short period of high airflow ventilation
consumes a large proportion of the fan energy consumption, and the two VAV systems
have relatively similar high demand duration due to the increase of indoor humidity,
hence the annual fan power of these two systems has little differences (6.5%). Different
from the room-based control with the manifold, the VAV system without individual
fans to supply rooms needs to boost supply airflow in the designed proportion, which in-
creases unnecessary supply airflow to some rooms. Therefore, the average supply airflow
and the annual fan power are higher than the other two VAV systems. But as energy
consumption is not the only concerning factor, whether it deserves to have the supply
manifold in the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system needs to be further
discussed.
However, the low fan power of the VAV system controlled by return temperature and
humidity is gotten by sacrificing other indicators of indoor comforts, such as CO2 con-
centration. The influence of the occasional insuﬀicient ventilation caused by humidity
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Simulation results of the indoor environment
29
control will be shown in the following chapter.
5.1.2
Zone heating
The AHU has a high heat recovery rate, which can explain the relatively small differ-
ence in the zone heating between these three systems (less than 21.7%). The supply
temperature of the AHU keeps around 20 degrees. As the AHU doesn’t have a heating
coil, all energy for preheating supply air comes from the return air, and the capability
for heating depends on the return airflow, return air temperature. When the ventilation
demand is small or the outdoor temperature is extremely low, there are some fluctua-
tions where the supply temperature decrease to 10-17 ℃. Therefore, the annual zone
heating increases with the increase of the supply airflow, but the influence is limited.
In total, the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system consumes the least
fan energy.
5.2
Simulation results of the indoor
environment
5.2.1
Overheating
The maximum operative temperature of all rooms is over 27 ◦C, which is the maximum
temperature requirement of Category III in DS/EN 16798-1 [15]. As there is no chiller in
the apartment and all cooling relies on the ventilation and heat transfer with the outdoor
environment, and the cooling capacity of the ventilation highly relies on the outdoor
temperature, the high temperature beyond the comfort level is understood. However,
the rooms might not be occupied when the indoor temperatures are high, and the high
temperature will not make the indoor environment unacceptable for residents. According
to the Danish building regulation BR18, the indoor temperature is acceptable when the
hours of the indoor temperatures above certain values are less than the stipulation.
BR18 stipulates that the operative temperature in dwellings with operable windows
throughout the year should not exceed 27◦C for more than 100 hours, and it should not
exceed 28◦C for more than 25 hours [23]. As the Table 5.2 shows, all systems prevent
overheating effectively. The operative temperature over 27◦C in all three scenarios (CAV,
VAV, room-based DCV, room-based DCV without the manifold) are less than 35 hours,
which is far less than the requirement in BR 18 of 100 hours [23]. In other words, the
renovated apartment doesn’t have an overheating problem with these three ventilation
systems. The CAV system has the lowest maximum temperature and the minimum
hours of temperature over 27◦C, while the two room-based DCV systems has the highest
maximum temperature and the longest time duration of temperature over 27 ◦C The big
amount of supply airflow counts for the relatively low temperature in cooling seasons. It
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Simulation results of the indoor environment
30
can be explained by the low minimum airflow in the DCV systems, and the ventilation
will not boost unless the control parameters reach the set-point. The conclusion is that
more ventilation (such as keeping ventilation when zones are not occupied or the indoor
environment quality is acceptable) can provide an environment with a less overheating
problem, but it is based on the price of extra energy consumption. As the temperature
in the cooling seasons still fulfills the requirement in BR18, VAV systems are definitely
a better choice considering energy consumption.
Table 5.2: Overheating
CAV
Temperature and
humidity
controlled VAV
Room-based DCV
Room-based DCV
without
the manifold
Unit
Maximum temperature
28.3
28.3
28.5
28.5
℃
Hours of temperature above 27℃
26
27
35
35
Hours
Hours of temperature above 28℃
2
2
10
10
Hours
5.2.2
CO2 Concentration
As shown in the Table 5.3, the novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system
is the most effective ventilation system for CO2 removal. CO2 concentration in all rooms
during the occupation is less than 950ppm, which can fulfill the requirement of Category
II in DE/EN 16798-1 [15] (based on the assumption that outdoor CO2 concentration
is 400ppm). The requirement of the Category II of a living room is 1200 ppm, which
is much higher than the indoor CO2 concentrations in the simulated novel base model.
Therefore, the CO2 concentration in the apartment is within the comfort level with the
novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system and the room-based demand-
controlled ventilation system without the manifold.
For the reference CAV system, only the CO2 concentration in bedroom1 can not fulfill
the requirement of Category II in DS/EN 16798-1, and the hours of CO2 concentration
above 950ppm reaches 35.31% of the occupied hours. The reason behind this situation
is that the airflow is set to be 35L/s based on the requirement in DS/EN 16798-1, and it
is a common value to insure the minimum fresh air supply, which might be not suﬀicient
to remove the contaminant generated by human activities.
The reference VAV system doesn’t take CO2 concentration into consideration, and that
explains the extremely high duration of CO2 concentration above the requirement in
DE/EN 16798-1 in the reference VAV system. So according to the air quality, room-
based ventilation is obviously the best choice of the ventilation system. Though the
VAV system controlled by temperature and humidity does well in energy consumption
and temperature controlling, it doesn’t work well in CO2 removal.
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Simulation results of the indoor environment
31
Table 5.3: The CO2 concentration of the three systems
Bedroom1
Bedroom2
Living room
Unit
CAV
Duration of CO2 above
950ppm (Occupied)
1160
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
35.31%
0
0
Duration of CO2 above
1200ppm (Occupied)
0
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
0
0
0
Temperature and humidity controlled VAV
Duration of CO2 above
950ppm (Occupied)
2580
314
507
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
78.54%
9.56%
15.75%
Duration of CO2 above
1200ppm (Occupied)
1640
0
13.3
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
49.92%
0
0.40%
Room-based DCV
Duration of CO2 above
950ppm (Occupied)
0
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
0
0
0
Duration of CO2 above
1200ppm (Occupied)
0
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
0
0
0
Room-based DCV without the manifold
Duration of CO2 above
950ppm (Occupied)
0
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
0
0
0
Duration of CO2 above
1200ppm (Occupied)
0
0
0
Hours
The ratio of occupied hours
0
0
0
5.2.3
Comprehensive comparison of the four
ventilation systems
Overall, the constant airflow volume ventilation consumes a lot of energy for fans and
zone heating. Compared with the room-based demand-controlled ventilation systems,
it only reduces a few hours of high indoor temperature, and it can not remove CO2
effectively during sleeping time. Therefore, this simple system can be replaced with
a VAV system with better energy performance and more effective indoor air quality
control.
When it comes to the return temperature and humidity controlled variable airflow volume
ventilation system, it performs well in energy saving, but the lack of CO2 controlling
leads to a long duration of high CO2 concentration in bedrooms during the occupation.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
32
This system can be used in buildings without high air quality demand for the purpose
of energy conservation and environment protection.
The two room-based demand-controlled ventilation systems have similar performance on
indoor environment quality control, but the flexible supply of the system with individual
fans in the manifold gives more potential to energy saving. With further study on the
life circle assessments of these two systems, the question that whether it deserves to have
the supply manifold can be answered.
5.3
Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
The energy consumption and the supply airflow are analyzed to see the influence of
changing the control set-point, use patterns and apartment properties, and it will help
to guide the design of the ventilation system.
5.3.1
Sensitivity of the fan power
As the Figure 5.2 shows, the fan power is sensitive to almost all the ventilation control set-
point except for the humidity control set-point for ventilation boost. The reason might
be that the human breath produces limited moisture, and the most indoor moisture is
brought by cooking and showering which last for a short period (normally less than one
and a half hours based on the research of the indoor moisture gains [34], [35]). Therefore,
the airflow to remove the humidity above the set level is limited and it will only last
for a short period. Besides, the humidity set-point for airflow boost varies within 50%
to 70% according to the DS/EN 16798-1 [15], the variation range is small. In that case,
the fan power is not sensitive to the humidity set-point for airflow boost.
Among all the ventilation control set-point, the cooling set-point has the biggest influence
on the fan power, one degree reduction on the cooling set-point will increase the fan power
by around 35%. It can be explained by the long-lasting time for temperature above
the set-point during summer, and the airflow boosts during the temperature above the
cooling set-point will increase fan power dramatically.
Increase the minimum supply airflow will also increase fan power a lot. As the venti-
lation system uses room-based demand control, the original minimum airflow supply of
0.1 l/(sm2) can satisfy the indoor environment requirements in DE/EN 16798-1. There-
fore, it is unnecessary to increase the minimum airflow which causes extra fan energy
consumption.
Though increase the CO2 set-point value for airflow boosting can reduce fan energy
consumption effectively, it will lead to the high CO2 concentration above the acceptable
level stipulated in Category II of the DE/EN 16798-1. Setting the CO2 set-point for
airflow boosting to 900ppm can still keep the CO2 concentration in supply rooms during
occupation within the limitation (950ppm for bedroom, 1200 for living room [15]), but
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
33
when it increases to 1150ppm, for more than 30% of occupied time Bedroom1 will face
the situation that CO2 concentration higher than the requirement of Category II in
DE/EN 16798-1. Therefore, the CO2 set-point can be set into 900ppm for the purpose
of energy saving. This result also indicates that the CO2 control is necessary for the
ventilation system when it considers to the indoor environment quality.
(a) Sensitivity of the fan power to the cooling
set-point for airflow boosting
(b) Sensitivity of the fan power to the CO2
set-point for airflow boosting
(c) Sensitivity of the fan power to the humid-
ity set-point for airflow boosting
(d) Sensitivity of the fan power to the the
minimum supply airflow
Figure 5.2: Sensitivity of the fan power to the ventilation set-point
As Figure 5.3 shows, opening windows at higher temperature increases fan power a lot,
and this factor is highly associated with ventilation cooling. The higher the cooling
set-point for windows opening is, the more demand for the mechanical ventilation for
cooling will be. As discussed before, the increase of airflow rates increasea the energy
consumption index of times. Though the use patterns are diverse, it is necessary to use
natural ventilation for cooling to save energy.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
34
Figure 5.3: Sensitivity of the fan power to the cooling set-point for windows opening
The fan power is not so sensitive to the doors’ leakage area, which can be seen in
Figure 5.4. There is a slight increase of the fan power caused by the decrease of the doors’
leakage area, which can be explained by the increase of the airflow velocity through the
door with a smaller leakage area, and it will cause larger resistance. In that case, larger
doors’ leakage area can help to reduce the AHU fan energy consumption. This result
emphasizes the importance of suﬀicient leakage area between rooms for the buildings
with mechanical ventilation systems.
Figure 5.4: Sensitivity of the fan power to the doors’ leakage area
5.3.2
Sensitivity of the average airflow
As the airflow boost is the main reason for the fan power increase, the annual average
airflow has a similar variation trend to the fan power consumption, and the amplitudes
of variation of two output are quite similar as it is shown in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.5,
Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.6, as well as Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.7. The cooling set-point
for airflow boost and the minimum supply airflow are the two main influence factors of
the annual average airflow, hence under the premise of satisfying environment quality,
the cooling set-point for airflow boost should be as high as possible and the minimum
supply airflow should be as low as possible to reduce fan energy consumption. The
base model’s cooling set-point for airflow boost of 26 ◦C is a good choice that limits
overheating without too much extra energy consumption. The CO2 set-point for airflow
boost can be adjusted to 900ppm, and this adjustment can reduce almost 10% of the fan
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
35
energy consumption (as Figure 5.2b shows) and still keep the indoor CO2 concentration
within the Category II level in DE/EN 16798-1. The minimum supply airflow should
be 0.1 l/(sm2) for the purpose of energy saving. Though it is stipulated in BR18 that
the minimum airflow should be 0.3 l/(sm2) [22], the demand-controlled ventilation can
control the indoor environment quality to fulfill the requirement of DE/EN 16798-1
effectively, hence it is fine to have less minimum supply airflow than it required in the
standard BR18.
(a) Sensitivity of the average airflow to the
cooling set-point for airflow boosting
(b) Sensitivity of the average airflow to the
CO2 set-point for airflow boosting
(c) Sensitivity of the average airflow to the
humidity set-point for airflow boosting
(d) Sensitivity of the average airflow to the
the minimum supply airflow
Figure 5.5: Sensitivity of the average airflow to the ventilation set-point
Figure 5.6: Sensitivity of the average airflow to the cooling set-point for windows opening
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
36
Figure 5.7: Sensitivity of the average airflow to the doors’ leakage area
5.3.3
Sensitivity of the zone heating
Comparing with the fan power, zone heating is less sensitive to the ventilation set-point
of the air handling unit. As Figure 5.2a and Figure 5.8a show, the change of the cooling
set-point for airflow boosting varies the fan power by 83%, but it only diversifies the
zone heating by 1%. It can be explained by the high heat recovery rate of the AHU,
which is 80%. The supply temperature keeps around 22 ◦C, which is higher than the
heating set-point of 21 ◦C. Therefore, the ventilation will not cause a lot of extra heat
demand during heating seasons. Besides, the cooling ventilation boost set-point of the
AHU is much higher than the heating set-point due to the design requirement in DS/EN
16798-1, which can avoid extra ventilation for cooling. Based on the above reasons, the
zone heating energy is not sensitive to the cooling boost set-point. The situations are
similar for other set-point like CO2 set-point for airflow boosting, humidity set-point for
airflow boosting, minimum supply airflow.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
37
(a) Sensitivity of the zone heating to the cool-
ing set-point for airflow boosting
(b) Sensitivity of the zone heating to the
CO2 set-point for airflow boosting
(c) Sensitivity of the zone heating to the hu-
midity set-point for airflow boosting
(d) Sensitivity of the zone heating to the the
minimum supply airflow
Figure 5.8: Sensitivity of the zone heating to the ventilation set-point
Similarly to the cooling set-point for ventilation boosting, the cooling set-point for win-
dows opening is higher than the heating set-point, hence it does not cause lots of extra
heating demand.
Figure 5.9: Sensitivity of the zone heating to the cooling set-point for windows opening
As Figure 5.10 shows, the zone heating is relatively sensitive to the doors’ leakage area.
The extremely small leakage area of 0.001 m2 (10% of the original value) increases the
zone heating energy of 19%. This finding verifies the theory that insuﬀicient leakage area
between rooms will lead to infiltration and exfiltration, which cause extra heat losses.
The rooms with high pressure caused by insuﬀicient air circulation between rooms will
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
38
exfiltrate the heated air to the outside, and other rooms with lower pressure than outdoor
pressure will infiltrate the cold air from the outside. This process brings a lot of extra
heat demand. The slight increase of the zone heating when the doors’ leakage area is
twice the original value can be explained by the increase of the turbulence flow around
the leakage of doors, the air convection can cause extra heat loss. As the leakage area
of the door in IDA-ICE is simplified as a rectangle area, it can not reflect the real
ventilation vents installed in the apartment. The author assumes that the real vents
with good air division can reduce the zone heating that increases with too large leakage
area.
Figure 5.10: Sensitivity of the zone heating to the doors’ leakage area
5.3.4
Sensitivity of the total annual energy with the
primary factors
The total annual energy consumption is sensitive to the cooling set-point for airflow
boost, CO2 set-point for airflow boosting and the doors’ leakage area. As Figure 5.12
shows, 24 ◦C is a relative energy saving set-point for windows opening based on the
assumed windows opening schedule. As Figure 5.13 shows, 0.01 m2 is a relative suitable
leakage area considers the total annual energy consumption with the primary factors,
which reduces the extra heat loss caused by infiltration and exfiltration.
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Sensitivity analysis of the parametric runs
39
(a) Sensitivity of the total annual energy to
the cooling set-point for airflow boosting
(b) Sensitivity of the total annual energy to
the CO2 set-point for airflow boosting
(c) Sensitivity of the total annual energy to
the humidity set-point for airflow boosting
(d) Sensitivity of the total annual energy to
the minimum supply airflow
Figure 5.11: Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the ventilation set-point
Figure 5.12: Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the cooling set-point for windows
opening
==PAGE:49==
5.4 The effect of different human behaviors on energy consumption
40
Figure 5.13: Sensitivity of the total annual energy to the doors’ leakage area
5.4
The effect of different human behaviors
on energy consumption
This research simulated different user behaviors of windows opening. In a real situation,
people don’t open the windows at a certain temperature or with a certain schedule. In
the simulation, a simplification that residents only open windows when they at home
and the indoor temperature reaches the cooling set-point for windows opening. The
following cases simulated by parametric runs are described in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Set-point of different use patterns
Case no.
Windows opening temperature
The cooling set-point
for airflow boost
The AHU heat recovery
temperature set-point
Open windows firstly
1
23
24
23
2
23
25
24
3
23
26
25
4
24
25
24
5
24
26
25
6
25
26
25
Using AHU firstly
7
25
24
23
8
26
24
23
9
26
25
24
As Figure 5.14 shows, opening windows at a lower temperature than ventilation boosting
can significantly reduce the fan energy. The scenarios that open windows before the
ventilation of the AHU boost has similar total annual energy consumption with the
primary factors, which is less than 2.5% variation. The fan power of these six scenarios
is similar. In other words, the value of the cooling set-point for airflow boosting has
little influence on the fan energy consumption. This can be explained by the cooling
demand is fulfilled by the natural ventilation before the ventilation boosting, hence the
fan energy consumption of these six scenarios are similar. Besides, the windows opening
set-point is higher than the zone heating set-point, hence the zone heating of these six
scenarios has little differences.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 The effect of different human behaviors on energy consumption
41
Differently, boosting the room-based demand-controlled ventilation system for cooling
before opening windows leads to more than 13.9% of total annual energy increase com-
pared with the scenarios of opening windows firstly. In addition to the increase of the
energy consumption, boosting the airflow firstly also leads the change of the cooling set-
point for airflow boost makes an impact on the fan energy consumption. 1 ◦C’s increase
of the cooling set-point for airflow boost decreases more than 80 kWh annual fan energy
consumption as case 8 and case 9 show.
In conclusion, opening windows before the mechanical ventilation system boosting helps
to save fan energy, and the limited zone heating energy increase is far less than the fan
power economizing. Though the user behaviors are diverse, and there are no common
use patterns of windows opening behaviors and ventilation boosting settings, it should
drive people’s attention to rational using natural ventilation to saving energy.
Figure 5.14: Energy consumption of different use patterns
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Research limitations
The research analyzes a novel room-based demand-controlled ventilation system by com-
paring it with a reference constant airflow volume ventilation system, a reference return
temperature and humidity controlled variable airflow volume ventilation system and the
room-based demand-controlled ventilation system without the manifolds, and detailed
analyses about the control set-point, use patterns, apartment properties of the model
have been made to evaluate the model’s input parameters.
The simulation results indicate that the novel room-based demand -controlled ventila-
tion saves 62.6% of the fan energy compared with the reference CAV system, which is
consistent with the existing literature on the room-based demand-controlled ventilation
system by K.M. Smith [16]. Furthermore, this research also finds the return tempera-
ture VAV has similar energy performance with the novel room-based demand-controlled
ventilation but less effectiveness on environment air quality control, and the room-based
DCV without the manifold consumes 59% more fan energy but has similar effects on
environment quality controlling. What’s more, the results of parametric runs verifies
the opinion from K.M. Smith that insuﬀicient leakage area between rooms leads to extra
heat loss and zone heating demand [16]. The finds of this research are helpful in selecting
mechanical ventilation systems and deciding the ventilation control set-point.
However, there are a lot of assumptions and simplifications of the model which might
affect the accuracy of the results. For instance, the research assumes that the windows
can only be opened when people at home and the indoor temperature reaches a certain
level, but in the real situation, people tend to not open the windows with a certain
schedule. The uncertainties of the user behaviours and internal gains increase the uncer-
tainties of the results. The simulated results can just represent a general pattern of the
performance of the ventilation systems and their influence factors. Another assumption
is that the doors are always closed, which is not possible in the real situation. Besides,
this research is based on a high heat recovery rate AHU which can reach 80%, but there
are risks of overestimation of heat recovery as the demand control can lead to a high
airflow rate sometimes.
When it comes to the results part, this research focuses more on the energy consumption
and some basic environment quality parameters such as overheating and CO2 concentra-
tion, but there are more environment quality parameters to be analyzed such as PMV,
PDD, and so on.
==PAGE:52==
6.2 Further research
43
Though the research gives some results regarding energy consumption and indoor envi-
ronment quality parameters, it still needs some economic analyses to answer whether it
deserves to investigate the novel room-based demand-controlled system and the manifold
with individual fans.
6.2
Further research
The windows and doors opening schedule in this research is simplified and monotonous.
Therefore, further study is required to be implemented in scenarios with more diverse
opening schedules and different heat gains.
Further research can be done by analyzing the investigation on the manifold and the
energy price. A life circle assessment helps to answer the selection of the ventilation
system better.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
conclusion
The reference constant airflow volume ventilation system consumes 841.7 kWh fan power
annually and 973.8 kWh zone heating annually with primary factors. The return temper-
ature and humidity controlled variable airflow volume ventilation system and the novel
room-based demand-controlled ventilation system have annual savings for more than
60% of fan power compared with the reference CAV system. Though the fan power and
zone heating of these two VAV systems are similar (difference less than 6%), the return
temperature and humidity controlled VAV system has up to 78.5% of the occupied time
of CO2 concentration higher than it required in DE/EN 16798-1, while the novel room-
based DCV controls CO2 concentration effectively as the CO2 concentration is less than
the required level of 950ppm for all occupied hours. The room-based DCV without the
manifold saves 40% of fan power compared with the reference CAV system, and it has
the same performance on environment quality control as the novel room-based DCV
with the manifold. All ventilation systems prevent overheating effectively.
Through the parametric runs of the ventilation set-point, use patterns and apartment
properties, the following conclusions can be gotten:
The cooling set-point for airflow boost is a main influence factor on the fan power, and
one degree reduction on the cooling set-point will increase the fan power by around 35%.
The value for the CO2 set-point for airflow boost can be adjusted to 900ppm, which
saves 8.8% of fan energy but still fulfill the CO2 limitation of Category II stipulated in
DE/EN 16798-1.
Insuﬀicient leakage cause the extra heat loss and heat demand. The zone heating is
relatively sensitive to the doors’ leakage area. 90% of leakage area’s reduction leads to
19% of zone heating energy increasing.
Opening windows before the mechanical ventilation boosting can reduce fan energy
consumption effectively, it can reduce more than 165 kWh annual energy consumption
compared with boosting airflow for cooling firstly. In the simulated scenarios, the cooling
set-point for airflow boosting almost not influence the fan power and total annual energy
as long as opening windows before the airflow boosting.
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
K.M. Smith and J. Kolarik. Simulations of a novel demand-controlled room-based
ventilation system for renovated apartments presentation, 2019.
[2]
EC. A clean planet for all. Technical report, European Commission (EC), 2018.
[3]
IPCC. Special report of IPCC. Technical report, The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), 2018.
[4]
IEA. World energy balances 2020 edition. Technical report, International Energy
Agency(IEA), 2020.
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/4f314df4-
8c60-4e48-9f36-bfea3d2b7fd5/WorldBAL_2020_Documentation.pdf.
[5]
IEA.
Energy eﬀiciency indicators june 2020 edition.
Technical report, Inter-
national Energy Agency(IEA), 2020.
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/
assets/93b232c2-dd6b-4938-8161-2eca3b0b5621/Efficiency_indicators_
Documentation.pdf.
[6]
M. Morelli, L. Ronby, S.E. Mikkelsen, M.G. Minzari, T. Kildemoes, and H.M. Tom-
merup. Energy retrofitting of a typical old danish multi-family building to a ”nearly-
zero” energy building based on experiences from a test apartment. Energy and
Buildings, 54:395–406, 2012.
[7]
Dikaia E. Saraga. Special issue on indoor air quality. Applied Sciences (switzerland),
10(4):1501, 2020.
[8]
Luis Carazo Fernández, Ramón Fernández Alvarez, Francisco Javier González-
Barcala, and José Antonio Rodríguez Portal. Indoor air contaminants and their im-
pact on respiratory pathologies. Archivos De Bronconeumologia, 49(1):22–7, 2013.
[9]
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, Air-conditioning Engineers, Inc.,
ASHRAE. Standard 62-2001 ventilation for acceptable indoor air quality. ASHRAE,
2002.
[10] Peter Strøm-Tejsen, Pawel Wargocki, David Peter Wyon, and Anna Kondracka.
The effect of air quality on sleep. Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Indoor Air Quality and Climate - Indoor Air 2014, pages 748–755, 2014.
[11] Hazim B. Awbi.
Ventilation.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2(1-
2):157–188, 1998.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
46
[12] Chika Ohashi, Toshiharu Ikaga, Shintaro Ando, Wataru Umishio, Naoto Takayama,
and Megumi Yanagisawa. Field studies on the effect of the indoor thermal environ-
ment on sleep in summer and winter. Healthy Buildings Europe 2015, Hb 2015 -
Conference Proceedings, 2015-, 2015.
[13] Fergus Nicol and Mike Wilson. An overview of the european standard en 15251. Pro-
ceedings of Conference: Adapting To Change: New Thinking on Comfort, Windsor
2010, 2010.
[14] Dansk Standard DS/EN 15251. Indoor environmental input parameters for design
and assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality,
thermal environment, lighting and acoustics. Dansk Standard, Kollegievej, Den-
mark, 2007.
[15] Dansk Standard DS/EN 16798-1. Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation
for buildings – Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and as-
sessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal
environment, lighting and acoustics – Module M1-6. Dansk Standard, Kollegievej,
Denmark, 2019.
[16] K.M. Smith and J. Kolarik. Simulations of a novel demand-controlled room-based
ventilation system for renovated apartments. I O P Conference Series: Materials
Science and Engineering, 609(3):032041, 2019.
[17] G Guyot, M.H. Sherman, and I.S. Walker. Smart ventilation energy and indoor
air quality performance in residential buildings: A review. Energy and Buildings,
165:416–430, 2018.
[18] Dorthe Kragsig Mortensen, Toke Rammer Nielsen, and Claus Topp. Demand con-
trolled ventilation in a bathroom. Proceedings of the 29th Aivc Conference in 2008,
pages 237–242, 2008.
[19] H Han, M Hatta, and H Rahman. Smart ventilation for energy conservation in
buildings. Evergreen, 6(1):44–51, 2019.
[20] Teet-Andrus Koiv, Hendrik Voll, Alo Mikola, and Dmitri Lukjanov. The indoor
climate and ventilation of elderly homes. Recent Researches in Environment, Energy
Planning and Pollution - Proc. of the 5th Wseas Int. Conf. on Renewable Energy
Sources, Res’11, Epese’11, Wwai’11, pages 229–232, 2011.
[21] Bolig og Planstyrelsen. Br18. Technical report, Bolig- og Planstyrelsen, 2018. https:
//bygningsreglementet.dk/Ovrige-bestemmelser/25/Krav.
[22] Bolig og Planstyrelsen. Br18. Technical report, Bolig- og Planstyrelsen, 2018. https:
//bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/Krav.
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
47
[23] Bolig og Planstyrelsen.
Br18.
Technical report,
Bolig- og Planstyrelsen,
2018.
https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/19/
Vejledninger/Termisk-indeklima.
[24] Bolig og Planstyrelsen. Br18. Technical report, Bolig- og Planstyrelsen, 2018. https:
//bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/22/Krav.
[25] EQUA.
User manual-ida indoor climate and energy.
Technical report, EQUA
Simulation AB, 2013. http://www.equaonline.com/iceuser/pdf/ice45eng.pdf.
[26] Lejlighed: Ryesgade 25 2 TH, 2200 København N. https://www.edc.dk/alle-
boliger/københavn-n/2200/ryesgade-25-2-th/.
[27] Dušan P. Sekulić and Ramesh K. Shah. Fundamentals of heat exchanger design.
Wiley-Interscience, 2003.
[28] Flori Muresan. The effect of windows on building performance, 2019. https://www.
ny-engineers.com/blog/the-effect-of-windows-on-building-performance.
[29] Ekolab. Energi- og indeklima-tiltag i renoveringen, 2018. https://ekolab.dk/wp-
content/uploads/Energi-og-indeklimatiltag-i-Ryesgade-25.pdf.
[30] Mette Havgaard Vorre, Mads Hulmose Wagner, Steffen Maagaard, Peter Noyé,
Nadja Lynge Lyng, and Lone Hedegaard Mortensen.
Branchevejledning for
indeklimaberegninger, 2017. https://sbi.dk/Assets/Branchevejledning-for-
indeklimaberegninger/Branchevejledning-for-indeklimaberegninger_redc.
pdf.
[31] American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers.
ASHRAE Standard 90.1. ASHRAE, 180 Technology Parkway, Peachtree Corners,
Georgia 30092 US, 2016.
[32] Kevin Michael Smith and Svend Svendsen. The effect of a rotary heat exchanger
in room-based ventilation on indoor humidity in existing apartments in temperate
climates. Energy and Buildings, 116:349–361, 2016.
[33] Dansk Standard DS/EN 7730.
International Organisation for Standardisation.
Dansk Standard, Kollegievej, Denmark, 2006.
[34] S.C. Hite and J.L. Bray. Research in home humidity control. Purdue University –
Engineering Experiment Station – Research Series, (106), 1948.
[35] F. W.H. Yik, P. S.K. Sat, and J. L. Niu.
Moisture generation through chinese
household activities. Indoor and Built Environment, 13(2):115–131, 2004.
==PAGE:57==
==PAGE:58==
