==PAGE:1==
Security and Authentication in Bluetooth Low
Energy
Kongens Lyngby
Master-2021
Supervisor: Professor, Weizhi Meng
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Building 324, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45253031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.imm.dtu.dk Master-2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The rapid and increasing use of wireless technology, especially Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE), has invaded our daily lives. With BLE, the small packets of
data are exchanged over a wireless channel, which has increased concerns about
data security. Bluetooth SIG (Special Interest Group) has deﬁned the security
level of the channel depending on the input/output capabilities of the BLE
devices. The BLE standards deﬁne that if the BLE device trying to establish
the connection has input-output capabilities and another BLE device does not
support input-output, the unauthenticated channel will be established. In the
worst case, the connection is established where no security is applied.
We propose a security protocol at the application layer that complements the Se-
curity Manager Protocol (SMP) to provide authentication and non-repudiation
or to take responsibility for establishing a secure channel when pairing has not
been used. The proposed protocol has been described in detail, reviewed for
security, implemented, tested and compared with similar protocols operating at
the application layer.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would thank Allah for giving me the strength and opportunity to complete my
master’s after many diﬃculties I have faced after leaving my country (Syria).
The credit goes to Denmark and their system, who oﬀered me a chance to
complete my studies. I would congratulate all my professor who has taught
me during my master’s degree. Furthermore, I would like to thank you all who
supported me and helped me to complete my thesis.I would like to give a special
thanks to my supervisor Weizhi Meng and his continuous feedback. My best
compliments to my parents for the special help I received from them.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
7
2.1
Physical Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Link Layer (LL)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Connection Establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Logical Link Control and Adaptation Protocol(L2CAP)
. . . . .
11
2.3.1
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Attribute Protocol (ATT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Generic Attribute Proﬁle (GATT)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
GATT Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Generic Access Proﬁle (GAP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.1
BLE Device Roles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.2
GAP Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.3
Operational Modes and Procedures:
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.4
Security: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Security Manager (SM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7.1
Phase 1: Pairing Feature Exchange
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7.2
Phase 2: Pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7.3
Phase 3: Key Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.8
Security Requirements and Pairing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
3
Related Work and Security Issues
36
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.1
General studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.2
Testing Security Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.1.3
Using Attack Tools to Attack BLE Device . . . . . . . . .
37
3.1.4
Suggested Solutions that require Changes in Standard . .
39
3.1.5
Attacks target the BLE Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.1.6
Application Layer Security Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2
BLE Security Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Approach
44
4.1
System Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
System Conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Device and User Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.1
User Sign up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.2
Session Establishment with Backend Server . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.3
Session Establishment with GATT Server . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.4
Data Encryption and Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Evaluation and Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.6
Our Approach Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Verﬁcation Using Open-Source Fixed-Point Model-Checker (OFMC) 57
4.7.1
Veriﬁcation Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.8
Sniﬃng Attacks Before and After Using the System . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion and Future Work
62
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
64
Appendix
68
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Technology has become a part of our lives. Scientists are constantly trying to
improve it to make it safer and more convenient for end-users. The wireless
revolution replaced wired cable networks with radio technology. The radio wave
is used to transmit data from one point to another with a short distance, such
as a few meters for Bluetooth or millions of miles for space communication.
Bluetooth, as a short-range wireless communications technology, is managed by
the Bluetooth SIG [2], an international organization that deﬁnes the standard
for Bluetooth and oversees the development process. Additionally, Bluetooth
SIG provides speciﬁcations for application developers on how to develop ap-
plications that use Bluetooth devices. Since data is transmitted in a wireless
medium, Bluetooth SIG designs secure protocols to transfer data securely be-
tween Bluetooth devices.
Bluetooth has evolved with time.
It started with version 1.0.
It was called
Bluetooth Classic and used for applications that require continuous data trans-
mission, such as audio streaming. Bluetooth SIG organization added BLE to
Bluetooth Core Speciﬁcation in version 4.0, released in 2010.
Understanding the diﬀerences between Bluetooth Classic and BLE is essential
for the developer before developing an application that uses Bluetooth. Blue-
tooth technology refers to any device that has Basic Rate(BR), Enhanced Data
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
Rate(EDR), and Low Energy(LE) functionalities. Depending on the function-
ality supported, there are three diﬀerent categories of Bluetooth devices[21].
• BR/EDR-Device:
When a Bluetooth device supports only BR and
EDR, it is referred to as Bluetooth Classic. For example, a mobile phone
connected to a headset uses Bluetooth Classic as it needs a continuous
communication channel to stream audio. Bluetooth Classic refers to any
devices with any version before BLE 4.0.
• Single Mode Device: Any Bluetooth device that supports only LE
functionality.
It is also called Bluetooth Smart.
An example a sport
sensor that displays data on a smartwatch.
• Dual Mode Device or Smart Ready: It supports BR/EDR/LE func-
tionality. In addition, it can link with both ER/EDR and LE simulta-
neously. For example, a patient’s mobile phone connects to a heart rate
monitor and receives heart rate measurements by the BLE channel. At
the same time, the patient’s mobile phone is connected to the headset to
stream audio via the Bluetooth Classic channel.
Bluetooth Smart is not compatible with Bluetooth Classic, while Bluetooth
Smart Ready can communicate with both.
Table 1.1 shows the compatibil-
ity between diﬀerent types of Bluetooth devices. The compatibility problem
is linked to the diﬀerence in the protocol stack between Bluetooth Classic and
Bluetooth Smart. Since Bluetooth Smart was invented to consume less power,
most protocol stack components have a radical change.
For example, Blue-
tooth Smart uses 40 channels at the physical layer, while Bluetooth classic uses
79 channels.
Figure 1.1 shows the protocol stack components for Bluetooth
Classic, Bluetooth Smart, and Bluetooth Smart Ready. The Bluetooth Classic
protocol stack details have not been studied and more focused on the Bluetooth
Smart protocol stack. Bluetooth Smart Ready has both Bluetooth Classic and
Bluetooth Smart protocols stack. Chapter 2 demonstrates the details of the
BLE protocol stack.
Bluetooth Smart Ready and Bluetooth Smart are supported by Bluetooth Core
Speciﬁcation 4.0, 4.1, 4.2, 5.x. They have been used in applications to save power
and increase battery life while maintaining the same communication range as
Bluetooth Classic. Devices such as smartwatches, pedometers, GPS tracking de-
vices, heart rate monitors, thermometers, blood pressure monitors, glucometers,
beacons, and sensors do not require to be connected all the time. Therefore,
BLE is the best choice for the application running on these devices. The key
features of BLE are:
==PAGE:9==
3
Bluetooth Clas-
sic
Bluetooth
Smart
Bluetooth
Smart Ready
Bluetooth Clas-
sic
Yes
No
Yes
Bluetooth
Smart
No
Yes
Yes
Bluetooth
Smart Ready
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 1.1: Compatibility Between Bluetooth Devices
Figure 1.1: Compatibility Between Bluetooth Devices [21]
• Ultra-low-power: It helps to run for months and years on a small bat-
tery. Therefore, BLE devices turn oﬀthe radio as often and as long as
possible.
• Low standby time: BLE uses only three advertising channels compared
to Bluetooth classic, which can use up to 32 channels.
• Short bursts with long-distance wireless connectivity: It extends
battery life.
• Faster connection. The BLE scanning device takes three milliseconds
(ms) to connect, compared to 100 ms for Bluetooth Classic[27].
• Small data packet size: It is 27 bytes in BLE 4.0 and up to 251 bytes
in BLE 4.2.
==PAGE:10==
4
Introduction
• Data is sent when it is needed: Therefore, devices do not require to
be connected all the time.
• BLE has low complexity and lower cost than BR/EDR system
Figure 1.2 presents the communication channels between Bluetooth Classic,
Bluetooth Smart, and Bluetooth Smart Ready. It is a complete scenario where
the mobile phone is connected to the headset to stream audio and uses the Clas-
sic Bluetooth communication channel. Simultaneously, a thermometer measures
the patient’s temperature and sends it to the mobile phone using the BLE com-
munication channel. The thermometer is in a standby state most of the time and
turns on the radio to notify nearby scanning devices of its presence and accept
the connection from the scanning mobile device. If the connection is established,
the thermometer may report the temperature changes to Mobile Phone, which
relays them over the Internet to the external server at the hospital.
.
Figure 1.2: Bluetooth Classic,Bluetooth Smart, Bluetooth Smart Ready[14]
1.1
Motivation
The widespread use of BLE devices in daily life, especially in the medical
ﬁeld[3],[4], may have motivated the attackers to attack the systems that uti-
lize BLE devices by exploiting either the common vulnerability in the protocol
design or ﬂaws in implementing the security protocol.
Suppose the attacker
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Contribution
5
manages to exploit an existing vulnerability in BLE devices used in the medical
ﬁeld; in that case, human safety can be aﬀected.
Since BLE is designed to be used in small and constrained devices, Bluetooth
Core Speciﬁcation has standardized how these devices can establish a secure
channel. Though, suppose any of the devices do not support input-output(IO)
capabilities. Due to this, unauthenticated Just Works will be the pairing method
used to establish a channel, and in the worst case, if the BLE devices decide not
to use security at all. Skipping the pairing process leads to sending unauthen-
ticated and unencrypted data in the wireless medium.
That has motivated other researchers and us to ﬁnd a solution to prevent the
danger of using BLE devices to do the sensitive job. A proof-of-concept approach
is presented by Diego A. Ortiz-Yepes [15] to provide application-level security.
The approach introduced a third party and assumed a symmetric key shared
in advance between a BLE device and a third party, which issues a token for a
legitimate user who provides a credential and obtains access to a BLE device.
1.2
Contribution
Taking the security goals: Authentication, Encryption, and Non-Repudiation,
when designing a system that depends on BLE devices to perform a sensitive
task, we introduce an alternative or supporting security protocol that is used
to provide encryption, authentication, and non-repudiation at the application
layer. The main contributions of our Proposed System as follows:
• According to [15]; "We expect some sort of user/device authentication
mechanism to be deployed," the author assumed that some sort of authen-
tication should be implemented at the application layer without discussing
this in detail. However, we have conﬁrmed that adding access control us-
ing a third party will help design a secure system where conﬁdentiality
and authenticity of data are guaranteed.
• The author in [15] did not discuss non-repudiation as a security goal.
In contrast, our approach makes authentication per user rather than per
device. This makes it possible to control a BLE device used by diﬀerent
users and hold them accountable for their actions. They need to request
a backend server token every time they want to access a BLE device.
The token is stored in the backend and associated with the corresponding
user[15].
• The author [15] mentioned, "The establishment of the BALSA Session
is independent of the association method. We have suggested using Just
==PAGE:12==
6
Introduction
Works because it is simple from the user’s perspective, and security is
provided at the application layer within the BALSA Session." Therefore,
after studying the SMP, data conﬁdentiality is achieved in BLE 4.2, where
BALSA could be used only for authentication. This will save time that
may be incurred due to duplicate use of encryption.
• The author in [15] did not discuss a concurrent client connecting to the
BLE device in the server role, as the author mentioned; "We have achieved
all the goals that we set out for BALSA except that the sensor cannot sup-
port a concurrent connection." In contrast, our implementation managed
sessions for multiple connecting clients simultaneously.
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 2 describes the BLE
protocol stack layers and Security Manager in detail.
Chapter 3 deals with
related work. Chapter 4 presents the proposed security protocol, evaluates its
performance, and veriﬁes its correctness using an automated tool.
We also
show that sniﬃng attacks were prevented by using our system by comparing
the sniﬀed packets before and after using the system. We conclude the thesis in
Chapter 5 and present future work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background:Bluetooth Low
Energy Protocol Stack
The BLE protocol stack consists of three main building blocks:
1. Application:. The top block where developers write an application that
communicates with the Host block.
2. Host: It contains protocol layers such as Generic Attribute Proﬁle (GATT),
Attribute Protocol (ATT), Security Manager (SM), and Generic Access
Proﬁle (GAP). It will be illustrated in detail later.
3. Controller: It contains the Link Layer (LL) and the Physical Layer.
Host and Controller communicate via Host Controller Interface (HCI). The
above building blocks can be implemented in a single chip or split across multiple
chips.
There are three main hardware conﬁgurations, designed according to the man-
ufacturer:
• System On Chip: All of the above blocks are implemented on the same
chip. An example is a sensor.
==PAGE:14==
8
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
• Two Chip through HCI: The Application and the Host blocks are
implemented in one chip, and the Controller is implemented in another
chip. An example is a smartphone or a tablet.
• Dual Chip with connectivity device: One chip implements the Ap-
plication block, and another chip implements the Host and the Controller
blocks. They communicate via a proprietary protocol.
Figure 2.1 shows various BLE hardware conﬁgurations. Host and Controller
blocks have a set of layers. Each layer in a protocol stack communicates with
the layer above it and the layer below it. Figure 1.1 shows the diﬀerent layers
of the BLE protocol stack.
Figure 2.1: BLE Hardware Conﬁguration [21]
2.1
Physical Layer
The physical layer is responsible for data transmission. As Bluetooth ER /EDR,
it operates in the 2.4 GHz band ISM, a radio spectrum internationally reserved
for industrial, scientiﬁc, and medical purposes. BLE devices can have only one
transmitter, one receiver, or both, while Bluetooth ER /EDR requires the device
to have both. BLE devices use 40 channels, which are divided into two main
categories.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Link Layer (LL)
9
1. Three Advertisement Channels: They are used to ﬁnd and connect
devices.
2. 37 Data Channels: They are used to send the actual data packets.
They are used to send the actual data packets. The BLE ISM band can interfere
with other wireless devices; therefore, Frequency Hopping (FH) is used. The
FH tells the BLE device which successive frequency to use to send data packets.
The BLE devices agree on the value of the hopping increment, and the FH
algorithm is used via CONNECT_REQ Protocol Data Unit (PDU) when the
connection is established. The physical layer adds 7 bytes to the BLE packet,
as shown in Figure. 2.2
Figure 2.2: BLE LL packet
2.2
Link Layer (LL)
The LL is responsible for controlling, negotiating, and establishing connectivity
between BLE devices. The LL adds a header of 2 bytes size to the BLE packet
received from the upper layers, as shown in Figure 2.3. The ﬁve possible states
of the LL are:
Figure 2.3: BLE LL packet
==PAGE:16==
10
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
1. Standby State: The standby state is a default state for any BLE device
in which no packets are sent or received. BLE devices transit to this state
from any other state.
2. Advertising State: The BLE device that sends advertising packets is
called an advertiser. An example is a thermometer that is always in the
standby state and wakes up when the temperature changes.
It sends
an advertisement packet to inform other BLE devices that there is a new
data value. Nearby scanning BLE devices will intercept the Advertisement
packet and establish a connection if needed.
3. Scanning State The device that scans for advertisement packets is called
a scanner. After the scanner captures the advertisement packet, it adds a
discovered device to the list of discovered devices.
4. Initiating State: The BLE device that initiates a connection with the
discovered BLE devices is called the initiator.
5. Connecting State: The initiator selects a BLE device from the list of
discovered devices and establishes a connection.
After the connection
is established, the initiator plays the role of a master. The device that
accepts a connection request from the initiator is called a slave.
Figure 2.4 shows the LL state machine and the BLE device roles.
2.2.1
Connection Establishment
When two BLE devices want to establish a connection. The following steps are
performed:
1. An advertiser periodically sends advertisement packets.
2. An initiator starts scanning for BLE devices nearby by sending a scan
request.
3. The advertiser responds with a scan reply.
4. The initiator sends a connection request.
5. The advertiser accepts a connection request from the initiator and estab-
lishes a communication channel with it.
Figure 2.5 shows how the connection establishment process works. After the
connection is established, the initiator is called the master, and the advertiser
is called the slave.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Logical Link Control and Adaptation Protocol(L2CAP)
11
Figure 2.4: BLE Link Layer State Machine [14]
Figure 2.5: Connection Establishment
2.3
Logical Link Control and Adaptation Proto-
col(L2CAP)
The L2CAP works as an intermediate layer between ATT and SM on one side
and the HCI interface on the other, if present. If the HCI is not implemented,
the L2CAP sends packets directly to the LL. The L2CAP is based on the concept
==PAGE:18==
12
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
CID
Description
0x0004
Attribute Protocol
0x0005
LE L2CAP Signaling Channel
0x0006
Security Manager Protocol
Table 2.1: CID Name-space for BLE
of channels. Channel Identiﬁer (CID) identiﬁes a local name that represents a
logical channel endpoint on the device. In BLE, the CID is ﬁxed compared to
the dynamic CID in ER /EDR. Table 2.1 shows the ﬁxed CID for BLE. Fixing
the channel helps the Attribute Protocol send data as soon as the connection
is established and saves time when the BLE device sends data to the channel.
The L2CAP adds a header of 4 bytes size to the BLE packet received from the
upper layers, as shown in the Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: BLE L2CAP packet
There are two types of packets in L2CAP as follows:
1. Protocol Data Unit (PDU): The PDU contains L2CAP protocol in-
formation beside Service Data Unit (SDU).
2. Service Data Unit (SDU): The SDU contains data from ATT and
encapsulated it within the PDU before being transmitted to the other
side. The PDU and SDU are shown in Figure 2.7.
2.3.1
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
The MTU is used to tell the receiving device the maximum SDU size it can
accept. The payload size in BLE 4.1 is 27 bytes, but it can be extended
up to 251 bytes with the packet length extension introduced in Bluetooth
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Attribute Protocol (ATT)
13
Figure 2.7: BLE L2CAP PDU and SDU[21]
4.2. However, it is still new and requires hardware support. The SDU
sender should not send an SDU packet that exceeds the maximum SDU
size of the receiving device.
2.4
Attribute Protocol (ATT)
The attribute protocol deﬁnes a ﬂat set of attributes and mechanisms for ac-
cessing them. It adopts the client-server model, which deﬁnes two roles a
Client is a device that needs to read and write an attribute value located in
a Server. The Server provides a list of attributes. An attribute represents a
data value, such as a temperature recorded by a thermometer. The ATT trans-
mits the data value within a PDU. The default packet size of ATT is 23 bytes.
Twenty bytes are used to send an actual data value; two bytes are used for the
attribute handle and one byte is used for the opcode, as shown in Figure 2.8.
PDU opcode deﬁnes which method is used to exchange data with the server,
and contains the auth ﬂag that determines whether or not authentication is
required. If authentication is required, the authentication code is sent to the
server.
There are six method types for PDUs supported by the ATT protocol as shown
in Table 2.2.
The structure of the attribute is explained in Figure 2.9. It has three properties
associated with it:
1. Attribute Type: It speciﬁes what an attribute represents. It is a Univer-
sal Unique Identiﬁer (UUID), and it can be a user-deﬁned 128-bit UUID
or 16-bit UUID speciﬁed by Bluetooth SIG.
2. Attribute Handle: It is a number that identiﬁes the attribute on the
==PAGE:20==
14
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
Figure 2.8: BLE ATT Packet Format
Method
source
destination
response re-
quired
Request
client
server
Yes
Response
server
client
No
Command
client
server
No
Notiﬁcation
server
client
No
Indication
server
client
Yes
Conﬁrmation
client
server
No
Table 2.2: ATT PDUs Methods
server-side. It occupies 2 bytes from the ATT packet size.
3. Attribute Permissions:
(a) Access Permissions: It represents an access level for the attributes,
such as readable, writable, or both.
(b) Encryption Permissions: It indicates whether access to the at-
tribute requires an encrypted channel or not.If the user pair and
the new BLE channel support encryption, the user obtains access,
otherwise access is denied, and the server will release an insuﬃcient
encryption error. The details of accessing the channel is shown in
Figure 2.10
(c) Authentication Permissions: It speciﬁes whether access to the
attribute requires an authenticated channel or not. If the channel is
authenticated, the user can access the attribute value. Otherwise, the
SMP will try to establish an authenticated channel and ask the user
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Generic Attribute Proﬁle (GATT)
15
Figure 2.9: BLE Attribute Structure [14]
Figure 2.10: BLE Access Encrypted Channel
to pair. If the user’s device pairs and the new BLE channel support
authenticated, the user obtains access. Otherwise, access is denied,
and the server will release an insuﬃcient authentication error. The
details of accessing the channel is shown in Figure 2.11
2.5
Generic Attribute Proﬁle (GATT)
It deﬁnes a framework to organize data inside characteristics and services using
attributes. GATT uses a client-server model. Since GATT is built on At-
tribute Protocol, it uses the same client-server model for the ATT protocol.
==PAGE:22==
16
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
Figure 2.11: BLE Access Authenticated Channel
The GATT deﬁnes two roles for the BLE devices. The BLE device can act as a
client role or a server role.
The GATT Server has the following responsibilities:
• It stores data that the server makes available to the GATT client.
• It accepts the ATT requests, commands, and conﬁrmations from the
GATT client.
• It sends indication and notiﬁcation to the GATT client when events are
raised on the server-side.
• It sends a response to ATT request.
• It speciﬁes the format of attributes contained on the GATT server as
Services and Characteristics.
The GATT Client has the following tasks:
• It sends a request to access data at the server.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Generic Attribute Proﬁle (GATT)
17
• It accepts the ATT response, notiﬁcation, and indication from the GATT
server.
• IT sends conﬁrmation in response to ATT indication.
Each BLE device must implement a Generic Access Proﬁle(GAP) proﬁle and
a GATT proﬁle. BLE devices can implement many proﬁles, depending on the
application. A proﬁle depends on another proﬁle if it uses parts of that proﬁle.
A proﬁle has one or more services. A service can be a primary service or a
secondary service. The primary service has one or more attributes and references
to other services, while the secondary service acts as a supporting service for the
primary service. Characteristic contains an attribute value and many descriptors
that describe the attribute value and make it understandable to the user. Figure
2.12 has shown the GATT proﬁle hierarchy.
Figure 2.12: GATT-Based Proﬁle Hierarchy [1]
==PAGE:24==
18
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
2.5.1
GATT Features
The GATT proﬁle deﬁnes eleven features and is mapped into a procedure and
sub-procedure at the ATT layer. The Exchange MTU feature was used to con-
ﬁgure the ATT_MTU size on both the GATT client and the GATT server. The
default ATT_MTU size is 23 bytes. However, it can be increased if both devices
support a larger ATT_MTU size. The procedure is initiated by the client when
it starts connecting to the GATT server. The GATT client sends an Exchange
MTU request to the GATT server, informing it of the supported ATT_MTU
size. The GATT server responds with its supported ATT_MTU size. Both
GATT client and GATT server choose the minimum (GATT client MTU size,
GATT server MTU size). Figure 2.13 shows the details of the Exchange MTU
procedure.
Figure 2.13: MTU Exchange Procedure
2.6
Generic Access Proﬁle (GAP)
It deﬁnes the way two Bluetooth devices interact with each other. It also deﬁnes
the diﬀerent modes of the devices, how to connect to the device and detect de-
vices in the vicinity. It also deﬁnes various Bluetooth parameters like Bluetooth
device name, address, appearance, pairing, bonding, device class and passkey.
2.6.1
BLE Device Roles
GAP deﬁnes four roles for BLE devices.
1. Broadcaster Role: The BLE device has only one transmitter that peri-
odically sends advertisement events. An example is a beacon device that
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Generic Access Proﬁle (GAP)
19
sends a notiﬁcation to a customer’s mobile phone in a supermarket.
2. Observer Role: The BLE device has only one receiver and receives the
data sent by Advertisement packets from the Broadcaster.
3. Peripheral Role: The BLE device has one transmitter and one receiver
and accepts a connection request from another BLE device. The peripheral
role is equivalent to the salve role in a piconet.
4. Central Role: The BLE device has both a transmitter and a receiver
and can establish a connection with the peripheral. Additionally, It sup-
ports multiple connections to many slaves simultaneously. The central role
corresponds to the master role in a piconet.
2.6.2
GAP Characteristics
The GAP deﬁnes a list of characteristics that provide further information about
the device.
1. Device Name characteristic: It contains 0-240 bytes representing the
name of the BLE device.
2. Appearance Characteristic: It is used by another BLE device to asso-
ciate an icon with the BLE device.
3. Peripheral Privacy Flag Characteristic: It helps to ﬁnd out whether
privacy is enabled for the peer device or not.
4. Reconnection Address Characteristic: It stores the address of the
device to connect to next time.
5. Peripheral Preferred Connection Parameters Characteristic (PCCP)
It contains the connection parameters preferred by the BLE device, such
as slave latency, minimum and maximum connection interval.
2.6.3
Operational Modes and Procedures:
GAP deﬁnes the mode that the BLE device adopts and the procedure that
implements the mode. There are four basic modes:
1. Broadcast Mode: The broadcaster sends data to the observer. Data is
sent in a one-way direction from the advertiser to the scanner.
==PAGE:26==
20
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
GAP Role
LL State
LL Role
Broadcaster
Advertising
Advertiser
Observer
Scanning
Scanner
Peripheral
Advertising
Advertiser
Peripheral
Connection
Slave
Central
Scanning
Scanner
Central
Initiating
Initiator
Central
Connection
Master
Table 2.3: GAP Role and Link Layer Role and State
2. Discovery Mode: The BLE device can be in non-detectable mode, lim-
ited detectable mode, and general detectable mode.
3. Connection Mode: A BLE device can be in non-connectable mode,
direct connectable mode, and indirect connectable mode.
4. Bonding Mode: A BLE device could be in bond-able mode or non-bond-
able mode.
Table 2.3 shows the relationship between the GAP device role and the corre-
sponding LL states and roles.
2.6.4
Security:
The BLE device in the server role provides data at the ATT layer. The GAP
deﬁnes the level of access to the attributes and whether access to those attributes
requires encryption or authentication. If the established connection between two
BLE devices does not meet the security requirements for accessing the attribute,
SMP can increase the security level for the connection. The BLE speciﬁcation
deﬁnes two security modes.
1. The LE Security Mode 1: Authenticated Encryption.
There are
four levels of security:
(a) Level 1: No security.
(b) Level 2: Encryption only.
(c) Level 3: Authenticated with Encryption.
(d) Level 4: Authenticated LE Secure Connection .
==PAGE:27==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
21
2. The LE Security Mode 2: Data Integrity Only It is used to sign
data and has two levels of security:
(a) Level 1: Unauthenticated pairing with data signing.
(b) Level 2: Authenticated pairing with data signing.
2.7
Security Manager (SM)
The SM speciﬁes a method of pairing depending on the desired security prop-
erties of the connection. Pairing occurs after a connection is established via LL
protocol between two BLE devices. The SM mediates between the L2CAP layer
and the GAP layer in the BLE stack. It enforces the security requirements for
an attribute deﬁned by the GAP by establishing a secure or authenticated chan-
nel or both. It supports privacy by hiding the actual device address of the BLE
device. It also sets the entropy of shared keys between BLE devices, depending
on the memory and processing power of the BLE device.
The main diﬀerence in the security architecture between Bluetooth Classic,
Bluetooth Smart Ready, and Bluetooth Smart is that the pairing procedures in
Bluetooth Classic are handled by the Link Manager Protocol (LMP) within the
Bluetooth Controller. In contrast, the pairing procedures in Bluetooth Smart
and Smart Ready are handled by the SMP within the host. This change in design
provides the ﬂexibility to change the key generation and distribution methods
in the host layer without making changes in the controller. The GAP passes the
authentication and encryption requirement to SM, which decides which keys to
generate and distribute to the BLE peer device.
The keys with their security properties are stored in a security database in each
BLE device and later used as follows:
1. Encrypt the connection with Long Term Key (LTK).
2. Verify the signature with Connection Signature Resolving Key (CSRK).
3. Generate a new random address for the BLE device with Identity Resolv-
ing Key (IRK).
4. Resolve the other real BLE device addresses from the random addresses
using the stored IRK in the security database.
The pairing process has three phases, as shown in Figure 2.14:
==PAGE:28==
22
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
1. Phase 1: Pairing feature exchange: The exchanged features deﬁne
the pairing mode and pairing method.
2. Phase 2 Pairing: Depending on the selected pairing mode and pairing
method, the key is generated and used to encrypt the link in phase 3.
3. Phase 3 Key Distribution (optional): The BLE device distributes
the keys by encrypting them with the key generated in phase 2.
Figure 2.14: BLE Pairing Process
Phase 1 and 3 are the same for the Legacy Pairing and Secure Connection
Pairing modes, while phase 2 has diﬀerent steps.
2.7.1
Phase 1: Pairing Feature Exchange
The BLE devices in Phase 1 exchange their capabilities [2.16] through the pairing
request and pairing response, which are used to determine the pairing method
and mode used in Phase 2. This phase can be started by either a master or a
slave. The security request is sent only when the slave starts the protocol. Figure
2.15 shows the format of both the pairing request and the pairing response.
Figure 13, 12, and 14 show the captured packets between two Android phone
devices Samsung Note 4, which uses BLE 4.1, and Huawei MediaPad T4 10,
which uses BLE 4.2.
The packet extracted from the HCI log and read into
Wireshark.
.
The pairing request and pairing response exchanged by the master and slave
contain the following capabilities features:
1. IO capabilities: these can be as follows: Display Only, Keypad Only,
Keyboard Display, Display Yes No, No Input No Output.
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
23
Figure 2.15: Pairing Request/Paring Response
Figure 2.16: BLE Security Manager Protocol Phase 1
2. Out-Of-Band (OOB) data ﬂag: when set to 1, the device supports OOB
and has a secure channel to exchange keys.
3. AuthReq Flag: It has;
(a) Bonding Flag: When set to 1, the BLE device requests to bond with
another BLE device.
(b) MITM ﬂag: When set to 1, the BLE device will ask for MITM pro-
tection.
(c) Secure Connection (SC) ﬂag: When set to 1, the BLE device supports
a secure connection pairing mode.
(d) keypress ﬂag: It is a new ﬂag introduced in BLE 4.2.
4. Maximum Entropy of key: Some BLE devices have a limited resource in
terms of memory and processing power and choose a key with low entropy.
5. Initiator key distribution: the set of keys that the initiator will distribute
in phase 3 and the required keys needed by the responder.
6. Responder key distribution: the set of keys that the responder will dis-
tribute in phase 3 and the required keys needed by the initiator.
==PAGE:30==
24
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
2.7.2
Phase 2: Pairing
The steps of phase 2 diﬀer between legacy pairing and secure connection pairing
mode.
It ends with the generation of a short-term key (STK) in LE legacy
pairing and the LTK in LE secure connection. In the key distribution phase,
either STK or the LTK is used to encrypt the connection.
2.7.2.1
Pairing Modes: Legacy Pairing and Secure Connection
The secure connection ﬂags that were part of the exchanged pairing request
and pairing response from phase 1, as shown in Figure 2.15, determine whether
secure connection or legacy pairing is used. Legacy Pairing is used in an old
version of BLE such as BLE 4.0 and 4.1 devices, while Secure Connection
is supported only in BLE 4.2 and 5.x. The Secure Connection mode enhances
the security of pairing setup by using a Elliptic Curve Cryptography and Diﬃe-
Hellman protocol to exchange public keys. Therefore, security is enhanced by
preventing passive eavesdropping attacks that legacy pairing initially suﬀers
from, where the attacker could sniﬀthe pairing packets and brute force the TK.
2.7.2.2
Association Models
The association models refer to pairing methods that depend on the pairing
capabilities exchanged between the two BLE devices. Figure 2.17 shows that
the chosen pairing method depends on the following capabilities of the two BLE
devices exchanged within the pairing request and pairing response in phase 1.
1. IO capabilities ﬂag.
2. OOB ﬂag.
3. SC ﬂag.
1. It begins by checking the SC ﬂag, and if it is set, the device chooses secure
connection pairing. Otherwise, legacy pairing is selected.
2. The second check is for the OOB ﬂag. If legacy pairing is selected and the
OOB ﬂag is set in the pairing request and pairing response, the OOB is
selected, while for secure connection, either the pairing request or pairing
response must set the OOB ﬂag so that the OOB is selected.
3. The third check is for the MITM ﬂag. The capabilities of IO determine
the pairing method if it is set in pairing requests and pairing responses.
Otherwise, Just Works is the default pairing method.
==PAGE:31==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
25
Figure 2.17: Pairing Method Depending on Devices Capabilities
Figure 2.18: Selected Pairing Method According to IO Capabilities
4. The fourth check is related to the IO capabilities. If at least one device
does not support the IO capabilities, the unauthenticated Just Works will
==PAGE:32==
26
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
be the default pairing method. Figure 2.18 shows how the pairing method
depends on the IO capabilities of both BLE devices.
SM provides four types of Association Models:
2.7.2.3
OOB
Both BLE devices rely on external secure communication channels such as Near
Field Communication (NFC) to transmit the key. The security of this method
depends on the security of the external channel, however, it is not widely used.
The main diﬀerence between legacy pairing and secure connection pairing modes
is that both devices in legacy pairing mode must support OOB. In contrast, it
is suﬃcient for one of the devices to support OOB in secure connection pairing
mode.
2.7.2.4
Passkey Entry
It is used when one device has a keyboard and another device has a display. It
shows a six-digit number for the user on the device that has a display, and an-
other user should read it and type it into the device that supports the keyboard.
The user interacts with the system as a third party to provide authentication.
However, it is still vulnerable to brute force attacks in BLE 4.0 and BLE 4.1
as the key has limited space between 000000 and 999999. If the attacker could
listen to the channel at the time of pairing establishment, he could brute force
the limited keyspace and extract the TK, while Passkey is secure in LE SC.
2.7.2.5
Numeric Compression
It is only supported in secure connection pairing mode. Figures 2.17 and 2.18
show that when OOB ﬂag is not set and secure connection and MITM ﬂags is
set for both devices, the IO capabilities deﬁnes the pairing method. Suppose
both BLE devices have DisplayYesNo or KeyboardDisplay. In that case, both
BLE devices show a number on the screens of both devices, and the users verify
if the two numbers are identical by pressing in yes or no buttons.
2.7.2.6
Just Works
The simplest and the most popular pairing method but the least secure one.
It does not protect against passive eavesdropping and MITM in legacy pairing
mode, whereas it protects against passive eavesdropping in secure connection
mode because it uses ECDH. Just Works is used in the following scenarios:
1. OOB and MITM are disabled.
==PAGE:33==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
27
2. OOB is disabled, and MITM is enabled, and one device does not support
IO capabilities.
2.7.2.7
LE Legacy Pairing Mode
The BLE devices use a TK to generate an STK, which is used to encrypt the
link in phase 3. For example, in the three types of association models, TK can
be set as the following.
1. Just Works: TK is set to 0.
2. OOB: TK is shared using a secure external channel.
3. Passkey Entry: the TK is generated and displayed on the screen of one
device, and the user has to read and type it in the other device that
supports the keyboard.
The LE Legacy Pairing pairing mode uses a bit commitment protocol as shown
in Figure 2.19 to conﬁrm that both devices have the same TK as:
1. The Central device uses the TK that entered by the user and generated a
random number Mrand and calculate Mconﬁrm as follows
Mconfirm = c1(TK, Mrand, PairingInfo, DeviceInfo)
.
2. The Peripheral device uses the TK that entered by the user and generated
a random number Srand and calculate Sconﬁrm as follows
Sconfirm = c1(TK, Srand, PairingInfo, deviceInfo)
.
3. Central device sends Mconﬁrm to Peripheral device.
4. The Peripheral device sends Sconﬁrm to Central device.
5. Central sent Mrand to Peripheral device.
6. The Peripheral check the correctness of Mconﬁrm using Mrand.
7. The Peripheral sends Srand to Central device.
8. The Central check the correctness of Sconﬁrm using Srand.
==PAGE:34==
28
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
9. If both Mconﬁrm and Sconﬁrm are correct, both devices will generate the
short term key (STK) using the equation
STK = AES128(TK, Srand∥Mrand)
.
Figure 2.19: LE Legacy Pairing Mode
2.7.2.8
LE Secure Connections Pairing Mode
The BLE 4.2 introduces Numeric Compression as a new pairing method. Phase
2 has three main steps. Step 1 and 3 are the same for all pairing methods, while
step 2 is diﬀerent according to the pairing method.
==PAGE:35==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
29
2.7.2.9
Step 1 Public-Key Exchange
The LE secure connection uses an ECDH algorithm to generate a pair of the
public key and its corresponding private key, as shown in Fig. 2.20 has the
following steps:
1. Each BLE device generates a public key(PK) and private key (SK) pair.
2. The Master device sends its public key to the slave device.
The sent
Master PK is shown in Figure 15 where the traﬃc captured between two
BLE devices during the pairing process.
3. The Slave device computes the shared key DHkey from its SK and Master
device PK.
4. The Slave device sends its PK to Master device, which uses it to generate a
shared key DHkey. Figure 16 shows the public key packet that is received
from the Slave.
Figure 2.20: Public Key Exchange
2.7.2.10
Step 2 :Authentication Stage 1 Numeric Comparison or
Just Works
The bit commitment protocol used to prevent replay attacks and numeric com-
parison will be executed as follows:
1. Every Device generates a random nonce and uses it beside both device’s
public keys to compute a commitment value.
2. The Responder sends its commitment value to the Initiator. The commit-
ment captured packet as shown in Figure 17.
==PAGE:36==
30
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
3. The Initiator sends its generated random nonce (Na) to Responder. Cap-
tured packet nonce has shown in Figure 18.
4. The Responder sends the random nonce(Nb) that was used previously to
create the commitment to the Initiator. Captured packet nonce has shown
in ﬁgure 19.
5. The Initiator uses the received random nonce as key to open commitment
and veriﬁes its correctness.
6. If the commitment is correct, both devices will compute 6-digit conﬁrma-
tion values that will show in both BLE device screens. The user is to
conﬁrm whether the two conﬁrmation values matched. This step is not
performed when Just Works is used because the device does not have dis-
play and input capabilities. Figure 2.21 shows the steps of Authentication
stage 1 for Numeric Compression and Just Works
2.7.2.11
Step 2 :Authentication Stage 1 and Passkey Entry
The Passkey Entry pairing is depending on the passkey that both users enter
on their respective device or if one of the devices does not have a keyboard,
the passkey will be shown on the display of one of the devices, and another
user should enter it in another device. Since the passkey is six-digit length,
the entropy of it will be 20 bits.
The bit commitment protocol is used to
verify every bit of the passkey and prevent MITM attacks, as both sides should
commit to every bit of the passkey. The details have shown in ﬁgure 2.22 by
repeating the steps 3 through 8 k times, where k is the entropy of the passkey 20
bits. Executing bit commitment k time comparing to one time in legacy pairing
passkey makes MITM attacks against secure connection tricky.
2.7.2.12
Step 2 :Authentication Stage 1 OOB
If the OOB ﬂag is set in at least one of the pairing requests or pairing responses,
the two BLE devices will exchange the commitment and a random number r
through the OOB channel, as shown in Fig. 22.
2.7.2.13
Authentication Stage 2 and LTK and MacKey Calculation
If the authentication stage 1 is succeed, the LTK and MacKey will be computed
using the following equation
MacKey||LTK = f5(DHKey, Na, Nb, DeviceAddressA, DeviceAddressB)
==PAGE:37==
2.7 Security Manager (SM)
31
Figure 2.21: Authentication Stage 1 Justs Works or Numeric Comparison [1]
LTK used for link encryption. MacKey is used with a previously exchanged
values to calculate the conﬁrmation value as follows.
E = f6(MacKey, Na, Nb, r, IOcap, A, B)
Each party sends its conﬁrmation value to another party which veriﬁes its cor-
rectness, as shown in Fig. 2.23
2.7.3
Phase 3: Key Distribution
Both pairing request and pairing response exchanged in phase 1 will determine
which keys the master and slave will distribute. The key distribution is protected
==PAGE:38==
32
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
Legacy Pairing
Secure Connec-
tion
Encryption information (LTK)
Yes
No
BLE device identiﬁca-
tion(Encrypted Diversi-
ﬁer(EDIV),Random Number
(Rand))
Yes
No
Identity Information(IRK)
Yes
Yes
Identity Address
Yes
Yes
Signing Information(CSRK)
Yes
Yes
Table 2.4: Keys Distribution and Pairing Mode
using the STK or LTK that was distributed in phase 2. Table 2.4 shows which
keys will be distributed and saved in the corresponding device security database
according to pairing mode.
2.8
Security Requirements and Pairing Methods
The SMP attempts to choose the appropriate pairing method to implement the
security level for the link, which is deﬁned by GAP and GATT. However, the
pairing method chosen depends on the capabilities of the BLE devices. If the
SMP selects the pairing method that does not meet the security requirement
deﬁned by GAP and GATT, an error message is raised at the GATT server.
Table 2.5 shows which pairing methods and modes are needed to meet the
security requirement.
==PAGE:39==
2.8 Security Requirements and Pairing Methods
33
Pairing Method
Pairing Mode
Security Requirement
-
-
Insecure Channel
Just Works
Legacy Pairing
Unauthenticated No
MITM protection
Just Works
Secure Connection
Unauthenticated No
MITM protection
OOB
Legacy Pairing
Authenticated MITM
Protection
OOB
Secure Connection
Authenticated MITM
Protection
Passkey Entry
Legacy Pairing
Authenticated MITM
Protection
Passkey Entry
Secure Connection
Authenticated MITM
Protection
Numeric Comparison
Secure connection
LE Secure Connection
Table 2.5: Security Requirement and Pairing Methods and Modes
==PAGE:40==
34
Background:Bluetooth Low Energy Protocol Stack
Figure 2.22: BLE Secure Connection Passkey
==PAGE:41==
2.8 Security Requirements and Pairing Methods
35
Figure 2.23: LTK and MacKey Calculation Secure Connection
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3
Related Work and Security
Issues
3.1
Related Work
Many studies have focused on BLE technology, and it could classify it into six
diﬀerent categories as follows:
1. General studies.
2. Testing security framework
3. Using attack tools to attack BLE device
4. Suggested solutions that require changes in standard
5. Application layer security protocol
6. Attacks target the BLE Standards.
3.1.1
General studies
Gupta Naresh in [14] explained the architecture of Bluetooth and the BLE
protocol stack layers: SM, ATT, GATT, LL, GAP, and Physical Layer. The
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Related Work
37
authors wrote a survey [27] explaining the diﬀerence between Bluetooth Classic
and BLE. They also explained the diﬀerence between Legacy Pairing and Secure
Connection pairing modes. Furthermore, they mentioned some potential attacks
that target security and privacy in BLE devices: Man-in-the-Middle(MITM),
Denial-of-Service, and Passive Eavesdropping and Miss-Bonding.
3.1.2
Testing Security Framework
In [8], the authors analyzed the security of characteristics on BLE device acting
as a GATT Server role, focusing on the read and write Characteristics. They
developed a tool and named it Security Proﬁler. The Security Proﬁler acts as
a central device and tests the characteristics in peripheral devices by trying
to access them, starting with the lowest security level.
The authors deﬁned
six security levels: None, Low, Medium, High, Unknown, and Custom. The
authors test six BLE devices and conclude that 83% of the tested devices allow
at least one unauthenticated write, 50% of the devices enable reading their
characteristics without authentication. One out of six devices allows reading
and writing their characteristics without authentication.
In [17], the authors designed a framework that starts from the National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology(NIST) classiﬁcation of threats such as MITM,
sniﬃng, command injection, fuzzing, DoS, and spooﬁng. The framework enables
the execution of the attacks by connecting a BLE device to a Personal Com-
puter(PC) and running the framework as a web service.
In [29], the framework is designed and implemented by the authors, which scans
BLE devices and detects devices that have not implemented security and authen-
tication at the application layer by performing taint analysis to check whether
the BLE application uses Number Used Once (nonce) and keys or not. The
authors distinguished their work from another existing testing framework BLE-
Cryptracer [7], which classiﬁes an app as secure by checking whether it has a
cryptographic API(Application Programming Interface) or not. The authors
showed that 93% of the tested Android apps are not secure. They designed
and implemented an application-level protocol to provide authentication. They
introduced an additional cheap hardware chip to use the public key for ECDH.
3.1.3
Using Attack Tools to Attack BLE Device
In [19], the author introduced his new tool Ubertooth as an open source sniﬃng
tool to track the establishment of a BLE connection as well as an existing
connection. In addition to Ubertooth, he presented Crackle(software tool) as
a BLE attack tool to attack the Legacy Pairing pairing mode in BLE 4.0 and
4.1 to extract the LTK used to generate the Session Key (SK) used to encrypt
==PAGE:44==
38
Related Work and Security Issues
the channel. The author demonstrated the vulnerability in the design of the
BLE security protocol, as the STK used to encrypt the channel during key
distribution depends on many values sent in plaintext and TK which are either
000000 in the case of Just Works or in the range of 000000-999999 for the
passkey, which is easy to brute force. The author presented theoretical attacks
such as key renegotiation attack to force the BLE Master or BLE Salve device
to rebuild the LTK by crafting LL packets "LL_REJECT_IND".
In [13], the author used the GATTracker and BtleJuice tools to perform the
MITM attack between the BLE-based sports wristband and the mobile app. The
author simulated an environment to put an attacker in the middle by connecting
two Cambridge Silicon Radio (CSR) 4.0 dongles to two virtual machines running
Kali Linux. The author also demonstrated how to intercept and manipulate data
using a tool called Burp. The Burp is a proxy tool that supports WebSocket
communication and provides the ability to modify on-the-ﬂy an intercepted
request.
Futhermore, the author used the hooking feature of GATTacker to
execute code when an event is received.
In [9], the author presented a real-time hack of the BLE channel between Smart
Bulb and Mobile Phone.
He connected the BLE adapter to Linux OS and
installed Gatttool to change the value to Smart Bulb and the Hcitool to scan
for the BLE devices nearby to perform the attack.
In [24], the authors demonstrated how to hack the BLE 4.0 communication
channel between smartphone and LightBlue Bean device.
The authors also
used Ubertooth and Crackle developed by [19] to decrypt the intercepted pack-
ets.
The author shows how to perform the following attacks: a disruption
against device availability, a forgery against user authenticity, and a modiﬁca-
tion against data integrity. The author performed an attack by sniﬃng packets
between BLE devices using Ubertooth, connecting to the target device, and ei-
ther replaying an old message or sending a forged message. The attacks targeted
three commercially available BLE devices: a bike lock, a light bulb, and a door
lock.
In [11], the authors found a vulnerability in Fitbit devices(family of ﬁtness
products ) by reverse engineering an Android application from Fitbit device,
while in [25], the author sniﬀed packets and later replayed them, parsed packets,
drained the battery, and sent fake messages using the BLETestTool. The attacks
targeted the following BLE smartwristbands: bong 3 HR, MitBand 2, TW64
and mambo HR.
In [22], the authors sniﬀed many BLE devices with Ubertooth, and after many
attempts, they succeeded in sniﬃng the connection between Logitech K780 and
Mac Mini. They used Crackle [19] to crack the LTK key and decrypt all future
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Related Work
39
packets.
The authors also indicated that if the attacker could gain physical
access to the phone, he could extract the HCI log ﬁle and read it in Wireshark
to see the keys exchanged between the phone and any paired BLE device.
In [20], the authors used the Ubertooth and Crackle tools from [19] to discover
the TK. The authors explained how to use Ubertooth and which pairing packets
should be sniﬀed to learn the keys.
3.1.4
Suggested Solutions that require Changes in Stan-
dard
In [16], the authors presented a new protocol to prevent a passive attack in
legacy pairing mode in BLE 4.0 and 4.1. The protocol is used when two BLE
devices have signiﬁcantly asymmetric capabilities and a secure key needs to
be exchanged over an insecure channel. The Fully Functional Device (FFD)
advertises so-called Merkle puzzles. Each puzzle has a strong key and an identi-
ﬁer(ID) encrypted with a weak key. They used advertising channels to transmit
all Merkle packets. They pointed out that this is still a theoretical solution.
In [10], the author studied the performance and energy consumption when the
Zero-Knowledge protocol is used in constrained devices.
In [12] the authors proposed a way to increase the length of the TK to increase
the time the attacker has to spend to crack the TK. The author’s solution targets
a special method of pairing where a passkey is used, and a BLE device displays
a TK in its display, and another device enters the TK using the keypad. He sug-
gested changing the format of the pairing request and pairing response packets
by using the 2 out of 3 reserved bit to deﬁne the security level that both BLE
devices want to achieve. The BLE devices repeat the process by displaying TK
in one of the devices and entering it in another BLE device until the security
level is reached.
3.1.5
Attacks target the BLE Standard
In [28], the authors presented vulnerabilities in the Android API that allowed
an attacker to perform an attack in BLE 4.2 and 5.x, which was considered
secure against MITM. In addition, the authors discovered the following design
ﬂaws in Android Platform:
• No mechanism to specify a pairing protocol.
• No mechanism to obtain the currently negotiated pairing protocol.
==PAGE:46==
40
Related Work and Security Issues
• Incorrect handling of pairing errors.
• There is no mechanism to remove a suspicious connection and start a new
secure pairing process with another BLE-connected device.
In [23], the authors performed similar work to [28] and illustrated that BLE
devices are vulnerable to spooﬁng attacks, where the attacker pretends to be a
previously paired server device, rejects a client’s authentication requests, and
feeds it false data. In addition, they investigated two security vulnerabilities in
the speciﬁcation related to.
1. Optional Authentication.
2. The proactive and reactive authentication procedures that the client uses
when it reconnects to the GATT server.
The authors demonstrated an example of spooﬁng the BLE Qura ring connecting
to a Google Pixel phone with an Ubuntu with CSR 4.0 dongle using BlueZ as
the BLE protocol stack.
In [5], the authors explained how the key negotiation protocol is vulnerable to an
entropy downgrade attack. The attacker could exploit the fact that BLE devices
exchange the desired entropy level for the key during the pairing process. Since
the integrity of the pairing process is not protected, the attacker could play an
MTIM and downgrade the entropy of the LTK and correspondingly the SK in
the BLE to 7 bytes. They performed the attack against 38 BLE devices from
diﬀerent vendors with diﬀerent protocol versions and security modes.
In [7], the authors illustrated how an unauthorized co-located Android applica-
tion could access authenticated encrypted pairing data used by the legitimate
application on the same Android device. The malicious application could ac-
cess protected and authenticated attribute data on the GATT server without the
user noticing because the malicious application does not require asking for Blue-
tooth and location permissions since the legitimate application already requested
these permissions during the initial connection setup. The malicious application
should connect to the GATT server after the GATT client has connected, paired,
and disconnected to avoid attracting the user’s attention. Another possible at-
tack exploits the fact that the GATT server supports simultaneous connections
to multiple applications. An attacker needs to be present at the active connec-
tion, so they do not required scan for BLE devices nearby, where they could
directly query the connected devices and connect to the target GATT server
to modify attribute data and disrupt the legitimate application with false data.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Related Work
41
They designed BLECryptracer as an analysis tool to test whether the applica-
tion supports security or not.
In [18], the author extended Rayn’s work [19] and proved that "BLE MITM
security assurance is false" by attacking the authentication protocol that uses
passkey pairing mode. The author exploited the bit-ﬂawed-commitment proto-
col where the attacker could impersonate a BLE device in the responder role
and pair it with the BLE device in the initiator role. The author explained
how the attacker could exploit the vulnerability in function c1, which is used
to generate the commit value, and proposed a redesign of function c1 [2] as a
countermeasure.
3.1.6
Application Layer Security Protocol
In [15], a proof-of-concept approach is presented to provide application-level
security. The approach introduced a third party and assumed a symmetric key
shared in advance between a BLE device and a third party, which issues a token
for a legitimate user who provides a credential and obtains access to a BLE
device. Fig 3.1 shows the steps to acquire a token using BALSA.
The authors[26] proposed a new framework to provide security between the
application layer and the GATT layer by using the phone’s camera to scan the
device’s Quick Response code (QR), which is used to generate a server public
key. Since the server’s public key is sent over a secure external channel, the
client authenticates the server’s public key and prevents the MITM attack on
DH. The solution uses ECDH to generate a Shared Secret Key (SSK) between
the two parties at the application layer. The SSK is used to generate the SK.
The presented framework uses a Challenge-Response protocol to ensure that the
SK is up-to-date and protects against reply attacks.
Since the BLE channel could be established without any security or authen-
tication, we put more focus on what was done in [15] and add access control
provided by an external third party that veriﬁes the authenticity and the au-
thorization level of the user. Moving authentication from the device level to
the user level can ensure that the device is always protected from unauthorized
users.
Non-repudiation is a security goal that has not been explained in detail by the
BLE standard. Since user actions should be controlled, a third party gives the
user access and revokes it from the BLE device. Non-repudiation is critical in an
application where the BLE device performs dangerous tasks, such as controlling
another medical device. An example is a BLE application that regulates medical
devices used by doctors and medical staﬀto read heart rate pulses and change
==PAGE:48==
42
Related Work and Security Issues
patient oxygen levels. Providing an access control system plays an essential role
in ensuring safety and protecting the lives of patients.
3.2
BLE Security Issues
1. Sniﬃng Attacks: The attacker listens to the BLE communication chan-
nel. It can be at the initial pairing and the attacker obtains access to all
the information that helps to brute force the TK in BLE 4.0 and 4.1. The
TK is used to extract the STK to decrypt the information that will be
sent later. Ubertooth can be used to sniﬀthe channel and Crackle can be
used to extract the TK from the sniﬃng packets. Sniﬃng attacks violates
the conﬁdentiality of data.
2. MITM Attack: A fake device is placed in the middle between two legit-
imate BLE devices to trick them to establish a connection with it. After
connection established ,malicious device intercepts,injects,remove and for-
wards packets between the two devices. The presence of a fake device is
not known to either BLE device. MITM violates the authenticity of data.
3. Spooﬁng Attacks: An attacker device pretends to be a legitimate device.
It tricks another BLE device into connecting and collects sensitive data
from that device. Spooﬁng attacks violates the authenticity of data.
4. Denial-of-Service(DoS) Attacks The attacker makes the BLE device
in the role of the peripheral inaccessible to other BLE devices and disrupts
the services oﬀered by the peripheral. The simplest example is BLE 4.0,
where the Salve only allow one connection with the master. By main-
taining connections with the target Slave, the attacker prevents it from
advertising and deprives other devices of the ability to connect to the
Slave. DoS violates the availability of data.
5. Jamming Attacks:Jamming is a type of DoS attack. It blocks the slave’s
advertisements and makes it inaccessible.Jamming violates the availability
of data.
6. Denial of Sleep Attack The attacker aims to drain the battery by drain-
ing the power of the devices by repeatedly connecting and disconnecting
them. It violates the availability of data.
7. Identity Tracking It compromises the privacy of the user of the BLE
device when the same Media Access Control (MAC) address is used for a
long period of time. The attacker can associate the MAC with the identity
of the user. To protect user privacy, BLE SM protocol exchanges IRK
during bonding process to resolve the random private resolvable address
of the its peer device.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 BLE Security Issues
43
Figure 3.1: BALSA Token Generation
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4
Approach
4.1
System Components
Our proposed system consists of the following components:
1. Backend Server: The Backend server is used for authentication. Every
user is assigned a username and password to log in to obtain a valid session
used to transfer the authenticated Token to authenticate the user’s BLE
device later. Table 4.1 demonstrates designed resources and meaning.
2. Mobile Phone: It represents the BLE device which has IO capabilities.
The user uses the Mobile phone to log in, scan for BLE devices nearby,
and connect to the BLE devices that the user has permission to connect.
3. Tablet: It simulates a BLE device in GATT server Role that does not
have IO capabilities.
Figure 4.1 shows an abstract view of the components of the system and the
interfaces between them. The details of the provided and the required interface
are shown in Fig. 4.2.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 System Components
45
Resource Name
Endpoint
Meaning
/User
GET
return a list of users
/User
POST
add a new user
/User
DELETE
delete a user
/Device
POST
add BLE device
/DeviceID
POST
change the device ID of the BLE de-
vice in both the GATT server and
Backend server
/authentication
POST
check the credential of existing user
/authorization
POST
authorize the user to access to the
BLE device
/key
POST
change the key between the Backend
server and the GATT server
/token
GET
The user asks for a token to obtain
access to GATT server
Table 4.1: Backend API
Figure 4.1: System Components
==PAGE:52==
46
Approach
Figure 4.2: Detailed Components Diagram
4.2
Assumptions
• The communication channel between BLE devices can be one of the fol-
lowing two states:
– Channel is unauthenticated: It is a particular case where just work is
used, and the initiator has a keyboard and display, and the responder
does not have any IO. Our proposed approach can not guarantee any
security goals if the initiator does not have IO capabilities because
the user needs to authenticate at Backend server in order to establish
a session with GATT server. We highlighted the case in Fig. 2.18.
– Channel is unauthenticated and unencrypted. It corresponds to se-
curity mode 1 level 1, and "no security" has been detected. Example:
Two Android BLE devices are trying to pair, and the user ignores
the user’s interaction to conﬁrm authentication. As a result, Android
will fall and send the packet in cleartext.
• The BLE device is simulated by a tablet running a GATT server program
that provides the same sensitive data stored in characteristics that are
expected from a BLE device in the GATT server role to oﬀer.
• The BLE device in the server role is expected to control other devices
such as medical devices. For example, medical devices are controlled by
changing the value of the sensitive characteristic.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Assumptions
47
Name
UUID
Access level
Attribute Per-
missions
Security Ser-
vice
fb340001-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
Symmetric
key
fb340002-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
deviceID
fb340009-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
read, write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
clientNonce
fb340003-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
read, write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
GattSessionRest
ServerNonce
fb340008-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
read, write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
Data
fb340010-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
read, write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
MAC
fb340005-8000-0080-0010-
00000d180000
read, write
no encryption
or authentica-
tion
Table 4.2: Security Service
• The proposed security service has a set of characteristics used to estab-
lish an encrypted and authenticated channel. Table 4.2 shows a list of
characteristics, corresponding UUID, the access level, and permissions.
• The key is stored in a secure ﬁle within the tablet and should be stored
in the BLE device’s non-volatile memory.
• The key and deviceID in the BLE device have a default value of a series
of zeros, which are changed after the system administrator sets up the
system.
• The attacker is not present when the administrator sets up the system,
which is a relatively reasonable assumption.
• Advanced Encryption Standard(AES) as the most prominent modern sym-
metric encryption system is used for data encryption and MAC is used to
provide data authentication.
==PAGE:54==
48
Approach
• The Electronic codebook (ECB) is the simplest mode of Block cipher is
used.
• The connection between the Mobile Phone and the REST server is pro-
tected by the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.
• The REST server is protected by setting a ﬁrewall to allow only Hypertext
Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) and Secure Shell Protocol(SSH) traﬃc.
Figure 4.3 shows the inbound rules of the ﬁrewall.
Figure 4.3: Firewall Inbound Rules
4.3
System Conﬁguration
The system administrator has a set of responsibilities, as shown in Fig.
4.4 as:
– Adding a BLE device: The system administrator is responsible
for setting up the BLE device at the site.
– Authorize users to access a BLE device: The users will have
access to the BLE device if the system administrator grants them
access.
– Conﬁgure the BLE device once it is placed at the site The
administrator sets the unique ID for every BLE device in server role
and stores a symmetric key in the BLE device and the REST server.
We added two functionalities to our app that allows the system ad-
ministrator to change the default values of deviceID and key at the
system setup time. Fig. 4.5 and Fig. 4.6 demonstrate the steps to
change the BLE device parameters. Fig. 6 shows the buttons change
key and change deviveID.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 System Conﬁguration
49
Figure 4.4: Administrator Use Case
Figure 4.5: Change DeviceID Process
Figure 4.6: Change key Process
==PAGE:56==
50
Approach
4.4
Device and User Authentication
The user of the system performs three main functions, as shown in the Figure.
4.7.
Figure 4.7: User Use Case
4.4.1
User Sign up
The user must register with Backend and set a username and password that will
be used later for login and session Establishment with Backend server.
4.4.2
Session Establishment with Backend Server
The session Establishment process is always triggered by the user who enters
his username and password through the app installed on his GATT client device
and uses the TLS protocol, which provides a secure channel to transmit user
data securely. Upon successful login, the Backend server establishes a session
that allows the user to acquire a token and establish a session with GATT server,
as shown in Fig. 4.8.
4.4.3
Session Establishment with GATT Server
The Backend server component provides a token to an authorized user that
previously opened a legitimate session with the Backend server. Next, another
session is established between the GATT client and the GATT server using the
token that the Backend server provides to the GATT client. Finally, the token
is used to authorize the user’s device, the GATT client, to access data at the
GATT server. The following steps achieve token generation:
• The BLE connection communication is established between the GATT
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Device and User Authentication
51
Figure 4.8: User Authentication Process
client and the GATT server by the user, who scans for nearby BLE device
and connects to the target device.
• The GATT client generates its nonce (NC) and writes it to the GATT
server.
• The GATT server generates its nonce (NS), encrypts the client’s nonce,
and encrypts its nonce with the shared key between the GATT server and
==PAGE:58==
52
Approach
the Backend server.
• The GATT client reads both encrypted nonces and deviceID from the
GATT server.
• The GATT client forwards the encrypted nonces,deviceID, and username
to the Backend server, which in turn checks the validity of the user session,
decrypts nonces, generates a session key(SK), and sends them back to the
GATT client.
• The Backend server saves a log that binds between the username,deviceID,
token, and time.
• The GATT client veriﬁes the NC by comparing it with the decrypted
nonce at the Backend server and authenticate the GATT server.
• The GATT client sends the MAC, the encrypted GATT server nonce with
the encrypted session key to the GATT server.
• The GATT server veriﬁes the MAC.
• If the MAC veriﬁcation has succeeded, the GATT server decrypts the SK,
veriﬁes the NS, and authenticates the GATT client.
• Both GATT client and GATT server have the same SK.
Fig. 4.8 shows the steps of session establishment with the GATT server.
4.4.4
Data Encryption and Authentication
After session establishment between the GATT client and the GATT server,
the device’s user uses the SK to generate another Message Authentication Code
(MAC) key. The SK and MAC are used to provide encryption and authenticity
by following the approach Encrypt-Then-MAC[6].
• The user requests to change the value of a sensitive Characteristic in the
GATT server.
• The GATT client inspects the channel security level and decides to either
Encrypt-Then-MAC if no security is provided or MAC if SMP provides
encryption.
• The GATT client encrypts the value with the SK obtained from the Back-
end server.
• The GATT client computes a MAC for the encrypted value.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Device and User Authentication
53
• The GATT client writes the encrypted value with MAC at the GATT
server.
• The GATT server veriﬁes the MAC to be sure about the authenticity of
the packet.
• If the MAC check has succeeded, the value will be decrypted, and the new
characteristic value will be used to control another device.
. This is shown in the Figure 4.9
Figure 4.9: Data Encryption and Authentication
==PAGE:60==
54
Approach
Execution Time
Unit
GATT Client Device
1
578
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
2
523
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
3
436
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
4
663
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
5
548
millisecond
Samsung A5
6
437
millisecond
Samsung A5
7
719
millisecond
Samsung A5
8
467
millisecond
Samsung A5
Average
546.375
millisecond
Table 4.3: Execution Time to Establish Session using Our Protocol
4.5
Evaluation and Comparison
We tested our protocol in a Huawei MediaPad T3 10 WiﬁTablet, simulating a
BLE device in a GATT Server Role, and two diﬀerent mobile devices: Samsung
A5(2017) SM -A520F running Android 8.0.0 and Samsung Galaxy Note 4 run-
ning Android 6.0.1 Marshmallow. We found that establishing a session between
the GATT client and the GATT server takes 546.375 ms on average, including
the time it takes for the GATT client to obtain the token from the backend.
Testing the same devices, but using BALSA, shows that the BALSA protocol
takes 560.875 ms; however, the author mentions in his paper that the average
time to establish a session is 750 ms. We could argue that this is because he
used a constrained BLE device, which consumes more time to perform the en-
cryption and decryption operations than the tablet, which can perform these
operations faster because it has more memory and processing resources than
a constrained BLE device. Table 4.3 presents the time required to establish a
session using our approach, and 4.4 presents the corresponding time required for
each device to establish a session using the BALSA protocol. It is relatively the
same time as for both protocols. The main diﬀerence between our approach and
BALSA is where the nonces are generated and encrypted. In our approach, the
nonces are generated and encrypted early, while in BALSA -protocol, a nonce
is generated early but encrypted later at the backend server. The comparison
between our proposed protocol and SMP is crucial and has been presented in
table 4.5 considering security goals and other factors.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Our Approach Limitations
55
Execution Time
Unit
GATT Client Device
1
671
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
2
546
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
3
720
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
4
524
millisecond
Samsung Galaxy Note 4
5
449
millisecond
Samsung A5
6
795
millisecond
Samsung A5
7
890
millisecond
Samsung A5
8
317
millisecond
Samsung A5
Average
560.875
millisecond
Table 4.4: Execution Time to Establish Session using BALSA [15]
4.6
Our Approach Limitations
• Adding an extra key management cost as the administrator must conﬁgure
every device when it sets at the ﬁeld.
• Adding an extra user-device management cost as every user must be au-
thorized to access the BLE device.
• Saving the Symmetric key inside the BLE device may make it a potential
target to the attacker who can compromise the system by just extracting
the symmetric key from the compromised device.
==PAGE:62==
56
Approach
Our Approach
Security Manager Pro-
tocol
Conﬁdentiality
Always achieved
Depend on pairing
method and mode
Authenticity
Always achieved
Depend on pairing
method and mode
Non-repudiation
It can retain a log of
user and its assigned
token
Not Discussed
External Server
required
not required
External secure chan-
nel
not required
required if OOB is
used
User interaction
Always
depend on pairing
method
Administrator interac-
tion
during device setup
and user authorization
Never
BLE Layer
Application Layer
Link Layer
Bonding
SK must be generated
every time between
GATT client and
GATT server, which
stores a shared key
with Backend server
Bonding is possible
between GATT client
and GATT server
Table 4.5: Comparison Between our Proposed Protocol and SMP
==PAGE:63==
4.7 Verﬁcation Using Open-Source Fixed-Point Model-Checker (OFMC) 57
4.7
Verﬁcation Using Open-Source Fixed-Point
Model-Checker (OFMC)
The OFMC is an automated protocol veriﬁcation tool developed by Sebastian[30]
and used in our project to verify the correctness of the designed protocol. Our
approach is built using two main protocols:
• Challenge-Response Protocol works as follows:
1. One party generates a random nonce and sends it to another party.
2. Another party encrypts it and sends it back to the ﬁrst party.
3. The sending party veriﬁes the authenticity of the other party after
decryption.
• TLS Protocol is used to provide a secure channel to transfer the password
that the user provides to the Backend server and the token that returns
to the user’s device.
4.7.1
Veriﬁcation Steps
Four main steps to describe the protocol in OFMC as follows:
4.7.1.1
Type Deﬁnition
The ﬁrst step of using OFMC is to deﬁne the types of elements that will be used
like Agents, Number, Function, and Symmetric Key.
• Three agents are involved in the communication:GATT Client(C),GATT
Server(S) and Backend Server(b). They are deﬁned by using the key-
word Agent followed by the names as follows: Agent C,S,b.
• Both TLS and Challenge-Response protocols are using numbers during
the protocol execution. The numbers are deﬁned by using the keyword
Number followed by a list of names representing the numbers as follows:
Number SNONCE,X,Y,g,CNONCE;
The challenge-response protocol uses CNONCE and SNONCE to provide
authentication for both parties. TLS uses g, X, Y to generate a Diﬀe-
Hellman (DH) key.
• The user-deﬁned functions that will be used by communication parties
must be deﬁned before usage. The function name pw is used to represent
the shared password between the GATT client and Backend server and sk
==PAGE:64==
58
Approach
is used to represent the shared key between the GATT server and Backend
server. The previous two functions are deﬁned as follows:
Function sk,pw
• The fresh session key that are used to encrypt and authenticate the session
is deﬁned by using the keyword Symmetric_key followed by the key
name as follows:
Symmetric_key KS;
4.7.1.2
Entities Deﬁnition
The second step of using OFMC is to deﬁne the entities involved in message com-
munication which are GATT Client,GATT Server and Backend Server.
Besides what every entity knows about other entities.
We have three main
entities as the following:
• GATT Client(C): It knows the Backend server’s public key (pk(b)),
its public key (pk(C)), and corresponding private key (inv(pk(C))); the
password is shared between the GATT client and Backend Server(pw(C,b)).
C: C,S,b,pw(C,b),pk(C),inv(pk(C)),pk(b),g;
• GATT Server(S): It knows the symmetric key that is shared with the
Backend Server.
S: C,S,b,sk(S,b);
• Backend Server(b): It knows the password of the GATT Client user
pw(C,b), the symmetric key with GATT Server sk(S,b), the public key
of the GATT Client pk(C), its public key pk(b)), and corresponding
private key inv(pk(b)).
b: C,S,b,pw(C,b),sk(S,b),pk(b),inv(pk(b)),pk(C),g
4.7.1.3
Message Exchange
The actual message exchange to establish a session between GATT Client and
GATT server is as follows
1. The GATT Client generates its nonce CNONCE and sends it To GATT
Server. C->S:C,S,CNONCE
2. The GATT Server will generate its nonce CNONCE and encrypts it beside
GATT Client Nonce using the symmetric key that is shared in advance
with Backend Server.
S->C: {|C,S,SNONCE,CNONCE|}sk(S,b))
==PAGE:65==
4.7 Verﬁcation Using Open-Source Fixed-Point Model-Checker (OFMC) 59
3. The GATT Client and Backend Server will establish a TLS session and
generate a DH key to protect the message exchanged later.
C->b : {C ,b , exp (g , X )} inv( pk ( C ))
b->C : {C ,b , exp (g , Y )} inv( pk ( b ))
4. The GATT Client user will authenticate with Backend and ask for a token
that will be used to authenticate its device with the GATT server.
C->b : {|pw(C,b), C ,S , {|C,S,SNONCE,CNONCE|}sk(S,b) |}
exp ( exp (g , X ) , Y )
b->C : {| KS,C,S,CNONCE,SNONCE,{| KS,C,S,SNONCE |}sk(S,b)
|} exp ( exp (g , X ) , Y )
5. The encrypted SK and GATT Server Nonce will be included in the token
that will be sent to the GATT server, which veriﬁes the correctness of its
NONCE and decrypts the SK.
C->S: {| KS,C,S,SNONCE |}sk(S,b)
4.7.1.4
Security Goals Deﬁnition
The last step is to deﬁne the security goals that the protocol wants to achieve
as follows:
• The BLE GATT client wants to be sure about the identity of the BLE
GATT server.
C authenticates S on CNONCE
• The BLE GATT server wants to be conﬁdent about the identity of the
BLE GATT client.
S authenticates C on SNONCE
• SK must be transmitted securely through the network.
KS Secret between C,S,b
Figure 9 shows the details of the veriﬁcation code for our approach. We have
also used OFMC to verify other researchers’ suggestions to use application-layer
security. We have conﬁrmed that both BALSA and QR do not show any attack.
The OFMC code that is used to verify the security of the protocol [26] that uses
QR code as a public key of DH is shown in Fig.10. To simulate transferring QR
code through a secure channel, we assume that the scanning process is protected
using the OOB channel represented by the shared key in OFMC. The OFMC
code that is used to verify the security of the protocol [15] is shown in ﬁgure 11.
==PAGE:66==
60
Approach
4.8
Sniﬃng Attacks Before and After Using the
System
Instead of using sniﬃng tools like Ubertooth, Adafruit, and nRF-Sniﬀer-for-
Bluetooth- LE, the Android phone has an HCI snoop log that can be used
through the developer options, as explained in detail in 5.2
The BLE packets should be sniﬀed before and after using the system to show
that our approach prevents the sniﬃng attack; this requires two experiments.
The ﬁrst experiment is to sniﬀthe channel without using the proposed system,
write the characteristic value, extract the log, and reading it in Wireshark. Fig.
4.10 shows that the channel is not encrypted as the data value "changeo2level" is
read. The second experiment is to sniﬀthe channel after applying our protocol,
write the characteristic value, extract the log, and read it in Wireshark. Fig.
4.11 shows that the channel is encrypted and authenticated after applying the
proposed system.
Figure 4.10: Data Sniﬀed Without using the Proposed System
==PAGE:67==
4.8 Sniﬃng Attacks Before and After Using the System
61
Figure 4.11: Data Sniﬀed using the Proposed System
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and Future
Work
5.1
Conclusion
The primary goal of this thesis is to introduce a security protocol that provides
encryption and authentication at the application layer as an alternative or sup-
port to the existing SMP, which can use a user as an external factor to verify
the authenticity of the communication. Our proposed protocol introduces a new
entity, the backend server, to provide authentication, encryption and authoriza-
tion. The backend server should be managed by a system administrator who
sets up the system at the site before using it. Although adding a new entity,
user and device manager complicates the system and causes additional work, it
guarantees that only legitimate users access the BLE device. We believe this is
critical for applications that use the BLE device to control other devices, such
as medical devices.
We review the work that has been done to improve the security of the BLE
communication channel. The proposed security improvement is either to de-
velop a protocol that provides protection at the application layer or to modify
the BLE standard. In addition, other researchers have developed a Security
Testing Framework that assesses the security of the system using BLE devices
and identiﬁes potential vulnerabilities and threats.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Future Work
63
5.2
Future Work
• We have succeeded in implementing the proposed security protocol. How-
ever, we simulate the BLE device using a tablet running Android. Using
a BLE device, such as a Nrf from Nordic Semiconductor, will give more
realistic results.
• Implement the protocol in the iPhone platform and measure performance
by using diﬀerent Phone Models.
• Since the LE functionality is added to save power in a Bluetooth device
that does not need to be constantly connected, adding a new protocol may
increase power consumption, which is contrary to the goal of inventing this
technology. Therefore, measuring the additional power consumption due
to the use of our new protocol and comparing it with the SM protocol is
an important task that challenges our work to be adapted.
• measuring the performance of the protocol by using many phone models
in Android Platform.
• Using Ubertooth and nRF sniﬀer-for-Bluetooth- LE to sniﬀthe BLE
packet instead of depending on the HCI log.
• Using Zero-Knowledge Protocol (ZNP) can improve the security as it
stores a public key in the BLE device instead of the symmetric key in
both BLE devices. Storing a public key instead of a symmetric key im-
proves security if the BLE device is compromised by an attacker, who gains
nothing by knowing the public key compared to knowing the symmetric
key. Both solutions cause additional work for the administrator since the
public key should be stored in the BLE device. ZNP can provide mutual
authentication by assigning a public key to both devices. The prover must
always prove that it has a secret, so the veriﬁer can verify this without
knowing the secret.
• Investigate the potential threats posed by storing the key in the BLE
device’s non-volatile memory and ﬁnd a way to protect it to reduce the
damage to the system if the device is compromised.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1] Bluetooth
core
specﬁciation
4.2.
https://www.bluetooth.com/
specifications/specs/core-specification/.
[2] Bluetooth special interest group.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Bluetooth_Special_Interest_Group.
[3] A personalized healthcare monitoring system for diabetic patients by utiliz-
ing ble-based sensors and real-time data processing. http://europepmc.
org/backend/ptpmcrender.fcgi?accid=PMC6068508&blobtype=pdf.
[4] Survey
on
smart
health
management
using
ble
and
ble
bea-
cons.
https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stamp/
stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9096227.
[5] D. Antonioli, N. O. Tippenhauer, and K. Rasmussen.
Key negotiation
downgrade attacks on bluetooth and bluetooth low energy.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/342695013_Key_Negotiation_
Downgrade_Attacks_on_Bluetooth_and_Bluetooth_Low_Energy, 2020.
[6] M. Bellare and C. Namprempre.
Authenticated encryption:
Relations
among notions and analysis of the generic composition paradigm. https:
//link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s00145-008-9026-x.pdf,
July 14 2007.
[7] J. Blasco and P. Sivakumaran. Attacks against ble devices by co-located
mobile applications.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
327010335_Attacks_Against_BLE_Devices_by_Co-located_Mobile_
Applications, 2018.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[8] J. Blasco and P. Sivakumaran.
A low energy proﬁle: Analysing char-
acteristic security on ble peripherals.
https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/323789695_A_Low_Energy_Profile_Analysing_
Characteristic_Security_on_BLE_Peripherals, 2018.
[9] A. Chandan and V. Khairnar. An active man-in-the-middle attack on blue-
tooth smart devices. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8597189,
July 2018.
[10] I. Chatzigiannakis,
A. Pyrgelis,
P. Spirakis,
and Y. C. Stamatiou.
Elliptic
curve
based
zero
knowledge
proofs
and
their
applicability
on
resource
constrained
devices.
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/51915766_Elliptic_Curve_Based_Zero_Knowledge_
Proofs_and_Their_Applicability_onResource_Constrained_Devices,
2011.
[11] B. Cyr, W. Horn, D. Miao, and M. A. Specter. Security analysis of wearable
ﬁtness devices ( ﬁtbit ). https://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.857/2014/
files/17-cyrbritt-webbhorn-specter-dmiao-hacking-fitbit.pdf,
2014.
[12] G.
Kwon,
J.
Kim,
J.
Noh,
and
S.
Cho.
Bluetooth
low
en-
ergy
security
vulnerability
and
improvement
method.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/312326687_Bluetooth_low_
energy_security_vulnerability_and_improvement_method, 2016.
[13] T. Melamed.
An active man-in-the-middle attack on bluetooth smart
devices. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322999675_An_
active_man-in-the-middle_attack_on_bluetooth_smart_devices,
2018.
[14] G.
Naresh.
Inside
bluetooth
low
energy
(2nd
edition).
https://app-knovel-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/web/toc.v/cid:
kpIBLEE009/viewerType:toc//root_slug:inside-bluetooth-low,
2016.
[15] D. A. Ortiz-Yepes. Balsa: Bluetooth low energy application layer security
add-on.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304409135_
BALSA_Bluetooth_Low_Energy_Application_Layer_Security_Add-on,
2015.
[16] H. Perrey, O. Ugus, and D. Westhoﬀ.
Security enhancement for blue-
tooth low energy with merkle puzzle.
https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/259688381_WiSec’_2011_Poster_Security_
Enhancement_for_Bluetooth_Low_Energy_with_Merkle’s_Puzzle.
==PAGE:72==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[17] A. Ray, V. Raj, M. Oriol, A. Monotand, and S. Obermeier. Bluetooth low
energy devices security testing framework.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8367065.
[18] T.
Rosa.
Bypassing
passkey
authentication
in
bluetooth
low
energy.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
Bypassing-Passkey-Authentication-in-Bluetooth-Low-Rosa/
5e8ab58f441f31cfd9bc9410e14a5283f925a0ae.
[19] M.
Ryan.
Bluetooth:
With
low
energy
comes
low
security.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261850049_Bluetooth_
With_low_energy_comes_low_security, 2014.
[20] A. Tekeoglu and S. Sevier.
Analyzing the security of bluetooth
low energy. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333228988_
Analyzing_the_Security_of_Bluetooth_Low_Energy, 2019.
[21] K. Townsend,
C. Cufí,
and R. Davidson.
Getting started with
bluetooth
low
energy.
https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/
getting-started-with/9781491900550/ch01.html.
[22] T. Willingham, C. Henderson, B. Kiel, M. Haque, and T. Atkison. Test-
ing vulnerabilities in bluetooth low energy. https://dl-acm-org.proxy.
findit.dtu.dk/doi/pdf/10.1145/3190645.3190693, 2019.
[23] J. Wu, Y. Nan, V. Kumar, and D. J. Tian. Blesa: Spooﬁng attacks against
reconnections in bluetooth low energy. https://friends.cs.purdue.edu/
pubs/WOOT20.pdf, 2020 August.
[24] W. Zegeye, R. A. Dean, F. Moazzami, and Y. Astatke.
Exploiting
bluetooth low energy pairing vulnerability in telemedicine.
https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/311611851_Exploiting_
Bluetooth_Low_Energy_Pairing_Vulnerability_in_Telemedicine,
August 2015.
[25] Q. Zhang and Z. Liang. Security analysis of bluetooth low energy based
smart wristbands.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8210548,
April 2017.
[26] Q. Zhang, Z. Liang, and Z. Cai.
Developing a new security framework
for bluetooth low energy devices.
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/332729059_Developing_a_New_Security_Framework_
for_Bluetooth_Low_Energy_Devices.
[27] Y. Zhang, J. Weng, R. Dey, and X. Fu. Bluetooth low energy (ble) security
and privacy. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336360887_
B_Bluetooth_Low_Energy_BLE_Security_and_Privacy.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[28] Y. Zhang, J. Weng, R. Dey, Y. Jin, Z. Lin, , and X. Fu. On the (in)security
of bluetooth low energy one-way secure connections only mode. https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/335462608_On_the_Insecurity_
of_Bluetooth_Low_Energy_One-Way_Secure_Connections_Only_Mode,
August 2019.
[29] Y. Zhang, J. Weng, Z. Ling, and B. Pearson. Bless: A ble application secu-
rity scanning framework. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
343436439_BLESS_A_BLE_Application_Security_Scanning_Framework,
2020.
[30] S. M. odersheim. Protocol security veriﬁcation tutorial. http://www2.imm.
dtu.dk/~samo/OFMC-tutorial.pdf, 2014.
==PAGE:74==
Appendix
Used tools:
• Amazon Web Service(AWS) for hosting the Backend server.
• Github to store the code.
– Backend server:https://github.com/mohamadmowfakhlal/rest-json-quickstartuser
– GATT server :https://github.com/mohamadmowfakhlal/BLEGATTServer
– GATT client: https://github.com/mohamadmowfakhlal/BLEGattClient
• Quarkus server to run an API that oﬀers service to Mobile phone.
• Android studio for developing an Android APPs for both mobile and
tablet.
• Eclipse to develop an API that runs using Quarkus server.
• OFMC veriﬁcation tool.
• Wireshark Packet Analyser.
Appendix A
Used Tools to run a real server in AWS:
==PAGE:75==
69
• Amazon Elastic Compute (Amazon EC2): A Virtual computing machine.
• Operating System: Ubuntu Linux.
• Hardware: General purpose, t2 micro.
• Data center: Frankfurt
Procedure to install an quarkus server on Amazon Linux instance.
• Launch the instance and save the key to access the machine remotely.
• Connect the instance using putty from windows. We should select the key
and hostname of the server and the login user name.
==PAGE:76==
70
Appendix
Figure 1: Log in to Server Using Putty
==PAGE:77==
71
• To ensure that all software packages are up to date
sudo apt-get update -y
• Edit the server’s security group by adding a security rule to allow inbound
HTTP(port 80),HTTPS(port 443) and SSH (port 22) connections to the
instance. Where, 0.0.0.0/0 means allow traﬃc from any IP address for IP
v4 and::/0 means allow traﬃc from any IP v6 address.
• Install Openjdk version "11.0.11" in the ubuntu
• Install Apache Maven 3.6.2+.
• Clone the project from the repository:
git clone https://github.com/mohamadmowfakhlal/rest-json-quickstartuser.
• Navigate to directory rest-json-quickstartuser: cd rest-json-quickstart.
• Start Quarkus server in development mode: sudo mvn compile quarkus:dev
==PAGE:78==
72
Appendix
Figure 2: Running Backend Server
==PAGE:79==
73
Figure 3: login page
==PAGE:80==
74
Appendix
Figure 4: Discovered devices
==PAGE:81==
75
Figure 5: App functionalities
==PAGE:82==
76
Appendix
Figure 6: change deviceID
==PAGE:83==
77
Figure 7: list service
==PAGE:84==
78
Appendix
Figure 8: list service2
==PAGE:85==
79
Appendix B
The OFMC veriﬁcation code for our approach is as follows:
Protocol: KeyEx
Figure 9: Veriﬁcation using OFMC
Types:
Agent C,S,b;
Number SNONCE,X,Y,g,CNONCE;
Symmetric_key KS;
Function sk,pw
Knowledge:
C: C,S,b,pw(C,b),pk(C),inv(pk(C)),pk(b),g;
S: C,S,b,sk(S,b);
b: C,S,b,pw(C,b),sk(S,b),pk(b),inv(pk(b)),pk(C),g
where C!=S
Actions:
C->S:C,S,CNONCE S->C: {|C,S,SNONCE,CNONCE|}sk(S,b)
C->b : {C ,b , exp (g , X )} inv( pk ( C ))
==PAGE:86==
80
Appendix
b->C : {C ,b , exp (g , Y )} inv( pk ( b ))
C->b : {|pw(C,b), C ,S , {|C,S,SNONCE,CNONCE|}sk(S,b) |} exp ( exp (g ,
X ) , Y )
b->C : {| KS,C,S,CNONCE,SNONCE,{| KS,C,S,SNONCE |}sk(S,b) |} exp (
exp (g , X ) , Y )
C->S: {| KS,C,S,SNONCE |}sk(S,b)
Goals:
C authenticates S on CNONCE
S authenticates C on SNONCE
KS secret between C,S,b
The Application Security protocol that uses the QR Protocol: DHwithQR
Figure 10: Veriﬁcation using OFMC for the Protocol that uses QR
==PAGE:87==
81
Types:
Agent C,S,s;
Number NS,NC,X,Y,T;
Function share,sk
Knowledge:
C:C,S,g,sk(C,S),share;
S: C,S,g,sk(C,S),share;
Actions:
C->S: {|exp(g,Y)|}sk(C,S)
S->C: {|NS,exp(g,X)|}share(exp(exp(g,X),Y)),exp(g,X)
C->S:{|NS,NC,T|}share(exp(exp(g,X),Y))
S->C:{|NC|}share(exp(exp(g,X),Y))
Goals:
share(exp(exp(g,X),Y)) secret between C,S
C authenticates S on share(exp(exp(g,X),Y)),C
S authenticates C on share(exp(exp(g,X),Y)),S
The BALSA protocol veriﬁcation code is as follows: Protocol: BALSA
Figure 11: Veriﬁcation using OFMC for the BALSA protocol [15]
Types:
==PAGE:88==
82
Appendix
Agent C,S,b;
Number BRAND,SNONCE,X,Y,g;
Symmetric_key KS;
Function sk,pre
Knowledge:
C: C,S,b,sk(C,b),pk(C),inv(pk(C)),pk(b),pre,g;
S: C,S,b,sk(S,b),pre;
b: C,S,b,sk(C,b),sk(S,b),pre,pk(b),inv(pk(b)),pk(C),g
where C!=S
Actions:
S->C: C,S,SNONCE
C->b : {C ,b , exp (g , X )} inv( pk ( C ))
b->C : {C ,b , exp (g , Y )} inv( pk ( b ))
C->b : {| C ,S , SNONCE |} exp ( exp (g , X ) , Y )
b->C : {| KS,C,S,BRAND,{| KS,C,S,SNONCE,BRAND |}sk(S,b) |} exp ( exp
(g , X ) , Y )
C->S: {| KS,C,S,SNONCE,BRAND |}sk(S,b),{|SNONCE|}KS
S->C:{|BRAND|}KS
Goals:
C authenticates b on KS,S
S authenticates b on KS,C
KS secret between C,S,b
==PAGE:89==
83
Appendix C
The steps to extract HCI log from the Android Phone:
1. Make sure that the phone is in development mode by enabling Developer
Options as the following
(a) Open Settings
(b) Scroll down and tap "About device" or "About phone".
(c) Scroll down, then tap "Build number" seven times.
(d) The "Developer options" menu will now appear in your Settings
menu.
2. Open Developer Options and enable Bluetooth HCI snoop log as
shown in Fig. 23. The Bluetooth HCI snoop log contains all the BLE
packets that expected be captured by sniﬃng tools.
3. Use the mobile phone that run the GATT Client App to exchange BLE
packets with another BLE devices in the GATT server role(Tablet). The
log is registered in the Bluetooth HCI log ﬁle.
4. From Developer options, press Take bug report as shown in Fig. 23.
5. Wait few minutes until the bug report is generated and share it with the
PC.
6. Use the Wireshark to open the log by navigating the ﬁle location at bu-
greport/FS/data/log/bt/btsnoop_hci.
7. All BLE packets that is sent and received from a phone will be shown.
It is hard to navigate ATT packet. Therefore use ﬁltering to ﬁlter ATT
packet by applying btatt ﬁler.
==PAGE:90==
84
Appendix
Appendix D
Figure 12: Security Request
==PAGE:91==
85
Figure 13: Pairing Request
==PAGE:92==
86
Appendix
Figure 14: Pairing Response
==PAGE:93==
87
Figure 15: Master Sends Public Key
==PAGE:94==
88
Appendix
Figure 16: Master receives Public Key
==PAGE:95==
89
Figure 17: Secure Connection Pairing Conﬁrm
==PAGE:96==
90
Appendix
Figure 18: Secure Pairing Initiator random
==PAGE:97==
91
Figure 19: Secure Connection Pairing Responder Random
==PAGE:98==
92
Appendix
Figure 20: Sent Pairing DHCheck
==PAGE:99==
93
Figure 21: Received pairing DHCheck
==PAGE:100==
94
Appendix
Figure 22: OOB Pairing
==PAGE:101==
95
Figure 23: HCI Log Enabling In Android
