==PAGE:1==
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehi­
cle Maintenance
An Online Service
Master Thesis
DTU Entrepreneurship
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
An Online Service
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Pedro Germani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship, Diplomvej, Building 371,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over the period of five months at the Centre for Technology
Entrepreneurship, Department of Management Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the Master of Science in Engineering, MSc. Eng.
– Business Analytics.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in computer programming, business
process model notation, machine learning, statistics, and calculus.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Lars Alkærsig for the support and guidance in this
project, whose advice facilitated my time management and discussions enriched the con­
tent of what I created. I would also like to thank Maja Vejlgaard for actively participating
and donating her time and attention, directly contributing to the results obtained within the
project scope and outside of it.
Pedro Germani ­ s190050
Signature
Date
25/06/2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The purpose of this dissertation was to investigate the market acceptance of a solution that
tackles the asymmetrical access to information on vehicle maintenance status between
vehicle owner and mechanic shops. Existing literature suggested a possibly inefficient
market populated with under­ and over­diagnosis and treatment of passenger­vehicles,
which goes in the opposite direction of digital market trends of increased customer cen­
trality of information transparency.
Through the creation of its own database and use of Machine Learning algorithms, the
study was capable of showing that predictive, preventive, and comparative vehicle main­
tenance can be brought to the general public in a simplified manner, with predictions
showing over 90% accuracy across all algorithms.
Furthermore, it was shown that products that utilized those algorithms to: (1) assess
vehicle mechanic quotes in terms of price point and parts/label necessity; (2) manage
vehicles preventive maintenance and create parts failure predictions to the user and; (3)
compare vehicle purchasing modalities with real­world data, had great market potential,
with an overall acceptance of more than 95%.
The core method utilized for testing this venture idea was the Lean Startup method. With
one loop of the Build­Measure­Learn cycle, it was possible to show that there is a market
need for solutions that aim to increase customer centrality and price transparency in the
independent automotive aftermarket mechanic shops marketplace.
ii
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Document Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Automotive Industry & Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Automotive Aftermarket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Vehicle Purchasing Modalities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Entrepreneurship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
The Lean Startup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.1
Research Problem & Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Minimum Viable Product
15
3.1
Build . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.1
Initial Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.2
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.3
Business Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.1.4
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2
Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.1
Customer Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3
Learn
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4
Analysis
45
4.1
Final Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2
Projected Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5
Future Steps
51
5.1
Scale­up Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6
Conclusions
55
Bibliography
57
A Quantitative survey process model
60
B Risk Mapping and Management
62
C Quantitative survey questions
65
D Mechanic Shop Service Quote
66
E
Product Prototypes
67
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Continuing global population growth and technological advancements are enough to bring
different levels of social solutions to arguably all nations worldwide. Mobility is a good
example, with extensive research and products being developed to increase efficiency
and social reach of current solutions – public transportation via bus, metro, and train,
personal mobility via bicycles, motorcycles, and cars, and also new concepts such as
personal electric transport devices are already present in the market. According to 2019
reports, there are about 324 million vehicles in Europe [1], roughly one for every two
people, showing how indisputably popular they are as a means of transportation.
The automotive industry has brought freedom and access to mobility while also making
it increasingly time­efficient, safer, and affordable [2]. For that reason, the ubiquity of
vehicle transportation is undeniable: in 2019, of all journeys, more than 70% were made
by car. In Europe, for example, the average costs per covered kilometer decreased by
65% over the past 40 years, depicting how individual mobility becomes more accessible
to a larger share of the population over time [2].
In the macro­economical corner of the automotive phenomenon, this sector is a strong
industry with attractive job opportunities, being considered a growth engine of Europe’s
economy. The turnover generated by it represents roughly 7% of EU’s GDP [2]. A sub­
category of the sector, the automotive aftermarket, is comprised of after­sales mainte­
nance, spare parts, and services. Its current global business value is at approximately
EUR 800 billion and is expected to grow 3% annually, to about EUR 1200 billion by 2030
[3].
The passenger­vehicle aftermarket has typically been the most recession­resistant part
of the automotive industry, showing, for example, a 1% decline in the United States during
the financial crisis from 2007 to 2009, while GDP dropped about 4% and automotive sales
fell 42% for new vehicles and 20% for used vehicles [4].
Vehicles are generally categorized as consumer goods that suffer from depreciation, fail­
ures, wear and tear, and many other aspects of an engineered machine with moving parts
and electronics. Therefore, maintaining a vehicle’s integrity with preventive and corrective
maintenance is imperative for its proper and safe functioning. Nowadays, vehicles have
extremely complex ECUs (Engine Control Unit) and related hardware to orchestrate cor­
rect functioning of systems that range from electronic throttle controls to haptic feedback1
of onboard interfaces.
Each day a vehicle produces up to 20 Gigabytes of data, which is collected primarily by
the vehicle’s manufacturer [1]. In addition, since the late 1990s, regulation in Europe
demands an On­Board­Diagnosis (OBD) port, which provides open access to vehicle and
diagnostics data, enabling mechanics to extract relevant information about the service
status of the vehicle, which is a crucial process before beginning the actual repair [1].
The advent of the internet has created a revolution in terms of data accessibility, resulting
in rising customer requirements due to higher awareness and expert knowledge gained
thanks to unlimited access to various sources of information [5]. In the next few years,
many trends will fundamentally change the industry in question, two being relevant for the
1Small vibrations or pulses that imitate analog experiences previously only possible through mechanical
buttons with mechanisms such as loaded springs.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
1
==PAGE:8==
current study: (1) big data and analytics becoming new sources of value generation and:
(2) connected vehicles enabling predictive maintenance [3].
The new industrial design will translate into higher price transparency for the customer
across the entire value chain. Furthermore, customers will increasingly rely on automated
systems, and recommendations [3]). Therefore, a customer­centered approach to mobil­
ity (versus a technology­focused approach) is essential to winning the next generation of
customers [2]. Finally, as stated by [6], at the heart of any successful strategy to manage
satisfaction is the ability to listen to the customer, which becomes particularly important
when, just like in many other relationships between consumers good owner versus service
provider, the expertise belongs to the latter.
It is assumed that the average vehicle owner does not possess knowledge nor tools to
get access to that data, even though it is possible and relatively easy to obtain basic infor­
mation through OBD port connectors via Bluetooth or micro­computers. This assumption
incurs asymmetrical access to knowledge between vehicle owners and dealerships/me­
chanic shops.
1.1
The Problem
Asymmetrical information in markets like the automotive service industry can be a pain
for the average vehicle owner. Not knowing what is wrong with your property, what should
be done to fix it, and how much it will cost raises several questions on who to trust when
it comes to preventive and corrective maintenance. This is not recent nor exclusive to the
automotive aftermarket industry: as cited by (Shane, 2000) from Schumpeter in 1934,
“economies operate in a constant state of disequilibrium. Technological, political, social,
regulatory, and other types of change offer a continuous supply of new information about
different ways to use resources to enhance wealth” [7].
The provision of joint diagnosis and repair implies that some fraud can be successful in
the automotive repair industry (especially in non­dealership associated shops) because
of the high, if not prohibitive, costs of discovery of the fraud [8]. Additionally, it is tough
for motorists to evaluate the quality and necessity of most types of repairs, even after the
service has been provided [9].
As indicated by the literature, this problem is highly observable in practice as well: a study
conducted by (Schneider, 2012) showed that when a vehicle with known flaws was pre­
sented to several mechanic shops as a way to test diagnosis and repair quotes, mechanics
recommended completely unnecessary repairs in 33% of experimental visits conducted
by the research team. Additionally, 75% of the field experiment visits were characterized
by severe under­treatment [9].
It is, therefore, evident that there are problems and trust issues that must be addressed
in the automotive repair industry. However, one source touches on a possible solution,
where it was found that repair shops quote higher prices to callers who cite a higher ex­
pected price [10], meaning that the prior knowledge of market prices for parts and services
could work in favor of vehicle owners.
The core problem is then identified and assumed to be the asymmetrical access to infor­
mation between vehicle owners and mechanic shops. Consequently, the present study
focuses more specifically on personal passenger vehicles, since fleet management falls
into a different category of relationship.
2
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Document Structure
The present document will set the stage with a thorough literature review on the automo­
tive aftermarket and its market trends regarding vehicle maintenance and the core prob­
lems that come with it. Following that, a possible solution for some of those problems
utilizing entrepreneurial and computing methods will be presented.
The solution will be fully developed in terms of algorithm functioning and market accep­
tance through a Minimum Viable Product exercise, followed by an analysis of the results
and what could be done in the future to develop the idea entirely.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Automotive Industry & Market
The advent of the internet still causes disruptions in some industries decades after its
arrival. With the aid of online comparison engines and reviews, customers are more
informed and more empowered than ever, using digital channels to gain a clearer picture
of cost and quality over goods. For example, it is now possible to buy a vehicle online,
with virtual showrooms that allow potential buyers to customize the interior and exterior
parts, as well as performance and entertainment features, and get it delivered to their
door.
A study by (McKinsey & Co., 2020) states that over 80% of customers already use online
sources during the car­buying process [11]. Moreover, that growing wave of technologi­
cal mega­trends is redefining mobility, giving regions and players outside the traditional
automotive set enough momentum to threaten established players [2].
2.1.1
Automotive Aftermarket
The automotive aftermarket possesses two main categories of revenue generation: (1)
the commercialization of parts and; (2) the installation of such parts and other services1.
Within each of these categories, one may find five distinct stakeholder groups: parts man­
ufacturers, parts distributors, workshops, intermediaries, and end­customers [3]. The two
segments of service (i.e., maintenance and repair) on one side and the retail and whole­
sale parts business on the other are a reasonably even split in terms of value [3].
Services to vehicles may be performed, generally speaking, by authorized dealers, usually
with the use of Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) parts and trained personnel, or
through third­party Independent Aftermarket (IAM) parts and shops. In Europe, there
are about 84000 of the first kind and approximately 378000 of the latter. Both segments
equally occupy about 50% of the entire market volume [1]. Figure 2.1 shows a sketch of
the relationships traced in the aforementioned market.
Figure 2.1: Automotive aftermarket stakeholders2
1Body and paint correction, wheels and tires alignment and balancing, interior cleaning, etc.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
5
==PAGE:12==
A trend of fixed­price preventive maintenance provided by authorized dealerships has
been seen in recent years. Literature shows that 33% of customers find it appealing
to have a loyalty program for service, parts, and upgrades with the dealership [11]. On
the other hand, 83% expressed that they would not select to repair their vehicle with the
dealership after the warranty period [5], which is potentially one of the driving factors for
the decentralized state of the market.
The automotive parts aftermarket, on the other hand, is defined by and valued according
to the retail selling price of service, wear and tear, and mechanical parts, as well as tires,
crash repair, consumables, and accessories [12]. Table 2.1 portraits the detailed items
which can be found in each of these sub­categories.
Table 2.1: Detailed components in the automotive aftermarket
Subcategory
Specifics
Service
Filters, wiper blades, spark plugs, oils
Wear & Tear
Batteries, exhaust and brake components, ride control
Mechanical
Transmission and power­train3
Consumables
Cleaners, waxes, polishes, washes, antifreeze
Accessories
Entertainment, alarms, wheels, interior/exterior parts4
As for the size of such market, (McKinsey & Co., 2018) estimated that the worldwide
aftermarket value in 2017 was approximately EUR 800 billion, parts and labor included
[3]. Business in North America accounted for around EUR 270 billion of global revenues,
Europe was second at roughly EUR 240 billion, and business in China generated approx­
imately EUR 90 billion [1].
It is expected that the overall automotive aftermarket will grow at roughly 3% per annum,
reaching approximately EUR 1200 billion by 2030 [3]. On the other hand, electric vehi­
cles (EVs) will likely require lower maintenance efforts, resulting in a net decrease in the
aftermarket value per vehicle.
The crisis driven by the COVID­19 pandemic could create long­term tailwinds for aftermar­
ket demand. Personal vehicles will likely supplant public transport for many consumers
due to the threat of contagion, which outweighs considerations related to cost and conve­
nience. Furthermore, the average vehicle age is likely to increase as economic pressures
force consumers to postpone new car purchases. This trend was observed during the fi­
nancial crisis of 2007 to 2009, beginning as a gradual increase in vehicle age and then
accelerating to lift the average by a full year in the United States. If this pattern repeats
during the COVID­19 crisis, the increase in older vehicles could boost the need for re­
pairs [4] and, consequently, for solutions to facilitate an end­customer relationship with
the repair industry.
The pandemic might have accelerated inevitable dynamics that will significantly disrupt
the automotive aftermarket in the coming years. Not having a comprehensive perspective
or fully understanding the consequences of this disruption can lead to the decline of whole
sub­businesses [3]. Market trends indicate that the way for players to maintain customers
2Adapted from [3].
3Excluding parts that fall into Service and Filters or Wear and Tear categories.
4Mats, spoilers, etc.
6
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:13==
and secure a position in the pool is, especially for maintenance providers, to ensure cus­
tomer loyalty through customer experience, predictive maintenance, and digital assistants
[3].
2.1.2
Vehicle Purchasing Modalities
The most common options when considering the purchase of a vehicle for private owners
are: (1) buying it new from the factory financing part of the amount or (2) paying the total
amount up­front; (3) buying it second­hand financing part of the amount (4) or paying the
total amount up­front and; (5) leasing5. With that being said, it is unlikely that the average
consumer will know how to compare such options in terms of, for example, cost over a
given period. Depreciation and maintenance are two non­trivial derived estimations that
will vary geographically and according to vehicle brand, model, and year, to name a few.
Diving a bit deeper into one of these modalities, private leasing, is essential to define it
broadly: leasing a vehicle privately usually involves a down­payment and monthly install­
ments. Those installments typically account for the cost of crucial preventive and cor­
rective (misuse excluded) maintenance and depreciation. Some other expenses could
include tires, annual taxes, and insurance. Therefore, still to be accounted for are fuel
expenditures and some consumables such as sprinkler­wash.
It should be evident that, depending on what is included in the lease, customers could
have difficulty evaluating this option in terms of the final cost. From one side, if a customer
possesses sufficient money and does not want to be bothered with maintaining the vehicle,
plus selling it after the desired period, then a lease might be a good option. However,
one must always bear in mind that the leasing provider’s management generates work;
therefore, a mark­up is applied to the price.
Even with such price composition nuances, the easiness of owning a lease seems to
surpass the cost, evidenced by the fact that one in three new­car purchases in the US
in 2019 was leased [13]. In contrast, one out of four new­car registrations is either a
leasing or a rental vehicle, up from only one out of six in 2014 in Europe, increasing the
total market from EUR 2.6 to 4.0 million in the last five years [14]. This can be partially
attributed to cultural changes of sharing­economy, where ownership loses ground to the
more efficient use of resources.
The popularity of private vehicle leasing and renting impacts the automotive aftermarket
since post­leased vehicles are directed to sales. In Germany, almost 50% of rental cars
are sold to and registered by the next customer within one year [14]. (McKinsey & Co.,
2019) estimates that off­lease vehicles will increase the number of used cars three years
old or less from 51% of the total in 2017 to about 60% in 2022 [15].
2.2
Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship was defined by (Shane, 2000) as a field in which “the scholarly exam­
ination of how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to create future goods and
services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited” [7]. In easier to grasp terms, it can
be defined as a mechanism by which society converts technical information into products
and services, involving two phenomena: the presence of lucrative opportunities and the
presence of enterprising individuals. The first are those situations in which new goods,
services, raw materials, and organizing methods can be introduced and sold at a greater
price than their cost of production, whereas the second are people who generate unique
5There is a possibility of leasing new or used vehicles, but since all cost variables are the same and fall
under the provider’s responsibility, there is no need to differentiate between the two
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
7
==PAGE:14==
theories and models about how to create value, and then craft experiments to test their
hypotheses [7].
Therefore, entrepreneurship is closely related to the success of ventures in the capitalist
world, the end goal being a monetary profit for those responsible for taking the risk of
selling goods or services to others. On the other hand, in a completely different branch of
human activities lies science, with the end goal being, theoretically, attaining knowledge.
The ability to reason and build detailed plans with metrics and milestones before attempt­
ing to solve a problem is arguably one of the most important skills a human being can have.
Take that away, and problem­solving becomes brute force actions potentially based on
previous experiences. Aristotle is recognized as giving the earliest systematic treatise on
the nature of scientific inquiry in the western tradition, one which embraced observation
and reasoning about the natural world [16].
As it is called today, the scientific method is one of if not the most ubiquitous problem­
solving method there is. It is simple in conception: test one’s hypotheses and theories,
usually constructed through inductive and deductive reasoning, with the use of systematic
experimentation and observation [16]. It is, therefore, an empirical method, which can be
extended to any purpose in which the basic steps are supported.
A somewhat simple but not necessarily trivial exercise is to frame entrepreneurship in the
scientific method wrapping: the construction of a hypothesis identifies an entrepreneurial
opportunity for a service or good to be sold for a profit. Then, observation and experimen­
tation present a solution to the public, while reasoning will be used to analyze the results
and adapt the initial hypothesis. This has expertly been done by (Ries, 2011), in his book,
“The Lean Startup”, which is discussed in the following section.
2.2.1
The Lean Startup
As cited in (Rasmussen, 2015), Eisenmann, Ries, and Dillard defined a lean startup as
a firm that follows a hypothesis­driven approach to the evaluation of an entrepreneurial
opportunity and the development of a new product for a specific market niche [17]. In this
context, the entrepreneurial opportunity is based on shaping the new solution to solve a
particular customer problem.
In the words of the author of “The Lean Startup” book, Eric Ries, “the goal of a startup is
to figure out the right thing to build – the thing customers want and will pay for as quickly
as possible”. It is a new way of looking at developing products that emphasize fast iter­
ation and customer insight. The attraction of this approach is to seek to offer a scientific
approach to the creation of startups, pushing entrepreneurs and innovators to undertake
structured experiments based on an underlying hypothesis, and incorporating feedback
from these experiments directly into a process of rapid iteration and innovation [18]. The
book and method have also introduced a shared vocabulary for discussing startup ac­
tivity and have provided and utilized several valuable tools and concepts, including the
Business Model Canvas (BMC), the minimum viable product, customer development and
validation, and pivoting [18].
A business model describes the rationale of how an organization creates, delivers, and
captures value and can be seen as a blueprint for a strategy to be implemented through
organizational structures, processes, and systems [19]. The (BMC) proposed by (Oster­
walder, 2010) is a “one­page” solution for a concise overview of that. The authors describe
that a business model can best be described through nine basic building blocks that show
the logic of how a company intends to make money [19]. They cover the four main ar­
eas of a business: customers, offer, infrastructure, and financial viability. An example
8
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:15==
of such canvas can be seen in Figure 2.2, and its applicability as­is, as well as possible
adaptations, will be discussed further in the present study.
Figure 2.2: BMC example for an electric car­share service provider.
A Minimum Viable Product (MVP) is a version of the product that enables a complete turn
of the Build­Measure­Learn loop with a minimum amount of effort and the least amount
of development time [20]. The minimum viable product lacks many features that may be
proven essential later on but should capture the solution’s potential from the customer’s
perspective.
After business description and laying out a viable product strategy, the latter needs to
be market­validated. Customer validation is the core of this strategy, bringing insights
into what needs reviewing for the next iteration. If customer validation brings to light
issues or opportunities for improvement, pivoting might be deemed necessary, which is
a structured course correction designed to test a new fundamental hypothesis about the
product, strategy, and engine of growth [20].
In general terms, the Lean Startup method can be described as Build­Measure­Learn
loops (similar to the scientific methodology’s loop of hypothesis­experiment­observe) that
aims to refine a product through market feedback. It is summarized and can be seen
in Figure 2.3, where building an initial MVP is necessary for the first iteration, and the
following optional ones should simplify over the first.
As recommended by (Stagars, 2014), if the MVP is too complex or expensive to build,
it may collect some feedback, but incremental development will be tedious. Finding the
right MVP is, therefore, the first order of business for a startup [21].
It may be considered a somewhat flexible methodology, especially for what metrics should
be used for the iterations. Some possibilities could be purchase intent of a product, reten­
tion of potential customers through the iterations, proper referral or the purpose of referral,
and registration for future product use.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: The Lean Startup process culminating in a final MVP.
The uniqueness of the methodology consists of its ability to take into account explicitly the
numerous uncertainties regarding the suitability of a given solution towards a specific cus­
tomer problem [17], making it, therefore, the empirical and systematic method for startups
that brought a paradigm shift in business modeling [21].
2.3
The Solution
Referring back to Section 1.1, the asymmetrical information in the automotive service in­
dustry seems to be a pain for the average vehicle owner due to the difficulty to evaluate
the quality and necessity of most types of repairs, even after the service has been pro­
vided. Furthermore, deciding which purchase modality to choose for vehicles can be a
complex comparison task, especially for variables like projected maintenance.
Addressing that issue, the present study proposes a digital solution that aims to reduce
information asymmetry and increase price transparency for customers through three main
deliveries: (1) a pay­per­use product that will assist customers with evaluating their quotes
from mechanic shops; (2) a subscription­based product for preventive and predictive vehi­
cle maintenance management and; (3) a pay­per­use product for vehicle purchase modal­
ities comparison.
The potential of such a solution is enormous: customers are demanding more services
that allow them to make educated decisions about their purchases [15], and the aid of
online comparison engines brings them precisely that [3]. A study from (Busse, 2013)
found that repair shops quote higher prices to callers who cite a higher expected price;
therefore, the prior knowledge to market prices of parts and services could work in favor
of vehicle owners. A key implication of that is consumers being able to use price expecta­
tions strategically to affect price negotiations, especially since shops agree to some form
of price concession 26% of the times [10].
To summarize the products that will be available from the online platform (mobile and web
applications), the reader might turn to Figure 2.4. In general terms: (1) will take as an
input the customer’s vehicle data (manufacturer, model, trim, year, engine displacement,
transmission type, odometer reading, and location) and the quote specifics (part names
and prices) to cross­reference with data from other users that have used the service and
have similar vehicles, and data from manufacturers, providing the user with a price and
10
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:17==
scope comparison for the service; (2) will actively notify the user about manufacturer
recommended preventive maintenance and potential failures to look out for based on
the population of similar vehicles through the use of machine learning algorithms; (3) will
give a final number of monetary expenditure for the user who wishes to compare specific
vehicles for purchase. In addition, used, new, financing or not, and lease options will be
available upon user input of down­payment, interest rates, and other necessary variables.
Figure 2.4: Initial solution sketch.
The database that is necessary for this product to work is arguably the biggest asset of
the solution. An initial set containing only manufacturer­related data, i.e., recommended
preventive maintenance, will be enough to kick­start the maintenance products. As users
utilize the service for quote appraisal, they will enrich the database with real­world data
through mechanisms discussed later. It is expected that, statistically, services and parts
that were not necessary but still accepted by the vehicle owner will be irrelevant. This is
of utter importance, since the extent to which expected prices help consumers depends
on whether the expected prices accurately reflect market prices [10].
Except for predictive and comparative maintenance for the subscription plan, all other
features exposed about the products will rely on basic queries and statistical analysis.
The algorithms utilized for the first one will be a supervised learning method called K­
nearest neighbors and a statistical method for survival analysis. The first attempts to
classify entries according to similar observations and bring suggestions of parts that aren’t
covered in the service. The second attempts to predict parts failure according to the
existing population of similar vehicles.
It is probably clear to the reader by now that the author is proposing such a solution to
be delivered as a startup through the use of the Lean Startup method. Building on top of
Figure 2.3, a version of the MVP applied to this venture may be seen below, on Figure
2.5, and the written development following it on Table 2.2.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: MVP process for the proposed solution.
Table 2.2: Steps of the Lean Startup method of the present study.
Iteration
Build
Measure
Learn
Final MVP
1
Build initial DB
Build survey
Write algorithms
Quantitative research
Detail products/pricing
Construct personas
Update
Final
Map risks
Qualitative research
BMC/product
BMC and
Process design
Deploy prototype
product
Define metrics
Gather data for Learn
description
2
Refine algorithms
Deploy prototype v2
Final Changes
Review process design
The study was be based in the markets of Brazil and Denmark since there could be dif­
ferent patterns between the two nations regarding the need for such a solution due to a
diversity of people and mobility realities, and economic and technological strengths. Set­
ting up the product in a global manner from the start, placing the consumer at the core, and
leveraging each region’s potential is fundamental to the future of the automotive industry
[2].
2.3.1
Research Problem & Question
Assumptions
It is assumed that the average private vehicle owner does not carry assessments of me­
chanic shops’ service quotes in terms of fairness of price and validity/necessity of parts
and labor. Similarly, the average vehicle owner does not carry detailed studies of different
vehicle purchase modalities.
The underlying reason for such assumptions is that the average vehicle owner does not
12
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:19==
detain sufficient knowledge on mechanics and maintenance to carry such assessments,
therefore suffering from the aforementioned asymmetrical access to information com­
pared to service providers.
Problem
Case 1: for vehicle owners who do not possess a maintenance plan from the manu­
facturer, when taking the vehicle to an IAM: are the prices of the parts and labor fair in
comparison to other shops? Do the parts actually have to be replaced? Is it preventive
(i.e., owner’s manual derived) or corrective maintenance? If corrective, has it happened
to other vehicles of the same brand, year, model, and similar odometer reading?
Case 2: For customers who do not own a vehicle but wish to: how should they conduct a
real­world comparison between buying a used or new car, financing, or leasing it?
Question
What kind of information would a platform need to: Case 1 – provide the customer with
price and content comparison in proposed services by mechanic shops taking into account
similar vehicles and; Case 2 – give the customer a final number of how much would
be spent with each alternative across a defined period. These comprise the exploratory
portion of the research question.
Finally, what is the validity (correctness) of the data used for these purposes? Is there
a market for said service? How much would they pay? These comprise the evaluative
portion of the research question.
Competitors Landscape
Vehicle Maintenance Management – The current marketplace for personal vehicle main­
tenance management appears to have a finite and well­defined pool of solutions: (1)
preventive maintenance; (2) expenditure tracking, and; (3) mechanic shop quote central­
ization.
The first type is represented by the major player in vehicle history report, CARFAX®. Avail­
able only in the United States, this application allows customers to check for scheduled
maintenance (owner’s manual programmed maintenance) through the Vehicle Identifica­
tion Number (VIN).
The second type is entirely dependent on user input and will simply send notifications by
either tracking odometer readings, which can be updated with every refueling or through
estimations: users insert an expected yearly driving distance and when the maintenance
should occur. Examples of these solutions are: Drivvo, AutoSist6, My Car, Simply Auto,
Auto Care, and Car Minder. The latter claims that it features “early detection of potential
problems by tracking fuel consumption”, which it is assumed to simply give warnings in
case fuel consumption increases above a certain predetermined threshold below the usual
average observed by the system, given that only fuel consumption is not enough to predict
and pin­point failures in complex machines such as passenger vehicles.
The third type is applications with mechanic pricing and service comparison. It works
through customer input of what should be done to the vehicle according to odometer
readings and the owner’s manual recommendations. It obtains quotes from several dif­
ferent mechanics around the area selected by the customer. This solution takes care of
payment and warranty, and it is known for tackling the fragmented non­dealership car ser­
vice industry. Some examples are the Danish­born Autobutler, Openbay, YourMechanic,
ClickMechanic, and BookMyGarage.
6Features service receipt digitization.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
13
==PAGE:20==
The proposed solution differs and stands out from the ones above for the following rea­
sons, respectively to each existing solution: (1) and (2) do not provide suggestions on
predictive maintenance based on real­world data, nor a way to check if parts prices are
fair or even if such parts are needed; (3) the customer would not need to know in advance
what he/she needs to input in the system as what has to be done to their vehicle. Instead,
they go to their mechanic of choice, and the system will provide them with the information
afterward about price fairness and analysis of potential under and over­diagnosis.
Furthermore, services that centralize mechanic quotes tend to add mark­ups that are
not necessarily transparent, thus defeating the point of customer centrality for which the
present solution aims. If the intermediate between customer and mechanic shop profits
proportionally to volume and price paid for services by customers, its efficiency shall also
be questioned.
Purchase Options Comparison Engines – As for tools that assess buying options by
comparing new, used, or leased vehicles, simple online “calculators” take the modality’s
inputs (down­payment, monthly payments, etc.) and provide the user with an estimate.
Since no inputs are usually demanded for the used car, these systems likely utilize market
averages for fixed (still present with stationary vehicles, such as depreciation) and variable
costs (fuel consumption, wear/tear of parts, etc.). Unfortunately, it does not seem to be
shared for such solutions to have second­hand vehicles comparison option, but rather
only for new (with or without financing) versus leasing, showing one more differential of
the proposed solution.
14
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:21==
3
Minimum Viable Product
3.1
Build
This section will construct a detailed explanation and develop the steps mentioned in 2.3
to reach the first viable product.
3.1.1
Initial Product
Building on top of the idea of an MVP, where the product should be the simplest possible
to allow one to obtain knowledge from the market in one turn of the build­measure­learn
cycle, many of the envisioned final features will not be present in the following description.
Those will, however, be detailed in Section 4.1.
Database
Three different data­sets were used for this study: (1) manufacturer recommended main­
tenance obtained from well­known brands in manufacturer’s Brazilian websites with 4378
observations; (2) real­world vehicle maintenance records from the Indian market1 with
1139 observations and; (3) artificial data that mimics what would be obtained from users
once the products are running with 5694 observations.
The attributes that were used in this first iteration can be seen in Table 3.1 and are detailed
below.
Table 3.1: Data­bases and their attributes for the first iteration of the MVP.
Attribute
Manufacturer
Real­world
Artificial
brand
X
X
year
X
X
trim
X
engine_displ
X
transmission_type
X
doors
X
body_var
X
km
X
X
X
license_plate
X
fuel
X
X
cost
X
part_service_name
X
X
X
unit_price
X
quantity
X
total_price
X
• brand: Discrete, nominal – the brand of the vehicle (Volkswagen, BMW, etc.).
• year: Discrete, interval – the manufacturing year, not to be confused with the model­
year. The first is the year that the vehicle was physically assembled and rolled out
of the factory. At the same time, the latter is the year advertised by the manufacturer
as being the year corresponding to the model.
1Available at www.kaggle.com/navins7/vehicle-maintenance-record, last accessed in 24/02/2021.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
15
==PAGE:22==
• trim: Discrete, nominal – the variant applied to the model, usually related to one or
more of engine options, wheels, and tires, performance packages, etc. Examples
are usually acronyms such as GT and ST, or words that can indicate the intended
market placement of the product, such as Cross, Touring, and City.
• engine_displ: Continuous, ratio – the engine displacement in liters.
• transmission_type: Discrete, nominal – the transmission type acronym. AT: auto­
matic; MT: manual; CVT: continuously variable; AM: automated manual.
• doors: Discrete, ratio – number of doors.
• body_var: Discrete, nominal – body variant, e.g., hatchback, sedan, SUV, etc.
• km: Continuous, ratio – the odometer reading in kilometers.
• license_plate: Discrete, nominal – the code used for the license plate of the vehicle.
• fuel: Discrete, nominal – the fuel type. Diesel, gasoline, ethanol, or flex. The latter
is particularly important in the Brazilian market, where vehicles may be fueled with
any mix of gasoline (which contains up to 27.5% of anhydrous ethanol) and hydrous
ethanol.
• cost: Continuous, ratio – the total cost of the service done to an entry at that odome­
ter reading.
• part_service_name: Discrete, nominal – the part name or service performed. The
engine fuel filter and engine oil are examples of this attribute.
• unit_price: Continuous, ratio – the unit price of the part/service.
• quantity: Continuous, ratio – the number of parts that were replaced/repaired (4
spark plugs, one fuel filter, etc.).
• total_price: Continuous, ratio – the total price of the parts/service (multiplication of
the unit price and quantity).
The observations in the databases are numerically described in Tables 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4.
Table 3.2: Manufacturer recommendations database attributes’ statistical description.
year
engine_displ
doors
km
mean
2019.2
2.0
3.6
57 323
std
1.3
0.6
0.8
29 084.8
min
2016
1.0
2
10 000
25%
2018
1.4
4
30 000
50%
2019
2.0
4
60 000
75%
2020
2.5
4
80 000
max
2021
2.8
4
120 000
16
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:23==
Table 3.3: Real­world database attributes’ statistical description.
year
km
cost
mean
2016.4
46 560.9
5230.8
std
0.5
25 817.9
2191.2
min
2016
9021
1099
25%
2016
27 327
3678.5
50%
2016
41 787
5199
75%
2017
61 278
6584
max
2018
137 822
14 000
Table 3.4: Artificial database attributes’ statistical description.
km
unit_price
quant
total_price
mean
81 255.8
159.1
2.2
282.2
std
42 362.2
232
1.5
264.6
min
9002
40
1
40
25%
49 081.5
79
1
82
50%
80 176
95
1
142
75%
119 561
114
4
408
max
150 994
1400
4
1400
The artificially created database becomes extremely important and differentiates itself
from the other two databases in two matters: (1) there are license plates (unique identi­
fiers) to vehicles, therefore vehicle­specific analyses may be performed; and (2) there are
known statistical relations and occurrences for specific parts, which obey the following
rules:
• Starter battery: 25% of vehicles from the database replace the part at 40000km and
80000km, 70% at 50000km and 100000km, and 5% at 60000km and 120000km.
• Rear shocks: 25% of the vehicles from the database replace the part at 100000km,
50% at 120000km, and 25% at 150000km.
• Clutch kit: 15% of the vehicles in the database replace the part at 80000km, 25%
at 90000km, 50% at 100000km, and 10% at 110000km.
• Thermostat valve: 20% of vehicles from the database showcase failure for this part.
Of those, 10% at 110000km, 20% at 130000km, and 70% at 150000km.
• Engine head gasket: 50% of the vehicles that present thermostat valve failure will
also present head gasket failure at the same odometer reading.
These relations were created to simulate a few different types of services that a vehicle
might need. For example, the starter battery represents a part that is only replaced under
failure or diagnosis of low voltage, occurring in rather short odometer reading intervals;
the rear shocks and clutch kit represent parts that have their wear related to use, with a
broader absolute distribution over the vehicle’s lifespan; the thermostat valve represents
parts that the majority of vehicles do not experience failures but, when they do, other parts
might fail concomitantly. The latter is represented by the engine head gasket, which only
fails in a percentage of thermostat valve failure occurrences.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
17
==PAGE:24==
To avoid all entries having the exact odometer reading for the changes, i.e., out of all
vehicles that needed a battery change at 40000km, they all got it at precisely that reading,
some variance was added. The function used was random uniformly distributed in an
interval of plus or minus 1000km from the reference.
The artificial database mimics the records that would be found in the general database
but specific to the exact vehicle specifications (i.e., brand, model, year, trim, engine size,
etc.) and, in this case, there are 100 different vehicles present, each with their unique
identifier (the license plate) and maintenance records.
Products
As previously discussed, there are three products: (1) one­time­use for maintenance
quote appraisal; (2) subscription plan for preventive and predictive maintenance and; (3)
vehicle purchasing modalities comparison. These can be translated into three different
algorithms, which use overlapping tranches of code. Figure 3.1 depicts such algorithms
to each product, respectively. The different types of query referenced in the figure are:
• Query type­I: manufacturer’s recommended services at specific odometer read­
ings.
• Query type­II: frequency of occurrence in similar vehicles.
• Query type­III: average vehicle­specific expenses.
• Algorithm 1: Takes as input the current vehicle data and what is present in the
service quote. Outputs predictions for other parts that similar vehicles with similar
service quotes around that odometer reading had service done to.
• Algorithm 2: Takes as input the current vehicle data, plus the historical mainte­
nance records for said vehicle, and uses the historical maintenance for similar ve­
hicles to output what parts are likely to fail within a specific predefined future time­
frame.
Figure 3.1: Algorithms and query types for each product.
The products are further developed below:
18
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:25==
• Vehicle service quote evaluation: a one­time­purchase modality in which the user
inputs the vehicle’s data (odometer reading, fabrication year, etc.), the mechanic
shop’s data (location, name, etc.), and the service quote details (parts and services
names, prices practiced). The output is possible parts and services that are not
covered in the service quote but are recommended by the manufacturer and price
comparison (percentage above or below the market average for that vehicle). Af­
ter presenting the results, the customer is questioned if he/she will follow with the
service or not (e.g., search for a second opinion) in exchange for a discount in the
query price or a coupon for future purchases. This allows the database to be cor­
rectly enriched with this new observation in case the customer does follow with the
service2.
• Vehicle maintenance management: a subscription plan where the customer add
vehicles to their virtual garage. From the beginning, odometer reading and model
specifications are known. The first is updated with every service that the vehicle
goes through, and estimated yearly by the system. The customer receives remain­
ders of their manufacturer­recommended services (usually every 10 thousand kilo­
meters or one year, or 10 thousand kilometers or two years, etc.), as well as pre­
dictive maintenance hints for specific odometer readings based on the population
of similar vehicles and the historical maintenance records for such vehicle. For ex­
ample, suppose in the database there is a part failing in 15% of the population. This
may then be considered relevant for the customer and is pushed as a recommended
preventive check. The customer has unlimited queries for service quotes and price
calculators in case he/she wants a new car. For quotes added to product 1, the
customer receives a percentage of necessity probability for the parts/services that
are not recommended by the manufacturer and suggestions for the same type of
parts.
• Vehicle purchasing options assessment: also a one­time­purchase modality in
which the user inputs the desired vehicle’s data (year, make, model, etc.) and, if
applicable, interest rates, monthly payments, or other fixed costs. For example,
suppose a customer wants to compare buying a used car paying the total amount
up­front to purchasing a new vehicle by financing it. In that case, the user has to
input exactly which car he/she wants to purchase, the interest rates practiced by the
dealership or bank, and how many years he/she intends to have the vehicle. The
same goes for any other comparison.
Risks
Even though (Ries, 2011) argues that risks for startups are usually of legal, branding, or
impact on morale nature, the author believes that a simple mapping of both higher scope
risks and other small ones involved with the MVP itself might go a long way for mitigating
situations that would otherwise not be identified.
Dealing with risks is an ongoing activity that should be performed constantly in organi­
zations and projects, regardless of their sizes. A simple yet effective risk mapping and
analysis for the venture proposed herein may be seen in Annex B, where each column is
described below:
• Risk: a description of the risk that is being addressed.
• Category: the domain that the risk belongs to (e.g., market, health, safety, product).
2Even if a service is not needed and the customer decides to perform it with the mechanic shop, it is
expected that, statistically, these will be irrelevant in comparison to the bulk of observations
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
19
==PAGE:26==
• Probability: the scale of how likely is it for the event to happen (low, medium, high,
very high, imminent).
• Impact: the scale of the projected extent of impacts (low, medium, high, very high).
• Stand: category of the stand (accept, mitigate, transfer/share).
• Possible action: explanation of what could be done to achieve the desired stand
effect.
The following risks are worth detailing for the current development stage:
• Errors when filling out the forms online or in the app: customers will have to
correctly fill out a questionnaire on what parts are being replaced and at what cost, as
well as their own (or wished) vehicle’s data. To avoid input misspelling and mistakes,
the system will have specific choices from a list. If the part is not yet listed, it should
be directed to manual review before being added and made available to future users.
This ensures that all parts and services that will be compared to the ones present
on the database and, later possibly added to it, are in a default format.
• Data validity for pursuing or not a second opinion: the activity of enriching the
database with real­world maintenance records is only as good as the truthfulness of
such information. If the vehicle in question did not go through the maintenance that
the customers specified, yet it has been added to the database, then the results for
future queries will be distorted from reality. To get the answer from the customers as
to whether they performed or not the service, the system could offer a money­back
feature for such information – pay previously to getting the results, or a discount
coupon for future use.
• Manufacturer information that needs to be constantly updated or added every
year with new releases: new vehicles with different maintenance plans and exist­
ing vehicles with changes to their maintenance recommendations must be closely
monitored and updated regularly. This is crucial for the preventive maintenance
feature of the system.
3.1.2
Algorithms
There are currently many different definitions of Machine Learning (ML) available in the
literature. Still, the author is attracted to the simple yet precise one provided by (Grus,
2015), where it is defined as the concept of creating and using models that are learned
from data [22]. The goal of the present study is to use existing data to develop models
that may be used to predict various outcomes for new data, e.g., given a vehicle’s char­
acteristics, which parts are likely to fail within a specific time or driven distance interval.
With that being said, two main categories of ML algorithms exist: supervised and unsu­
pervised learning. The first has a set of data correctly­labeled to train the models with,
and the latter does not [22]. For the present study two different algorithms will be used
and detailed in the following.
Algorithm 1 – K­Nearest Neighbors
K­Nearest Neighbors is a supervised learning algorithm in which the core rationale is
assuming that vectors with similar components within a given vector space must be of the
same category [22]. Thus, the algorithm makes no mathematical assumptions and only
needs a notion of distance to compare observations.
Theoretical Model: Considering the K nearest neighbors (K being the number of neigh­
bors that one wishes to account for) closest to the target variable, how many observations
20
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:27==
of each category fall within that radius? The one that has the biggest amount of repre­
sentatives will be the classification used for the target. For exemplification purposes, the
author will make use of a two­dimensional vector space to enable visualizations and fa­
cilitate understanding of how the K­nearest neighbors algorithm works: take a set of 8
observations (vectors), each composed of x and y values corresponding to coordinates
on the two­dimensional plane, plus a categorical value c which is equal to 1 if the obser­
vation belongs to category A or 0 if it belongs to category B. Therefore, a generic vector
for observation i can be represented as ⃗Oi = (c, x, y).
Further developing this example, the following observations are plotted in Figure 3.2:
Table 3.5: Observations for KNN example.
Category
x­coordinate
y­coordinate
A
4
8
A
4.5
4
A
6
7
A
10
10
B
4.5
5
B
5.5
4.8
B
10
2
B
1
5
?
5
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
y
Category A
Category B
Target
Figure 3.2: Vector space with 2 categories of observations
In the example above, if K = 3 neighbors are selected, then the target observation shall
be classified as Category B. Contrarily, if K = 5 neighbors are selected, it will be classified
as Category A. The algorithm simply ranks the distance to all neighbors and selects the
K nearest ones, following with a count for each category in that sub­group. The distance
used in the employed algorithm is the Minkowski, described by:
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
21
==PAGE:28==
d(X, Y) =

n
∑
i=1
|xi −yi|p

(1−p)
where X and Y are vectors, n is the dimension of such vectors, x and y are the terms
(attribute values), and p is an integer which is commonly either 1 (turning this metric into
the well known Manhattan distance) or 2 (turning it into the Euclidean distance). This is
the default distance of many built­in algorithms in Python, and it is used mainly due to its
flexibility.
The main difference from the example depicted above to what was used as data in the
present study is that the vectors have more than two independent variables. For each
database, the number of dimensions is shown in Table 3.1, corresponding to previously
discussed attributes. The pseudo­code for the KNN algorithm may be seen below in
Algorithm 1.
Data: (observations_set, K, target_var)
distances_list;
categories_list;
results_dictionary;
for obs in observations_set do
d = getDistance(obs.coord,target_var.coord);
append(distances_list,d);
append(categories_list,obs.category);
end
sort(distances_list in ascending order);
sort(categories_list by distances_list);
for i in K do
cat = categories_list[i];
results_dictionary[cat].value += 1
end
return max(results_dictionary);
Algorithm 1: K­Nearest Neighbors
Data preparation: all categorical data was one­hot encoded, i.e., the parts changed
for each service, the brand and model of the vehicles, and the type of fuel. The real­
world dataset was used to develop this algorithm, having no missing values or outliers.
Therefore, little to no preparation work had to be done since this seems to be a pre­
processed data­set.
The KNN algorithm runs into trouble in higher dimensions thanks to the “curse of dimen­
sionality” due to the vastness of high dimensional spaces (21 in the case of this data­set)
[22]. Such spaces create an effect of increasing the average distance between points
and the ratio of the minimum distance by the average distance. This can result in the
closest observations not being that much closer to each other than the average distance
and, therefore, not having a lot in common with each other, completely undermining the
assumption of the algorithm.
22
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:29==
To reduce such effect, one may only select features that are most relevant for the model,
using two strategies: (1) checking for correlations amongst attributes and removing one of
them (highly correlated attributes simply increase the number of dimensions without nec­
essarily improving the model performance) and; (2) performing feature selection methods.
Figure 3.3 shows the Pearson correlation between all attributes (22 in this case since one
of them will be selected as the target variable one is trying to predict), where closer to dark
blue means a strong positive linear correlation, and closer to light yellow means strong
negative linear correlation.
Figure 3.3
The following correlations are noticeable and could be problematic: petrol and year;
brand_honda and washer_plug_drain; air_filter and fuel_filter.
Modelling: After splitting the data randomly into training and test sets with a 3:1 split,
respectively, the algorithm will be tested with the part coolant. One question that arises
after the example from Figure 3.2 is how many neighbors one should consider to decrease
the mean error for the classification. Addressing that variable, models were created in a
range from 1 to 40 neighbors, with results depicted in Figure 3.4, showing that, for this
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
23
==PAGE:30==
vehicle part, the best value for K after tuning is 3, where the mean error is minimal and
equal to 0.7%.
Figure 3.4
A critical step in creating an effective predictive model is to select which features should be
used as predictors [23]. For numeric predictors, such as the ones utilized here, the classic
approach of quantifying each relationship with the outcome using the sample correlation
statistic suffices. Pre­processing by removing highly correlated predictors can alleviate
problems such as the previously mentioned curse of dimensionality [23].
Using Figure 3.3, which points out the attributes with high linear correlation, it is clear
that diesel and petrol are, also by definition, mutually exclusive. Therefore, deleting one
of them should cause no damage to the prediction. Indeed, the removal of petrol and
other similar cases, namely brand_honda, and air_filter, increase the performance of the
model.
The results for the part coolant comparing the gains in model performance for these two
procedures (tuning of the parameter K and feature selection) may be seen below on Ta­
ble 3.6, where precision, recall, and F­1 score are calculated for accurately predicted
observations (i.e., where a coolant change was needed).
The definition of the variables shown in Table 3.6 according to [22] are:
• TP: observations that are positive and were categorized as such.
• FP: observations that are negative and were categorized as positive.
• TN: observations that are negative and were categorized as such.
• FN: observations that are positive and were categorized as negative.
• Precision (p): the ratio between true positives and all observations categorized as
positive (TP + FP).
• Recall (r): the ratio between true positives and all observations that are positive (TP
+ FN).
24
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:31==
• F1­score: the combination of recall and precision into one score, defined by 2×p×r
(p+r) .
• Mean error: the average between all observations with regards to correctly predicted
outcomes.
Table 3.6: Model performance results.
No Feature Selection
With Feature Selection
K­neighbors
5
3
3
TP
10
13
13
FP
0
1
0
TN
271
270
271
FN
4
1
1
Precision
1.00
0.93
1.00
Recall
0.71
0.93
0.93
F1­score
0.83
0.93
0.96
Mean error
1.404%
0.702%
0.351%
Algorithm 2 – Survival Analysis
Survival Analysis is a type of supervised learning algorithm used to analyze or predict
when an event is likely to happen. It originated from medical research, but its use has
dramatically expanded to many different fields such as speed of loan repayments, cus­
tomer lifetime value, customer churn, employee churn, and machine failure [24].
Theoretical Model:
For this study, the Cox Proportional Hazard model (CoxPH) was used. It was originally
intended as a representation of the behaviour of failure­time that is convenient, flexible,
and yet entirely empirical [25]. It is a semi­parametric regression model that focuses
on modeling a hazard function h(t, ⃗xi) by assuming that its time λ0(t) and feature η(⃗xi)
components are proportional. More specifically, it is a multiple linear regression of the
logarithm of the hazard on the variables xi, with the baseline hazard being an “intercept”
term that varies with time [24], such that:
h(t, ⃗xi) = h0(t) × η(⃗xi)
(3.1)
with h0(t) being the baseline function, t the survival time, and η(⃗xi) a risk function with a
linear representation:
η(⃗xi) = exp

p
∑
j=1
xi
j × w j

(3.2)
The coefficients to be determined, w j, if presenting a value greater than zero, or equiv­
alently a hazard ratio greater than one, indicate that as the value of the ith covariate in­
creases, the event hazard also increases and thus the length of survival decreases.
Contextually, it is wished to predict when a specific part will fail. Therefore, for each of the
j time intervals (2000 equally sized) from equation 3.2, the attributes corresponding to x
are the vectors with other data that are taken into account for the regression.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
25
==PAGE:32==
Data preparation:
Following the same procedure as for the KNN algorithm, categorical data has been one­
hot encoded. Due to how this dataset has been created, i.e., planned observations, there
are no outliers or errors, so no preparation work had to be done. Also, all correlations
between attributes are known; therefore, no feature selection has to be performed either.
Nevertheless, the reader may check for the correlation table on Figure 3.5, where the
scale is the same as for Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.5: Pearson correlation amongst attributes for artificial dataset.
Modelling:
After splitting the data randomly into training and test sets, with a test size of 40%, the
algorithm is applied to two parts, starter battery and clutch kit. To assess the precision of
the prediction two indicators shall be used: concordance index and Brier score. The first,
commonly called C­index, is a generalization of the Area Under the Curve (AUC) metric
that can take into account censored data. It measures the model’s ability to correctly
provide a reliable ranking of the survival times based on the individual risk scores [24],
and it is defined as:
C =
∑
i,j
(
1T j<Ti × 1η j>ηi × δj
)
∑
i,j
(
1T j<Ti × δj
)
(3.3)
26
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:33==
where ηi is the risk score for observation i, 1T j<Ti = 1 if T j < Ti, else 0, 1η j>ηi = 1 if ηj > ηi,
else 0, and δ j = 1 if the observation is not censored, i.e., the failure time exists within the
dataset, 0 otherwise [26]. A C­index of 1 corresponds to the best model prediction, and a
C­index of 0.5 corresponds to a random prediction [24].
The second, Brier score, is used to evaluate the accuracy of a predicted survival function
at a given time t; it represents the average squared distances between the observed
survival status and the predicted survival probability and is always a number between 0
and 1, 0 being the best possible value [24]. It is defined by:
BS (t) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(
1Ti>t −ˆS (t, ⃗xi)
)2
(3.4)
where N is the size of the sample, 1Ti>t=1 if Ti > t or 0 otherwise, and ˆS (t, ⃗xi) is the survival
function previously obtained with 3.1. It is useful to present an Integrated Brier Score
(IBS) across a time interval, which is defined by [27]:
IBS =
∫tmax
t0
BS (t)dw(t)
(3.5)
where the weighting function is w(t) = t/tmax, and the integral is estimated via the trape­
zoidal rule.
In models that are considered “useful”, generally speaking, values of C­index are closer
to 0.7 [28], and Brier score values are below 0.25 [27]. The results for both vehicle parts
may be seen below, in Figures 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9.
Figure 3.6: Prediction error for starter battery.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.7: Prediction vs. real failures for starter battery.
Figure 3.8: Prediction error for clutch kit.
Figure 3.9: Prediction vs. real failures for clutch kit.
Predictions for starter battery show an IBS of 0.07 over a time (odometer reading in this
case) from 0 to 159949km in Figure 3.6, where the vertical axis is the error, and the
horizontal axis is the odometer reading. As for the prediction, Figure 3.7 shows a mean
28
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:35==
absolute error of a little over six observations, where the vertical axis represents the total
population (number of vehicles) at risk (in this case 600, which is 40% of the test data out
of 1500 observations), and the horizontal axis shows the odometer readings. The drops
that can be observed represent part failures, thus reducing the population at risk, since
once a part has failed, it is no longer a part of the “un­broken” population.
Similarly, predictions for clutch kit show an IBS of 0.04 in Figure 3.8 through 159905km,
and a mean absolute error of a little more than 7 observations in Figure 3.9.
Both algorithms performed well and showed promising results with these datasets. How­
ever, not all attributes should be used as target variables since preventive maintenance
parts, i.e., regular interval occurrence, would be highly correlated to each other and
odometer readings. It is, therefore, technically correct to apply the algorithms to pre­
dict parts that are commonly replaced under failure or clear signs of wear, such as clutch
kit, brake system parts, transmission parts, fuel pump, suspension parts, amongst others.
3.1.3
Business Model
As previously touched upon, the BMC is a great tool to summarize, in one page, all in­
stances of a business. For a startup in a very initial point of its trajectory, some of the
entries of the original BMC by (Osterwalder, 2010) do not make much sense. Therefore,
the author has chosen to use an adapted version from (Stagars, 2014), which can be
seen in Figure 3.10.
Most of the content in each bin shown in Figure 3.10 was extensively discussed in previ­
ous sections. One that may be further developed is key resources: the created database,
with real­world maintenance data, is considered one. The reason for that is evident when
put into perspective with the current accessibility to similar data – dealerships and man­
ufacturers do not make it public, and local mechanic shops tend not to have a way of
extracting global data from all their clients or perhaps not even have it. The author has
attempted to contact more than ten dealerships and ask for simple data observations
but was shut down. The same with independent mechanic shops, although the reaction
leaned mostly towards ignoring the requests.
Figure 3.10: BMC for the initial MVP. Adapted from [21].
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
29
==PAGE:36==
3.1.4
Metrics
To truly assess if the proposed solution solves a problem or not, two hypotheses will be
tested: the value and the growth hypothesis. The first one tests whether a product or
service delivers value to customers, while the second one tests how new customers will
discover a product or service [20].
These two hypotheses must be a part of the customer validation process, which will be
described in Section 3.2.1. For now, a brief description of the metrics suffices:
• Usage intent: if willing to use the service.
• Purchase intent: if willing to purchase the service.
• Mailing list subscription: participants of the quantitative survey will be asked if they
would be interested in subscribing for a later phase of the product prototype.
• Errors committed when filling forms: participants of the qualitative survey will be
asked to transcript commonly encountered mechanic shop quotes, their vehicle’s
data, and the variables of a lease or finance proposal to the system so that errors
can be assessed.
3.2
Measure
This phase of the Lean Startup process is about gathering feedback from the market to
assess the need for the proposed product. In other words, there is the need to do case
study research to understand a real­world case, assuming that such an understanding is
likely to involve critical contextual conditions pertinent to the present case [29].
To do that, the author has opted for two steps: a quantitative and a qualitative part. In
the first one, the overall usage and purchase intents shall be captured. The second one,
which will have two sub­phases defined by the first and second versions of the product
prototype, is wished to grasp how hard it is for customers to use the service and the
participants’ overall opinion.
Case Study Research Methodology
The first, quantitative phase, is defined as a survey since it intends to answer the following
questions through a questionnaire [29]:
• Who might need the solution that is being developed?
• What exactly do they need?
• Where is this product most likely to succeed?
• How many people would pay for the product/service?
• How much are they willing to pay?
The second, qualitative phase, is defined as a case study since it cannot manipulate
the behavior of the participants and intends to answer the following questions through
interviews and the observation of results [29]:
• How do people interact with the prototype, and what kind of problems arise?
• Why such problems occur?
To obtain data in an organized, reproducible, and planned manner, one must build a re­
search design. A way of defining such concept is as the blueprint for a research that deals
with problems like what questions to study, what data is relevant, and how to analyze the
30
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:37==
results. This ensures that the initial questions are being answered [29]. What to ask has
already been defined, thus leaving the gap of how to ask and analyze it to the following
sections.
3.2.1
Customer Validation
Quantitative Study
Further developing the questions of 3.2, it is desired to know the following from those who
already own one or more vehicles, followed by the explanation of why it is wished to know
that:
• Was the internet utilized to get technical information on different aspects (e.g., main­
tenance costs) of owning a vehicle before purchasing? – attempting to estimate the
size of the potential market through this sampling.
• Do users perform vehicle maintenance at home, or do they take it to a mechanic
shop? If the latter, is it a lease or someone else being responsible to take it? – in
case of either of the last two option, is lack of knowledge one of the reasons behind
that choice?
• If users are responsible for their vehicle’s maintenance management, is analyzing
prices and necessity of parts/services from a mechanic quote an issue? – is the
hypothetical pain that the solution attempts to solve an actual issue?
• If it is a pain, would a service like the one proposed herein be interesting? – usage
intent.
• Would a small fee in a pay­per­use format for inquiries and a subscription plan
for the more advanced, full maintenance management service, be acceptable? –
willingness­to­pay (WTP).
And for those who do not own a vehicle:
• If one is not planning on buying a vehicle soon, what is the reason? – checking if
clarity of costs is an issue.
• If the respondent said he/she was planning on buying a vehicle, has the price of
different purchasing modalities been compared? – what is the current split of the
sample in terms of looking for information beforehand or not.
• If cost was an issue, would a comparison engine be interesting? – usage intent.
• Would a small fee in a pay­per­use format be acceptable? – WTP.
The complete survey questionnaire may be seen in Appendix C, and both design pro­
cesses are summarized in Appendix A where, for fitment purposes, some of the demo­
graphics questions were omitted.
A total of 77 people responded to the survey, with a time of completion distribution as
seen in Figure 3.11.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.11
With more than 80% of respondents being able to finish the survey in 4 minutes or less, it is
safe to say that a tedious, long survey was not a deterrent for participants. Demographics­
wise, the results may be seen on Figures 3.12 and 3.13, with regards to age and gender,
and employment and presence of children under 18 years of age at their household, re­
spectively.
Figure 3.12: Distribution of age and gender for survey respondents.
32
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.13: Employment status and presence of children in the household.
The survey brings some exciting results that go hand­in­hand with many market nuances
that were exposed in Section 2, and should therefore not be neglected in terms of cus­
tomer behavior. For example, more than 85% of vehicle owners claim that they have
conducted some sort of online research before the acquisition of their vehicles, a number
even higher than the one mentioned by [11] in Section 2.1.
For those who own a vehicle, which are 48% of all respondents, it was asked what they
had considered at the time of the purchase in terms of a few vehicle and brand character­
istics. The alternatives and response distribution (more than one could be selected) may
be seen below in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Vehicle owners primary concerns when purchasing.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
33
==PAGE:40==
Evidently, respondents value vehicles’ reliability and fuel consumption (100% selected
at least one cost­related alternative) over the brand status, which translates directly into
overall operation cost. This question was intended to capture the own perceived knowl­
edge on vehicles of respondents, where the underlying rank of complexity amongst the
choices decreases from top to bottom in Figure 3.14. As expected, fewer respondents
chose the overall operation cost, which is composed of variable costs such as fuel con­
sumption, preventive, and corrective maintenance, compared to simpler terms such as
fuel consumption. This suggests that the audience is, indeed, a non­specialist type of
audience.
The flowchart in Appendix A shows the overall results with percentages that trickled down
into each question. Each of the questions raised in Section 3.2 will be further developed
in the following paragraphs.
The results for the question of what people need may be seen on Figure 3.15, where it
is attempted to get an idea of how attractive each product is for the public. It is important
to note that product 1 was presented only for respondents who own a vehicle, product 3
only for respondents who do not own a vehicle, and product 2 for all respondents. This
is because product 1 is related to vehicle maintenance, and many of the questions would
not make sense if the respondent does not have a vehicle. The same goes for product 3,
which questions focused on the fact that the respondent did not own a vehicle.
All three products seem to have promising market potential, with a tiny percentage of
respondents believing products 2 and 3 would not be helpful at all. This might be because
such respondents did not plan or did not want to buy a vehicle soon, therefore not being
a part of the potential market.
The next portion of the study aims to answer where are the products most likely to suc­
ceed, i.e. if there are differences between the two proposed locations (Brazil and Den­
mark), and how many would pay for the product. Figure 3.16 shows the split by country
and product, where can be seen the absolute number of respondents in each bar, followed
by the percentage split between willing and not willing to pay.
Figure 3.15: Product acceptance distribution.
34
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.16: Respondents’ WTP by product and country.
Analysis of Figure 3.16 shows that Brazilian respondents are less willing to pay in compar­
ison to Danish and others nationalities across all products, which could be due to different
cultural and economic characteristics. This is especially true for product 2, with only 14%
of the Brazilian public willing to pay for it. However, for products 1 and 3, a more consis­
tent result may be seen across the nations, with percentages ranging from 70 to 100%.
One entertaining remark that follows from what was mentioned about vehicle ownership
and participation in products 1 and 3 that can be derived from Figure 3.16, is that 73% of
Brazilian respondents own a vehicle. In contrast, only 33% of the Danish ones do.
In general terms, product 1 seems to be the most accepted one, with a very high percent­
age of respondents stating they would pay for such a solution, with product 3 also show­
ing promising averages. In contrast, product 2 is the least desired one when it comes to
spending, but not when it comes to how useful or interesting it could be, as can be seen
in Figure 3.15, where the total of respondents said they would find it at least moderately
helpful.
As for how much they are willing to pay, at this stage of the research, no objective amount
of money was disclosed during the survey, but rather a magnitude. For products 1 and 3
the respondents were informed that it would cost them a one­time fee of about the same
as a “good cup­of­coffee”. As for product 2 an annual subscription of around the same
value as the monthly payment for typical video and music streaming services would be
charged, as can be seen on Appendix C, questions 15 and 17, respectively.
Last but not least, one wishes to discover profiles of who might need the solution: since
three products were embedded in the research, this question will also be answered in
3 parts. For product 1, i.e., mechanic service quote appraisal, Figure 3.17 shows four
different observed classes of respondents divided into five age groups, in which the per­
centages represent the number of positive answers to WTP in reference to the whole
sample. Figure 3.18 shows the same thing but within their age group.
In this manner, one can check the representation that each group has in the respondents’
population and the potential of each group in its local sample. After analyzing both figures,
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
35
==PAGE:42==
it is clear that, for product 1, when considering the whole population of respondents, males
who own a vehicle, are currently working, and do not have a child seem to be the majority
of positive results. That group is also the largest in absolute numbers, as it can be seen
from Figures 3.12 and 3.13. Therefore, turning the attention to the in­group results from
Figure 3.18, makes it possible to identify positive results within the group represented by
females, with a vehicle, currently working, with children, between the ages of 36 and 55.
Figure 3.17: Product 1 market demographics – total respondents.
Figure 3.18: Product 1 market demographics – in­group respondents.
For product 2, Figures 3.19 and 3.20 show the same as product’s 1 analysis. It can be
seen that a profile represented by a male in his 30s, currently working, with a vehicle, and
no children seems to be a potentially good target.
36
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.19: Product 2 market demographics – total respondents.
Figure 3.20: Product 2 market demographics – in­group respondents.
Lastly, for product 3, i.e., comparative service for purchasing options, Figures 3.21 and
3.22, which also show the same as the ones for product 1 and 2, depict a significant
change in the age of possible customers towards a younger age. For this one, either a
male or a female, in their 20s, without a car, currently working, and without children seem
to be a good target.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.21: Product 3 market demographics – total respondents.
Figure 3.22: Product 3 market demographics – in­group respondents.
38
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:45==
It is wished to trace profiles that match the identified groups and use them to obtain qual­
itative information. The profiles that were identified and picked are:
• Product 1: Female in her 50s, owns a vehicle, is currently working, and has a child
under 18 years old.
• Product 2: Male in his 30s, owns a vehicle, is currently working, and does not have
children.
• Product 3: Female in her 20s, does not own a vehicle, is currently working, and
does not have children.
The following personas were created for the qualitative interviews:
Figure 3.23: Persona for Product 1.
Figure 3.24: Persona for Product 2.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.25: Persona for Product 3.
Three hand­picked respondents that fit within those profiles participated in interviews
where the product prototype was presented to assess their interaction with it and doc­
ument their impressions, frustrations, and any other inputs. The names are fictitious, and
the identity of the participants will remain anonymous.
The reason behind choosing personas is to put the user in focus and attempt to assess
what he/she is trying to accomplish. Personas are defined by [30] as “pretend users”
which will interact with the product that was designed for them. They are not real people,
but they represent them throughout the design process. Personas are not actually “made
up”, but instead discovered as a byproduct of an investigation process [30], just like the
one conducted beforehand in the present study.
Qualitative Study
The goal for this stage of the case study is to assess how users interact with a prototype
of the products. This phase is not about solution attractiveness or WTP and, since such
variables were discussed in the previous section, impressions from the interviewees on
those will not be addressed.
When it comes to qualitative input, the author believes it is best to leave the questions
as open as possible, thus assessing what the user feels and thinks while interacting with
the product. With that being said, the following questions were presented to all three
participants:
1. What was easy about using the product?
2. What was hard about using the product?
3. Was there anything frustrating about this?
4. Is there anything you would like to add?
Other product­specific questions were presented to the interviewees, and will be dis­
cussed when applicable. To simplify the presentation of design and results for the quali­
tative assessment of the products through the deployment of the prototypes, each will be
presented separately.
40
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:47==
Product 1 – Mechanic Quote Appraisal: The persona who participated in the interview for
this product was Anne, whose profile may be seen in Figure 3.23. Anne was presented
with a short description of the case, which was a fictional document from a mechanic shop
with a service quote (Appendix D), followed by the online page in which she should fill­out
the information present on such quote to get an appraisal of the price and necessity of
parts/services. Figures E.1 and E.2 in Appendix E show the screen with the fields that
had to be filled only for one part of the quote as an example.
After filling out all the fields, Anne was presented with the outputs of the system, which
can be seen below, in Figure 3.26.
Figure 3.26: Product 1, screen 3 – output results.
Anne’s response to questions 1 through 4 may be seen below:
1. The whole process was very straightforward in terms of filling out the website page.
2. Nothing about the page itself, but the order of fields in the quote were different than
on the website, which made it harder with the going back and forth.
3. The previously mentioned going back and forth to find the data from the mechanic
quote, but nothing too serious about that.
4. When displaying the results of how much the parts are more expensive or cheaper
than the market, I would have preferred to see absolute values instead of percent­
ages.
And two product­specific questions followed by Anne’s responses in italic:
• Knowing what you know now, would you perform the service with this shop? – I
would call another shop and check prices for the same parts and services, in case I
did not know the shop in the first place. If I knew the shop well enough, I would trust
them in recommending non­predicted services to some extent, which would come
down to cost.
• If a discount for future use of this appraisal service was offered to you in exchange for
whether you decide to get a second opinion or not, would you give us that information
and redeem the voucher? – Yes, I would give the information to get the voucher.
Product 2 – Maintenance Management Service: The persona who participated in the
interview for this product was Michael, whose profile may be seen in Figure 3.24. Michael
was taken directly to the web page in which he would have to fill out the information about
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
41
==PAGE:48==
his vehicle and himself. Figures E.3 and E.4 in Appendix E shows the screens with the
fields that had to be filled. Michael’s responses to questions 1 through 4 may be seen
below:
1. Everything, except for a few terms, was straightforward.
2. I was not familiar with the term “odometer”, but a quick search online gave me the
answer.
3. Not at all, elementary data to be filled­out.
4. Calculating how much I drive per month was not very straightforward, so maybe the
website could help with that. Also, after finishing, I got the message about bringing
the future mechanic quotes for the system to get them appraised, so I think it would
be interesting to have a list of recommended mechanic shops around me.
Product 3 – Vehicle Purchase Modality Engine: The persona who participated in the in­
terview for this product was Mia, whose profile may be seen in Figure 3.25. Mia was
given three web pages to retrieve information from, each containing a different car pur­
chase option: (1) a vehicle marketplace with a second­hand car that was the “paying the
full amount upfront” option; (2) a manufacturer’s website with a new car that would be
leased and; (3) a manufacturer’s website with a new car that would be financed with a
down­payment defined by the manufacturer. She was then presented with the page to fill
out the information needed to compare those options. Figures E.5 and E.6 in Appendix
E show the screen with the fields that had to be filled.
After filling out the information, Mia received a table at the bottom of her screen with all
the costs derived from owning each option. Figure 3.27 shows such table.
Figure 3.27: Product 3, screen 3 – output results.
Mia’s response to questions 1 through 4 may be seen below:
1. Overall, very easy. The drop­down menus were nice and helped out since I do not
have a lot of knowledge of cars. The table with the final results of the comparison
was also effortless to read.
2. It was hard to know which fields were mandatory to fill out. I was also unsure if
putting the monthly payments and the down payment was enough for the leasing
42
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:49==
and financing options since the website displayed several other variables and per­
centages, especially for the latter.
3. When I was asked to provide the VIN or license plate of the vehicle. I did not have
a license plate for the brand new cars nor knew what a VIN was. For the used car,
unfortunately, it was without the license plates on the pictures, so I did not know
what to do. I later understood that it was not mandatory, but rather just to make
100% sure of what car model and the year it is about if I did have it.
4. I think that filling out the system with certain criteria (e.g., hatchback, a maximum
age, etc.) could be more helpful for when I am not decided on which model, espe­
cially for used cars. That could also go for the price range for new cars. Finally,
I think that there is a great opportunity to present a more interactive output, like a
scroll button or a plot that shows the costs changing according to intended years of
usage. For example, is it better to lease, buy or finance for a certain set of choices
based on different years of ownership? For first­time car buyers, like myself, it is
difficult to know how long you want to stay with a car.
It is essential to add that Mia questioned why she was asked the first four questions (age,
gender, country of residence, and years without car accidents), to which was clarified they
were needed for insurance estimations.
3.3
Learn
This phase of the MVP aims to highlight the “lessons learned” from the previous phases
and direct the product to either pivot or persevere. The qualitative study yielded interesting
results, of which the following are listed:
• Product 1 showed outstanding results in terms of attractiveness and adherence to
WTP across­the­board in both countries, age intervals, and genders.
• Product 2 seemed to be highly attractive and interesting to customers but displayed
lower adherence and WTP compared to the other two products, possibly due to
higher pricing and yearly commitment.
• Product 3 seems to be more interesting for a younger public.
• The percentage of respondents who state they sometimes do not know how to ana­
lyze a mechanic service quote corroborates with the research question hypothesis
that there is a need for such service in the market.
• A noticeable difference between Denmark and Brazil regarding WTP for product 2
suggests that subscription plans might not be the best initial go­to­market strategy
for the latter country.
The quantitative study is imperative in showing how the transition from technical charac­
teristics to ideation process and customer experience went in terms of acceptability. The
following lessons learned are highlighted:
• Simplifying the data needed for the online forms seems to be key. Asking for terms
such as odometer and VIN does not seem to help the non­technical public. For as
obvious as this might be to some, the line between technical and non­technical is
often blurry for those who live the technicalities of similar solutions.
• Less specific demands for product 3 could simplify the process for customers and
provide them with guidance a few steps earlier in the buying process. Deciding, for
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
43
==PAGE:50==
example, what kind of vehicle and the price range should be enough to provide them
with options.
With the lessons exposed above, it is clear that the proposed solution is on the right track.
For that matter, it has been decided that not only the product will persevere in its current
state (although with small changes that will be discussed in the following sections), but
also that the second round of MVP exposed in Figure 2.5 will not be conducted, since
only slight gain in feedback from customers is expected, when compared to a great effort
in terms of time disposal. This decision goes hand­in­hand with the fact that agility and
efficiency are critical in the start­up phase of a venture [20].
44
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:51==
4
Analysis
This chapter of the study will summarize what was created, presented, and learned from
the MVP experience. It will also discuss possible changes to the products, database,
algorithms, and business model.
Final Database
All databases used in the study were significant, with the artificial one being, undoubtedly,
imperative. The reason for that is because the manufacturer’s recommended services are
only used for queries and play no role in the algorithms used. Furthermore, the real­world
database had the downside of not having a vehicle­specific identifier. Finally, the handling
and validity of the artificial database were shown to work in theory, with no loss of validity
for an inductive step towards an actual, hypothetical database with similar attributes to be
applicable for the models in production.
It is important to note that when fully operational the two databases (manufacturer’s and
real­world data) would have to have very different handling processes: the first one would
have to be constantly monitored alongside the manufacturer’s releases of new vehicles
and changes made to existing models. The author sees no other option other than, at least
initially, manually checking for updates and including new vehicles. As for the second one,
it would be enriched with the use of products 1 and 2.
4.1
Final Product
Considering the results obtained from the algorithms and the qualitative and quantitative
studies, each product may be assessed now with knowledge from a potential market.
Product 1 – the high acceptance of this product in terms of how useful it would be and
a stated WTP corroborates with the initial hypothesis of it being a valid and potentially
sought­after solution for the public. Therefore, a small change, which will be justified in
the following item, will be made to the description of this product as seen in Section 3.1.1:
to bring more to the customer, Algorithm 1, explained in the same section, will be added
to it, bringing the outputs of the K­nearest­neighbors algorithm for the customer. I.e.,
parts that are not manufacturer recommended services but frequently appear in similar
observations.
Product 2 – this product was the most unexpected in terms of public reaction. The overall
very high interest coupled with a lower WTP compared to the other two products brings
some new ideas for slight tweaks that may help with future customer acquisition strategies.
The customers seem to be drawn to the easy­to­get, valuable information, and what they
do not seem to be fond of is the price­point and commitment necessity. Furthermore, as
exposed in Section 2.3.1, several free services bring similar products to this one, albeit
only with outputs derived from query type­I (i.e., manufacturer’s recommended services
reminders). Therefore, this product would now have this feature free­of­charge, Algorithm
1 would only be a part of product 1, and a subscription would only be needed for the
predictive part. This should be an excellent strategy to increase the user base of the
product and perhaps revenues of product 1, which is imperative for database enrichment
and, therefore, correct functioning of machine learning algorithms, since database size is
considered to be one of the main problems of production­based solutions [22].
Product 3 – high acceptance of this product coupled with the simplicity of implementation
result in no back­end changes.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
45
==PAGE:52==
The updated products from 3.1 may be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Updated algorithms and query types for each product.
Section 3.1.1 provided an overview of what risks could be taken into account at this stage
of the research. In retrospection, even though there were no errors from the interviewees
when filling out the forms online, there were some doubts about a few of the requested
fields, which suggests that improvements could be made to the next version of the proto­
type.
For product 1 the reader shall be reminded that the user would always be asked if he/she
would go for a second opinion after receiving the appraisal of the mechanic shop quote
or not. This statement and the answer to it are critical to the correct functioning of the
system since services that have not taken place cannot be a part of the database, with
the risk of creating deviations that will affect supervised learning algorithms. Thankfully,
the one interviewee handled that request well and seemed pleased that there would be a
discount if she wished for a second opinion and brought another quote to be appraised.
The whole point of running case studies is to understand what works and does not work
for the user. Following suggestions obtained from the interviews, all potential monetary
differences in service quotes would be changed to absolute values instead of percentages,
a list of mechanic shops would be suggested for customers of product 2 (easily withdrawn
from the system), all required fields would be marked, and more flexible criteria could be a
feature in future versions. A key takeaway is that the type of information requested should
be as simple as possible.
The last point concerns what the interviewee product 3 said regarding not knowing what
vehicle she would search for. The author understands that the customer does not nec­
essarily know exactly what they want, but also has to take into account that this was a
hypothetical situation, in which this specific person might not be right now in search of a
vehicle, therefore having less information from the market. For that reason, this sugges­
tion will not be taken as a priority but rather as a possibility for future versions.
With the exposed above, the business model suffers practically no changes and is virtually
the same as the one presented in Figure 3.10, except for the cost structure. This is due
46
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:53==
to the simplicity of opting for a value­driven strategy by looking at similar products on the
market, instead of creating a cost­driven strategy for an ongoing start­up that should have
stable economies of scale and efficiency.
4.2
Projected Market
Market size estimation can be a dangerous task in terms of over­optimistic penetration
and traction, defined by as the rate at which non­paying users are processed into paying
customers [31]. To avoid as much as possible a non­realistic projection, the following
items will be considered for each product: (1) definition of potential target customers; (2)
volume of target customers estimation; (3) penetration rate determination and; (4) aver­
age ticket determination (next section), thus obtaining potential revenues. The numbers
obtained from the qualitative study and the fleet size, and the number of yearly vehicle
transactions in each country will enable this calculation.
Brazil has had, for the past ten years, an average of 11.5 million passenger vehicle reg­
istrations yearly, 2.4 million of those being new cars [32] and 9 million second­hand cars
[33]. The total passenger vehicle fleet size is 58 million [34]. As for Denmark, there
were on average, from 2017 to 2019, 210 thousand new vehicles, around 600 thousand
used vehicles sold [35], and a total fleet of about 2.6 million [36]. Table 4.1 shows those
vehicle­related numbers, as well as the total population of each country by age groups
[37] [38].
Table 4.1: Population distribution, fleet size and yearly vehicle transactions.
Denmark
Brazil
Poptot (’000)
5840
213300
Pop(0−17) (’000)
1153
44040
Pop(18−25) (’000)
594
32587
Pop(26−35) (’000)
758
34146
Pop(36−45) (’000)
693
33048
Pop(46−55) (’000)
803
26682
Pop(56−65) (’000)
728
21155
Fleet (’000)
2600
58000
Transactions (’000)
810
11500
In the following, each product’s potential market shall be developed. Since product 2’s
market will be estimated using a lead­conversion strategy derived from the other products,
it will be addressed for last. For products 1 and 3, the following equation shall be used:
Mp =
Pop(age_interval)
(Poptot −Pop(0−17)) × M0 × i × p
(4.1)
Where Mp is the final potential market, M0 is the initial market size (number of vehicle
transactions or fleet size), i is the percentage of internet usage by users for that market,
and p is the market penetration rate. For this exercise, it is assumed that the demograph­
ics in terms of age groups for vehicle owners follow the national distribution.
Product 1 ­ quote appraisal
The qualitative study showed an apparent normally distributed public age around the mid­
30s. Therefore the initial targeted public will be of people between 26 and 45 years old.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
47
==PAGE:54==
Literature suggests that middle­aged users have been the fastest­growing customer base
for music and video streaming services [39], which supports the idea of including such
demographics for this product.
This study found that more than 85% of respondents of the survey declared to have used
the internet for vehicle comparison, research, and planning before a purchase or a service.
As previously mentioned, literature suggests that 80% does so [11]; therefore, this more
conservative number shall be used. Finally, a 1% market penetration rate will be used for
this product. Substituting these and country­specific numbers in 4.1, yields Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Market for product 1.
Denmark
Brazil
M0
2600
5800
i
80%
80%
p
1%
1%
Mp
6440
184185
These numbers are considered yearly customers for product 1, but not necessarily recur­
ring sales, since some churn is expected but not addressed at this point.
Product 3 ­ purchase comparison
For this product, the qualitative study showed a lean towards a younger public, which is
why the population between 18 and 25 years old will be targeted at first. The results from
the same exercise conducted for product 1 may be seen below on Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Market size potential for product 3.
Denmark
Brazil
M0
810
11500
i
80%
80%
p
1%
1%
Mp
4946
84029
Product 2 ­ maintenance management
Lastly, the subscription service adherence may be calculated as a percentage of lead
conversion from the two other products. Lead conversion rate could be conservatively
estimated at 5% for Denmark and 2% for Brazil, due to the lower acceptance of this
product by the latter, yielding Table 4.3.
Table 4.4: Market size potential for product 2.
Denmark
Brazil
Leads
11385
268215
Lead Conversion Rate
5%
2%
Pm
569
5364
Pricing Architecture
The products have been presented to the participants of the quantitative survey with a
price estimate, as seen in Appendix C. It is desired to possess revenue figures for a
48
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:55==
financial forecast, therefore this section will reach numbers based on secondary data
sources.
Product 1: Recent engine oil technology advancements have been expanding the interval
between maintenance, which applies to many new vehicles [40]. The worldwide fleet has
not caught up to that just yet, therefore assuming that a vehicle visits (or should visit)
the mechanic shop at least once a year comes with no loss of validity. The average car
mechanic service in Brazil is BRL 1500 [41], and in Denmark DKK 3720 [42]. Setting then
a fixed percentage for both countries of 1%, the prices would be BRL 15 and DKK 37.20,
respectively, which yields a combined yearly revenue of a little over DKK 3.5 million1.
Product 2: This product presented the worst (albeit not negative) responses for WTP,
possibly due to prices or commitment aversion. Utilizing other subscription­based ser­
vices is enough for this exercise. The biggest market shareholder in music streaming
services charges BRL 19.90 monthly for their basic plan in Brazil and DKK 99 in Denmark.
Using those prices would result in a yearly price of 238.8 and 1188, respectively. The
author does not believe that these are reasonable price points, especially for the Danish
market. A conservative price would be to set it, as it was presented for survey partici­
pants, at a much lower price point. There seems to be a big difference between the two
markets for this type of service compared to the example presented for product 1 of av­
erage mechanic service. A first price definition based on market knowledge will then be
BRL 99 and DKK 299 per year, yielding a combined yearly revenue of a little over DKK 1
million.
Product 3: The biggest automotive marketplace websites in Brazil and Denmark are ar­
guably Webmotors and Bilbasen, respectively. The first commercializes online posts to
sell vehicles for BRL 289.90 [43], valid until the vehicle is sold, while the second sells it
for DKK 229 per month [44]. These products are a useful WTP indicator for used vehi­
cle commercialization and, therefore, may be used to reference how much people could
spend to decide on which vehicle to choose. It is believed that customers would be willing
to pay more to sell a vehicle than to purchase one, since accomplishing that means an
immediate pay­back on the value of the service. Thus, prices will be set at BRL 29.90 and
DKK 49.9, yielding a combined yearly revenue of a little over DKK 3.2 million.
The final estimated yearly revenue for all three services stands at DKK 7.8 million, and
the breakdown may be seen on Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Combined potential yearly revenue in DKK (’000).
Product
Denmark
Brazil
Total
1 – Quote Appraisal
240
3347
3586
2 – Maintenance Management
170
838
1008
3 – Purchase Comparison
247
3044
3290
Total
657
7229
7885
4.3
Limitations
The project timeline now coincides with the reader’s time frame; therefore, it is an excellent
opportunity to address the limitations of what has been done so far.
1With a conversion rate of 1 BRL = 1.21 DKK.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
49
==PAGE:56==
Database
By this point, the reader should be familiar with how the database is enriched with the
user’s data by flagging positive or negative responses to getting a second opinion from
a different mechanic. However, getting this information does not guarantee that the cus­
tomer, after informing not going for a second opinion, for example, actually performed the
service. Further validation methods could be implemented in the future, such as commu­
nication with the shop through partnership.
Furthermore, as was pointed out by the literature addressed in Section 2, a high per­
centage of mechanical services are either under or over­treated, which creates a non­
predictable feedback mechanism with the creation of the database. Thankfully, the set of
parts and services that are not preventive recommended services is finite (even though
potentially significant), and genuine high­frequency problems tend to group by vehicle
model and year since technology advancements points at extinguishing old common is­
sues. Meaning, patterns would still be observable and therefore used by machine learning
algorithms.
Case study
In an ideal scenario, both quantitative and qualitative studies should contain a bigger
sample size. To interpret the results of the first with the least amount of bias, the author has
divided the analysis into absolute and relative quantities for demographics such as age
and gender. Nevertheless, this maneuver does not account for the lack of respondents.
The same argument applies to the qualitative study, which despite not needing as large
of a sample as quantitative analyses, still benefits from more than one opinion across
product prototypes.
Projections
It is risky to assess market size based on such global numbers as it was done here,
and attempting to attenuate the problem by setting a very conservative percentage for
market penetration is not ideal. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this exercise, the chosen
actions should suffice, which is to situate the reader regarding a realistic potential for the
products.
Finally, the pricing architecture can be considered an educated guess, which is appropri­
ate for moment. However, in future steps, a better understanding of the market would be
needed to find the optimal price­point for the products.
50
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:57==
5
Future Steps
The results obtained in terms of algorithm development and market potential for the solu­
tion presented herein lead the author to optimistically set up the stage for future actions
to reach market and possibly commercialize the products described.
5.1
Scale­up Plan
Following the concept of how organizations develop introduced by [45], which specifies
that companies will have five stages of evolution and five stages of revolution, a plan is
proposed for the first two stages of the first, namely: creativity and direction, which then
means the first phase of revolution, the leadership crisis, will also be addressed.
The domains which will be contemplated in this projection will be (1) internal structuring;
(2) product development; (3) go­to­market strategy, and; (4) financial forecast.
Internal Structuring
The first step and mark­zero of the proposed timeline is to design the selection process
and needed positions, aiming for a good development team, which is vital to help small
companies succeed and grow [46].
A professional with robust database management and product development background
is needed, with reliable cloud computing services and full­stack development skills. He/she
should be on­boarded as quickly as possible and start setting up the company in cloud
services and data architecture.
The following addition should be a commercially­oriented professional to help with prod­
uct placement, marketing strategies, and customer experience. The interaction between
those two positions is imperative to guarantee a refined product that contemplates infor­
mation and knowledge from both areas [46].
The third significant addition will be a professional with financial and accounting skills,
capable of handling negotiations for investments, taxes, and other accounting duties. Fi­
nally, it is expected that the technical area will need one or two other employees, possibly
part­time, to assist with, for example, database creation and updating.
Product Development
Creating a refined product definition can be a challenge for companies for several rea­
sons: The number of options surpasses the company’s ability to build them, information
is lacking, and the relationships between marketing and engineering are weak [46]. How­
ever, the latter will hopefully be covered by what was exposed previously about pushing
from the start for constant communication between the areas.
As it was done for the present stage of the venture, products will be defined using pro­
totypes since that reduces the chances of future problems [46]. Furthermore, the user
interface design should focus early in the product life cycle, differently than what was
done so far, where a very crude and objective user experience was in focus to assess
content acceptance. This is to ensure that no significant changes shall be made to the
product late in its life­cycle, which could create confusion for the customers [46].
Go­to­market Strategy
A great practice, as preached by [46], is to create a release timeline. This ensures that
a logical succession between products will exist, and efforts to launch to be focused on
specific goals and deadlines.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
51
==PAGE:58==
The first product to be available will be product 2, which will come out as a free­of­charge
basic maintenance management service, attempting to convert customers into using prod­
uct 1 whenever they need maintenance done to their vehicle, creating the much­needed
database for all products.
Reaching customers for this target market could be done
through social media posts and pages advertisement, which should be inexpensive at
a small scale.
Product 3 would be launched afterward since much can be done with rougher estimations
initially, which would later be refined as the database grows. The younger target market
could be reached through shorter advertisements in photo and video social media.
Finally, product 1, which is expected to be the venture’s flagship, should be rolled out
when the database is sufficiently large for both algorithms to have relevant results. In
addition, more effort and capital could be put into an advertisement for new customers
and existing customers at this stage, with the use of coupons and marketing emails, for
example.
Financial Forecast
According to [47] there are three main components to a basic financial forecast: profit and
loss statement, cash flow statement, and balance sheet. A simplified version of these may
be seen below on Table 5.1, for a time frame of two years. The forecast attempts to be
as conservative as possible and is heavily supported by a few assumptions and consid­
erations. The following discussion summarizes the rationale behind its construction:
• Market acquisition for the first quarter for each product is set at 0.5% of the potential
market exposed in Figure 4.5. By each following quarter, the market acquisition is
halved for each product (i.e., 0.25% for the second quarter). This is by no means a
goal but rather an attempt at representing an increase in the customer base without
the assumption of exacerbated growth.
• The Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) was estimated to be expenses from cloud services
and other related necessities, which should be very little in the beginning.
• None of the C­level professionals would be getting a salary in this proposed forecast.
• Some lines were included as provisions, such as financial expenses, interests, and
fiscal/social debts.
• Corporation taxes were considered 20% of revenues.
• The company would borrow money from the founders in two different rounds, one for
DKK 10k in the beginning and another for DKK 50k after five quarters. The company
would then be in debt with the founders, which should be reimbursed in the future.
• There is one round of investment considered in this forecast, totaling DKK 160k by
the end of 2023.
• The database gathered after the launching of product 3 is considered an intangible
asset.
52
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.1: Financial forecast in DKK (’000).
2021
2022
2023
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
P&L
Revenues
0
0
0
0
16.5
24.7
46.7
60.7
COGS
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(7.5)
(10)
(12.5)
Gross profit
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.5)
(2.5)
11.5
17.2
36.7
48.2
SG&A
0
0
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(7.5)
(10)
(20)
EBITDA
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(5)
6.5
9.7
26.7
28.2
Financial exp.
0
0
0
0
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.5)
Profit before tax
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(5)
4.9
8.2
25.2
26.7
Corp. tax
0
0
0
0
(0.9)
(1.6)
(5)
(5.3)
Net income
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(5)
3.9
6.5
20.1
21.4
Cash Flow
Fiscal/Social debts
0
0
0
0
0
(1)
(1)
(1)
Gross operating CF
(2.5)
(2.5)
(5)
(5)
6.5
8.7
25.7
27.2
Interests
0
(0.2)
(0.2)
(0.2)
(1.2)
(1.2)
(1.2)
(1.2)
Net Operating CF
(2.5)
(2.7)
(5.2)
(5.2)
4.2
5.8
19.5
20.6
New borrowings
10
0
0
0
50
0
0
0
Capital Raise
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
150
Change in cash
7.5
(2.7)
(5.2)
(5.2)
54.2
5.8
19.5
170.6
Cash position
7.5
4.8
(0.4)
(5.6)
48.6
54.4
73.9
244.6
Balance
Intangible assets
0
0
0
0
5
10
15
15
Financial debt
(10)
(10)
(10)
(10)
(60)
(60)
(60)
(60)
Total liability/equity
(2.5)
(5.2)
(10.4)
(15.6)
(6.3)
3.4
27.9
198.5
Timeline
The operational, financial, and personnel strategies may be seen below in a combined
timeline of events for the first two years of operation.
Figure 5.1: Timeline for first two years of operation.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
53
==PAGE:60==
54
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusions
This study has brought to light an apparent problem in the automotive aftermarket indus­
try of asymmetrical access to information on vehicle maintenance status between vehicle
owner and mechanic shop. This has justified the creation of an online solution that has
as its core goal to bring a frame of reference and increase transparency for vehicle own­
ers in terms of service necessity and price fairness, alongside with two other features of
maintenance management and purchase modality comparison that should yield increased
revenues and the value of a future proprietary database.
Referencing back to the research questions raised in Section 2.3.1, it is safe to say that
a platform that aims to solve such problem would have to have constantly updated vehi­
cle manufacturer’s recommended services, constantly enriched real­world maintenance
records obtained from its own customers, and relevant data on users and their vehicles.
To assess the viability of this venture, two different domains were developed: (1) a tech­
nical, developmental side, where ML algorithms that use data and produce useful outputs
to customers were used to show that it is indeed possible to retrieve valuable insight
from mechanic quotes, purchase inquiries, and predictive maintenance using a database
for supervised learning and; (2) an entrepreneurial side, where the Lean Startup method
showed that there is a market for this solution which can be monetized, justifying the
attempt to commercialize this idea.
It is safe to say that the research questions were answered and customer centrality should
be pursued in the decentralized automotive aftermarket service industry through the use
of solutions such as the one built here. Conclusively, this dissertation created substantial
evidence of overall market trends in the automotive industry, with findings that contribute
to rethinking the way the market operates and how to survive the pressure from changing
customer needs and expectations in an ever­growing competitive environment.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
55
==PAGE:62==
56
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Reiter, A. Mueller, U. Hartmann, M. Schatz, and L. Greschuchna, “Next level
service performance – intelligent order assistants in automotive aftermarket,” HCII,
vol. 11589, pp. 114–125, 2019.
[2]
McKinsey and Company, Race 2050 – a vision for the european automotive indus­
try, 2019.
[3]
——, Ready for inspection: The automotive aftermarket in 2030, 2018.
[4]
——, Beyond coronavirus: The road ahead for the automotive aftermarket, 2020.
[5]
A. Lotko, P. A. Korneta, M. A. Lotko, and R. Longwic, “Using neural networks in
modeling customer loyalty in passenger cars maintenance and repair services,”
Journal of Applied Sciences, vol. 8, no. 713, 2018, doi:10.3390/app8050713.
[6]
T. Jones and E. Sasser, Why satisfied customers defect, 1995.
[7]
S. Shane and S. Venkataraman, “The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of
research,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 25, no. 1, 2000.
[8]
M. Darby and E. Karni, “Free competition and the optimal amount of fraud,” The
Journal of Law & Economics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 67–88, 1973.
[9]
H. Schneider, “Agency problems and reputation in expert services: Evidence from
auto repair,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 406–433, 2012.
[10]
M. Busse, A. Israely, and F. Zettelmeyer, “Repairing the damage: The effect of price
expectations on auto­repair price quotes,” CSIO Working Paper, no. 0126, 2013,
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/92472.
[11]
McKinsey and Company, A future beyond brick and mortar – disruptive change
ahead in automotive retail, 2020.
[12]
MarketLine, Automotive aftermarket in europe, 2012.
[13]
R. de Best. (2021). “Percentage of newly­bought vehicles on lease in the united
states from 1st quarter of 2017 to 3rd quarter of 2020,” [Online]. Available: https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/453122/share-of-new-vehicles-on-lease-usa/.
[14]
B. Uyttebroeck. (2020). “Europeans lease and rent more cars than ever before,”
[Online]. Available: https://www.globalfleet.com/en/financial- models/europe/
analysis/europeans-lease-and-rent-more-cars-ever?a=BUY03&t%5C%5B0%5C%
5D=Dataforce&curl=1.
[15]
McKinsey and Company, Used cars, news platforms: Accelerating sales in a digitally
disrupted market, 2019.
[16]
H. Andersen and B. Hepburn. (2020). “Scientific method,” [Online]. Available: https:
//stanford.library.sydney.edu.au/archives/sum2019/entries/scientific-method/.
[17]
E. S. Rasmussen and S. Tanev, “The emergence of the lean global startup as a new
type of firm,” Technology Innovation Management Review, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 12–19,
2015, https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/941.
[18]
T. Felin, A. Gambardella, S. Stern, and T. Zenger, “Lean startup and the business
model: Experimentation revisited,” Long Range Planning, 2019, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.lrp.2019.06.002.
[19]
A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, Business Model Generation, 1st ed. John Wiley &
Sons, 2010, ISBN: 978­0470­87641­1.
[20]
E. Ries, The Lean Startup – How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Inno­
vation to Create Radically Successful Businesses, 1st ed. Currency, 2011, ISBN:
9780307887917.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
57
==PAGE:64==
[21]
M. Stagars, The Lean Startup Changed Everything. Apress, 2014, pp. 15–27, ISBN:
9781484206232.
[22]
J. Grus, Data Science from Scratch – First Principles with Python, 1st ed. O’Reilly
Media, 2015, ISBN: 978­1­491­90142­7.
[23]
M. Kuhn and K. Johnson, Applied Predictive Modeling, 1st ed. Springer, 2013,
pp. 487–501, ISBN: 978­1­4614­6848­6.
[24]
S. Fotso et al. (2019). “PySurvival: Open source package for survival analysis mod­
eling,” [Online]. Available: https://www.pysurvival.io/.
[25]
D. R. Cox, “Regression models and life­tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical So­
ciety, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 187–220, 1972.
[26]
M. Schmid, M. N. Wright, and A. Ziegler, “On the use of harrell’s c for clinical risk
prediction via random survival forests,” 2016.
[27]
(2021). “Scikit survival ­ integrated brier score,” [Online]. Available: https://scikit-
survival.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/generated/sksurv.metrics.integrated_brier_
score.html#sksurv.metrics.integrated_brier_score.
[28]
H. Uno, T. Cai, M. J. Pencina, R. B. D’agostino, and L. J. Wei, “On the c­statistics
for evaluating overall adequacy of risk prediction procedures with censored survival
data,” Stat Med, vol. 10, no. 30, pp. 1105–1117, 2011.
[29]
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research – Design and Methods, 5th ed. Sage, 2014, ISBN:
978­1­4833­0200­3.
[30]
A. Cooper, The Inmates are Running the Asylum – Why High Tech Products Drives
Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity, 2nd ed. Sams, 2004, ISBN: 0­672­32614­
0.
[31]
A. Maurya, Scaling Lean – Mastering the Key Metrics for Startup Growth, 1st ed.
Portfolio, 2016, ISBN: 1101980524.
[32]
ANFAVEA. (2021). “Yearly new licensed vehicles in brazil,” [Online]. Available: https:
//www.anfavea.com.br/estatisticas.
[33]
FENABRAVE. (2021). “Yearly used sold vehicles in brazil,” [Online]. Available: https:
//abinteligencia.com.br/category/estatisticas-periodicas/fenabrave/.
[34]
Federal Government of Brazil. (2021). “Passenger vehicle fleet size in brazil,” [On­
line]. Available: https://www.gov.br/infraestrutura/pt- br/assuntos/transito/
conteudo-denatran/frota-de-veiculos-2020.
[35]
S. Hallenslev. (2020). “Ny rekord: Brugtbilsalget går amok,” [Online]. Available:
https://blog.bilbasen.dk/brugtbilsalget-juni-2020-269987/.
[36]
Danmarks Statistik. (2019). “Motorparken – bestanden af personbiler,” [Online]. Avail­
able: https://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/Udgivelser/nyt/GetPdf.aspx?cid=28467.
[37]
Federal Government of Brazil. (2021). “Pesquisa nacional por amostra de domicílios
contínua trimestral,” [Online]. Available: https://sidra.ibge.gov.br/tabela/5918.
[38]
Danmarks Statistik. (2021). “Population in denmark,” [Online]. Available: www.dst.
dk/en/Statistik/emner/befolkning-og-valg/befolkning-og-befolkningsfremskrivning/
folketal.
[39]
(2020). “Over 55s are fastest growing group of users of music streaming services,”
[Online]. Available: https://eraltd.org/news-events/press-releases/2020/over-55s-
are-fastest-growing-group-of-users-of-music-streaming-services-in-the-uk/.
[40]
(). “How often do cars need service,” [Online]. Available: https://www.aaa.com/
autorepair/articles/how-often-do-cars-need-service.
[41]
B. P. Lima. (2013). “Brasileiro gasta por ano 40% do valor do carro com manutenção
e despesas,” [Online]. Available: https://economia.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,
brasileiro- gasta- por- ano- 40- do- valor- do- carro- com- manutencao- e- despesas,
145264e.
58
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:65==
[42]
R. Fokus. (2016). “Så stor er forskellen på bilservice­priser,” [Online]. Available:
https://www.bt.dk/forbrug/saa-stor-er-forskellen-paa-bilservice-priser.
[43]
Webmotors. (2021). “Venda seu carro usado ou seminovo na webmotors,” [Online].
Available: https://www.webmotors.com.br/vender/carro/modalidade.
[44]
Bilbasen. (2021). “Sælg din bil på bilbasen,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
bilbasen.dk/syi/?id=daa46613-4f66-4f45-ae80-2779f1b9d81c#!/syi-carspecifications/
syi-hub.
[45]
L. E. Greiner, “Evolution and revolution as organizations grow,” Harvard Business
Review, pp. 55–66, 1998.
[46]
L. Testa, Growing Software – Proven Strategies for Managing Software Engineers,
1st ed. No Starch Press, 2009, ISBN: 1­59327­183­2.
[47]
T. B. P. Shop. (2021). “Financial forecast example for new businesses and startups,”
[Online]. Available: https://www.thebusinessplanshop.com/en/blog/financial-
forecast-example.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
59
==PAGE:66==
60
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:67==
A
Quantitative survey process model
Figure A.1: Process model used for the quantitative survey with resulting percentages.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
61
==PAGE:68==
62
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:69==
B
Risk Mapping and Management
Table B.1: Risk mapping and management
#
Risk
Category
Probability / Impact / Stand
Possible Action / Notes
1
Manufacturers not releasing
information on services
Market
Low / High / Mitigate
Launching of services that
push for transparency
2
Dealerships increasing their
efforts in fixed price
maintenance plans
Market
Medium / Medium / Accept
The termination of factory
warranty should still drive
customers away from
the higher prices
of dealerships
3
Mechanic shops against
services which bring
visibility for
vehicle owners
Market
Low / Low / Mitigate
Push for transparency and
involve mechanics with
features such as
ratings could help
bring them more customers.
4
Competitors with already built databases
to come up with a similar product
Market
Medium / Very high / Accept
–
5
Errors when filling up
the forms online
or in the app
Customers
High / Medium / Mitigate
Constant updates
and monitoring.
Data validation
as standard.
6
Trouble with
understanding what
the product brings
Customers
Remote / Very high / Mitigate
Simple delivery methods for the product –
Transparency and
objectiveness.
...
...
...
...
...
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
63
==PAGE:70==
Table B.2: Risk table continued
#
Risk
Category
Probability / Impact / Stand
Possible Action / Notes
...
...
...
...
...
7
Data validity for pursuing
or not a second opinion
Customers
High / Very high / Mitigate
Request and give a discount
for customers who do.
8
Too tedious/long quantitative survey
Customers
Medium / Very high / Mitigate
Get feedback by
applying test beforehand.
9
”Server” crashing when
performing prototype tests
Infrastructure
Medium / Medium / Transfer/share
Run the prototype
with a back­up PC ready.
10
Manufacturer information that needs
to be constantly updated or added every
year with new releases
Product
Imminent / Very high / Accept
Keep updated on manufacturers
changes, update databases with every
new vehicle release.
11
Customers’ data mishandling
Customers
Low / High / Mitigate
Observe and apply
EU­GDPR’s best practices.
64
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:71==
C
Quantitative survey questions
Figure C.1: Survey questions.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
65
==PAGE:72==
D
Mechanic Shop Service Quote
Figure D.1: Document that simulated a mechanic shop’s quote.
66
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:73==
E
Product Prototypes
Figure E.1: Product 1, screen 1.
Figure E.2: Product 1, screen 2.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure E.3: Product 2, screen 1.
Figure E.4: Product 2, screen 2.
68
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
==PAGE:75==
Figure E.5: Product 3, screen 1.
Figure E.6: Product 3, screen 2.
Predictive, Preventive, and Comparative Vehicle Maintenance
69
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Diplomvej, Building 371
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
