==PAGE:1==
Changes in Travel Behaviour in Zealand during
Covid-19 pandemic
Ændringer i rejseadfærd på Sjælland under Covid-19-pandemien
Dimitra Mavroudi
Ioanna Tsiligianni
Master thesis project· 30 ECTS / (Person)
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Department of Transport
Copenhagen, 2021
Supervisor : Professor Otto Anker Nielsen, DTU Management
CoSupervisor : Assistant Professor Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson, DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgments
This thesis is submitted as the ﬁnal project for the qualiﬁcation of a Master of Science Degree
in Industrial Engineering and Management from the Management Engineering Department of
the Technical University of Denmark.
We want to thank our supervisors, professor Otto Anker Nielsen and assistant professor Jes-
per Bláfoss Ingvardson, for their guidance and advice throughout the project. More speciﬁcally,
we would like to thank both supervisors for providing access to the data used in the report,
regular meetings, brainstorming sessions, submitting targeted feedback and guidance for the
analysis process, and helping out with technicalities.
We would like to thank Rejsekort A/S for providing data from the Danish smart card with
consent from all included contractors. We want to thank special consultant Hjalmar Christiansen,
at DTU Transport responsible for the National Traﬃc Survey, for supporting with insights when-
ever needed and giving access to the TU detailed data set.
Lastly, we are grateful to our family and friends, especially to our dear friend Nikolaos
Zafeiridis, for their continuous support and patience throughout this project.
Dimitra & Ioanna
Copenhagen, 2021
"As you set out for Ithaca hope your road is a long one, full of adventure, full of discovery."
Konstantinos Kavaﬁs
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Covid-19 pandemic outbreak has signiﬁcantly impacted travel behavior across the globe.
Imposed restrictions from national authorities regarding universal lockdowns, teleworking, the
closing of retail and educational activities have created new mobility patterns during the pan-
demic. Even though it is expected that ridership levels will experience a signiﬁcant decrease, it is
still unknown how these patterns will evolve after the pandemic and how they will return to prior
rates. The present master thesis focuses on the correlation between the Covid-19 pandemic and
the change in travel patterns in Zealand, Denmark. In order to provide an analysis of Covid-19
pandemic impacts in Denmark, data extracted by the Danish National Travel Survey (TU) and
by Danish Smart Travel card are being examined.
After explaining the fundamental elements of the current study in-depth, a statistical analysis
has been performed in both data sets using relevant software (Python, MS Excel) for their
manipulation. The results depict the number of trips per person per day for the periods of Pre
Lockdown, Hard Lockdown, Reopening, and Light Lockdown from 2017 to 2020 in Zealand.
The analysis is being divided into two sections, public transport mode trips, including bus, metro,
s-train, regional train, and private mode trips, including trips performed by bike, private vehicles
(primarily cars), taxi, and ﬁnally, walking trips. The results indicate that public transport modes
have experienced a sharp decrease, especially during the period of Hard Lockdown, ranging
from 50% to 75%.
On the contrary, during the same period, private mode trips start increasing, especially
walking trips, which have been almost doubled, justifying this downward trend in public trans-
portation. Already from the start of the Reopening period, when the national restrictions have
been lifted, public transport mode trips start rising again, indicating the moderate return of
the passengers to their old travel habits, but still underscore Pre Lockdown levels by 50%.
Following the upward trend, total private mode trips peaked in the Reopening period, com-
pared to the previous examined years and the other lockdown periods. The results demonstrate
that social-distancing measures and travel purpose are the two most inﬂuential factors in travel
decision-making during the pandemic. Commuting and leisure purposes hold the highest share
of travelers’ daily routine, where walking trips have been doubled compared to the trips per-
formed in 2019 for leisure purposes. Therefore, walkers tend to cover longer distances after the
pandemic, but a noticeable change in travel behavior is the average covered distance by bike,
which has been increased concerning the examined years 2017 to 2019. The present report dis-
cusses that the coronavirus crisis might result in structural, behavioral travel changes, although
future research is necessary to observe the long-lasting eﬀects of Covid-19. Understanding
travel behavior evolving during a pandemic crisis can contribute to better transport management
in the future.
Keywords: Covid-19 pandemic, travel behavior, Zealand, public transportation, private
mode trips, travel purpose, lockdown, reopening, restrictions
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Covid-19 Timeline in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Reading Guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Consequences of Covid-19
6
3
Introducing Data-sets
10
3.1
TU:The Danish National Travel Survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Rejsekort:The Danish smart travel card . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methodology
12
4.1
Analysis Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Data Framing and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.1
TU:The Danish National Travel Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2.2
Rejsekort: The Danish smart travel card . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Data Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Results
24
5.1
Analysis A Results: Private Mode Trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
Relative Change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.2
Distance covered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Analysis B Results : Public Mode Transport Trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.1
Relative Change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Distribution of Modal share: Leisure and Workplace
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Discussion
57
7
Conclusion
60
Appendices
i
A Handling Rejsekort Data - Code
i
A.1
"Cleaning" Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
A.2
Data Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
viii
A.3
Relative Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
B
Handling TU Data
x
B.1
"Cleaning" Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
B.2
Detailed TU Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
B.3
Relative Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xv
B.4
Average Covered Distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xvi
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Daily travelling is a vital element of the everyday life of people all around the world. There
are many diﬀerent reasons that can justify trips during each day and they can also vary during
the day. Some of the most common reasons for travelling is transportation to and from work
or educational institutions, leisure activities and business purposes. Another essential aspect
of daily travelling is the mode of transport used for every trip, which can be a single trip or
a combination trip to reach the desired destination. The study of Dieleman et al [1] used the
Netherlands National Travel Survey from 1996 and found that the majority of the trips are related
to work and leisure purposes, where the car was the dominant mode of transport. In addition,
they found that depending on the journey purpose, the type of transportation was alternating,
so there is a strong inﬂuence between these two variables.[1] However, it is worth mentioning
that the Netherlands is a country where citizens highly prefer travelling by bike or walking
for all trips. All the above-mentioned elements help to describe the travel behaviour and the
factors that can be inﬂuenced by, combined with signiﬁcant socio-demographic factors, such
as gender, household structure, personal income, routine and car possessing, as depicted from
several pieces of research.[2] [3]
Transportation in Denmark is highly developed, consisting of many diﬀerent transport modes
that contribute to the daily trips of its citizens, making their routine easier and more comfortable.
The most important Danish transportation channels are the rail and sea passenger traﬃc and
road infrastructure, including exclusive cycling and pedestrian areas. Having 1100 kilometres
of motorway, 84 S-train stations, 4 lines of Metro, two of them launched in 2019 and 2020
respectively, and 2 long-distance bridges connecting Zealand and Funen and Copenhagen and
Malmö in Sweden, makes it easy to navigate around Denmark. In addition, Denmark has a strong
tradition of cycling for over 100 years with over 12000 kilometres of cycling paths nationwide,
which is considered to be a quarter of private transport for small distances.[4]
However, Covid-19 has aﬀected the everyday life of people all around the world. One im-
portant aspect of the daily routine that has been highly aﬀected worldwide by this unprecedented
pandemic is daily trips to or from work, travelling, or going from place to place as well as
outbound journeys. The level of impact is diﬀerent across the world since each national gov-
ernment has decided to restrain the pandemic by using diﬀerent approaches and setting varied
restrictions. In Denmark, since the beginning of the pandemic, 290686 persons have been
infected by Covid-19, from which 281195 people have recovered so far. [5] In order to take the
necessary precautions, Danish authorities have decided to announce several restrictions during
the pandemic period, which were being updated based on the epidemiological data at that time.
The Covid-19 Timeline in Denmark included in the current analysis will be presented in-depth
in the next section.
1
==PAGE:6==
1.1.1
Covid-19 Timeline in Denmark
It may be that the Covid-19 has aﬀected the nations on an international level; however, the
reactions even inside the European Union, between the individual member states vary and change.
Denmark was among the ﬁrst countries to lock down society, while the Danish government
quickly adopted aid packages to support this socio-economic crisis. Even though in January
2020, the possibility of the coronavirus to approach Denmark was neglected, one month later, the
ﬁrst Dane has been infected by Covid-19. In early March, the Prime Minister held her ﬁrst press
conference regarding the pandemic and imposed the ﬁrst travel restrictions, which have been
followed by a national lockdown on March 11th 2020. The lockdown included borders closing,
closed public services, schools and institutions, department stores, hairdressers, restaurants,
assembly ban for more than 100 people, as well as high recommendations against unnecessary
travelling. Instead of two weeks, which was initially planned, the lockdown continued until
mid-April, when the Danish authorities initiated a 5-phase reopening plan, including reopening
education institutions, the retail market, restaurants and cafes, and lowered public transport
and assembly restrictions. On May 7th, in her eleventh press conference, the Prime Minister
announced Phase 2 of the reopening, which oﬃcially restarted the commercial activities in
Denmark, such as cafes and restaurants and educational institutions. Border restrictions were
loosened for speciﬁc conditions and neighbouring countries. On August 22nd, it became a
mandatory requirement that travellers and staﬀwear face masks in public transport in Denmark.
As the number of infections was rising in Denmark during September, the government decided
to introduce new restrictions regarding restaurants and cafes to limit the infection across Danes
that continued until November, when the assembly ban has been reduced from 50 people to
10, and further restrictions on local level in Hjørring, Frederikshavn, Brønderslev, Jammerbugt,
Vesthimmerland, Thisted and Læsø municipalities have been set. This light lockdown continued
until December 7th 2020.[6]
Months
Sum of Cases
Sum of Deaths
Weekly new hospital
admissions per 100k
Jan, 2020
0
0
0
Feb, 2020
2
0
0
March, 2020
2575
77
17,80941
Apr, 2020
6431
366
17,38007
May, 2020
2625
128
7,092853
Jun, 2020
1118
34
2,026529
Jul, 2020
974
10
1,305222
Aug, 2020
2975
9
2,129573
Sep, 2020
10764
26
5,169367
Oct, 2020
17761
69
8,346553
Nov, 2020
34127
110
21,70791
Dec, 2020
30406
112
44,05125
Figure 1:
Biweekly conﬁrmed COVID-19
cases in Denmark from March 10th, 2020 to
December 7th, 2020 [7]
Table 1: Monthly number of new reported
COVID-19 cases, deaths and weekly new hos-
pital admissions in Denmark from January
2020 to December 2020 [8], [9]
2
==PAGE:7==
Table 1 shows the number of cases for the total population per month in the study period and
the weekly hospital admissions per 100000 citizens. Figure 1 compares the weekly number of
cases per million inhabitants for Denmark. As illustrated, the biweekly conﬁrmed Covid-19 cases
in Denmark appear to be rising from March 10th to December 7th, with some slight ﬂuctuations
during this period. The biweekly conﬁrmed cases on March 10th were approximately 440. In
April 2020, the infected surpassed the 6000 cases, leading to a sharp decrease in May, with
Denmark dropping to 2625 Covid-19 cases and 7.1 weekly hospital admissions, which permitted
lifting the restrictions in a series of Reopening phases. During June and July 2020, the biweekly
cases dramatically dropped down to 193 and 168 in Denmark per million people, respectively.
From August, the numbers increased to 511 biweekly conﬁrmed cases per million people in
Denmark, while in November 2020, the monthly infected cases reached a peak, with a total of
34127 conﬁrmed Covid-19 cases in Denmark, the biggest infection rate since the beginning of
the pandemic. In December 2020, hospitals in Denmark faced the most challenging time in
their health system, having to deal with 44 new hospitalized cases per week per 100000 of the
population.[8]
1.2
Scope
The scope of this thesis report is to deﬁne the impact on travel behavior in Zealand of Covid-19
pandemic restrictions which have been placed in Denmark. The study is based on data from
the National Transport Survey (TU) and the Danish Smart Travel Card (Rejsekort) in order to
identify the changes in the use, the trip purpose and selection of transportation modes during the
diﬀerent time periods of corona restrictions set by Danish Government. Therefore, the main goal
of the thesis is to examine how these preferences have changed during this unusual period and
build a trend-line of the changes between the past four years and the diﬀerent periods of Covid-19
timeline. The present report is based on collected data which will be statistically analysed in
order to illustrate the deviations in travel behaviour among diﬀerent lockdown periods, aiming
to interpret the impacts of the pandemic in the ﬁeld of public transport and private mode trips.
More speciﬁcally, the decrease in the number of users of public transportation during the Covid-
19 pandemic in contrast to previous years, alongside the increase in the number of users that have
replaced public transportation with their own vehicles or walking, are expected to be presented.
In addition, a preliminary simulation of future travelling preferences could be illustrated based
on the studied periods. Even though the examined sample refers to a small region, it can be set
as a foundation for studies of global networks.
3
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Objective
The objective of the thesis is primarily to identify possible diﬀerentiation in travel behavior and
the change of transport preferences during diﬀerent lockdown periods, of the ﬁrst corona wave
in Denmark, in order to create a trend-line of the travel changes that occurred in Zealand, during
the last four years, from 2017 until 2020.
It is also worth exploring how many users have converted from public transportation to own
vehicles and how many have chosen to use public transport again after the Danish government
has raised the Covid-19 restrictions in the reopening phase.
Therefore, this thesis aims to master the following learning objectives:
• Change Identiﬁcation of transport preferences during diﬀerent lockdown periods
• Data collection by TU and Rejsekort from 2017-2020
• Data Analysis and Interpretation in order to identify the changes in travel behaviour due
to Covid-19 pandemic
• Management of big and complex data sets
• Development of statistical analysis models and tools ( Python, Microsoft Excel)
• Export of valid statistical results and creation of a trend-line between diﬀerent lockdown
periods and modes of transport
• Discussion of the analysis ﬁndings and the consequences of Covid-19 in Zealand’s public
transportation
Research question:
Which are the changes in travel behavior in Zealand during Covid-19 pandemic?
1.4
Limitations
The present thesis analysis is mainly based on two data sets: the National Transport Survey
(TU) and the Danish Travelcard (Rejsekort). Therefore, it is expected that this study does not
correspond to all travelers for the region of Zealand. Even if the use of Rejsekort echoes to
the majority of the Danish population, there are several diﬀerent ticketing methods in public
transportation, such as student cards, day passes, single tickets, or monthly passes.
It is
highlighted that the following analysis has not considered alternative cards or payment methods
for traveling around Zealand. Moreover, due to the complexity and the size of the data sets,
only a part of Denmark, Zealand, has been chosen to implement this research. It is considered a
preliminary analysis of the immediate impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic in transport, without
high penetration in all single regions of Denmark.
Other limitations of this study may be found regarding the diﬀerentiation in data and their
manipulation. The two sources of the data collected consist mostly of unlike data frames, and
their approach varies. Hence, the following analysis is structured in two similar, but not identical,
statistical methods. More speciﬁcally TU survey provides a broader range of socio-demographic
information of the travelers, while Rejsekort not, as well as data concerning private modes of
transportation such as vehicles, bicycles, walking trips, etc. Hence, the results of the study are
4
==PAGE:9==
going to be presented in two sections. Analysis A considers only TU information of private
mode trips preferences, while Analysis B focuses on extracting a more generic outcome on
public transportation combining both data sets. For this comparison to be equivalent, age and
personal information of travelers, traveling hours of the day, and duration of active cards have
not been included in the interpretation of the data sets.
1.5
Reading Guidance
The present master thesis is structured as follows. In the ﬁrst chapter, an overview of the thesis
purpose and the timeline of the restrictions in Denmark is being provided. The paper will
cover the entire Covid-19 ﬁrst outbreak in Zealand, Denmark, including Pre Lockdown, Hard
Lockdown, Reopening, and Light Lockdown periods. The introduction chapter is followed by
a theoretical review of the Covid-19 pandemic consequences in all areas of daily life, focusing
on the transport sector, which has profoundly been aﬀected and in disarray. Furthermore, recent
literature is being presented to support the analysis of the thesis topic. In Chapter 3, the data
that the present analysis will be based on will be presented in order to set the foundations of
Chapter 4, which will penetrate further into the conducted methodology, the inserted variables,
the statistical method, and the data manipulation for supporting the research question. The
ﬁndings regarding the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on daily trips will be illustrated in
Chapter 5 and analyzed in depth. Finally, in Chapter 6 and Chapter 7, conclusions and general
comments will be drawn to provide future research directions pointed to adjust transport models
and future societies to the changing circumstances and challenges forced by the pandemic crisis.
5
==PAGE:10==
2
Consequences of Covid-19
Covid-19, also known as the coronavirus, is a highly contagious disease that attacks the respira-
tory system. The ﬁrst infection cases have been reported in Wuhan, China, in December 2019,
which led to a worldwide spread and the recognition of Covid-19 as a pandemic on March 11th
by the World Health Organization (WHO).[10] As the infection approached many countries, al-
ready 203 countries had Covid-19 cases by March 30th, 2020. Therefore, national governments
have decided to follow a similar policy, alternating from country to country, in order to face
this unusual enemy.[11] The most common policies that the governments have followed in order
to restrain the highly increasing Covid-19 cases were regarding social distancing measures of
individuals or lockdowns, which included educational institutions, commercial activities, public
transport, and travel restrictions. Reports have shown that this kind of eﬀort, inspired by Chinese
policies, which were the ﬁrst to face this pandemic, has seriously contributed to the decrease of
infected patients. [12]
Covid-19 pandemic has both direct and indirect impacts. The direct impacts are considered
the ones that Covid-19, as a deeply infectious virus, is causing to human health. However,
there are severe indirect impacts to people caused by the measures taken to reduce the spread of
Covid-19. In one day, people were obliged to adjust rapidly to changing realities and alternate
their daily lives. Daily, professional and transportation habits have changed dramatically, so it
raises the question of whether people can respond to this unique situation and what behavioral
changes may follow these external forced impacts. Research in Egypt, among many others,
showed that the lockdown may have constrained the spread of the coronavirus but has resulted
in depression and anxiety due to social isolation, fear of getting infected, uncertainty for the
future, and ﬁnancial stress. The results showed that 32.9% of the interviewees had experienced
depression, 46.5% had experienced anxiety, and ﬁnally, 51.2% had experienced extensive stress.
[13] There have also been records of xenophobia, increased prejudice, racism, and cases of
suspicion and fear in many countries, such as North America, Europe, and the Asia Paciﬁc
region.[14]
As the guideline regarding social distancing becomes more and more extensive worldwide,
people seem to diﬀerentiate their travel behavior and the way they transport. A part of the
travelers using the public transport obeys the government instructions for avoiding traveling
during rush hours and only for necessary trips, while using the essential hygiene precautions.
On the other hand, another part tries to avoid all spaces where many people gather, including
public transport. There is a large eﬀort promoted through articles, media, and websites to
awaken travelers regarding the risks of using public transportation. Most of these risks raise
reasonable questions to the public perception on whether they should use public transportation
during this pandemic period and if it is safe enough to continue using the public transport modes
for their daily trips. [15] Therefore, it is reasonable to support that the signiﬁcant reductions
in public transport demand worldwide are also linked to the change of public mentality during
the pandemic, the alternation in work practices, where more and more employees are highly
encouraged to work from home, and the augmented use of private transport modes.[15]
Although restrictions have assisted in this battle against coronavirus, they have signiﬁcantly
impacted the public transport operations by reducing ridership and travel demands. Another
impact of the social distancing posed due to Covid-19, in public transport, is the reduced
passenger capacity in all modes of transport in order to follow the hygiene guidelines and
provide safer services for the travelers. According to the UITP, apart from the reduced ridership
6
==PAGE:11==
and provided services, another key consequence of Covid-19 in public transport is the upcoming
ﬁnancial challenges due to the reduced users, leading to the request for express economic
support to continue operating in such changing realities.
[15]However, it has been agreed
that the international association of public transport (UITP) tends to keep the public transport
services at the same level, despite the signiﬁcant reductions imposed by government regulations,
in order to provide safer trips, especially to the high-risk groups, and urge travelers to continue
using public transportation.[15]
Based on conducted surveys, the public transport sector has experienced many challenges
during the Covid-19 pandemic. More speciﬁcally, it has been reported that in the USA, national
ridership has dropped by 75% during the pandemic, according to the Transit app company,
while the related percentages of reduction are 85%, 67%, and 60% in San Francisco, Detroit,
and Philadelphia, respectively. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has reported a drop
of 93% in the use of subway in New York City and 60% in the use of Metro, both in Los Angeles
and Washington, D.C.[16] Dramatic decrease has also been observed in Toronto in April 2020,
where the ridership percentage has fallen by 80 %-90% from the beginning of the pandemic
since most employees are working from home and they self-quarantine, leading the association
to request ﬁnancial aid to deal this crisis.[17] Similarly, train ridership in Singapore has dropped
by 80% since the begging of the pandemic, as stated by the Minister of Transport.[18] Another
study in the Netherlands showed that trips in total had been aﬀected during Covid-19, especially
for public transport trips where the drop is more than 90%, and as far as car trips are concerned,
the drop is 80%. However, it has been reported that the share of walking and cycling trips has
been increased, indicating that there are diﬀerent motives for traveling and that people choose
to walk or bike more for leisure purposes.[19]. Similar arguments could also be drawn from a
study conducted in Budapest, Hungary, where once again public transport trips show the most
signiﬁcant decrease, with 80% drop in contrast to the cycling trips, which have doubled their
mobility share compared to the one they held back in 2018, and vehicle share reached 65%
during the second half of March 2020.[20]Measuring mobility patterns during the lockdown
in Switzerland, a country with a similar restriction policy as the one in Denmark, resulted in
less travel demand since most travelers were working from home. They also resulted in higher
cycling trips per day and over 100% increase in the bike share during the examined period,
including lockdown, post lockdown, and the period when face masks became mandatory in the
use of public transportation. It has also been found that car trips were lower during the hard
lockdown period but eventually, they recovered after the relaxation of the lockdown measures.
[21]
Before Covid-19, the primary reason to choose a mode of traveling for business or private
purposes was the time of arrival. However, since the outbreak of the Covid-19 crisis, the primary
reason is the risk of infection, dropping the time of arrival to the destination at the second place.
This leads to a switch from public transportation modes towards more private modes such as
cycling, walking, and private vehicles. A survey conducted among 8000 participants investigated
the level of safety between a range of diﬀerent transport modes, both public and private, based on
people’s perceptions. This survey showed that the safest mobility modes are, with high deviation,
walking, private vehicles, and cycling, where carsharing and bike-sharing appear to be the last
selection of the interviewees.[22]Based on the above theory, it has been recorded that the car
usage split has been increased worldwide and that many users have moved from other modes of
transport to cars and bikes. Before the Covid-19 crisis, most of the cities that participated in
the survey focused on individual cars, where the car share was, on average, around 38%, with a
7
==PAGE:12==
signiﬁcant variation based on spatial diversity, size, and urban transport system. Even though the
survey indicates that the car share has been increased due to the pandemic, the 70% of the people
interviewed in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and China,
support that they are willing to replace daily trips via their private vehicle with walking and
biking. [22] According to another study, which examined the connection between the Covid-19
ﬁrst wave of pandemic and mobility sequence, the car users mostly appear to switch to bike
mode, where 25.8% is for commuting purposes, and 52.2% is related to leisure activities. It has
also been found that 35.6% of the interviewees alternated their mobility way after the Covid-19
pandemic, but also 23.1% of the respondents stated it was impossible to change their primary
mode of transport. It is worth mentioning that most public transport travelers switched to cars
by 44.8% for business purposes and when it comes to leisure purposes, most public transport
users switched to walking by 51.9%, followed by 30.9% that switched to private vehicles. [23]
On the other hand, one positive outcome of the tight lockdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic
is the decrease in road accidents in that period. A study conducted in 15 countries showed that
accidents on the road had been reduced due to the diﬀerent mobility conditions. In fact, mobility
patterns alternation has resulted in 3.1% to 7.1% fewer road fatalities, where 10% decrease was
related to trips for working purpose, since many employees have been working from home, so
they did not have to commute. Another remarkable observation is that the reduction in the
use of public transportation and transit between diﬀerent stations, which took place in order
to minimize the spread of coronavirus, has resulted in 2.4% to 5.5% fewer road fatalities. In
general, Covid-19 restrictions have restrained retail and leisure activities which are identiﬁed to
trigger risky driving behavior. [24]
As previously mentioned, cycling rates have been increased since the outbreak of the Covid-
19 pandemic. More and more users choose to swift to cycling from other traditional transport
modes in order to commute and travel for leisure purposes. Apart from this undeniable increase
in cycling, there were many ﬂuctuations in its ridership, between 2019 and 2020, due to the strict
travel restrictions, such as curfews, quarantines, closures of businesses, schools, universities, and
restaurants that the national governments have set to prevent the excessive spread of Covid-19
pandemic, when traveling was almost prohibited. Even with these unusual conditions, cycling
appears to have a large increase in many cities, ranging from 7% to 26% in London and Oslo,
respectively, which became even more prominent after the relaxation of the lockdown measures.
The bike-share as a transport mode has risen from 7% to 9% between 2019 and 2020 in Vienna
and from 5% to 18% in Milan. Alongside the increase in bike share in comparison to the same
period of 2019, the amount of sold bicycles has grown by 39% in the USA, 27% in France,
20% in the UK, 17% in Germany, 23% in Australia, and by 20% in Italy, verifying the theory
obtained from other studies, indicating that previous car and public transport users have adopted
new transportation habits. Interviewed cyclists mentioned that the main reasons for using bikes
as a mobility mode are stress relief and mental health, physical ﬁtness, socializing with friends
and family, relaxation, and ﬁnally, getting outdoors.
Since cycling outdoors contributes to
the reduction of coronavirus contagion and preserves social distancing, many governmental
authorities have been promoting cycling through the expansion of the already existed cycling
infrastructure, including new or extended bike lanes, more bike parking spots, and establishing
bike-sharing possibilities in many cities combined with discount rates and oﬀers. Switching
to bicycles can be considered a positive aspect of the coronavirus outbreak. More and more
travelers prefer more sustainable ways for their daily trips, both short and long-distance trips,
while protecting the environment, reducing traﬃc and noise pollution, and preserving mental
8
==PAGE:13==
and physical health. In addition, it is noticeable that cycling is now a part of people’s daily
routine, and it is not a trend that will fade after things will return to the pre-Covid-19 period.
Thus, it will be vital for the national authorities and governments to continuously promoting
cycling through supporting cycling infrastructure, such as on-road bike lanes, car-free streets
shared streets, and reduced speed limits, and retain successful policies that help cycling thrive
after Covid-19 pandemic.[25]
Covid-19 has unquestionably changed the behaviors and experiences of people’s daily rou-
tine, not only due to the virus’s direct impact but also due to the government’s measures to
defeat the pandemic. Activity models and the current situation of work and education inﬂuence
people’s travel patterns. In addition, decisions for speciﬁc travel modes could have changed,
inﬂuencing people’s travel patterns. The reported changes in ridership levels and patterns and
the restrictions posed for the prevention of the coronavirus spread have raised unusual challenges
to the public transport sector. However, these changes are ruled by signiﬁcant uncertainty, and
the dynamics of the pandemic often do not follow a logical recovery path. The leading case is
to what extent and how people have traveled and how they have adjusted their daily trip routines
during the pandemic. The mode of transport, traveled distances, and journey purpose towards
modes are particularly relevant here. The above presented framework has been used to identify
topics of interest and structure the data collection and data analysis of this research.
9
==PAGE:14==
3
Introducing Data-sets
3.1
TU:The Danish National Travel Survey
TU is the Danish National Travel Survey, ﬁrstly issued in 1975. The Danish National Survey
has experienced many diﬀerent versions, taking its ﬁnal one in 2015, which has been used until
today. The primary purpose of TU is to record the transport behavior of danish residents. The
research is conducted by the Department of DTU Transport in collaboration with a range of
Danish governmental authorities and organizations, such as the Danish Ministry of Transport,
the Danish Road Directorate, the Danish Transport Authority, the Region of Southern Denmark,
the Capital Region of Denmark, the Organisation of Danish Regions, the Confederation of
Danish Industry, the Danish Automobile Association, Movia (Public Transport on Zealand, incl.
Copenhagen), the Danish Road Safety Council and 26 municipalities of Greater Copenhagen.
Through this collaboration, DTU Transport is trying to perform a well-founded survey containing
stable and detailed data that are not easy to extract and analyze.
The TU survey is based on a basic questionnaire, conducted either via web or telephone,
reﬂecting the individual behavior of Danish residents between 10 and 84 years. In order to
achieve its application in statistical analysis, TU data refer to speciﬁc single days while the
sampling is based on gender, age, and geographical group, having approximately 20000 samples
per year. The interviewee is being contacted and asked to submit the related responses through
a URL link at a speciﬁc date. If the questionnaire is not submitted on time, the interviewee is
being contacted through telephone. Approximately 58% of the selected sample is responding
and submitting the related responses. The content of the questionnaire mostly concerns the
socio-economical criteria of the interviewee, such as gender, age, place of residence, general
transport preferences such as car and bicycle ownership, household members, workplace data,
and at last, details for single trips per day, such as date and time, selected transport mode and
destination. All data in TU are weighted and scaled based on typical adjustment by calendar
date and various socio-demographic criteria obtained from Statistics Denmark. TU data are
weighted so that a single year sum equals the number of Danish residents from 10 to 84 years
old, so a ranking has been applied after Diary Date, Home Municipality, Age and gender. The
response rate is being adjusted, so the observations need to be weighed before being used in any
calculation procedure.
The content of the TU data set includes six diﬀerent tables containing all the relevant
responses recorded during the interviews. These six tables consist of the "Session" tab, which
includes all the basic information derived from the interviews as well as the weights of each
observation, the "Journey" tab, which contains information based on the conducted single trips
since there are no journey questions in the questionnaire and the "Tur" tab, which contains all the
trip information and variables. In addition, the data set includes the "Deltur" tab, which is highly
connected with the transport usage in every trip, the "Household" tab, containing data about all
the members inhabiting in the same household, such as family members, and ﬁnally, the "Bil"
tab, recording the number of private cars of each family member. It is worth mentioning that
one interview session represents one person for one day when it comes to TU data. In addition,
the term "journey" represents one complete journey, including the route from and to home,
while the term "trip" represents a single route from one stop to the next.[26] A wind range of
information is not mentioned since it is not relevant to the conducted analysis that this report is
presenting. TU data and selected parameters will be presented in the following chapters.
10
==PAGE:15==
3.2
Rejsekort:The Danish smart travel card
The Danish travel card, or Rejsekort, is an electronic ticket method for using public transport
in Denmark. This electronic payment system was established in 2003, and it is a collaboration
between DSB, a Danish rail company which is the largest in Scandinavia, HUR, a political
council promoting regional development plans in Greater Copenhagen, Ørestadsselskabet, a
company with public proﬁle owned by the Copenhagen Municipality and the Ministry of Finance
responsible for urban development, and other regional bus companies. The system of the Danish
travel card has introduced a new payment system in Danish public transportation, and it has
replaced the old zone ticket method. The ticket price is being calculated based on each trip’s
starting and ending point, measuring the travel distance between these two locations to provide
a more accurate ratio of the covered distance and the ticket fare. The Rejsekort is designed to
be applied without any exception in all modes of transport, including all types of trains, buses,
and metro. There are three diﬀerent types of the Rejsekort that a passenger can obtain, the
superpersonal, the personal, or the anonymous card. The superpersonal card is fully personalized
while including a picture of its owner, meaning that only the owner can use it alongside one or
more co-travelers. The personal card is connected to a speciﬁc owner, but it is permitted for
others rather than the owner to use it in public transportation. Last, the anonymous card is not
attached to an owner, and anyone holding this card may use it to travel.
Rejsekort is working through scanning machines that are built in the metro or train stations
and inside the buses. The cardholder must scan it at a card reader once the trip has started and
then must scan it once again at the end of the journey. Both scanning operations are deﬁned
as "check-in" and "check out" and determine the journey’s price calculation. The Rejsekort is
charged or "top-up" through speciﬁc machines in train platforms, and then, the amount of money
related to the trip value is being deducted. Personalized cards can also be connected to a bank
account to withdraw money automatically, directly from the card owner’s account. Like in the
old ticketing system, the more a passenger uses the Rejsekort in a month, the bigger the discount
is on the trip cost. However, the diﬀerence between the old and the new discount system is that
the old one was limited to a group of zones, while the new one reﬂects a national level. In order
to make the use of Rejsekort more customer-friendly and avoid having long queues for check-in
and check out, ticket gates have been removed from the stations and have been replaced with
card reader machines.[27] As previously mentioned, the Rejsekort payment system is depending
on the distance that a traveler covers during its trip. Therefore, the operational areas have been
divided into diﬀerent zones, and they determine the ticket fare. With Rejsekort, a passenger can
travel by using one of the contracted public transport operators, regionally in Funen, Jutland, and
Zealand. Trips are also permitted between Funen and Jutland or Northern Jutland and Southern
Jutland, but without crossing Storebælt. If selecting bus or train, a passenger can travel on
Funen or in Jutland, except in Northern Jutland, and across Storebælt. The regional fare groups
include 5 Danish areas nationally, Zealand, Funen, and Jutland’s northern, central and southern
regions. The transport companies that are in contract with Rejsekort are DSB, Movia, Metro,
South traﬃc, Central traﬃc, Fynbus, and ﬁnally, Arriva.[28]
Many travelers use Rejsekort for their daily transportation across the country, leading to a
wide range of information. Such information is the number and the type of passengers that
have been checked in, the date of the trip, the place of the check-in and check out alongside a
unique card id that the Rejsekort company has issued. Rejsekort data used for the analysis will
be presented in the following chapters.
11
==PAGE:16==
4
Methodology
The present chapter illustrates the detailed process that has been followed in order to conduct
a statistical analysis regarding the change in travel behavior in Zealand. The topics that will
be presented are concerning the analysis method regarding data manipulation and extraction of
results, the framing of the mentioned data sets, assumptions or limitations that have occurred
along the way to support the conducted analysis, and ﬁnally, the data normalization process.
4.1
Analysis Method
It has been widely recognized that Covid-19 has highly impacted mobility behavior and patterns
worldwide, with a wide range of consequences to be observed but mostly on public transportation.
In these continuously changing realities, travelers, transport companies, and governments have to
adjust their previously performed practices and adopt new ones. Studies have shown that in many
cities, public transportation modes have experienced the biggest shock, as far as the ridership
levels are concerned, where private vehicles, bicycles, and walking, appear to increase since the
beginning of the pandemic. The most intense impacts are derived from the general restrictions of
a lockdown than from restrictions on the mobility itself. In addition, research on travel behavior
in the USA during the pandemic shows that behavioral changes arise from the placed restrictions
and the fear of citizens to avoid the spread of the disease. Reduced mobility has been observed
before the implementation of strict traveling policies [29]. Thus, it is important to study the
deviation of changes in transportation before and after lockdown and during the diﬀerent types
of restrictions. In this context, it is worth exploring the consequences of the Covid-19 pandemic
in Denmark’s mobility patterns and in speciﬁc, in the region of Zealand, where according to
a study published in 2009, private vehicles held the biggest share of the transport modes used
by individuals for travel purposes, with a percentage of 66%, public transport modes held 18%
of the private mode trips, of which the 8.1% is concerning trains, the 9.7% buses and ﬁnally,
bicycles held 4.6% of the individual choices for traveling in Denmark.[30]
Since the start of the pandemic, many studies have tried to identify the key factors of Covid-
19 and their impacts on everyday life, but fewer studies are investigating its side eﬀects, for
example, in transportation. Recent literature has shown that mobile data has been widely used to
provide this kind of information to the researchers to draw several conclusions on how Covid-19
has aﬀected mobility behavior and the key reason for the change in travel behavior. However,
the collected mobile data are considered less eﬀective since they cannot project the socio-
demographic aspects of the travelers, such as gender, age, or household structure, which play a
signiﬁcant role in understanding the impacts of Covid-19 in diﬀerent groups of travelers. Travel
surveys, another widely performed method of analysis, usually capture this type of information
and can conclude to more solid arguments.[21]
The foundation of the analysis consists of two sections, of which the ﬁrst one includes
individual data gathered from a national survey (TU) based on questionnaires and feedback
from the travelers themselves. The second part of the analysis focuses on smart travel cards
(Rejsekort) gathering data from their instant use by travelers and helps us identify speciﬁc
details on travel behavior. Both data sets have been described and analyzed in-depth in Chapter
3. Similar to the current analysis, many studies have based their analysis on national travel
surveys, such as in Australia, where a travel survey in households has been conducted[31]. In
the Netherlands, questionnaires have been distributed to 2000 households in order to capture
12
==PAGE:17==
their travel habits [19], while other studies have been structured through online distribution of
Google forms survey. The survey included socio-demographic questions, such as nationality,
gender, age, educational level, car ownership, and information regarding the travel behavior and
purpose during the pre and post-Covid period.[23] Since the Danish public transport system
is highly developed, there is a need for more advanced tools that can interpret travel behavior,
and facilitate data collection and analysis. Danish Travel Card, also known as Smart travel card
(Rejsekort), can be considered such a tool and can provide a wide range of accurate information
about daily trips and provide relevant results for travel behavior. Smart card analysis has been
recently used in the investigation of the changes in travel behavior due to long-term disruptions
in public services in Greater Copenhagen.[32] Similar to the Danish public transport ticketing
system, Sweden has developed modern ways of fare payment, which are based on contactless
tickets in the form of a prepaid card that a traveler can use in every transport mode, containing
a unique id and can produce much information regarding transport mode, ticket type etc. This
ticketing system has been recently used to analyze the impacts of Covid-19 on public transport
ridership in Stockholm. [33]
In order to project the impacts of the Covid-19 in Denmark, starting from January 2020 to
December 2020, this present report will be based on analyzing the statistics of passengers who
have selected to travel via public transportation (Rejsekort, TU) and on passengers who have
preferred to use another private way of traveling (TU) while identifying the primary purpose
of their trip. For this purpose, the analysis has been divided into Analysis A and B, regarding
private vehicles and public transport trips, respectively. Both data sets are dated from 2017
until 2020; however, more attention is given to the direct comparison between 2020 and 2019
ﬁgures, as examined in similar pandemic transportation research in the Netherlands. [19]. Data
sets are being manipulated through statistical software, in order to provide solid comparison
between the pre status of mobility in the Danish region of Zealand and the post Covid-19 status.
Due to the data sets’ size, two diﬀerent methods have been used to accommodate the current
analysis. TU data set is analyzed via MS Excel, while Rejsekort data frame is structured in
Python, Jupyter notebooks, since its size requires diﬀerent manipulation. The aim is to study
the diﬀerentiation in travel behavior and the change of transport preferences during diﬀerent
lockdown periods in order to create a trend-line of the travel changes in Zealand, before and after
Covid-19 restrictions. Statistical outputs are derived throughout a thorough ﬁltering process on
both data sets to conclude in the absolute number of trips per person per day for each transport
mode. Several assumptions have been made alongside data exclusion in building the necessary
coding and functioning that will assist in the extraction of the ﬁnal results.
All assumed
units, data "cleaning," and normalization are being analyzed in the next section. The same
methodology is being followed for handling both Rejsekort and TU data to extract comparable
units and results. Descriptive statistics are applied to the two data samples in order to estimate
the general tendency of travel behavior in Zealand regarding the selection of transport mode,
the travel purpose, the relative change between the same periods in 2019 and 2020 and draw
reliable conclusions. However, while analyzing long-term smart card data is not always easy
to determine whether the changes in the mobility patterns occurred by the examined diﬃculties
or by regular seasonal variations, since passengers tend to change their travel behavior, even
without vital reasons. This is why it is crucial to select a baseline to which the analysis can
be compared to. [32] The structure of the analysis is based on four speciﬁc time periods that
the data sets have been divided to, for comparison purposes, following the Covid-19 timeline of
restrictions in Denmark. According to the measures taken by the Danish Government and the
13
==PAGE:18==
lockdown restrictions applied to the country, including the studied region of Zealand, four main
periods will be used throughout the entire report:
1. Pre Lockdown: January 1, 2020 - March 10, 2020
2. Hard Lockdown: March 11, 2020 - May 7, 2020
3. Reopening: May 8, 2020 - September 16, 2020
4. Light Lockdown: September 17, 2020 - December 7, 2020
This analysis will present the main ﬁndings regarding the change in travel preferences
and their related purposes through relevant graphs that will be discussed in depth. Data are
manipulated in such a way to enable a comparison between pandemic and the corresponding
periods of the previous years. In the next sections, there will be a detailed description of the data
framing, the assumptions and the limitations that have been developed along the way and the
implemented data normalization that is required for comparing the ﬁnal ﬁgures of the analysed
samples.
4.2
Data Framing and Assumptions
4.2.1
TU:The Danish National Travel Survey
As presented in the previous chapter, the TU data set comprises six diﬀerent tables containing all
the relevant responses recorded during the interviews. These six tables consist of the "Session"
tab, the "Journey" tab, the "Tur" tab, "Deltur" tab, the "Household" tab, and the "Bil" tab. For
the current statistical analysis, two main tabs have been taken into consideration, the "Session"
Tab and the "Journey" tab. The "Session" tab describes, in general, the transportation behavior
of a person in one day alongside basic personalized information about the interviewee. All
the observations included in the "Session" tab are combined with relevant weights of the data
set.
More precisely, apart from the data related to the speciﬁc date and time of the trip,
the primary information contained in this speciﬁc data set is related to the interviewee’s home
address, gender, age and birthplace, professional and educational information, including speciﬁc
information about the workplace, for example, address, working hours, the distance between
home and place of occupation and type of traveler based on the working hours. In addition,
it contains information regarding car and bicycle ownership, type of ticket payment, economic
status per household, family status, and members. Among this wide range of information,
speciﬁc variables have been selected to be relevant to the conducted analysis.
The ﬁrst variable of the "Session" tab that played a signiﬁcant role in the calculations is the
"Session Id". This variable refers to the corresponding session making it possible to correlate
diﬀerent session ids between diﬀerent tabs of the survey to identify the behavior of one session
from many diﬀerent perspectives. In the present analysis, the use of "Session Id" has assisted
in identifying information contained in the "Journey" tab that will be further analyzed in the
following paragraphs. Another important variable that has been included in the calculations
is the "SessionWeight".
TU data is weighted based on socio-geographic measurements of
Danish residents between 10-84 years old and calendar elements so that one year sum equals the
annual average daily traﬃc. The "DiaryDate" variable has been also taken into consideration,
counting from 1.1.1970, combined with the "DiaryYear", starting from 2006 to 2020, and the
14
==PAGE:19==
"DiaryMonth". These variables are included in the "Session" tab of the data set and they have
been sorted in order to allocate each observation to the related examined lockdown period. In
the TU, months are encoded by number values from 1 to 12, as presented below:
Months
Number Values
January
1
February
2
March
3
April
4
May
5
June
6
July
7
August
8
September
9
October
10
November
11
December
12
Table 2: Number Values of Months in TU Data set
After establishing the fundamental variables that are the foundation of the analysis, the
transportation data must be deﬁned to construct the trend-line of the travel behavior during the
Covid-19 pandemic. This information will be deducted from the "Journey" tab, which describes
a complete journey per observation that begins and terminates at home. The details of the
home, which is called journey base, are being described in the "Session" tab. Therefore, this
tab contains all the information relevant to the start and the end of the journey, the type of trip,
time, distance, duration, journey purpose, primary and secondary stays, and their details and the
mode of transportation, by using speciﬁc variables.
One of the variables that have been selected from the before mentioned tab is the "Prim-
ModeExclCT". This variable has been selected because it describes the primary mode that
the interviewee has traveled, with the most immense covered distance, excluding commercial
transport, which is not relevant for the study since the conducted analysis aims to depict the
travel behavior of the passengers in their daily trips. Commercial transport trips are deﬁned as
trips with a purpose related to commercial transport of goods, people, and other commercial
traﬃc. The value range that this variable is between, is presented below:
15
==PAGE:20==
Transport Mode
Description
1
Walk/Run
2
Bicycle, including electric cycle, tricycle, etc.
3
Moped 30 (yellow number plate)
4
Moped 45 (white number plate)
5
Skateboard,roller skates,scooter
6
Horse-drawn carriage, horse
7
Disability moped (electric)
8
Electric scooter etc.
11
Passenger car
12
Van for goods transport with maximum total weight below 3.5 tons
13
Lorry for goods transport wit maximum total weight above 3.5 tons
14
Motorcycle
15
Tractor, working tools
25
Taxi cab, including empty taxi cabs
26
Bus trips which are not public transport
(Tourist coach, rented bus, school buses, military buses, etc.)
31
Bus
32
S-train (Copenhagen suburban trains)
33
Other train, except from S-trains or Metro
34
Metro
35
Dial-a-ride (ﬂexible transport service)
37
Light rail/tram Light rail in Århus/Odense/Copenhagen
41
Ferry (water bus)
42
Pleasure boat (all types of pleasure boating, from canoes and dinghies to large yachts)
51
Airplane, including airliner, private plane and helicopter
Table 3: "PrimModeExclCT" variable Value Range in TU Data set
Having identiﬁed the diﬀerent transportation ways that an interviewee has selected for his
day trip, the journey purpose needs to be deﬁned. In order to include the journey purpose into the
analysis, the variable "PrimTargetPurp" has been selected, which is contained in the "Journey"
tab. This variable deﬁnes the purpose of the primary stay of the journey, which is considered
the main purpose in the current analysis, and it contains the below values.
16
==PAGE:21==
Purpose Value
Description
1
Home, (place of residence)
11
Workplace (normal workplace/address of employer)
12
School, educational institution
13
Youth center, youth club, after-school center
14
Nursery, crèche, day care
20
Unknown Errand
21
Collect/bring persons from/to sport, school, visit or other purpose
22
Collect/bring persons from/to bus/train/ferry
23
Collect/bring objects
24
Unknown leisure
25
Shopping
31
Other errand (bank, library, garage,etc.)
Private errands.Bring objects, collect objects,have objects repaired.
32
Social/health (visit to doctor, hospital, job centre, etc.)
38
Church
39
Education that does not take place at the school/education institution
(e.g. schooltrips, excursions, study trips)
41
Visit family/friends
42
Do sports
43
Entertainment (cinema, cafe, restaurant, sport spectator, etc.)
44
Summer cottage, allotment
45
Walk, run, bicycle trip, drive
(leisure trips which are purpose in themselves)
46
Holiday, excursion
47
Meetings in private setting
49
Other leisure activity
(Leisure activity which is not sport, and for which no wages are paid)
50
Unknown business purpose
Table 4: "PrimTargetPurp" variable Value Range in TU Data set
It should be mentioned that the journey purpose is related to the stay with the longest staying
time during the time of the journey. Another signiﬁcant variable that has been included in the
calculation is the "PrimTargetNTMzone" and it determines the number of the zone, as presented
in the Danish national transport model, regarding the primary stay of the journey. It is an integer
variable that takes a wide range of values, but since the conducted analysis is based on the
analysis of the travel behavior in Zealand, it will be sorted to meet these region requirements
and be further analyzed in the next subsections. Finally, the "SumLenExclCT" variable refers
to the distance covered in kilometers by each transport mode per trip, both private and public,
and will be included in the ﬁnal part of Analysis A to provide relevant outcomes regarding the
average covered distance. [34]
17
==PAGE:22==
Assumptions and Limitations
After selecting the relevant elements to the study and the reference period, the next step
was to clean and extract the related data. The original data sets provided by both the Danish
National Travel Survey and the Rejsekort had to be reﬁned into this study’s needs and objectives.
Diﬀerent types of data ﬁlters have been used to reduce the content of errors or irrelevant outputs.
Similar techniques have been adapted for these two sources to align the diﬀerent data frames,
follow the same strategy, and conclude in typical outputs.
Firstly, regarding the TU data set, the variable of the primary mode of transport originally
has a wide value range. However, this research is focused on individual travel behavior and pref-
erences in the region of Zealand, excluding long-distance trips, goods transport, or tourist trips.
Accordingly, "PrimModeExclCT" codes [6, 26, 12,13,15, 37,41, 42, 51] have been removed
from the detailed list discussed in the previous chapter. Also, a number of categories referring
to a personal vehicle, such as a car or motorcycle [3,4,5,7,8,11,14], have been grouped into one
variable called "Vehicles". The type of vehicle does not alter the results of this study, as the
main point of interest is focused on distinguishing the preference between private vehicles and
public transportation. However, it should be mentioned that the car owns approximately 98%
of the observations that are included in this transport mode group, leaving the rest categories
to have a minor impact on the analysis results. Therefore the ﬁnal transport mode groups have
been shaped as follows:
Transport Mode Groups
Code Numbers
Vehicles
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 14
Walk
1
Taxi
25, 35
Bicycle
2
Bus
31
Metro
34
S-Train
32
Regional Train
33
Table 5: Transport Mode Categories as occurred by the grouping of the related code numbers
18
==PAGE:23==
Similar to the private vehicles group, the travel purposes have been grouped based on their
codes in order to facilitate the analysis and conclude to more comprehensive results. In speciﬁc,
the detailed grouping of the travel purposes is presented below.
Transport Mode Groups
Code Numbers
Workplace
11
Business Activities
51, 52, 53, 54, 61, 62
Collection
21, 22, 23
Educational Institution
12, 13, 14
Private Errands
32, 33, 38, 47
Leisure Activities
31, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49
Table 6: Travel Purpose Categories as occurred by the grouping of the related code numbers
The remaining "PrimTargetPurp" codes 1,20,25,50 have been excluded from the analysis
since they only refer to a small number of observations, and they do not signiﬁcantly impact the
study’s outcome.
Secondly, TU covers observations for the outer region of Zealand, to which the interviewees
may have traveled as well. For the precision of results, this issue of accepted regions has been
resolved by ﬁltering the variable "PrimTargetNTMzone" from the selected data set, reserving
only all zone codes smaller than 400000, which reﬂects to the region of Zealand.
In order to make this research as accurate as possible, results and conclusions should be
derived from daily behavior, uninﬂuenced by speciﬁc occasions or events. Danish public holi-
days and the summer holiday period have been excluded for the comparison of travel behavior
between the four years and the diﬀerent periods. A public holiday may alter the actual image
of travel behavior, besides the pandemic impacts. Therefore, the whole month of July and the
ﬁrst ten days of August, popular for Danish summer holidays, have been excluded from all
years. Days of public holidays have also been removed respectively to each year’s calendar [35].
Consequently, the variable of "DiaryDate" has been cleaned according to these requirements.
4.2.2
Rejsekort: The Danish smart travel card
Based on the Rejsekort daily transactions that the company has reported, several results have
emerged. These reports have been the foundation of the data sets that will support the present
analysis. In order to provide an overview of this data set, an overall description indicating each
concept and deﬁnition included will be presented.
19
==PAGE:24==
The main information derived from the data set is the following categories. Speciﬁc data
have been used for this analysis. More speciﬁcally, the categories selected for this analysis are
presented in bold.
• Msgreportdate : time and date of the transaction
• ContractorId : name of the contractor the trip has been performed with
• PassagerAntal1 : number of checked-in passengers of PassagerType1
• PassagerAntal2 : number of checked-in passengers of PassagerType2
• PassagerAntal3 : number of checked-in passengers of PassagerType3
• PassagerType1 : passenger type of PassagerAntal1
• PassagerType2 : passenger type of PassagerAntal2
• PassagerType3 : passenger type of PassagerAntal3
• RuteId : name id of public transportation used
• RejseDato : date of the trip
• StopPointNr : code of the station where the transaction has been performed
• StopPointId : name of the station where the transaction has been performed
• NyUdførende : speciﬁc type of public transportation- contractor used (e.g DSB,
S-train, Movia,Arriva, Metro etc.)
• Model : type of transaction (e.g. ﬁrst check-in, check-in transfer, etc.)
• turtype : overall transaction activity during trip
• ModalKomb : general type of public transportation used
• turngl : unique trip id
• TakstOmraade : fare region
• Kortnr_Kryp : card id
• ProduktFamilie : fare class
20
==PAGE:25==
The values that each of the categories mentioned above provides directly the information
needed to perform the analysis. However, this is not always easy since the type of values may
be encoded and need further explanation.
For instance, the values of the passenger type ("PassagerType1", "PassagerType2", "Pas-
sagerType3") may vary within a range of numbers between 1 and 18. Therefore, the deﬁnition
of the category "PassagerType" is presented below:
Passenger Type Value
Description
1
Adult-personal
2
Child-personal
3
Bicycle ﬂex
4
Pensioner
5
Youth
6
Dog-ﬂex
7
Adult-ﬂex
8
Adult-anonymous
9
Child-ﬂex
10
Child-anonymous
13
Bicycle - personal
14
Dog - personal
16
Cycle - anonymous
17
Dog - anonymous
18
Handicap - personal
Table 7: Passenger Type Value Range in Rejsekort Data set
In addition, the "turtype" category is composed of the following possible transactions:
• Fi: First check-in, which happens when the customer starts the journey
• Co: Check-out, which happens when the customer ends the journey
• Su: Check-in successive, which happens when changing the trip, without prior check-out
• Tr: Check-in transfer, which happens only after a previous check-out
• Cc: Check-in cancel
• Io: Check-in out, which happens when check-in & check-out takes place at the same
transaction. A ﬁxed price will be charged on the travel card, which cannot be canceled
• In: Inspection, which happens by being inspected during the journey
Another two categories that include a wide range of values useful for the analysis are the
"ModalKomb" and the "NyUdførende" category. Despite the fact that they are both contain-
ing similar information concerning the mode of transport that the card owner has used during
the journey, it has been observed that "ModalKomb" contains more generic groups of public
transportation, such as bus, metro, and train alongside their combinations, that may enclose
21
==PAGE:26==
other observations that are not obviously reﬂecting in this variable. On the other hand, "NyUd-
førende" category speciﬁes the contractor and the type of the precise mode of transport that may
be enclosed in the "ModalKomb" variable. Using both categories, they provide a more detailed
description of the generated results, increasing the accuracy of the analysis and assisting the
comparison between the diﬀerent lockdown periods during the four examined years.
Assumptions and Limitations
Rejsekort complete data set for 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 has been "cleaned" according
to a variety of assumptions and limitations, similarly with the previously mentioned TU data
framing. Many transactions are not relevant to this research and had to be excluded. Firstly,
as mentioned previously, the original data set includes all possible types of trips, even those
that did not occur due to cancellation. Hence, check-in cancel ("Cc") and the corresponding
ﬁrst check-in ("Fi") of travel cards had to be removed by ﬁltering all rows according to trip type
("turtype").
Afterwards, the extensive list of passenger types presented had to be limited, retaining only
the transportation of humans and excluding the rest of the types of checked-in passengers that
do not impact this research of travel behavior. Dogs and personal vehicles have been removed
because they are not included in the valid passenger type codes equal to [1,2,4,5,7,8,9,10,18].
In Rejeskort data, a completed trip is considered the trip of one passenger, when the the same
card has been checked-in and checked-out for the same unique trip id. Due to Rejsekort’s
operational mode, more than one person can be checked in on the same card and use public
transportation. In order to assess Rejsekort data and investigate the number of performed trips,
it was mandatory to create an additional variable that counts the number of passengers traveling.
Thus, the variable "Passengers_count" has been created, counting each passenger as a single trip,
belonging to the valid passenger type codes. It has been observed that the data set includes a few
transactions corresponding to a large group of people. For example, on speciﬁc occasions such
as a school day trip, there was one Rejsekort check-in for a wide number of students that may
have altered the expected results of this study. For this reason, observations consisting of a sum
larger than 10 passengers have been removed. In order to avoid double counting, the variable
"Passengers_count" considers the number of passengers only for unique trip ids ("turngl") when
check-out ("turtype"="Co") is performed, meaning that an entire trip has been completed. Thus,
the other values of the "turtype" category "Tr","Su", "Io" and "In" have not been taken into
account.
Similarly to the TU data set ﬁltering, Rejsekort observations have been abridged to include
only the accepted zones that match all Zealand regions. A list of stop points and their IDs have
been imported to the initial data set to ﬁlter all years and periods respectively and maintain
only the rows corresponding to zone ID smaller than 400000. In this way, this analysis is
focused exclusively on travel behavior in Zealand. As previously mentioned, data frames should
be ﬁltered to maintain only individuals’ daily transportation preferences, excluding summer
vacation and yearly public holidays in Denmark.
In order to keep the alignment with TU
data, the whole month of July and the ﬁrst ten days of August have been similarly removed.
"Rejsedato" column has been ﬁltered according to these limitations to drop all of these dates
[35].
22
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Data Normalization
The results of this study are based on two diﬀerent sources of data and, therefore, it is necessary
to structure both data sets eﬃciently. Data normalization is crucial for improving consistency
and cohesion between them and lead to higher quality and precise outcomes. This process
aimed to create similar frames and establish relationships between them to make the database
more ﬂexible. TU data set and Rejsekort data set contain diﬀerent value ranges, and the main
requirement is to adjust values measured on diﬀerent scales to a notionally standard scale. For
example, the travel survey weights each observation on a diﬀerent scale per interviewee, while
the danish travel card shares all transactions without any weight. Therefore, this research’s most
suitable normalization rating is to understand better and compare the results to approach scores
as trips per person per day.
The normalization process starts with calculating the sum of session weights per mode and
purpose divided by the total sum of session weights regarding the TU. Each of the interviewees
corresponds to a unique observation and session weight. Thus, to identify a cohesive unit of
measurement and present all scores as "trips per person per day", it is necessary to consider these
various weights and normalize them respectively by dividing each observation session weight
by the total sum. Moreover, it is vital to explore whether there is a need to adjust the trips per
single day since we have determined four, not equable, periods as a baseline for this analysis.
Calculating the number of days divided by the count of observations in every examined period,
it is observed that this ratio remains stable in all four examined periods. Therefore, it is not
required to make any further adjustments in the data set regarding the normalization per day.
Analyzed periods have the same ratio, and results are eventually expressed in the desired unit of
trips per person per day.
For the Rejsekort data set, normalized results have been acquired using the variable of cards
ID, column "Kortnr_Kryp", to ﬁnd the transactions per card for every group of public transport
modes. In addition, an extra variable has been imported to the data set, the "Passengers_count",
to calculate the sum of passengers traveling per card in each of the observations. It should be
highlighted that in this data set, in contrast to the TU, the sum of variable "Passengers_count"
is taken into consideration instead of the sum of observations, as one transaction may consist of
more than one individual. Data sets have been ﬁltered in Jupyter Notebook for all periods from
2017 to 2020, and the extra column has been included. The function used for this purpose takes
one observation, a data frame row, and returns the sum of "PassagerAntal" if "Passagertype" is
in the accepted list. In the normalization process, the new variable, the sum of passengers per
mode, is initially divided by the sum of the unique cards. Afterward, this value is divided again
by the sum of days respectively for each period. Thus, Rejsekort public mode trips are presented
as trips per card per day.
According to the assumptions of each data set that have been introduced in the prior section,
data normalization has been properly implemented to the selected timeline of the analysis and
respectively to the aim of this research and its results.
23
==PAGE:28==
5
Results
For a better interpretation of the analysis outputs, results are divided into three main sections.
Analysis A focuses on private mode trips, trips conducted via private vehicles(cars, motorcycles),
bicycles, taxis, or walking. As previously mentioned, these transportation preferences arise only
from the TU data and deﬁne how the travel behavior has endorsed this kind of transportation
during the pandemic, besides public modes of trips. This section explores the frequency and
the purpose of each of these transportation groups, alongside the relative change of the trips
performed by private transport modes and an analysis of the covered travel distance for walking
and cycling trips.
On the other hand, Analysis B illustrates the results considering only the public trips in
the region of Zealand. It is a combination of both TU and Rejsekort data and a discussion
between their outputs. For the TU data set, results are also presented similarly with Analysis
A, considering the purpose of trips, this time for public modes. Regarding the Rejsekort data
set, the analysis consists of the visualization of the absolute number of trips per card per day
for each of the periods examined. Moreover, the two data frames are combined to examine the
alignment of ﬁnal results and the relative change among them.
In order to delve deeper into travel preferences during the pandemic, it is essential to examine
all the relevant information regarding which transport mode most people used and for which
purpose. A sequence of bar charts is presented showing the number of trips per person per
day according to the purpose of transportation. As it was mentioned in previous section, six
categories of travel purpose have been identiﬁed for this research: "Business", "Collection",
"Educational Institution", "Leisure", "Private Errands" and "Workplace".
Private modes of
transport consist of "Walk", "Vehicle", "Taxi" and "Bicycle", while public modes consist of
"Metro", "Bus", "Regional Train" and "S-train", and the absolute number of trips have been
detected for each of the four investigated periods.
The last section of "Results" considers both private and public modes of transport in one
common analysis. TU data has been manipulated in order to investigate the most favorable
purposes for mobility and derive the distribution of private and public transport modal share
accordingly.
This section examines how travel behavior has probably been changed in the
transition from a pre-covid to a post-covid era, taking into consideration the most common daily
needs for traveling.
24
==PAGE:29==
5.1
Analysis A Results: Private Mode Trips
Analysis A focuses on the precise impact of the Covid-19 crisis on individual transportation, car,
motorcycle, or taxi and non-monotorized transport, walk or bicycle. From recently published
literature [25], it is shown that these travel preferences have been highly increased, especially
during the ﬁrst lockdown. This section illustrates an overview of these mode shares, named
"private mode trips", and their purpose per period.
Figure 2: Comparison of Total Private Mode Trips between 2017 and 2020
This diagram provides information about the sum of all individual transport modes, reported
as "private mode trips." It is clear from the above line graph that there is a sharp growth of
trips during 2020, in the year of the Covid-19 crisis, in contrast to the previous years. These
mobility preferences appear to peak during the Reopening period in 2020, May 8th to September
16th, with "private mode trips" increasing by almost 11%, when the lockdown and government
restrictions have been lifted. In general, it can be stated that since the ﬁrst wave of the pandemic,
the Hard Lockdown, it is observed that citizens have already started to change their mobility
behavior slightly, in comparison to the same periods of 2017, 2018, and 2019. Pre-lockdown trip
preferences are almost similar among the four years since the pandemic outbreak did not exist
during this period. In general, total private mode trips show similar values and trends during the
three-year pre-covid period, when possible ﬂuctuations in the daily trips can be season-related
and are not aﬀected by pandemic factors. The most noticeable changes appear to take place
during the Reopening and the Light Lockdown period in 2020. In the following analysis, it’s
been investigated which private modes have been increased and for which purpose.
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3: Private Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Pre Lockdown Period in
2017-2020 based on TU Data
In order to further penetrate into each examined period, Figure 3 illustrates the trend of travel
behavior before the crisis of Covid-19 according to the travel purpose. It is an initial diagram
in order to observe how travel preferences ﬂuctuate in a non-pandemic period. It draws the
conclusion that there is a consistency between the number of trips per mode for all years, with
"Workplace" and "Leisure" having a dominant role in mobility purposes. The most noticeable
change is that personal vehicles, cars mainly, are the most favorable mode of transport in all
the examined years, 2017 to 2020, compared to walking, taxi, and cycling trips. This ﬁgure
mainly introduces the layout of travel behavior concerning private modes and serves comparison
purposes for the Pre and Post Covid-19 periods.
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4: Private Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Hard Lockdown Period
in 2017-2020 based on TU Data
Following, Figure 4 illustrates the decrease of individual motorized and non-motorized
private modes of transport, which took place in Zealand after the imposed restrictions against
the ﬁrst wave of the pandemic. The sudden growth of mobility on foot is observed from the early
beginning of the pandemic, during the Hard Lockdown period. Speciﬁcally, walking for leisure
purposes in 2020 has been tripled in comparison to the previous years. Cars and bicycles have
started to have a modest decrease and increase in people’s preferences respectively, while taxi
has almost zero impact. This graph shows how the fear of the pandemic and the spread of the
disease led to rapid and immediate changes in travel behavior, already from the ﬁrst two months
of the applied lockdown and the local restrictions in Zealand.
27
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5: Private Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Reopening Period in
2017-2020 based on TU Data
Followed by the Hard Lockdown ﬁgures, the above bar chart illustrates the variation of
private mode trips per purpose during the third period of the Covid-19 timeline, the reopening
period. It is obvious from the graph that "Walk" has been considerably risen compared to the
previous years. Like the previously studied period, Hard Lockdown, the most dramatic impact
is shown in "Walk" for leisure purposes, almost doubled between 2019 and 2020. The number
of trips via personal vehicles remains steady between the four years, and respectively for all-
purpose categories. However, in contrast to the Hard Lockdown period, cars and motorcycles
have been increased by 10%. Likewise, "Bicycle" appears to have marginally changed.
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6: Private Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Light Lockdown Period
in 2017-2020 based on TU Data
Figure 6 gives information on the Light Lockdown; the last period studied through this
research. It is clear from the chart that Light Lockdown in 2020, compared with the same period
in 2017, 2018 and 2019, neither ﬂuctuates dramatically nor appears to have any noticeable
changes in private modes. As was the case with the previous timeline periods, only "Walk",
mainly for leisure, has been doubled during the Light Lockdown in the pandemic year compared
to the previous four examined years. Apart from this rise, numbers of trips per person per day
conclude that citizens have probably started to travel like usual during this fourth period without
sharp changes from their past travel behavior. Even if some restrictions are back in place, fear
and government policies are looser during the second lockdown. In general, all private mode
trips remain at high levels during the Light Lockdown in 2020, recording only a slight drop from
the reopening phase of the same year.
29
==PAGE:34==
5.1.1
Relative Change
The following analysis and outputs summarize the results of Analysis A by applying the concept
of relative change. In fact, two quantities, the number of trips of one mode in the year 2019
and the same unit in 2020, have been compared repeatedly for all private mode trips in these
two years. The comparison is expressed as a ratio and is a unitless number, as it is presented
in the y-axis. Therefore, these results provide information on the actual change, the diﬀerence
of values between 2019 and 2020, in comparison with the reference value, the value in 2019.
Relative change is expressed as the ratio of the actual change and the reference value, as deﬁned
in the equation below.
Relative change (x, xreference ) = Actual change
xreference
=
∆
xreference
= x −xreference
xreference
(1)
Figure 7: Relative Change of Total Private Mode Trips between 2019 and 2020
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 7 describes the relative change of all private modes of transport during the four peri-
ods between 2019 and 2020. The purpose of the line graph is to summarize the ﬂuctuation in
travel behavior regarding all private modes, cumulatively and individually. Private mode trips,
which mainly consist of car, walk, bicycle, and taxi trips, have signiﬁcant variations among
the four transport categories. It should be stated that these variations may be due to the small
number of observations included in the TU data set and seasonal variations of the examined
periods. "Walk" has been dramatically increased during the Hard Lockdown in 2020, which
leads to a relative change equal to 1, while "Taxi" marks a relative change equal to -1. Even if the
relative change of "Walk" appears to have a decreasing trend during the following two periods,
values remain positive, indicating the rise from 2019 to 2020. Also, during the Light Lockdown,
"Taxi" seems to counterbalance its prior drop, this time with a relative change larger than 1.
The use of bicycles remains almost stable between 2019 and 2020, showing, correspondingly,
a slight increase during the Hard Lockdown period and a slight decrease during the Reopening
and Light Lockdown periods. On the contrary, the "Vehicle" category, which consists of cars in
the majority, marks -0.15 as relative change during the Hard Lockdown and almost zero change
during the next two periods. Summarizing all of these results for each mode, the line of relative
change for total trips indicates a small deviation during all periods, between 0 and 0.1, which
concludes to an overall gentle increase of private modes of transport in 2020.
5.1.2
Distance covered
In an attempt to identify possible positive aspects of the Covid-19 pandemic in travel behavior,
a further penetration in the walking and cycling trips has been implemented. Since both travel
practices have been increased in some lockdown periods under speciﬁc circumstances, but they
are higher compared to the Pre Lockdown period and the majority of previous years, there is a
need of investigating whether there are permanent changes in the travel behavior in Zealand that
may be beneﬁcial for the society after returning to normal. It is, therefore, examined whether
people have started to make longer distance trips by foot or bicycles during the pandemic.
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 8: Average Covered Distance of Walking Trips Per Lockdown Period in 2017-2020 for
TU Data
The analysis showed that the average covered distance per trip is signiﬁcantly rising during
the Hard Lockdown of 2020 by approximately 25% compared to 2019 and by nearly 60%
compared to 2018 and 2017. This tendency also continued in the Light Lockdown period with
an increase of around 27% since 2019.
Additionally, a slight decrease is illustrated in the
Reopening period in comparison with 2019. However, the average walking distance is similar
between 2017 and 2018. It can be seen that the three previous years have almost the opposite
trend compared to 2020, which creates the question of why this is happening. It is strange that
the average walking distance decreased during the Hard Lockdown period of 2017 to 2019 since
weather conditions were supposed to be better than Pre Lockdown, which includes the winter
months. However, it is logical to support that this slight decrease may be due to other seasonal
conditions that are not examined in this report and then there is an increase again during the
Reopening period, where summer weather allowed longer walking trips. We should always keep
in mind that the small TU sample size may justify this ﬂuctuating trend of the trips in 2017,
2018, and 2019. Although this preliminary analysis does not allow us to draw solid conclusions
on whether walking trips will continue this rising trend in the future or the change in this travel
pattern will become more permanent, it can be said that there is a clear preference for people
to walk more since the pre-pandemic state. This tendency occurs mainly during periods when
there were limited options due to the restrictions and the fear for infection was dominant, such
as the Hard and Light Lockdown periods.
32
==PAGE:37==
Figure 9: Average Covered Distance of Cycling Trips Per Lockdown Period in 2017-2020 for
TU Data
Similarly, the average covered distance per bicycle trip has a rising trend during the entire
2020 ﬁrst year of the Covid-19 pandemic in Zealand, maintained until the start of the Light
Lockdown period, illustrated in Figure 9.
Compared to 2019, the average covered cycling
distance appears to be decreased in the two ﬁrst examined periods, but it has a major increase
by 62% during the Reopening period and by 27% during the Light Lockdown period. This
noticeable change may raise concerns on why covered cycling distance has dropped in the
Reopening and Light Lockdown period of 2019 when weather conditions have been more
appropriate for longer bicycle trips. Once again, TU data set size may be the reason for such
deviations combined with other conditional reasons that remain unknown. 2017 and 2018 trends
of average cycling distance are more equable to each other and retain a more logical upward
trend. In comparison to these two years, covered distance in 2020 seems to have a large growth,
by 50%, in Hard Lockdown and an even larger, by 88%, during the Reopening phase in Zealand.
During the Hard Lockdown period, the average kilometers per cycling trip are slightly reduced
in 2020 compared to 2019, meaning that people still used their bicycles even if commercial and
educational activities have been closed down. A more considerable decrease may have been
expected since the travel purposes have been alternated. However, the average travel distance
indicates that more and more travelers have chosen cycling for more trips and longer distances.
Similar results emerged from a recent analysis in Switzerland, where kilometers traveled by
bike have been signiﬁcantly risen during the ﬁrst wave of the crisis, mainly for leisure, with the
largest increase in the lockdown period, which was stabilized in the post-lockdown period. [21]
33
==PAGE:38==
5.2
Analysis B Results : Public Mode Transport Trips
This section presents all the analysis results concerning public modes of transport, speciﬁcally
metro, bus, and train, studying separately the regional train and the S-train in Zealand. The
visualization of the following results aims to highlight how people reacted to public modes of
transport, which were considered to be less safe, during the Covid-19 crisis. Outputs consist of
diagrams with a total overview of trips the last four years, charts with travel purpose or detailed
charts per transport mode for 2020 and the past three years, as well as summary graphs expressing
the relative change and the mode share based on travel behavior in public transportation.
Figure 10: Comparison of Total Public Mode Trips for 2017-2020 based on TU Data
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 11: Comparison of Total Public Mode Trips for 2017-2020 based on Rejsekort Data
Figures 10 and 11 provide an overview of total public trips, the daily sum of trips via metro,
bus, regional train, and s-train. It is a statistical comparison between the absolute number of
trips in 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 for each of the four periods. Figure 10 results arise from
TU data, while ﬁgure 11 from Rejsekort data. In both data sets, public transportation appears
to have a spectacular fall by the beginning of the pandemic when comparing with the three
previous years. The most dramatic decrease in these modes occurs during the Hard Lockdown,
in the spring of 2020. TU data show a decline of more than two-thirds, while Rejsekort trips
have fallen almost by 40%, compared with 2017, 2018, and 2019. During the next two periods
of the studied timeline, the total number of public trips from both sources begin to moderately
rise again, when compared with the period of Hard Lockdown. It is important to highlight that
during the Reopening period in 2020, Rejsekort data illustrates a signiﬁcantly larger number of
total public trips in contrast to 2017 and 2019 values. It is the only period after the beginning of
the pandemic that 2020 trips have a higher rate than the previous years. This result comes from
a sharp drop in public trips that appears to take place during the spring and summer periods
in 2017 and 2019, according to Rejsekort’s data set, and does not have any correlation with
the pandemic crisis. This decreasing trend in the years 2017 to 2019 raises concerns about the
conditions that led to this result. It may depend on various external factors, such as seasonal
eﬀects and possible disruptions in public transportation during this period in Zealand. However,
it seems like the past three years, public transport trips have followed the same trend, which
creates a consistency in the results, reducing the possibility of a data analysis error. During the
Light Lockdown, trips continue to have an increasing trend. However, many trips still deviate
from the pre-covid situation, highlighting that changes in travel behavior are perceptible.
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 12: Total Public Mode Trips Per Lockdown Period in 2020 for TU and Rejsekort Data
The above line graph summarizes the two prior diagrams, considering only the year 2020,
the year of the Covid-19 crisis. Data collection from both sources, TU and Rejsekort, follow
the same trend-line in terms of travel behavior throughout the diﬀerent periods. The number
of trips vary since there are major diﬀerences in sample size and content. Rejsekort data set
contains millions of observations which can provide a mean of trips per person per day, closer
to the actual number, and can justify the distance between the two lines. However, data sets
have been manipulated similarly, as previously mentioned, and their results seem to correspond
respectively. It can be seen that both data sets indicate the sharp decrease in the use of public
transportation in the Hard Lockdown period, which unfortunately has not been restored after the
relaxation of the restrictions.
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 13: Public Trips Per Transport Mode During Pre Lockdown Period in 2017-2020 based
on Rejsekort Data
In order to identify what exactly is happening in the public transportation sector, it is essential
to penetrate into each lockdown period individually. Figure 13 illustrates a detailed bar chart
of public trips, separately for each one of the four transport modes, during the Pre lockdown
period of all the investigated years. Pre lockdown period is recognized as the period before
the Covid-19 outbreak in Denmark, and it reﬂects the normal travel behavior in Zealand until
the ﬁrst Covid-19 wave. This bar chart describes the image of public transportation before the
pandemic, followed by the corresponding results for the other periods, in order to conduct an
accurate comparison between the diﬀerent periods and create reasonable arguments about the
eﬀect of the Covid-19 pandemic in Zealand’s level of ridership. It is clear that the bus has always
been the most appealing public transport mode during 2017-2020, while "Regional Train" has
the lowest score. In addition, metro trips in 2020 appear to have a sharp increase, almost double
than in the previous years. It should be considered that until September 2019, metro services
consisted of two lines, M1 and M2, to which has been added one additional line, M3, followed
by M4 in March 2020. Thus, it should be mentioned that in this speciﬁc examined time, January
to March, from 2017 and 2019, there are only two operating metro lines that may justify this
increase in 2020. [36] Furthermore, these two additional metro lines constructed in Q4 of 2019
and Q1 of 2020 have caused the increase in metro ridership, but also the sudden decrease in bus
ridership since more people were choosing the subway for their daily trips.
37
==PAGE:42==
Figure 14: Public Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Pre Lockdown Period
in 2017-2020 based on TU Data
An analysis of public trips per mode per purpose is also provided for each period, similar
to the one for private mode trips in Analysis A. It is observed that travel preferences ﬂuctuate
depending on the purpose of mobility. "Metro" is the rarest choice, mainly for leisure purposes
while "Bus" seems to be less popular for commuting purposes. On the other hand, traveling
for education shows a large number of trips by bus and trains, where "S-train" is the preferred
transport mode for all the examined travel purposes. "Leisure" and "Workplace" have noticeable
observations in all modes of public transportation. However, as already mentioned, the analysis
of the purpose of each trip is based on TU data so it is expected that there will be diﬀerences in
the ﬁnal ﬁgures compared to the results of Rejsekort.
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 15: Public Trips Per Transport Mode During Hard Lockdown Period in 2017-2020 based
on Rejsekort Data
After the ﬁrst outbreak of Covid-19 in Denmark, the national government has decided to
restrain rising infection cases through a wide range of restrictions. Part of that restrictions
was related to national lockdowns, where commercial activities have been closed, educational
institutions switched to online teaching, and the biggest part of the companies promoted remote
working. These drastic actions greatly aﬀected the travel behavior of Danes, who had to change
their daily travel routine immediately. The bar chart in Figure 15 draws the conclusion of sharp
impacts during the months of the Hard Lockdown in 2020, starting from March 11th, when the
ﬁrst national lockdown was set in eﬀect. It is essential to highlight that every mode of public
transportation has plunged in the year of the pandemic. "Bus", which was the most popular
mode, has fallen in half, but still scores more trips per day than the rest of the public modes.
"S-train" and "Regional Train" also appear to have a considerable decrease of 50%. The number
of trips via metro has slightly fallen, but they are still less than trips by s-train and bus. The before
mentioned decrease in public transportation has been already observed in similar researches in
many cities around the world, where the levels of public transportation fell by 60% [16] to 90%
[17]. Therefore, it was expected that Denmark and Zealand, in speciﬁc, will follow the same
trend of the decrease in the travel behavior of public transport modes.
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 16: Public Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Hard Lockdown Period
in 2017-2020 based on TU Data
Figure 16 estimates the changes in travel behavior per purpose during the Hard Lockdown.
Due to governmental restrictions, the number of trips per person per day in most of purpose
categories has been dramatically declined in 2020, such as "Educational institution" and "Work-
place", as danish lockdown has encouraged teleworking and studying from home. The level
of ridership in public transportation is also reduced compared to the same period in the other
examined years. Despite the sudden decrease in bus use, it seems that it continues to be the most
trusted mode of public transport, especially for "Leisure", aligning with the results indicated by
the Rejsekort data analysis which has been previously presented. It is once again identiﬁed that
travel behavior in Zealand has signiﬁcantly been aﬀected during the Covid-19 pandemic.
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 17: Public Trips Per Transport Mode During Reopening Period in 2017-2020 based on
Rejsekort Data
After the Hard Lockdown, the Danish government started to ease travel restrictions and
reopen the country, starting from commercial activities followed by cafes, restaurants and
educational institutions. This reopening phase has impacted the mobility patterns as well, as it
was already expected and predicted from similar studies in many cities. The consequences of
the reopening phase in Denmark in public transport modes, from May 7th to September 16th,
are illustrated quantitatively in Figure 17. It can be clearly seen that the use of the examined
modes of public transport has been increased compared to the same time period in 2019. This
increase during the Reopening period of 2020 is highly connected with the data sets’ diﬀerences
and other seasonal reasons that may not be related to the pandemic. However, each mode of
transport individually is ﬂuctuating between 2017 and 2020. Trips per card per day in "Regional
Train", "S-train" and "Bus" in 2020, appear to have similar behavior in regards to their related
trips in 2017, but they decreased in comparison to 2018. On the contrary, "Metro" seems to have
the most trips per card per day in 2020 than in previous years 2017,2018, and it almost doubled
since 2019, with approximately 0.03 trips per card per day. Additionally, "Bus" and "S-train"
reached approximately 0.06 and 0.05 trips per card per day, respectively, in 2020 against 0.05
and 0.03 in 2019, respectively, without surpassing the 2018 ﬁgure, when "Bus" reached the
highest level of this period analysis with 0.07 trips per car per day. It is also worth mentioning
that the conducted analysis has resulted in an increased amount of trips per card per day during
the 2020 Reopening period in the region of Zealand, in contrast to the 2020 Hard Lockdown
41
==PAGE:46==
period in all the analyzed modes of public transport. However, despite this increase between
Hard Lockdown Period and Reopening Period, the ﬁgures have not yet reached Pre Lockdown
levels, where "Bus" had 0.08 trips per card per day in 2020 instead of 0.06, "Metro" had 0.05
instead of 0.03, "S-train" had 0.055 instead of 0.045 and ﬁnally "Regional Train" has now less
than 0.01 trips per card per day. These results are proving the argument that the former users
of public transportation have switched to other private modes of transport[25], such as private
vehicles or cycling, or this is due to public perception around a higher spread of coronavirus
and hygiene issues in public transportation. [15] The question that is now raising is if it will be
possible again to return to a pre-covid state when it comes to the use of public transport modes
and if governments are able enough to convince users to return to their old habits.
Figure 18: Public Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Reopening Period in
2017-2020 based on TU Data
Despite the variation in the levels of ridership in public transport modes, after the lightening of
the Covid-19 restrictions, people started to travel again for various reasons that have been entered
their daily routine again. Although many employees were still working from home, some of
them were permitted to return to their workplace and follow up with their commercial and leisure
activities, changing the pattern of travel purposes. As emerged from the conducted analysis,
people mostly used public transportation for leisure activities, commuting, and educational
purposes during the Reopening period. "Bus" and "S-train" appear to be the most popular
modes of transport at the Reopening period for the before mentioned travel purposes. Traveling
42
==PAGE:47==
to the workplace has been increased since the Hard Lockdown, which can be justiﬁed by the
reopening of shopping malls, shops, cafes, and restaurants where the employees were required
to be physically present but also by the fact that that many companies followed diﬀerent policies
and permitted a percentage of their workforce to return to the oﬃces. In addition, the use of S-
train has been increased after the Hard Lockdown period, and it seems that users have chosen to
travel via this mode of transport for many diﬀerent purposes. Since ridership has been increased
after the Hard Lockdown period, more users have selected public transport to travel for the six
examined travel purposes, and the trips have been allocated to all four examined modes of public
transport. However, it can be seen from the graph that more people have traveled for leisure
and working purposes during the same period between 2017 to 2019, in comparison to 2020.
The overall assessment of the travel behavior during the Reopening phase is that trips have been
increased after the Hard Lockdown Period, but they did not reach Pre Lockdown levels, even in
terms of travel purpose. The detailed analysis of the Reopening period for the trips per person
per day is being illustrated in Figure 18.
Figure 19: Public Trips Per Transport Mode During Light Lockdown Period in 2017-2020 based
on Rejsekort Data
On September 17th, the Danish government has imposed new restrictions in order to control
the increasing coronavirus cases. However, the measures taken were still less strict than the ones
announced at the beginning of the ﬁrst wave of Covid-19 in March. In Figure 19, it is depicted
that the ridership level of all transport modes has slightly increased since the Reopening Period
43
==PAGE:48==
but remains lower than the same period between 2019. The same values tend to ﬂuctuate between
the same time period of 2017 and 2018. Ridership in "Metro" takes the lowest scores in 2017
and 2018 since at that time metro was operating with two metro lines less, which may justify
the reduced ﬁgures. This fact also justiﬁes the increased 2019 numbers in "Metro", which has
been operating with an additional line since November 2019. The newly introduced restrictions
have not greatly aﬀected travel behavior in Zealand since they only concerned opening hours
of the cafes and restaurants, assembly ban, and other restrictions on a local level. This Light
Lockdown period was in eﬀect until December 7th, when the current analysis is concluding.
Therefore, the imposed measures did not change the daily travel behavior of the Danes, who
continued traveling in the period between September 17th, 2020 to December 7th, 2020. Bus
trips have been doubled since the Hard Lockdown period as well as Metro, S-train, and Regional
Train trips. It is also observed that 2020 ridership levels are less than in 2019 in all public
transport modes. In general, the ﬁgures of all public transport modes are ﬂuctuating between the
same period in 2017 to 2020. As it has occurred from the conducted analysis, trips per card per
day are still lower than the Pre Lockdown period, meaning that there are still travelers that have
reduced their daily trips due to coronavirus or they have shifted to diﬀerent modes of transport
in a period that has lighter restrictions and may be considered a simulation of the reality before
Covid-19 outbreak.
Figure 20: Public Trips Per Transport Mode per Travel Purpose During Light Lockdown Period
in 2017-2020 based on TU Data
44
==PAGE:49==
During the Light Lockdown period, more and more people are starting to use public transport
modes for educational purposes since educational institutions were functioning, while "Regional
Train" seems to increase the users’ preferences. In addition, business trips began to be performed
again via bus, regional train, and s-train. The ﬁgures seem to have a slight decrease since the
Reopening period of 2020. However, users have started to commute more via other public
transport modes, such as metro and regional train, so the shares of working and leisure purposes
have been allocated accordingly. Compared to the same period in 2017 to 2019, all travel
purposes seem to have been reduced, with major changes in work, leisure, and educational
purposes, which have been highly aﬀected by the restrictions against Covid-19 infection. In
general, TU data indicate a signiﬁcant decline in the number of trips per travel purpose compared
to the number of trips in the previous years, even larger than the one that Rejsekort’s analysis
has outlined. Sample size and type may be a possible reason for this signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
Figure 21: Public Trips Per Transport Mode Per Lockdown Period in 2019 based on TU data
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure 22: Public Trips Per Transport Mode Per Lockdown Period in 2020 based on TU data
The ﬁnal part of the "Results" section aims to provide an overview of the resulted ﬁgures
for further comprehension and comparison of the analysis conclusions. Figures 21 and 22 give
information on the comparison of the absolute number of trips per day for each public mode
between the whole year 2019 and 2020. Figure 21 describes the use of regional train, metro,
bus, and s-train during the four periods in 2019, and ﬁgure 22 introduces the trips in 2020,
based exclusively on TU survey data. A sharp decline of "S-Train" is recorded during the Hard
Lockdown in 2020, compared with the same period last year, as well as with the prior period of
the same year. Less than 0,005 trips per day have been conducted via S-Train during the ﬁrst
months of the pandemic. Similarly, bus use has started to continuously fall during the Hard
Lockdown period, recording only around 20% of the same trips in 2019. It is clear that the
public modes, which used to be the most desirable in the past, have the most dramatic impact
during the year of the pandemic. Metro is the public mode that appears to be the less safe and
trusted for moving around Zealand during the ﬁrst wave of the pandemic. On the other hand, it
is noticeable how "Regional Train", which was the highest in rate during the Hard Lockdown, is
the only public mode that continues to decrease in the following period as well; the Reopening.
"Metro", "S-Train" and "Bus" gradually rise during Reopening and Light Lockdown in 2020.
Hence, the number of trips per person per day is low compared to the Pre Lockdown period of
the same year and all periods in 2019. Around 50% of trips in a non-pandemic era have been
restored during the phase of lifting government restrictions.
46
==PAGE:51==
Figure 23: Public Trips Per Transport Mode Per Lockdown Period in 2019 based on Rejsekort
data
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure 24: Public Trips Per Transport Mode Per Lockdown Period in 2020 based on Rejsekort
data
Figures 23 and 24 illustrate the same comparison with the prior bar chats, but this time
based on data collection from Rejsekort. As previously mentioned, the bus is the most common
public transport mode used throughout all periods, both in 2019 and 2020. During the months
of Hard Lockdown in 2019, "Bus" had the highest rate, 0.1 trips per card per day, while during
the same period in 2020, it presents its lowest score decreased nearly by 50%. It is observed that
all four modes of public transport have plunged suddenly in the transition from Pre Lockdown
to Hard Lockdown period in the year of the pandemic. In addition, all of them appear to be
gently increased again during the following periods of the pandemic, the Reopening phase in
Zealand, and the following Light Lockdown during autumn 2020. "Regional Train" seems
to vary marginally among all these periods in 2019 and 2020. Travel preferences using this
mode had already been low before the pandemic and continue to have nearly steady frequency
during 2019 and 2020. Despite the fact that the two data sets have some diﬀerences, the general
common output is that all public transport modes have been highly aﬀected by the Covid-19
outbreak changing the travel behavior of travelers in Zealand.
48
==PAGE:53==
5.2.1
Relative Change
In order to quantify the actual change in the travel behavior in Zealand compared with 2019, the
relative change of public transport trips has been calculated.
Figure 25: Relative Change of Total Public Mode Trips between 2019 and 2020 based on TU
Data
49
==PAGE:54==
Figure 26: Relative Change of Total Public Mode Trips between 2019 and 2020 based on
Rejsekort Data
Firstly, the relative change is calculated for TU data, Figure 25, and afterward for Rejsekort
data, Figure 26. As expected from analyzing all prior results of the TU data set in this section, the
relative change is negative in the majority of the observations since most values are smaller than
the reference value, the number of trips in 2019. The dramatic decrease in public transportation
is conﬁrmed throughout this concept for each transport mode. To begin with TU data, only
"S-Train" and "Bus" appear to have a positive relative change between 2019 and 2020, taking
place only in the period of Pre Lockdown. Hence, this slight increase has no point of interest
as it refers to the pre-pandemic period. "S-Train" records a relative change of -0.9 during Hard
Lockdown, the largest negative relative change among all results, followed by "Bus" and "Metro"
marking nearly the same value, around -0.8. It is important to comment on "Regional Train,"
which has a large diﬀerentiation in results, showing the sharpest decrease during the Reopening
phase, in contrast to the rest of the public modes. Travel behavior in Reopening and Light
Lockdown periods seem to vary depending on the choice of mobility. For example, bus and
metro use began to rise again when restrictions were lifted and continued to oﬀset their negative
impacts in the following period of Light Lockdown. On the other hand, "S-train" records a
greater negative relative change during the last period than the Reopening phase.
50
==PAGE:55==
Studying the Rejsekort results in the second bar chart, it is clear that the ﬂuctuation of outputs
varies from the TU data. The observations that should be highlighted, and do not align with
the TU conclusions, consider the Reopening period, where all out of four public modes appear
to have a positive relative change, an increase of mobility from 2019 to 2020. This increase
during the Reopening period of 2020 is highly connected with the low numbers presented in
the analysis of 2019 Reopening ridership. For reasons that the pandemic cannot explain, the
public transport ﬁgures of that speciﬁc time appear much lower than expected, creating this
high diﬀerence between 2019 and 2020. Apart from that, the remaining results regarding Hard
Lockdown, Pre Lockdown, and Light Lockdown present the expected behavior, the decrease of
the total ridership, as expressed earlier in the "Results". According to the description of data
sets, the two sources diﬀer a lot in size and content and, therefore, end up in several variations of
results, similar to the current variations in relative change results. Rejsekort data is more reliable
and cohesive for smart card users than a limited-number national survey since it is derived from
actual indicators cards that capture all trips instantly. Moreover, literature and prior results have
implied the gentle rise of public trips during the reopening of society. Figure 26 also draws the
conclusion of a sudden decline, evenly in "Regional Train", "S-Train" and "Bus", and a more
moderate decrease in the use of metro, during the Hard lockdown period in 2020.
Figure 27: Relative Change of Total Public Mode Trips based on TU and Rejsekort
51
==PAGE:56==
Concluding the "Results" chapter, the relative change that occurred by the comparison of
the travel behavior in Zealand between 2019 and 2020 has been visualized and placed in a
line graph for both examined data sets. This line graph indicates the ﬁndings of the relative
change of public trips from Rejsekort and TU data. All variations and remarks located in the
previous diagrams are more evident by depicting the trend of relative change from 2019 to 2020.
Similar to the analyzed results in earlier sections, public transport modes have experienced a
considerable decrease during the Hard Lockdown, which tried to rebound during the following
periods, with Rejsekort presenting a large positive relative change for the reasons explained
earlier. Both lines may follow a similar trend, but ﬁgures vary greatly since the Rejsekort sample
is enormous, consisting of millions of observations. At this point, it is accurate to state that the
Covid-19 pandemic has highly impacted travel behavior in Zealand, while public transportation
has experienced one of the biggest shocks from an operational point of view.
5.3
Distribution of Modal share: Leisure and Workplace
A signiﬁcant point that was concluded from both Analysis A and Analysis B is that both
"Leisure" and "Workplace" are the most common purposes for traveling in Zealand. In this
framework, there was a need for further penetration in the transport modes that have met the
travelers’ needs to draw a pattern of the mobility change for commuting and leisure purposes.
This section describes the distribution of private and public transport modal share, regarding
these two purposes, in 2019 and 2020. Comparison is made in order to identify the diﬀerence
in the allocation of modal share between pre-covid and post-covid situations.
The current
examinations are based on the TU data set for the export of the following results.
52
==PAGE:57==
Figure 28: The modal share in case of leisure activities in 2019
Figure 28 illustrates the percentage of trips for each mode of transport, which were conducted
during 2019 for leisure purposes. Distribution of total trips is derived from TU data and consists
of "Bicycle", "Walk", "Vehicle", "Taxi", "Metro", "Bus", "Regional Train" and "S-train". It
is clear from the pie chart that a signiﬁcant majority of 53.31% has chosen to travel by their
personal vehicle (car). "Walk" is the second in ranking with a percentage of 26.66%, while
"Bicycle" is the third most popular mode of transport during 2019, recording 20.16%. In the
rest of the transport modes, mobility has been almost equally distributed, except for "Taxi, "
which represents a minority of 0.24%.
53
==PAGE:58==
Figure 29: The modal share in case of leisure activities in 2020
This pie chart draws the conclusions of changes in travel behavior during 2020, the year of
the Covid-19 crisis, regarding "Leisure" as the purpose for traveling. In comparison with the
prior similar graph of 2019, it is derived that the use of all public transport modes has been
decreased, resulting mainly in the sharp rise of "Walk" mobility. "Metro", "S-train", "Regional
Train" and "Bus" have been dropped nearly by half, while the modal share of "Walk" grew from
26.66% to 39.47%. "Bicycle" has also been slightly increased by almost 2%. Although the
"Vehicle" ﬁgure has been decreased in the post-covid era, this transport mode still holds the
most signiﬁcant mobility share for leisure purposes among all the examined transport modes. It
is concluded that many citizens in Zealand, as far as leisure activities are concerned, decided to
abstain from public modes of transportation during the pandemic and replace them by moving
on foot or by bicycle.
54
==PAGE:59==
Figure 30: The modal share in case of commuting activities in 2019
Figure 30 gives information on modal share 2019, taking into account the "Workplace" as
the purpose of traveling. TU survey is also used here for the extraction of the above graph. Once
again, the majority of the participants preferred to travel by their own vehicle during the whole
year of 2019. In this case of commuting activities, a signiﬁcant fraction of citizens, around 20%,
had chosen to move by bicycle as well. S-train also used to be a popular mode of transport to
the workplace during the pre-covid situation, marking 7.7% of the total modal share. Next in
ranking is "Walk" with 6.4%, "Bus" with 4.2%, "Regional Train" with 4%, "Metro" with 1.4%
and, lastly, the "Taxi" covering only 0.4% of trips for commuting activities.
55
==PAGE:60==
Figure 31: The modal share in case of commuting activities in 2020
Moving to the post-covid era, modal share for commuting activities during the year of the
pandemic has been changed since 2019. The most noticeable observation is the massive use of
the vehicle for traveling to the workplace. "Vehicle" category, consisting mainly of cars, covers
67% among the eight choices of transport modes while appearing increased since the pre-covid
era. Bicycle and Metro use have remained steady from 2019 to 2020 in commuting activities,
while the rest of the modes have been decreased. "Taxi" has been completely plunged to 0%. In
conclusion, these variations between pre-covid and post-covid travel behavior voice the fear of
citizens traveling to their workplace by public transportation, which is widely shared, and the
restrictions that highly encouraged working from home. It explains why more and more people
began to prefer using their car, or alternatively continued using their bicycle, for this purpose of
mobility.
56
==PAGE:61==
6
Discussion
As manifested in the analysis above, the Covid-19 pandemic and the related lockdown restrictions
signiﬁcantly impacted ridership levels in private and public transport services. At this point, it
remains unknown whether the pandemic crisis will have long-lasting eﬀects on the daily traveling
of transport systems.
Experience has shown that large-scale crises have not fundamentally
changed travel patterns but have led to innovation and changes in how transport is performed.[37]
This may suggest that post-pandemic traveling conditions may not be so diﬀerent from the pre-
pandemic standards.
As emerged from the conducted analysis of the private mode trips during the four diﬀerent
examined lockdown periods compared to the same periods between 2017 and 2019, there is a
large increase of people traveling with alternative ways than public transportation, especially
during Hard Lockdown, Reopening and Light Lockdown period. The most signiﬁcant eﬀects of
the Covid-19 pandemic have been observed in "Walk" trips during the Hard Lockdown period,
which have been highly increased in contrast with the Pre Lockdown period and the same period,
January to March 10th, in 2019. It seems that more and more people had selected to walk for
leisure purposes in this time, and in general, more walking trips had occurred than in 2019, since
walking may be assumed as the safest way of transportation, against Covid-19 spread, as well
as the only way out when Denmark was in catholic lockdown. Another signiﬁcant observation
that emerged from the above analysis is the sharp increase in the use of private vehicles during
the Reopening period, especially for commuting and leisure purposes, compared to the other
lockdown periods in 2020 but also in the Reopening and Light Lockdown period of 2019.
Finally, cycling appears a slight increase during the Hard Lockdown period compared to the
Pre Lockdown period, which became larger in the Reopening period in 2020. It is accurate to
assume that more travelers have selected bicycles for their daily trips, mostly for leisure and
working purposes, instead of other modes of transport. This is also conﬁrmed by the Light
Lockdown period when despite the small decrease in bike usage, the trips per person per day are
still higher than in Pre Lockdown and Hard Lockdown period, which means that cycling may be
a long-lasting part of people’s travel routine. It is worth mentioning that the observed increases
in both vehicles and cycling trips during the Reopening period can be justiﬁed by the restrictions
held at that time, which permitted the opening of all retail activities, restaurants, cafes, cultural
and educational institutions. Similar results have emerged from recent literature indicating that
bike and walking trips have risen for both commuting and leisure purposes in the post Covid-19
period, conﬁrming the current analysis[23]. In addition, more travelers have selected to travel
longer distances by foot or bicycle during the pandemic than in the year 2019, meaning that the
Covid-19 pandemic has impacted distance travel decisions, adding a new aspect to the change
in travel behavior. Similar studies once again provide that the highest percentage of travelers
shifting toward walking for commuting purposes is 43.3% in the 0–4 km group, conﬁrming the
current analysis ﬁndings.[23]
The results, as mentioned earlier, indicate that the Covid-19 pandemic has signiﬁcantly
changed the travel behavior in Zealand, which may alternate mobility patterns in the future.
However, the increase in the use of bicycles or walking may be considered a positive outcome of
the pandemic, from a social and environmental perspective, since more and more travelers choose
more sustainable and environmentally friendly transport methods. The results of this preliminary
analysis could also indicate that the increase in cycling during the Covid-19 pandemic will persist
over the coming years since this rising trend in 2020 may came from former public transport
57
==PAGE:62==
passengers who switched to cycling because they were afraid to use crowded trains and buses.
In order the cycling and walking to continue rising over the coming years and retain beneﬁcial
eﬀects on society, there will be a need for further infrastructure upgrade and promotion of more
sustainable alternatives after the governmental lockdowns and restrictions are lifted.
Some
examples are longer and well-connected bike lanes and wider pedestrian areas with smaller
traﬃc light cycles that will reduce waiting time and promote these two mobility ways.[22]
As far as public transportation is concerned, there is a sharp decline of citizens using any
public mode for their daily mobility during the crisis of Covid-19. Comparing the number
of trips during the pandemic year with the number of 2019, 2018, and 2017 major variations
have been observed. Changes in travel behavior are not only visible by comparing year by
year but also among the four diﬀerent periods in the year 2020 itself. Analysis and results of
this present research indicate that the Hard Lockdown has been the most detrimental period for
public transportation in Zealand. From March 2020 to May 2020, trips conducted via metro,
bus, or trains mark the lowest use frequency during the ﬁrst wave of the pandemic. TU and
Rejsekort’s data concluded that these public modes of transport had lost nearly more than 50% of
their passengers during the Hard Lockdown. Rejsekort card users seem to have limited bus use
by the most during the ﬁrst national lockdown, while the TU survey concludes that the largest
decrease takes place in the metro. It is acknowledged that there is no impactless mode of public
transport during this period. Moreover, since educational institutions have closed and most
companies switched to the "work-from-home" era, the most dramatic impacts appear by digging
into mobility purposes of "Workplace", "Educational institution", and "Business". On the other
hand, the two following periods point out that this sudden change of travel behavior results from
the initial feeling of anxiety for the spread of the disease and the government restrictions. As
months pass by, it seems that passengers start to adjust to this "new reality" and moderately
return to public transportation. There was no scant evidence globally showing that the use of
public transport modes generates coronavirus outbreaks. Physical distancing, hand sanitizers,
and face masks which cover the mouth and nose appear to be adequate to strengthen again the
public transportation, without any high risk of getting infected by the virus [38]. During the
Reopening period and the next lighter lockdown in Zealand, several public trips began to rise
again. Society has lifted the national lockdown, and citizens return gradually to workplaces,
educational institutions, and leisure activities. It is reasonable that the frequency of mobility
via metro, bus, or train has not been elevated to the original pre-covid values. However, there
is a promising rise in all modes during the reopening phase of society, around 25% from the
pre-lockdown levels.
The biggest questions concern the post-pandemic era and its challenges. Are people ready
to get back to their usual travel behaviors? What is the eventual damage of public transportation
after the crisis of Covid-19?
The overview of this analysis and the transition of diﬀerent
lockdown periods indicate that the "lost" passengers in public transportation are a temporary
impact of the pandemic. Recent literature shows that people are slowly getting back onto trains,
buses, and the metro. Eﬃcient measures and guidelines are capable of reserving the system
of transportation safe and alive. Based on global ﬁndings, all public modes invest in hygiene
adjustments and operational and safety changes to cope with this challenge. [39] However,
we should acknowledge that these new trends introduced during the Covid-19 crisis, such as
teleworking, may persist after the pandemic to some extent.
In this case scenario, public
transport services may have to deal with more long-lasting consequences requiring special
handling from public authorities and public transport providers. Such new policies may include
58
==PAGE:63==
existing demand assessment to update the existing timetable and reduce operational costs, with
fewer vehicles and fewer bus routes, where necessary. If there is a need to attract more and more
passengers to public transportation, this should be connected with establishing new protocols
that enhance safety and trust in transport vehicles and facilities. This means that the solutions to
these challenges require deep cleaning of all the spaces that a passenger uses, automatic doors to
prevent passengers from pressing buttons, reduced vehicle capacity, hand sanitizers for the users,
upgraded ventilation systems and air renewal in the vehicles, increased frequency of itinerary
during rush hours, enabling physical distancing at stations and stops and ﬁnally, promotion of
contactless payments to avoid physical contact. In general, as in every crisis, national funding
and support programs are crucial for the ﬁnancial viability of the public transportation sector.
Both parties, government, and contractors need to collaborate and coordinate their eﬀorts to
overcome any challenges that may occur. [40]
As a ﬁnal discussion point, it should be mentioned that the current analysis has been based on
two diﬀerent data sets, the National Travel Survey (TU) and Rejsekort data from 2017 to 2020.
The analyzed variables may be similar, but these two data sets have signiﬁcant diﬀerences as well
as advantages and disadvantages that created challenges throughout the analysis. National Travel
Survey (TU) is a representative sample containing critical data aligned with other characteristics
such as sex, age, socioeconomic status, or marital status, which can be considered advantageous
for the analysis. However, to accommodate the current analysis, several sample elements have
been excluded, such as periods, which have narrowed down the examined sample. Therefore, it
can be stated that the disadvantage of TU data is the level of robustness they create since a sample
with more extended periods would have created more accurate ﬁndings. In addition, grouping
transport categories to perform the analysis may create a level of uncertainty in the results, such
as in the group of "Vehicle", where the car may acquire 98% of the observations but also other
types of vehicles included. On the other hand, the Rejsekort data set is not representative since
it does not reﬂect the travel behavior of the entire population as there are other ways for traveling
in Zealand, such as student cards, monthly passes, etc. However, the advantage of Rejsekort is
lying on a large number of observations that it supports and can provide an overview of the travel
behavior closer to the actual number. In addition, a larger sample size reduces the possibility
of sampling errors and increases the possibility that the sample provides accurate results for the
target population. Concluding, it should be mentioned that the above-observed advantages and
disadvantages may aﬀect the overall robustness of the results. Nevertheless, the combination of
the random sampling with the representative sampling method was applied in an eﬀort to reduce
bias further and provide as accurate results as possible.
59
==PAGE:64==
7
Conclusion
The present paper investigates the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on travel behavior and
mobility patterns in Zealand, Denmark. Research and export results are based on two diﬀerent
sources, the Danish National Travel Survey (TU) and the Danish Smart Travel Card (Rejsekort).
A combination of both data sets has been respectively manipulated to identify the broader image
of changes in transportation and achieve higher reliability in the interpretation of the results.
The analysis is focused on four diﬀerent periods according to the Covid-19 timeline and delves
into dates from 2017 to 2020. To better understand these research outputs, private and public
modes of transport have been separately examined.
Primary ﬁndings concern the situation after Covid-19 restrictions in Zealand and the change
in transport users’ perspective. Firstly, it is concluded that the pandemic outbreak has aﬀected
the majority of public transport modes in daily travel activities. The most dramatic impacts are
visible throughout the ﬁrst outbreak of Covid-19, the Hard Lockdown, which takes place from
mid-March to mid-May 2020. Comparing this period dates with the same date range in 2017,
2018, and 2019, it is observed that "Metro", "Bus", "Regional Train" and "S-train" have been
decreased nearly by half. The same reﬂections come from both data sets, with minor variations
in values of each model. In general, all results show this dramatic drop in public transportation
during the ﬁrst wave of the pandemic. In the progress of this research, it is identiﬁed that these
impacts have started to subside, already from the end of the ﬁrst Hard Lockdown. The period
of Reopening, when restrictions have been lifted, and the following lockdown in autumn of
2020, consisting of more loose government policies, indicate the gradual return of passengers to
public modes of transport. Besides the gradual rise of public trips, daily values throughout these
periods still deviate enough from the pre-covid situation in transportation and may generate
concerns about the future of transportation. These alterations are directly connected with the
sudden growth in the use of private modes of transport. The most critical reﬂections concern a
considerable rise of "Walk" and "Vehicle" during the ﬁrst Hard Lockdown and a slighter increase
of "Bicycle". Travel behavior had signiﬁcantly shifted from public to private modes of travel
during the ﬁrst months of the pandemic outbreak, as Zealand was in catholic lockdown, and
the fear of the spread of the disease was more intense at the beginning of the crisis. Overall,
this present analysis, in combination with recently published literature, concludes that these
modal shifts are probably not permanent. It is observed that the post-covid situation could
be carefully counterbalanced day by day and that the most considerable inﬂuence on decision-
making concerns primarily pandemic restrictions.
Future research could follow up on this study to measure how and why travel behavior
has changed at the end of the pandemic. There is also a need for national comparison since
this paper is focused only on the region of Zealand, Denmark, and there are variations from
region to region. Infrastructure, age, and income could greatly impact the decision-making
of traveling during and after the pandemic. Thus, it would be highly interesting to see how
these widely implemented surveys in citizens and their socio-demographic data can contribute
to gain information on how these factors inﬂuence the mobility pattern in Denmark. More
insight is necessary in local travel indicators, combining diﬀerent sources, such as other ticket
methods, and meters, such as GPS and crowd-sourced data, in order to stand for the majority
of passengers. Lastly, in terms of socio-economic or environmental approach, further analysis
could be implemented to investigate the economic impacts on local transportation services and
the potential beneﬁts to society and the environment created by the Covid-19 outbreak.
60
==PAGE:65==
References
[1] Dieleman F. M., Dĳst M., and Burghouwt G. Urban form and travel behaviour: Micro-level
household attributes and residential context. Urban Studies, 39(3):507 - 527, 2002.
[2] Best H.& Lanzendorf M. Division of labour and gender diﬀerences in metropolitan car use:
An empirical study in Cologne, Germany. Journal of Transport Geography, 13(2):109-121,
2005.
[3] Boarnet M.G. and Sarmiento S. Can land-use policy really aﬀect travel behaviour? A
study of the link between non-work travel and land-use characteristics. Urban Studies,
35(7):1155 - 1169, 1998.
[4] Oﬃcial Website of Denmark.
https://denmark.dk/innovation-and-design/
infrastructure. Accessed: 2021-05-25.
[5] Danish Health Authority. https://www.sst.dk/en/english/corona-eng/status-
of-the-epidemic/covid-19-updates-statistics-and-charts. Accessed: 2021-
06-16.
[6] http://thinkeuropa.dk/.
http://thinkeuropa.dk/politik/tidslinje-over-
coronakrisen-hvad-skete-der-og-hvornaar. Accessed: 2021-02-20.
[7] Our
World
in
Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/biweekly-
confirmed-covid-19-cases?tab=chart&time=earliest..2020-12-
07&country=~DNK. Accessed: 2021-03-20.
[8] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/
en/publications-data/download-todays-data-geographic-distribution-
covid-19-cases-worldwide. Accessed: 2021-03-20.
[9] Data
on
hospital
and
icu
admission
rates
and
current
occupancy
for
covid-
19.
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/download-data-
hospital-and-icu-admission-rates-and-current-occupancy-covid-19. Ac-
cessed: 2021-06-21.
[10] World Health Organization. Archived: WHO Timeline - COVID-19. https://www.who.
int/news/item/27-04-2020-who-timeline---covid-19. Accessed: 2021-05-18.
[11] Shunqing Xu & Yuanyuan Li. Beware of the second wave of covid-19. The Lancet,
395(10233):1321-1322, 2020.
[12] Anderson R. M., Heesterbeek H., Klinkenberg D., and Hollingsworth T. D. How will
country based mitigation measures inﬂuence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The
Lancet, 395(10228):931-934, 2020.
[13] Ahmed Arafa, Amel Mohamed, Lamiaa Saleh, and Shaimaa Senosy. Psychological impacts
of the covid-19 pandemic on the public in egypt. Community Mental Health Journal,
57:64-69, 2021.
61
==PAGE:66==
[14] B.K. Agarwal, Varsha & Sunitha. Covid – 19: Current pandemic and its societal impact.
International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology, 29(5):432-439, 2020.
[15] UITP.
Public transport authorities and COVID-19:
impact and response to a pan-
demic.
https://www.lek.com/sites/default/files/PDFs/COVID19-public-
transport-impacts.pdf. Accessed: 2021-05-26.
[16] T. Hughes. Poor, essential and on the bus: Coronavirus is putting public transportation rid-
ers at risk. https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/04/14/public-
transportation-users-risk-coronavirus-spreads-across-us/2979779001/.
Accessed: 2021-05-20.
[17] Shawn Jeﬀords. Transit ridership, revenue in steep decline during COVID-19 pandemic.
https://nationalpost.com/pmn/news-pmn/canada-news-pmn/go-transit-
ridership-down-90-per-cent-as-people-stay-home-during-pandemic.
Accessed: 2021-05-20.
[18] Clara Chong.
Train ridership down by 80% since coronavirus outbreak started, says
transport minister khaw.
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/train-
ridership-fell-80-since-coronavirus-outbreak-started-but-upside-
was-good-safe. Accessed: 2021-05-18.
[19] Mathĳs de Haas, Roel Faber, and Marĳe Hamersma. How covid-19 and the dutch ‘intelli-
gent lockdown’ change activities, work and travel behaviour: Evidence from longitudinal
data in the netherlands. Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 6(100150),
2020.
[20] Péter Bucsky. Modal share changes due to covid-19: The case of budapest. Transportation
Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 8(100141), 2020.
[21] Joseph Molloy, Thomas Schatzmann, Beaumont Schoeman, Christopher Tchervenkov,
Beat Hintermann, and Kay W. Axhausen. Observed impacts of the covid-19 ﬁrst wave on
travel behaviour in Switzerland based on a large gps panel. Transport Policy, 104:43-51,
2021.
[22] EIT. Urban mobility strategies during covid-19. https://www.eiturbanmobility.eu/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Urban-mobility-strategies-during-COVID-
19_long-1.pdf. Accessed: 2021-05-28.
[23] Ali Enes Dingil & Domokos Esztergár-Kiss. The inﬂuence of the covid-19 pandemic on
mobility patterns: The ﬁrst wave’s results. Transportation Letters, 2021.
[24] Monik Gupta, Nishant Mukund Pawar, and Nagendra R. Velaga. Impact of lockdown and
change in mobility patterns on road fatalities during covid-19 pandemic. Transportation
Letters, 2021.
[25] Ralph Buehler & John Pucher. Covid-19 impacts on cycling, 2019–2020. Transport
Reviews, 8(100242), 2021.
[26] Hjalmar Christiansen & Britt Zoëga Skougaard. Documentation of the danish national
travel survey. DTU Transport, Data and Modelcenter, 10, 2015.
62
==PAGE:67==
[27] Rejsekort. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rejsekort. Accessed: 2021-04-04.
[28] Rejsekort Oﬃcial Website. https://www.rejsekort.dk/. Accessed: 2021-04-04.
[29] Hamada S Badr, Hongru Du, Maximilian Marshall, Ensheng Dong, Marietta M Squire,
and Lauren M Gardner. Association between mobility patterns and covid-19 transmission
in the usa: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet, 2020.
[30] Ministry of Transport. The Danish Transport System. https://trimis.ec.europa.
eu/sites/default/files/project/documents/Facts%20and%20Figures%
20netversion.pdf. Accessed: 2021-03-10.
[31] Matthew J.Beck and David A.Hensher. Insights into the impact of covid-19 on household
travel and activities in australia – the early days of easing restrictions. Transport Policy,
99:95-119, 2020.
[32] Morten Eltved, Nils Breyer, Jesper Blafoss Ingvardson, and Otto Anker Nielsen. Impacts
of long-term service disruptions on passenger travel behaviour: A smart card analysis from
the greater copenhagen area. Transportation Research Part C, 2021.
[33] Erik Jenelius and Matej Cebecauer. Impacts of covid-19 on public transport ridership
in sweden: Analysis of ticket validations, sales and passenger counts. Transportation
Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 8(100242), 2020.
[34] Hjalmar Christiansen & Oana Baescu. The danish national travel survey - catalogue of
variables. DTU,Center for Transport Analytics, 2, 2020.
[35] https://www.calendarlabs.com.
https://www.calendarlabs.com/holidays/.
Ac-
cessed: 2021-03-15.
[36] Metro Oﬃcial Website. https://m.dk/rejser/se-metroens-linjer/. Accessed:
2021-06-04.
[37] Konstantinos Gkiotsalitis & Oded Cats. Public transport planning adaption under the
covid-19 pandemic crisis: literature review of research needs and directions. Transport
Reviews, 2020.
[38] Maxine Joselow. There is little evidence that mass transit poses a risk of coronavirus
outbreaks. Scientiﬁc American, 2020.
[39] Public transport is covid-safe: A sector ready to build back better. https://www.uitp.
org/. Accessed: 2021-06-05.
[40] International Transport Forum. Covid-19 and transport: A compendium. OECD Publish-
ing, 2021.
63
==PAGE:68==
Appendices
A
Handling Rejsekort Data - Code
A.1
"Cleaning" Data set
The implemented Python code developed to get the results is presented below, emphasizing the
most important procedures that concluded in the ﬁnal results of the analysis. First, the needed
columns of the data are being imported to Jupyter Notebooks, and the type of the variables is
being identiﬁed.
Figure i: Rejsekort Data set: Selecting the needed variables for the analysis from the entire
data set
In order to disregard the invalid trips, the cancelled trips and their corresponding check-
in has been excluded of the data set. When variable "Model" is taking the value "Cc", the
corresponding variable "turngl" is being deleted, alongside the related "Fi" value.
i
==PAGE:69==
Figure ii: Rejsekort Data set: Calculating unique trips by excluding cancelled trips
Then, the passenger type is being ﬁltered in order to meet the required valid types that have
been selected in the analysis. An extra column, called "Passengers_count," is being created to
calculate the number of valid passengers checked-in the same card since one trip is considered
the single trip of one passenger.
ii
==PAGE:70==
Figure iii: Rejsekort Data set: Filtering the valid passenger type and adding a new column for
counting the number of passengers per card
The ﬁgure below presents the inserting of the extra "Stoplist_all" csv ﬁle to ﬁlter the zones,
so both data set and results depict the region of Zealand. The ﬁlter "ZoneId"<400000 is being
applied. The Rejsekort data layout is also presented.
iii
==PAGE:71==
Figure iv: Rejsekort Data set: Filtering accepted region zones
After excluding the regions outside Zealand, with code bigger than 400000, the number of
passenger is being calculated to meet the new adjustments.
iv
==PAGE:72==
Figure v: Rejsekort Data set: Excluding regions outside Zealand, with code bigger than 400000
There was also a need to exclude public holidays and summer vacations from the data set
to increase its level of accuracy without adding additional variations that may aﬀect the results.
The variable "RejseDato" is being ﬁltered accordingly for all the examined months and periods.
v
==PAGE:73==
Figure vi: Rejsekort Data set: Filtering data by date
In addition, the same value has been used for the division of the four examined periods out
of this enormous data set.
vi
==PAGE:74==
Figure vii: Rejsekort Data set: Setting the examined time period, while excluding public
holidays
vii
==PAGE:75==
Since more than one passenger can travel with the same Rejsekort, there was a need to reduce
the data set excluding cards that contained more than ten travelers. A bigger group of people
may represent school trips that do not reﬂect a typical travel behavior, and hence, it is excluded.
Figure viii: Rejsekort Data set: Excluding checked-in passenger number above 10
A.2
Data Normalization
Chapter 4.3 of the analysis presents the data normalization to be comparable between the
diﬀerent lockdown periods. In the Rejsekort data set, the normalization has been conducted
as follows. The number of the passengers, meaning the number of the trips provided by the
variable "Passengers_count" is divided by the number of unique cards and then divided again
by the number of the days of each selected lockdown period.
viii
==PAGE:76==
Figure ix: Rejsekort Data Normalization trips per card per day
A.3
Relative Change
The relative change of the public modes presented in Chapter 5.2.1 has been calculated and
illustrated below.
Figure x: Rejsekort Data set: Calculations of Relative Change 2019-2020 per public mode
transport for all periods
ix
==PAGE:77==
B
Handling TU Data
B.1
"Cleaning" Data set
The outlay of the TU data set is presented below. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁgure below illustrates the
"Journey" tab, which assisted in the analysis. The ﬁrst row presents a typical sample of the
included variables, while highlighted in yellow are the ones that have been used in the analysis.
The variables have been ﬁltered to meet the assumptions presented in the report.
Figure xi: TU Data set: "Journey" Tab
The additional tab that has been included in the analysis is the "Session" tab, presented
below. Again, the used variables are shown in yellow. The "TransportMode" variable contains
all the examined modes, with the same names as presented in the analysis.
x
==PAGE:78==
Figure xii: TU Data set: "Session" Tab
B.2
Detailed TU Results
This section includes all the detailed results, after normalization, regarding TU data for both
private and public mode trips, as presented in Chapter 5. The results are presented for all the
examined lockdown periods, including total trips per person per day for all transport modes
from 2017 to 2019 combined with the results per travel purpose.
Figure xiii: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per transport mode during Pre Lockdown
xi
==PAGE:79==
Figure xiv: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per travel purpose during Pre Lockdown
Figure xv: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per transport mode during Hard Lockdown
xii
==PAGE:80==
Figure xvi: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per travel purpose during Hard Lockdown
Figure xvii: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per transport mode during Reopening
Period
xiii
==PAGE:81==
Figure xviii: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per travel purpose during Reopening
Period
Figure xix: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per transport mode during Light Lock-
down
xiv
==PAGE:82==
Figure xx: TU Data set: Detailed Normalised results per travel purpose during Light Lockdown
B.3
Relative Change
Based on TU data, the relative change of private and public transport modes presented in Chapter
5 of the results has been calculated and illustrated in the ﬁgure below.
Figure xxi: TU Data set: Calculations of Relative Change 2019-2020 per private transport
mode for all lockdown periods
xv
==PAGE:83==
Figure xxii: TU Data set: Calculations of Relative Change 2019-2020 per public mode transport
for all lockdown periods
B.4
Average Covered Distance
The ﬁnal part of Analysis A includes the calculation of the average covered walking and cycling
distance per lockdown period. The detailed results provided by the calculations are visible in
the ﬁgure below.
Figure xxiii: TU Data set: Calculations of average covered walking and cycling distance
xvi
