==PAGE:1==
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram
Data
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Jakob Rydhof
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Algorithms, Logic and
Graphs, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of algorithms.
Jakob Rydhof - s153840
Signature
June 18th 2021
Date
ii
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis I have investigated methods for compressing spectrogram data by combining
different methods and experimented with different approaches.
I have developed some new ideas and some new combinations of existing and new ideas.
I have experimented with different parameters to optimize the compression ratio of specific
spectrograms, reaching compression ratios of up to 5,58 with lossless compression and
a compression ratio of 8,3 with a lossless compression method, with a tolerable loss in
precision for a real use case for the data.
Some of the methods used are: delta compression, Haar wavelet trandformation, La-
grange polynomials, cubic splines, sorting the data, run length encoding, a variable width
encoding and a lossy encoding.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Inge and Philip, supervisors, DTU
I would like to thank Inge and Philip for their guidance on this project, they have been an
enormous support for generating ideas and keeping me on track. They have also been a
great moral support when things were not going as smoothly as planned.
Lars, Henrik and Claus, FOSS
I would like to thank FOSS, and especially Lars, Henrik and Claus for starting this project,
supplying the spectrograms, and their help with testing the real consequences in the ex-
periments.
At last I would like to thank Amalie for her love and support during these times, I would
not want to know what the difficult times would have been like without you.
iv
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Compression Phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Fixed Point Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Delta Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Haar Wavelet Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Lagrange Polynomial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Cubic Splines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Sorted Spectrograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.7
Run Length Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.8
Variable Width Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.9
Lossy Grid Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Implementation
15
3.1
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Binary Encodable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Lagrange and Cubic Spline as Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Haar Wavelet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Lossy Lagrange Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.6
Sorted Spectrograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.7
Compression Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Experiments
23
4.1
Methodology of Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Results from Existing Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Optimal Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Comparison of Delta, Haar Wavelet, Lagrange and Cubic Splines . . . . . . 25
4.5
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.6
Lossy Lagrange Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.7
Sorted Spectrograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.8
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Conclusion
33
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Bibliography
35
A Title
37
A.1 Lagrange as Prediction Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.2 Cubic Spline Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
v
==PAGE:8==
A.3 Lossy Lagrange Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.4 ZFP Experiment Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.5 Sorted Spectrograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
A.6 Encoding Overhead
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
A.7 Performance Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
vi
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In this thesis I have investigated different methods of compressing spectrograms. Since
spectrograms are constructed by floating point data with few repetitions, ordinary com-
pression methods usually used on strings, like the LempelZiv family of compression algo-
rtihms would not produce very good compression ratios.
Instead of exploiting repetitions in the data, when compressing floating point data like
spectrograms, we can exploit the fact that it is a continuous graph, this means that neigh-
bouring points are usually quite close in value, and a small part of the spectrogram usually
closely relates to a simple function.
I have investigated two different approaches:
1. In the first approach I use previous values to predict the next value, and then store
the difference in a compact format, where fewer significant bits encodes to a smaller
size, this usually results in a lossless compression, but a few methods I have tested
have a loss anyway.
2. The other approach is to store a polynomial, which represents a small part of the
spectrogram, allowing a certain error on each data point, this results in a lossy com-
pression.
This thesis has been conducted in collaboration with FOSS, they have provided the data
and the interesting problem.
1.1
Data
I have investigated the compression of spectrogram data from FOSS. The experiments
are tested on three different types of spectrograms, called A1, A2 and A3.
A1 consists of 100 spectrograms, each spectrogram consists of 4200 floats.
A2 consists of 100 spectrograms, each spectrogram consists of 1060 floats.
A3 consists of 700 spectrograms, each spectrogram consists of 400 floats.
These are spectrograms from different measurement instruments and different products,
and are therefore very different in forms, and consistency across different spectrograms.
In this report I have investigated how different compression schemes work for these types
of spectrograms. The spectrograms can be seen in fig. 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3.
1.2
Compression Phases
The compression schemes I have investigated in this thesis follows a structure with two
phases. The first phase is a transformation phase, where the goal is to reduce the number
of significant bits. The second phase is the encoding phase, where the relevant bits are
encoded in as few bits as possible.
This division into phases, makes it possible to exchange methods used for a phase out
with another, to investigate which combinations work the best. In the transformation phase
some transformations can also be combined by doing one after another, which makes it
possible to compare in many interesting ways.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
1
==PAGE:10==
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Figure 1.1: A1 spectrograms
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Figure 1.2: A2 spectrograms
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Figure 1.3: A3 spectrograms
2
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:11==
1.2.1
Transformation
The transformation phase is about transforming the values in some way. The transfor-
mations have a goal of making the values more systematic, in a way that they can be
encoded into a small space. The initial goal of the transformation was to maximize the
amount of leading zeros or ones, in each value, to compress the repeating bits. But other
transformations developed later had other goals.
Some transformations might require some meta data, in order to reverse the transforma-
tion, making it initially bigger than the original value.
1.2.2
Encoding
The transfomation phase is about minimizing the amount of relevant bits. The encoding
phase is about encoding the relevant bits, into the smallest possible space.
There are 3 different ways I have investigated of doing this, using run length encoding
(section 2.7), using variable width encoding (section 2.8) and using lossy grids (sec-
tion 2.9).
1.3
Related Work
FOSS has created a solution, which is described in [FOS] and used for reference to test
my results against, as well as get an understanding of the problem, and ideas for solutions.
Some of the ideas in this thesis has also been based on concepts described in Lakshmi-
narasimhan et al. [Lak+11] and Lindstrom [Lin14], which are two very different approaches
for compression of floating point data.
In Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] they sort data, and compress it by fitting cubic
splines to parts of the data.
In Lindstrom [Lin14] they use wavelets to compress the data.
In section 4.2.2 I will briefly discuss the results of using their compression libraries to
compress the spectrograms from FOSS.
In Di and Cappello [DC16] they use multiple curve fitting methods to predict a value,
and stores which is the best one. This method also seems interesting, but I have not
investigated if this technique could be combined with my work.
1.4
Contributions
In this section I will briefly explain what I have contributed to the research area in this
thesis.
1.4.1
Variable Width Encoding
Variable Width Encoding is described in section 2.8, and though it is no way new, I did
not find any research using it in compression of floating point data, it is usually used in
encoding schemes, like UTF-8. But I have applied it to the bit strings, to efficiently encode
few significant bits.
1.4.2
Lossy Grids
Another encoding I came up with, which unfortunately did not turn out to be very useful in
this context, was the encoding called lossy grids, described in section 2.9.
1.4.3
Efficient Indices for Sorted Data
In Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] it is suggested that sorting the data can improve
compression ratio. But in the paper, in order to reverse the sorting, each data point is
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
3
==PAGE:12==
accommodated with the original index, this way each index takes up log2(s), where s is
the size of the data set.
In order to decrease the size in bits for each index, I came up with another indexing
scheme as described in 2.6, where each index refers to a part of the spectrogram instead
of the exact location, and the structure of the spectrogram is then used to find the exact
location.
1.4.4
The Use of Lagrange and Cubic Splines
In Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] they store cubic b-splines to represent part of the
data set. In section 2.4.2 I do the same but with a Lagrange polynomial instead. The
reason I chose to use Lagrange instead, is that the results shown in section 4.4 show
better results using Lagrange, than cubic splines
Furthermore the use of cubic splines and Lagrange polynomials to predict as described
in section 2.4.1 and section 2.5, came from reading about cubic splines in Lakshmi-
narasimhan et al. [Lak+11], and combining it with the idea of predicting values from pre-
vious values, as the delta compression does. But I have not found any research using
these techniques for prediction. Though in Di and Cappello [DC16] they also use curve
fitting to predict and compress.
And this prediction was further improved to include few samples from the spectrogram,
to know some key data points further along the spectrogram for better predictions using
Lagrange and cubic splines.
4
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
2.1
Fixed Point Transformation
A lot of the transformations described later requires the data to be an integer type, but
the spectrogram data is floating points. Floating points can be converted to integers by
simply casting the values, which is to interpret the bits of the floating points as an integer.
Another way is to convert the floating points to a fixed point binary representation, and
casting this as an integer.
0
000 0000 0
000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000
sign
exponent
fraction
Figure 2.1: Floating point structure
A fixed point value is another way to represent decimal numbers in a computer. It works
a lot like an integer number, but a fixed number of the bits are used to represent the
numbers after the decimal point.
0010.00000000
= 21
= 2
0000.10000000
= 2−1
= 0.5
0000.01000000
= 2−2
= 0.25
0000.01100000
= 2−2 + 2−3
= 0.375
Figure 2.2: Example of fixed point representations
The idea for using fixed point representation was to exploit that all the data in a spec-
trogram is within a certain range, and by limiting the range of representable values, it is
possible to use fewer bits.
Floating Point: 0.57
0011 1111 0001 0001 1110 1010 1000 0101
Fixed Point: 0.57
0000 0001 1001 0001 1110 1010 1000 0101
Figure 2.3: Example representation of 0.57
2.1.1
Problems with Fixed Point
This fixed point idea was however dismissed upon further examination of using it in ex-
periments.
The problem with fixed points is that it can only improve the compression rate, if it de-
creases precision, it also has a problem where it can easily make it worse if the fixed
point is not configured exactly to the right range.
The mantissa of the floating point is a fixed point number between 1 and 2, which is mul-
tiplied by 2 to the power of the exponent. So by making a fixed point only, we would have
an implied number to multiply with. But if the number is too large, we lose precision, and
if it is too small we will end up with a lot of insignificant bits in the least significant bit parts
of the fixed point bit string, which is the opposite of what we want for good compression
ratios.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
5
==PAGE:14==
As shown above the idea for fixed point was to remove some significant bits at the expo-
nent part. But when we have two numbers in floating point, there are 2 cases:
1. The exponents are the same, in which case a delta compression removes the ex-
ponent bits anyway. And we would get the same result using fixed points.
2. The exponents are different, in which case there are 2 ways to handle it:
(a) Have the fixed point range in the lower exponent value, in which case the fixed
point value of the higher exponent will be shifted left, which worsen the com-
pression potential.
(b) Have the fixed point range in the higher exponent value, which decreases pre-
cision of the lower exponent value.
Because of this fixed points will not be investigated further.
2.2
Delta Transformation
A delta transformation is a transformation of a spectrogram, where the first value is stored
as is, and the following values are stored as the previous value minus itself. That is, only
the deltas between values are stored.
Original
=
[x0, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6]
Delta transformed
=
[x0, x1-x0, x2-x1, x3-x2, x4-x3, x5-x4, x6-x5]
Figure 2.4: Example of delta transformation
The reason for using a delta transformation is that the difference between 2 neighbouring
data points, are usually a smaller number than each number. Smaller numbers can then
be encoded more efficiently.
The delta encoding can be executed multiple times on the same list, which can some
times be used to get even smaller numbers. The number of times it is executed on each
list is called the level. When calculating a delta of an level x, then the x’th element of the
list is kept untouched from that delta. That is, when calculating a delta of level 3, the first
element is the same value as in the original list, the second element is stored as delta of
level 1, the third element as delta of level 2, and the rest are delta of level 3.
Original
=
[ x0, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ]
Delta level 1
=
[ x0, x1-x0, x2-x1, x3-x2, x4-x3, x5-x4, x6-x5 ]
Delta level 2
=
[ x0, x1-x0, (x2-x1)-(x1-x0), (x3-x2)-(x2-x1)
, (x4-x3)-(x3-x2), (x5-x4)-(x4-x3), (x6-x5)-(x5-x4)
]
Figure 2.5: Example of delta of different levels
2.2.1
Correctness
The first number is stored, and is correct. The second number is subtracted by the first,
which means we will get the original second number back by adding the first. Since we
now have the second number, we can get the third. And by induction this works for the
entire list.
Since each delta level is doing a delta transformation on a list of values, that just happens
to be delta values, then doing it multiple times is just as correct as doing it once.
6
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Haar Wavelet Transformation
In the article Lindstrom [Lin14], one of the steps used in the compression scheme is a
block transformation, where a few different transformations are compared, the simplest
of them is the Haar Wavelet Transformation.
2.3.1
Block transformations
Block transformations are transformations on 2 dimensional blocks of a specific size,
where the transformation minimizes the absolute value of the numbers by utilizing that
the values have similarities.
2.3.2
Haar Wavelet Transformation specification
The Haar Wavelet Transformation works on a block where each dimension is a power
of two. It works by taking in two numbers at a time, and then write the average and the
difference of the two numbers out instead. This is then recursively done on the averages
that come out of it, until there is just one average, and a lot of differences in a row. Then
this is done on all rows, and subsequently on each column.
When dealing with spectrograms the data is one dimensional, therefore the Haar Wavelet
Transformation is not done column wise. But the spectrogram is still split up into blocks
which size is a power of 2.
20
32
40
48
avg
diff
avg
diff
26
6
44
4
Change into averages and differences.
avg
avg
diff
diff
26
44
6
4
Rearrange values.
avg
diff
diff
diff
35
9
6
4
Calculate averages and differences of averages.
Figure 2.6: Example of the Haar Wavelet Transformation on one row
The decoding of Haar Wavelet is as described in fig. 2.7, it works simply by using an
average and a diff, where one value is created by subtracting the difference from the
average another value by adding. This is then done recursively.
avg
diff
diff
diff
35
9
6
4
The haar wavelet encoded data
35 −9 = 26
35 + 9 = 44
6
4
26
6
44
4
rearrange values
26 −6 = 20
26 + 6 = 32
44 −4 = 40
44 + 4 = 48
20
32
40
48
Figure 2.7: Example of decoding Haar Wavelet on one row
2.3.3
Loss of Precision
The transformation is done on unsigned integers, in order to increase the number of lead-
ing zeros. And because we take an average and a difference, we can lose some precision
if the difference between the two numbers is an odd number, as the average will have to
be one closer to one of the numbers, than the other. The error will at most cut of the
one least significant bit per iteration of calculating the average and difference. There are
log(WindowSize) iterations, so in general it is a small loss in precision.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
7
==PAGE:16==
21
32
avg
diff
26
6
Encoded data
20
32
Decoded again
Figure 2.8: Example of loss in precision.
2.3.4
Correctness
The operation of Haar wavelet is to take the average og two numbers X and Y, and the
difference between X and the average, which is stored. Because the difference between
two numbers and their average is the same for the two numbers, recovering the two num-
bers by using the stored difference with the average, in the positive and negative direction,
will give back the original numbers, except for the slight loss of precision described in the
section above.
2.4
Lagrange Polynomial
Lagrange Polynomial is a function turning a set of points into a polynomial which goes
through all the points. The polynomial degree will be 1 less than the number of points.
The following explanaition is based on [Wik].
Given a set of k + 1 points: (x0, y0), ..., (xj, yj), ..., (xk, yk) where no two xj are the same,
the following defines the Lagrange polynomial:
L(x) =
k
∑
j=0
yj · lj(x)
Where
lj(x) =
∏
0<m<k ∧m̸=j
x −xm
xj −xm
An intuition for how this work is that each yj · lj(x) is a polynomial with roots in all other
points than xJ, and in xj it is equal to yj. So at each xj all the other polynomials are 0,
and only the polynomial generated by xj is contributing to the value at the given point.
2.4.1
Using Lagrange Polynomial for Prediction
The Lagrange Polynomial can be used for extrapolation, which is to predict how a graph
looks, given a set of points, outside the range of the given set of points.
By using N number of previous points, Lagrange can be used to predict the next point in
the spectrogram, and the difference will then be a smaller absolute value than the data
point value itself, and should therefore encode to a smaller number.
Interpolation
By storing some sampled data points from the original spectrogram, Lagrange can also
be used for interpolation, by constructing a Lagrange Polynomial with N previous data
points, along with the next sampled data point, the prediction should be more precise in
general, which results in smaller differences, at the cost of storing a few sampled data
points.
8
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:17==
Correctness
Using Lagrange for prediction works by using some previous values to predict the next
value, and since the function to generate the Lagrange polynomial is deterministic, as
long as the previous values used are the same when decompressing as compressing,
it will calculate the same value, which will have the same difference as the stored one.
The first value of the spectrogram is stored as is, which means it is correct, and then by
induction, Lagrange will generate the same predictions as in the compression.
When using interpolation by storing some samples outside of this, the same argument
applies, just with the sample given as an extra data point, and by storing the indices the
same sample is used for compression and decompression of the same data points.
A small detail to be aware of, is that if there are less than N previous values, then all
previous values will be used, but this is both in compression and decompression, and will
not change the correctness.
2.4.2
Lossy Lagrange
Another way to use the Lagrange Polynomial, is to generate polynomials of a certain
degree, and store the coefficients of the polynomials, to be able to reconstruct the original
data points.
Each polynomial will then be able to represent the same number of data points as coeffi-
cients in the polynomial, without any loss of precision.
In order to use this for compression, each polynomial needs to represent more data points
than the number of coefficients. This is achieved by allowing an error margin, and then
create a polynomial that fits as many data points as possible, within the allowed error
margin but still of the same number of coefficients. Which makes the compression lossy.
Correctness
The lossy Lagrange compression is not lossless, so the correctness means that the gen-
erated polynomial does not evaluate to a value with a greater error, than the given error.
And since this is tested for every data point in the compression phase, and polynomials
which does not live up to this requirement are discarded, the polynomials used must list
up to the requirement.
2.5
Cubic Splines
In Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] cubic splines are used to compress the data, by
storing a cubic spline generated for a set of data points.
Cubic Spline is a piecewise polynomial function, generated from a set of points, where
each polynomial starts in one point and ends in the next point. The polynomials are
created to have the same derivative and second derivative in each point, as the other
polynomial in the same point. This makes the spline smooth across points, even though
it is two different polynomials meeting.
Cubic Splines are constructed by a set of equations, which constrain each piece of the
spline. The equations are then solved to find the 4 coefficients of each spline.
The following explanation is based on [Wei].
Given the set of points for the spline (y0, y1, ..., yn), each piece of a spline between two
points have the following form:
Yi(t) = ai + bit + cit2 + dit3
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
9
==PAGE:18==
Where t ∈[0, 1] and i = 0, ..., n −1.
The 4 coefficients can then be decided by the following equations:
Yi(0) = ai
(2.1)
Yi(1) = ai + bi + ci + di
(2.2)
Y
′
i (0) = bi
(2.3)
Y
′
i (1) = bi + 2ci + 3di
(2.4)
We then create some constraints across different splines, where we require the first and
second derivative to match. These equations will be used to get the derivative of Y in
different points, which can then be used above to solve for the coefficients.
Yi−1(1) = yi
(2.5)
Y
′
i−1(1) = Y
′
i (0)
(2.6)
Yi(0) = yi
(2.7)
Y
′′
i−1(1) = Y
′′
i (0)
(2.8)
For the end points, there are no other derivative or second derivative to match, instead
the constraint it that they should be zero.
The equations for across the cubic splines (2.5-2.8) are then set up in a system of equa-
tions and solved, and then the equations for the coefficients (2.1-2.4) are solved.
2.5.1
Compression with Cubic Splines
Cubic splines are used as a prediction using interpolation, in the same way as the inter-
polation described in section 2.4.1. By taking N previous points and 1 sampled point from
later in the spectrogram, generating a cubic spline, using that to predict the next value,
and storing the difference.
Cubic splines does not work with extrapolation, because the spline is only defined between
two data points.
2.5.2
Correctness
Using cubic splines works by using some previous values to predict the next value, and
since the function to generate the cubic spline is deterministic, as long as the given values
are the same when decompressing as compressing, it will calculate the same value, which
will have the same difference as the stored one.
2.5.3
Performance
The performance critical part of the cubic spline compression, is solving the linear equation
system. Given N data points, there will be 4N equations with 4 unknowns in each. And
the equations are solved using singular value decomposition, which has an asymptotic run
time of O(n3)[Cub]. Which amount to 64N3, where N −1 is the number of previous points,
for each prediction. In total this is a constant overhead since it is for each prediction, and
not dependent of the size of the spectrogram, but as it is shown in section 4.8, it has a
large effect on the runtime.
10
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:19==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Figure 2.9: Example of an A1 spectrogram divided into segments. There are 25 seg-
ments.
2.6
Sorted Spectrograms
According to Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11], sorting the data before compressing it
yield better results for some similar floating point data sets.
But if the data is sorted, some information is needed to reconstruct the original order
again. In Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] they store an index vector, with the original
index for each value, and then exploiting that these index vectors should be similar across
different graphs, as the graphs have a common pattern. By using delta encoding between
index vectors of different graphs, the space used by the index vectors are decreased.
Another way Lakshminarasimhan et al. [Lak+11] decreases the size, is by using a small bit
size. In a data set with 700 data points, each index can be encoded in 10 bits, instead of
using a standard number of bits like 32 or 16, the bit size for each index can be encoded
in the beginning of the binary data structure, and the bit size can be minimized for the
index vector.
I came up with a way to further improve this. Since a data set can be divided into seg-
ments, where the data is already ordered, either the graph is increasing or decreasing in
a specific segment, it is not necessary to store the precise index, of the data point, but just
an index of the segment it belongs to, after that the values of the same segment can be
sorted to construct the original order. This way each index requires fewer bits, as there
are less segments than data points.
2.6.1
Correctness
Each value is tagged with the index of the segment it belongs to, and the indices of seg-
ments are consecutive, therefore each value will end up in the correct segment again.
Because the values in each segment originally were ordered, by sorting the values they
will get their original order back. And a segment is defined as the longest list of ordered
data points.
The last problem is that an ordering can be either increasing or decreasing. Here the
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
11
==PAGE:20==
initial ordering of the first segment is stored, and is therefore easy to get right. The rest of
the segments alternate between increasing and decreasing order. This is correct, since
a segment is the longest possible list of data points with the given ordering, where equals
are treated as part of that ordering. The only way to break a decreasing ordering, would
be with a data point with a higher value, which would result in a segment of increasing
values, even if the segment was just 1 data point. Therefore, it can be concluded that
segments must be alternating between increasing and decreasing ordering.
2.7
Run Length Encoding
Run length encoding is a simple compression technique, used when the data is known to
have a lot of repeating elements in a row.
It works by counting the number of repetitions of the next element, and then encoding a
number along with the element.
original
aaaaabba
run length encoding
5a 2b 1c
Figure 2.10: Example of run length encoding on a string.
For spectrograms the transformations minimize the absolute value of each data point,
which maximizes the number of leading zeros(or ones), run length encoding can then be
used to encode the number of leading bits, and shorten the bit string.
int
279
binary
0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0001 0001 0111
run length encoding
1 0011 1 0001 0111
Figure 2.11: Example of run length encoding on spectrograms. The red bits encode the
number of leading zeros.
In order to encode the number of leading bits, 5 bits are needed. 1 more bit is also needed
to know if the leading bits are ones or zeros. Therefore this adds a constant overhead of
6 bits to each value, besides the number of significant bits.
2.7.1
Correctness
We have stored all the relevant bits, a number representing the number of leading bits, and
1 bit for knowing whether the leading bits are ones or zeros. This is enough information
to get the original value back.
2.8
Variable Width Encoding
Variable width encoding is an encoding scheme, usually used in character set encodings,
such as UTF-8. It can also be used for compression, where each 32 bit unsigned int is
encoded in chunks of X bits and 1 continuation bit, which indicates whether the chunk is
the last chunk of the unsigned bit. An example can be seen in fig. 2.12.
By using variable width encoding, the number of bits used can be specified using the
following formula:
NS + ⌊NS/TS⌋+ 1 + TS −(NS
mod TS)
Where NS is the number of significant bits of the number to encode.
TS is the size of each chunk.
12
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:21==
int
279
binary
0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0001 0001 0111
variable width encoding
1100 1010 0111
Figure 2.12: Example of variable width encoding with chunk size 3. Red bits encode
whether it is the last chunk.
The NS is the bits needed to be stored, and have to be there, the rest is a overhead to
store these bits efficiently. ⌊NS/TS⌋+ 1 is the continuation bits, and grows linearly with
the number of significant bits. TS −(NS mod TS) are the extra bits when the number of
significant bits are not divisible by the chunk size, this is constant(in that it does not grow
by the size of NS) but an arbitrary number between 0 and TS −1, for practical purposes
it can therefore be estimated to be an overhead of (TS −1)/2 on average.
When TS increases, ⌊NS/TS⌋decreases but TS −(NS mod TS) increases. Choosing
the right size for TS requires some tests, as it depends on the average size of NS.
Besides this, 1 bit is also stored at the very beginning to indicate whether the value has
leading ones or zeros.
2.8.1
Correctness
In variable width encoding, we have stored enough chunks to contain all the relevant bits,
and we know the original size of the value, therefore by simply padding the bits stored in
variable width encoding until we have the original size, it will be the original value.
The 1 bit at the very beginning is used to know whether to pad with ones or zeros.
2.9
Lossy Grid Encoding
The lossy grid encoding, is a simple encoding scheme I came up with, where a small
number of bits are used to encode each unsigned integer, by allowing a smaller set of
numbers to be represented, and thereby allowing a loss in precision.
2.9.1
Specification
Lossy Grid encoding works by using E bits for an exponent and B bits for a base, as well
as 1 bit for the sign of the number.
From these E and B bits, there is only a small set of possible values, namely (1..B +
1)1..E+1 ∪0.
In both the base and the exponent, we start the numbers at one instead of zero, since
X0 = 1 and 0X = 0, which means a lot of different encodings decode to the same number,
which is wasteful. Instead a special case is made where 0 is encoded as the base and
the exponent being 0, since 1 can still be encoded as 1X.
Using this encoding scheme, the precision is better when the number is close to zero, but
it is still possible to encode numbers being further from zero.
Encoding works by figuring out the possible values, and encoding a value as the closest
possible value.
Decoding works by the following simple function:
{
0
if base == 0 ∧exponent == 0
(base + 1)exponent+1
otherwise
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
13
==PAGE:22==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Figure 2.13: Example of how Lossy Grid does not work with delta compression. The
blue line is an A3 spectrogram, the red one is the values after being compressed and
decompressed using delta and Lossy Grid encoding.
2.9.2
Problems with Lossy Grid
Lossy Grids were an idea that was tested, but it did not end up being useful for any com-
pressions. The reason is that the loss in precision in an encoding scheme, accumulates
when values are dependent on earlier values. And of the techniques I have investigated,
the best ones depend on the relation between values.
14
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:23==
3
Implementation
In this chapter I will describe some implementation details, that are important to under-
stand how the code works and to understand the details about some of the structures used
in the compression. I will also explain some specific optimizations required to achieve the
results from the Experiments chapter.
The implementation is written in Haskell, and a basic understanding of functional pro-
gramming is probably necessary to understand the code, but should not be necessary for
understanding the chapter.
The code has been tested by different tests. Lossless compression methods have been
tested by decompressing compressed data, a so called round trip property, to verify the
result is the original data, both for the 3 data sets, but also for custom generated data
using property based testing.
Lossy compression techniques have been tested in the same way but verified to be within
some error bound instead of the exact same data.
3.1
Encoding
During this thesis, I have mainly used two different encoding schemes, run length encod-
ing and variable width encoding, the theory can be found in section 2.7 and section 2.8
respectively.
These encodings work to minimize the size, when there are a lot of leading zeros or ones.
A lot of places in this report, I have simply stated leading zeros, but it also refers to the
case of it being leading ones.
3.1.1
Shared Between Both Encodings
The first step of both encodings is to check if the value has leading ones or zeros, and then
store 1 bit to tell which leading bits it was, if the leading bits are ones, the complement
of the value is calculated, and used for the rest of the encodings. Then the number of
leading zeros are counted.
3.1.2
Run Length Encoding
In the run length encoding scheme, the number of leading zeros are stored directly in 5
bits, but since 32 leading zeros are possible, but 0 is not, 1 is added from the binary value
of the 5 bits to represent the numbers from 1-32. Besides these 5 bits, all the relevant
bits, which are the bits that come after the leading zeros, are stored as is.
Decoding the value works by reading the first 6 bits, and then using the 5 bits for the
number of leading zeros to calculate how many relevant bits there are, and reading that
number of bits, since many of these numbers are stored in a long binary sequence without
any markers of when each number begins or ends, it is necessary to know how many
leading zeros there was to know how many bits to read.
0
11000
1001101
leading zeros or ones
number of leading zeros
rest of bits
Figure 3.1: Example of run length encoded binary value
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
15
==PAGE:24==
3.1.3
Variable Width Encoding
Variable width encoding splits up the relevant bits into chunks, the size of these chunks
can be specified in the code.
Once the number of leading zeros is known, the number of relevant bits to encode into
variable width is 32 - number-of-leading-zeros = NRB. The encoding works by taking
SC (SC = size of each chunk) of the least significant bits and encoding those along with
one continuation bit set to 1, and then shift the number we are encoding by SC bits to the
right. This is done recursively where NRB is updated to NRB −SC until NRB <= SC,
in which case the last chunk is encoded and prepended with the continuation bit set to 0.
This encoding reverses the order of the chunks, but the opposite is done in the decoding.
At the very beginning of decoding, 1 bit is read, which represents whether the leading bits
were ones or zeros. This is used in the end to take the complement, if the bit was 1. After
this the decoding works by reading SC + 1 bits, where the first is the continuation bit. A
32 bit value is initialized to 0, and the SC bits gets added. In the next iterations, the bits
of each chunk are shifted left by SC ∗iteration before adding them to the value. This is
then repeated until the continuation bit is 0.
3.2
Binary Encodable
In order to compactly encode the data, and easily make different data structures encod-
able I created a type class, which in this case is sort of like an interface in object oriented
programming, called BinaryEncodeable.
In order for a type to be binary encodable it has to implement 2 functions: encode and
decode.
3.2.1
Encode
The encode function takes a value of the given type and returns a tuple of (Int, [Byte])
(called a binary encoded stream, in short BES), where the Int represents how many bits
are used by this encoding for the first byte in the list.
Two BES can be compactly appended as shown in section 3.2.1, which is essential for
easily encoding values to this type and compactly encode them, especially for simple
types like booleans which are used a lot in the encodings.
bes1
(3,
[0000 0011, 0100 1010])
bes2
(1,
[0000 0001, 1100 1001])
append bes1 bes2
(4,
[0000 0110, 1001 0101, 1100 1001])
Figure 3.2: Example of appending two binary encoded streams (BES).
The implementation of encoding is different for each type, but as an example a boolean
would simply encode like:
{
(1, [1])
if True
(1, [0])
if False
3.2.2
Decode
The decode function takes a parameter, which I will come back to later, and a BES, The
return type is an Either String (t,BES), where t is the type being decoded. The Either
String is just a way to say that the function may fail to decode a BES to the given type,
16
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:25==
in which case a String will be returned which contains an error message. The (t,BES)
returned is the value of type t and the part of the BES used for decoding that was not
consumed.
An important aspect of this, is that a given type is not required to use the same number
of bits for different values, the number of bits consumed by the decoding is determined
at decoding time, which is essential to compactly encode both run length encoding and
variable width encoding.
The implementation of decode is different for each type, but for run length encoding, it
would decode 1 boolean(with the boolean decode implementation), then decode 5 bits
and using the value of those 5 bits to figure out how many more bits to decode.
The first parameter given to decode is used for a few special types, where a value is
stored once, but is needed multiple times for decoding. An example of this is encoding a
list of integers, where it is known that no value it larger than 7, so each integer is encoded
in 3 bits each, then the number 3 would be decoded before the list, and passed along as
this parameter, so the later decode function calls know to decode 3 bits at a time, without
having to encode this for each value. This is used to encode the indices in the sorted
spectrogram type described in section 3.6.
3.2.3
Composability
When types implements the BinaryEncodeable type class, the types can roughly be split
into either being a concrete value type, like a boolean, or it is a container type, which con-
tains BinaryEncodeable values. For container types the encoding and decoding is usually
just about encoding or decoding the inner values in the right sequence, and sometimes
with some meta data about the container type.
An important reason to have the BinaryEncodeable type class is also that it makes it easy
to have container types like the Predictable described in section 3.3 which have some
meta data for the sampled values, but besides this, it can contain any type within it. As
long as the inner type is binary encodable, the Predictable type can be encoded and
decoded, because it simply calls encode or decode, which uses the implementation of
the inner type.
3.2.4
Final encode and decode
As described above the encode and decode functions use the BES type, which has an Int
as well as the encoded bits, to also encode this Int when the data is completely encoded
there is a function called finalEncode, which encoded the Int in the beginning of the binary
data using 1 byte, and a function finalDecode which read this byte before decoding.
finalEncode and finalDecode are only used at the high level, when writing the data out,
or reading it in, and encode and decode are then used when container types encode or
decode their inner types.
3.3
Lagrange and Cubic Spline as Predictions
The Lagrange prediction and cubic splines are used in the same way, where some values
are sampled from the original spectrogram, then a prediction is generated by a function of
a list of previous values and one sampled value. This pattern is captured in the Predictable
module, which contains the encoding logic and some shared functionality.
3.3.1
Predictable type
The Predictable type consists of a list of sampled values, a list of index deltas, a byte to
register the size of each index delta and a list of deltas from the prediction.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3.2
List of Sampled Values
The list of sampled values is generated by finding each local minima and maxima and
sampling those as values. The local minima and maxima are chosen because they would
give a good idea of an overall structure of the graph.
The idea about using samples is that only relatively few values should be sampled. In that
case even without compressing them, the overhead should be negligible and the samples
would then be able to improve the prediction for every data point. In order to improve the
compression rate, samples are compressed anyway.
The way the sampled values are compressed, is by first permuting them by moving every
other value to the end. This is done because they are local minima and maxima, and
the original permutation must be alternating between a minima and maxima, but after
the permutation they are grouped as minima and maxima, which improves a simple delta
compression. Then a simple delta transformation is used on the sampled values, and they
are encoded with run length encoding, the choice of run length encoding is because the
few samples means the delta encoding is not very good(though still better than nothing),
and in section 4.5 we will see that run length encoding is the best, when there are many
significant bits.
3.3.3
List of Index Deltas
In order to use the sampled values, the indices are also required, but instead of storing
the indices, the number of elements between two samples is stored, also called the delta.
This is because it is a smaller number, and can therefore be stored more efficiently. The
list of index deltas is stored as values of X bits each, where X is the smallest number of
bits required to store the largest value, as simple unsigned integers. This is why a byte is
also required to store the number of bits required by each index delta.
3.3.4
List of Deltas
The list of deltas is simply the list of deltas between the predicted value and the actual
value. Before computing the delta, the values are cast to unsigned integers, which makes
the delta generate leading zeros. A small floating point data would simply have a low
exponent value, but the mantissa would not necessarily have many leading zeros.
3.3.5
Cubic Spline Implementation
The cubic spline generated to use for the prediction of the next value is generated by a
library[Baz15] and the prediction is then used to find the delta.
3.4
Haar Wavelet
The Haar Wavelet transformation requires a specific block size, this requires some details
to explain how it is done correctly and efficiently.
First of all the spectrograms does not necessarily have a length, which is divisible with
the block size, and because the block size is required to be a power of two, and the
compression ratio depends on a good block size, the block size cannot be changed to fit
the given spectrogram length.
To fix this problem, when the last block is reached, and there is not enough values, the
spectrogram is padded with zeros. In order to then know which values are part of the
spectrogram, and which are padded, a number is stored to tell how many values are in
the spectrogram.
Another detail is that a block is represented as a list, but since a list can usually have an
arbitrary size, the encode function for a list stores the length of the list, Instead the list of a
18
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:27==
block in the Haar Wavelet transformation is encoded directly, without using the list encode
function, and instead the block size is given for the decode function to decode it as a list,
with the length of the block size.
3.5
Lossy Lagrange Compression
The Lossy Lagrange compression theory is described in section 2.4.2. The idea itself is
simple enough, to construct and store a polynomial of a certain degree which represents
a set of data points.
But there are quite a lot implementation details to achieve a decent compression ratio.
3.5.1
Expansion
First of all, the Lagrange polynomial generates a polynomial, where the number of coeffi-
cients is equal to the number of given points. The expansion is about finding the maximum
number of points a polynomial can represent within the given error bound.
A simple way to use lossy Lagrange, is to take the first N number of points, generate a
Lagrange polynomial, and greedily test if the next data point is within the given error bound
of the value of the Lagrange polynomial in that place. Where N is the chosen number of
coefficients for the polynomial.
But as it will be shown later in section 4.6.1, this method is not good enough to beat
lossless compression without a large allowed error.
A better approach, is to take M points, for which we will try to generate a polynomial with
N coefficients, where M >= N. Since generating a Lagrange polynomial using M points
would result in a polynomial with M coefficients, and M is different for each polynomial,
we cannot use all the M points to generate the polynomial.
Instead I sample N data points. The first and last data points are always sampled, the
rest are sampled every with a roughly equal distance between samples.
If the polynomial can then represent all M points, within the given error, we can try in-
creasing M, otherwise we can decrease M.
This method matches more points within the given error, but it also requires more com-
putation. In order to minimize the computation needed, finding the optimal M is divided
into 2 steps:
• Double M until we cannot match the M points with a polynomial. This M is now the
upper bound, and the lower bound is M/2.
• Set M to the average of the upper bound and lower bound, and test if a polynomial
can match, if it can, M is the new lower bound, otherwise it is the new upper bound.
This is repeated until the upper bound and lower bound have a difference of 1, in
which case the lower bound is the optimal number for M
The asymptotic run time of this is quadratic in the number of points in the spectrogram.
The run time to generate each Lagrange polynomial is A∗N +log2 (2A)∗N ≡AN +AN,
where A is the number of successions of the first step, N is the number of points that
are tested whether they are within the given error bound and log2 2A is the number of
iterations the second step takes. Both A and N are less than 2 times the number of
elements consumed, which means generating each polynomial is quadratic in the number
elements it consumes, and in total this is quadratic at worst case.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
19
==PAGE:28==
3.5.2
Compression of Coefficients
In order to increase the compression ratio, the coefficients stored for each polynomial are
compressed. The coefficients are compressed with a delta compression, where the delta
is calculated across polynomials, using the delta between the same coefficient.
Given a polynomial of degree 3, a · x3 + b · x2 + c · x + d the 4 coefficients: a, b, c, d are
stored. In figure fig. 3.3 it is shown how the delta compression of the coefficents are done.
[
[a1, b1, c1, d1]
[a2, b2, c2, d2]
...
[an, bn, cn, dn]
]
[
[a1, a2, a3, ..., an]
[b1, b2, b3, ..., bn]
[c1, c2, c3, ..., cn]
[d1, d2, d3, ..., dn]
]
Figure 3.3: Visualization of transposing of coefficients for delta compression.
a, b, c and d are coefficients of a polynomial. There are n polynomials. In the left, we have
n polynomials in a list, if we then transpose this, we get a list with a length of 4, where
each list inside is a list with one coefficient from each polynomial, each of these 4 lists are
then compressed with a delta compression.
3.6
Sorted Spectrograms
The implementation of sorted spectrograms stores a bit to indicate whether the spectro-
gram start ascending or descending, a byte indicating the bit size required for each index,
a list of indices for each element pointing to the block the element originally was in, and
at last a data structure containing the elements.
The sorted spectrogram is constructed by the following algorithm:
1. Find ascending and descending blocks of the spectrogram
2. Check if the first block is ascending or descending
3. Give a consecutive index to each block of ascending or descending elements
4. Find the largest block index, and how many bits are required to represent it
5. Set the bit size for indices to the required bit size
6. Combine elements with block indices as tuples
7. Sort by element values
8. Split elements and block indices into separate lists
Getting back the original values is done with the following algorithm:
1. Combine elements with block indices as tuples
2. Sort by block indices
3. Group by block indices to construct lists with all elements of the block
4. Sort each block by element value, alternating between descending or ascending
5. Combine the sorted blocks in the order of the block indices
6. Split the elements from the block indices
20
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:29==
3.6.1
Data Structure for the Elements
The last part of the sorted spectrogram type is any data structure, which contains the el-
ements, by allowing it to be any data structure the sorted spectrogram can be combined
with any other transformation method, even of the transformation changes the data struc-
ture. The only requirement is that the other transformation can be constructed from a list,
and can construct a list again for when the sorting has to be reversed. This also means
that the sorted spectrogram is constructed to contain a list of sorted elements.
3.7
Compression Methods
A compression method is a combination of transformations and encodings. In the code
this is the modules called Compression.NAME, where each module defines a compress and
decompress function, which simply composes transformations together and then encodes
the data, or decodes first in the decompress function.
A few of the methods use transformations which requires some meta data, in which case
the data is split into multiple data structures. In this case the compression method can
use different transformations and encodings for the different data structures.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:31==
4
Experiments
4.1
Methodology of Experiments
The following experiments have been conducted on the A1, A2 and A3 data sets de-
scribed in section 1.1. The experiments have been conducted to find the optimal values
for different parameters, that can tune the methods compression ratio, and to compare
similar methods and evaluate their compression ratio. And just to clarify, the compression
ratio is uncompressed size
compressed size in absolute value.
In the experiments I have conducted, the compression ratio of a data set is the average
compression ratio of the spectrograms in the dataset. The entire data set has not been
compressed at once.
Some compression methods are not lossless. With those methods comparing the com-
pression ratio alone is not sufficient, therefore I have included the Root Mean Square Error
from Real value in short RMSER, and with the help of FOSS, the data has been tested
on a real use case, of predicting the protein, where the results are compared with the pre-
diction using the original spectrogram. In these cases the Root Mean Square Error from
Prediction, in short RMSEP, is calculated, which is the difference between the prediction
using the original data, and the one using the lossy data.
4.2
Results from Existing Tools
4.2.1
FOSS Existing Results
FOSS has a method for compressing the data. The compression ratios of this method are
shown in the top row of fig. 4.1, which is calculated by FOSS. But the choice of param-
eters by FOSS has been a compromise between speed and compression ratio, where
the experiments I have conducted focusses on optimal compression ratio. The bottom
row of fig. 4.1 therefore shows the compression ratio I was able to get by changing the
parameters.
A1
A2
A3
FOSS
4,16
1,77
3,88
Optimal Compression Ratio
4,39
1,77
4,89
Figure 4.1: Compression ratio of FOSS current implementation. Top row is calculated by
FOSS, with their choice of parameters. Bottom row is calculated by my imitation of their
compression method, but with parameters chosen for optimal compression ratio.
4.2.2
Other Floating Point Compression Tools
A1
A2
A3
RMSER A1
RMSER A2
RMSER A3
ZFP
1,47
1,09
1,34
ISABELLA
2,74
1,81
2,35
6,33e-4
6,42e-4
6,30e-4
Figure 4.2: Compression ratio of current floating point compression libraries.
I have tested a few other compression tools in fig. 4.2.
ISABELLA is from Lakshmi-
narasimhan et al. [Lak+11] and ZFP from Lindstrom [Lin14]. The results are not very
impressive, but there is also a lot of difference in floating point data sets.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
23
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Optimal Parameters
In this section, each of the different methods of compression will be investigated, in order
to find the optimal parameters to use for each method.
4.3.1
Delta Transformation
The only parameter of the delta transformation is the delta level, which is how many times
the delta should be calculated. 1 is the delta, 2 is the delta of the delta values, and so on.
Figure 4.3 shows the compression ratio using different delta levels. The optimal value is
different for all types of spectrograms, and though it would be possible to use different
delta levels on different types, it might require more analysis beforehand, which would
take time. Since the delta level of 4 seems to be near optimal for all types, it will be used
as the default.
Delta level
A1
A2
A3
1
1.56
1.13
1.45
2
2.51
1.21
2.25
3
4.00
1.25
3.86
4
4.60
1.22
5.40
5
4.16
1.21
5.51
6
3.63
1.17
4.60
Figure 4.3: Comparison of compression ratio of different delta levels. Using variable width
encoding.
4.3.2
Haar Wavelet Transformation
Since the Haar Wavelet transformation uses an average, there will be some lost precision
which grows with the window size. Therefore the RMSER is also shown. Because there
is an error to account for, there is not an optimal value for the window size, however 16
seems like an overall good size, since the error of A1 grows quite a lot from 16 to 32
compared to the small increase in compression ratio. For A2, the window size does not
seem to matter much in any way. And for A3 16 has the optimal compression ratio, though
the error does grow a bit from 8 to 16.
In general the errors are quite small. In fig. 4.5 Foss has run a model for estimating
proteing using the spectrograms after being compressed and decompressed. The model
has an error in itself, as seen in the second row, and the errors from the compression are
a lot smaller than that.
A1
A1
A2
A2
A3
A3
Block Size
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
4
1.409
3.4e-8
1.017
7.6e-9
1.327
3.2e-8
8
1.492
4.2e-8
1.025
9.3e-9
1.384
4.0e-8
16
1.530
4.8e-8
1.026
1.0e-8
1.411
4.6e-8
32
1.545
5.4e-8
1.023
1.1e-8
1.405
5.1e-8
64
1.552
5.8e-8
1.022
1.2e-8
1.379
5.5e-8
128
1.555
6.3e-8
1.011
1.3e-8
1.330
6.0e-8
Figure 4.4: Comparison of compression ratio of different window sizes. Using variable
width encoding. RMSER is also included to show the loss of precision.
24
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:33==
A1
A2
RMSEP of model
0.18
0.029
4
0.000374
4.14e-08
8
0.0005331
5.28e-08
16
0.0006592
8.32e-08
32
0.0006668
9.59e-08
64
0.0006745
1.121e-07
128
0.0006855
1.162e-07
Figure 4.5: The RMSEP values of running a protein prediction model on A1 and A2 with
different allowed errors. The RMSEP of model, is the error present in the model, with the
original spectrograms. The values are then the difference between running the model on
the original data, and the data with the given lost precission. The model is not possible
for A3, since it is a different kind of data.
4.3.3
Lagrange Used for Prediction
In fig. 4.6, we can see the optimal number of points seem to be 4 for A1, but 5 for A2 and
A3. But since the difference is very small for A2, and twice as big for A1 as for A3, 4 will
be chosen as the optimal value. The optimal delta value is always 1, as can be seen in
appendix A.1, which shows the full comparison of the many combinations of parameters.
Number of points
A1
A2
A3
1
1.682
1.111
1.462
2
2.674
1.199
2.315
3
4.110
1.274
3.900
4
4.591
1.300
5.311
5
4.177
1.304
5.459
6
3.667
1.302
4.620
7
3.299
1.295
4.010
Figure 4.6: Lagrange: Comparison of compression ratio, using different number of points
to generate the lagrange polynomial, and different delta levels for compressing sampled
values. 1 sampled value is always used, beside the number of points.
4.3.4
Cubic Spline
For Cubic Splines, the optimal value is using 3 data points, besides the known value, and
a delta level of 1. As is shown in fig. 4.7 this is the optimal number of data points. The delta
level has a significant smaller impact, but a full comparison of the different combinations
of parameters is shown in appendix A.2, where it is shown that a delta level of 1 is optimal.
4.4
Comparison of Delta, Haar Wavelet, Lagrange and Cubic
Splines
There are 4 different transformations, where the goal of the transformation is to minimise
the number of significant bits, using the structure in the spectrogram data. This is delta,
Haar Wavelet Transformation, Lagrange (using Lagrange Polynomial for prediction) and
Cubic Splines.
Though the goal for these transformations are to reduce the number of significant bits, the
Lagrange and Cubic Splines techniques also stores meta data. They store a set of data
points sampled from the spectrogram, to improve the precision of the predictions.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
25
==PAGE:34==
Number of Points
A1
A2
A3
1
1.682
1.111
1.462
2
2.598
1.196
2.206
3
2.663
1.209
2.236
4
2.649
1.208
2.228
5
2.653
1.208
2.231
6
2.652
1.208
2.230
7
2.652
1.208
2.231
Figure 4.7: Cubic Spline: Comparison of compression ratio, using different number of
points to generate the cubic spline. 1 sampled value is always used, beside the number
of points.
Haar Wavelet is clearly the worst, and furthermore it is not completely lossless.
Cubic Splines are also bad compared to delta and Lagrange, only on A2 is it close to
compete. In fig. 4.9 we can see that the predictions are actually worse than delta com-
pression for A1 and A3, even though it requires extra data to get those predictions. So
even if the overhead of the meta data was reduced, it would not be able to beat the delta
compression. Furthermore the run time of cubic splines was by far the worst as seen in
section 4.8.
The overall best one is delta compression, but Lagrange is close, even a bit better for A2
compression. If we look at fig. 4.9, we can see that Lagrange actually predicts the values
for A2 a lot better than delta, but yet it is only marginally better, this is because a lot more
points are sampled in A2, as the local minimums and maximums are sampled. A2 has
more waves, therefore more space is used on meta data. Delta compression also runs
faster, so in general it seems like the best option.
A1
A2
A3
Delta
4.60
1.22
5.40
Haar Wavelet
1.53
1.02
1.41
Lagrange
4.59
1.30
5.31
Cubic Splines
2.66
1.20
2.23
Figure 4.8: Compression ratio of different compression techniques, using variable width
as the encoding.
A1
A2
A3
Delta
28.7
14.2
29.7
Haar Wavelet
18.6
10.9
17.2
Lagrange
28.9
18.6
30.0
Cubic Splines
24.9
17.2
23.3
Figure 4.9: Average number of leading zeros generated by different transformation tech-
niques.
4.5
Encoding
When comparing different encodings, the important thing is how much overhead it con-
tributes, that is: given X significant bits, how many extra bits are required to encode the
X bits.
26
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:35==
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
rle
vwe - 1
vwe - 2
vwe - 3
vwe - 4
vwe - 5
Figure 4.10: The overhead in bits each encoding type contributes, given the number of
significant bits. rle is run length encoding and vwe is variable width encoding, where the
number represents the chunk size used. The vwe graphs have been smoothed out. The
smoothness is because all values will not have the exact amount of significant bits, so the
smooth graph shows what it would be like with the given number of significant bits being
around that number. To see the non smooth version see appendix A.6
A1
A3
Delta VWE size 3
4.60
5.40
Delta VWE size 2
4.64
5.58
Lagrange VWE size 3
4.59
5.31
Lagrange VWE size 2
4.66
5.57
Figure 4.11: Comparison between delta and Lagrange prediction with variable width en-
coding chunk size of 2 and 3.
Since the encodings are simple, and the number of significant bits is very limited, the
overhead can be calculated for different number of significant bits instead of running actual
experiments.
In fig. 4.9 the best predictions leave 2-3 significant bits, and in fig. 4.10 the best encoding
for 2 significant bits is variable width encoding with a chunk size of 2, and for 3 significant
bits it is a chunk size of 3. Since they switch somewhere between chunk size of 2 and 3,
but a chunk size of 3 will compress better when there are more significant bits, as there
are for A2 spectrograms.
But in fig. 4.11 we can see that a chunk size of 2 would increase the compression rate for
A1 and A2 for both delta and Lagrange prediction, and Lagrange prediction would even
end up being slightly better than delta, due to the better prediction.
It is also shown in fig. 4.10 that run length encoding is optimal, when there are more than
7 significant bits. Combining this with the number of leading zeros in fig. 4.9, we can
conclude that run length encoding would be better for A2 spectrograms. In fig. 4.12 we
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
27
==PAGE:36==
A2
Delta VWE
1.22
Delta RLE
1.36
Lagrange VWE
1.30
Lagrange RLE
1.36
Figure 4.12: Comparison between delta and Lagrange prediction with variable width en-
coding and run length encoding.
can see how the compression ratio would improve by using run length encoding instead
of variable width encoding.
4.6
Lossy Lagrange Compression
A1
A1
A2
A2
A3
A3
Given Max Error
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
1.0e-4
10.11
4.2e-5
1.371
2.7e-5
7.830
4.0e-5
9.0e-5
9.771
3.7e-5
1.349
2.4e-5
7.745
3.6e-5
7.0e-5
9.094
2.9e-5
1.301
1.8e-5
7.492
2.8e-5
5.0e-5
8.296
2.0e-5
1.245
1.2e-5
6.935
2.0e-5
3.0e-5
7.335
1.2e-5
1.177
6.9e-6
5.849
1.1e-5
1.0e-5
5.592
3.8e-6
1.062
1.9e-6
4.639
3.7e-6
9.0e-6
5.433
3.4e-6
1.053
1.6e-6
4.533
3.3e-6
7.0e-6
5.102
2.6e-6
1.032
1.2e-6
4.260
2.6e-6
5.0e-6
4.678
1.8e-6
1.008
7.7e-7
3.740
1.8e-6
3.0e-6
4.015
1.0e-6
0.980
3.8e-7
3.206
1.0e-6
1.0e-6
2.523
3.4e-7
0.950
7.8e-8
2.102
3.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.162
3.0e-8
0.936
9.8e-9
1.108
3.3e-8
1.0e-8
0.955
3.0-10
0.886
2.4e-9
0.934
0.0
Figure 4.13: Lossy Lagrange logarithmic expansion: Comparison of compression ratio
and RMSER with different error bounds. The delta level used is 1, and the number of
coefficients is 4.
The Lossy Lagrange Compression has a few different parameters, delta level used by
delta transformation, number of coefficients of the polynomials to be created and the
allowed error margin.
Since the compression is lossy, it is also important to evaluate how much precision is
lost, and what consequences the lost precision has, where it is possible. In fig. 4.13 and
4.14 I compare the different allowed errors, showing the compression ratio as well as the
RMSER.
4.6.1
Linear Expansion Results
As described in section 3.5.1 there were two ways to find the points to compress with the
Lagrange polynomial, and generating the polynomial, linear or logarithmic expansion. In
fig. 4.14 linear expansion results are shown. If the results from linear expansion are com-
pared to the lossless compressions, they require a very high error bound to get the same
compression ratio, for this reason the compression method is not investigated further.
4.6.2
Logarithmic Expansion Results
For A1 a given max error of 5 ∗10−6 results in a better compression ratio than the best
lossless compression. Where for A2 the given max error has to be 1 ∗10−4, and for A3 it
28
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:37==
A1
A1
A2
A2
A3
A3
Given Max Error
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
Comp ratio
RMSER
1.0e-2
11.78
3.5e-3
1.693
3.0e-3
9.570
3.3e-3
5.0e-3
9.656
1.7e-3
1.474
1.4e-3
7.945
1.6e-3
1.0e-3
6.247
3.3e-4
1.181
2.4e-4
5.763
3.2e-4
9.0e-4
6.117
3.0e-4
1.166
2.1e-4
5.653
2.9e-4
7.0e-4
5.692
2.3e-4
1.139
1.6e-4
5.331
2.2e-4
5.0e-4
5.227
1.6e-4
1.105
1.1e-4
4.833
1.6e-4
3.0e-4
4.645
9.9e-5
1.056
6.4e-5
4.213
9.6e-5
1.0e-4
3.577
3.2e-5
0.973
1.8e-5
3.356
3.1e-5
1.0e-5
2.152
3.0e-6
0.868
1.2e-6
2.144
2.8e-6
1.0e-6
1.446
2.6e-7
0.836
4.1e-8
1.524
2.5e-7
Figure 4.14: Lossy Lagrange linear expansion: Comparison of compression ratio and
RMSER with different error bounds. The delta level used is 1, and the number of coeffi-
cients is 4.
has to be 3 ∗10−5.
The given error has a lot of influence on the precision, therefore it does not make sense
to compare different error margins against each other directly, instead the different error
margins and the compression ratio is used when comparing delta levels and number of
coefficients.
In appendix A.3 there are some tables for comparing different delta levels and number
of coefficients, which has been used to determine the choice of a delta level of 1 and 4
coefficients. The delta level does not change the error in any way, but the number of
coefficients influences the error a bit, the fewer coefficients the larger the error becomes.
4.6.3
Consequences for real usage
In order to evaluate the consequences for real world usage of the data, FOSS has tested
a protein prediction model on the spectrograms after going through a lossy Lagrange
compression.
This model only works for the A1 and A2 data sets, as the A3 spectrograms are of a
different kind. It was therefore not possible for FOSS to test the consequences on the A3
spectrograms.
The tests are conducted by using a model to estimate the amount of protein, first on the
original spectrograms, and then running the model on the lossy spectrograms. Then cal-
culating the difference between these values on individual spectrograms, and calculating
the RMSEP on the set of all spectrograms of the given type.
The results can be seen in fig. 4.15. As a reference value, the RMSEP of the difference
between the prediction model results and the reference value for protein amount is known
to be 0,18 for A1 and 0,029 for A2. Since the model itself, on the original spectrograms
have this error, an error should at least not be bigger than this error, and preferably be
small in comparison.
It should be noted, that the delta level and coefficients are 2 and 5 for the test on the real
world use case, but 1 and 4 in the previous section. This is because the parameters was
changed after the experiment on the real use case was executed.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
29
==PAGE:38==
A1 RMSEP
A2 RMSEP
A1 Comp Ratio
A2 Comp Ratio
0.5
2.4806
35.15
0.1
0.1264
10.90
0.05
0.0651
7.399
0.01
0.0131
3.861
5 · 10−3
0.0052
2.952
1 · 10−3
1.2497
0.000351
17.92
1.803
5 · 10−4
1.0439
0.000142
14.64
1.620
1 · 10−4
0.2809
8.50e-06
9.602
1.272
9 · 10−5
0.3071
1.02e-05
9.343
1.256
7 · 10−5
0.2658
1.07e-05
8.708
1.221
5 · 10−5
0.1757
2.78e-06
7.995
1.173
3 · 10−5
0.0903
1.04e-06
6.923
1.108
1 · 10−5
0.0256
5.88e-07
4.501
1.007
1 · 10−6
0.0026
4.35e-07
2.038
0.929
1 · 10−7
0.0002
1.01e-07
1.020
0.886
Figure 4.15: The RMSEP values of running a protein prediction model on A1 and A2 with
different allowed errors. The values are the difference between running the model on
the original data, and the data with the given lost precision. The model is not possible
for A3, since it is a different kind of data. The compressions have been executed with 5
coefficients and a delta level of 2.
A1 results:
The A1 spectrograms are in general difficult to use to predict the protein amount, therefore
the loss in precision has great consequences for the prediction accuracy. Using a given
error between 3 · 10−5 and 5 · 10−5 is both better than the lossless compression ratio,
and has an extra contribution to the error, which is less than the error of the original
spectrogram for the protein prediction model. The A1 results shows a good compression
ratio, but the protein predictions are not very good.
To compare the results from this, with the compression ratios with better parameters. The
RMSER was 1.6·10−5 and 2.8·10−5 for an allowed error of 3·10−5 and 5·10−5 respectively
for A1. The closest RMSER with the new parameters is 2.0·10−5, which is between them,
and results in a compression ratio of 8.3, which is better than both.
A2 results:
The A2 spectrograms do not compress as well as A1, but the protein prediction is very
close, even for very lossy compressions. This is probably due to the following reasons.
First the lower the compression rate, the more values are exact, because the nature of the
compression is that it fits as many data points in a fixed degree polynomial as possible,
but some data points are used to create the polynomial and are therefore exact, so the
lower the compression ratio, the more data points are exact, and the smaller is the total
error. This can also be seen in fig. 4.13, where the RMSER values are generally smaller
for A2 than A1, with the same allowed error bound.
FOSS also mentioned another reason, which helps the A2 prediction. The type of spec-
trogram holds a lot information about the protein amount, even with a lot information lost,
there is still a lot of information about the protein.
30
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:39==
4.7
Sorted Spectrograms
While the idea about sorting the data, and efficiently store indices to reconstruct the origi-
nal spectrogram was interesting, the results did not turn out very well. Sorting the data did
not improve the predictions. While sorting the values decreased the delta between some
neighbouring points, it also created some very jagged places, as seen in appendix A.5,
which does not compress well with methods requiring smooth segments. In fig. 4.16 it is
shown how the prediction is worse for all method on all data sets, which means the com-
pression will be even worse, because the sorted spectrogram also requires some extra
data stored.
A1
A2
A3
Delta
28.7
14.2
29.7
Sorted Delta
18.6
13.5
22.5
Lagrange
28.9
18.6
30.0
Sorted Lagrange
19.5
14.6
23.4
Cubic Splines
24.9
17.2
23.3
Sorted Cubic Splines
20.7
16.0
21.3
Figure 4.16: Comparison showing how sorting decreases the prediction precision for all
methods on all data sets.
Another possibility was that lossy Lagrange would work better with sorted data, since it
needs some segments to smooth, but if there is a large change, it would start a new
polynomial, and that would be fine, as long as the sudden changes are far enough apart
to generate good polynomials for the segments between. But as shown in fig. 4.17 lossy
Lagrange does not improve by sorting either.
A1
A2
A3
Lossy Lagrange
5.59
1.06
4.63
Sorted Lossy Lagrange
1.04
0.86
1.59
Sorted Lossy Lagrange - no sort overhead
1.24
1.06
1.68
Figure 4.17: Comparison showing lossy Lagrange decrease in compression with sorting.
The last line shows the compression ratio for sorted data, but without any of the overhead
needed to reverse the data.
4.8
Performance
For performance benchmarks the experiments have been conducted on a laptop with an
AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 4750U CPU, which has a base clock speed of 1,7 GHz and a max
boost of 4,1 GHz, using 32 GB of DDR4 RAM with a speed of 3200 MT/s.
Tables for the performance can be found in appendix A.7. For compression the simple
delta compression methods are by far the fastest, using Lagrange for prediction takes
about twice as long, and Haar Wavelet almost twice as long as Lagrange. Cubic splines
are by far the worst, but the lossy Lagrange versions also takes way longer for each data
set, linear expansion takes around 10 times as long as delta and logarithmic is about twice
as slow.
For decompression it is mainly the same picture, except that lossy Lagrange is a lot faster,
this is because lossy Lagrange compression has to find a polynomial which matches, but
in decompression lossy Lagrange just calculates the values from the polynomial. Interest-
ingly the logarithmic expansion is faster for decompression than linear expansion, and it
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
31
==PAGE:40==
seems to be connected to the compression ratio, which makes sense, as there are fewer
polynomials stored with better compression ratio, but more values to be calculated for
each polynomial.
By looking at the difference between delta run length encoding and delta variable width
encoding, it seems that the fastest encoding is the one which compresses the best, for
A1 and A3 variable width encoding is a tiny bit faster, but on A2 run length encoding is
almost twice as fast.
32
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:41==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis I have found, created and compared many different compression methods. I
have achieved a compression ratio 4,66 for A1, which is a small improvement compared to
the compression ratio of 4,39 using the method from FOSS. For A2 types of spectrograms
I did not find any method to improve their existing results. For A3 I achieved a compression
ratio of 5,58 compared to 4,89 using the optimal parameters with FOSS method, this is
also a good improvement.
Furthermore I developed a lossy compression, which is able to further increase the com-
pression ratio, at the cost of some loss of precision. The test on a real use case for the
data shows that an improved compression ratio can be achieved at a tolerable, but not
negligible, cost.
5.1
Future Work
5.1.1
Storing Data Points for Lossy Lagrange
In the lossy Lagrange method, I store the coefficients of the polynomial, in order to recon-
struct it. Another possibility would be to store the value of the points used to generate it,
which would still be floating points, but might be compressed better by the delta compres-
sion used to compress the coefficients.
There would only be a need to store the values, as the x value for the point is found de-
terministically from the number of points represented by the polynomial, and that number
is known at decompression time as well.
5.1.2
Generating Lossy Lagrange Polynomials
The method I have used to generate lossy Lagrange polynomials is not the best overall
fit. It fits some points perfectly, but that just means it will be further from other points.
A better approach would be to generate a polynomial in a way, where it is not bound to
some specific points but instead is simply bound by being within the error margin of as
many points as possible. It could be by some regression technique, or something else
entirely.
5.1.3
Lossy Delta Compression
While some of the compression ratios of lossy Lagrange seem really good, they also
require quite a big loss. It would be interesting to see if the lossless compression methods
could be adapted to be lossy, and how the compression ratios would compare to lossy
Lagrange.
A simple idea would be to simply cut off the least significant bit on all values being stored,
but as shown in lossy grid encoding in section 2.9, even small errors accumulate in the
delta transformation, which is not viable.
But perhaps there is a way it could be done. An idea for a delta level of 1, and just 1 bit cut
off, if the cut off alternated between rounding up and rounding down, the error would not
accumulate for very long. But for higher delta levels the problem becomes harder, as the
short time the error accumulates, would accumulate to the next delta level decompression.
5.1.4
Sample Techniques for Lagrange Prediction
In the Lagrange prediction compression method I sample local minima and maxima. It
seems to work well, but I have not tested other methods. It would be interesting to see
what other methods could be used, and how the results would change.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1.5
Adaptive Parameters and Encodings
In section 4.5 I have shown that A1 is best compressed with variable width encoding, but
A2 would be better compressed by run length encoding. Furthermore in section 4.3 I have
shown that the optimal parameter is sometimes different across the different spectrogram
types. Therefore if these techniques are to be used for real work, I would recommend mak-
ing it possible to use different encodings and parameters depending on the spectrogram
type. Perhaps even by storing some meta data about the parameters in the compressed
file format, would probably increase the compression ratio enough to overcome the extra
data.
5.1.6
Variable Width Encoding Leading Bit
For the variable width encoding scheme, 1 bit is prepended at the very beginning, to indi-
cate whether the leading bits are ones or zeros. Another approach to solve this problem,
would be to have at least one of the leading bits at the beginning of the variable width
encoding, and then pad with the most significant bit of the variable width encoding. This
might improve the compression ratio slightly, since a variable width encoding of chunk
size 3 would have a 1/3 chance expanding the size by 4. But as it is now, it always cost
1 bit overhead. How well it would work depends on the distribution of significant bits, but
it would be interesting to test.
5.1.7
Implicit Bit in Run Length Encoding
In Conradsen and Fjorder [CF21] they exploit the fact that the first bit after a run of leading
zeros must be a one bit, therefore they don’t store that first one bit explicitly, in order to
save a bit more storage. That would also be possible in the run length encoding I have
used.
34
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[FOS]
FOSS. “New format for spectra”. unpublished.
[Lak+11]
Sriram Lakshminarasimhan et al. “Compressing the Incompressible with IS-
ABELA: In-situ Reduction of Spatio-temporal Data”. In: Euro-Par 2011 Parallel
Processing. Ed. by Emmanuel Jeannot, Raymond Namyst, and Jean Roman.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 366–379. ISBN: 978-
3-642-23400-2.
[Lin14]
Peter Lindstrom. “Fixed-Rate Compressed Floating-Point Arrays”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20 (Aug. 2014). DOI:
10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346458.
[DC16]
Sheng Di and Franck Cappello. “Fast Error-Bounded Lossy HPC Data Com-
pression with SZ”. In: 2016 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Pro-
cessing Symposium (IPDPS). 2016, pp. 730–739. DOI: 10.1109/IPDPS.2016.
11.
[Wik]
Lagrange polynomial. Last visited on 27/5/2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Lagrange_polynomial.
[Wei]
Eric W. Weisstein. Cubic Spline. From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource.
Last visited on 27/5/2021. URL: \url{https://mathworld.wolfram.com/CubicSpline.
html}.
[Cub]
Singular Value Decompositions. class notes for CS 357 - Numerical Methods
I. University of Illinois, 2021.
[Baz15]
Gershom Bazerman. cubicspline: Natural cubic spline interpolation. 2015. [On-
line]. URL: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cubicspline.
[CF21]
Asger Conradsen and Gustav V. Fjorder. “Compression Schemes for Spectro-
scopic Data”. Not yet published. M.S. thesis. Lyngby, Denmark: DTU, 2021.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:45==
A
Title
A.1
Lagrange as Prediction Parameters
Number of points
Delta level
A1
A2
A3
1
0
1.676
1.080
1.459
1
1
1.682
1.111
1.462
1
2
1.681
1.106
1.462
1
3
1.680
1.103
1.462
1
4
1.680
1.098
1.462
1
5
1.679
1.096
1.462
2
0
2.661
1.162
2.308
2
1
2.674
1.199
2.315
2
2
2.671
1.194
2.315
2
3
2.670
1.189
2.315
2
4
2.669
1.184
2.315
2
5
2.667
1.181
2.315
3
0
4.079
1.233
3.881
3
1
4.110
1.274
3.900
3
2
4.103
1.268
3.900
3
3
4.100
1.263
3.900
3
4
4.098
1.257
3.900
3
5
4.094
1.254
3.900
4
0
4.552
1.257
5.276
4
1
4.591
1.300
5.311
4
2
4.583
1.294
5.311
4
3
4.579
1.289
5.311
4
4
4.576
1.283
5.311
4
5
4.571
1.279
5.311
5
0
4.144
1.261
5.422
5
1
4.177
1.304
5.459
5
2
4.170
1.298
5.459
5
3
4.167
1.292
5.459
5
4
4.164
1.286
5.459
5
5
4.161
1.283
5.459
6
0
3.642
1.259
4.593
6
1
3.667
1.302
4.620
6
2
3.662
1.296
4.620
6
3
3.660
1.290
4.620
6
4
3.657
1.284
4.620
6
5
3.655
1.281
4.620
7
0
3.279
1.253
3.990
7
1
3.299
1.295
4.010
7
2
3.295
1.289
4.010
7
3
3.293
1.284
4.010
7
4
3.291
1.278
4.010
7
5
3.289
1.274
4.010
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
37
==PAGE:46==
A.2
Cubic Spline Parameters
Number of Points
delta level
A1
A2
A3
1
0
1.676
1.080
1.459
2
1
2.598
1.196
2.206
3
2
2.660
1.204
2.236
4
3
2.646
1.198
2.228
5
4
2.648
1.193
2.231
6
5
2.646
1.190
2.230
A.3
Lossy Lagrange Parameters
A.3.1
Delta
A1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Max Error
Coefficients
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
2
13.04
16.55
16.41
16.42
15.79
15.61
6.4e-4
6.4e-4
6.4e-4
6.4e-4
6.4e-4
6.4e-4
1.0e-3
3
17.75
20.77
20.44
20.23
19.84
19.58
5.2e-4
5.2e-4
5.2e-4
5.2e-4
5.2e-4
5.2e-4
1.0e-3
4
17.59
19.99
19.70
19.55
19.27
19.04
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
1.0e-3
5
16.23
18.27
17.92
17.91
17.64
17.36
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
1.0e-3
6
14.38
16.08
15.86
15.74
15.53
15.28
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
4.9e-4
2
9.309
12.04
12.09
12.12
11.66
11.49
3.2e-4
3.2e-4
3.2e-4
3.2e-4
3.2e-4
3.2e-4
4.9e-4
3
13.63
16.24
15.90
15.77
15.38
15.28
2.5e-4
2.5e-4
2.5e-4
2.5e-4
2.5e-4
2.5e-4
4.9e-4
4
13.88
16.05
15.72
15.63
15.36
15.12
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
4.9e-4
5
13.14
14.87
14.64
14.49
14.29
14.12
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
4.9e-4
6
12.08
13.55
13.39
13.23
13.04
12.88
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.0e-4
2
4.346
5.913
6.145
6.197
5.964
5.835
6.0e-5
6.0e-5
6.0e-5
6.0e-5
6.0e-5
6.0e-5
1.0e-4
3
7.946
9.788
9.638
9.521
9.222
9.139
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
1.0e-4
4
8.662
10.11
10.03
9.960
9.709
9.604
4.2e-5
4.2e-5
4.2e-5
4.2e-5
4.2e-5
4.2e-5
1.0e-4
5
8.461
9.790
9.602
9.500
9.275
9.223
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
1.0e-4
6
7.231
8.246
8.108
8.021
7.870
7.790
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
2
4.143
5.654
5.897
5.942
5.716
5.592
5.4e-5
5.4e-5
5.4e-5
5.4e-5
5.4e-5
5.4e-5
9.0e-5
3
7.670
9.469
9.323
9.224
8.920
8.848
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
9.0e-5
4
8.348
9.771
9.707
9.612
9.383
9.284
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
9.0e-5
5
8.222
9.519
9.343
9.235
9.025
8.969
3.1e-5
3.1e-5
3.1e-5
3.1e-5
3.1e-5
3.1e-5
9.0e-5
6
6.877
7.858
7.721
7.642
7.492
7.408
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
6.9e-5
2
3.697
5.085
5.332
5.389
5.187
5.068
4.1e-5
4.1e-5
4.1e-5
4.1e-5
4.1e-5
4.1e-5
6.9e-5
3
7.046
8.743
8.617
8.535
8.242
8.172
3.4e-5
3.4e-5
3.4e-5
3.4e-5
3.4e-5
3.4e-5
6.9e-5
4
7.748
9.094
9.039
8.937
8.736
8.647
2.9e-5
2.9e-5
2.9e-5
2.9e-5
2.9e-5
2.9e-5
6.9e-5
5
7.660
8.869
8.708
8.615
8.417
8.367
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
6.9e-5
6
6.053
6.944
6.832
6.759
6.613
6.549
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
5.0e-5
2
3.178
4.419
4.669
4.740
4.567
4.454
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
5.0e-5
3
6.306
7.876
7.770
7.693
7.418
7.362
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
5.0e-5
4
7.029
8.296
8.238
8.146
7.961
7.877
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
5.0e-5
5
7.014
8.128
7.995
7.906
7.748
7.674
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
5.0e-5
6
5.070
5.842
5.749
5.681
5.553
5.502
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
3.0e-5
2
2.526
3.567
3.817
3.901
3.768
3.670
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
3.0e-5
3
5.289
6.682
6.605
6.550
6.310
6.255
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
3.0e-5
4
6.174
7.335
7.268
7.214
7.030
6.947
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
3.0e-5
5
6.039
7.030
6.923
6.861
6.724
6.645
9.8e-6
9.8e-6
9.8e-6
9.8e-6
9.8e-6
9.8e-6
3.0e-5
6
3.959
4.560
4.479
4.433
4.333
4.290
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
1.0e-5
2
1.599
2.325
2.562
2.664
2.593
2.520
4.7e-6
4.7e-6
4.7e-6
4.7e-6
4.7e-6
4.7e-6
1.0e-5
3
3.714
4.798
4.787
4.740
4.564
4.512
4.6e-6
4.6e-6
4.6e-6
4.6e-6
4.6e-6
4.6e-6
1.0e-5
4
4.633
5.592
5.535
5.490
5.338
5.284
3.8e-6
3.8e-6
3.8e-6
3.8e-6
3.8e-6
3.8e-6
1.0e-5
5
3.847
4.535
4.501
4.461
4.347
4.302
2.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.8e-6
1.0e-5
6
2.564
2.936
2.864
2.815
2.733
2.698
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-6
2
0.928
1.401
1.602
1.719
1.707
1.659
2.2e-7
2.2e-7
2.2e-7
2.2e-7
2.2e-7
2.2e-7
1.0e-6
3
1.875
2.540
2.597
2.576
2.478
2.428
4.1e-7
4.1e-7
4.1e-7
4.1e-7
4.1e-7
4.1e-7
1.0e-6
4
2.035
2.523
2.484
2.445
2.361
2.333
3.4e-7
3.4e-7
3.4e-7
3.4e-7
3.4e-7
3.4e-7
1.0e-6
5
1.728
2.082
2.038
1.996
1.922
1.893
3.1e-7
3.1e-7
3.1e-7
3.1e-7
3.1e-7
3.1e-7
1.0e-6
6
1.418
1.669
1.621
1.579
1.517
1.493
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-7
2
0.834
1.271
1.475
1.601
1.611
1.576
5.8e-9
5.8e-9
5.8e-9
5.8e-9
5.8e-9
5.8e-9
1.0e-7
3
0.942
1.266
1.292
1.272
1.223
1.192
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
1.0e-7
4
0.892
1.162
1.172
1.145
1.098
1.069
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
1.0e-7
5
0.830
1.032
1.020
0.989
0.944
0.920
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
1.0e-7
6
0.796
1.016
1.025
1.008
0.968
0.945
4.8e-8
4.8e-8
4.8e-8
4.8e-8
4.8e-8
4.8e-8
38
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:47==
A2
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Max Error
Coefficients
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
2
7.474
9.368
9.668
9.680
9.490
9.360
6.5e-4
6.5e-4
6.5e-4
6.5e-4
6.5e-4
6.5e-4
1.0e-3
3
13.79
15.68
15.38
15.51
15.23
15.22
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
4.3e-4
1.0e-3
4
14.28
15.82
15.53
15.68
15.54
15.54
3.7e-4
3.7e-4
3.7e-4
3.7e-4
3.7e-4
3.7e-4
1.0e-3
5
10.12
11.28
11.15
11.34
11.22
11.20
3.6e-4
3.6e-4
3.6e-4
3.6e-4
3.6e-4
3.6e-4
1.0e-3
6
9.423
10.18
10.05
10.03
9.972
9.972
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
4.9e-4
2
5.519
7.108
7.410
7.414
7.198
7.113
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
3.1e-4
4.9e-4
3
10.00
11.76
11.69
11.63
11.39
11.51
2.4e-4
2.4e-4
2.4e-4
2.4e-4
2.4e-4
2.4e-4
4.9e-4
4
9.927
11.04
11.00
11.00
10.94
10.88
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
2.1e-4
4.9e-4
5
9.987
11.11
11.09
11.18
11.12
11.12
1.6e-4
1.6e-4
1.6e-4
1.6e-4
1.6e-4
1.6e-4
4.9e-4
6
8.418
9.248
9.071
9.299
9.132
9.087
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.0e-4
2
2.791
3.797
4.096
4.128
3.987
3.905
5.6e-5
5.6e-5
5.6e-5
5.6e-5
5.6e-5
5.6e-5
1.0e-4
3
5.796
7.121
7.106
7.041
6.801
6.762
5.0e-5
5.0e-5
5.0e-5
5.0e-5
5.0e-5
5.0e-5
1.0e-4
4
6.835
7.830
7.845
7.687
7.539
7.549
4.0e-5
4.0e-5
4.0e-5
4.0e-5
4.0e-5
4.0e-5
1.0e-4
5
6.670
7.405
7.364
7.331
7.293
7.303
3.3e-5
3.3e-5
3.3e-5
3.3e-5
3.3e-5
3.3e-5
1.0e-4
6
5.890
6.490
6.342
6.340
6.273
6.279
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
2
2.681
3.653
3.971
4.022
3.871
3.750
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
4.9e-5
9.0e-5
3
5.711
7.002
7.004
6.937
6.691
6.655
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
4.4e-5
9.0e-5
4
6.775
7.745
7.761
7.636
7.474
7.497
3.6e-5
3.6e-5
3.6e-5
3.6e-5
3.6e-5
3.6e-5
9.0e-5
5
6.573
7.307
7.263
7.227
7.177
7.192
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
9.0e-5
6
5.622
6.197
6.056
6.069
6.001
6.012
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
6.9e-5
2
2.328
3.202
3.505
3.578
3.449
3.364
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
3.7e-5
6.9e-5
3
5.131
6.353
6.396
6.322
6.132
6.096
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
3.5e-5
6.9e-5
4
6.562
7.492
7.556
7.441
7.262
7.308
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
2.8e-5
6.9e-5
5
6.219
6.933
6.905
6.834
6.772
6.778
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
2.3e-5
6.9e-5
6
5.000
5.541
5.455
5.462
5.360
5.375
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
1.7e-5
5.0e-5
2
2.096
2.902
3.190
3.258
3.154
3.061
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
5.0e-5
3
4.759
5.932
5.994
5.902
5.697
5.658
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
5.0e-5
4
5.995
6.935
6.969
6.893
6.700
6.702
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
5.0e-5
5
5.444
6.114
6.140
6.073
5.971
5.946
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
1.6e-5
5.0e-5
6
4.195
4.652
4.647
4.605
4.508
4.497
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
3.0e-5
2
1.669
2.346
2.609
2.735
2.673
2.616
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
3.0e-5
3
4.129
5.175
5.248
5.161
5.020
4.961
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
3.0e-5
4
4.961
5.849
5.818
5.780
5.571
5.614
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
1.1e-5
3.0e-5
5
4.926
5.579
5.626
5.582
5.467
5.447
9.3e-6
9.3e-6
9.3e-6
9.3e-6
9.3e-6
9.3e-6
3.0e-5
6
3.276
3.659
3.662
3.617
3.539
3.517
7.2e-6
7.2e-6
7.2e-6
7.2e-6
7.2e-6
7.2e-6
1.0e-5
2
1.166
1.678
1.919
2.065
2.073
2.056
3.6e-6
3.6e-6
3.6e-6
3.6e-6
3.6e-6
3.6e-6
1.0e-5
3
3.069
3.926
4.026
3.936
3.836
3.760
4.5e-6
4.5e-6
4.5e-6
4.5e-6
4.5e-6
4.5e-6
1.0e-5
4
3.895
4.639
4.612
4.567
4.476
4.402
3.7e-6
3.7e-6
3.7e-6
3.7e-6
3.7e-6
3.7e-6
1.0e-5
5
3.360
3.885
3.901
3.853
3.759
3.740
2.6e-6
2.6e-6
2.6e-6
2.6e-6
2.6e-6
2.6e-6
1.0e-5
6
2.306
2.563
2.516
2.472
2.413
2.389
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-6
2
0.876
1.293
1.522
1.687
1.738
1.744
1.6e-7
1.6e-7
1.6e-7
1.6e-7
1.6e-7
1.6e-7
1.0e-6
3
1.620
2.175
2.280
2.265
2.203
2.153
3.9e-7
3.9e-7
3.9e-7
3.9e-7
3.9e-7
3.9e-7
1.0e-6
4
1.687
2.102
2.112
2.073
2.006
1.957
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
1.0e-6
5
1.516
1.824
1.809
1.765
1.701
1.661
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
1.0e-6
6
1.350
1.577
1.540
1.497
1.437
1.412
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-7
2
0.829
1.231
1.461
1.637
1.710
1.730
4.8e-9
4.8e-9
4.8e-9
4.8e-9
4.8e-9
4.8e-9
1.0e-7
3
0.918
1.198
1.230
1.220
1.180
1.149
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
1.0e-7
4
0.869
1.108
1.128
1.114
1.075
1.047
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
1.0e-7
5
0.821
1.007
1.003
0.975
0.932
0.905
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
1.0e-7
6
0.772
0.983
1.006
0.994
0.956
0.931
4.9e-8
4.9e-8
4.9e-8
4.9e-8
4.9e-8
4.9e-8
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
39
==PAGE:48==
A3
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Max Error
Coefficients
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
2
1.698
2.008
1.955
1.946
1.883
1.871
4.2e-4
4.2e-4
4.2e-4
4.2e-4
4.2e-4
4.2e-4
1.0e-3
3
1.912
2.137
2.118
2.100
2.055
2.040
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
3.8e-4
1.0e-3
4
1.870
2.018
1.965
1.915
1.855
1.827
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
5
1.715
1.839
1.803
1.770
1.728
1.700
2.8e-4
2.8e-4
2.8e-4
2.8e-4
2.8e-4
2.8e-4
1.0e-3
6
1.735
1.829
1.776
1.734
1.687
1.650
2.7e-4
2.7e-4
2.7e-4
2.7e-4
2.7e-4
2.7e-4
4.9e-4
2
1.449
1.732
1.694
1.684
1.629
1.616
1.9e-4
1.9e-4
1.9e-4
1.9e-4
1.9e-4
1.9e-4
4.9e-4
3
1.647
1.862
1.834
1.824
1.781
1.764
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
1.8e-4
4.9e-4
4
1.622
1.775
1.734
1.703
1.655
1.629
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
5
1.516
1.640
1.620
1.593
1.555
1.535
1.3e-4
1.3e-4
1.3e-4
1.3e-4
1.3e-4
1.3e-4
4.9e-4
6
1.518
1.615
1.576
1.547
1.505
1.478
1.2e-4
1.2e-4
1.2e-4
1.2e-4
1.2e-4
1.2e-4
1.0e-4
2
1.116
1.361
1.338
1.334
1.289
1.278
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
1.0e-4
3
1.247
1.431
1.413
1.403
1.362
1.354
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
1.0e-4
4
1.227
1.371
1.338
1.321
1.282
1.269
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
2.7e-5
1.0e-4
5
1.180
1.291
1.272
1.252
1.225
1.211
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
6
1.185
1.280
1.254
1.231
1.200
1.185
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
9.0e-5
2
1.101
1.345
1.322
1.318
1.274
1.263
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
3
1.225
1.407
1.390
1.380
1.339
1.332
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
4
1.206
1.349
1.316
1.298
1.260
1.246
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
2.4e-5
9.0e-5
5
1.163
1.274
1.256
1.236
1.209
1.195
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
6
1.167
1.260
1.234
1.212
1.181
1.167
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
6.9e-5
2
1.064
1.304
1.282
1.279
1.237
1.226
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
6.9e-5
3
1.184
1.363
1.348
1.336
1.296
1.290
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
6.9e-5
4
1.161
1.301
1.271
1.251
1.213
1.201
1.8e-5
1.8e-5
1.8e-5
1.8e-5
1.8e-5
1.8e-5
6.9e-5
5
1.128
1.238
1.221
1.201
1.174
1.160
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
6
1.129
1.223
1.198
1.176
1.147
1.133
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
5.0e-5
2
1.019
1.254
1.234
1.232
1.191
1.181
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
5.0e-5
3
1.136
1.312
1.298
1.285
1.247
1.241
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
5.0e-5
4
1.108
1.245
1.220
1.200
1.163
1.150
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
5
1.079
1.189
1.173
1.155
1.127
1.114
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
6
1.082
1.176
1.152
1.131
1.101
1.088
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
3.0e-5
2
0.967
1.197
1.180
1.177
1.139
1.127
6.8e-6
6.8e-6
6.8e-6
6.8e-6
6.8e-6
6.8e-6
3.0e-5
3
1.071
1.242
1.231
1.217
1.181
1.174
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
4
1.041
1.177
1.156
1.137
1.102
1.090
6.9e-6
6.9e-6
6.9e-6
6.9e-6
6.9e-6
6.9e-6
3.0e-5
5
1.014
1.122
1.108
1.091
1.063
1.052
5.5e-6
5.5e-6
5.5e-6
5.5e-6
5.5e-6
5.5e-6
3.0e-5
6
1.021
1.113
1.093
1.072
1.044
1.030
5.9e-6
5.9e-6
5.9e-6
5.9e-6
5.9e-6
5.9e-6
1.0e-5
2
0.885
1.106
1.095
1.092
1.057
1.045
1.5e-6
1.5e-6
1.5e-6
1.5e-6
1.5e-6
1.5e-6
1.0e-5
3
0.964
1.127
1.120
1.108
1.074
1.067
2.0e-6
2.0e-6
2.0e-6
2.0e-6
2.0e-6
2.0e-6
1.0e-5
4
0.933
1.062
1.044
1.027
0.994
0.984
1.9e-6
1.9e-6
1.9e-6
1.9e-6
1.9e-6
1.9e-6
1.0e-5
5
0.915
1.019
1.007
0.990
0.964
0.953
1.4e-6
1.4e-6
1.4e-6
1.4e-6
1.4e-6
1.4e-6
1.0e-5
6
0.922
1.011
0.992
0.973
0.946
0.934
1.7e-6
1.7e-6
1.7e-6
1.7e-6
1.7e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-6
2
0.827
1.043
1.038
1.035
1.004
0.993
4.3e-8
4.3e-8
4.3e-8
4.3e-8
4.3e-8
4.3e-8
1.0e-6
3
0.854
1.010
1.007
0.996
0.966
0.958
7.6e-8
7.6e-8
7.6e-8
7.6e-8
7.6e-8
7.6e-8
1.0e-6
4
0.813
0.950
0.944
0.933
0.905
0.897
7.8e-8
7.8e-8
7.8e-8
7.8e-8
7.8e-8
7.8e-8
1.0e-6
5
0.819
0.932
0.929
0.918
0.896
0.888
8.0e-8
8.0e-8
8.0e-8
8.0e-8
8.0e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-6
6
0.798
0.901
0.897
0.887
0.866
0.858
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
2
0.821
1.037
1.034
1.031
1.000
0.989
1.0e-9
1.0e-9
1.0e-9
1.0e-9
1.0e-9
1.0e-9
1.0e-7
3
0.839
0.994
0.992
0.981
0.952
0.943
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
1.0e-7
4
0.797
0.936
0.933
0.924
0.898
0.890
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
1.0e-7
5
0.804
0.901
0.886
0.873
0.850
0.842
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
6
0.774
0.863
0.850
0.838
0.817
0.810
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
40
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:49==
A.3.2
Coefficients
A1
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
Max Error
Delta
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
0
13.04
17.75
17.59
16.23
14.38
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
1
16.55
20.77
19.99
18.27
16.08
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
2
16.41
20.44
19.70
17.92
15.86
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
3
16.42
20.23
19.55
17.91
15.74
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
4
15.79
19.84
19.27
17.64
15.53
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
1.0e-3
5
15.61
19.58
19.04
17.36
15.28
6.4e-4
5.2e-4
4.3e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
4.9e-4
0
9.309
13.63
13.88
13.14
12.08
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
1
12.04
16.24
16.05
14.87
13.55
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
2
12.09
15.90
15.72
14.64
13.39
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
3
12.12
15.77
15.63
14.49
13.23
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
4
11.66
15.38
15.36
14.29
13.04
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
5
11.49
15.28
15.12
14.12
12.88
3.2e-4
2.5e-4
2.1e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.0e-4
0
4.346
7.946
8.662
8.461
7.231
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
1
5.913
9.788
10.11
9.790
8.246
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
2
6.145
9.638
10.03
9.602
8.108
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
3
6.197
9.521
9.960
9.500
8.021
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
4
5.964
9.222
9.709
9.275
7.870
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
5
5.835
9.139
9.604
9.223
7.790
6.0e-5
4.9e-5
4.2e-5
3.5e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
0
4.143
7.670
8.348
8.222
6.877
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
1
5.654
9.469
9.771
9.519
7.858
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
2
5.897
9.323
9.707
9.343
7.721
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
3
5.942
9.224
9.612
9.235
7.642
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
4
5.716
8.920
9.383
9.025
7.492
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
5
5.592
8.848
9.284
8.969
7.408
5.4e-5
4.4e-5
3.7e-5
3.1e-5
2.3e-5
6.9e-5
0
3.697
7.046
7.748
7.660
6.053
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
1
5.085
8.743
9.094
8.869
6.944
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
2
5.332
8.617
9.039
8.708
6.832
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
3
5.389
8.535
8.937
8.615
6.759
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
4
5.187
8.242
8.736
8.417
6.613
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
5
5.068
8.172
8.647
8.367
6.549
4.1e-5
3.4e-5
2.9e-5
2.4e-5
1.7e-5
5.0e-5
0
3.178
6.306
7.029
7.014
5.070
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
1
4.419
7.876
8.296
8.128
5.842
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
2
4.669
7.770
8.238
7.995
5.749
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
3
4.740
7.693
8.146
7.906
5.681
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
4
4.567
7.418
7.961
7.748
5.553
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
5.0e-5
5
4.454
7.362
7.877
7.674
5.502
2.8e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.7e-5
1.2e-5
3.0e-5
0
2.526
5.289
6.174
6.039
3.959
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
1
3.567
6.682
7.335
7.030
4.560
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
2
3.817
6.605
7.268
6.923
4.479
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
3
3.901
6.550
7.214
6.861
4.433
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
4
3.768
6.310
7.030
6.724
4.333
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
3.0e-5
5
3.670
6.255
6.947
6.645
4.290
1.6e-5
1.4e-5
1.2e-5
9.8e-6
7.4e-6
1.0e-5
0
1.599
3.714
4.633
3.847
2.564
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
1
2.325
4.798
5.592
4.535
2.936
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
2
2.562
4.787
5.535
4.501
2.864
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
3
2.664
4.740
5.490
4.461
2.815
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
4
2.593
4.564
5.338
4.347
2.733
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
5
2.520
4.512
5.284
4.302
2.698
4.7e-6
4.6e-6
3.8e-6
2.8e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-6
0
0.928
1.875
2.035
1.728
1.418
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
1
1.401
2.540
2.523
2.082
1.669
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
2
1.602
2.597
2.484
2.038
1.621
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
3
1.719
2.576
2.445
1.996
1.579
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
4
1.707
2.478
2.361
1.922
1.517
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
5
1.659
2.428
2.333
1.893
1.493
2.2e-7
4.1e-7
3.4e-7
3.1e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-7
0
0.834
0.942
0.892
0.830
0.796
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
1.0e-7
1
1.271
1.266
1.162
1.032
1.016
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
1.0e-7
2
1.475
1.292
1.172
1.020
1.025
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
1.0e-7
3
1.601
1.272
1.145
0.989
1.008
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
1.0e-7
4
1.611
1.223
1.098
0.944
0.968
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
1.0e-7
5
1.576
1.192
1.069
0.920
0.945
5.8e-9
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
3.0e-8
4.8e-8
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
41
==PAGE:50==
A2
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
Max Error
Delta
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
0
7.474
13.79
14.28
10.12
9.423
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
1.0e-3
1
9.368
15.68
15.82
11.28
10.18
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
1.0e-3
2
9.668
15.38
15.53
11.15
10.05
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
1.0e-3
3
9.680
15.51
15.68
11.34
10.03
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
1.0e-3
4
9.490
15.23
15.54
11.22
9.972
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
1.0e-3
5
9.360
15.22
15.54
11.20
9.972
6.5e-4
4.3e-4
3.7e-4
3.6e-4
3.1e-4
4.9e-4
0
5.519
10.00
9.927
9.987
8.418
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
1
7.108
11.76
11.04
11.11
9.248
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
2
7.410
11.69
11.00
11.09
9.071
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
3
7.414
11.63
11.00
11.18
9.299
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
4
7.198
11.39
10.94
11.12
9.132
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
4.9e-4
5
7.113
11.51
10.88
11.12
9.087
3.1e-4
2.4e-4
2.1e-4
1.6e-4
1.5e-4
1.0e-4
0
2.791
5.796
6.835
6.670
5.890
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
1
3.797
7.121
7.830
7.405
6.490
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
2
4.096
7.106
7.845
7.364
6.342
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
3
4.128
7.041
7.687
7.331
6.340
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
4
3.987
6.801
7.539
7.293
6.273
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
1.0e-4
5
3.905
6.762
7.549
7.303
6.279
5.6e-5
5.0e-5
4.0e-5
3.3e-5
2.6e-5
9.0e-5
0
2.681
5.711
6.775
6.573
5.622
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
1
3.653
7.002
7.745
7.307
6.197
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
2
3.971
7.004
7.761
7.263
6.056
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
3
4.022
6.937
7.636
7.227
6.069
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
4
3.871
6.691
7.474
7.177
6.001
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
9.0e-5
5
3.750
6.655
7.497
7.192
6.012
4.9e-5
4.4e-5
3.6e-5
3.0e-5
2.3e-5
6.9e-5
0
2.328
5.131
6.562
6.219
5.000
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
1
3.202
6.353
7.492
6.933
5.541
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
2
3.505
6.396
7.556
6.905
5.455
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
3
3.578
6.322
7.441
6.834
5.462
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
4
3.449
6.132
7.262
6.772
5.360
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
6.9e-5
5
3.364
6.096
7.308
6.778
5.375
3.7e-5
3.5e-5
2.8e-5
2.3e-5
1.7e-5
5.0e-5
0
2.096
4.759
5.995
5.444
4.195
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
5.0e-5
1
2.902
5.932
6.935
6.114
4.652
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
5.0e-5
2
3.190
5.994
6.969
6.140
4.647
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
5.0e-5
3
3.258
5.902
6.893
6.073
4.605
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
5.0e-5
4
3.154
5.697
6.700
5.971
4.508
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
5.0e-5
5
3.061
5.658
6.702
5.946
4.497
2.7e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
1.6e-5
1.1e-5
3.0e-5
0
1.669
4.129
4.961
4.926
3.276
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
3.0e-5
1
2.346
5.175
5.849
5.579
3.659
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
3.0e-5
2
2.609
5.248
5.818
5.626
3.662
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
3.0e-5
3
2.735
5.161
5.780
5.582
3.617
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
3.0e-5
4
2.673
5.020
5.571
5.467
3.539
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
3.0e-5
5
2.616
4.961
5.614
5.447
3.517
1.4e-5
1.4e-5
1.1e-5
9.3e-6
7.2e-6
1.0e-5
0
1.166
3.069
3.895
3.360
2.306
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
1
1.678
3.926
4.639
3.885
2.563
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
2
1.919
4.026
4.612
3.901
2.516
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
3
2.065
3.936
4.567
3.853
2.472
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
4
2.073
3.836
4.476
3.759
2.413
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-5
5
2.056
3.760
4.402
3.740
2.389
3.6e-6
4.5e-6
3.7e-6
2.6e-6
2.5e-6
1.0e-6
0
0.876
1.620
1.687
1.516
1.350
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
1
1.293
2.175
2.102
1.824
1.577
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
2
1.522
2.280
2.112
1.809
1.540
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
3
1.687
2.265
2.073
1.765
1.497
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
4
1.738
2.203
2.006
1.701
1.437
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-6
5
1.744
2.153
1.957
1.661
1.412
1.6e-7
3.9e-7
3.0e-7
3.0e-7
2.9e-7
1.0e-7
0
0.829
0.918
0.869
0.821
0.772
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
1.0e-7
1
1.231
1.198
1.108
1.007
0.983
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
1.0e-7
2
1.461
1.230
1.128
1.003
1.006
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
1.0e-7
3
1.637
1.220
1.114
0.975
0.994
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
1.0e-7
4
1.710
1.180
1.075
0.932
0.956
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
1.0e-7
5
1.730
1.149
1.047
0.905
0.931
4.8e-9
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
3.3e-8
4.9e-8
42
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:51==
A3
2
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
Max Error
Delta
CR
CR
CR
CR
CR
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
RMSER
1.0e-3
0
1.698
1.912
1.870
1.715
1.735
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
1.0e-3
1
2.008
2.137
2.018
1.839
1.829
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
1.0e-3
2
1.955
2.118
1.965
1.803
1.776
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
1.0e-3
3
1.946
2.100
1.915
1.770
1.734
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
1.0e-3
4
1.883
2.055
1.855
1.728
1.687
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
1.0e-3
5
1.871
2.040
1.827
1.700
1.650
4.2e-4
3.8e-4
3.3e-4
2.8e-4
2.7e-4
4.9e-4
0
1.449
1.647
1.622
1.516
1.518
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
4.9e-4
1
1.732
1.862
1.775
1.640
1.615
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
4.9e-4
2
1.694
1.834
1.734
1.620
1.576
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
4.9e-4
3
1.684
1.824
1.703
1.593
1.547
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
4.9e-4
4
1.629
1.781
1.655
1.555
1.505
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
4.9e-4
5
1.616
1.764
1.629
1.535
1.478
1.9e-4
1.8e-4
1.5e-4
1.3e-4
1.2e-4
1.0e-4
0
1.116
1.247
1.227
1.180
1.185
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
1
1.361
1.431
1.371
1.291
1.280
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
2
1.338
1.413
1.338
1.272
1.254
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
3
1.334
1.403
1.321
1.252
1.231
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
4
1.289
1.362
1.282
1.225
1.200
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
1.0e-4
5
1.278
1.354
1.269
1.211
1.185
3.0e-5
3.0e-5
2.7e-5
2.2e-5
2.2e-5
9.0e-5
0
1.101
1.225
1.206
1.163
1.167
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
1
1.345
1.407
1.349
1.274
1.260
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
2
1.322
1.390
1.316
1.256
1.234
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
3
1.318
1.380
1.298
1.236
1.212
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
4
1.274
1.339
1.260
1.209
1.181
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
9.0e-5
5
1.263
1.332
1.246
1.195
1.167
2.6e-5
2.6e-5
2.4e-5
2.0e-5
2.0e-5
6.9e-5
0
1.064
1.184
1.161
1.128
1.129
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
1
1.304
1.363
1.301
1.238
1.223
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
2
1.282
1.348
1.271
1.221
1.198
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
3
1.279
1.336
1.251
1.201
1.176
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
4
1.237
1.296
1.213
1.174
1.147
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
6.9e-5
5
1.226
1.290
1.201
1.160
1.133
1.9e-5
1.9e-5
1.8e-5
1.5e-5
1.5e-5
5.0e-5
0
1.019
1.136
1.108
1.079
1.082
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
1
1.254
1.312
1.245
1.189
1.176
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
2
1.234
1.298
1.220
1.173
1.152
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
3
1.232
1.285
1.200
1.155
1.131
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
4
1.191
1.247
1.163
1.127
1.101
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
5.0e-5
5
1.181
1.241
1.150
1.114
1.088
1.3e-5
1.3e-5
1.2e-5
1.0e-5
1.0e-5
3.0e-5
0
0.967
1.071
1.041
1.014
1.021
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
3.0e-5
1
1.197
1.242
1.177
1.122
1.113
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
3.0e-5
2
1.180
1.231
1.156
1.108
1.093
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
3.0e-5
3
1.177
1.217
1.137
1.091
1.072
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
3.0e-5
4
1.139
1.181
1.102
1.063
1.044
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
3.0e-5
5
1.127
1.174
1.090
1.052
1.030
6.8e-6
7.4e-6
6.9e-6
5.5e-6
5.9e-6
1.0e-5
0
0.885
0.964
0.933
0.915
0.922
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-5
1
1.106
1.127
1.062
1.019
1.011
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-5
2
1.095
1.120
1.044
1.007
0.992
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-5
3
1.092
1.108
1.027
0.990
0.973
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-5
4
1.057
1.074
0.994
0.964
0.946
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-5
5
1.045
1.067
0.984
0.953
0.934
1.5e-6
2.0e-6
1.9e-6
1.4e-6
1.7e-6
1.0e-6
0
0.827
0.854
0.813
0.819
0.798
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-6
1
1.043
1.010
0.950
0.932
0.901
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-6
2
1.038
1.007
0.944
0.929
0.897
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-6
3
1.035
0.996
0.933
0.918
0.887
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-6
4
1.004
0.966
0.905
0.896
0.866
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-6
5
0.993
0.958
0.897
0.888
0.858
4.3e-8
7.6e-8
7.8e-8
8.0e-8
1.0e-7
1.0e-7
0
0.821
0.839
0.797
0.804
0.774
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
1
1.037
0.994
0.936
0.901
0.863
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
2
1.034
0.992
0.933
0.886
0.850
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
3
1.031
0.981
0.924
0.873
0.838
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
4
1.000
0.952
0.898
0.850
0.817
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
1.0e-7
5
0.989
0.943
0.890
0.842
0.810
1.0e-9
9.8e-9
9.8e-9
2.2e-8
2.2e-8
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
43
==PAGE:52==
A.4
ZFP Experiment Code
1
#include <iostream >
2
#include"bitstream.h"
3
#include"zfp.h"
4
#include <fstream >
5
using namespace std;
6
7
void test(char spec[]) {
8
ifstream rf(spec, ios::out | ios::binary);
9
if(!rf) {
10
cout << "Cannot open file!" << endl;
11
return ;
12
}
13
unsigned int rows = 0;
14
unsigned int columns = 0;
15
rf.read((char *) &rows, sizeof(unsigned int));
16
rf.read((char *) &columns , sizeof(unsigned int));
17
18
double ds[rows][columns];
19
for(int i = 0; i < columns; i++){
20
for(int j = 0; j < rows; j++){
21
rf.read((char *) &ds[j][i], sizeof(double));
22
}
23
}
24
rf.close();
25
float fs[rows][columns];
26
for(int i = 0; i < columns; i++){
27
for(int j = 0; j < rows; j++){
28
fs[j][i] = static_cast <float >(ds[j][i]);
29
}
30
}
31
32
int fs_size = rows*columns;
33
zfp_field* output_zfp = zfp_field_2d(fs, zfp_type_float , rows, columns);
34
35
void* buf = malloc(4*fs_size);
36
37
bitstream* bs = stream_open(buf, 4*fs_size);
38
zfp_stream* zs = zfp_stream_open(bs);
39
zfp_stream_set_reversible(zs);
40
41
size_t size = zfp_compress(zs, output_zfp);
42
43
printf("size: %d\n", (int) size);
44
printf("uncompressed byte size: %d\n", (int) 4*rows*columns);
45
printf("compression ratio: %f\n", (float) (4*rows*columns) / (float) size);
46
47
return ;
48
}
49
50
int main() {
51
printf("a1\n");
52
test("../../data/a1.bin");
53
printf("a2\n");
54
test("../../data/a2.bin");
55
printf("a3\n");
56
test("../../data/a3.bin");
57
return 1;
58
}
Listing A.1: zfp/main.cpp
44
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:53==
A.5
Sorted Spectrograms
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Figure A.1: A1 Sorted spectrograms
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Figure A.2: A2 Sorted spectrograms
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Figure A.3: A3 Sorted spectrograms
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
45
==PAGE:54==
A.6
Encoding Overhead
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
rle
vwe - 1
vwe - 2
vwe - 3
vwe - 4
vwe - 5
The overhead in bits each encoding type contributes, given the number of significant
bits. rle is run length encoding and vwe is variable width encoding, where the number
represents the chunk size used.
A.7
Performance Benchmarks
A.7.1
Compression times
Name
Mean
MeanLB
MeanUB
Stddev
StddevLB
StddevUB
Delta Run Length Encoding/a1
0.593
0.556
0.624
4.076e-2
3.351e-2
4.659e-2
Delta Run Length Encoding/a2
0.138
0.135
0.145
6.849e-3
3.378e-3
9.598e-3
Delta Run Length Encoding/a3
0.145
0.142
0.149
4.703e-3
2.472e-3
7.158e-3
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a1
0.496
0.474
0.518
2.619e-2
1.836e-2
3.149e-2
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.312
0.302
0.322
1.227e-2
5.354e-4
1.524e-2
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.117
0.116
0.121
3.731e-3
2.019e-3
5.440e-3
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a1
1.735
1.616
1.775
7.930e-2
2.566e-4
9.222e-2
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.567
0.538
0.611
4.258e-2
1.189e-2
5.631e-2
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.560
0.557
0.564
3.942e-3
2.252e-4
4.880e-3
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a1
0.952
0.927
0.977
3.090e-2
1.753e-2
3.751e-2
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.438
0.422
0.465
2.526e-2
4.189e-4
3.098e-2
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.401
0.397
0.407
6.353e-3
9.433e-4
8.149e-3
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a1
23.748
23.688
23.779
5.875e-2
3.806e-3
7.179e-2
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a2
5.794
5.747
5.842
5.972e-2
2.898e-2
7.842e-2
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a3
15.601
15.328
15.869
0.314
0.269
0.354
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a1
5.722
5.638
5.753
5.703e-2
9.913e-3
7.210e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a2
1.796
1.750
1.821
4.514e-2
2.032e-3
5.519e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a3
2.573
2.546
2.603
3.511e-2
1.730e-2
4.794e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a1
11.892
11.385
12.072
0.338
5.092e-3
0.401
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a2
2.841
2.769
2.900
7.991e-2
3.666e-2
0.100
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a3
6.729
6.711
6.740
1.827e-2
7.366e-3
2.519e-2
Sorted Cubic Spline/a1
55.428
55.319
55.562
0.138
5.755e-2
0.190
Sorted Cubic Spline/a2
14.076
13.951
14.410
0.224
1.289e-2
0.274
Sorted Cubic Spline/a3
36.147
35.536
36.665
0.665
0.271
0.881
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a1
2.524
2.488
2.537
2.443e-2
1.822e-3
3.130e-2
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.637
0.595
0.695
5.522e-2
3.058e-3
6.883e-2
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.537
0.533
0.543
5.860e-3
5.260e-4
7.257e-3
Time in seconds to compress the entire dataset. The sizes of the data sets are:
A1=100x4200, A2=100x1060, A3=700x400.
46
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
==PAGE:55==
A.7.2
Decompression times
Name
Mean
MeanLB
MeanUB
Stddev
StddevLB
StddevUB
Delta Run Length Encoding/a1
0.439
0.428
0.458
1.857e-2
4.722e-4
2.236e-2
Delta Run Length Encoding/a2
0.101
9.948e-2
0.108
5.022e-3
7.832e-4
8.162e-3
Delta Run Length Encoding/a3
0.137
0.134
0.141
5.701e-3
2.915e-3
8.613e-3
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a1
0.425
0.412
0.444
1.795e-2
8.483e-4
2.240e-2
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.259
0.249
0.283
1.856e-2
4.851e-3
2.450e-2
Delta Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.132
0.130
0.135
3.832e-3
2.391e-3
5.377e-3
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a1
0.946
0.925
0.972
2.652e-2
9.852e-3
3.617e-2
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.297
0.290
0.306
1.025e-2
1.590e-3
1.383e-2
Haar Wavelet Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.370
0.368
0.370
1.319e-3
1.136e-3
1.414e-3
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a1
0.813
0.799
0.839
2.590e-2
6.209e-6
3.128e-2
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a2
0.377
0.364
0.403
2.466e-2
6.993e-4
2.971e-2
Lagrange Prediction Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.423
0.421
0.426
2.722e-3
2.033e-3
3.235e-3
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a1
22.440
22.393
22.481
5.012e-2
1.403e-2
6.203e-2
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a2
5.451
5.427
5.487
3.694e-2
7.171e-3
4.834e-2
Cubic Spline Variable Width Encoding/a3
14.946
14.932
14.981
2.350e-2
3.755e-4
2.814e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a1
2.259
2.038
2.408
0.220
9.957e-2
0.305
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a2
0.629
0.614
0.654
2.463e-2
2.090e-3
3.121e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Linear expansion/a3
1.077
1.067
1.093
1.662e-2
6.160e-3
2.273e-2
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a1
1.025
1.020
1.029
5.334e-3
2.398e-3
7.056e-3
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a2
0.437
0.435
0.438
1.290e-3
9.908e-4
1.527e-3
Lossy Lagrange - Logarithmic expansion/a3
0.657
0.652
0.660
4.706e-3
2.197e-3
6.291e-3
Sorted Cubic Spline/a1
54.781
54.649
54.858
0.131
4.740e-2
0.179
Sorted Cubic Spline/a2
14.192
14.057
14.240
9.091e-2
5.128e-3
0.110
Sorted Cubic Spline/a3
35.630
35.401
35.813
0.225
2.937e-2
0.278
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a1
2.449
2.365
2.495
8.166e-2
1.328e-2
0.104
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a2
1.375
1.350
1.389
2.452e-2
1.086e-2
3.362e-2
Sorted Delta Variable Width Encoding/a3
0.627
0.624
0.632
4.642e-3
3.638e-4
6.082e-3
Time in seconds to decompress the entire dataset. The sizes of the data sets are:
A1=100x4200, A2=100x1060, A3=700x400.
Compression and Storage of Spectrogram Data
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
