==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
"stop"  : 43 
"down": 10 
"left"    :   7 
"on"     :   1 
Hardware Accelerator for Spiking
Neural Networks
Master Thesis
Hans Jakob Damsgaard (s163915)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The area of artificial intelligence is becoming increasingly popular and has wide-spread
use already. In particular the sub-area of artificial neural networks (ANNs) has seen
much attention and serves as the basis for many modern software products due to their
flexibility and learning capabilities. However, the increased number of such models de-
ployed in mobile low-power devices introduces a need to do such processing efficiently
offline. This is difficult using regular ANNs as their evaluation is most often based on
expensive floating-point operations and many memory accesses. This has led to the intro-
duction of computing-oriented spiking neural networks (SNNs) as a potential alternative.
Basing themselves on binary events in time known as spikes, SNNs remove the need for
costly multiplications, enabling small, efficient, low-power accelerator implementations.
This masters thesis presents the design and implementation of a number of opti-
mizations to an existing SNN accelerator targeting a significant reduction in its power
consumption. Firstly, a network is trained for a keyword spotting application, and next
the network is mapped to the accelerator. After introduction of clock gating and an
alternative memory layout with different quantization, the optimized accelerator was
found to consume fewer FPGA resources and 67.5% less power than the baseline design
when targeting a Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA on a Digilent Genesys-2 board.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering. The project was
carried out from January 4 to June 19, 2021. It has a weight of 32.5 ECTS.
The full source code is available open-source on GitHub. Beware that the Chisel3 and
ChiselTest packages’ APIs might be subject to change. Please file an issue if the code
does not compile.
Kongens Lyngby, June 18, 2021
Hans Jakob Damsgaard (s163915)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor through all five years at DTU, Jens Sparsø, who has
not only supported me during the project period, kept me on track, and improved my
focus on the key points of the project, but also been a general inspiration throughout my
studies. I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Zuzana Jelcicova for providing in-
depth theoretical ideas, explaining important topics, and supporting me throughout the
project. A big thanks also to my co-supervisors at Demant, Axel Bregnsbo and Anders
Hebsgaard, for taking this project on and giving me access to some of their brightest
colleagues.
Finally, I wish to thank Anthon Vincent Riber and Simon Thye Andersen for being
great friends and study-buddies for the last three years. It has been most enjoyable to
learn and discuss digital design and deep learning with both of them.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Terminology
The following terminology will be used throughout the report. Basic knowledge of digital
hardware design is expected from the reader.
1. Spiking Neural Network (SNN) terminology
• Spike - Represents a binary event in time, which models an impulse trans-
mitted within a mammal brain.
• Neuron - Represents the main component of SNNs, which are networks, i.e.,
graphs, of neurons. Spiking neurons communicate with one another using
spikes of different weights.
• Membrane potential - A physical neuron acts like a capacitor in that in-
coming spikes each add a little charge to its membrane, which in turn raises
its membrane potential. When the potential crosses a critical threshold, the
neuron outputs a spike thereby draining its membrane. In simulations, the
potential is modeled as a sum which is updated on incoming spikes.
• Potential decay - Just like real capacitors leak charge at a very low rate, so
do spiking neurons. This is modeled by subtraction of a scaled version of the
membrane potential in each update cycle.
• Refractory period - After a spike, a neuron cannot spike again for a number
of update cycles called its refractory period. Its membrane potential may still
be updated.
• Synapse/Axon - In a biological brain, the axon is an ”arm”-like part of
a neuron which transmits spikes out of the neuron, whereas the synapse is
the chemical channel between a source neuron’s axon and one or more sink
neurons. In simulation, this is modeled by a matrix of weighted connections,
and the two terms are used interchangeably.
• Excitation - Excitation means increasing the membrane potential of a neu-
ron, i.e., the result of receiving a spike from a synapse with a positive weight.
• Inhibition - Inhibition is the opposite of excitation.
• Time step - The mammal brain operates in continuous time, whereas sim-
ulations of SNNs are inherently discrete with short constant-length update
intervals. Everything in an SNN therefore happens with reference to a spe-
cific time step; spikes generated in time step i are used for updates in time
==PAGE:10==
viii
Terminology
step i + 1; if a neuron spikes in time step i and has a refractory period r it
cannot spike again before time step i + r etc. Time steps are typically 1 ms
long.
• Spike encoding - A transformation of traditional (integer/floating-point)
data representation to a binary time-indexed format suitable for an SNN.
2. Acronyms
• AER - Address event representation
• ANN - Artificial neural network, i.e., a layered network of classic artificial
neurons
• ASIC - Application-specific integrated circuit
• ASM - Algorithmic state machine
• BUFGCE - (Xilinx primitive) Global clock buffer with clock enable
• Chisel - Constructing hardware in a Scala-embedded language
• CI - Continuous integration
• CNN - Convolutional neural network
• CPU - Central processing unit
• CRV - Constraint-random verification
• FCNN - Fully-connected neural network
• FF - Flip-flop
• FFNN - Feed-forward neural network
• FFT - Fast Fourier transform
• FIRRTL - Flexible intermediate representation of RTL
• FPGA - Field-programmable gate-array
• FSM[D] - Finite state machine [with datapath]
• GPU - Graphics processing unit
• GRU - Gated recurrent unit
• GSCD - Google speech commands dataset
• HDL - Hardware description language
• IF - Integrate-and-fire
• JDK - Java development kit
• JTAG - Joint test action group (name of standardized testing interface)
• LIF - Leaky integrate-and-fire
• LSTM - Long short-term memory
• LUT - Look-up table
==PAGE:11==
Terminology
ix
• MFC - Mel-frequency cepstrum
• MLP - Multilayer perceptron
• MMCM - Mixed-mode clock manager
• MRAM - Magneto-resistive RAM
• RAM - Random access memory
• ReLU - Rectified linear unit
• ReRAM - Resistive RAM
• RNN - Recurrent neural network
• RTL - Register transfer level
• SAIF - Switching activity interchange format
• SBT - Scala build tool
• SNN - Spiking neural network, i.e., a layered network of spiking neurons
• STDP - Spike-timing-dependent plasticity
• STFT - Short-time Fourier transform
• TPU - Tensor processing unit
• VCD - Value change dump
• YAML - (recursive) YAML ain’t markup language
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Terminology
vii
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Chisel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Network Development
17
3.1
The Google Speech Commands Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
The Showcase Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Original Accelerator
29
4.1
Accelerator Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Design
35
5.1
Baseline and Design Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Design Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Clock Gating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Architectural Changes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Implementation
55
6.1
Parameterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Mapping to Accelerator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.4
Building the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Results
67
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
7.1
Resource Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
System Timing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3
Power Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.4
Classification Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Discussion
77
8.1
Classification Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.2
Power Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9
Conclusion
89
Bibliography
91
A Network Development
97
A.1 MNIST Classification Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.3 Training Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
A.4 Parameter Export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
A.5 Testing Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
B Accelerator Sources
145
B.1 Chisel Source Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
B.2 Verilog Source Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
B.3 Mapping Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
C Hardware Testers
201
C.1 Unit Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
C.2 System Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
C.3 VHDL Testbench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
D Other Sources
269
D.1 Makefile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
D.2 Build Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
D.3 Github Actions CI Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
D.4 Flawed Chisel Top-level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are seeing ever-increasing popularity and are being
deployed to mobile devices for many different applications including image recognition
and keyword spotting. Keyword spotting (KWS) is particularly interesting to consider,
as the neural networks used for this particular application are running all the time.
Examples of such applications are Apple’s Siri, Google’s Assistant, and Amazon’s Alexa,
which are activated by saying different phrases. The KWS networks thus serve as an
early filtering of incoming audio signals such that costly connections to online audio
processing servers are opened only when absolutely needed. As such, the networks must
be relatively small and must be evaluated in efficient hardware such that they do not
drain the mobile device’s battery too quick.
The majority of research into this topic focuses on regular ANNs, which base them-
selves on multiply-accumulate operations for summing weighted inputs and non-linear
activation functions. However, such networks map poorly to the traditional Von Neu-
mann architectures employed in modern CPUs due to their memory requirements and
by relying on expensive floating-point multiplications and additions [Bou+19]. Efficient
accelerator hardware for such ANNs does exist and takes a near-memory computing
approach to distributing memory modules and evaluation units across a chip to exploit
locality in memory access patterns better [Che+14; Par+17]. However, the architectures
are inherently limited by the required arithmetic circuitry, and while there is extensive
work in reducing the power consumption of these types of networks by quantization, net-
work pruning, and approximate arithmetic [HMD16], further optimizations are possible
by switching to a class of networks known as spiking neural networks (SNNs).
SNNs are the third generation of artificial neural networks. They aim, in part, to
reduce the arithmetic requirements of neural network evaluation by reducing continuous
activations to binary events in time known as spikes, and in part, to model biological
brains more closely [Kas19]. As such, the neurons of consist of elements similar to those
of biological neurons, and as incoming values are binary, require no multiplications to
be evaluated. This enables highly efficient hardware accelerators to be implemented and
deployed in ultra low-power devices.
This report presents the design and implementation of a number of power-focused
optimizations of an SNN hardware accelerator and its conversion from MNIST til Google
Speech Commands classification. The description begins by introducing the necessary
background information related to ANNs and SNNs and the Chisel HDL used to describe
the accelerator hardware and its testing in chapter 2. Chapter 3 presents the dataset and
the network development process which precedes the hardware development. Chapter 4
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
gives a brief introduction to the baseline system which is sought optimized, while chap-
ter 5 presents the optimizations introduced. Chapter 6 covers implementation-specific
details of interest, code details and the extensive verification suite used to maintain
accelerator functionality. Chapter 7 presents the results of the optimizations both in
terms of resource usage and power consumption of the accelerator, and in terms of SNN
classification accuracy. Finally, chapter 8 discusses the work presented in the report
and potential future work, and chapter 9 concludes. All of the relevant source code is
available in the appendices A thru D.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter covers basic theory about both regular artificial neural networks, spiking
neural networks, and the Chisel HDL which is used to define the hardware accelerator
in this project. This background knowledge is the foundation of the remaining chapters
of this report. Note that this is only a brief introduction to the aforementioned topics,
and that both ANN and SNN research and development of Chisel are on-going processes.
Please refer to the listed references for more in-depth explanations.
2.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks are machine learning models of the human brain. They are directed
graphs with layers of neurons grouped together with weighted connections (synapses)
between the layers. In the following, the traditional second-generation and relatively
newer third-generation neural network models are briefly introduced. First-generation
neural networks with binary weights and activations are, effectively, no longer used and
will not be covered further.
2.1.1
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
Second-generation ANNs are based on continuous neurons. As an example, consider
the simplest ANN model, a fully-connected network (FCNN), shown in figure 2.1 - fully-
connected referring to the fact that each neuron in layer L has a connection to all neurons
in layer L + 1.
Each neuron calculates a so-called activation, which is a weighted sum of the neuron
values of the previous layer and their relatively weights. The activations of the input
layer are equal to the input values, which are usually normalized to be in the range
[0, 1]. This implies that the input layer has the same number of neurons as there are
values in an input (e.g., 784 for classic 28x28 MNIST images). Similarly, the output
layer traditionally has the same number of neurons as there are classes.
The m’th neuron in layer L calculates:
aL
m = h
(N−1
∑
n=0
WnmaL−1
m
+ bL
m
)
where Wnm is the synaptic weight between the n’th neuron in layer L −1 and the
m’th neuron in layer L, aL−1
n
is the activation of the n’th neuron in layer L −1, and
==PAGE:18==
4
2 Background
Input
Hidden
Output
0.53
0.91
0.17
0.02
0.85
0.04
0.07
Figure 2.1: An example FCNN with three layers.
bL
m is an optional bias. Finally, h represents a non-linear activation function. h must
be non-linear as otherwise, the network could be collapsed into a simple matrix-vector
or matrix-matrix multiplication. For classification tasks, the softmax activation func-
tion, shown in equation 2.1, is used for the output layer such that activations represent
probabilities of each class, while other layers typically use either hyperbolic tangent
(equation 2.2) or rectified linear unit (ReLU) (equation 2.3), because they provide good
network performance. ReLU is particularly popular for networks used in edge devices
due to its simplicity and good generalization performance.
softmax(x)i =
exp(xi)
∑N−1
j=0 exp(xj)
(2.1)
tanh(x) = exp(x) −exp(−x)
exp(x) + exp(−x)
(2.2)
ReLU(x) =
{
x
x ≥0
0
x < 0
(2.3)
When created, the network weights are typically randomized for simple initialization.
Subsequently, the network must be trained, i.e., fitted to a specific task. This can be
done in two ways depending on the task at hand; either supervised or unsupervised.
Supervised training is by far the most common as it is used in traditional classification
tasks and bases its learning on comparing a network response to an expected result
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Neural Networks
5
(e.g., the class of an image) - thus, the training data should have class labels. Unsuper-
vised learning tasks typically aim at recreating the input from a learnt smaller internal
representation - thus, training data does not need class labels. Nonetheless, this train-
ing phase must be completed prior to deployment of neural network models in their
evaluation phase.
The training process is based on backpropagation algorithms, which approximates
a gradient descent method in which the gradient of an loss (error) function between
expected output and current network output is calculated. The network output is, as
described above, a function of network weights and biases as well as the activation
functions meaning that it is possible to propagate the error back through the network
and evaluate how much of the total error each weight and bias contribute. Subsequently,
the network weights are updated towards a minimum of the loss function. The process is
extremely compute-heavy and therefore typically takes place on HPC servers or special
tensor processor hardware. When the network is deployed, it is no longer trained, but
only used for inference. The method is only approximate because since the activation
functions are non-linear, they are non-differentiable [Nie15].
The network shown in figure 2.1 is an example of a so-called multilayer perceptron
(MLP) with a simple neuron model. More complex network types (especially RNNs)
utilize more complex cells with built-in memory and more than one input and one output.
Long short-term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) cells are examples of
such cells. They are useful for networks meant to operate on longer sequences of data as
they can accumulate information internally and thus present both a current and historic
activation for the network to learn from [HS97; Cho+14].
2.1.1.1
Advantages
ANNs have undergone significant research for years at this point, and there exist several
well-developed open-source tools to model and train such networks (e.g., FaceBook’s
PyTorch [Ya] and Google’s TensorFlow [Aa]).
This also means that there are well-
known models and strategies for solving various modeling tasks; FFNNs or convolutional
networks (CNNs) for classification tasks, recurrent networks (RNNs) with memory and
backward connections for series data tasks, Transformers for natural language processing
etc. [Vas+17]. Additionally, there exist multiple highly optimized training algorithms.
So far, ANNs represent the vast majority of neural network applications.
Well-known models for image classification tasks include the VGG-16 and ResNet
family of networks used for image classification of the large-scale 1000-class ImageNet
dataset. Both use tens of layers of various types and thus billions of operations per
inference to achieve high classification accuracy [SZ15; He+15]. However, such models
are not suitable for small-scale low-power environments, but may serve as inspiration
for smaller networks.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Background
2.1.1.2
Disadvantages
The main disadvantage of ANNs is a combination of their increasing size with task
difficulty combined with the fact that their operation depends on large numbers of
multiplications and additions. Despite being trained with floating-point numbers, the
models are typically quantized to, for example, 16-bit integers before deployment. This
is done for two reasons; it reduces the model size to about half of the original model,
and integer arithmetic is much simpler and less power and time consuming than floating-
point arithmetic. The cost, naturally, is a small drop in model accuracy, which in most
cases is acceptable if the original model performs more than well enough. Alternatively,
models that show little variance in their weights may be compressed efficiently by, e.g.,
run-length or Base-Delta-Immediate (B∆I) coding [Pek+12].
Within the scope of this work, the main disadvantage is the power consumption of
the networks - even when implemented in special hardware. The fact that inferences in
even small networks require several hundreds of thousands of multiplications is simply
not acceptable in small, power-constrained devices. Seeing as this is a general issue of
ANNs, it calls for research into alternative network models.
2.1.2
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
Spiking neural networks are the third generation of artificial neural networks, which
attempt to both reduce the complexity of calculating network activations and model bi-
ological brains even closer by replacing the floating-point/integer activations with binary
events in time known as spikes.
Biological brains are analog in nature and operate asynchronously in time based on
continuous inputs. Modeling continuous inputs with infinite resolution is impossible, so
instead a constant-length time step resolution ∆t is used. This means that all layers of
the network are evaluated at each of such steps and resulting spikes are buffered and
used in subsequent time steps.
SNN research is carried out in two branches; the neuroscience branch focusing on
modeling the brain as closely as possibly, and the so-called neuromorphic (meaning using
VLSI architectures to model neuro-biological systems) computing branch focusing on
attempting to exploit the SNN features for machine learning. Naturally, the neuroscience
branch utilizes more complex neuron and synapse models to better understand how the
brain works, while the other branch simplifies the neuron and synapse models and bases
its work on models taken from existing ANN research to make training and evaluation
computationally simpler. Existing work has some overlaps between the two fields and
therefore shows great variety in neuron models, synapse models, and data encoding as
well as experimental setups. This project considers only the neuromorphic computing
branch of the field.
Consider as an example the SNN shown in figure 2.2, which is the SNN equivalent of
the ANN shown in figure 2.1. At the high level, the network consists of three elements;
a spike encoding, a neuron model, and a synaptic model. The spike encoding determines
how input data is mapped to spike trains and thus determines the output of the input
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Neural Networks
7
Input
Hidden
Output
Spike encoding
Neuron 
model #1
Neuron 
model #2
Figure 2.2: An example SNN with three layers with spike encoding and neuron models
marked. The weighted synaptic model is used. Neuron models #1 and #2 can be the
same.
layer of the network. The synaptic model determines how spikes are modeled between
neurons in the network. Most networks simply use weighted connections as in regular
ANNs, while some networks also apply a trainable delay to the synapses, which may alter
spike patterns of subsequent neurons when used in combination with decay. Finally, the
neuron model determines how a specific neuron is updated and its behavior when spiking.
There exist several different ways of encoding input data into spike trains and mul-
tiple different neuron models. The models most relevant to this project are covered in
the following sections.
2.1.2.1
Spike encoding
Spike encoding refers to the mapping process from continuous numbered data to a spike
train representation suitable for inputting into an SNN. As mentioned earlier, there are
many different ways of performing this mapping with different characteristics. The main
distinction is between rate-based and timing-based encodings.
Rate-based encodings are the most common and most intuitive. A rate-based en-
coding represents input values as spike trains in which the time distance between two
spikes is inversely proportional to the input value. This means that large input values
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Background
are represented with many spikes and small input values with few spikes. In simple
rate-based encodings, the distance between spikes is constant.
Timing-based encodings are less common but can provide even sparser activity by
representing inputs with fewer spikes overall. Typically, a single input datum is repre-
sented as a single spike whose timing in the total evaluation time carries a weight - the
larger the input datum, the earlier the spike is generated. In rank-order encoding, the
entire input is considered at once and spikes are generated based on the sorted order of
input values - greatest value first.
Figure 2.3 shows examples of simple rate encoding and rank-order encoding for three
neurons and their respective input values. The displayed time is n · ∆t corresponding to
the total evaluation time.
Input value
Rate encoding
Rank-order encoding
Neuron
1st
2nd
3rd
Figure 2.3: Examples of simple rate encoding and rank order encoding.
When training a network, one aims for the model to generalize as well as possible.
For ANNs, this often implies making minute random changes to the inputs in order to
avoid training the network on exactly the same data multiple times. A similar technique
is applied when training SNNs, where the randomness is introduced by small changes
in spike rate or relative timing of neurons. An example is Poisson encoding, which is
a rate-based encoding in which the distance between spikes is drawn from a Poisson
distribution rather than constant.
2.1.2.2
Neuron models
Neuron models differ from the two research branches. The neuroscience branch typically
uses highly detailed models based on a number of experimentally found differential
equations modeling the neurons as close to their natural behavior as possible.
The
neurocomputing branch instead focuses on computational efficiency and less on biological
accuracy.
Nonetheless, all models share a common feature; namely the modeling of a membrane
potential measuring how excited a neuron is.
When a neuron receives a spike, the
membrane potential is increased by a certain amount depending on the intensity (weight)
of the spike. The analog equivalent of this is to consider the membrane potential as a
capacitor which integrates incoming current over time to store up charge. Whenever
the membrane potential crosses a neuron-specific threshold, the neuron produces a spike
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Neural Networks
9
and its membrane is drained. Afterwards, the neuron cannot spike for a given refractory
period, which for SNNs is a number of time steps. The leaky nature of biological neurons
(and capacitors) is modeled as a decay of the membrane potential over time.
Depending on the intensity of each spike, the increase in membrane potential can be
either excitatory (i.e., making the neuron more excited) or inhibitory (i.e., making the
neuron less excited). In practice, using a combination of excitatory and inhibitory con-
nections between neurons can reduce spike activity. Additionally, some neuron models
also include a bias term which is added to the membrane potential in the end of each
evaluation - just like in regular ANNs.
Some commonly used neuron models are the Hodgkin-Huxley, Leaky-Integrate-and-
Fire, and Izhikevich models. The Hodgkin-Huxley model is a biologically plausible model
which bases its estimates around three differential equations modeling experimentally
described sodium, potassium and leakage channels of squid’s neuron. A spike is modeled
as a flow of ions from the neuron. Seeing as it is a rather detailed model (despite not
being somewhat simplified), it is preferred in the neuroscience research branch but not
so much in the neurocomputing branch.
The simplest neuron model used in neurocomputing is the integrate-and-fire (IF)
model, which simply models a leak-free membrane potential which is increased on in-
coming spikes and reset when a spike is generated. This basic model is known as leaky
integrate-and-fire (LIF) when extended by a decay factor. The continuous version of
LIF is also described by a differential equation for the membrane potential as a function
of incoming currents over time (i.e., similar to a parallel connection of a capacitor and
a resistor). The equation may be discretized and evaluated on a time step basis. It
is the most well-known spiking neuron model due to its simplicity and computational
efficiency.
Finally, the Izhikevich model combines some of the biologic plausibility of the Hodgkin-
Huxley model with the computational efficiency of the LIF model. This is achieved by
extending the simple differential equation of the LIF model by some extra parameters
which affect the recovery of the neurons; i.e., how the neuron regenerates after spiking.
In the LIF model, the neuron is simply unable to spike for a period of time, which is the
same after any spike. In the Izhikevich model, the recovery is dynamic and even affects
how the membrane potential is updated.
Various models combining features of the three described above also exist. An ex-
ample is the so-called Diehl and Cook neuron model, which is an extended LIF model
with trainable threshold [Kas19; DC15].
2.1.2.3
Network evaluation
As explained before, an SNN is evaluated in discrete time steps of length ∆t. Within
each time step t, spikes generated in the previous time step t −1 are used for updating
the relevant membrane potentials and new spikes may be generated. The new spikes are
used in the subsequent time step t + 1. This implies that spikes take a number of time
steps proportional to the number of layers to propagate through the network.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Background
For a specific neuron, the membrane potential is updated by all spikes from neurons
to which it has synapses. The size of each increase depends on the weights assigned to
the synapses over which the spikes were transmitted. Once updated by all spikes, the
bias is added and the membrane potential is updated by the decay factor. If the potential
remains higher than the neuron’s threshold and the neuron is out of its refractory period,
the neuron spikes and its membrane potential is reset. The refractory period is kept by
a saturating decrementer.
As an example, figure 2.4 shows the membrane potential of an LIF neuron receiving
only excitatory spikes and whose bias is zero. The neuron has a refractory period of one
time step. Within the first time step, its membrane potential crosses the threshold, a
spike is generated, and the membrane potential is reset. Within the second time step,
the membrane potential once again crosses the threshold, but since the neuron is in
its refractory period, no spike is generated. At the border between two time steps, a
decay of 0.9 is applied to the membrane potential.
Please note that certain neuron
models restrict membrane potential updates to take place only when a neuron is out of
its refractory period.
The network response to a specific input is the set of spikes output by the network
over a predetermined number of time steps, n. That means, instead of presenting a
classification result as a vector of probabilities, instead the evaluation is based on average
spiking activity of neurons assigned to a specific class.
0
1
2
3
0.0
1.0
Stimulus
0
1
2
3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Membrane potential
0
1
2
3
0.0
1.0
Spikes
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the increase in normalized membrane potential from incoming
spike stimuli that leads to generation of new spikes in an LIF neuron. The neuron shown
has a refractory period of one time step. All three plots share the same x-axis. The
y-axis of the middle plot is normalized w.r.t. the neuron’s threshold potential.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Chisel
11
2.1.2.4
Advantages
The list of advantages of SNNs is long. Their learning capability is the same as for other
ANN types, while they are significantly easier to evaluate. Their main advantage is that
updates to a neuron’s membrane potential is simple addition or subtraction rather than
the multiply-accumulate operation of regular ANN neurons. This means that neurons
can be implemented in hardware with significantly less area and thus power than their
ANN counterparts.
The typically sparse spiking activity is another benefit when considering custom
hardware accelerators, because it enables equally sparse interconnect between neurons
in the network. Additionally, the use of spikes as asynchronous events in time makes
SNNs even more suited for hardware acceleration. This has already been explored by
both Intel and IBM in their respective Loihi and TrueNorth neuromorphic chips, which
implement thousands of spiking neurons with support for dynamic configuration as well
as interconnection of multiple chips [Dav+18; Ako+15].
2.1.2.5
Disadvantages
Currently, the main disadvantage of working with SNNs is the relative youth of the
research field and thus its tools. Although several open-source tools (for example; nengo
[Bek+14], ANNarchy [VDH15] and BindsNET [Haz+18]) exist, they are usually based on
the well-establish existing ANN tools, PyTorch and TensorFlow, which are optimized for
regular ANNs running on GPUs or TPUs. Modeling SNNs efficiently on these platforms
is not ideal and leads to long training and evaluation time. Thus, rather than modeling
SNNs directly, some tools instead train regular ANN models and implement a kind of
conversion step to transform them into SNN equivalents; e.g., by using the snn-toolbox
package [Rue+].
Training is further complicated by the fact that SNNs tend to have many more high-
level parameters (evaluation time, time step length, reset potentials, thresholds, decay
factors, refractory periods etc.)
as compared to their ANN counterparts.
Although
the majority of the parameters are constants and thus untouched by training, finding
the optimal combination is difficult. Additionally, existing training algorithms based on
STDP are inherently unsupervised and perform poorly compared to well-known ANN
counterparts [Tav+19; Bou+19].
2.2
Chisel
Chisel1 is a modern HDL by UC Berkeley and CHIPS Alliance (funded by Google,
Intel, SiFive etc.) [Law+; Ea]. It is embedded in Scala which is based on Java, but
enables native support for functional programming features. Chisel cannot be compiled
directly to, for example, an FPGA, but instead it is first mapped to an intermediate
1Any mention of Chisel refers to the Chisel3 Scala package.
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Background
representation called FIRRTL which is further transformed (emitted) to synthesizable
Verilog or SystemVerilog. Being a primarily academic tool thus far, the Verilog constructs
generated from it are made to map well to both Xilinx and Altera FPGAs. The following
is a short introduction to component definition and testing with Chisel.
2.2.1
Modules
In Chisel, components are defined as classes that extend the base Module class. Modules
must define a field called io which includes a bundle of signals defining the IO of the
particular module. This bundle also includes the definition of an implicit clock and
reset. Subsequently, the class’ body, representing its constructor, defines the module’s
hardware with a number of constructs.
All operations are based around three data
types; Bools representing Boolean values, UInts or SInts representing unsigned and
signed integers, respectively. In practice, Bools can be used the same way as VHDL’s
std_logic type, while UInt is used like a combination of VHDL’s std_logic_vector
and unsigned types.
Hardware can be constructed with all the typical Boolean operators, as well as with
a number of constructs representing either Wires, rising-edge triggered active-high reset
registers, multiplexers or synchronous/asynchronous memories. As an example, consider
the following code snippet, which is an implementation of the pipelined adder shown in
figure 2.5.
1
class PipelinedAdder(width: Int = 32) extends Module {
2
val io = IO(new Bundle {
3
val en = Input(Bool())
4
val op1 = Input(UInt(width.W))
5
val op2 = Input(UInt(width.W))
6
val res = Output(UInt(width.W))
7
})
8
9
val en
= Reg(Bool())
10
en := io.en
11
12
val op1 = RegEnable(io.op1, 0.U, io.en)
13
val op2 = RegEnable(io.op2, 0.U, io.en)
14
val add = Wire(UInt(width.W))
15
add := op1 + op2
16
17
val res = RegInit(0.U(width.W))
18
when(en) {
19
res := add
20
}
21
io.res := res
22
}
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Chisel
13
Note that the design above could be written in a much more concise style, but it
is left rather verbose for illustrative purposes.
A Verilog version of the module can
be emitted with the following code and by using the SBT command sbt "runMain
PipelinedAdder".
1
object PipelinedAdder extends App {
2
(new chisel3.stage.ChiselStage)
3
.emitVerilog(new PipelinedAdder , Array("--target -dir", "build"))
4
}
Additionally, Chisel supports blackbox components either with or without Verilog
source code. Such modules either extend BlackBox or ExtModule and enable emission of
custom modules with a specific structure. This allows users to reuse prior implementa-
tions directly in their Chisel project or include placeholder instantiations of source-less
blackboxes such as FPGA primitives. For example, the following is a definition of a
source-less Xilinx BUFGCE primitive [Sup18]:
1
class ClockBufferIO extends Bundle {
2
val I
= Input(Clock())
3
val CE = Input(Bool())
4
val O
= Output(Clock())
5
}
6
7
class BUFGCE extends BlackBox(Map("SIM_DEVICE" -> "7SERIES")) {
8
val io = IO(new ClockBufferIO)
9
// empty constructor body
10
}
Hierarchies of modules are created in the same way as in other HDLs by instantiating
new copies of sub-modules. The benefit of Chisel is particularly clear in this regard as
its functional features allows instantiation of, for example, eight of the above modules in
a single line as follows. Combined with features such as the bulk connection operator <>,
this makes for fewer lines of code as compared to similar VHDL or Verilog descriptions.
1
val adders = Seq.fill(8) { Module(new PipelinedAdder) }
2.2.2
Testing
Testing, or verification, of Chisel modules is enabled primarily through the early alpha
ChiselTest package developed by the same team as Chisel and FIRRTL [La]. ChiselTest
is based on the ScalaTest package meant for software regression/unit testing and enables
users to run simulation-based verification flows based on so-called testers (or specs). The
tests are described with four basic operations; peek, poke, expect and step operating
on IO of the DUT. In particular, peek enables viewing the value of an output, poke
enables setting a particular value on an input, and expect represents an assertion-based
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Background
io_op1
io_en
io_op2
0
0
reset
clock
+
add
0
res
io_res
en
Figure 2.5: A pipelined adder illustrating a simple Chisel module definition.
check of a specific value on an output. step operates on the DUT’s clock and advances
simulation time by one clock cycle. As an example, consider the following tester of the
design presented above:
1
class AdderTester extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
2
behavior of "Pipelined adder"
3
4
it should "enable and add" in {
5
test(new PipelinedAdder) { dut =>
6
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
7
dut.io.op1.poke(17.U)
8
dut.io.op2.poke(25.U)
9
dut.clock.step()
10
dut.io.res.expect(0.U)
11
dut.clock.step()
12
dut.io.res.expect(42.U)
13
}
14
}
15
}
Per default, tests are run based on FIRRTL’s native simulation engine, Treadle [Ma],
but for larger systems tests, the backend can be switched over to either Verilator or
Synopsys VCS. Verilator support is more extensive than support for VCS primarily due
to the fact that Verilator is open-source [al]. Tests are also per-default run without any
kind of output except a few printed lines in the terminal window, but it can be configured
to output VCD results. Using Verilator and outputting VCD results is enabled as:
1
...
2
it should "enable and add" in {
3
test(new PipelinedAdder)
4
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation ,
VerilatorBackendAnnotation)) { dut =>
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Chisel
15
5
// test body
6
}
7
}
8
...
ChiselTest also supports multithreaded tests with fork and join. This is similar to
VHDL testbenches’ parallel processes and is particularly useful for testing components
with enqueue-dequeue functionality like, e.g., FIFOs. Tester threads are synchronized
on calls to step to ensure correct operation.
2.2.3
Advantages and Disadvantages
Chisel is still undergoing development, and so two of the main disadvantages are that it
lacks features as compared to VHDL and (System-)Verilog (e.g., sub-vector assignments),
and that its API may undergo relatively large changes rendering older designs to require
significant modifications to be updated. Seeing as it is open-source, many more people
can help suggest and develop features to make them available in the future; thus, the time
from feature suggestion to implementation in the public snapshot repository is relatively
short. Additional disadvantages include a lack of support for non-edge triggered latch-
based storages and limited multi-clock support; issues which have affected this project.
The main advantage of Chisel is that it abstracts away some implementation details
(in particular, modules have implicit clock and reset signals) from the user, making
Chisel code very concise. Being completely separate from relevant testing features, it
is not possible to mix non-synthesizable code into correctly written Chisel code, as it
is in both VHDL and Verilog. Additionally, being embedded in Scala, users can make
full use of the object-oriented and functional programming schemes to generate complex
hardware with little code. This also makes CRV much easier in ChiselTest as compared
to VHDL or Verilog testbenches, and at a much smaller initial effort than using, e.g.,
UVM [Dob+21].
The interested reader may refer to the free e-book [Sch19], the related GitHub repos-
itories [Law+; Izr+; Ma] or the Chisel homepage [Ea].
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Network Development
This chapter describes the Google Speech Commands dataset (GSCD) and the prepro-
cessing steps performed before training an SNN model on it. Next, it introduces the
showcase network that is implemented using the BindsNET library in Python and ex-
ported and executed on the accelerator. Finally, it presents a regular PyTorch ANN
reference model used primarily to verify that it is possible to train a model on the
preprocessed dataset. Throughout the project, the models have also been trained and
tested on the MNIST dataset as a baseline for how well they learn.
Training scripts are included as separate files included in appendix A listings A.4 and
A.5. All other Python source files are organized as a library kwsonsnn also included in
appendix A. Some of the exploration is documented in the shape of a Jupyter notebook,
which is not included in the appendix, but available in the Github repository.
3.1
The Google Speech Commands Dataset
Google Speech Commands is an open dataset for speech recognition by Google Brain
[War18]. More specifically, it targets keyword spotting (KWS) - the operation of contin-
uously listening for trigger words before launching a full-scale speech recognition service.
Most well-known examples include Google’s ”Ok Google”, Apple’s ”Hey Siri”, and Ama-
zon’s ”Alexa”. The unit of recognition is generally a single word or a very short phrase.
KWS models should be small and have low compute requirements as they are supposed
to be on all the time. Additionally, they are expected to primarily operate on noise or
silence, which should not activate the full-scale service. In the following, the dataset is
first introduced followed by an explanation of the preprocessing steps applied to it.
3.1.1
Dataset Description
GSCD is available in two versions; the first version used in this project contains 64,727
utterances spread across 30 different keywords, and the second version used in recent
research contains 105,829 utterances spread across 35 different keywords.
All audio
files are roughly one second long and come from many different speakers as they were
crowdsourced through an app and an online collection tool. Both versions of the dataset
are distributed through the TensorFlow project [War18; Wara; Warb]. Class labels are
provided in the form of directory names, while files meant for validation and test splits
are listed in two .txt files. Per default, the dataset employs an 80-10-10 split.
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Network Development
The keywords of the first version are selected from different relevant fields; firstly, to
match other research, the dataset includes utterances of digits from zero to nine (similar
to spoken MNIST and TIDIGITS [LD93]); secondly, words relevant to the IoT or robotics
fields like ”up”, ”down”, ”on” and ”off”; finally, the remaining words are random nouns
or names some of which are similar in pronunciation to some of the others, e.g., ”tree”.
The second version dataset simply extends the first with more robotics-related keywords
like ”forward” and ”backward”. An additional set of files include recordings of various
types of background noise.
In the work related to this project, authors limit themselves to the set of 10 IoT/robotics
keywords, and thus, the same is done in this project [Zha+18]. Additionally, authors
choose to include ”unknown” and ”silence” classes to underline their network’s perfor-
mance in those special cases; i.e., show that it does not flag those classes unnecessarily.
The accelerator presented in this project is designed to work with 10 classes, and thus,
to include unknown and silence classes as part of the keyword spotting application, two
of the 10 keywords were discarded; ”left” and ”right”. These two words were removed
due to their lesser relevance to the hearing aid field than the other eight keywords. The
final list of classes is thus:
up
down
on
off
yes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
Figure 3.1 shows the distribution of samples in each of the 10 classes in the different
splits. The data for the plots is generated in the Jupyter notebook using the custom
dataset class.
3.1.2
Preprocessing
To easily use the dataset in Python, it should be wrapped in a class. Luckily, BindsNET
includes an implementation of the spoken MNIST dataset that can be used as a reference
point [Haz+18]. The resulting SpeechCommandsDataset class is available in appendix A.
up
down
on
offyes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
1,800
1,820
1,840
1,860
1,880
Count
(a) Training split.
up
down
on
offyes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
200
220
240
260
(b) Validation split.
up
down
on
offyes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
200
220
240
260
(c) Test split.
Figure 3.1: The distribution of examples across the 10 classes used.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 The Google Speech Commands Dataset
19
Each of the audio files goes through a number of preprocessing steps before being
included in the final dataset. The audio is sampled at 16 kHz with samples represented
by 16-bit integers. Firstly, when fetched, the audio signals are padded to a length of one
second with white noise sampled from a normal distribution scaled by the median of the
original signal. The majority of the subsequent processing steps find their inspiration in
[Fay16] and BindsNET’s spoken MNIST implementation, see here.
Next, the signal is pre-emphasized and normalized; the first of which aims to amplify
high frequencies to make the frequency spectrum more balanced. The resulting signal
is cut into frames of a suitable length and overlap. The preprocessing targets images
of 22x22 pixels matching the scaled-down MNIST images used in [Rib20]. The frame
overlap is traditionally between 0 and 50%. Using a frame length of 85 ms and a stride
of 40 ms leads to 1 s−0.085 s
0.040 s
≈23 frames of which the last one is not used. The frames
are passed through a short-time Fourier transform (STFT), which is a frame-based
fast Fourier transform (FFT) variant [PM07]. The resulting power spectrum is further
transformed into a so-called mel-frequency cepstrum (MFC). In an MFC, frequency
bands are equally spaced on a mel scale rather than a linear frequency scale as in the
FFT. The transform from frequency to mel is the following:
m = 2595 log10
(
1 + f
700
)
(3.1)
This representation approximates human hearing more closely [Fay16]. Finally, the filter
banks are converted to dB and normalized. The resulting ”images” resemble regular
spectrograms with time on the x-axis and frequency on the y-axis.
A literature review showed that related works tend to use a frame length in [10, 40] ms
and a frame overlap in [0, 75]% indicating that the initially selected values are too large
[Zha+18; Blo+19; Sun+16]. Additional experiments also showed that especially SNN
models had a hard time learning from the processed data. This was likely due to two
phenomena:
1. Different utterances of the same word by different speakers might have drastically
different MFCs either due to high background noise levels or due to the position
of the utterance in the audio snippet
2. The relatively low resolution of the MFC leads to high pixel values and thus high
spike rates when using rate encoding or seemingly randomly timed spikes when
using rank-order encoding
In an attempt to solve these issues and concurrently reduce the frame length, the pre-
processing was altered to include a section of code that calculates the dot product of
8000-sample snippets of the signal taken at a stride of 1000 samples with a Blackman
window of the same size. The absolute value of the snippets is used for comparison and
the frame with the highest dot product is selected. The Blackman window was selected
for two reasons; it is available directly in Python’s Numpy library, and its graph is sim-
ilar to that of a normal distribution, see the middle of figure 3.2. The second reason is
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Network Development
most important as it ensures selection of snippets whose loudest sections are centered.
Although barely noticeable, the final waveform in figure 3.2 has its peaks centered better
compared to the original waveform.
The resulting 8000-sample frames now represent only half a second of audio. Thus,
it is possible to use a frame length of 40 ms and a frame stride of 20 ms (leading to
25 frames of which the last three are not used), which is closer to that of related work.
Finally, a filter that sets all pixels whose values are less than the 80th percentile of the
MFC to zero was added. This was done to isolate the most important pixels. The
80th percentile was chosen as roughly 20% of pixels are non-zero in scaled-down 22x22
MNIST images, which [Rib20] proved a small showcase network could learn from.
Although the above optimizations lead to more similar MFCs and higher classification
accuracy, different utterances of the same keyword still, as expected, show some variation.
Consider, for example, the four utterances of ”up” shown in figure 3.3. The utterances are
reasonably centered and have similar-looking waveforms, and their MFCs show similar
patterns albeit with some differences. The most noticeable differences are the delayed
pop-like pronunciation of the letter p in the third example and the powerful low-frequency
background noise in the fourth example, which sets them apart from the others.
Loading the dataset from individual audio files is very memory intensive. To solve
this, when each split is fetched the first time, a number of files in the Pickle format are
generated within the relevant keyword folders. Pickle is a Python library that utilizes
zip-like compression algorithms to store Python objects to files. The Pickle interface to
Python is very intuitive and thus part of both Numpy and PyTorch.
A similar methodology is used for both silence and unknowns; silence samples are
generated only once per split independent of the keywords used and stored within a
new folder _silence, while unknown samples are dependent on the keywords used and
thus generated again if a new keyword combination is passed to the class. To enable
efficient reuse, unknown samples are stored in files whose names are hashes of the lists of
keywords used in the samples in a new folder _unknown, see listing 3.1. For simplicity,
all Pickle files store a triple of audio signals, labels and the sampling rate used.
Original signal
Weight function
Result signal
Figure 3.2: An example of an original signal, the Blackman window, and the signal re-
sulting from centering. The x-axis of the left-most plot has twice the range (in [0, 16000))
of the other two plots (both in [0, 8000)). The audio snippet amplitudes are normalized
to [−1, 1], while the window function lies within [0, 1].
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The Showcase Network
21
(a) Centered and normalized waveforms. x-axis is samples in [0, 8000) and y-axis is nor-
malized amplitude in [−1, 1].
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Mel-frequency cepstrums (spectrograms). x-axis is frame # and y-axis is filter index.
Figure 3.3: Four different utterances of the keyword ”up” and their MFCs.
1
unknowns = sorted(list(set(all_keywords).difference(set(used_kws))))
2
ukhash =
hashlib.sha1('_'.join(unknowns).encode('utf-8')).hexdigest()
3
ukpath = os.path.join(self.path, folder_name , ukhash + pickle_file)
Listing 3.1: Generation of the file name for unknown keywords.
The final implementation is available in appendix A listing A.1.
3.2
The Showcase Network
The project bases its work around a showcase network for which the accelerator is de-
signed. It is a small FFNN-like SNN model adapted from an existing model described in
[DC15] with some adaptations matching those presented in [Rib20] and the supervised
MNIST example available as part of BindsNET. In the following, the network architec-
ture is presented, followed by an in-depth description of its development in BindsNET,
and the classification results achieved. Finally, the development of a reference PyTorch
model used for sanity checks of GSCD is presented.
3.2.1
Network Architecture
The showcase network is shown in figure 3.4. It is a fully connected SNN with three
layers; an input layer X, an excitatory layer Ae which acts both as an internal layer and
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Network Development
as the output layer, and an inhibitory layer Ai which acts to inhibit the activity of the
Ae layer. The input layer has 484 neurons, thus taking in the 22x22 images produced
by preprocessing the dataset, and the other two layers both have 200 neurons. Layer
Ae uses Diehl and Cook neurons, while layer Ai uses basic LIF neurons. The network is
trained using rank-order encoding with no randomization in the input layer.
Only the weights between layers X and Ae are trained, while the other weights are
constants scaled by exc and inh set in the training script. All trainable weights are
in the range [0, 1], and they are divided by a constant value set in the training script
after each update to keep them low. Weights from the Ae to the Ai is a square diagonal
matrix, i.e., WAe_to_Ai = exc · I200. This means that a spike from layer Ae excites only
one neuron in layer Ai. On the other hand, weights from the Ai to the Ae layer are a
non-diagonal matrix, i.e., WAi_to_Ae = (inh · I200) −inh. An inhibitory neuron thus
inhibits all neurons in Ae except the one with the same index.
Note that figure 3.4 also includes the sizes of the weight matrices and the IDs assigned
to the axons, which are relevant for mapping the network to an accelerator.
X
Ae
Ai
484x200
[0:483]
[0:199]
[512:711]
200x200
200x200
484 neurons
200 neurons
200 neurons
Figure 3.4: The showcase network architecture. Number of neurons and axon IDs are
shown in the figure. They match the ones shown in [Rib20].
Just as described in [Rib20], the network is trained using floating-point numbers, but
the accelerator operates on fixed-point numbers. Thus, the weights must be converted
before being mapped to the accelerator. This is described more in-depth in the following
chapters.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The Showcase Network
23
3.2.2
Development in BindsNET
The network implementation in BindsNET is available in appendix A listing A.3. The
implementation is near identical to that of the DiehlAndCook2015 model included in
BindsNET, see here, with minor changes to the default values of some parameters as
well as changes to some neuron specifics forcing them to use positive membrane potentials
and thresholds.
The network differs from the one presented in [Rib20] in that its weights and thresh-
olds are unscaled and thus represented by small floating-point numbers. Additionally,
minor changes to the inhibitory connection weights, learning rates, and weight normal-
ization have been introduced in an attempt to achieve better classification accuracy.
The model is trained by using the separate training script available in appendix A
listing A.5. The training script may be called with a set of command line options, all
of which have default values that make the script run with minimal compute effort; i.e.,
not necessarily the best setup for, e.g., evaluating a network with new parameters. The
parameters are listed in table 3.1.
The script is clearly separated in three sections as most such scripts are; namely, an
argument passing section in which the parser and its options are declared and assigned
to suitably named variables, a setup section where the model and datasets are declared,
and the training loop.
Within the setup section, the model is first declared with the selected parameters.
Next, depending on the --use_mnist option, either the MNIST or GSCD dataset is
loaded and passed into a so-called DataLoader, which helps to more efficiently load data
into the relevant memory prior to its use. Next, the spike encoders are declared. Per
default, the script uses BindsNET’s RankOrderEncoder for both training, validation and
testing images, and the NullEncoder for labels. When a rate encoding is to be used, a
PoissonEncoder should be used for training images and a RateEncoder for validation
and testing, as explained in section 2.1.2.1. Finally, training and plot related variables
are declared and initialized accordingly. If the --gpu option is passed and a GPU is
available, the network and dataset are moved to it. Assignment updates and accuracy
calculations are kept on the CPU due to an error otherwise being thrown by BindsNET’s
all_activity(...) and proportion_weighting(...) functions.
The training loop is built around a classic PyTorch structure. It is a for loop running
the requested number of epochs. Within each epoch, the entire training set is iterated
over and used for training with updates and plots in regular intervals as requested, and
the validation set is used to check training progress at the end of each epoch. The script
implements checkpointing, which serves to always keep track of the best-performing
model. If at the end of an epoch, the current iteration of the model outperforms the
previously best-performing model in validation accuracy, a copy of it is stored.
Training is based on the simple PostPre algorithm, which is an STDP-based algo-
rithm which aims to ensure the same spiking activity in the post-synaptic neuron as in
the pre-synaptic neuron. As explained in section 2.1.2.5, STDP algorithms are inher-
ently unsupervised. The training script bypasses this limitation by clamping one (or
more) neuron(s) in the excitatory layer such that weights between the spiking neurons
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Network Development
Parameter
Default
Description
--gpu
False
Enables running on CUDA-based GPUs.
--use_mnist
False
Switches to using MNIST instead of GSCD.
--seed
2
Seed for the PyTorch random number generation.
--epochs
5
Number of epochs to train the network for.
--n_clamp
1
Number of neurons to clamp while training.
--n_train
-1
# training examples to use. -1 means all.
--n_valid
-1
# validation examples to use. -1 means all.
--exc
4.5
Absolute excitatory connection weight.
--inh
3.0
Absolute inhibitory connection weight.
--time
500
Time for a single evaluation run in ms.
--dt
1.0
Time step length in ms. # time steps is time/dt.
--intensity
128.0
Scaling factor for input images.
--plot
False
Enables debug plots during training.
--plot_interval
250
# examples between debug plot updates.
--update_interval
250
# examples between assignment and print updates.
Table 3.1: Command line options for the showcase network training script.
in the input layer and the clamped neuron(s) are increased and unrelated weights are
decreased.
At the end of the training loop, the test set is iterated over to check the model’s
performance on so-far unseen data, and the best-performing model is stored as a Pickle
file. The entire loop is wrapped in a try-except-finally structure meaning that it is
possible to halt the training at any point and not lose any work.
For the majority of short experiments run as part of this project, the following
command was executed:
python train.py --plot --epochs 1 --n_train 1000 --n_valid 100
[--intensity 37.0]
For longer training runs, the following command was used:
python train.py --gpu [--intensity 37.0]
In both cases, the --intensity argument may be left out when using rank-order
encoding. When using rate encoding, an intensity of 37 ensures the same average spike
activity when using GSCD as when using MNIST with an intensity of 128 as in [Rib20].
==PAGE:39==
3.2 The Showcase Network
25
3.2.3
Classification Results
The showcase network unfortunately only achieves 31% classification accuracy with the
above configuration and GSCD, and after training for five epochs1. The classification
results are shown in table 3.2. This is significantly worse than the MNIST performance
of the similar network presented in [Rib20], but likely explainable by the more difficult-
to-predict dataset. A further discussion is available in chapter 8.
GSCD
up
down
on
off
yes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
up
117
31
28
49
34
23
32
67
45
0
down
14
73
22
13
23
50
36
10
23
3
on
40
27
67
60
4
26
58
19
33
11
off
39
24
53
71
11
22
39
39
21
0
yes
6
18
6
3
129
16
10
5
27
1
no
5
32
32
14
17
52
30
17
36
53
go
14
20
20
26
6
32
28
19
22
1
stop
18
13
10
12
3
10
10
56
1
0
unknown
6
11
8
10
12
18
8
7
29
2
silence
13
4
0
4
17
3
0
10
5
181
Accuracy: 31.67%
Table 3.2: Test results for GSCD using the showcase network. Columns represent true
classes, while rows represent predicted classes.
The networks trained as part of this project all perform significantly worse compared
to the ones presented in [DC15; Rib20]. In general, no iteration of the network develop-
ment achieved better than 50% classification accuracy, which is well below what is to
be expected from a system of this kind. This poor performance might be explained by
one or more of the following reasons:
• the showcase network is too simple both in architecture and in the number of
trainable weights, or
• the BindsNET library does not have training algorithms capable of capturing the
patterns of GSCD when using either rate or rank-order spike encodings, or
• the GSCD images are of too low resolution to be learnt efficiently by any network.
The latter reason is unlikely as other related works use similar-sized images and achieve
much better results; albeit, using different network architectures and/or different SNN
libraries [Zha+18; Wan+20]. Experiments with using the DiehlAndCook2015 network
1Training models with BindsNET is extremely slow compared to regular ANN training. Each image
can take between 0.3 and 1 second to process, even on GPU.
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Network Development
architecture with corresponding rate encoding and scaled-down MNIST images in Bind-
sNET show that the model still fails to achieve near the results presented in [DC15].
Unfortunately, no other works use the same network architecture for GSCD classifica-
tion, and BindsNET does not have any reference results to compare with, meaning that
the first two reasons remain likely.
Throughout trying to optimize network performance, the most important plot pro-
duced by the training script is the receptive field (square weights) plot which shows the
weights arranged in 22x22 squares for each neuron. The interesting observation is that
when training a network for MNIST, the weights form clear patterns that resemble the
digits they are trained for. Looking at the same type of plot for GSCD instead shows
that there is similarity between same-class examples, but also that there is little varia-
tion across classes. No such plot is included here2, but one may be produced using the
training script in appendix A listing A.4.3
A further discussion of solutions to this issue and experiments to carry out as future
work is presented in chapter 8.
3.2.4
PyTorch Reference Model
A PyTorch reference model is included in its training script, see appendix A listing A.5.
It is a small FFNN with the same dimensions as the showcase network, except it is
non-spiking and has trainable weights between all layers. The ReLU activation function
is used out of the hidden layer, while the softmax activation function is used out of the
output layer to make it output probabilities. Being so simple, it fits in very few lines of
code as shown in listing 3.2.
Since the network has 200 output neurons, the probabilities output are summed in
groups of 20 neurons after which the greatest sum represents the network prediction,
again to mimic the operation of the showcase network.
The loss function used for
training the network also implements this summation and returns the mean absolute
error between the summed probabilities compared to a one-hot encoded expected value.
From a few experiments, this seemed to give better results than mean squared error.
1
class ShowCaseNetPT(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self):
3
super(ShowCaseNetPT , self).__init__()
4
5
self.ff1 = nn.Linear(in_features=484, out_features=200)
6
self.ff2 = nn.Linear(in_features=200, out_features=200)
7
8
def forward(self, X):
2The main reason for this is that the showcase network was trained on the DTU HPC servers which
do not allow Python plots.
3Unfortunately, the function from BindsNET transforming the weight matrix into these receptive
fields leaves them rotated by 90 degrees clockwise.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 The Showcase Network
27
9
return F.softmax(self.ff2(F.relu(self.ff1(X.view(-1)))),
dim=0)
Listing 3.2: PyTorch description of the reference ANN model.
The test results for GSCD after training the network for five epochs are shown in
table 3.3. MNIST classification results are available in appendix A table A.2. Training is
carried out using the Adam optimizer with a start learning rate of 0.0002. The numbers
clearly show that it is possible to learn patterns from the GSCD, but that some classes
are much more difficult to predict than others. This was the expected result judging by
the relatively poor classification accuracy of the BindsNET model. As explained earlier,
the issue is that the preprocessed utterances from GSCD are very similar across different
classes - especially the unknown class is troublesome as some of its keywords are easily
mistaken for other classes.
Another observation to be made here is that it is possible for relatively small networks
to learn patterns from the preprocessed GSCD. Hence, the dataset carries only part of
the blame for the poor observed performance when using SNN models, as explained in
section 3.2.3.
GSCD
up
down
on
off
yes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
up
223
5
7
28
0
11
14
4
6
0
down
2
154
3
0
4
12
7
3
10
0
on
1
2
214
39
0
2
10
2
13
0
off
9
2
5
162
1
6
12
4
11
0
yes
1
3
0
0
225
1
3
5
17
0
no
2
28
0
1
1
140
22
2
6
11
go
12
29
4
3
3
57
153
3
16
0
stop
11
6
3
10
0
4
12
218
19
0
unknown
11
21
10
16
19
16
16
7
142
0
silence
0
3
0
3
3
3
2
1
2
241
Accuracy: 73.85%
Table 3.3: Test results for GSCD using the reference ANN. Columns represent true
classes, while rows represent predicted classes.
The training script for the reference model is built in much the same structure as the
showcase network’s training script and thus will not be covered in further detail here.
Its command line options are listed in table 3.4.
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Network Development
Parameter
Default
Description
--gpu
False
Enables running on CUDA-based GPUs.
--use_mnist
False
Switches to using MNIST instead of GSCD.
--seed
2
Seed for the PyTorch random number generation.
--epochs
5
Number of epochs to train the network for.
--n_train
-1
# training examples to use. -1 means all.
--n_valid
-1
# validation examples to use. -1 means all.
--lr
0.0002
Start learning rate used by the Adam optimizer.
Table 3.4: Command line options for the showcase network training script.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Original Accelerator
This chapter first gives a brief introduction to the design presented in [Rib20] followed
by a short discussion of its main shortcomings. All circuit diagrams shown here and in
the following chapters use the same style meaning that thin wires represent single bits,
while bold wires represent bundles whose widths are greater than one bit.
4.1
Accelerator Design
The original accelerator design targets the computational SNN field, and more specif-
ically power-constrained devices used in hearing aids or IoT devices. Thus, the main
focus points are low power consumption while ensuring the required functionality of
a useful system. As such, the accelerator per-default only supports the group of LIF
neurons (including Diehl and Cook neurons) and a limited number of synapses between
different network layers. The design is modular and, to some degree, parameterizable
with configuration of number of evaluation units etc. Configurations have to satisfy
a set of requirements ensuring correct network evaluation within each time step. The
design takes inspiration both from state-of-the-art designs such as IBM’s TrueNorth
chip [Ako+15], Intel’s Loihi chip [Dav+18], as well as several others [Raj+19; Fan+18;
Bou+19].
4.1.1
Top-level Overview
The design is a near-memory computing-inspired accelerator based around a configurable
number of cores of three different types; input cores to act as the input layer of the im-
plemented network, neuron cores taking care of evaluating the neurons of the network,
and output cores to extract generated spikes from the accelerator. To enable easy test-
ing on an FPGA, the top-level design implements an off-chip communication module
based around a UART. The accelerator bases its evaluation around a two-phase system
controlled in part by the off-chip communication and the accelerator cores such that the
cores are always operating in the same phase and recently input spike periods do not
affect the current inference.
The accelerator thus employs the common architecture of evaluation cores communi-
cating over a fabric of sorts [Raj+19]. This is illustrated in the abstract overview shown
in figure 4.1a. Figure 4.1b shows the structure of the implemented accelerator. This
figure also shows how the accelerator targets a modular implementation in which in the
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Original Accelerator
number of input, output, and neuron cores may be controlled to match a corresponding
network. The main modules of the system are introduced in more detail in the following
sections.
   AER-based 
  communication 
 fabric
Neuron  
core 0
Neuron  
core 1
Neuron  
core 2
Neuron  
core 
(a)
Off-chip communication
Input  
core(s)
Output  
core(s)
spike ID
spike periods
Neuron
core(s)
input spikes
output spikes
rx
tx
(b)
Figure 4.1: 4.1a is an abstract overview of the common way of arranging neuromorphic
accelerators, while 4.1b shows the design of the accelerator in [Rib20].
4.1.2
Spike Communication
The accelerator employs the basic zero-delay synaptic model, and seeing as it is rather
small, the communication fabric implemented is a simple bus, as shown in figure 4.1b.
All cores are equipped with a bus interface, and input and neuron cores also include a
spike transmission system modules capable of converting internal spike formats to the
one used on the bus. The bus is a bundle of shared wires OR’ed together in the top-level
module1, and spikes are communicated using an AER encoding of coreID # neuronID
[Sta02]. Each bus interface includes a LUT-style ROM with an entry for each other core.
The ROM is used for filtering spikes from the bus such that only spikes whose core IDs a
core is subscribed to are passed through to the core’s so-called axon system. Conflicting
bus requests are handled by a round robin bus arbiter with lookahead.
The axon system is relatively simple combination of two memory modules and two
counters. The two modules are time-multiplexed and switched between in each time step
such that one memory is being written to, while the other is being read. This ensures
the correct operation between two consecutive time steps. Combined with the commu-
nication fabric and network weights, the axon system implements what is known as a
neuromorphic crossbar. An example of this structure is shown in figure 4.2. Incoming
spikes enter the crossbar from the left, and dots represent weighted connections that
1Chisel does not support tri-state signal values. All cores per default output zero on the bus.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Accelerator Design
31
scale the spikes before they are output. In the accelerator, incoming spikes are stored in
their AER format and used for addressing memories storing the weights that are then
used to update neurons’ membrane potentials. More on this in the following sections.
axons
neurons
synapses
mapping
Figure 4.2: An example neuromorphic crossbar, as inspired by [Fan+18].
4.1.3
Spike Input and Output
Spikes are input into the accelerator through input cores, which perform simple opera-
tions on an indirectly encoded image whose pixel values represent spike periods. As such,
the input cores implement a bus interface and a spike transmission system to communi-
cate correctly with the communication fabric, an FSM and a pair of time-multiplexed
memories for storing images. The off-chip communication module writes spike periods
into one of the memories, while the other is being read by the FSM.
Similarly, spikes generated by the core which accelerates the excicatory layer, are
intercepted on the bus and output to the off-chip communication by an output core.
like the input core, it is a relatively simple core implementing a bus interface and a
small FIFO queue to store incoming spikes. As such, it implements no FSM but rather
just the read and write control logic for the FIFO queue.
4.1.4
Neuron Evaluation
Spikes generated by the input cores are evaluated by a set of neuron cores.
These
cores implement a discretized version of the LIF neurons described by three equations
[Bou+19]. When doing so, two neuron values can be updated in each time step; the
membrane potential and the refractory counter. Evaluated membrane potential is up-
dated according to equation 4.1, which describes the membrane potential of neuron j of
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Original Accelerator
layer l in time step t. λ is the decay factor, wl
i,j is the synaptic weight between neuron
i of layer l −1 and neuron j of layer l, xl−1
i
(t −1) is a binary factor indicating whether
the pre-synaptic neuron spiked in time step t −1, and bl
j is the neuron-specific bias.
eval_V ml
j(t) = V ml
j(t −1) · λ +
∑
i
(
wl
i,j · xl−1
i
(t −1)
)
+ bl
j
(4.1)
As described previously, a neuron spikes if its membrane potential is greater than a
threshold at the end of a time step. Although not a state variable, this is summarized
in equation 4.2, where thres_V ml
j is the membrane threshold. The refractory counter
is updated according to equation 4.3. Per default, the refractory counter is decremented
if non-zero, set to a specific value refractory_setl
j if a neuron spikes in time step t, or
kept at zero otherwise.
xl
j(t) =



1
if eval_V ml
j(t) ≥thres_V ml
j
0
otherwise
(4.2)
refractoryl
j(t) =







refractoryl
j(t −1) −1
if refractoryl
j(t −1) ̸= 0
refractory_setl
j
else if xl
j(t)
0
otherwise
(4.3)
After the evaluated membrane potential and refractory counter values have been
calculated, the final membrane potential value is selected according to equation 4.4.
reset_V ml
j is the reset potential of neuron j of layer l, and xl
j(t) indicates whether
neuron j of layer l spikes in the current time step t.
V ml
j(t) =







reset_V ml
j
if refractoryl
j(t −1) ̸= 0
reset_V ml
j
else if xl
j(t)
eval_V ml
j(t)
otherwise
(4.4)
The accelerator implements this using a number of different modules. As shown in
figure 4.3, the neuron cores include instantiations of a bus interface, a spike transmission
system, and a neurons block, which again contains eight neuron evaluators and corre-
sponding evaluation memories controlled by a common FSMD. The neuron evaluators
each evaluate a subset of the neurons mapped to the specific core in a time-multiplexed
manner.
The transmission system implements an arbitration scheme to fairly select
between spikes in the rare occasion of two concurrently evaluated neurons in a core
spiking simultaneously. All network-related values including the dynamic neuron values
are stored in the evaluation memories using an offset-based addressing combined with
the AER of the bus. This underlines the focus on modularity. Network parameters are
scaled and rounded to 17-bit signed integers, which the neuron cores operate on.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Shortcomings
33
Bus interface
spikeCnt
aData
Axon system
valid
Spike
transmission
Neurons
grant
rx
req
tx
valid
axon ID
ready
data
aEna
n
spikes
inOut
aAddr
Control unit
Neuron
evaluator
Evaluation
memory
Figure 4.3: An overview of the neuron core architecture. The number of neuron evalua-
tors and evaluation memories is configurable and determines how many neurons can be
evaluated by the core.
4.2
Shortcomings
The accelerator has a few shortcomings, some of which are also pointed out in [Rib20].
Firstly, its memory requirements are rather large due to the way the evaluation mem-
ories are implemented. In particular, the fact that neither their size nor their width is
a power of two (or a size that is easily optimizable by Vivado) means that they are
difficult to map to BRAM cells on the FPGA. In the original design, the evaluation
memories contain all relevant information for each set of time-multiplexed neurons; i.e.,
refrac counters, membrane potentials, weights, biases etc. The high memory consump-
tion significantly contributes both to the fact that a Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA is needed
to fit it, and to the accelerators second shortcoming; its power consumption.
Secondly, being designed for low-power applications, the accelerator’s power con-
sumption is nearly 1 W in an FPGA and estimated 65.9 mW in an ASIC implemen-
tation. This is way too much for a hearing aid use case, in which the steady power
consumption should rather be close to or less than 5 mW. The power consumption
is, as reported in chapter 6 in [Rib20], dominated by three components; static power,
dynamic power in BRAMs, and dynamic power in the clock distribution network. Static
power is mainly dominated by the sheer area of the accelerator and thus depends both
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Original Accelerator
on the number of BRAM modules and other primitives used by the accelerator. The
dynamic power, on the other hand, is highly dependent on the switching activity in the
accelerator, and the routing of the clock network.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Design
This chapter introduces the new accelerator design and the updated and new modules. It
begins by defining the baseline system which is to be optimized, introducing the design
objective and the approach taken. Next, an overview of the final design is presented
followed by in-depth descriptions of the optimizations introduced and changes to system
modules accompanying them. Any modules not mentioned in this section are, apart
from potential code optimizations, the same as presented in [Rib20]. Implementation
details are available in the following chapter.
5.1
Baseline and Design Objective
This section gives a brief introduction to the baseline system configuration used as basis
for the optimizations introduced, and the objective of the optimizations. Further details
follow in the upcoming sections.
5.1.1
Baseline Design
The baseline design used for understanding the effects of the introduced optimizations
is the design for accelerating the showcase network described in [Rib20]. In particular,
the version of the accelerator implementing the so-called ”cheat” to reduce the number
of globally unique axon IDs to 768 instead of 1024. This ”cheat” was introduced as
the evaluation memories would otherwise become too large for Vivado to efficiently map
them to BRAM cells. This is due in particular to their non-power-of-two size. As a
result, the ”cheat” version of the accelerator has some axons with overlapping IDs but
still operates correctly because of the implemented coreID # neuronID AER. This
”cheat” is kept in place to provide a fair basis of comparison.
As such, the baseline design implements two input cores covering 484 input neurons
(out of 512 possible), two neuron cores with 200 neurons mapped to each (out of 256
possible), and an output core that outputs spikes produced by the excitatory layer. The
entire accelerator operates on a common 80 MHz clock produced by an on-chip MMCM.
==PAGE:50==
36
5 Design
5.1.2
Design Objective
The design objective is two-fold; first, to carry over the main design objectives presented
in [Rib20], i.e., modularity and parameterization; and second, and most important, to
reduce the power consumption of the accelerator with relatively few but well-founded
changes. As such, the overall structure of the original accelerator and the majority of its
modules remain; albeit, some with slight alterations and others completely redesigned.
The power optimizations are introduced in two orthogonal steps:
1. High-level clock gating
2. Spike encoding change and network quantization
These two steps and the module changes introduced as part of them are presented
in more detail in the coming sections. Both are motivated by the shortcomings of the
original accelerator design outlined in section 4.2 and the list of potential future work
presented in [Rib20].
The main motivations behind introducing clock gating were firstly to explore the
potential effects of this, as the original design only employs inferred clock gating, and
secondly, to reduce the switching activity both in the accelerator cores and the corre-
sponding clock network when the cores are idle. This introduction is expected to have
a significant impact on the power consumption of the accelerator seeing as its cores are
idle in almost 99% of the time [Rib20].
Changing to a timing-based spike encoding can, as briefly discussed in chapter 2,
reduce network activity and thus the power consumption of the accelerator cores during
evaluation. Furthermore, switching to a different encoding affects only the input cores.
Similarly, quantizing network weights to a different and smaller format than the original
accelerator’s 17-bit signed integer format can reduce the size of the evaluation memories
and, thus, the accelerator area resulting in a reduction in both static and dynamic power
consumption.
Furthermore, an implicit design objective is to reduce the number of BRAM cells as
much as possible, as they seem to dominate both area and power consumption of the
original accelerator. This focus has led to small, but not insignificant changes introduced
to both spike period memories and evaluation memories.
5.2
Design Overview
The structure of the accelerator remains the same after optimization, but the cores are
decoupled from the top-level control after introduction of an extra clock domain. The
clocks of the two clock domains are, of course, correlated, and thus it should be possible
to perform timing closure around them with little trouble. Nonetheless, the accelerator is
designed to have as few signals as possible crossing the clock domain borders. Figure 5.1
shows an overview of the final system with all of its modules. With parameterization, it
is possible to select the number of neuron cores P, but the system per default implements
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Clock Gating
37
two input cores and one output core to fit the showcase network. Note that for simplicity,
some control signals for time step signaling, the phase system and clock gating signals
produced by the cores are left out in the overview.
req
grant
Input core
req
grant
Input core
req
grant
Output core
Bus
arbiter
req grant
Neuron core
Off-chip communication
Clock 
gating
en
we
addr
di
en
addr
di
core clock
top clock
en
addr
do
en
we
addr
we
di
full
en
do
empty
do
Figure 5.1: Overview of the final system. The dashed line represents the border between
the two clock domains; the top clock domain and the core clock domain.
All of the modules shown in figure 5.1 that have changed as compared to the baseline
design are presented in more detail in the following sections. Initially, changes were
introduced to implement clock gating, and subsequently to change the spike encoding
and network parameter representations to reduce spike activity and save storage space.
5.3
Clock Gating
This section describes the high-level clock gating approach, its control, and the design
changes it introduces.
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Design
5.3.1
Approach
Clock gating may be introduced at multiple levels of the design all the way from switching
off entire sections of a design to just a single or a few cells. The high-level (coarse-grained)
clock gating approach1 was selected for several reasons. Firstly, it requires relatively few
changes to the accelerator. Secondly, it is well-suited for this application due to the
evaluation model employed by the cores in which they are all active in a short while in
the beginning of each time step after which they are all idle. And finally, the FPGA used
for testing the design has limited clock enable-equipped clock buffers available [Sup18]
making lower-level (fine-grained) clock gating more difficult to implement2.
The implemented clock gating switches the entire accelerator off once all cores have
finished evaluating their spikes of the current time step till the next time step begins.
This is achievable by subtle changes to the top-level module. The central component is a
gated clock buffer (BUFGCE primitive for Xilinx FPGAs [Sup18]) and its control logic
with corresponding control signals passing both ways over the clock domain border as
indicated in figure 5.2. The cores based around FSMs are given two extra IO ports; an
input newTS used to signal that a new time step is beginning, and an output pmClkEn
indicating that a core still needs the clock to be enabled. The newTS signals are generated
from a common time step cycle counter in the top-level, while the pmClkEn signals are
generated based on evaluation status in each core - more on this in the following sections.
The pmClkEn signals are combined in the top-level module using the saturating counter
shown in figure 5.3, which helps to ensure that pending bus operations are completed
before the clock is switched off. Currently, the value x is set to 50 cycles, which is plenty
to flush all bus interfaces.
CE
newTS
Clock gate unit
topClock
pmClkEn
Accelerator cores
manual block gating
Figure 5.2: An abstract view on the clock gating approach employed in this project.
Inspired by a figure provided by Demant.
1The approach is referred to as ”manual block gating” in a figure provided by Demant.
2Although it may be possible to implement latch-based clock gate cells on the FPGA and map their
outputs to clock nets, each clock region only has a limited number of independent clock nets that, if
exceeded, may lead to otherwise related cells being spread across multiple clock regions.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Clock Gating
39
x.U
=
coreEn
-
1
0
!=
pmClkEn_0
pmClkEn_n
Figure 5.3: The circuit which combines incoming pmClkEn signals from all the cores and
disables the clock after a x cycles have passed since no core had its pmClkEn asserted.
The BUFGCE primitive is a global clock buffer with a CE signal built-in, which
operates in the expected way of a clock gating cell.
That is, if the enable signal is
asserted while the clock is high, the clock is not activated before its next rising edge.
Similarly, if the enable signal is deasserted while the clock is high, the clock pulse is
still completed. Hence, no glitches or untimely clock pulses will affect the accelerator
cores [Sup18]. Unfortunately, the Xilinx manuals do not describe potential clock delay
introduced by the BUFGCE, so to balance the potential skew between the gated and
non-gated clocks, an extra BUFGCE with its enable input always asserted is instantiated
in the top level. This extra BUFGCE drives the always-on modules.
Note, that, traditionally, disabled cores should not require incoming control signals
for clock gating, but rather they should be put in an idle state before being disabled,
such that they resume correct operation once the clock is re-enabled. However, such an
implementation is more suitable for per-core clock gating instead of the global approach
taken here. It is also important to note that while the system now implements a gated
clock domain, it still shares a common synchronous reset signal. The functionality of
the MMCM and BUFGCEs is such that upon a reset, the clock is propagated to all cells
regardless of the clock enable CE signal shown in figure 5.2 [Sup18].
5.3.2
Core Decoupling
The introduction of high level clock gating means that the system now has two separate,
albeit correlated, clock domains. Thus, the two domains should be decoupled from one
another as much as possible; i.e., as few signals as possible should cross the domain
border in order to minimize the risk of timing issues causing metastability and to make
the system easier to synthesize as fewer signals need to undergo timing closure.
In the original design, spike periods are fed into the input cores which contained
time-multiplexed dual-port memories, and spikes are output through a simple FIFO
[Rib20] included in the output core. The easiest approach to decoupling the accelerator
is thus to replace these memories by true dual-port equivalents with two independently
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Design
clocked interfaces, as shown in figure 5.1. Both FPGAs and ASICs may be configured
to implement such memories with little overhead [Sup19].
5.3.2.1
Organization
To make this decoupling simpler, the memories are moved out of the input and output
cores and instantiated as part of the top-level module to make it easier to control their
clock connections. Orthogonally, the decision was made to replace the time-multiplexed
memory system of the input cores with an offset-based addressing system. The reasoning
was that the memories are relatively small and combining them halves the number of
BRAM cells required to implement them at little hardware overhead. The phase system
described in section 4.1.1 remains and is now only used to select whether to add an
offset to the requested address. The input core and off-chip communication operate out
of phase such that they do operate on the half of the memory used by the other. Note
also that the data-out port facing the off-chip communication and the data-in port facing
the input cores are not used as either module only performs writes or reads, respectively.
Additionally, if the number of neurons mapped to a single core is a power of two, the
offset addition may be replaced by a simple OR operation.
5.3.2.2
True Dual-port Memories
The true dual-port memory module is a rather primitive module and thus not shown in
a figure. Instead, it is more interesting to focus on the FIFO as there are several ways
to implement a true dual-port FIFO. Initial attempts had multiple issues particularly in
terms of correctly indicating full/empty status. Generating such flags requires passing a
version of the write address and read address across the clock domain border and perform
some comparison between them on either side. This is nearly impossible to do by passing
unsigned integer addresses across the border - regardless of whether synchronization
registers are used. Instead, most implementations employ a Gray encoding which is one
bit wider than the address counters and has several benefits over the unsigned addresses.
Firstly, the inherent benefit of Gray code is that only one bit changes in the bit pattern
following an increment, potentially leading to fewer metastability issues. And secondly,
the redundant format enables simpler generation of the full/empty flags by comparing
in particular the MSBs of the two codes; keeping in mind that the MSB of an n-bit Gray
code follows the same pattern as the MSB of an n-bit binary code [Chu06; Gis18].
The FIFO used as part of this project finds its inspiration in an implementation
available in [Chu06] section 16.9.1 and utilizes the true dual-port memory module pre-
viously described. The design is presented in more detail in figure 5.4. The read and
write control logic is placed in each their own clock domain, and no synchronization
registers are placed between them. They share many of the same features, but their flag
generation hardware differs slightly. Both sides operate in a cyclic fashion following the
bit patterns generated by the Gray-encoded read and write pointers. In the figure, the
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Clock Gating
41
left side of the dashed line contains logic clocked by the write clock, while the other side
is clocked by the read clock.
The increment block shown in figure 5.4 represents a Gray code increment opera-
tion, which is most easily handled in three steps: (1) Gray-to-binary conversion, (2)
binary increment, and (3) binary-to-Gray conversion. The Gray-to-binary and binary-
to-Gray conversions are based on XOR operations. An n-bit Gray code (gn−1, ..., g1, g0)
is converted to a corresponding n-bit binary code (bn−1, ..., b1, b0) as follows:
bn−1 = gn−1
bn−2 = bn−1 ⊕gn−2
...
b1 = b2 ⊕g1
b0 = b1 ⊕g0
Thankfully, in Chisel this is quite easy to implement in a single line of code:
VecInit((0 until n).map( i =>c(n-1, i).xorR()).toSeq).asUInt
The binary-to-Gray conversion is much simpler. Using the same n-bit binary code as in
the example before, the corresponding Gray code is calculated as follows:
(gn−1, ..., g1, g0) = (bn−1, ..., b1, b0) ⊕(0, bn−1, ..., b2, b1)
Finally, the binary increment is a simple unsigned addition.
The implemented queue is relatively small with just 16 entries. This should be plenty
as some initial experiments using the provided pre-trained showcase network showed
that the excitatory layer only produces roughly 100 spikes over the duration of an entire
inference, all of which are read and transmitted by the off-chip communication module
as they are produced. Additionally, as reported in [Rib20], 16 entries was enough for the
queue to never fill up, even when using rate encoding. For 16 queue entries, n = 4, and
the read and write pointers are 5 bits each, as shown in figure 5.4. The read and write
addresses used to access the dual-port memory consist of the XOR of the two MSBs
concatenated with the n −1 LSBs of the counters. With this in mind, the queue is full
when the addresses are the same, but the MSBs of the pointers differ, and it is empty
when both the addresses and the MSBs of the pointers are the same.
5.3.3
Other Module Updates
Introducing the true dual-port memories presented above leads to changes to several
other modules; most importantly, the off-chip communication, and the input, neuron,
and output cores. The updates to these modules are explained in more detail in this
section.
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Design
ena
wea
addra
dia
doa
enb
web
addrb
dib
dob
grayIncrement
[2:0]
wPtr
we
[4]
!=
=
=
full
[2:0]
[3]
[4]
[3]
[4]
[2:0]
4
5
[4]
5
5
writeControl
grayIncrement
[2:0]
rPtr
rd
[4]
=
=
=
empty
[2:0]
[3]
[4]
[3]
[4]
[2:0]
4
5
[4]
5
5
readControl
0
rPtr
wPtr
datai
datao
8
8
Figure 5.4: The design of the true dual-port FIFO. The clock domain split is indicated
by the dashed line.
The memory at the center is an instance of the true dual-port
memory module. Only read and write pointers cross the clock domain boundary.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Clock Gating
43
5.3.3.1
Off-chip Communication
The off-chip communication remains roughly the same as in [Rib20], except the address-
ing logic for the input memories has changed from the time-multiplexed interface used
in the baseline design, and the logic to read out spikes from the output queue is slightly
different. As such, the off-chip communication still instantiates a UART and a control
FSM for receiving spike periods from a computer and writing the received periods into
the input memories, as shown in figure 5.1. The FSM also manages the phase system
that ensures synchronicity between the state of the off-chip communication and the ac-
celerator cores. Periods are still received as four bytes each; first, two bytes representing
the input neuron ID, which acts as an index into the memories, followed by the spike
period also represented by two bytes. All four values are shifted into four registers addr1,
addr0, period1 and period0 when received via the UART. Subsequently, as only 256
neurons are mapped to each input core, addr1 is used only for selecting which input
memory to write the spike period to. The ASM chart for the control FSM is shown
in figure 5.5. Notice how the FSM signals that it is ready to receive a new image by
transmitting 255, a value that lies outside the range of possible output spike IDs with
the showcase network’s 200 neurons in layer Ae.
phase
change?
UART tx
ready?
pixCnt = 0 
byteCnt = 0 
txBuf = 255 
txV = true
pixCnt += 1
addr1 = 0?
inC1We = true
inC0We = true
image  
done?
phase = !phase
UART rx
valid?
shift rx byte in 
byteCnt += 1
4 bytes
received?
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
no
yes
no
idle
start
receiveW
toCore
Figure 5.5: The ASM chart for the FSM of the off-chip communication module.
An overview of the off-chip communication module is shown in figure 5.6.
The
control FSMD shown includes all the logic for reading values out of the output queue
and for transferring them to the UART. The control logic for the output FIFO and the
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Design
buffer register used to store bytes to transmit via the UART is shown in more detail in
figure 5.7. The enReg register is needed due to the synchronous behavior of the queue
which introduces a single cycle delay. Note that both txV and txBuf registers are shared
such that they may be set by both the FSMD (for transmitting the start value) and by
the control logic. The txV register is reset when the UART module flags that it has read
the value of the txBuf register. Control signals for the top-most multiplexer are left out
but consist of the FSM’s state and enReg.
Control FSMD
addr1
period0
period1
addr0
+
256.U
valid
data
ready
validdata
ready
rx
tx
UART
rx channel
tx channel
inC0Addr 
inC1Addr
inC0Di 
inC1Di
inC0We
inC1We
inC0HSout
inC1HSout
inC0HSin
inC1HSin
qEn
qEmpty
qData
phase from  
input cores
to/from  
FIFO
to input  
memory
to input  
memory
to input  
memory
phase to  
input cores
9
8
8
8
9
Figure 5.6: Abstract schematic of the off-chip communication module based around its
FSMD and four registers used for shifting in neuron IDs and spike periods.
5.3.3.2
Input Core
The input core module is updated in several ways. Firstly, its previously built-in time-
multiplexed memories have been removed, as mentioned earlier. Secondly, its FSMD has
undergone a little change to implement the clock gating. Finally, it no longer contains
its own time step cycle counter but instead utilizes a shared counter included in the top
level. Regardless of the changes, its main mode of operation remains the same. As in
[Rib20], the input core is still limited to supplying spikes to as many neurons as the
neuron cores can fit, i.e., 256 for the current implementation. This ensures conformity
with the AER protocol employed on the communication fabric.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Clock Gating
45
txBuf
enReg
qEn
255.U
qData
qEmpty
txV
valid
data
0.B
txReady
Figure 5.7: The control circuitry for reading the output FIFO and communicating spike
IDs to the UART.
The input core’s datapath still contains both a transmission system and a bus inter-
face. As will be covered later, the new input core implements rank-order encoding, but
still uses the indirect period-based encoding to generate spikes. Similarly, as mentioned
earlier, the phase handshaking between the off-chip communication and the input core
to ensure correct operation when switching between inferences is still in place. Figure 5.8
shows the ASM chart of the input core FSMD. It resembles that of [Rib20] significantly,
although some signals differ and the original sWait state has been replaced by a done
state with different operation.
Per default, the input core’s pmClkEn signal is asserted, while memEn (i.e., the enable
signal for the input memories) is deasserted. For clarity, figure 5.8 shows the value of
pmClkEn in all states, as it can be deasserted depending on various conditions in two of
the five states. memEn, on the other hand, is only shown when it is asserted. The state
machine resets to the idle state from which an inference is begun. The firstr state
serves to enable the synchronous input memory such that its first output is available
when entering the spikegen state in which all but one pixels may be turned into spikes.
Once enabled for all input pixels, the state machine moves to the lastgen state in which
it may generate the last spike before entering the done state. Here, the FSM will spend
the majority of the time when it has finished generating spikes and is waiting for the
next time step of an inference. It only returns to the idle state after a full inference
and stays there till a phase change is signaled by the off-chip communication and a new
time step has begun.
Spikes are generated the same way as before by supplying a vector of Booleans to the
transmission system. Common subexpression elimination is applied to avoid generation
of two copies of the comparison circuit for the spike generation.
The result is the
shouldSpike signal, which is now shared between the spikegen and lastgen states.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Design
pmClkEn = false 
ts = 0 
pixCnt = 0
new phase?
new time
step?
pmClkEn = true 
phase = !phase
pmClkEn = true 
memEn = true 
pixCnt += 1
pmClkEn = true 
memEn = true 
pixCnt += 1
should 
spike?
generate 
spike
last pixel
read?
pmClkEn = true 
ts += 1
should 
spike?
generate 
spike
pmClkEn = true
new time
step?
finished 
tx'ing?
pmClkEn = false
inference
done?
idle
firstr
spikegen
lastgen
done
yes
yes
no
no
yes
no
no
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes
no
Figure 5.8: The ASM chart for the FSM of the input core module. The pmClkEn signal
is, per default, asserted in all states, but shown for all states nonetheless.
5.3.3.3
Neuron Core
The neuron core component also sees little change. Its baseline schematic shown in
figure 4.3 hence remains the same apart of passing through the added newTS control
signal and generate the pmClkEn signal as the OR of an inverted done signal generated
by the control FSM and the request out of the core’s bus interface. This is to ensure
that both the full evaluation has completed as controlled by the FSM, and that the bus
interface has been flushed. The axon system is left unchanged, the neuron evaluator
has an 8:1 decay selection multiplexer replaced by a shift operator (likely implemented
as a barrel shifter) instead, while the evaluation memories see a larger redesign to be
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Clock Gating
47
done = true 
neuron = 0 
axon = 0 
evalEnable = false
new time
step?
done = false 
inOut = !inOut 
update spikeCnt
ena = true 
sel = dynamic 
pos = neuron 
 
reset eval. unit
ena = true 
sel = dynamic 
pos = neuron + 32 
 
load refrac. counters
ena = true 
sel = const 
pos = decay 
aEna = true 
axon += 1 
 
load membrane pots.
spikeCnt  
= 0?
ena = true 
sel = weights 
pos = neuron * 768 +
aData 
aEna = true 
axon += 1 
 
decay membrane
potentials if in
refractory period
spikeCnt =
axon?
ena = true 
sel = weights 
pos = neuron * 768 +
aData 
aEna = true 
axon += 1 
 
update membrane
potentials if out of
refractory period
spikeCnt  
= axon -1?
ena = true 
sel = biasthresh 
pos = neuron
spikeCnt  
= 0?
decay
membrane
potentials if in
refractory
period
add weights to
membrane
potentials if
not in
refractory
period
ena = true 
sel = biasthresh 
pos = neuron + 32 
 
update membrane
potentials if out of
refractory period
ena = true 
sel = const 
pos = refrac 
 
compare membrane
potentials to
thresholds
ena = true 
wr = true 
sel = dynamic 
pos = neuron 
 
output spikes if any
ena = true 
sel = const 
pos = rst 
 
output spikes if any
ena = true 
wr = true 
sel = dynamic 
pos = neuron + 32 
axon = 0 
neuron += 1
all neurons
evaluated?
idle
rRefrac
rPot
rDecay
rWeight1
rWeight2
rBias
rThresh
rRefracSet
wRefrac
rPotSet
wPot
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
Figure 5.9: The ASM chart for the FSM of the neuron core control unit. The done
signal is used for clock gating.
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Design
presented in section 5.4.2.2.
The control unit has changed slightly; partly in terms of introducing the extra control
signals for clock gating, partly to implement the different addressing model used for the
evaluation memory optimizations, and partly as it no longer includes a time step cycle
counter but instead utilizes the shared one like the input core.
The ASM chart for
the control unit FSM is shown in figure 5.9. All of the control signals have default
values; clock gating control signal done, evaluation memory controls ena and wr, and
axon system enable aEna are all deasserted per default, while the address signals refer
to the constant memory’s address zero. The evaluation units are enabled per default,
but disabled in the idle state in which the control unit spends the majority of the time.
The FSM is in its idle state at the beginning of each time step. When a new time
step begins, it updates each of the neurons mapped to the core eight at a time, one per
evaluation unit. The evaluation is controlled by a bundle of control signals for each pair
of evaluation unit and corresponding memory.
To better understand the ASM chart, the signal names presented in it must be de-
scribed. Firstly, sel and pos refer to evaluation memory module selection and address as
is described in more detail in section 5.4.2.2; const, dynamic, biasthresh and weights
refer to enumerated values used for increased code readability. The inOut register imple-
ments a phase system similar to that between the off-chip communication and the input
cores, except it is used to select between the time-multiplexed memory modules of the
axon system. This register must be switched at the beginning of a new time step to read
out spikes generated in the previous time step. Similarly, the spikeCnt register stores
the number of spikes received by the axon system in the previous time step and affects
how many iterations of the rWeight1 and rWeight2 states to execute, if any, before
passing on to reading and applying biases. The aData signal refers to the output of the
axon memories and represents a neuron ID which is used for offsetting indexing into
the evaluation memories. Finally, the neuron and axon registers are used for counting
which set of eight neurons is currently undergoing evaluation and for indexing into the
axon system memory, respectively. For simplicity, the bundled control signals for the
evaluation units are abstracted into textual descriptions of their values in each state.
Despite the memory optimizations introduced in the following section, the evaluation
memory still has only one output interface to the evaluation units. Thus, the number
of cycles to pass over all steps to evaluate a layer of neurons remains to be memory
bound. As such, each state of the control unit still enables only one interaction with
the evaluation memories. The states remain named describing their functionality; states
with a prefixed r enable the memories for reading, while states with a prefixed w enable
the memories for writing. Their individual functionality is the same as described in
[Rib20] section 3.7.2.3 and will thus not be covered in greater detail here.
5.3.3.4
Output Core
The output core sees only little change apart from the removal of the FIFO queue and
its control logic. The resulting core is very small and implements only a bus interface,
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Architectural Changes
49
write enable logic for the true dual-port FIFO, and the necessary clock gating hardware.
The resulting system serves the same purpose as originally; it reads spikes from the
communication fabric using its bus interface and communicates them to the off-chip
communication through the FIFO. It differs from the input and neuron cores in that it
does not include any FSM. Hence, it does not require a newTS input and its pmClkEn
signal must be generated in a different way. As such, this is done by an OR reduction
of the bus OR’ed with its bus interface’s valid signal. The resulting implementation is
shown in figure 5.10.
Bus interface
rx
grant
tx
req
grant
rx
reqOut
tx
valid
false.B
0.U
reqIn
spikeID
pmClkEn
qDi
axonID
qFull
qWe
11
11
8
Figure 5.10: The schematic of the output core.
5.3.3.5
Neuromorphic Processor
Finally, the top-level neuromorphic processor module is updated to include the afore-
mentioned time step cycle counter to generate the control signal that re-enables the
core FSMs and causes them to re-enable the core clock. Additionally, it instantiates all
of the modules shown in figure 5.1 and places them in their respective clock domains.
The time step cycle counter remains a saturating decrementer set to count down from
80 MHz · 1 ms = 80000 and asserting newTS for a single cycle when reaching zero.
5.4
Architectural Changes
This section presents the architectural changes introduced to support rank-order en-
coding instead of rate encoding in the input cores, and the quantization of network
parameters.
5.4.1
Spike Encoding
Changing the spike encoding in the input core proved to require relatively little work.
As presented in the previous chapter, an input image is fed into the accelerator in
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Design
an indirect spike format; namely, spike periods. Using rate encoding, each pixel can
lead to multiple spikes during an inference, and thus, the circuitry required is a costly
modulo operator and a time step counter. The rank-order encoding approach uses a
similar indirect format of input images, except the pixel values no longer represent spike
periods, but rather which time step the particular pixel should spike in. This also means
that the modulo operator may be replaced by a simple comparator.
Figure 5.11 shows a comparison of the hardware required for either implementation.
Apart from the expected power savings arising from the lower spike activity in the
input cores and subsequently the other cores resulting from the different encoding, a
comparator is also a significantly smaller circuit than a modulo operator. Thus, an area
saving is expected, although it is unlikely that this will lead to a significant power saving
as the power is dominated by memory accesses, and the number of accesses does not
change. Changing the encoding does not affect the input core’s state machine.
=
shouldSpike
period
ts
0
%
(a)
=
shouldSpike
period
ts
(b)
Figure 5.11: Hardware for spike generation for: 5.11a rate encoding, and 5.11b rank-
order encoding.
5.4.2
Weight Quantization
The work presented in [Rib20] trains a network whose parameters are scaled by a factor
of 1000 such that they are easily quantizable to the 17-bit integer format used in the
accelerator. This approach does not match that of most recent works which instead train
unscaled networks and quantize the weights to a suitable fixed-point format depending
on the acceptable loss in network accuracy [HMD16; Den+20]. The following sections
present the parameters meant to be stored in the evaluation memories, the selection of
suitable fixed-point formats, as well as the updated evaluation memory design.
5.4.2.1
Network Parameters
To better understand the quantization options available, it is important to understand
the parameters required to fully describe the showcase network - essentially, the param-
eters that are included in the evaluation memories. The memories store the following
parameters (number of entries per evaluation memory in the original accelerator in
parentheses):
• Reset potentials (32)
• Refractory periods (32)
• Decays (32)
• Biases (32)
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Architectural Changes
51
• Thresholds (32)
• Weights (32 · 768 = 24576)
• Refractory counters (32)
• Membrane potentials (32)
Reset potentials, refractory periods, and decays are constants for each layer, however,
the original accelerator allocates memory space for unique values for each neuron. This
provides a small optimization opportunity seeing as just one of each parameter could
be shared between all neurons mapped to a specific evaluation memory. This, of course,
may reduce the set of networks that can map to the accelerator to ones whose layers
share these three parameters, but it does not affect networks defined in BindsNET.
Biases, thresholds, weights, refractory counters, and membrane potentials, on the
other hand, are unique for each neuron and thus must have adequate space allocated
for them. The refractory counters and membrane potentials are the only dynamic pa-
rameters of the neurons implementation; i.e., the only values which are updated by the
neuron evaluators. Notice in particular how the evaluation memories are dominated by
the weights pinpointing them as being the most relevant for optimizations.
The parameters have very different numerical ranges. The decays, refractory periods
and counters are usually relatively small integers; at least when employing the shift-
subtract estimation decay technique used in [Rib20]. Membrane potentials, thresholds,
biases and weights, on the other hand, are floating-point values in the software model
with much greater potential range. With the exception of thresholds, decays, and the
trainable weights, the remaining parameters are controllable and may thus be selected
to fit specific fixed-point formats. In the experiments carried out as part of this project,
thresholds and constant weights have been controlled in increments of 0.5, i.e., values
that may be perfectly represented by fixed-point formats with just one decimal bit. This
means the fixed-point format is primarily determined by the number of bits required to
represent the trainable weights.
This project takes a conservative approach to quantization due to limited oppor-
tunities for evaluating the effects of different quantizations in BindsNET. Hence, the
approach chosen is to introduce a fixed-point format of the same width as the original
memory entries for all network parameters except the weights. As a result, the design
targets a 7.10 format which strikes a good balance between supporting suitably large val-
ues with relatively good accuracy to three base-10 decimals. Different formats are used
for different parameters due to their numerical ranges, and the formats are converted
on-the-fly as needed.
As such, it is reasonable to limit reset potentials, decays and refractory periods to
small 5-bit integers, the first of which must be converted to 7.10 to be used in the neuron
evaluators. Biases, thresholds and membrane potentials may be kept directly in the 7.10
format. Weights may be grouped in two; the trainable weights and the constant weights.
These may be stored using two different formats indicating the different numerical ranges
they take. Hence, trainable weights are stored in a 0.10 format suitable for their [0, 1]
range, while constant weights are stored in a 6.4 format giving them greater range but
less precision. Weights are stored in 11-bit entries, and the MSB of each weight memory
entry is used to select between the two formats.
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Design
Using these formats and selecting the default network parameters listed in table 3.1,
only quantizing the trainable weights – and potentially biases, if they were non-zero –
introduces error. For the pre-trained network included in the project’s Github repository,
this error amounts to just 7.0·10−4 on average. Expectedly, this should have little effect
on overall network accuracy as NNs generally are known to be quite error resistant – this
is underlined by the number of papers focusing on NN compression that show little effect
of more aggressive quantization approaches than that taken here [HMD16; Den+20].
5.4.2.2
Evaluation Memory
The updated version of the evaluation memories exploits the optimization opportunities
outlined above and implements a split memory organization with parameters grouped
according to their widths as follows (selection enum in parentheses):
• Reset potential, refractory period, decay (const)
• Refractory counters and membrane potentials (dynamic)
• Biases and thresholds (biasthresh)
• Weights (weights)
The design is shown in figure 5.12. The control unit FSM of the neuron core is altered
to implement a split address protocol in which two bits addr.sel are used to select
between the four memories, and a wider addr.pos signal is used to address the memories.
Switching to this alternative addressing mode requires little change to the control unit
FSM and no change to the interconnect defined in the neurons module.
The diagram shows how only one of the memory modules is enabled at once controlled
in part by the shared input en and the value of addr.sel.
A pipelined version of
addr.sel is used to connect the requested memory module to the output. Furthermore,
the diagram shows how weights are kept in two formats selected between by the most
significant bit of each entry and how they are appended other bit sequences to match
the 17-bit format used in the neuron evaluators. Similarly, as described earlier, the
reset potential is stored in a different format from the refractory period and the decay,
and thus, a pipelined version of the two least-significant bits of addr.pos is used select
between the two formats. The changes to the control unit are indicated its ASM chart
in figure 5.9.
The previous implementation of the evaluation memory module required a total
storage of:
(7 · 32 + 24576) · 17 b
1024 b/kb
= 411.7 kb
This fits into roughly 17 BRAM cells depending on placement and cell duplication. The
new implementation reduces the storage requirement to:
4 · 5 b + 2 · 64 · 17 b + 24576 · 11 b
1024 b/kb
= 266.1 kb
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Architectural Changes
53
=
0
en
constmem
dynamem
btmem
wghtmem
addr
do
=
1
=
2
=
3
sel
pos
en
en
en
ena
addr
addr
addr
addr
wr
we
writeData
di
do
do
do
selPipe
readData
do(10)
do(9)
0.U(6.W)
[9:0]
1
0
do(9)(6.W)
[10:0]
=
0.U(12.W)
0
0.U(10.W)
do(4)(2.W)
1
0
addrPipe
5
17
17
11
2
2
17
15
2
17
Figure 5.12: An overview of the evaluation memory implementation. The four memory
blocks share the majority of top-level IO ports and are selected between using addr.sel.
Combining wires indicates concatenation. Note that the relative scale of the memory
blocks is not accurate.
The new implementation also means that, again depending on mapping, the evaluation
memory modules fit into 13 BRAM cells (11 for weights, one for dynamics, and one
biases and thresholds), assuming the constants memory will be mapped to registers or
pipelined LUT-RAM due to its size. That is a significant area reduction!
Not only does the new quantization save storage space, it also ensures that writes
affect only the dynamics memory. This, combined with the fact that significantly fewer
BRAM cells are enabled at once, will likely lead to significant power savings.
The
optimization comes at little overhead in terms of address pipelining and output selection
hardware in the evaluation units – something that likely cancels out the savings arising
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Design
from moving away from the offset-based addressing system used in the original control
units [Rib20]. Furthermore, the split memory implementation enables returning to 1024
unique axons as 1024 · 32 = 32K fits the depth of the available BRAM cells, should one
wish to do so.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
This chapter presents implementation specific details both in terms of code considera-
tions and testing suite. First, a brief overview of the available parameterization options
of the accelerator is presented followed by a description of the mapping process from
BindsNET model to the accelerator. Second, an in-depth presentation of the verifica-
tion flow employed in the project is presented. Finally, a short guide to building the
accelerator is given.
6.1
Parameterization
The accelerator design employs much the same parameterization options as in [Rib20],
although some parameters have been removed as a result of the changes introduced in
particular to the evaluation memories. In the original design, the accelerator could be
configured to implement any generic network with a total of 1024 globally unique axons,
but a ”cheat” was introduced as the evaluation memories would otherwise be too large
to fit the FPGA targeted, as described previously. A further discussion of the AER is
provided in section 8.3.2.
6.1.1
Available Parameters
Currently, the implementation provides the following parameters all included as global
constants as part of the neuroproc package:
• FREQ denoting the operating frequency targeted for the accelerator. This pa-
rameter affects the number of cycles per time step as well as the off-chip commu-
nication’s UART module. Defaults to 80 MHz, roughly the maximum achievable
when synthesizing the design in Vivado [Rib20].
• BAUDRATE denoting the baud rate used by the off-chip communication’s UART
module. Defaults to 115,200.
• TIMESTEP is the length of a time step in seconds. Defaults to 1 ms correspond-
ing to the value used when training the showcase network.
• EVALTS is the number of time steps to run for a full inference. This also delimits
the size of incoming spike periods.
==PAGE:70==
56
6 Implementation
• CORES denoting the number of cores implemented. This constant is used in
some loops in both the bus arbiter and top-level modules, but it does not affect
the number of cores of each type being instantiated.
• CONSTDATAWIDTH is the width of the entries in the constants part of the
evaluation memories. Defaults to 5 bits.
• NEUDATAWIDTH is the width of the entries in the dynamics and bias/thresh-
old parts of the evaluation memories. Defaults to 17 bits, as in [Rib20].
• WGTDATAWIDTH is the width of the weights part of the evaluation memories.
Defaults to 11 bits.
• AXONNR is the number of uniquely numbered axons supported. As described
above, this is currently set to the ”cheat” value of 3·256 = 768 which is sufficient to
accelerate the showcase network. With the introduction of architectural changes
to the evaluation memories, this can safely be changed back to 1024 if needed.
• TMNEURONS denoting the number of neurons to map to each neuron evaluator.
Defaults to 32.
• EVALUNITS denoting the number of neuron evaluators to implement per neuron
core. Defaults to 8.
• RANKORDERENC is used to select between rate and rank-order encoding
hardware in the input cores. Defaults to true.
• INPUTSIZE is the size of the input image. Defaults to 22 · 22 = 484 matching
the size of the preprocessed GSCD snippets.
Finally, the package contains several parameters resulting from various operations on
the above. Most noticeably are the global address width used on the bus GLOBALADDRWIDTH
= log2Up(CORES) + log2Up(EVALUNITS) + log2Up(TMNEURONS).
The original implementation from [Rib20] made these constants available in a sepa-
rate file called Constants.scala including a similarly named Scala object that all other
source files needed to import to use the constants. This implementation moves away
from this approach and instead organizes the source files in a Scala package neuroproc
with a corresponding package object available in package.scala, see appendix B list-
ing B.1. This means the constants are, per default, available to any other files in the
same package.
6.1.2
Parameterization Considerations
The parameterization options listed above only provide limited control over module gen-
eration. A fully parameterized design should be generic enough to work under almost any
configuration (that satisfies the previously mentioned correctness requirements) without
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Mapping to Accelerator
57
the need for additional changes to the source code. This is not currently the case, as, e.g.,
the mapping script is limited to work solely for the showcase network and the top-level
module also hardcoded to include the right number of cores of each type.
Furthermore, seeing as Chisel is embedded in Scala, which has native support for both
explicit and implicit parameters to class constructors, this parameterization technique
should be reconsidered.
More advanced projects, such as RocketChip, employ only
implicit parameters. They work in much the same way as global constants, but enable
much easier scoping.
6.2
Mapping to Accelerator
The mapping process from a pre-trained network to the accelerator means to take the
network parameters and distribute them into memory initialization files for each of the
evaluation memories, and to map the network layers to the accelerator cores.
6.2.1
Evaluation Memory Initialization
The process of mapping a network to evaluation memories is carried out in two steps.
Firstly, the pre-trained network is stored as a PyTorch-formatted Pickle file, which is
read into a small Python script, export.py, see appendix A listing A.7. From there, the
non-None network parameters (biases are not used for this network and thus stored as
None) are extracted one by one. Within the script, they can be scaled and rounded
accordingly after which they are written to a JSON file.
Secondly, the JSON file is processed by a Scala script, Mapping.scala, see appendix B
listing B.19. The script utilizes some of the constants describing the accelerator. The
script reads the JSON file and formats its entries as arrays of the proper data types.
Afterwards, it first produces the evaluation unit ID-independent initialization files con-
taining constants (reset potential, refractory period, and decay factor) and dynamic
variables (refractory counters and membrane potentials). The dynamic variables are all
initialized to zero. Next, it produces files containing biases and thresholds, and files con-
taining the weights. Both are dependent on the evaluation unit ID. In all cases, numbers
are scaled to their desired fixed-point precision.
This procedure differs from that presented in [Rib20] in that the networks are trained
using un-scaled weights (rather than weights scaled by a factor of 1000), such that their
dynamic range is kept low. As described in section 5.4.2, the weights should fit into two
10-bit fixed-point formats. The weights between layers X and Ae are, due to their low
dynamic range, mapped to a 0.10 format, while the other weights are mapped to a 6.4
format. For simplicity, remaining values will stay at 17 bits as in [Rib20], albeit mapped
to a 7.10 fixed-point format. The mapping script utilizes the round method to convert
from floating-point to integer numbers. This was chosen over the toInt method which
always floors input floats, as rounding will tend to give rise to a smaller overall error, as
listed in section 5.4.2.2.
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Implementation
The procedure is kept in two different languages because of their different features.
Python is easiest to use when opening Pickle files, but Scala has better support for
low-level bitwise operations.
As such, JSON only serves as a practical intermediate
representation between the two.
Note that an additional Python script, convert.py,
capable of reading an original 17-bit integer JSON file, as used in [Rib20], and convert
it into a partly floating-point equivalent that works with the mapping script is also
provided with the source code, see appendix A listing A.8.
Note that neither of the three scripts are written specifically targeting the showcase
network. They require some rewriting to become fully generic, although the necessary
functions and transforms are available.
6.2.2
Core Mapping
Mapping layers to cores is handled in the same way as presented in [Rib20]. The bus
interfaces each contain a small ROM, which is manually initialized based on a JSON
file whose entries are numbered by core IDs. The ROM entries determine whether a
specific core is subscribed to spikes with the core ID present on the bus, and – for the
neuron core to which the Ae layer is mapped – whether the spike maps to a weight in
the X_to_Ae or Ai_to_Ae connection.
Using the same network architecture, the mapping is also the same as presented in
listing 5.2 in [Rib20]. This means that the X layer remains mapped to two input cores
with IDs 0 and 1, the Ae layer is mapped to core 2, the Ai layer is mapped to core 3,
while the output core with ID 4 simply subscribes to spikes from the Ae layer.
6.2.3
Various Issues and Solutions
The issue of generating 16 different versions of the EvaluationMemory module with
different initialization files described in [Rib20] remains to be solved the same way. In
updated versions of Chisel, it might be that providing paths to the initialization files as
arguments to the class constructors will lead to generation of different modules.
Another issue that arose after altering the implementation of the evaluation memories
was that Vivado optimized the memories of core 3; i.e., the memories containing that
Ae_to_Ai weights. The connections are all initialized to either 0 or −inh because of
their constant nature described in section 3.2.1. This leads to a reduction of the memory
width to two bits per entry instead of the 11 bits used in the description; i.e., one bit
to select between the two fixed-point formats, and another to select the entry’s value.
Such an optimization would give the new accelerator an unfair advantage in both area
and power compared to the original while also removing the possibility of having greater
variation in weights in core 3. Thus, to avoid this optimization, an unused write port
was introduced to the weight memories, forcing Vivado to avoid optimizations1. Please
note that this write port is not shown in figure 5.12.
1Vivado seemingly ignores both keep and dont_touch attributes when doing memory optimizations.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Verification
59
Finally, Chisel does include a FixedPoint data type that supports all the required
operations and implicitly checks for mismatching decimal points at compile time. This
would be highly suitable for the evaluation memories and neuron evaluators, but it is
still undergoing development and thus not yet fully documented nor part of the non-
experimental API. As a result, it was opted against.
6.3
Verification
The accelerator is provided with an extensive test suite. This test suite has served two
purposes during the project period; firstly, writing unit tests for each of the original
modules based on their descriptions in Chisel was an opportunity to better understand
their operation, and secondly, the unit tests served to ensure that nothing was broken
after updates were introduced. After the project, they serve to ensure that no future
updates to the accelerator break any of the existing modules.
While some tests were part of the original design presented in [Rib20], several modules
were missing tests, and the neuromorphic processor tester was missing checks for correct
outputs. Additionally, the ChiselTest package is set to take over from the Chisel iotesters
package used in [Rib20], and thus, this was an opportunity to switch.
Tests are included in two sub-packages to the main kwsonsnn package; namely,
unittests and systemtests. These are described in-depth in the following.
6.3.1
Unit Tests
The unit tests package includes tester classes for all modules, apart from the neuro-
morphic processor module.
Each tester runs series of inputs and expects the mod-
ules to respond in the correct manner. Whenever possible, in particular when testing
memory-based modules, basic principles of constraint random verification have been
applied. This means that all inputs are essentially random, and the method aims to
cover most of the interesting input combinations by fewer tests than required to ex-
haustively cover every combination [Dob+21; Mey04]. This is particularly clear in the
TrueDualPortMemorySpec class, included in appendix C listing C.7, where both ad-
dresses, data and enables are randomly generated.
6.3.2
System Tests
The system tests package includes testers for larger combinations of modules than what
fits in a regular unit test. The main tester is the neuromorphic processor tester, which
runs the accelerator processing a full input image, see appendix C listing C.21. This has
served to check that introduced code optimizations did not alter the operation of the
accelerator. During the initial stage of the project, the original accelerator’s response to
a reference image was recorded and has since been used as expected output.
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Implementation
The technique also led to the discovery of two errors in the source code presented
in [Rib20]. The two errors were found through a step-by-step introduction of updated
components until the test outputs differed from the expected. These two errors were:
• The original EvaluationMemory class used loadMemoryFromFile without specify-
ing the file content type. The function defaults to expecting hex format files, but
the initialization files are in binary format2. No errors are thrown when building
the accelerator or running simulations of it, but the spike activity is much higher
than what must be expected due to some thresholds having the wrong sign.
• The original OutputCore class contained a basic FIFO with a saturating items
counter which was unfortunately one bit too small. This meant the queue was
never registered as being full and would thus get entries overwritten constantly.
Both errors have been addressed to the author of [Rib20].
The system-level tests also make full use of the capabilities for testing anynomous
modules in ChiselTest. This enables creating modules only for testing and makes it easier
to check, e.g., that the output core works correctly with the supplied FIFO, and that
the off-chip communication works with both input core memory and output FIFO. For
examples, see the OutputCoretoMemTester and OCCtoMemTester classes both included
in appendix C.
6.3.3
Selection of Simulation Backend
The majority of the tests are executed with the Treadle backend as it is faster to start
up than Verilator. Verilator is used for all other tests as it is much faster when executing
larger tests. Tests of blackbox modules with Verilog source also requires Verilator.
During the project period, the implementation of clock gating led to a discussion of
whether Verilator was the right simulation engine to stick with. This discussion arose
as Verilator is a synchronous simulator rather than an event-driven simulator, as is
typically used in vendor tools such as Vivado or VCS. This means that Verilator only
to a certain extend supports non-edge-triggered storage devices, and seeing as the clock
gates are latch-based, they are not guaranteed to work properly. In fact, the Verilator
documentation states: ”Verilator is optimized for edge sensitive (flop based) designs. It
will attempt to do the correct thing for latches, but most performance optimizations will
be disabled around the latch.” on page 48 [Sny].
To ensure correct operation, one could switch to Synopsys VCS, but Chiseltest’s VCS
backend is quite limited. Initial attemps at running simulations in VCS were unsuccess-
ful primarily due to the much increased simulation time as compared to other available
tools – the top level simulation did not pass the 50% mark after more than 24 hours.
Contacting the developers of ChiselTest instead led to them giving assurance that Ver-
ilator should work correctly in this case, as it is the simulator currently employed by
2Since Chisel is undergoing development, it is likely this error is due to an API update [Law+]
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Verification
61
the developers of Rocket Chip (likely the most well-known Chisel project). Addition-
ally, they pointed out the /*verilator clock_enable*/ signal attribute that instructs
Verilator’s scheduler that a signal is used to gate a clock and that no race conditions
occur on it [Sny]. As a result, the implementation of a latch-based clock gate, shown in
listing 6.1, resembles that of Rocket Chip, available here, and uses this attribute. It is
written in SystemVerilog to enable use of the always_latch construct.
1
/* verilator lint_off UNOPTFLAT */
2
module ClockBufferBB(input I, input CE, output O);
3
reg en_latched /*verilator clock_enable*/;
4
always_latch @(*) if (!I) en_latched = CE;
5
assign O = en_latched & I;
6
endmodule
Listing 6.1: A latch-based clock gate with the Verilator clock_enable attribute to
ensure correct simulation.
Top-level tests can also be run through Vivado’s XSim using a VHDL testbench,
which is included in appendix C listing C.22. The testbench performs the same test as
its ChiselTest equivalent based on the same input image and expected output. Running
the ChiselTest tester in Verilator takes roughly two hours depending on other system
loads, while running a post-implementation test3 in Vivado can take up to five hours.
The generated build script ensures that the testbench and its dependencies (image and
result files) are added to the sim_1 fileset in Vivado, but it does not run the simulation
automatically.
Please note that in order to enable testing with Treadle and Verilator, two implemen-
tations of a clock gate are provided; one implementing the Xilinx BUFGCE primitive
[Sup18] and the other being the latch-based gate shown in figure 6.1, inspired by [Jon02].
The latch-based design consists of an active-low latch, a NAND and an inverter, which
together ensure that no input change while the clock is high causes an unwanted clock
pulse to be generated. This design assumes the gated clock is used only for positive-edge
triggered flip-flops. A synth parameter to the relevant Chisel modules selects between
the two such that they are used properly. This parameter also selects between two sets
of paths pointing to the memory initialization files of the evaluation memories such that
simulations work correctly both in Verilator and XSim.
gate
D
Q
clk
gated clk
Figure 6.1: A latch-based clock gating cell, which ensures no glitches on the gated clock.
3The basic RTL behavioral test with the same source files in Vivado unfortunately fails with several
signals taking the undefined value X.
==PAGE:76==
62
6 Implementation
6.3.4
Continuous Integration
As mentioned previously, the source code is available open-source on GitHub.
The
repository is set up to run continuous integration (CI) checks on every pull request and
push to the master branch to ensure new additions do not break existing work. I decided
to use GitHub actions as my CI workflow as it is both easy to work with and directly
integrated into GitHub [Git].
To enable GitHub actions, the repository must contain a file .github/workflows/ci.yml,
which is a YAML format file describing step-by-step the pre-test setup and test execu-
tion of one or more test jobs. Currently, it describes two flows; unit tests and system
tests, respectively. The unit test flow performs the following steps in order:
1. Checkout the source code
2. Install Verilator, JDK 11, and Python 3.7
3. Install Python dependencies (PyTorch and BindsNET)
4. Compile the Scala code
5. Run the export.py script to export the pre-trained network to JSON
6. Run the Mapping.scala script to generate memory initialization files
7. Execute tests
while the system test flow performs the following steps, also in order:
1. Checkout the source code
2. Install Verilator and JDK 11
3. Compile the Scala code
4. Execute tests
The description of the unit test flow is shown in listing 6.2. In both flows, tests tagged
with SlowTest are ignored due to the monthly limit on CI minutes included in the free
version of GitHub4. Tests are run in an Ubuntu 20.04 environment to emulate that on
which the code was written. If all tests pass, a green badge shows up in the repository’s
readme section.
1
name: NeuromorphicProcessor CI
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
pull_request:
4Running the non-SlowTest tests takes roughly two minutes, while running the full test suite takes
roughly two hours.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Verification
63
6
7
jobs:
8
test:
9
name: Unit Tests
10
runs-on: ubuntu -20.04
11
12
steps:
13
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
14
15
- name: Install Verilator
16
run: |
17
sudo apt-get install -y verilator
18
verilator --version
19
- name: Set up JDK 11
20
uses: actions/setup-java@v1
21
with:
22
java-version: 11
23
- name: Set up Python
24
uses: actions/setup-python@v2
25
with:
26
python -version: 3.7
27
- name: Install dependencies
28
run: |
29
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
30
pip install -r requirements.txt
31
32
- name: Compile
33
run: sbt compile
34
35
- name: Export pretrained network
36
run: python netwkdev/export.py netwkdev/pretrained/network.pt
37
38
- name: Create memory initialization
39
run: sbt "runMain MakeDataFiles
netwkdev/pretrained/network.json"
40
41
- name: Unit Tests
42
run: sbt "testOnly neuroproc.unittests.** -- -l
neuroproc.unittests.SlowTest"
Listing 6.2: The YAML description of the GitHub Actions unit test CI flow.
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Implementation
6.4
Building the Project
To build the accelerator and run it on an FPGA board, first clone the git repository as:
git clone https://github.com/hansemandse/KWSonSNN.git
Next, follow the steps outlined in the project’s readme, which describe how to install
the required tools; Java JDK 8 (or 11), Scala build tool (SBT), Verilator, and Pip and
the Python libraries used. All other requirements should already be available on any
recent distribution of Ubuntu.
Now, simply run:
make all
Doing so builds the accelerator with SBT and outputs the Verilog code into a new
folder build, generates the memory mapping files as described in section 6.2, and removes
some `ifndef SYNTHESIS ... `endif wraps from the Verilog code ensuring correct
memory initialization. Finally, a shell script, mapping/gentcl.sh, generates a Tcl script
which can create a new project in Vivado, input all the source files, and start synthesis
and implementation runs up until the point of bit stream generation.
Subsequently, if Vivado is available in the command line, a new project may be setup
and initialized by running:
vivado -mode gui -source build.tcl
Alternatively, open a new Vivado window. Click Tools -> Run Tcl Script and
select the build script. Beware that the script assumes Vivado is installed in a Linux
environment and thus does not work on Windows.
The build targets the Digilent Genesys-2 board, which features a Xilinx Kintex-7
FPGA. To work properly on this board, which has a 200 MHz differential clock crystal,
the neuromorphic processor must be instantiated alongside an MMCM primitive, which
can divide the clock down to the targeted 80 MHz. This is done by using a Verilog
top-level file and an MMCM instantiation generated through Vivado’s clock wizard IP
generator tool. The top-level file is shown in listing 6.3. Subsequently, the top-level IO
is mapped to the relevant ports with the constraints file shown in listing 6.4.
Program the board by connecting its JTAG micro-USB port to the computer first,
and once programmed, switch to its UART port. Next, make sure to reset the accelerator
by pressing the button labelled BTNU. Finally, with the accelerator on the board, the
serial connection script netwkdev/test.py – available in appendix A listing A.9 – may
be used to run a series of test images on the accelerator and gather results, which are
presented in the form of a confusion matrix in the terminal.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Building the Project
65
1
2
module neuroTop(sysclk_n , sysclk_p , reset, uartTx, uartRx);
3
4
input
sysclk_n , sysclk_p , reset, uartRx;
5
output uartTx;
6
wire clk;
7
8
clk_wiz_0 clkGen(
9
.clk_out1(clk),
10
.reset(reset),
11
.clk_in1_p(sysclk_p),
12
.clk_in1_n(sysclk_n)
13
);
14
15
NeuromorphicProcessor np(
16
.clock(clk),
17
.reset(reset),
18
.io_uartTx(uartTx),
19
.io_uartRx(uartRx)
20
);
21
22
endmodule
Listing 6.3: The Verilog top-level file instantiating and interconnecting a neuromorphic
processor and and MMCM.
1
## Clock Signal
2
set_property -dict {PACKAGE_PIN AD11 IOSTANDARD LVDS} [get_ports
sysclk_n]
3
set_property -dict {PACKAGE_PIN AD12 IOSTANDARD LVDS} [get_ports
sysclk_p]
4
create_clock -period 5.000 -name sysclk_p -waveform {0.000 2.500}
[get_ports sysclk_p]
5
6
## Reset Button
7
set_property -dict {PACKAGE_PIN B19 IOSTANDARD LVCMOS12} [get_ports
reset]
8
9
## UART
10
set_property -dict {PACKAGE_PIN Y23 IOSTANDARD LVCMOS33} [get_ports
uartTx]
11
set_property -dict {PACKAGE_PIN Y20 IOSTANDARD LVCMOS33} [get_ports
uartRx]
Listing 6.4: The top-level constraints for the Kintex-7 FPGA.
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Implementation
6.4.1
The SYNTHESIS Flag
Using loadMemoryFromFileInline in Chisel inserts readmemb or readmemh calls wrapped
inside `ifndef SYNTHESIS ... `endif in the generated Verilog code. This works fine
for simulation purposes, as the SYNTHESIS flag is not set in those cases, but according
to the IEEE Verilog RTL synthesis standard, any synthesis tool must implicitly set it,
see section 6.2 in [05]. This, however, leads to the initialization calls being removed in
preprocessing, if the wrap is not removed.
The alternative to using loadMemoryFromFileInline is to manually insert initializa-
tion calls into the generated Verilog code, as was done in [Rib20]. Unfortunately, doing
so makes testing with ChiselTest much more difficult, hence why the first option was
decided upon.
6.4.2
Chisel Top-level
As part of the final experiments of the project, a Chisel top-level module with corre-
sponding blackbox implementation of the MMCM was also produced. It is included in
appendix D listing D.4. Using a Chisel top module would mean fewer files are gener-
ated by building the accelerator. Unfortunately, a few experiments showed roughly 10%
higher resource consumption using the Chisel top module rather than the Verilog one
in listing 6.3. Despite double checking synthesis settings and constraints in Vivado, no
solution was found to this issue; hence why the Verilog top is still used.
Both the NeuroTop and ClkGen classes extend the Chisel RawModule class, which is
a simpler version of the Module class without implicit clock and reset. This was decided
upon to avoid such unused top-level signals, but should not affect Verilog generation. In
fact, apart from some signal names, the generated top-level Verilog is nearly identical
to the manually written code. Both versions run the provided testbench without errors.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Results
This chapter covers the results of the implemented design when synthesized and imple-
mented for a Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA in Vivado. Additionally, the results are compared
to those presented in [Rib20]. Vivado is set up with the default synthesis and imple-
mentation strategies, retiming is disabled in both steps, flatten_hierarchy is also
disabled, but post-implementation and post-placement power optimization steps are en-
abled. Some of these results are further discussed in chapter 8.
7.1
Resource Consumption
Table 7.1 presents the resource consumption of the implemented accelerator with the
showcase network mapped to it on the aforementioned FPGA in a hierarchical structure.
These numbers must be seen in comparison to those in table 6.1 in [Rib20]. Accelerator
cores are numbered with their respective core IDs. The numbers result from the synthesis
step and show some interesting differences to the results of the baseline system. As
Vivado is configured to be allowed to rebuild the design architecture, synthesis results
are shown instead of implementation results. The rebuilding and placement optimization
steps might otherwise obscure the observations to be made from the resource utilization
due to seemingly random distribution of resources across otherwise unrelated modules.
The number of multiplexers implemented accounts only for the so-called F7 Muxes as
reported by Vivado; they act to combine the outputs of two 6-input LUTs either to select
between their functions or to enable mapping of 7-input Boolean equations directly to a
single logic slice. Implementation results show only a decrease in total number of LUTs
to 3899. All other measures are the same.
As in [Rib20], the overall resource consumption relative to the available resources of
the selected FPGA is quite low. The most noticeable differences are in the number of
BRAM cells and the number of FFs required. Both of these differences are explainable by
the evaluation memory optimizations introduced in section 5.4.2.2. Firstly, as predicted
during the design process, the overall number of BRAM cells per evaluation memory is
lower than before, and additional savings seem to be achieved by some of the four
memories not being mapped to BRAM cells but instead to registers.
Similarly, as
expected, both of the input cores and the output core are significantly smaller than
previously as they have had their memory-related hardware removed.
On the other
hand, the neuron cores have grown slightly in size as compared to the baseline system,
and they have slightly different sizes.
==PAGE:82==
68
7 Results
Module name
LUTs
FFs
BRAMs
DSPs
Muxes
Count
%
Count
%
Count
%
Count
Count
Top-level
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
>MMCM
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
0
0
>Neuromorphic proc.
3945
100
1697
100
187
100
2
20
>>Bus arbiter
7
0.18
7
0.41
0
0
0
0
>>Input memory 0
9
0.23
9
0.53
0.5
0.27
0
0
>>Input memory 1
9
0.23
9
0.53
0.5
0.27
0
9
>>Input core 0
86
2.18
97
5.72
0
0
0
5
>>Input core 1
86
2.18
97
5.72
0
0
0
5
>>Neuron core 2
1883
47.7
660
38.9
93
49.7
1
5
>>Neuron core 3
1712
43.4
658
38.8
93
49.7
1
5
>>Output core 4
4
0.10
9
0.53
0
0
0
0
>>Output FIFO
23
0.58
14
0.82
0
0
0
0
>>Off-chip com.
85
2.15
114
6.72
0
0
0
0
Total
3945
100
1697
100
187
100
2
20
Available
203800
1.94
407600
0.42
445
42.0
840
152850
Table 7.1: Post-synthesis resource consumption of the accelerator with the aforemen-
tioned synthesis settings.
To better understand the differences in resource consumption by the neuron cores,
consider table 7.2 which presents the resource consumption of neuron core 2. These
numbers must be seen in comparison to those in table 6.2 in [Rib20]. Clearly, as expected,
the increase in number of FFs consumed comes from the evaluation memories. More
surprising is the significantly increased number of LUTs consumed by the evaluation
units. Seeing as these are left mostly untouched (except for changing an 8:1 multiplexer
to a shift operation), this difference is inexplicable.
A synthesis run of the original
implementation of the neuron evaluator with the above synthesis settings showed a
resource consumption of 152 LUTs, i.e., more than consumption by the updated version
and much more than reported in [Rib20]. An additional comparison of their generated
Verilog codes also shows no major differences.
The size difference between the two
otherwise identical neuron cores arises from different sizes of the evaluation memories.
As two of the four memories in each evaluation memory module do not have write ports
and thus may be considered as ROMs, Vivado can apply different optimization strategies
to the differently initialized memories of each neuron core giving rise to these results.
Figure 7.1 shows the post-implementation floor plan of the accelerator mapped to the
FPGA. Each of the major modules is color coded. The schematic view clearly shows how
little of the available resources are consumed by the accelerator, and in comparison to
figure 6.1 in [Rib20], especially the lower number of BRAM cells used is clear. The cells
are concentrated in the lower half of the FPGA enabling the BRAM cells to be placed
near one another. All of the available clock buffers are located in the center of the FPGA.
==PAGE:83==
7.1 Resource Consumption
69
Module name
LUTs
FFs
BRAMs
DSPs
Muxes
Count
%
Count
%
Count
%
Count
Count
Neuron core 2
1883
100
660
100
93
100
1
5
>Axon system
60
3.19
11
1.67
1
1.08
0
0
>Bus interface
8
0.42
11
1.67
0
0
0
0
>Spike trans.
44
2.34
55
8.33
0
0
0
5
>Neurons
1770
94.0
583
88.3
92
98.9
1
0
>>Control unit
83
4.41
39
5.91
0
0
1
0
>>Eval. mems.
568
30.2
264
40.0
92
98.9
0
0
>>Eval. units
1119
59.4
280
42.4
0
0
0
0
Total
1883
100
660
100
93
100
1
5
Available
203800
0.92
407600
0.16
445
20.9
840
152850
Table 7.2: Post-synthesis resource consumption of neuron core 2 with the aforementioned
synthesis settings. Categories Eval. mems. and Eval. units sum together the eight of
each unit instantiated as part of the neuron core.
Thus, all global clocks are propagated from here via a central vertical clock backbone
and distributed to the individual clock regions via horizontal clock rows. Internal to
the clock regions, the clock is distributed based on a central clock management tile
[Sup18]. Neither table presented above includes clock buffers as these result in direct
instantiations of BUFGCTRL (a generalized BUFGCE) primitives with no other logic.
A more in-depth schematic view of the floor plan of neuron core 2 is shown in fig-
ure 7.2. It is interesting to see that the evaluation units are placed separately alongside
their evaluation memories, while the remainder of the core is somewhat linearly dis-
tributed in between the cores. This is likely done to improve timing and reduce total
wire length; two of the motivations behind the near-memory computing research direc-
tion which this accelerator finds inspiration from, as mentioned in chapter 4.
An interesting observation made during the process of generating these results is that
enabling flatten_hierarchy and setting it to rebuilt leads to a resource consumption
of a few hundred FFs fewer and more than a thousand more LUTs. This seems to be
due to certain components being able to share registers, while the neuron evaluators
require more LUTs. Similarly, to improve timing, the input memories are mapped to
pipelined LUT-RAM instead of BRAM cells. Due to these differences and to enable a
fair comparison with the results in [Rib20] – for which flatten_hierarchy was disabled
– the setting was left disabled.
==PAGE:84==
70
7 Results
Figure 7.1: Floor plan of the full accelerator. Purple: bus arbiter. Yellow: both input
memories. Green: both input cores. Blue: neuron core 2. Red: neuron core 3. Orange:
output core. Dark green: output FIFO. Light blue: off-chip communication.
7.2
System Timing
Despite not being in focus in this project, the results of the timing analysis in Vivado
are presented here. The system is still implemented with an 80 MHz clock frequency,
but with two different, but correlated clock domains. Post-implementation results are
used here to take place and route results into account.
The critical path of the circuit is within the core clock domain; specifically between
the axon system and one of the weight memories in neuron core 3. The path has a total
delay of 10.081 ns of which the logic delay is 3.272 ns and the remaining 6.809 ns are
net delay. This phenomenon of net delay dominating critical paths in FPGAs is not
uncommon due to their layout and the fact that they consist of many of the same logic
slices. It is particularly troublesome for BRAM-heavy systems such as this accelerator
because of the sparsity of BRAM cells. In this case, the net delay is large due to an
==PAGE:85==
7.2 System Timing
71
Figure 7.2: Floor plan of neuron core 2. Light blue: axon system. Orange: bus interface.
Pink: control unit. Blue: evaluation memories. Green: evaluation units. Red: spike
transmission. Cyan: the rest of the accelerator.
unfortunate mapping of the axon system to the bottom left corner of the FPGA, while
the evaluation memories are spread across the right half of the FPGA. Nonetheless,
the fact that the critical path has 2.419 ns negative slack suggests that Vivado has
not struggled to place and route the circuit. In comparison to the results presented in
[Rib20], this slack is significantly higher. This may likely also be explained by the fewer
BRAM cells leading to a less spread-out circuit with overall shorter nets.
Note that no attempts have been made to increase the clock frequency of the accel-
erator. Seeing as it targets low-power applications, its operating frequency should be
kept as low as possible; naturally, taking evaluation time into account ensuring that all
neurons can be evaluated in each time step under worst-case spike activity. Nonethe-
less, the results presented above indicate that the accelerator is capable of running at
significantly higher frequencies than targeted, should that be wanted.
==PAGE:86==
72
7 Results
7.3
Power Consumption
As described in chapter 5, the optimizations introduced to the accelerator have primarily
focused on reducing its power consumption. As such, the results presented here are of
utmost importance to prove the benefits of the changes made. The results are gathered
in a similar way as done in [Rib20] using the testbench shown in appendix C listing C.22
to generate a switching activity interchange format (SAIF) file. The testbench tests a
full inference run on the accelerator starting out by transmitting an indirectly rank-order
encoded input image – in this case, a random utterance of the keyword ”up” – and next
waiting for 500 time steps while collecting and comparing the generated spikes to a set
of expected spikes generated by the corresponding ChiselTest tester.
As such, the simulation time spans roughly 669 ms. The produced SAIF file may be
used to generate a post-implementation power report whose findings are summarized in
the overview shown in figure 7.3. These results must be seen in comparison to those of
figure 6.3 in [Rib20] and show significant savings. Firstly, the total estimated power is
322 mW consisting of 150 mW dynamic power and 172 mW static power. Compared to
the baseline’s 989 mW, 539 mW and 450 mW, this corresponds to reductions of 67%,
72% and 62%, respectively. Comparing more in detail, the reduction in dynamic power
seems to be driven by two factors; the overall reduction in number of BRAMs and the
different spike encoding giving rise to significantly less activity in the accelerator – in
fact, the reduction in BRAM dynamic power is nearly 99%. Similarly, the main driving
factor of the reduction in static power must the overall smaller area of the accelerator.
As in [Rib20], it is positive to see that signals and logic each consume less than 1 mW of
dynamic power. This means that the attempts at implementing efficient hardware have
been successful.
Figure 7.3: An overview of the power estimate produced by Vivado when supplying
it with the SAIF file from the aforementioned simulation.
Notice in particular the
significantly lower dynamic power consumption in BRAMs.
==PAGE:87==
7.3 Power Consumption
73
The spike activity is interesting to comment on further. Due to the configuration
of the excitatory layer Ae and the inhibitory layer Ai of the showcase network, a single
spike from layer Ae gives rise to 199 spikes produced by layer Ai. Using the network
provided in [Rib20] with rate encoding and greater neuron thresholds than here, an input
image may give rise to more than 1000 input spikes resulting in roughly 100-150 spikes
produced by layer Ae. With higher thresholds, many input spikes are required to cause
a neuron in layer Ae to spike, so this relation makes sense but implies many BRAM
accesses the neuron cores. Meanwhile, with lower thresholds and rank-order encoded
inputs as used here, the test image gives rise to just 23 spikes from layer Ae.
To better understand where the power is consumed, consider table 7.3 which presents
the dynamic power consumption split across individual modules using the same hierarchi-
cal structure as in table 7.1. As indicated in the table, these results suffer from Vivado’s
limited accuracy but still show a clear picture. The MMCM takes up the majority of
the dynamic power consumption (86% to be precise) and roughly 40% of the total power
consumption. Otherwise, the remaining dynamic power seems to be burnt in the clock
network. Comparing to [Rib20], the clock power has actually increased by 2 mW, which
might be the result of the introduced BUFGCEs. This is rather unexpected as a major
part of the clock network is gated whenever the accelerator is idle. More on this in
section 8.2.
Module name
Dyn. power
Clocks
BRAM
MMCM
IO
[mW]
%
[mW]
[mW]
[mW]
[mW]
Top-level
150
47
–
–
–
–
>MMCM
129
40
2
<1
123
4
>Neuromorphic proc.
21
6.5
16
4
<1
<1
>>Bus arbiter
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
>>Input memory 0
1
<1
<1
1
<1
<1
>>Input memory 1
1
<1
<1
1
<1
<1
>>Input core 0
1
<1
1
<1
<1
<1
>>Input core 1
1
<1
1
<1
<1
<1
>>Neuron core 2
7
2.2
6
1
<1
<1
>>Neuron core 3
7
2.2
6
1
<1
<1
>>Output core 4
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
>>Output FIFO
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
>>Off-chip com.
2
<1
1
<1
<1
<1
Table 7.3: Post-implementation dynamic power results for the accelerator after sim-
ulation. Column two and three show dynamic power of a particular module and its
percentage of total power, while the subsequent columns specify its sources. Sources
whose values generally<1 lie below 1 mW are not shown.
Table 7.4 further specifies the power consumption of submodules in neuron core 2.
Again, the majority of the table entries are left rather unspecific due to Vivado’s limited
==PAGE:88==
74
7 Results
accuracy, but the numbers do show a clear picture nonetheless; the majority of the
dynamic power is burnt in the axon system, evaluation memories and evaluation units.
This was to be expected due to these modules either being based primarily on BRAMs
spread across the FPGA, or performing the majority of the arithmetic operations of the
accelerator.
Module name
Dyn. power
Clocks
BRAM
[mW]
%
[mW]
[mW]
Neuron core 2
7
2.2
6
1
>Axon system
2
<1
<1
1
>Bus interface
<1
<1
<1
<1
>Spike trans.
<1
<1
<1
<1
>Neurons
5
1.6
5
<1
>>Control unit
<1
<1
<1
<1
>>Eval. mems.
3
<1
3
<1
>>Eval. units
2
<1
2
<1
Table 7.4: Post-implementation dynamic power results for neuron core 2 after simulation.
The columns present the same information as in table 7.3; MMCM and IO columns are
removed as all their entries are less than 1 mW.
Despite the poor performance of the showcase network presented in table 3.2, there
is no reason to expect greater spike activity if a better performing network of the same
size is mapped to the accelerator. This is due to the normalization of weights in the
training script that ensures the sum of weights within a single neuron’s receptive field
does not exceed a set value, and that the input layer is insensitive to differences in input
image intensity as each pixel can at most lead to one input spike.
7.4
Classification Accuracy
Finally, the classification accuracy of the showcase network mapped to the accelerator
must be tested to better understand the effects of the quantization introduced in sec-
tion 5.4.2.2. These results are gathered by running inferences directly on the accelerator
with the test script given in appendix A listing A.9. The resulting confusion matrix is
shown in table 7.5.
The results resemble the seemingly random classification behavior of the software
model of the network. This makes it difficult to conclude anything regarding the impact
of the weight quantization introduced. The intuition is that a network that does not
initially have a reasonably high classification accuracy meaning that the receptive field
of each neuron is not well-tuned into a specific class, will experience a greater impact on
its already poor accuracy when quantized. This seems to be the case for the showcase
network here.
==PAGE:89==
7.4 Classification Accuracy
75
GSCD
up
down
on
off
yes
no
go
stop
unknown
silence
up
53
32
36
33
43
42
38
28
28
39
down
2
1
1
0
0
0
4
1
2
2
on
62
63
55
53
50
51
60
54
59
47
off
1
3
3
5
4
3
2
3
3
2
yes
73
80
91
90
90
95
81
95
73
94
no
9
5
1
12
12
13
7
10
16
10
go
3
0
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
1
stop
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
unknown
0
0
1
0
1
1
2
1
0
1
silence
69
69
58
68
56
45
55
57
61
56
Accuracy: 10.84%
Table 7.5:
Test results for GSCD using the showcase network on the accelerator.
Columns represent true classes, while rows represent predicted classes.
However, seeing as the neuron evaluation components of the accelerator remain
largely unchanged, it is safe to conclude that the accelerator evaluates the network
mapped to it correctly and that using a better-performing network will lead to better
results. Also, judging by results presented in related works [HMD16; Has+16] and con-
sidering that quantization to 10 bits should provide slightly less error than with 8 bits, a
drop in classification accuracy of anywhere from zero to roughly 4% should be expected
for well-performing networks.
==PAGE:90==
76
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
This chapter covers discussions of the classification accuracy of the showcase network
both in terms of sources to this inaccuracy and potential solutions to it. Next, the
power consumption reductions are briefly discussed. Then follows an extensive list of
future work is covered. The future work focuses primarily on hardware redesign of the
accelerator, and a little on the flow from SNN model in Python to a Chisel description
of a corresponding accelerator.
Finally, the discussion briefly mentions how further
optimizations may be achieved when targeting an ASIC implementation, and what to
expect in terms of power consumption in such an environment.
8.1
Classification Accuracy
From the results presented in chapter 3 section 3.2.3, it is clear that the showcase network
does not perform as well as should be expected. As argued previously, this is likely due
to the network being too simple and/or the training algorithms of BindsNET being
unable to capture the hard-to-predict spike patterns of GSCD.
8.1.1
Sources of Inaccuracy
Judging by table 3.2, in particular the ”down”, ”no”, ”go”, and ”unknown” classes are
predicted almost randomly among the other classes. ”up” and ”off” are particularly
popular predictions, which may be explained by their short pronunciations leading to
few, high-valued weights in their respective receptive fields. The high-valued weights will,
due to the centering of audio snippets and relatively similar MFCs across all classes, lead
to many predictions of those two classes1. This is unfortunately unavoidable as it is a
result of how the network is trained.
An interesting observation from the numerous training runs carried out as part of
this project is that a specific network configuration may provide reasonable (i.e., better
than as reported here) classification accuracy when training the network for only a
few epochs with significantly fewer examples, while training a network with the exact
same parameters with all of the examples will end up performing worse. Similarly, first-
epoch results tend to be better than results arising from training for more epochs. This
phenomenon seems to be insensitive to hyper parameters such as, e.g., learning rates
1A similar trend is seen with the ”1” class of MNIST which also has few high-valued weights in
similar positions to those of ”4”, ”7”, and ”9”.
==PAGE:92==
78
8 Discussion
and normalization factors. Hence, this underlines the fact that the network is incapable
of generalizing well enough to capture the patterns of GSCD.
8.1.2
Potential Solutions
This poor performance is, of course, not satisfactory and renders the trained network
rather unusable in practice. Arguably, the classification task would become easier if no
two keywords have (partially) similar pronunciation. Using this logic, it would make
sense to avoid pairs such as ”on” and ”off”, and ”no” and ”go”. Unfortunately, many
applications of KWS require natural combinations of words with similar pronunciations,
and thus the network should perform well even under this requirement. Instead, to
achiever better classification accuracy, I suggest following two paths:
• explore different MFC resolutions
• explore alternative network architectures
Despite the preprocessing steps presumably being correct, the MFC resolution is still
a potential path to explore for better classification accuracy. The current dataset imple-
mentation is configured to use a frame length and a number of filters ensuring square
MFCs, although this might not be the optimal configuration; in fact, some related work
uses a longer frame length and fewer filters [Wan+20]. Exploring different configurations
is, thus, interesting. Additionally, just like MNIST images traditionally are 28x28 pix-
els, perhaps using higher resolution MFCs with either more filters or more frames evenly
distributed along the entire second of the GSCD snippets will provide better results; for
example, 49x40 MFCs are used in [Zha+18]. Increasing MFC resolution does, however,
increase the size of the input layer of the network, the number of weights, and thus the
memory consumption of the accelerator. Hence, this is likely an accuracy-area tradeoff.
8.1.3
Architectural Considerations
Most modern image classification tasks employ more advanced network architectures
than simple single-layer FFNNs. Deeper networks with more weights are often capable
of capturing different patterns in each layer to gain better knowledge on each input
and thus provide higher overall classification accuracy. However, in the SNN-related
literature, it is unclear exactly how a multi-layer SNN would be constructed. Initial
experiments with introduction of more excitatory layers without lateral inhibition (i.e.,
one excitatory neuron spiking leads to inhibition of all other excitatory neurons in a
layer) in the showcase network did not provide any better results than what was achieved
with the showcase network. It is likely that if networks have layers that are primarily
excitatory, they should each have a corresponding inhibitory layer to reduce their activity.
An example of such a configuration is shown in figure 8.1. Naturally, this means selection
of even more network parameters and thus a potentially significantly more difficult
==PAGE:93==
8.1 Classification Accuracy
79
optimization process. It also means many more weights and thus a significantly larger
accelerator area.
Input layer
Output layer
Hidden layer
Hidden layer
exc.
inh.
exc.
inh.
exc.
inh.
train.
train.
train.
Figure 8.1: A deeper version of the showcase network in which all layers in the forward
path have lateral inhibition.
Alternatively, the network architecture could be drastically changed into for example
a convolutional model. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are networks which con-
tain layers that convolve weighted filters with input feature maps to extract higher-order
features. Switching to such an architecture will likely enable the network to recognize
class-specific patterns in the preprocessed MFCs that the current FFNN does not. Addi-
tionally, adding first a convolutional layer and next a pooling layer will reduce the size of
the resulting image and thus the size of the remaining layers of the network. Overall, this
means that the memory consumption of the accelerator might not increase, although its
area likely will due to the addition of extra hardware for the convolutions. Alternatively,
if the accelerator is to operate all the time, it might make sense to explore network archi-
tectures that support streaming in inputs. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), or even
recurrent convolutional neural networks (RCNNs), are interesting alternatives. Both re-
current network types require introduction of more weights and more neuron values that
need storage. This means increases in both storage and area for updating the recurrent
state. All three architectures have spiking equivalents, although they seem to appear in
fewer articles than regular SNNs [RV20; VCS19]2.
Figure 8.2a shows a spiking version of a 2D convolutional connection with a single
input feature map and a single 3x3 filter. Note that the input feature map is updated in
each time step and consists only of binary entries making the indicated multiplications
simple AND-operations. Figure 8.2b shows a spiking long short-term memory (LSTM)
cell proposed in [RV20], with its characteristic three ”gates”; the forget gate to clear the
cell’s content, the input gate taking in new inputs, and the output gate which calculates
its output based on both current input and stored history. LSTM cells require a lot of
storage, but few cells can provide good performance in sequence tasks.
Searching for the optimal network configuration for a specific dataset is a tedious
process and one that requires a more in-depth understanding of the nature of spiking
neural networks than what has been part of this project. From the literature, it seems
2Likely due to deep SNN and recurrent SNN research being in their infancy, as pointed out in [RV20]
==PAGE:94==
80
8 Discussion
(a) An example 2D convolutional connection connec-
tion. The post-synaptic neuron’s membrane potential
update is proportional to the sum of the filter multipled
by the input feature map.
(b) A spiking LSTM cell.
σ1 and
σ2 are activation functions operat-
ing on the cell’s membrane potential
u, xt is current spike input, and ct
and ht represent unit state and hid-
den state, respectively.
Figure 8.2: Example cells for spiking CNN and LSTM models.
networks are designed for specific use cases, and they often employ features that are not
available in the computing-oriented SNN libraries such as BindsNET. For example, the
adapted showcase network used in this project is a less-advanced version of a network
targeting the MNIST dataset as presented in [DC15], in which the authors use a different
library with more biologically plausible synapse models and different STDP algorithms.
It is worth reconsidering whether BindsNET is the right library to use for this pur-
pose. While it does provide 2D convolutional and max-pooling connections, see here,
it unfortunately does not have any recurrent topologies, nor does it support more ad-
vanced synapse models. A potential alternative is the Nengo library meant for Intel’s
Loihi, which supports both layer types and is likely the most well-developed and most
used SNN library [Bek+14]. Nengo bases itself directly on Numpy rather than an exist-
ing ANN development library, which means that it provides a more clean development
flow as it does not inherit anything unrelated. Alternatively, one might explore the
ANN-to-SNN conversion strategy of training a suitable ANN model and utilizing, e.g.,
SNN Toolbox for converting it into a corresponding SNN [Rue+17]. This has proven to
be possible with little accuracy reduction.
8.2
Power Consumption
The results presented in the previous chapter are clear in that they show a significant
power reduction as compared to the original accelerator of [Rib20]. However, the reduc-
tion seems to arise almost solely from memory and spike encoding-related optimizations,
and not from the implemented clock gating – which actually seems to slightly increase
the clock network power consumption. The increase might be explained by the introduc-
==PAGE:95==
8.3 Future Work
81
tion of two extra controllable clock buffers, or it might be a result of different routing.
Some effects are masked by Vivado rounding all power measures to three decimals.
The initial expectation was for clock gating to bring relatively large savings due to
reduced switching the accelerator cores. This expectation was reinforced by an experi-
ment carried out in the VLSI design course at DTU, where a comparison of three shift
register implementations – an always-active register, a clock enable based register, and
a clock gating-based register – showed nearly 50% power reductions from clock gating
and only 10% with clock enable. Furthermore, clock gating is listed as future work in
[Rib20]. However a more in-depth look at the source code for the baseline system after
the project start revealed that the system employs clock enables on almost all of the
registers which see the most activity, and all its FSMs have an idle state that they wait
in once they finish their execution till a new time step beings. All memories are also
disabled when not needed. As a result of this, introducing clock gating at a high level
did not provide nearly the expected effects.
Naturally, FPGAs provide only a good platform for testing different digital systems,
but their architecture means that power estimates tend to be significantly higher than
what may be expected from an equivalent ASIC implementation. More on this in sec-
tion 8.3.6.
8.3
Future Work
This section presents a handful of further optimization options of the accelerator as well
as related work that is worth investigating further but could not be fit into the limited
time of the project.
8.3.1
Neuron Core
The neuron cores did not receive as much attention in this project as expected. They
should be the main focus for optimizations as they include the most hardware and
perform the most work in the accelerator. As such, a few possible optimizations are
presented here.
While relatively flexible, the current structure of the neuron cores is complex and
would thus benefit from having its control system be more closely linked to the eval-
uation memories and neuron evaluators. As described in section 5.3.3.3, the meuron
evaluation process is still memory bound being limited by the shared output interface
of the evaluation memory module connected to the neuron evaluators. Implementing
instead a combined neuron evaluation unit with split memory and evaluation hardware
would enable reduction of the number of states of the control unit FSM significantly as
multiple unrelated values could be read concurrently. This would reduce the number of
cycles required for updating all neurons in a layer and thus enable either mapping more
neurons to a core or hardware savings from fewer evaluation units being required for the
current number of neurons. It might be that a different mapping of network parameters
==PAGE:96==
82
8 Discussion
to the individual memory modules that presented in section 5.4.2.2 would be beneficial
for this purpose; a limitation of the current implementation is that refractory counters
and membrane potentials cannot be read/written in the same cycle. Grouping together
instead membrane potentials and thresholds, and refractory counters and biases would
likely enable fewer states in the control unit FSM.
Another change that would decrease the precision gap between software model and
the accelerator is the introduction of a reset loop at the end of an inference. In the train-
ing scripts, this is managed by calling BindsNET’s reset_state_variables method,
which resets both refractory counters and membrane potentials of all neurons to their
specified reset values. In the case of the accelerator, the introduction of this loop would
require adding a couple of new states and a time step counter to the neuron cores’ control
FSM, as well as introducing an extra time step delay between two consecutive inference
runs; something that could be managed by slightly altering the phase system used to
indicate readiness between the accelerator cores and the off-chip communication.
8.3.2
Communication Fabric
As shown in figure 4.1a, the accelerator cores should communicate over any generic AER-
based communication fabric. In the current implementation, the accelerator is rather
locked to using a basic bus due to the incorporation of bus interfaces and spike transmis-
sion systems directly in the cores. Combined with the internal AER of coreID # neuronID
which limits the number of neurons which can be mapped to each core to 256, this is
a rather unflexible way to connect cores, and also implies a need for two input cores to
implement even the simple showcase network.
Intuitively, one would expect an accelerator of this kind to be so generic that it
implements only one input core, one output core, and any number of neuron cores. This
may be achieved with the following two changes:
• A generalized communication fabric
• An alternative AER
The communication fabric should be viewed as any n-port ”cloud” to which the accel-
erator cores connect. The connection may be made using regular ready-valid interfaces,
as shown in figure 8.3. Using such generic interfaces to the cores, the ”cloud” should
be interchangeable depending on the number of cores and expected spike activity. This
means that a bus may still be used if the size of the accelerator allows it, while larger ac-
celerators can employ, e.g., any broadcast-capable NoC architecture [Fan+18; Dav+18].
Similarly, the AER may be altered slightly to layerID # neuronID such that it is not
only more intuitive for the engineer to work with but also no longer poses an obstacle
in terms of the number of neurons that may be mapped to a specific core. In fact, with
this AER, it should be possible to map more than one layer to a particular core.
Introducing these changes, however, mean a significant redesign of the accelerator is
required, as it affects not only the mapping of layers to cores, the axon system, spike
==PAGE:97==
8.3 Future Work
83
valid
data
ready
valid
data
ready
Accelerator core
Arbiter
RV-based
bus interf.
RV-based
bus interf.
RV-based
NI
Figure 8.3: A generic communication fabric with corresponding ready-valid interfaces
on all cores. In this illustration, two fabrics are pictured; a bus and a torus NoC.
transmission and input and output cores. It is unlikely that this change will lead to lower
power or resource consumption, but it will make for a much more generic accelerator.
8.3.3
Time Step Flexibility
The design is currently configured such that there are neuron evaluators enough to
evaluate spikes from all axons to all neurons correctly within a single time step. However,
as proven in [Rib20], the accelerator is inactive in almost 99% of the time in each time
step. This introduces a trade-off between the accelerator area in terms of how many
evaluation units are implemented, and how many spikes can be treated in each time
step.
Reducing the number of evaluation units means that the accelerator might experience
the rare case of there being too many spikes to correctly update all neurons within a
time step. In this case, the accelerator may employ a flexible time step length such that
it is possible for one (or a few) time step(s) to borrow from the subsequent time step(s),
which then become relatively shorter. Combining this feature with a communication
fabric and axon system which can better exploit the sparse spike activity can potentially
lead to power savings.
Currently, as described in section 5.3.3.5, the top-level neuromorphic processor mod-
ule keeps track of time steps with a cycle counter and indicates to the cores when a
new time step begins. This control could be made more flexible by replacing the sim-
ple counter with a combined state machine and counter controlled by the same signals
currently used to control clock gating. This would introduce little extra logic in the top-
==PAGE:98==
84
8 Discussion
level while allowing reduction of the number of evaluation units to be just one in each
neuron core. The axon system could, because of its time-multiplexed nature, be made
completely asynchronous by introducing local clock generation similar to the methods
shown in [Wan+20].
The flexibility could be taken to the extreme by switching to fully asynchronous
evaluation, such that each spike is used for updates when received. This is done for
example in [Dav+18], but would require a significant redesign of the entire accelerator
as well as a switch away from using Chisel.
8.3.4
Further Memory Optimizations
Despite some area savings achieved by altering the quantization strategy presented in
this project, further optimizations are likely achievable. Most noticeably, techniques
such as memory compression and network pruning can reduce the memory requirements
of most networks significantly; [HMD16] reports 35x to 49x reductions in size for state-
of-the-art ANN models, and, using an alternative training algorithm than the previously
mentioned STDP-based ones, their techniques are suitable for SNNs too [Den+20].
Network pruning is the act of removing certain low-weight connections from the
network during training. Pruning in itself can reduce model size by up to 10 times
with little effect on the accuracy, when the model is retrained with pruning. Similarly,
applying various compression algorithms (traditionally, run-length or Huffman coding)
may be applied to the pruned weights to achieve greater reductions. This is due to the
observed great similarity between trained weights [HMD16].
The accelerator would, of course, require some additional hardware to implement
both pruned and compressed networks as both would (potentially) affect the evaluation
memories and their addressing modes as well as output hardware; especially for handling
compression algorithms efficiently, as run-length coding requires a linear-time algorithm
to decompress it, while Huffman coding requires a dictionary lookup [Ltd].
Additional power savings may be achievable by introducing a different memory layout
of the evaluation memories. Like caches, arranging the memories in blocks of multiple
weights (e.g., one or a power of two block(s) per neuron) and reading out an entire block
into a register buffer would reduce the number of accesses made to the memory itself.
Assuming more than a certain percentage of the weights in a block are used, this might
provide some savings. If not, it is likely that the overhead of reading out many more
bits at once may be less efficient than the current implementation. Nevertheless, this is
worth exploring.
8.3.5
Reconfigurability
To function in a real product, the accelerator needs to be reconfigurable on-the-fly to
enable efficient changes between different network models or simply different network
weights. Further reconfiguration options include support for different spike encodings in
the input cores and different neuron models in the neuron cores.
==PAGE:99==
8.3 Future Work
85
Currently, supporting reconfiguration of the network weights would be a relatively
little change of adding a second port to the evaluation memories to be able to overwrite
them from an external control unit. However, the network model is hardwired by the
ROMs included in the bus interfaces; but replacing the ROMs with equivalently sized
RAMs again with outward-facing write ports controlled by an external unit would allow
changing the network model on-the-fly.
Nonetheless, such introductions also require
changes to the off-chip communication module such that it may differ between incom-
ing spike periods and reconfiguration parameters. With the data amounts required for
representing even small networks like the showcase network used in this project, the
UART-based communication becomes impractical.
Instead, the accelerator could be
(and likely would be) placed in a system alongside a microcontroller capable of repro-
gramming it much faster.
Supporting different spike encodings could be enabled by implementing all the dif-
ferent encodings and selecting between them with a multiplexer controlled by a register.
Currently, two spike encodings are available in the source code – rate and rank-order –
but only one is implemented, selected by a parameter RANKORDERENC given in the pack-
age description. The register could be written to by the same external control circuit
that controls the other memories. An illustration of this kind of system is provided in
figure 8.4.
0
1
from external 
control
shouldSpike
=
Rank-order
spikePeriod
ts
=
0
=
0
1
%
=
0
Rate
Figure 8.4: System to switch between spike encodings.
A similar strategy can be applied for supporting different neuron models, except such
an addition will have more wide-spread effects on both neuron evaluators, evaluation
memories, and the neuron core control units. The evaluators could be extended with
controllability in a similar way to that for supporting different spike encodings, while
the evaluation memories could be made sufficiently large such that they can contain all
of the required neuron parameters regardless of neuron model. Control units could be
extended with states for evaluating all possible neuron models and simply configured
to take different paths through the state graph depending on the neuron model in use.
However, this would require a major redesign of the accelerator.
Since the accelerator modules are all parameterizable, the ideal work flow would be
to define an SNN model in a Python library such as BindsNET and be able to export a
corresponding accelerator implementation with core mappings and weight initialization
directly. This flow would benefit from the aforementioned updates to the AER and
==PAGE:100==
86
8 Discussion
communication fabric as well as memory optimizations presented before, as the mapping
could focus solely on the neuron cores and explore which compression options work the
best. Furthermore, introducing different neuron models and spike encodings and being
able to select between them would make for a highly flexibly library of modules, and
one that could be used to explore different accelerator architectures very quickly. The
flow is illustrated in figure 8.5.
coreMap.json
start
define model
generate
core map
train model
generate
mem. init.
generate
Chisel
synthesize
accelerator
end
*.mem
*.scala
Figure 8.5: Ideal work flow with automatic accelerator generation from an SNN model
in Python.
Despite not being shown in the flow, it is assumed that the generated accelerator
supports the reconfiguration options described above such that the initialization only
provides a starting point as part of the bitstream.
8.3.6
ASIC Implementation
A final task that still needs exploration is an ASIC implementation of the accelerator in
a representative process. At the time of writing, students at DTU can only access a basic
suite of Synopsys tools including Design Vision for synthesis and VCS for simulation.
However, only a custom – rather simple – 90 nm process used in the VLSI design course
is available, and Design Vision does not include a memory compiler. Thus, to generate
reasonable results, a greater tool suite is required.
It must be expected that the power results presented in section 7.3 are significantly
higher than what can be expected in an equivalent ASIC implementation. [KR07] re-
ports that, on average, one can expect up to 14x lower power consumption, depending
on the mixture of logic, memory and arithmetic cells used in the design.
However,
the authors of [KR07] do not take clock gating into account. It is likely that exactly
clock gating has a greater effect on dynamic power in an ASIC environment, where
==PAGE:101==
8.3 Future Work
87
the clock network is a more significant part of the total dynamic power consumption,
but this is hard to judge from FPGA power numbers. Replacing existing clock enables
with lower-level clock gating at individual modules or registers might lead to greater
reductions, but this introduces extra hardware for generating the clock gate signals that,
because of the already low switching activity in the accelerator, might limit the overall
effects on power savings. Furthermore, an ASIC implementation can utilize more recent
advances in low-power memories to implement more power-efficient non-volatile evalu-
ation memories. Using non-volative memory technologies allows for implementation of
power-gating to further reduce static power consumption; optimizations not available in
an FPGA context. Technologies such as resistive RAM (RRAM) and magnetoresistive
RAM (MRAM) can provide good trade-offs between power consumption and delay, and
they are non-volatile [Rze+21; Raj+19].
With the same assumptions as in [Rib20] section 7.1.1, based on [KR07], it is possible
to provide a rough estimate for the power of an equivalent ASIC implementation based
on the FPGA results presented in table 7.3. As such, the system is considered in its
current form without the MMCM, and operating under the expected temperature of
a hearing aid.
With these assumptions, [Rib20] derives a 7x expected reduction in
dynamic power and a 70x reduction in static power leading to a power consumption
of 6.31 mW as per equation 8.1. This number is, again, significantly lower than the
65.9 mW reported in [Rib20] and thus brings the accelerator much closer to the expected
sub-5 mW operating power of an accelerator for a hearing aid. With the optimizations
described in this chapter implemented, this power consumption may be reduced further.
This estimate must be considered very rough. A more accurate estimate
150 mW −123 mW
7
+ 172 mW
70
= 6.31 mW
(8.1)
Seeing as the accelerator remains capable of performing 263 million synaptic opera-
tions per second [Rib20], its power efficiency with the above power estimate is now 41.7
million synaptic operations per mW. This brings it within a factor of 16 of the efficiency
of IBM’s TrueNorth chip [Ako+15], albeit with much less functionality. If implemented
with an ASIC flow, the results in terms of area and power would need to be compared
to other more similar designs or to the other modules of the overall system in which the
accelerator is to be placed, all implemented in the same process. This might be rather
difficult due to limited publicity of such systems.
==PAGE:102==
88
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis has documented the work carried out as part of the project of optimizing
a hardware accelerator for spiking neural networks and converting it from executing
simple digit recognition to a KWS application. The chapters presented basic background
information about SNNs and the Chisel HDL, the network development and training,
the baseline system and the optimizations introduced. This was followed by a short
description of relevant implementation details, and the results obtained.
Finally, a
discussion presented reasons as to why the showcase network performs rather poorly
along with potential solutions to this issue, a short evaluation of the power consumption
results achieved, as well as potential future work that did not fit into the project period.
SNNs are attractive alternatives to regular multiplication-based ANNs due in partic-
ular to their sparse activity and addition-based neuron updates. Their architecture and
operations map particularly well to application-specific near-memory computing acceler-
ators. However, as computing-oriented SNNs is a relatively young area of research, the
libraries used to define and train such models are under-developed and harder to use com-
pared to their ANN counterparts. Nonetheless, the project presents an implementation
of a showcase FFNN in the BindsNET library, which achieves only 31.5% classification
accuracy on the preprocessed GSCD, and a corresponding hardware accelerator to which
the showcase network maps.
The accelerator bases itself around a number of cores; two input cores, a parame-
terizable number of neuron cores and one output core, interconnected by a common
AER-based bus. Input images are fed to the acceleration in an indirect period-based
rank-order encoding and output spikes are read from the accelerator, both via a UART
connection. High-level clock gating is applied such that the accelerator cores are all
switched off by a shared clock buffer when they are finished evaluating and waiting for
the next time step to begin. Network parameters are mapped to updated evaluation
memory modules which target a 7.10 fixed-point format, but include weights in two
other formats, 6.4 and 0.10, which are converted on-the-fly.
The hardware results show that the optimized accelerator uses roughly the same
number of LUTs, much fewer BRAMs, and slightly more FFs than the baseline design.
This, combined with the reduction in spike activity from using rank-order encoding,
leads to significant power savings. The full system consumes a total of 322 mW, just
32.5% of the baseline design’s total power consumption. This was found to be the result
of a 99% reduction of BRAM dynamic power and a 61.7% reduction of static power.
==PAGE:104==
90
9 Conclusion
The discussion starts with a presentation of some sources to the showcase network’s
inaccuracy as well as potential solutions to these. The conclusion to this is that the
network has too few trainable weights to learn the more-difficult patterns of preprocessed
GSCD and that potential solutions include different preprocessing steps and changes to
the network architecture and size. Finally, it continues by presenting considerations
on future work. The conclusion to this is that most of the accelerator modules should
be redesigned in a reconfigurable, modular fashion based around a generic AER-based
interconnect.
Overall, the project provides answers to the questions set out in the project descrip-
tion and presents an accelerator which is much closer to the targeted sub-5 mW ultra
low-power hearing aid application than the baseline.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[05]
“Verilog Register Transfer Level Synthesis”. In: IEC 62142-2005 First edition
2005-06 IEEE Std 1364.1 (2005), pages 1–116. doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2005.
339572.
[Aa]
Martín Abadi and Paul Barham et al. TensorFlow. https://github.com/
tensorflow/tensorflow. Google Brain. url: https://www.tensorflow.
org/ (visited on April 18, 2021).
[Ako+15]
Filipp Akopyan et al. “TrueNorth: Design and Tool Flow of a 65 mW 1
Million Neuron Programmable Neurosynaptic Chip”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 34.10 (2015),
pages 1537–1557. doi: 10.1109/TCAD.2015.2474396.
[al]
Wilson Snyder et al. Verilator. Verilator. url: https : / / github . com /
verilator/verilator (visited on April 16, 2021).
[Bek+14]
Trevor Bekolay et al. “Nengo: a Python tool for building large-scale func-
tional brain models”. In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 7.48 (2014). https:
//www.nengo.ai/ or https://github.com/nengo/nengo (visited on May
11, 2021), pages 1–13. issn: 1662-5196. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2013.00048.
[Blo+19]
Peter Blouw et al. Benchmarking Keyword Spotting Efficiency on Neuromor-
phic Hardware. 2019. arXiv: 1812.01739 [cs.LG].
[Bou+19]
Maxence Bouvier et al. “Spiking Neural Networks Hardware Implemen-
tations and Challenges”. In: ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in
Computing Systems 15.2 (June 2019), pages 1–35. issn: 1550-4840. doi:
10.1145/3304103. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3304103.
[Che+14]
Tianshi Chen et al. “DianNao: A Small-Footprint High-Throughput Acceler-
ator for Ubiquitous Machine-Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems. ASPLOS ’14. Salt Lake City, Utah, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2014, pages 269–284. isbn: 9781450323055. doi:
10.1145/2541940.2541967. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2541940.
2541967.
[Cho+14]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-
Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. 2014. arXiv: 1406.1078 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:106==
92
Bibliography
[Chu06]
Pong P. Chu. RTL Hardware Design Using VHDL: Coding for Efficiency,
Portability, and Scalability. Wiley Interscience, 2006. isbn: 978-0-471-72092-
8.
[Dav+18]
Mike Davies et al. “Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-
Chip Learning”. In: IEEE Micro 38.1 (2018), pages 82–99. doi: 10.1109/
MM.2018.112130359.
[DC15]
Peter U. Diehl and Matthew Cook. “Unsupervised learning of digit recog-
nition using spike-timing-dependent plasticity”. In: Frontiers in Computa-
tional Neuroscience 9 (2015), page 99. issn: 1662-5188. doi: 10.3389/fncom.
2015.00099. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
fncom.2015.00099.
[Den+20]
Lei Deng et al. Comprehensive SNN Compression Using ADMM Optimiza-
tion and Activity Regularization. 2020. arXiv: 1911.00822 [cs.NE].
[Dob+21]
Andrew Dobis et al. Open-Source Verification with Chisel and Scala. 2021.
arXiv: 2102.13460 [cs.PL].
[Ea]
Schuyler Eldridge and Jack Koenig et al. Chisel/FIRRTL Hardware Com-
piler Framework. CHIPS Alliance. url: https://www.chisel-lang.org/
(visited on April 15, 2021).
[Fan+18]
Haowem Fang et al. Scalable NoC-based Neuromorphic Hardware Learning
and Inference. 2018. arXiv: 1810.09233 [cs.ET].
[Fay16]
Haytham Fayek. Speech Processing for Machine Learning: Filter banks, Mel-
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs) and What’s In-Between. April
2016. url: https://haythamfayek.com/2016/04/21/speech-processing-
for-machine-learning.html (visited on May 18, 2021).
[Gis18]
ZipCPU by Gisselquist Technology. Crossing clock domains with an Asyn-
chronous FIFO. 2018. url: https://zipcpu.com/blog/2018/07/06/
afifo.html (visited on June 13, 2021).
[Git]
GitHub. GitHub Actions Docs. url: https : / / docs . github . com / en /
actions (visited on May 15, 2021).
[Has+16]
Soheil Hashemi et al. Understanding the Impact of Precision Quantization
on the Accuracy and Energy of Neural Networks. 2016. arXiv: 1612.03940
[cs.NE].
[Haz+18]
Hananel Hazan et al. “BindsNET: A Machine Learning-Oriented Spiking
Neural Networks Library in Python”. In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 12
(2018). https://github.com/BindsNET/bindsnet (visited on May 11,
2021), page 89. issn: 1662-5196. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2018.00089. url:
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fninf.2018.00089.
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015.
arXiv: 1512.03385 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
93
[HMD16]
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. Deep Compression: Compress-
ing Deep Neural Networks with Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman
Coding. 2016. arXiv: 1510.00149 [cs.CV].
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In:
Neural Computation 9.8 (November 1997), pages 1735–1780. issn: 0899-
7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. eprint: https://direct.mit.
edu/neco/article-pdf/9/8/1735/813796/neco.1997.9.8.1735.pdf.
url: https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[Izr+]
Adam Izraelevitz et al. FIRRTL. CHIPS Alliance. url: https://github.
com/chipsalliance/firrtl (visited on April 15, 2021).
[Jon02]
Darren Jones. How To Successfully Use Gated Clocking in an ASIC Design.
2002. url: http://home.ustc.edu.cn/~wyu0725/documents/snug_
collection/how%20to%20successfully%20use%20gated%20clocking%
20in%20an%20asic%20design.pdf (visited on May 31, 2021).
[Kas19]
Nikola K. Kasabov. Time-Space, Spiking Neural Networks and Brain-Inspired
Artificial Intelligence. Volume 7. Springer, 2019.
[KR07]
Ian Kuon and Jonathan Rose. “Measuring the Gap Between FPGAs and
ASICs”. In: IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems 26.2 (2007), pages 203–215. doi: 10.1109/TCAD.2006.
884574.
[La]
Richard Lin and Chick Markley et al. ChiselTest. University of California,
Berkeley, Architecture Research. url: https://github.com/ucb- bar/
chisel-testers2/ (visited on April 16, 2021).
[Law+]
Jim Lawson et al. Chisel3. CHIPS Alliance. url: https://github.com/
chipsalliance/chisel3 (visited on April 15, 2021).
[LD93]
R. Gary Leonard and George Doddington. TIDIGITS LDC93S10. 1993. url:
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC93S10 (visited on May 18, 2021).
[Ltd]
Parewa Labs Pvt. Ltd. Huffman Coding. url: https://www.programiz.
com/dsa/huffman-coding (visited on June 8, 2021).
[Ma]
Chick Markley and Jim Lawson et al. Treadle. CHIPS Alliance. url: https:
//github.com/chipsalliance/treadle (visited on April 15, 2021).
[Mey04]
Andreas Meyer. “Chapter 5 - Random Testing”. In: Principles of Functional
Verification. Edited by Andreas Meyer. Burlington: Newnes, 2004, pages 83–
113. isbn: 978-0-7506-7617-5. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
075067617-5/50005-5. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780750676175500055.
[Nie15]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Available online
at http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/ (visited on June 18,
2021). Determination Press, 2015.
==PAGE:108==
94
Bibliography
[Par+17]
Angshuman Parashar et al. SCNN: An Accelerator for Compressed-sparse
Convolutional Neural Networks. 2017. arXiv: 1708.04485 [cs.NE].
[Pek+12]
Gennady Pekhimenko et al. “Base-Delta-Immediate Compression: Practical
Data Compression for on-Chip Caches”. In: Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
national Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques.
PACT ’12. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2012, pages 377–388. isbn: 9781450311823. doi: 10.1145/2370816.
2370870. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2370816.2370870.
[PM07]
John G. Proakis and Dimitris G. Manolakis. Digital Signal Processing -
Principles, Algorithms, and Applications. 4th edition. Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey 07458: Pearson, 2007. isbn: 0-13-187374-1.
[Raj+19]
Bipin Rajendran et al. Low-Power Neuromorphic Hardware for Signal Pro-
cessing Applications. 2019. arXiv: 1901.03690 [cs.ET].
[Rib20]
Anthon Vincent Riber. “Power-Efficient Hardware Platform for Spiking Neu-
ral Networks”. Master’s thesis. Kongens Lyngby: Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), July 2020.
[Rue+]
Bodo Rueckauer et al. Spiking neural network conversion toolbox. Institute of
Neuroinformatics, ETH Zürich. url: https://snntoolbox.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/# (visited on May 11, 2021).
[Rue+17]
Bodo Rueckauer et al. “Conversion of Continuous-Valued Deep Networks to
Efficient Event-Driven Networks for Image Classification”. In: Frontiers in
Neuroscience 11 (2017), page 682. issn: 1662-453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2017.00682. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
fnins.2017.00682.
[RV20]
Ali Lotfi Rezaabad and Sriram Vishwanath. Long Short-Term Memory Spik-
ing Networks and Their Applications. 2020. arXiv: 2007.04779 [cs.NE].
[Rze+21]
Piotr Rzeszut et al. Multi-state MRAM cells for hardware neuromorphic
computing. 2021. arXiv: 2102.03415 [cs.ET].
[Sch19]
Martin Schoeberl. Digital Design with Chisel. Kindle Direct Publishing, 2019.
url: https://github.com/schoeberl/chisel-book.
[Sny]
Wilson Snyder. Verilator - Release 4.202. url: https://www.veripool.
org/ftp/verilator_doc.pdf (visited on May 15, 2021).
[Sta02]
Brains in Silicon Group Stanford University. Extended Address Event Rep-
resentation Draft Standard v0.4. 2002. url: https://web.stanford.edu/
group / brainsinsilicon/documents/methAER.pdf (visited on June 4,
2021).
[Sun+16]
Ming Sun et al. “Max-pooling loss training of long short-term memory net-
works for small-footprint keyword spotting”. In: 2016 IEEE Spoken Lan-
guage Technology Workshop (SLT) (December 2016). doi: 10.1109/slt.
2016.7846306. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SLT.2016.7846306.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
95
[Sup18]
Xilinx Support. 7 Series FPGAs Clocking Resources. Version 1.14. Xil-
inx. July 2018. Chapter 3. url: https://www.xilinx.com/support/
documentation/user_guides/ug472_7Series_Clocking.pdf (visited on
April 16, 2021).
[Sup19]
Xilinx Support. 7 Series FPGAs Memory Resources. Version 1.13. Xilinx.
February 2019. Chapter 1. url: https://www.xilinx.com/support/
documentation/user_guides/ug473_7Series_Memory_Resources.pdf
(visited on June 2, 2019).
[SZ15]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[Tav+19]
Amirhossein Tavanaei et al. “Deep learning in spiking neural networks”. In:
Neural Networks 111 (March 2019), pages 47–63. issn: 0893-6080. doi: 10.
1016/j.neunet.2018.12.002. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
neunet.2018.12.002.
[Vas+17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2017. arXiv: 1706.03762
[cs.CL].
[VCS19]
Ruthvik Vaila, John Chiasson, and Vishal Saxena. “Feature Extraction Us-
ing Spiking Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Neuromorphic Systems. ICONS ’19. Knoxville, TN,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. isbn: 9781450376808.
doi: 10.1145/3354265.3354279. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3354265.3354279.
[VDH15]
Julien Vitay, Helge Dinkelbach, and Fred Hamker. “ANNarchy: a code gen-
eration approach to neural simulations on parallel hardware”. In: Frontiers
in Neuroinformatics 9 (2015). https://github.com/vitay/ANNarchy (vis-
ited on May 11, 2021), page 19. issn: 1662-5196. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2015.
00019. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fninf.
2015.00019.
[Wan+20]
Dewei Wang et al. Always-On, Sub-300-nW, Event-Driven Spiking Neural
Network based on Spike-Driven Clock-Generation and Clock- and Power-
Gating for an Ultra-Low-Power Intelligent Device. 2020. arXiv: 2006.12314
[cs.NE].
[Wara]
Pete Warden. Speech commands dataset version 1. url: http://download.
tensorflow.org/data/speech_commands_v0.01.tar.gz (visited on
May 16, 2021).
[Warb]
Pete Warden. Speech commands dataset version 2. url: http://download.
tensorflow.org/data/speech_commands_v0.02.tar.gz (visited on
May 16, 2021).
[War18]
Pete Warden. Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech
Recognition. 2018. arXiv: 1804.03209 [cs.CL].
==PAGE:110==
96
Bibliography
[Ya]
Edward Z. Yang and Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch. https://github.com/
pytorch/pytorch. FaceBook AI Research. url: https://pytorch.org/
(visited on April 18, 2021).
[Zha+18]
Yundong Zhang et al. Hello Edge: Keyword Spotting on Microcontrollers.
2018. arXiv: 1711.07128 [cs.SD].
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX A
Network Development
This chapter includes all Python source files used as part of the network development
in the project. The Jupyter notebook is not included here.
A.1
MNIST Classification Results
The following are classification results for both the showcase network and the reference
PyTorch model on MNIST. Note that the showcase network is trained only for two
epochs on MNIST due to a 24-hour job duration limit on GPU tasks running on DTU’s
HPC servers.
MNIST
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
387
45
108
79
30
63
85
18
98
28
1
101
1077
531
528
255
339
255
375
512
347
2
77
4
213
76
35
41
106
17
73
43
3
82
3
46
148
23
102
57
23
71
39
4
69
0
44
49
427
47
137
62
59
196
5
162
3
34
72
49
241
97
56
57
86
6
44
0
26
15
33
20
199
5
48
27
7
23
1
20
23
46
18
9
437
28
104
8
20
2
3
15
16
12
8
8
18
28
9
15
0
7
5
68
9
5
27
10
111
Accuracy: 32.58%
Table A.1: Validation results for MNIST using the showcase network. Columns rep-
resent true classes, while rows represent predicted classes.
A.2
The kwsonsnn Library
The following are the source files for the kwsonsnn library; i.e., the SpeechCommandsDataset
class, the ShowCaseNet class and relevant spike encoding classes and methods.
==PAGE:112==
98
A Network Development
MNIST
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
967
0
3
0
1
4
6
0
5
7
1
0
1122
3
0
0
0
3
5
0
5
2
1
4
999
8
6
0
1
9
6
2
3
4
1
8
984
1
17
2
4
23
15
4
0
0
4
0
954
3
4
1
4
24
5
2
1
0
3
1
851
7
1
6
5
6
4
1
5
0
8
6
933
0
8
2
7
1
4
7
9
4
4
1
1004
11
17
8
1
2
3
5
2
5
1
0
908
2
9
0
0
0
1
5
2
0
4
3
930
Accuracy: 96.52%
Table A.2: Validation results for MNIST using the reference ANN. Columns represent
true classes, while rows represent predicted classes.
1
# The following is heavily inspired by
2
#
https://github.com/BindsNET/bindsnet/blob/master/bindsnet/datasets/spoken_mnist
3
4
from typing import Tuple, List, Iterable
5
import os
6
import torch
7
import torch.nn.functional as F
8
import numpy as np
9
from scipy.io import wavfile
10
import warnings
11
from tqdm import tqdm
12
import tarfile
13
from urllib.request import urlretrieve
14
import hashlib
15
16
class SpeechCommandsDataset(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
17
"""
18
Handles loading and saving of the Speech Commands audio dataset
`(link)
19
<https://ai.googleblog.com/2017/08/launching -speech -commands -dataset.html>`_.
20
"""
21
train_pickle = 'train.pt'
22
valid_pickle = 'valid.pt'
23
test_pickle
= 'test.pt'
24
==PAGE:113==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
99
25
url =
'http://download.tensorflow.org/data/speech_commands_v0.01.tar.gz'
26
keywords = ['bed', 'bird', 'cat', 'dog', 'down', 'eight',
'five', 'four',
\
27
'go', 'happy', 'house', 'left', 'marvin', 'nine',
'no', 'off',
\
28
'on', 'one', 'right', 'seven', 'sheila', 'six',
'stop','three', \
29
'tree', 'two', 'up', 'wow', 'yes', 'zero']
30
files = ['LICENSE', 'README.md', 'testing_list.txt',
'validation_list.txt']
31
32
back_folder
= '_background_noise_'
33
unknown_folder = '_unknown'
34
silence_folder = '_silence'
35
36
def __init__(
37
self,
38
path: str,
39
download: bool = False,
40
shuffle: bool = True,
41
preprocess: bool = True,
42
split: str = 'train',
43
num_samples: int = -1,
44
kws: List[str] = ['up', 'down', 'left', 'right', 'on',
'off', 'yes', 'no', 'go', 'stop'],
45
unknown: bool = False,
46
silence: bool = False
47
) -> None:
48
"""
49
Constructor for the ``SpeechCommandsDataset `` class.
Assumes data is downloaded
50
and unzipped in ``./path``.
51
52
:param path: Pathname of directory in which to store the
dataset.
53
:param download: Whether to download the dataset.
54
:param shuffle: Whether to randomly permute order of
dataset.
55
:param preprocess: Whether to preprocess the dataset.
56
:param split: Train, test, or validation split; in
``{'train', 'test', 'valid'}``.
57
:param num_samples: Number of samples to pass to the batch.
58
:param kws: List of keywords to use; in {keywords in Speech
Commands dataset}.
59
:param unknown: Whether to add an 'unknown' class sampled
==PAGE:114==
100
A Network Development
from the unused classes.
60
:param silence: Whether to add a 'silence' class sampled
from background noise.
61
"""
62
super().__init__()
63
self.processed = False
64
65
self.path = path
66
self.shuffle = shuffle
67
self.num_samples = num_samples
68
self.kws = list(filter(lambda x: x.lower() not in
['unknown', 'silence'], kws))
69
self.unknown = unknown
70
self.silence = silence
71
72
# Unused keywords are considered part of the 'unknown' class
73
self.unknowns =
sorted(list(set(SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords).difference(set(kws))))
74
if not os.path.isdir(os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.unknown_folder)):
75
os.mkdir(os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.unknown_folder))
76
if not os.path.isdir(os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.silence_folder)):
77
os.mkdir(os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.silence_folder))
78
if self.unknown:
79
assert self.unknowns != [], \
80
"at least one keyword must be unused for it to be
part of the 'unknown' class"
81
82
# Download the dataset if requested
83
if download:
84
self._download()
85
86
# Check that specified keywords are legal
87
labels = []
88
for _, dirs, _ in os.walk(self.path):
89
labels.extend(list(filter(lambda x: not
x.startswith('_'), dirs)))
90
assert all(map(lambda x: x.lower() in labels, self.kws)), \
91
'all given keywords must be part of the dataset'
92
93
# Get the requested split
94
if 'train' in split.lower():
95
self.audio, self.labels , self.sr = self._get_train()
==PAGE:115==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
101
96
elif 'test' in split.lower() or 'valid' in split.lower():
97
self.audio, self.labels , self.sr =
self._get_test_or_valid('valid' in split.lower())
98
else:
99
raise ValueError("split must be one of 'train', 'test',
or 'valid'")
100
101
# Process the data
102
if preprocess:
103
self._process_data()
104
105
def __len__(self):
106
return len(self.audio)
107
108
def __getitem__(self, ind):
109
"""
110
Generates slightly randomized shifts and noise versions of
the audio signals.
111
"""
112
if not self.processed:
113
audio = self.audio[ind][:self.num_samples]
114
else:
115
audio = self.audio[ind]
116
117
label = self.labels[ind]
118
return {'audio': audio, 'label': label}
119
120
def _get_splitfiles(self) -> List[str]:
121
"""
122
Get the two files determining test and validation splits.
123
"""
124
return [os.path.join(self.path, 'testing_list.txt'),
125
os.path.join(self.path, 'validation_list.txt')]
126
127
def _get_train(self) -> Tuple[List[torch.Tensor], torch.Tensor,
int]:
128
"""
129
Get the training set split of the Speech Commands dataset.
130
131
:return: Speech Commands training audio and labels.
132
"""
133
split_files = self._get_splitfiles()
134
remove_files = []
135
for file in split_files:
136
if not os.path.isfile(file):
137
raise FileNotFoundError(f"test split file {file}
==PAGE:116==
102
A Network Development
not found")
138
else:
139
with open(file) as f:
140
lines = f.read().split('\n')
141
lines = [os.path.join(self.path, x) for x in
lines]
142
remove_files.extend(lines)
143
# Fix difference between Win32 and Unix paths
144
remove_files = list(map(lambda x: x.replace('\\', '/'),
remove_files))
145
146
# If the training set has not been fetched before, fetch
the entire set
147
# and save it as Pickle files
148
pf = SpeechCommandsDataset.train_pickle
149
pickle_files = [
150
os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf)
151
for kw in SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords
152
]
153
if not all(map(os.path.isfile , pickle_files)):
154
# Run through all keywords and generate Pickle files
155
for kw in SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords:
156
# Find the relevant files
157
files = []
158
for root, _, filenames in
os.walk(os.path.join(self.path, kw)):
159
files.extend(list(map(lambda x:
os.path.join(root, x), filenames)))
160
# Fix difference between Win32 and Unix paths
161
files = list(map(lambda x: x.replace('\\', '/'),
files))
162
163
# Remove files used as part of the other splits
164
files =
list(set(files).difference(set(remove_files)))
165
166
# Fetch the unprocessed data
167
print(f"Fetching keyword '{kw}'", flush=True)
168
audio, labels , sr = self._fetch_data(files)
169
170
# Store as a Pickle file
171
torch.save(
172
(audio, labels , sr),
173
open(os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf), 'wb')
174
)
175
==PAGE:117==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
103
176
# Get the requested keywords
177
audio, labels , sr = [], [], -1
178
for kw in self.kws:
179
p_audio , p_labels , p_sr = torch.load(
180
open(os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf), 'rb')
181
)
182
if sr != -1:
183
assert p_sr == sr
184
else:
185
sr = p_sr
186
audio.extend(p_audio)
187
labels.extend(p_labels)
188
189
# Get some unknowns , if requested
190
if self.unknown:
191
u_audio , u_labels , u_sr = self._get_unknowns(pf,
len(audio))
192
assert u_sr == sr
193
audio.extend(u_audio)
194
labels.extend(u_labels)
195
self.kws.append('unknown')
196
197
# Get some silence , if requested
198
if self.silence:
199
s_audio , s_labels , s_sr = self._get_silence(pf,
len(audio))
200
assert s_sr == sr
201
audio.extend(s_audio)
202
labels.extend(s_labels)
203
self.kws.append('silence')
204
205
audio
= np.array(audio)
206
labels = np.array(labels)
207
208
# If requested , shuffle the data
209
if self.shuffle:
210
perm = np.random.permutation(np.arange(labels.shape[0]))
211
audio, labels = [audio[_] for _ in perm], labels[perm]
212
213
return audio, labels , sr
214
215
def _get_test_or_valid(
216
self, valid: bool = False
217
) -> Tuple[List[torch.Tensor], torch.Tensor, int]:
218
"""
219
Get the validation or test set split of the Speech Commands
==PAGE:118==
104
A Network Development
dataset.
220
221
:param valid: Whether to fetch test or validation split.
222
:return: Speech Commands test audio and labels.
223
"""
224
split_file = self._get_splitfiles()[1 if valid else 0]
225
226
# First find which files to use
227
all_files = []
228
if not os.path.isfile(split_file):
229
raise FileNotFoundError(f"test split file {split_file}
not found")
230
else:
231
with open(split_file) as f:
232
lines = f.read().split('\n')[:-2]
233
#lines = list(filter(lambda x: x[:x.find('/')] in
self.kws, lines))
234
lines = [os.path.join(self.path, x) for x in lines]
235
all_files.extend(lines)
236
# Fix difference between Win32 and Unix paths
237
all_files = list(map(lambda x: x.replace('\\', '/'),
all_files))
238
239
# If the test or validation set has not been fetched
before , fetch the entire
240
# set and save it as a Pickle file
241
pf = SpeechCommandsDataset.valid_pickle if valid else
SpeechCommandsDataset.test_pickle
242
pickle_files = [
243
os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf) for kw in
SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords
244
]
245
if not all(map(os.path.isfile , pickle_files)):
246
# Run through all keywords and generate Pickle files
247
for kw in SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords:
248
# Find the relevant files
249
files = []
250
for root, _, filenames in
os.walk(os.path.join(self.path, kw)):
251
files.extend(list(map(lambda x:
os.path.join(root, x), filenames)))
252
# Fix difference between Win32 and Unix paths
253
files = list(map(lambda x: x.replace('\\', '/'),
files))
254
255
# Remove files used in other splits
==PAGE:119==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
105
256
files = list(filter(lambda x: x in all_files ,
files))
257
258
# Fetch the unprocessed data
259
print(f"Fetching keyword '{kw}'", flush=True)
260
audio, labels , sr = self._fetch_data(files)
261
262
# Store as a Pickle file
263
torch.save(
264
(audio, labels , sr),
265
open(os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf), 'wb')
266
)
267
268
# Get the requested keywords
269
audio, labels , sr = [], [], -1
270
for kw in self.kws:
271
p_audio , p_labels , p_sr = torch.load(
272
open(os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf), 'rb')
273
)
274
if sr != -1:
275
assert p_sr == sr
276
else:
277
sr = p_sr
278
audio.extend(p_audio)
279
labels.extend(p_labels)
280
281
# Get some unknowns , if requested
282
if self.unknown:
283
u_audio , u_labels , u_sr = self._get_unknowns(pf,
len(audio))
284
assert u_sr == sr
285
audio.extend(u_audio)
286
labels.extend(u_labels)
287
self.kws.append('unknown')
288
289
# Get some silence , if requested
290
if self.silence:
291
s_audio , s_labels , s_sr = self._get_silence(pf,
len(audio))
292
assert s_sr == sr
293
audio.extend(s_audio)
294
labels.extend(s_labels)
295
self.kws.append('silence')
296
297
audio
= np.array(audio)
298
labels = np.array(labels)
==PAGE:120==
106
A Network Development
299
300
# If requested , shuffle the data
301
if self.shuffle:
302
perm = np.random.permutation(np.arange(labels.shape[0]))
303
audio, labels = [torch.Tensor(audio[_]) for _ in perm],
labels[perm]
304
305
return audio, labels , sr
306
307
def _get_unknowns(self, pf: str, audiolen: int) ->
Tuple[List[np.ndarray], List[str], int]:
308
"""
309
Get a set of unknown keywords randomly sampled from unused
keywords.
310
311
:param pf: The pickle file ending to use.
312
:param audiolen: The length of the current audio array.
313
:return: A tuple of randomly sampled unused keywords.
314
"""
315
# Check if this combination of unknowns have been generated
before
316
ukhash =
hashlib.sha1('_'.join(self.unknowns).encode('utf-8')).hexdigest()
317
ukpath = os.path.join(
318
self.path, SpeechCommandsDataset.unknown_folder , ukhash
+ pf
319
)
320
if os.path.isfile(ukpath):
321
u_audio , u_labels , u_sr = torch.load(open(ukpath, 'rb'))
322
# ... otherwise , generate it and store it
323
else:
324
u_audio , u_labels , u_sr = [], [], -1
325
per_class = int((audiolen / len(self.kws)) /
len(self.unknowns))
326
327
# Run through all unknown keywords
328
for kw in self.unknowns:
329
p_audio , _, p_sr = torch.load(
330
open(os.path.join(self.path, kw, pf), 'rb')
331
)
332
if u_sr != -1:
333
assert p_sr == u_sr
334
else:
335
u_sr = p_sr
336
rand_ind = np.random.choice(len(p_audio),
per_class , replace=False)
==PAGE:121==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
107
337
p_audio = list(np.array(p_audio)[rand_ind])
338
u_audio.extend(p_audio)
339
u_labels.extend(['unknown'] * per_class)
340
341
# Store the resulting mix as a Pickle file
342
torch.save(
343
(u_audio , np.array(u_labels), u_sr),
344
open(ukpath , 'wb')
345
)
346
347
return u_audio , u_labels , u_sr
348
349
def _get_silence(self, pf: str, audiolen: int) ->
Tuple[List[np.ndarray], np.ndarray , int]:
350
"""
351
Get a set of random noise or silence samples.
352
353
:param pf: The pickle file ending to use.
354
:param audiolen: The length of the current audio array.
355
:return: A tuple of randomly sampled silence or noise.
356
"""
357
# Check if the silence has been generated before
358
slcpath = os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.silence_folder , pf)
359
if os.path.isfile(slcpath):
360
s_audio , s_labels , s_sr = torch.load(open(slcpath ,
'rb'))
361
# ... otherwise , generate it and store it
362
else:
363
# Get the files to fetch the audio from
364
files = []
365
for root, _, filenames in os.walk(
366
os.path.join(self.path,
SpeechCommandsDataset.back_folder)
367
):
368
files.extend(
369
list(map(
370
lambda x: os.path.join(root, x),
371
filter(lambda x: '.md' not in x, filenames)
372
))
373
)
374
# Fix difference between Win32 and Unix paths
375
files = list(map(lambda x: x.replace('\\', '/'), files))
376
377
# Sample some audio from each of the files
378
s_audio , s_labels , s_sr = [], [], -1
==PAGE:122==
108
A Network Development
379
per_file = int((audiolen / len(self.kws)) / len(files))
380
381
# Run through all of the files using an 80-10-10 split
382
for f in files:
383
# Fetch the unprocessed audio
384
sr, signal = wavfile.read(f)
385
if s_sr != -1:
386
assert sr == s_sr
387
else:
388
s_sr = sr
389
390
# Depending on the split, use a different portion
of the signal
391
if pf == SpeechCommandsDataset.train_pickle:
392
start, end = 0, int(0.8*len(signal))
393
elif pf == SpeechCommandsDataset.valid_pickle:
394
start, end = int(0.8*len(signal)),
int(0.9*len(signal))
395
else:
396
start, end = int(0.9*len(signal)), len(signal)
397
signal = signal[start:end]
398
399
# Randomly sample the signal a number of times
400
length = 8000
401
audio = [
402
signal[ind:ind+length] for ind in
np.random.choice(
403
len(signal) - length, per_file ,
replace=False
404
)
405
]
406
audio = list(map(lambda x: (x / max(np.abs(x))) +
1e-9, audio))
407
408
s_audio.extend(audio)
409
s_labels.extend(['silence'] * per_file)
410
411
# Store the resulting mix as a Pickle file
412
torch.save(
413
(s_audio , np.array(s_labels), s_sr),
414
open(slcpath , 'wb')
415
)
416
417
return s_audio , s_labels , s_sr
418
419
def _download(self) -> None:
==PAGE:123==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
109
420
"""
421
Downloads and unzips the Speech Commands dataset , if it is
not already downloaded.
422
"""
423
tar_name = 'dataset.tar.gz'
424
425
def dataset_avail() -> bool:
426
return all(map(lambda x:
os.path.exists(os.path.join(self.path, x)),
SpeechCommandsDataset.keywords)) \
427
and all(map(lambda x:
os.path.isfile(os.path.join(self.path, x)),
SpeechCommandsDataset.files))
428
429
def tarfile_avail() -> bool:
430
return os.path.isfile(os.path.join(self.path, tar_name))
431
432
# Create directory if it does not exist
433
if not os.path.isdir(self.path):
434
os.mkdir(self.path)
435
436
# Check if the dataset is already downloaded
437
if not dataset_avail():
438
if not tarfile_avail():
439
# Download the dataset file
440
urlretrieve(SpeechCommandsDataset.url,
os.path.join(self.path, tar_name))
441
442
# Extracting leads to all data folders being present in
``data_path ``
443
cwd = os.getcwd()
444
os.chdir(self.path)
445
f = tarfile.open(tar_name , 'r:gz')
446
f.extractall()
447
f.close()
448
os.remove(tar_name)
449
os.chdir(cwd)
450
451
def _fetch_data(
452
self, files: Iterable[str]
453
) -> Tuple[List[np.ndarray], np.ndarray , int]:
454
"""
455
Opens files of Speech Commands data and processes them into
``numpy`` arrays.
456
Labels are one-hot encoded according to their position in
``self.kws``.
==PAGE:124==
110
A Network Development
457
458
:param files: Names of the files containing Spoken MNIST
audio to load.
459
:return: Processed Speech Commands audio and label data.
460
"""
461
audio, labels = [], []
462
exp_sr , _ = wavfile.read(files[0])
463
464
# For subsampling - to center the audio, the subsampled
frames are weighted
465
# by a window giving central samples greater weight
466
frame_length , frame_stride = 8000, 1000
467
num_frames = (exp_sr - frame_length) // frame_stride + 1
468
indices = (
469
np.tile(np.arange(0, frame_length), (num_frames , 1))
470
+ np.tile(
471
np.arange(0, num_frames * frame_stride ,
frame_stride), (frame_length , 1)
472
).T
473
)
474
weight = np.tile(np.blackman(frame_length), (num_frames , 1))
475
476
# For each file, fetch the audio signal
477
pbar = tqdm(files)
478
for f in pbar:
479
# Get label from file name
480
label = f.split('/')[-2]
481
482
# Get signal from .wav file
483
sr, signal = wavfile.read(f)
484
if sr != exp_sr:
485
raise ValueError("all audio files must have the
same sampling rate")
486
487
# Taken directly from
488
#
https://github.com/BindsNET/bindsnet/blob/master/bindsnet/datasets/
489
# also inspired by
490
#
https://towardsdatascience.com/speech-classification -using-neural-n
491
pre_emphasis = 0.97
492
signal = np.append(
493
signal[0], signal[1:] - pre_emphasis * signal[:-1]
494
)
495
496
# Pad to length of 1 second
==PAGE:125==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
111
497
signal = np.hstack(
498
(signal ,
np.random.normal(scale=abs(np.median(signal)),
size=exp_sr -len(signal)))
499
)
500
501
# Pick out sub-part of the signal - first attempt uses
8000 samples (i.e., half)
502
frames = signal[indices.astype(np.int32, copy=False)]
503
signal = frames[np.argmax(np.sum(np.dot(np.abs(frames),
weight.T), 1))]
504
505
# Normalization for easier plotting - add constant to
avoid true_divide error
506
signal /= max(np.abs(signal)) + 1e-9
507
508
# Append the signal and its label to the lists
509
with warnings.catch_warnings():
510
warnings.simplefilter("ignore")
511
audio.append(signal), labels.append(label)
512
513
return audio, np.array(labels), exp_sr
514
515
def _process_data(self) -> None:
516
"""
517
Applies common FFT-related techniques to the audio signals
but leaves
518
the labels. Must be called explicitly to affect the
dataset. Non-reversible.
519
"""
520
if self.processed:
521
print('Dataset has already been processed!')
522
return
523
self.processed = True
524
525
# Run through all audio and labels
526
audio, labels = [], []
527
pbar = tqdm(zip(self.audio, self.labels))
528
for signal , label in pbar:
529
# Again, taken more or less directly from
530
#
https://github.com/BindsNET/bindsnet/blob/master/bindsnet/datas
531
532
# Various sources use different frame sizes - typical
values in [10ms, 40ms]
533
# Similarly , different strides (and hence, overlaps)
==PAGE:126==
112
A Network Development
are used - typical values in [0%, 75%]
534
# For example ,
https://github.com/BindsNET/bindsnet/blob/master/bindsnet/datasets/
535
# uses frame_size=25ms and frame_stride=10ms (60%
overlap)
536
# whereas Hello Edge (https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.07128)
537
# uses frame_size=40ms and frame_stride=20ms (50%
overlap)
538
# and Benchmarking KWS Efficiency ...
(https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01739)
539
# uses frame_size=.... and frame_stride=10ms (...
overlap).
540
# I choose to use the same setup as Hello Edge
targeting a smaller network as presented
541
# in Benchmarking KWS Efficiency (i.e., no
convolutions).
542
543
# Also, the Mel Spectral Frequency Component analysis
transforms the inputs to
544
# the same size as the images used as part of the
previous work by Anthon (i.e., 22x22).
545
# TODO: Make this code more flexible - for example
allowing selection of frame_length.
546
547
# In seconds ... (like Hello Edge now)
548
frame_length = 0.04
549
frame_stride = 0.02
550
551
assert frame_length <= 1.0, (
552
f'frames should be shorter than or equal to signal
length , got {frame_length}'
553
)
554
assert frame_stride < frame_length , (
555
f'frame stride should be less than frame length ,
got {frame_length} and {frame_stride}'
556
)
557
558
# ... converted to samples
559
frame_length , frame_stride = (
560
int(round(frame_length * self.sr)),
561
int(round(frame_stride * self.sr))
562
)
563
signal_length = len(signal)
564
565
# Pad to ensure at least one frame
566
num_frames = int(np.ceil(float(np.abs(signal_length -
==PAGE:127==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
113
frame_length)) / frame_stride))
567
pad_signal_length = num_frames * frame_stride +
frame_length
568
signal = np.append(signal, np.zeros((pad_signal_length
- signal_length)))
569
570
# Collect frames from signal
571
indices = (
572
np.tile(np.arange(0, frame_length), (num_frames , 1))
573
+ np.tile(
574
np.arange(0, num_frames * frame_stride ,
frame_stride), (frame_length , 1)
575
).T
576
)
577
frames = signal[indices.astype(np.int32, copy=False)]
578
579
# A Hamming window is used to reduce noise in the FFT
due to cuts in the signal
580
frames *= np.hamming(frame_length)
581
582
# Perform FFT (real input signal)
583
# According to
https://haythamfayek.com/2016/04/21/speech-processing -for-machi
584
# NFFT is typically either 256 or 512
585
NFFT = 512
586
f_mag = np.abs(np.fft.rfft(frames, NFFT))
587
f_pow = (1.0 / NFFT) * (f_mag ** 2)
588
589
# Generate Mel filter banks
590
nfilt = 22
591
# Convert Hz to Mel (see
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel_scale)
592
low_freq_mel = 0
593
high_freq_mel = 2595 * np.log10(1 + (self.sr / 2) / 700)
594
# Equally spaced in Mel scale
595
mel_points = np.linspace(low_freq_mel , high_freq_mel ,
nfilt + 2)
596
hz_points = 700 * (10 ** (mel_points / 2595) - 1)
597
bin = np.floor((NFFT + 1) * hz_points / self.sr)
598
599
fbank = np.zeros((nfilt, int(np.floor(NFFT / 2 + 1))))
600
for m in range(1, nfilt + 1):
601
f_m_minus = int(bin[m - 1])
# left
602
f_m = int(bin[m])
# center
603
f_m_plus = int(bin[m + 1])
# right
604
==PAGE:128==
114
A Network Development
605
for k in range(f_m_minus , f_m):
606
fbank[m - 1, k] = (k - bin[m - 1]) / (bin[m] -
bin[m - 1])
607
for k in range(f_m, f_m_plus):
608
fbank[m - 1, k] = (bin[m + 1] - k) / (bin[m +
1] - bin[m])
609
610
filter_banks = np.dot(f_pow, fbank.T)
611
# Replace zeros with smallest positive number for
stability
612
filter_banks = np.where(filter_banks == 0,
np.finfo(float).eps, filter_banks)
613
# Convert to dB
614
filter_banks = 20 * np.log10(filter_banks)
615
# Fix negative dB numbers after normalization
616
filter_banks += np.abs(np.min(filter_banks))
617
# Filter out everything below the 80th percentile and
normalize
618
filter_banks = np.where(
619
filter_banks >= np.percentile(filter_banks , 80),
filter_banks , 0
620
)
621
filter_banks /= (np.max(filter_banks) + 1e-9)
622
623
# Append the signal and its label to the lists
624
with warnings.catch_warnings():
625
warnings.simplefilter("ignore")
626
audio.append(torch.Tensor(filter_banks[:nfilt,
:nfilt]))
627
labels.append(self.kws.index(label))
628
629
# Store result
630
self.audio, self.labels = torch.stack(audio),
torch.Tensor(labels)
Listing A.1: Implementation of the GSCD in a format suitable for training PyTorch
models.
1
# Reused from
2
#
https://github.com/Thonner/bindsnet/blob/master/bindsnet/encoding/encodings.py
3
4
import torch
5
from bindsnet.encoding import Encoder
6
7
class RateEncoder(Encoder):
==PAGE:129==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
115
8
def __init__(self, time: int, dt: float = 1.0, **kwargs):
9
"""
10
Creates a callable RateEncoder which encodes as defined in
``bindsnet.encoding ``
11
12
:param time: Length of Rate spike train per input variable.
13
:param dt: Simulation time step.
14
"""
15
super().__init__(time, dt=dt, **kwargs)
16
17
self.enc = rate
18
19
def rate(datum: torch.Tensor , time: int, dt: float = 1.0, **kwargs)
-> torch.Tensor:
20
"""
21
Direct rate based incoding
22
"""
23
assert (datum >= 0).all(), "Inputs must be non-negative"
24
25
# Get shape and size of data.
26
shape, size = datum.shape, datum.numel()
27
datum = datum.flatten()
28
time = int(time / dt)
29
30
# Compute firing rates in seconds as function of data intensity ,
31
# accounting for simulation time step.
32
rate = torch.zeros(size, device=datum.device)
33
rate[datum != 0] = 1 / datum[datum != 0] * (1000 / dt)
34
35
timeRates = torch.ones(time+1, size, device=datum.device)
36
for i in range(time+1):
37
timeRates[i] = rate
38
39
# Calculate spike times by cumulatively summing over time
dimension.
40
times = torch.cumsum(timeRates , dim=0).long()
41
times[times >= time + 1] = 0
42
43
# Create tensor of spikes.
44
spikes = torch.zeros(time + 1, size, device=datum.device).byte()
45
spikes[times, torch.arange(size)] = 1
46
spikes = spikes[1:]
47
48
return spikes.view(time, *shape)
49
50
class RatePeriod(Encoder):
==PAGE:130==
116
A Network Development
51
def __init__(self, time: int, dt: float = 1.0, **kwargs):
52
"""
53
Creates a callable RatePeriod which returns the period of
spikes as defined in
54
``bindsnet.encoding ``
55
56
:param time: Length of rate spike train per input variable.
57
:param dt: Simulation time step.
58
"""
59
super().__init__(time, dt=dt, **kwargs)
60
61
self.enc = ratePeriod
62
63
def ratePeriod(datum: torch.Tensor , time: int, dt: float = 1.0,
**kwargs) -> torch.Tensor:
64
"""
65
Indirect period -based rate encoding
66
"""
67
assert (datum >= 0).all(), "Inputs must be non-negative"
68
69
# Get shape and size of data.
70
shape, size = datum.shape, datum.numel()
71
datum = datum.flatten()
72
time = int(time / dt)
73
74
# Compute firing rates in seconds as function of data intensity ,
75
# accounting for simulation time step.
76
rate = torch.zeros(size, device=datum.device)
77
rate[datum != 0] = 1 / datum[datum != 0] * (1000 / dt)
78
79
return torch.clamp(rate.round(), min=0, max=time).long()
80
81
# Everything below here is new
82
class RankOrderPeriod(Encoder):
83
def __init__(self, time: int, dt: float = 1.0, **kwargs):
84
"""
85
Creates a callable RankOrderPeriod which returns the period
of rank-order
86
encoded spikes as defined in ``bindsnet.encoding ``
87
88
:param time: Length of input spike train per input variable.
89
:param dt: Simulation time step.
90
"""
91
super().__init__(time, dt=dt, **kwargs)
92
93
self.enc = rankOrderPeriod
==PAGE:131==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
117
94
95
def rankOrderPeriod(datum: torch.Tensor, time: int, dt: float =
1.0, **kwargs) -> torch.Tensor:
96
"""
97
Indirect period -based rank-order encoding
98
"""
99
assert (datum >= 0).all(), "Inputs must be non-negative"
100
101
# Get shape and size of data.
102
shape, size = datum.shape, datum.numel()
103
datum = datum.flatten()
104
time = int(time / dt)
105
106
# Convert to periods.
107
datum /= datum.max()
108
times = torch.zeros(size)
109
times[datum != 0] = 1 / datum[datum != 0]
110
times *= time / times.max()
111
112
return torch.ceil(times).long()
Listing A.2: Various encoding-related function and class definitions.
1
# The following model is reused from
2
# https://github.com/Thonner/bindsnet/tree/master/examples/mnist
3
4
from typing import Optional , Union, Sequence , Iterable
5
import torch
6
from bindsnet.network import Network
7
from bindsnet.network.nodes import Input, LIFNodes ,
DiehlAndCookNodes
8
from bindsnet.network.topology import Connection , LocalConnection
9
from bindsnet.learning import PostPre
10
11
class ShowCaseNet(Network):
12
# language=rst
13
"""
14
Implements the spiking neural network architecture from `(Diehl
& Cook 2015)
15
<https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2015.00099/full>`_.
Scaled
16
to fit the KWSonSNN accelerator.
17
"""
18
19
def __init__(
20
self,
==PAGE:132==
118
A Network Development
21
n_inpt: int,
22
n_neurons: int = 200,
23
exc: float = 22.5,
24
inh: float = 22.5,
25
dt: float = 1.0,
26
nu: Optional[Union[float, Sequence[float]]] = (1e-4, 1e-2),
27
reduction: Optional[callable] = None,
28
wmin: float = 0.0,
29
wmax: float = 1.0,
30
norm: float = 78.4,
31
theta_plus: float = 0.05,
32
tc_theta_decay: float = 1e7,
33
inpt_shape: Optional[Iterable[int]] = None,
34
) -> None:
35
# language=rst
36
"""
37
Constructor for class ``ShowCaseNet ``.
38
39
:param n_inpt: Number of input neurons. Matches the 1D size
of the input data.
40
:param n_neurons: Number of excitatory , inhibitory neurons.
41
:param exc: Strength of synapse weights from excitatory to
inhibitory layer.
42
:param inh: Strength of synapse weights from inhibitory to
excitatory layer.
43
:param dt: Simulation time step.
44
:param nu: Single or pair of learning rates for pre- and
post-synaptic events ,
45
respectively.
46
:param reduction: Method for reducing parameter updates
along the minibatch
47
dimension.
48
:param wmin: Minimum allowed weight on input to excitatory
synapses.
49
:param wmax: Maximum allowed weight on input to excitatory
synapses.
50
:param norm: Input to excitatory layer connection weights
normalization
51
constant.
52
:param theta_plus: On-spike increment of
``DiehlAndCookNodes `` membrane
53
threshold potential.
54
:param tc_theta_decay: Time constant of
``DiehlAndCookNodes `` threshold
55
potential decay.
56
:param inpt_shape: The dimensionality of the input layer.
==PAGE:133==
A.2 The kwsonsnn Library
119
57
"""
58
super().__init__(dt=dt)
59
60
self.n_inpt = n_inpt
61
self.inpt_shape = inpt_shape
62
self.n_neurons = n_neurons
63
self.exc = exc
64
self.inh = inh
65
self.dt = dt
66
67
# Layers
68
input_layer = Input(
69
n=self.n_inpt , shape=self.inpt_shape , traces=True,
tc_trace=20.0
70
)
71
exc_layer = DiehlAndCookNodes(
72
n=self.n_neurons ,
73
traces=True,
74
rest=0.0,
75
reset=1.0,
76
thresh=3.0,
77
refrac=5,
78
tc_decay=100.0,
79
tc_trace=20.0,
80
theta_plus=theta_plus ,
81
tc_theta_decay=tc_theta_decay ,
82
)
83
inh_layer = LIFNodes(
84
n=self.n_neurons ,
85
traces=False,
86
rest=0.0,
87
reset=3.0,
88
thresh=4.0,
89
tc_decay=10.0,
90
refrac=2,
91
tc_trace=20.0,
92
)
93
94
# Connections
95
w = 0.3 * torch.rand(self.n_inpt, self.n_neurons)
96
input_exc_conn = Connection(
97
source=input_layer ,
98
target=exc_layer ,
99
w=w,
100
update_rule=PostPre ,
101
nu=nu,
==PAGE:134==
120
A Network Development
102
reduction=reduction ,
103
wmin=wmin,
104
wmax=wmax,
105
norm=norm,
106
)
107
w = self.exc * torch.diag(torch.ones(self.n_neurons))
108
exc_inh_conn = Connection(
109
source=exc_layer , target=inh_layer , w=w, wmin=0,
wmax=self.exc
110
)
111
w = -self.inh * (
112
torch.ones(self.n_neurons , self.n_neurons)
113
- torch.diag(torch.ones(self.n_neurons))
114
)
115
inh_exc_conn = Connection(
116
source=inh_layer , target=exc_layer , w=w,
wmin=-self.inh, wmax=0
117
)
118
119
# Add to network
120
self.add_layer(input_layer , name="X")
121
self.add_layer(exc_layer , name="Ae")
122
self.add_layer(inh_layer , name="Ai")
123
self.add_connection(input_exc_conn , source="X", target="Ae")
124
self.add_connection(exc_inh_conn , source="Ae", target="Ai")
125
self.add_connection(inh_exc_conn , source="Ai", target="Ae")
Listing A.3: Implementation of the showcase network.
A.3
Training Scripts
The following are the training scripts for the BindsNET and PyTorch reference models,
respectively.
1
from kwsonsnn.model import ShowCaseNet
2
from kwsonsnn.dataset import SpeechCommandsDataset
3
from kwsonsnn.encode import RateEncoder
4
5
import argparse
6
import numpy as np
7
from pandas import DataFrame
8
import torch
9
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
10
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
11
from tqdm import tqdm
==PAGE:135==
A.3 Training Scripts
121
12
from bindsnet.network.monitors import Monitor
13
from bindsnet.evaluation import (
14
all_activity , proportion_weighting , assign_labels
15
)
16
from bindsnet.encoding import (
17
NullEncoder , PoissonEncoder , RankOrderEncoder
18
)
19
20
####################################################################
21
# Argument parsing
#
22
####################################################################
23
print('Initializing parser')
24
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
25
parser.add_argument('--use_mnist', dest='use_mnist',
action='store_true')
26
parser.add_argument('--seed', type=int, default=2)
27
parser.add_argument('--epochs', type=int, default=5)
28
parser.add_argument('--n_clamp', type=int, default=1)
29
parser.add_argument('--n_train', type=int, default=-1)
30
parser.add_argument('--n_valid', type=int, default=-1)
31
parser.add_argument('--exc', type=float, default=4.5)
32
parser.add_argument('--inh', type=float, default=3.0)
33
parser.add_argument('--time', type=int, default=500)
34
parser.add_argument('--dt', type=int, default=1.0)
35
parser.add_argument('--intensity', type=float, default=128.0)
36
parser.add_argument('--update_interval', type=int, default=250)
37
parser.add_argument('--gpu', dest='gpu', action='store_true')
38
parser.add_argument('--plot', dest='plot', action='store_true')
39
parser.add_argument('--plot_interval', type=int, default=250)
40
parser.set_defaults(use_mnist=False, gpu=False, plot=False)
41
42
args = parser.parse_args()
43
44
use_mnist = args.use_mnist
45
seed = args.seed
46
epochs = args.epochs
47
n_clamp = args.n_clamp
48
n_train = args.n_train
49
n_valid = args.n_valid
50
exc = args.exc
51
inh = args.inh
52
time = args.time
53
dt = args.dt
54
intensity = args.intensity
55
update_interval = args.update_interval
56
gpu = args.gpu
==PAGE:136==
122
A Network Development
57
plot = args.plot
58
plot_interval = args.plot_interval
59
60
if use_mnist:
61
import os
62
from torchvision import transforms
63
from bindsnet.datasets import MNIST
64
65
if plot:
66
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
67
from bindsnet.utils import (
68
get_square_assignments , get_square_weights
69
)
70
from bindsnet.analysis.plotting import (
71
plot_input , plot_assignments , plot_weights , plot_spikes ,
plot_voltages
72
)
73
74
####################################################################
75
# Setup
#
76
####################################################################
77
# Network and GPU-related setup
78
print('Setting up network')
79
n_neurons = 200
80
cuda_avail = torch.cuda.is_available()
81
network = ShowCaseNet(
82
n_inpt=22*22,
83
n_neurons=n_neurons ,
84
exc=exc,
85
inh=inh,
86
dt=dt,
87
norm=48.4 if use_mnist else 2*48.4,
88
nu=[1e-10, 1e-3] if use_mnist else [1e-5, 2e-3],
89
inpt_shape=(1, 22, 22),
90
theta_plus=0.05
91
)
92
device = torch.device(f'cuda' if gpu and cuda_avail else 'cpu')
93
print(f'Using device = {str(device)}')
94
network = network.to(device)
95
if gpu and cuda_avail:
96
torch.cuda.manual_seed(seed)
97
else:
98
torch.manual_seed(seed)
99
100
# Get the dataset
101
print('Fetching the dataset')
==PAGE:137==
A.3 Training Scripts
123
102
kws = ['up', 'down', 'on', 'off', 'yes', 'no', 'go', 'stop']
103
data_path = './data'
104
train_data = MNIST(
105
RankOrderEncoder(time=time, dt=dt),
106
None,
107
root=os.path.join('.', 'mnist'),
108
download=True,
109
transform=transforms.Compose([
110
transforms.Resize(size=(22,22)),
111
transforms.ToTensor(),
112
transforms.Lambda(lambda x: x * intensity)
113
])
114
) if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
115
data_path , download=True, kws=kws, unknown=True, silence=True
116
)
117
valid_data = MNIST(
118
RankOrderEncoder(time=time, dt=dt),
119
None,
120
root=os.path.join('.', 'mnist'),
121
download=False,
122
transform=transforms.Compose([
123
transforms.Resize(size=(22,22)),
124
transforms.ToTensor(),
125
transforms.Lambda(lambda x: x * intensity)
126
]),
127
train=False
128
) if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
129
data_path , download=False, split='valid', kws=kws,
unknown=True, silence=True
130
)
131
test_data = None if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
132
data_path , download=False, split='test', kws=kws, unknown=True,
silence=True
133
)
134
kws.extend(['unknown', 'silence'])
135
136
# Wrap in dataloaders
137
train_loader = DataLoader(
138
train_data , batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
139
)
140
valid_loader = DataLoader(
141
valid_data , batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
142
)
143
test_loader
= None if use_mnist else DataLoader(
==PAGE:138==
124
A Network Development
144
test_data , batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
145
)
146
if not use_mnist:
147
train_enc = RankOrderEncoder(time=time, dt=dt)
148
valid_enc = RankOrderEncoder(time=time, dt=dt)
149
label_enc = NullEncoder()
150
n_train = n_train if n_train != -1 else len(train_loader.dataset)
151
n_valid = n_valid if n_valid != -1 else len(valid_loader.dataset)
152
n_classes = 10 if use_mnist else len(kws)
153
n_sqrt
= int(np.ceil(np.sqrt(n_neurons)))
154
per_class = int(n_neurons / n_classes)
155
156
# Recording stuff throughout the training
157
assignments = -torch.ones(n_neurons , device=device)
158
proportions = torch.zeros((n_neurons , n_classes), device=device)
159
rates = torch.zeros((n_neurons , n_classes), device=device)
160
161
# Spike recording
162
spikes = {}
163
for layer in set(network.layers):
164
spikes[layer] = Monitor(network.layers[layer],
state_vars=['s'], time=time)
165
network.add_monitor(spikes[layer], name=f'{layer}_spikes')
166
167
# Voltage recording and plotting -related variables
168
if plot:
169
exc_v_monitor = Monitor(
170
network.layers['Ae'], ['v'], time=time, device=device
171
)
172
inh_v_monitor = Monitor(
173
network.layers['Ai'], ['v'], time=time, device=device
174
)
175
network.add_monitor(exc_v_monitor , name='exc_voltage')
176
network.add_monitor(inh_v_monitor , name='inh_voltage')
177
178
inpt_axes , inpt_ims = None, None
179
spike_ims , spike_axes = None, None
180
weights_im = None
181
assigns_im = None
182
voltage_ims , voltage_axes = None, None
183
184
# For checkpointing purposes
185
best_network = network
186
best_acc
= 1 / n_classes
187
==PAGE:139==
A.3 Training Scripts
125
188
####################################################################
189
# Training , validation , and test loops
#
190
####################################################################
191
try:
192
epochbar = tqdm(range(epochs))
193
for ep in epochbar:
194
# Training
195
network.train(mode=True)
196
accuracy = {'all': [], 'proportion': []}
197
spike_record = torch.zeros(
198
(update_interval , int(time / dt), n_neurons),
device=device
199
)
200
labels = []
201
print('Begin training.')
202
for (i, datum) in tqdm(enumerate(train_loader)):
203
if i >= n_train:
204
break
205
if use_mnist:
206
image = datum['encoded_image']
207
label = datum['label']
208
else:
209
image = train_enc(datum['audio'] * intensity)
210
image = image.view(1, *image.shape)
211
label = label_enc(datum['label'])
212
image, label = image.to(device), label.to(device)
213
214
if i % update_interval == 0 and i > 0:
215
# Get a tensor of labels
216
label_tensor = torch.Tensor(labels).to(device)
217
218
# Get network predictions.
219
if use_mnist:
220
confusion = DataFrame(
221
[[0] * n_classes for _ in range(n_classes)]
222
)
223
else:
224
confusion = DataFrame(
225
[[0] * n_classes for _ in range(n_classes)],
226
columns=kws,
227
index=kws
228
)
229
all_activity_pred = all_activity(
230
spike_record.to('cpu'), assignments.to('cpu'),
n_classes
231
).to(device)
==PAGE:140==
126
A Network Development
232
proportion_pred = proportion_weighting(
233
spike_record.to('cpu'),
234
assignments.to('cpu'),
235
proportions.to('cpu'),
236
n_classes
237
).to(device)
238
for j in range(len(label_tensor)):
239
true_idx = label_tensor[j].long().item()
240
pred_idx = all_activity_pred[j].item()
241
if use_mnist:
242
confusion[true_idx][pred_idx] += 1
243
else:
244
confusion[kws[true_idx]][kws[pred_idx]] += 1
245
246
# Compute network accuracy
247
accuracy['all'].append(
248
100 * \
249
torch.sum(label_tensor.long() ==
all_activity_pred).item() \
250
/ update_interval
251
)
252
accuracy['proportion'].append(
253
100 * \
254
torch.sum(label_tensor.long() ==
proportion_pred).item() \
255
/ update_interval
256
)
257
258
print('\nAll activity accuracy: {:.2f} (last), '\
259
'{:.2f} (average), {:.2f} (best)'.format(
260
accuracy['all'][-1],
261
np.mean(accuracy['all']),
262
np.max(accuracy['all'])
263
))
264
265
print('Proportion weighting accuracy: {:.2f}
(last), '\
266
'{:.2f} (average), {:.2f} (best)\n'.format(
267
accuracy['proportion'][-1],
268
np.mean(accuracy['proportion']),
269
np.max(accuracy['proportion'])
270
))
271
272
# Assign labels to excitatory layer neurons.
273
assignments , proportions , rates = assign_labels(
274
spike_record , label_tensor , n_classes , rates
==PAGE:141==
A.3 Training Scripts
127
275
)
276
277
# Clear list of labels
278
labels = []
279
print('Confusion matrix:')
280
print(confusion)
281
282
labels.append(label)
283
284
# Run the network on the input. Clamps output neurons.
285
choice = np.random.choice(per_class , size=n_clamp ,
replace=False)
286
clamp = {'Ae': per_class * label[0].long() \
287
+ torch.Tensor(choice).long().to(device)}
288
inputs = {'X': image.view(time, 1, 1, 22, 22)}
289
network.run(inputs=inputs , time=time, clamp=clamp)
290
291
# Add to spikes recording. The spikes are monitored
constantly.
292
spike_record[i % update_interval] =
spikes['Ae'].get('s').view(
293
time, n_neurons
294
)
295
296
# Optionally plot training information every plot
interval
297
if plot and i % plot_interval == 0 and i > 0:
298
inpt = inputs['X'].view(time, 484).sum(0).view(22,
22)
299
input_exc_weights = network.connections[('X',
'Ae')].w
300
square_weights = get_square_weights(
301
input_exc_weights.view(484, n_neurons), n_sqrt,
22
302
)
303
square_assignments = get_square_assignments(
304
assignments , n_sqrt
305
)
306
voltages = {'Ae': exc_v_monitor.get('v'),
307
'Ai': inh_v_monitor.get('v')}
308
309
# Plot labelled input
310
inpt_axes , inpt_ims = plot_input(
311
image.sum(1).view(22, 22),
312
inpt,
313
label=label,
==PAGE:142==
128
A Network Development
314
axes=inpt_axes ,
315
ims=inpt_ims ,
316
)
317
318
# Plot the spikes from each layer
319
spike_ims , spike_axes = plot_spikes(
320
{l: spikes[l].get('s').view(time, 1, -1) for l
in spikes},
321
ims=spike_ims ,
322
axes=spike_axes ,
323
)
324
325
# Plot the weights , assignments , and performance
326
weights_im = plot_weights(square_weights ,
im=weights_im)
327
assigns_im = plot_assignments(
328
square_assignments , im=assigns_im , classes=kws
329
)
330
331
# Plot the node voltages
332
voltage_ims , voltage_axes = plot_voltages(
333
voltages , ims=voltage_ims , axes=voltage_axes
334
)
335
336
# Pause to allow plots to appear. Should be
adjusted to the
337
# particular system the script is running on.
338
plt.pause(1)
339
340
# Reset state variables.
341
network.reset_state_variables()
342
343
# Validation
344
network.train(mode=False)
345
print('Begin validation.')
346
accuracy = {'all': 0, 'proportion': 0}
347
spike_record = torch.zeros(
348
(1, int(time / dt), n_neurons), device=device
349
)
350
if use_mnist:
351
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)])
352
else:
353
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)],
354
columns=kws, index=kws
==PAGE:143==
A.3 Training Scripts
129
355
)
356
for (i, datum) in tqdm(enumerate(valid_loader)):
357
if i >= n_valid:
358
break
359
if use_mnist:
360
image = datum['encoded_image']
361
label = datum['label']
362
else:
363
image = valid_enc(datum['audio'] * intensity)
364
image = image.view(1, *image.shape)
365
label = label_enc(datum['label'])
366
image, label = image.to(device), label.to(device)
367
inputs = {'X': image.view(time, 1, 1, 22, 22)}
368
# Run the network on the input
369
network.run(inputs=inputs , time=time)
370
# Add to spike record
371
spike_record[0] = spikes['Ae'].get('s').squeeze()
372
# Get network predictions
373
all_activity_pred = all_activity(
374
spike_record.to('cpu'), assignments.to('cpu'),
n_classes
375
).to(device)
376
proportion_pred = proportion_weighting(
377
spike_record.to('cpu'),
378
assignments.to('cpu'),
379
proportions.to('cpu'),
380
n_classes
381
).to(device)
382
# Compute accuracy
383
accuracy['all'] += \
384
float(torch.sum(label.long() ==
all_activity_pred).item())
385
accuracy['proportion'] += \
386
float(torch.sum(label.long() ==
proportion_pred).item())
387
true_idx = label.long().item()
388
pred_idx = all_activity_pred.item()
389
if use_mnist:
390
confusion[true_idx][pred_idx] += 1
391
else:
392
confusion[kws[true_idx]][kws[pred_idx]] += 1
393
# Reset state variables
394
network.reset_state_variables()
395
396
acc = accuracy['all'] / n_valid
397
propacc = accuracy['proportion'] / n_valid
==PAGE:144==
130
A Network Development
398
best_network = network if acc > best_acc else best_network
399
best_acc = acc if acc > best_acc else best_acc
400
print(f'Results for epoch {ep}:')
401
print(f'\tOverall validation accuracy is {acc:.2f}')
402
print(f'\tProportion weighting test accuracy is
{propacc:.2f}')
403
print('Confusion matrix:')
404
print(confusion)
405
406
if use_mnist:
407
exit(0)
408
409
print('Begin test.')
410
network.train(mode=False)
411
accuracy = {'all': 0, 'proportion': 0}
412
spike_record = torch.zeros((1, int(time / dt), n_neurons),
device=device)
413
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)],
414
columns=kws, index=kws
415
)
416
for datum in tqdm(test_loader):
417
image = valid_enc(datum['audio'] * intensity).to(device)
418
image = image.view(1, *image.shape)
419
label = label_enc(datum['label']).to(device)
420
inputs = {'X': image.view(time, 1, 1, 22, 22)}
421
# Run the network on the input
422
network.run(inputs=inputs , time=time)
423
# Add to spike record
424
spike_record[0] = spikes['Ae'].get('s').squeeze()
425
# Get network predictions
426
all_activity_pred = all_activity(
427
spike_record.to('cpu'), assignments.to('cpu'), n_classes
428
).to(device)
429
proportion_pred = proportion_weighting(
430
spike_record.to('cpu'),
431
assignments.to('cpu'),
432
proportions.to('cpu'),
433
n_classes
434
).to(device)
435
# Compute accuracy
436
accuracy['all'] += \
437
float(torch.sum(label.long() ==
all_activity_pred).item())
438
accuracy['proportion'] += \
439
float(torch.sum(label.long() == proportion_pred).item())
==PAGE:145==
A.3 Training Scripts
131
440
confusion[kws[label.long().item()]][kws[all_activity_pred.item()]]
+= 1
441
# Reset state variables
442
network.reset_state_variables()
443
444
print('Overall test accuracy is {:.2f}'.format(
445
accuracy["all"] / len(test_loader.dataset)
446
))
447
print('Proportion weighting test accuracy is {:.2f}'.format(
448
accuracy["proportion"] / len(test_loader.dataset)
449
))
450
print('Confusion matrix:')
451
print(confusion)
452
except KeyboardInterrupt:
453
print('Keyboard interrupt caught.')
454
finally:
455
import os
456
if not os.path.isdir('pretrained'):
457
os.mkdir('pretrained')
458
torch.save(best_network.state_dict(), 'pretrained/network.pt')
Listing A.4: Training script for the ShowCaseNet SNN model using rank-order encoding.
1
from kwsonsnn.dataset import SpeechCommandsDataset
2
3
import argparse
4
from tqdm import tqdm
5
import numpy as np
6
from pandas import DataFrame
7
import torch
8
import torch.nn as nn
9
import torch.nn.functional as F
10
import torch.optim as optim
11
12
####################################################################
13
# Argument parsing
#
14
####################################################################
15
print('Initializing parser')
16
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
17
parser.add_argument("--use_mnist", dest="use_mnist",
action="store_true")
18
parser.add_argument("--seed", type=int, default=2)
19
parser.add_argument("--epochs", type=int, default=100)
20
parser.add_argument("--lr", type=float, default=0.0002)
21
parser.add_argument("--n_train", type=int, default=-1)
22
parser.add_argument("--n_valid", type=int, default=-1)
==PAGE:146==
132
A Network Development
23
parser.add_argument("--gpu", dest="gpu", action="store_true")
24
parser.set_defaults(use_mnist=False, gpu=False)
25
26
args = parser.parse_args()
27
28
use_mnist = args.use_mnist
29
seed = args.seed
30
epochs = args.epochs
31
lr = args.lr
32
n_train = args.n_train
33
n_valid = args.n_valid
34
gpu = args.gpu
35
36
if use_mnist:
37
import os
38
from torchvision import transforms
39
from torchvision.datasets import MNIST
40
41
####################################################################
42
# Setup
#
43
####################################################################
44
# Network and GPU-related setup
45
print('Setting up network')
46
cuda_avail = torch.cuda.is_available()
47
class ShowCaseNetPT(nn.Module):
48
def __init__(self):
49
super(ShowCaseNetPT , self).__init__()
50
51
# Build a very simple model with two layers
52
self.ff1 = nn.Linear(in_features=484, out_features=200)
53
self.ff2 = nn.Linear(in_features=200, out_features=200)
54
55
def forward(self, X):
56
return F.softmax(self.ff2(F.relu(self.ff1(X.view(-1)))),
dim=0)
57
58
network = ShowCaseNetPT()
59
device = torch.device(f'cuda' if gpu and cuda_avail else 'cpu')
60
print(f'Using device = {str(device)}')
61
network = network.to(device)
62
if gpu and cuda_avail:
63
torch.cuda.manual_seed(seed)
64
else:
65
torch.manual_seed(seed)
66
67
# Get the dataset
==PAGE:147==
A.3 Training Scripts
133
68
print('Fetching the dataset')
69
kws = ['up', 'down', 'on', 'off', 'yes', 'no', 'go', 'stop']
70
data_path = './data'
71
train_data = MNIST(
72
os.path.join(".", "mnist"),
73
download=True,
74
transform=transforms.Compose(
75
[transforms.Resize(size=(22,22)), transforms.ToTensor()]
76
)
77
) if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
78
data_path , download=True, kws=kws, unknown=True, silence=True
79
)
80
valid_data = MNIST(
81
os.path.join(".", "mnist"),
82
download=False,
83
transform=transforms.Compose(
84
[transforms.Resize(size=(22,22)), transforms.ToTensor()]
85
),
86
train=False
87
) if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
88
data_path , download=False, split='valid', kws=kws,
unknown=True, silence=True
89
)
90
test_data = None if use_mnist else SpeechCommandsDataset(
91
data_path , download=False, split='test', kws=kws, unknown=True,
silence=True
92
)
93
kws.extend(['unknown', 'silence'])
94
95
# Wrap in dataloaders
96
train_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
97
train_data , batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
98
)
99
valid_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
100
valid_data , batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
101
)
102
test_loader
= None if use_mnist else torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
103
test_data ,
batch_size=1, pin_memory=gpu and cuda_avail ,
shuffle=True
104
)
105
n_train = n_train if n_train != -1 else len(train_loader.dataset)
106
n_valid = n_valid if n_valid != -1 else len(valid_loader.dataset)
107
n_classes = 10 if use_mnist else len(kws)
108
==PAGE:148==
134
A Network Development
109
# For checkpointing purposes
110
best_network = network
111
best_acc
= 1 / n_classes
112
113
# Get predicted class
114
def get_pred(Y_hat):
115
# Convert Y_hat to the right size
116
Y_hat = Y_hat.view(n_classes , -1)
117
Y_hat = Y_hat.sum(1)
118
return Y_hat.argmax()
119
120
# Custom loss function to use the same network
121
def cust_crit(Y_hat, Y):
122
# Convert Y_hat to the right size
123
Y_hat = Y_hat.view(n_classes , -1)
124
Y_hat = Y_hat.sum(1)
125
126
# One-hot encode Y
127
oh = torch.zeros(n_classes , device=device)
128
oh[Y.long().item()] = 1
129
Y = oh
130
131
# Return mean absolute error
132
return torch.sum(torch.abs(Y_hat - Y)) / n_classes
133
134
####################################################################
135
# Training , validation , and test loops
#
136
####################################################################
137
criterion = cust_crit
138
optimizer = optim.Adam(network.parameters(), lr=lr)
139
try:
140
print('Begin training loop.')
141
epochbar = tqdm(range(epochs))
142
for ep in epochbar:
143
# Training
144
print(f'Epoch {ep}, learning rate {lr}')
145
network.train()
146
hit = 0
147
epoch_training_loss = 0
148
for (i, datum) in tqdm(enumerate(train_loader)):
149
if i >= n_train:
150
break
151
optimizer.zero_grad()
152
if use_mnist:
153
inputs = datum[0]
154
target = datum[1]
==PAGE:149==
A.3 Training Scripts
135
155
else:
156
inputs = datum['audio'].to(device)
157
target = torch.Tensor([datum['label']]).to(device)
158
output = network(inputs)
159
loss = criterion(output , target)
160
loss.backward()
161
optimizer.step()
162
epoch_training_loss += loss.item()
163
164
if target.long().item() ==
get_pred(output).long().item():
165
hit += 1
166
print('\ttraining loss: {:.5f}, accuracy: {:.2f}%'.format(
167
epoch_training_loss / n_train , (hit / n_train) * 100
168
))
169
170
# Validation
171
network.eval()
172
epoch_validation_loss = 0
173
hit = 0
174
if use_mnist:
175
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)])
176
else:
177
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)],
178
columns=kws, index=kws
179
)
180
with torch.no_grad():
181
for (i, datum) in tqdm(enumerate(valid_loader)):
182
if i >= n_valid:
183
break
184
if use_mnist:
185
inputs = datum[0]
186
target = datum[1]
187
else:
188
inputs = datum['audio'].to(device)
189
target =
torch.Tensor([datum['label']]).to(device)
190
output = network(inputs)
191
loss = criterion(output, target)
192
epoch_validation_loss += loss.item()
193
194
true_idx = target.long().item()
195
pred_idx = get_pred(output).long().item()
196
if use_mnist:
==PAGE:150==
136
A Network Development
197
confusion[true_idx][pred_idx] += 1
198
else:
199
confusion[kws[true_idx]][kws[pred_idx]] += 1
200
if true_idx == pred_idx:
201
hit += 1
202
acc = (hit / n_valid) * 100
203
print('\tvalidation loss: {:.5f}, accuracy: {:.2f}%'.format(
204
epoch_validation_loss / n_valid , acc
205
))
206
print('Confusion matrix:')
207
print(confusion)
208
best_network = network if acc > best_acc else best_network
209
best_acc = acc if acc > best_acc else best_acc
210
211
if use_mnist:
212
exit(0)
213
214
print('Begin test.')
215
network.eval()
216
hit = 0
217
test_loss = 0
218
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in
range(n_classes)],
219
columns=kws, index=kws
220
)
221
with torch.no_grad():
222
for (i, datum) in tqdm(enumerate(test_loader)):
223
if use_mnist:
224
inputs = datum[0]
225
target = datum[1]
226
else:
227
inputs = datum['audio'].to(device)
228
target = torch.Tensor([datum['label']]).to(device)
229
output = network(inputs)
230
loss = criterion(output , target)
231
test_loss += loss.item()
232
233
true_idx = target.long().item()
234
pred_idx = get_pred(output).long().item()
235
confusion[kws[true_idx]][kws[pred_idx]] += 1
236
if true_idx == pred_idx:
237
hit += 1
238
print('\ttest loss: {:.5f}, accuracy: {:.2f}%'.format(
239
test_loss / len(test_loader.dataset),
240
(hit / len(test_loader.dataset)) * 100
241
))
==PAGE:151==
A.3 Training Scripts
137
242
print('Confusion matrix:')
243
print(confusion)
244
245
except KeyboardInterrupt:
246
print('Keyboard interrupt caught.')
247
finally:
248
import os
249
if not os.path.isdir('pretrained'):
250
os.mkdir('pretrained')
251
torch.save(best_network.state_dict(), 'pretrained/networkpt.pt')
Listing A.5: Training script for the reference ANN model.
1
#!/bin/bash
2
#BSUB -q gpuv100
3
#BSUB -J train
4
#BSUB -n 4
5
#BSUB -gpu "num=1:mode=exclusive_process"
6
#BSUB -W 24:00
7
#BSUB -R "rusage[mem=16GB]"
8
#BSUB -R "span[hosts=1]"
9
#BSUB -u sXXXXXX@student.dtu.dk
10
#BSUB -B
11
#BSUB -N
12
#BSUB -o gpu-rankorder -%J.out
13
#BSUB -e gpu-rankorder -%J.err
14
#BSUB -R "select[gpu16gb]"
15
16
nvidia -smi
17
module load python3/3.7.6
18
module load numpy/1.18.1-python -3.7.6-openblas -0.3.7
19
module load pandas/1.0.3-python -3.7.6
20
21
if [ ! -d "results" ]
22
then
23
mkdir "results"
24
fi
25
26
python3 train.py --gpu --epochs 5 > ./results/bindsnet.txt
Listing A.6: Shell script to queue a training of the showcase network using BSUB
available on DTU’s servers.
==PAGE:152==
138
A Network Development
A.4
Parameter Export
The following is the Python script to export the parameters of a pretrained network
stored as a Pickle file to a suitably formatted JSON file, and a second script to convert
a 17-bit integer formatted JSON file into one suitable for the mapping script developed
for this project.
1
from kwsonsnn.model import ShowCaseNet
2
3
import argparse
4
import numpy as np
5
import torch
6
import json
7
8
####################################################################
9
# Argument parsing
#
10
####################################################################
11
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
12
parser.add_argument("nwkfile")
13
parser.add_argument("--scale", type=float, default=1.0)
14
args = parser.parse_args()
15
16
nwkfile = args.nwkfile.lower()
17
scale = args.scale
18
19
assert '.pt' in nwkfile , 'Input file should end in `.pt`'
20
tgtfile = nwkfile[:-3] + '.json'
21
22
####################################################################
23
# Fetch network and export to JSON
#
24
####################################################################
25
def getDecayShift(modelDecay):
26
if modelDecay < 0.5:
27
return 1
28
for i in range(2,8):
29
if modelDecay > 1 - 2**(-i) and modelDecay < 1 -
2**(-(i+1)):
30
if modelDecay < 1 - (2**(-(i)) - 2**(-(i+2))):
31
return i
32
else:
33
return i+1
34
break
35
36
network = ShowCaseNet(n_inpt=22*22, inpt_shape=(1, 22, 22))
37
try:
38
nwk = torch.load(nwkfile , map_location=torch.device('cpu'))
==PAGE:153==
A.4 Parameter Export
139
39
if 'X_to_Ae.b' not in nwk:
40
network.X_to_Ae.b
= None
41
if 'Ae_to_Ai.b' not in nwk:
42
network.Ae_to_Ai.b = None
43
if 'Ai_to_Ae.b' not in nwk:
44
network.Ai_to_Ae.b = None
45
network.load_state_dict(nwk)
46
except:
47
print(f"The given file ({nwkfile}) is not a Pickle'd
ShowCaseNet")
48
exit(1)
49
50
data = {}
51
52
# Deactivate training of layers
53
network.learning = False
54
network.X.learning = False
55
network.X_to_Ae.training = False
56
network.Ae.learning = False
57
network.Ae_to_Ai.training = False
58
network.Ai.learning = False
59
network.Ai_to_Ae.training = False
60
61
# Read out values
62
nAe = network.Ae.n
63
threshAe = (
64
torch.tensor(np.tile(network.Ae.thresh * scale, nAe)) +
65
network.Ae.theta * scale
66
)
67
bAe1 = network.X_to_Ae.b
68
bAe2 = network.Ai_to_Ae.b
69
biasesAe = (
70
(bAe1 if bAe1 is not None else torch.zeros(nAe)) +
71
(bAe2 if bAe2 is not None else torch.zeros(nAe))
72
) * scale
73
w1Ae = network.X_to_Ae.w.data * scale
74
w2Ae = network.Ai_to_Ae.w.data * scale
75
76
nAi = network.Ai.n
77
threshAi = torch.tensor(np.tile(network.Ai.thresh * scale, nAi))
78
bAi = network.Ae_to_Ai.b
79
biasesAi = bAi if bAi is not None else torch.zeros(nAi)
80
wAi = network.Ae_to_Ai.w.data * scale
81
82
# Write all values to a JSON file
83
data = {}
==PAGE:154==
140
A Network Development
84
data['l1'] = []
85
data['l1'].append({
86
'reset'
: [round(network.Ae.reset.item())] * nAe,
87
'refrac' : [round(network.Ae.refrac.item())] * nAe,
88
'decay'
: [getDecayShift(network.Ae.decay.item())] * nAe,
89
'biases' : biasesAe.tolist(),
90
'thresh' : threshAe.tolist(),
91
'w1'
: [r for r in w1Ae.tolist()],
92
'w2'
: [r for r in w2Ae.tolist()]
93
})
94
95
data['l2'] = []
96
data['l2'].append({
97
'reset'
: [round(network.Ai.reset.item())] * nAi,
98
'refrac' : [round(network.Ai.refrac.item())] * nAi,
99
'decay'
: [getDecayShift(network.Ai.decay.item())] * nAi,
100
'biases' : biasesAi.tolist(),
101
'thresh' : threshAi.tolist(),
102
'w'
: [r for r in wAi.tolist()]
103
})
104
105
with open(tgtfile , 'w') as f:
106
json.dump(data, f)
Listing A.7: Script to export the parameters of a ShowCaseNet stored as a Pickle file to
a JSON file. Pass the path to the Pickle file as the first argument to the script.
1
import argparse
2
import json
3
4
####################################################################
5
# Argument parsing
#
6
####################################################################
7
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
8
parser.add_argument("nwkfile")
9
parser.add_argument("--scale", type=float, default=1000.0)
10
args = parser.parse_args()
11
12
nwkfile = args.nwkfile
13
scale = args.scale
14
15
assert '.json' in nwkfile , 'Input file should end in `.json`'
16
tgtfile = nwkfile[:-5] + '_fp.json'
17
18
####################################################################
19
# Fetch data
#
==PAGE:155==
A.5 Testing Script
141
20
####################################################################
21
with open(nwkfile , 'r') as f:
22
data = json.load(f)
23
24
####################################################################
25
# Re-export data
#
26
####################################################################
27
l1_conv , l1_wconv = (['thresh', 'biases'], ['w1', 'w2'])
28
l2_conv , l2_wconv = (['thresh', 'biases'], ['w'])
29
30
for l in l1_conv:
31
data['l1'][0][l] = list(map(lambda x: x / scale,
data['l1'][0][l]))
32
33
for l in l1_wconv:
34
data['l1'][0][l] = list(map(
35
lambda wl: list(map(lambda w: w / scale, wl)),
36
data['l1'][0][l]
37
))
38
39
for l in l2_conv:
40
data['l2'][0][l] = list(map(lambda x: x / scale,
data['l2'][0][l]))
41
42
for l in l2_wconv:
43
data['l2'][0][l] = list(map(
44
lambda wl: list(map(lambda w: w / scale, wl)),
45
data['l2'][0][l]
46
))
47
48
with open(tgtfile , 'w') as f:
49
json.dump(data, f)
Listing A.8: Script to convert a previously exported 17-bit showcase network stored as
JSON file into one suitable for the mapping script developed for this project.
A.5
Testing Script
The following is a short script to connect to the accelerator and run test images on it.
1
from kwsonsnn.dataset import SpeechCommandsDataset
2
from kwsonsnn.encode import RankOrderPeriod
3
4
from argparse import ArgumentParser
5
import numpy as np
==PAGE:156==
142
A Network Development
6
from pandas import DataFrame
7
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
8
from bindsnet.encoding import NullEncoder
9
import serial
10
from tqdm import tqdm
11
12
####################################################################
13
# Argument parsing
#
14
####################################################################
15
parser = ArgumentParser()
16
parser.add_argument("--time", type=int, default=500)
17
parser.add_argument("--dt", type=float, default=1.0)
18
19
args = parser.parse_args()
20
21
time = args.time
22
dt = args.dt
23
24
####################################################################
25
# Setup
#
26
####################################################################
27
# Load dataset
28
print('Fetching the dataset')
29
data_path = './data'
30
kws = ['up', 'down', 'on', 'off', 'yes', 'no', 'go', 'stop']
31
test_data = SpeechCommandsDataset(
32
data_path , download=False, split='test', kws=kws, unknown=True,
silence=True
33
)
34
kws.extend(['unknown', 'silence'])
35
36
# Wrap in dataloader
37
test_loader = DataLoader(test_data , batch_size=1, shuffle=True)
38
39
# Various parameters
40
n_neurons = 200
41
n_classes = len(kws)
42
n_sqrt
= int(np.ceil(np.sqrt(n_neurons)))
43
per_class = int(n_neurons / n_classes)
44
45
# Get the spike encoder
46
test_enc
= RankOrderPeriod(time=time, dt=dt)
47
label_enc = NullEncoder()
48
49
####################################################################
50
# Test loop
#
==PAGE:157==
A.5 Testing Script
143
51
####################################################################
52
hit = 0
53
confusion = DataFrame([[0] * n_classes for _ in range(n_classes)],
54
columns=kws, index=kws
55
)
56
try:
57
# Create serial connection
58
ser = serial.Serial('/dev/ttyUSB0', 115200, stopbits=1,
timeout=0.5)
59
60
# Run through the entire test dataset
61
for datum in tqdm(test_loader):
62
image = test_enc(datum['audio'])
63
image = np.array(image.view(-1), dtype=np.int32)
64
label = label_enc(datum['label'])
65
66
# Transfer period
67
for i in range(len(image)):
68
ser.write(bytes([i >> 8]))
69
ser.write(bytes([i & 0xff]))
70
ser.write(bytes([(image[i].item() >> 8) & 0xff]))
71
ser.write(bytes([image[i].item() & 0xff]))
72
73
# Get response
74
cnt = 0
75
response = np.zeros(n_classes)
76
while cnt != 2:
77
byte = ser.read()
78
if byte == b'':
79
cnt += 1
80
else:
81
ind = int(byte.hex(), 16)
82
if ind == 255:
83
cnt += 1
84
else:
85
print(f'Received spike {ind}')
86
response[ind // per_class] += 1
87
88
# Update statistics
89
true_idx = label.long().item()
90
pred_idx = np.argmax(response)
91
confusion[kws[true_idx]][kws[pred_idx]] += 1
92
if true_idx == pred_idx:
93
hit += 1
94
95
except serial.serialutil.SerialException:
==PAGE:158==
144
A Network Development
96
print('Serial port unavailable')
97
except KeyboardInterrupt:
98
print('Keyboard interrupt caught.')
99
finally:
100
print(f'Accuracy: {hit/len(test_loader.dataset):.2f}')
101
print('Confusion matrix:')
102
print(confusion)
103
ser.close()
Listing A.9: Script to run test images on the accelerator.
==PAGE:159==
APPENDIX B
Accelerator Sources
This chapter includes all source files that, together, constitute the neuromorphic acceler-
ator. This includes all hardware description classes, the mapping script, the two Verilog
files that bind together the top-level design, and the constraints needed to synthesize
the accelerator in Vivado.
B.1
Chisel Source Files
The following are the source files constituting the neuromorphic accelerator. Files are
grouped according to their location in the accelerator architecture, and relative to the
hierarchy within each group.
B.1.1
Package File
1
import chisel3._
2
import chisel3.util._
3
import spray.json._
4
import java.io._
5
6
package object neuroproc {
7
val FREQ
= 80000000
// in Hz
8
val BAUDRATE
= 115200
9
val TIMESTEP
= 0.001
// in seconds
10
val EVALTS
= 500
// in time steps
11
val CYCLESPRSTEP
= (FREQ*TIMESTEP).toInt
12
val CORES
= 5
13
val CONSTDATAWIDTH
= 5
14
val NEUDATAWIDTH
= 17
15
val WGHTDATAWIDTH
= 11
16
val AXONNR
= 3 * 256
17
val AXONIDWIDTH
= log2Up(AXONNR)
18
val TMNEURONS
= 32
19
val NWIDTH
= log2Up(TMNEURONS)
20
val EVALUNITS
= 8
21
val NEURONSPRCORE
= TMNEURONS * EVALUNITS
22
val GLOBALADDRWIDTH
= log2Up(CORES) + log2Up(EVALUNITS) + NWIDTH
==PAGE:160==
146
B Accelerator Sources
23
val AXONMSBWIDTH
= AXONIDWIDTH - log2Up(NEURONSPRCORE)
24
val EVALMEMADDRWIDTH = log2Up(TMNEURONS * AXONNR)
25
val PERIODWIDTH
= log2Up(EVALTS)
26
val RATEADDRWIDTH
= log2Up(NEURONSPRCORE)
27
val INPUTSIZE
= 22*22
28
val RANKORDERENC
= true
29
30
// Hardcoded neurons mapped to each core
31
val neuronsInCore = Array(256, 228, 200, 200, 200)
32
33
// The control signals bundle used for neuron evaluators
34
class EvalCntrSigs extends Bundle {
35
val potSel = UInt(2.W)
// 0: dataIn , 1: sum, 2: potReg
36
val spikeSel = UInt(2.W)
// 0: >thres, 1: reset, 2,3: keep
37
val refracSel = UInt(1.W)
// 0: dataIn , 1: RefracReg
38
val decaySel = Bool()
// 1: subtract decay, 0: otherwise
39
val writeDataSel = UInt(2.W)
// 0: dataIn , 1: potential , 2:
refracCnt
40
}
41
42
// The memory address and selection bundle for evaluation memories
43
class MemAddr extends Bundle {
44
val sel = UInt(2.W)
45
val pos = UInt(EVALMEMADDRWIDTH.W)
46
}
47
val const :: dynamic :: biasthresh :: weights :: Nil = Enum(4)
48
49
// Interface reader returns a ROM for a core's bus interface
50
class InterfaceReader {
51
var cores = Map.empty[Int, Array[Array[Int]]]
52
53
def JsArrayTo1DArray(jarray: JsArray): Array[Int] = {
54
return jarray.elements.toArray.map(
55
_.asInstanceOf[JsNumber].value.toInt
56
)
57
}
58
59
def getFilter(coreID: Int): Vector[Int] = {
60
val source =
scala.io.Source.fromFile("mapping/interfaceLut484.json")
61
val lines = try
source.mkString.parseJson.asInstanceOf[JsObject] finally
source.close()
62
val paramJson =
lines.fields("cores").asInstanceOf[JsObject].fields(
63
coreID.toString
==PAGE:161==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
147
64
).asInstanceOf[JsObject]
65
66
val valid = JsArrayTo1DArray(
67
paramJson.fields("valid").asInstanceOf[JsArray]
68
)
69
val data = JsArrayTo1DArray(
70
paramJson.fields("data").asInstanceOf[JsArray]
71
)
72
73
var rom : Vector[Int] = Vector()
74
for(i <- 0 until valid.size){
75
rom = rom.:+((valid(i) << 2) + data(i))(collection.breakOut)
76
}
77
return rom
78
}
79
}
80
}
Listing B.1: Package file for the neuroproc package.
B.1.2
Module Files
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Round-robin bus arbiter with lookahead */
7
class BusArbiter extends Module {
8
val io = IO(new Bundle {
9
val reqs
= Input(Vec(CORES, Bool()))
10
val grants = Output(Vec(CORES, Bool()))
11
})
12
13
val maskedReqs = Wire(Vec(CORES, Bool()))
14
val mask
= Wire(Vec(CORES, Bool()))
15
val maskRegs
= RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(CORES)(true.B)))
16
val grants
= Wire(Vec(CORES, Bool()))
17
val grantRegs
= RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(CORES)(false.B)))
18
19
val oneReq
= Wire(Bool())
20
val value
= Wire(UInt(log2Up(CORES).W))
21
22
// Default assignment
23
value
:= 0.U
==PAGE:162==
148
B Accelerator Sources
24
oneReq := false.B
25
26
for (i <- 0 until CORES) {
27
// Store incoming requests and the mask
28
maskRegs(i)
:= mask(i)
29
grantRegs(i) := grants(i)
30
31
// Mask requests
32
maskedReqs(i) := maskRegs(i) && io.reqs(i)
33
34
// Check if a request is high
35
when(maskedReqs(i)) {
36
oneReq := true.B
37
value
:= i.U
38
}
39
40
// Generate grants
41
grants(i) := (i.U === value && oneReq)
42
}
43
44
// Generate mask from masked requests
45
for (i <- 0 to CORES - 2) {
46
mask(i) := mask(i + 1) || maskedReqs(i + 1)
47
}
48
mask(CORES -1) := value === 0.U
49
50
io.grants := grantRegs
51
}
Listing B.2: Bus arbiter module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Bus interface with ROM-based control
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
*
10
* @note Internal ROM is initialized based on an external JSON
11
*
file read by the `InterfaceReader ` class.
12
*/
13
class BusInterface(coreId: Int) extends Module {
14
val io = IO(new Bundle {
15
// For bus
==PAGE:163==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
149
16
val grant
= Input(Bool())
17
val reqOut
= Output(Bool())
18
val tx
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
19
val rx
= Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
20
21
// For axon system valid/ready
22
val axonID
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
23
val valid
= Output(Bool())
24
25
// For spike transmission valid/ready
26
val spikeID = Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
27
val ready
= Output(Bool())
28
val reqIn
= Input(Bool())
29
})
30
31
// Create ROM from mapping file
32
val lutReader = new InterfaceReader
33
val romContent = lutReader.getFilter(coreId)
34
val romContChi = romContent.map {
35
i => i.asUInt((AXONMSBWIDTH + 1).W)
36
}
37
val filterROM
= VecInit(romContChi)
38
39
// Output tx spike ID or zero
40
io.tx := Mux(io.grant, io.spikeID , 0.U)
41
io.reqOut := io.reqIn && ~io.grant
42
io.ready
:= io.grant
43
44
// Output subscription info and axon ID
45
val axonIDLSBReg = RegInit(0.U((AXONIDWIDTH - AXONMSBWIDTH).W))
46
axonIDLSBReg := io.rx(AXONIDWIDTH - AXONMSBWIDTH - 1, 0)
47
48
val synROMReg
= RegInit(0.U((AXONMSBWIDTH + 1).W))
49
synROMReg := Mux(io.rx.orR, filterROM(io.rx(GLOBALADDRWIDTH - 1,
GLOBALADDRWIDTH - log2Up(CORES))), 0.U)
50
51
io.valid
:= synROMReg(AXONMSBWIDTH)
52
io.axonID := synROMReg(AXONMSBWIDTH - 1, 0) ## axonIDLSBReg
53
}
Listing B.3: Bus interface module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
==PAGE:164==
150
B Accelerator Sources
5
6
/** Priority mask reset encoder module */
7
class PriorityMaskRstEncoder extends Module {
8
val io = IO(new Bundle {
9
val reqs
= Input(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
10
val value = Output(UInt(log2Up(EVALUNITS).W))
11
val mask
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
12
val rst
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
13
val valid = Output(Bool())
14
})
15
16
// Default assignment
17
io.value := 0.U
18
io.valid := false.B
19
20
// Generate valid and value outputs
21
for (j <- 0 to EVALUNITS - 1) {
22
when(io.reqs(j)) {
23
io.valid := true.B
24
io.value := j.U
25
}
26
}
27
28
// Generate mask from requests
29
for (i <- 0 to EVALUNITS - 2)
30
io.mask(i) := io.mask(i + 1) || io.reqs(i + 1)
31
io.mask(EVALUNITS - 1) := io.value === 0.U
32
33
// Generate resets
34
for (j <- 0 to EVALUNITS - 1)
35
io.rst(j) := j.U === io.value && io.valid
36
}
Listing B.4: Priority mask reset encoder module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Transmission system module
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
*/
10
class TransmissionSystem(coreID: Int) extends Module {
11
val io = IO(new Bundle {
==PAGE:165==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
151
12
// For communication fabric interface
13
val data
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
14
val ready
= Input(Bool())
15
val valid
= Output(Bool())
16
17
// For neurons control
18
val n
= Input(UInt(NWIDTH.W))
19
val spikes = Input(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
20
})
21
22
val spikeRegs
= RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(false.B)))
23
val neuronIdMSB
=
RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(0.U(NWIDTH.W))))
24
val maskRegs
= RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(true.B)))
25
26
val spikeEncoder = Module(new PriorityMaskRstEncoder)
27
val encoderReqs
= Wire(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
28
val rstReadySel
= Wire(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
29
val spikeUpdate
= Wire(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
30
31
// Default assignments
32
io.data
:= 0.U
33
io.valid := spikeEncoder.io.valid
34
spikeEncoder.io.reqs := encoderReqs
35
36
for (i <- 0 to EVALUNITS - 1) {
37
encoderReqs(i) := maskRegs(i) && spikeRegs(i)
38
39
rstReadySel(i) := ~(spikeEncoder.io.rst(i) && io.ready)
40
spikeUpdate(i) := rstReadySel(i) && spikeRegs(i)
41
42
when(io.ready) {
43
maskRegs(i) := spikeEncoder.io.mask(i)
44
}.elsewhen(!spikeEncoder.io.valid) {
45
maskRegs(i) := true.B
46
}
47
48
when(~spikeUpdate(i)) {
49
neuronIdMSB(i) := io.n
50
spikeRegs(i) := io.spikes(i)
51
}
52
53
when(i.U === spikeEncoder.io.value) {
54
io.data := coreID.U(log2Up(CORES).W) ## neuronIdMSB(i) ##
spikeEncoder.io.value
55
}
==PAGE:166==
152
B Accelerator Sources
56
}
57
}
Listing B.5: Transmission system module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** IO declaration for clock buffers */
7
class ClockBufferIO extends Bundle {
8
val I
= Input(Clock())
9
val CE = Input(Bool())
10
val O
= Output(Clock())
11
}
12
13
/** Abstract clock buffer class with clock buffer IO */
14
abstract class ClockBuffer extends Module {
15
val io = IO(new ClockBufferIO)
16
}
17
18
/** Xilinx BUFGCE primitive blackbox
19
*
20
* @note This works well for clock gating in Xilinx 7-series FPGAs.
21
*
In ASIC designs , a more involved latch-based gate along
22
*
the lines of `ClockBufferBB ` should be used, as described
23
*
in "How to Successfully Use Gated Clocking in an ASIC
24
*
Design" by Darren Jones of MIPS Technologies.
25
*/
26
class BUFGCE extends BlackBox(Map("SIM_DEVICE" -> "7SERIES")) {
27
val io = IO(new ClockBufferIO)
28
}
29
30
/** Module class instantiating the `BUFGCE ` blackbox */
31
class ClockBufferFPGA extends ClockBuffer {
32
val bg = Module(new BUFGCE)
33
io <> bg.io
34
}
35
36
/** Latch-based clock gating cell blackbox
37
*
38
* @note Implements the latch-based alternative to the BUFGCE.
39
*
The Verilator comments instruct Verilator not to warn
40
*
about the latch and to consider the latches signal a
41
*
clock enable thus ensuring correct multi-clock operation.
==PAGE:167==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
153
42
*
Inspired by Rocket Chip.
43
*/
44
class ClockBufferBB extends BlackBox with HasBlackBoxInline {
45
val io = IO(new ClockBufferIO)
46
setInline("ClockBufferBB.v",
47
s"""
48
|/* verilator lint_off UNOPTFLAT */
49
|module ClockBufferBB(input I, input CE, output O);
50
|
reg en_latched /*verilator clock_enable*/;
51
|
always_latch @(*) if (!I) en_latched = CE;
52
|
assign O = en_latched & I;
53
|endmodule
54
""".stripMargin)
55
}
56
57
/** Module class instantiating the `ClockBufferBB ` blackbox */
58
class ClockBufferVerilog extends ClockBuffer {
59
val bb = Module(new ClockBufferBB)
60
io <> bb.io
61
}
62
63
/** Generates new clock buffers
64
*
65
* @param synth whether this module is used in FPGA synthesis or
66
*
simulation
67
*/
68
object ClockBuffer {
69
def apply(synth: Boolean = false) = {
70
if (synth)
71
new ClockBufferFPGA
72
else
73
new ClockBufferVerilog
74
}
75
}
Listing B.6: Definitions of both clock gate implementations and their shared IO class.
1
// Inspired by HDL templates from Xilinx UG901
2
package neuroproc
3
4
import chisel3._
5
import chisel3.util._
6
7
/** IO declaration for true dual-port memories
8
*
9
* @param addrW the address width in bits
==PAGE:168==
154
B Accelerator Sources
10
* @param dataW the data width in bits
11
*/
12
class TrueDualPortMemoryIO(val addrW: Int, val dataW: Int) extends
Bundle {
13
require(addrW > 0, "address width must be greater than 0")
14
require(dataW > 0, "data width must be greater than 0")
15
16
val clka
= Input(Clock())
17
val ena
= Input(Bool())
18
val wea
= Input(Bool())
19
val addra = Input(UInt(addrW.W))
20
val dia
= Input(UInt(dataW.W))
21
val doa
= Output(UInt(dataW.W))
22
23
val clkb
= Input(Clock())
24
val enb
= Input(Bool())
25
val web
= Input(Bool())
26
val addrb = Input(UInt(addrW.W))
27
val dib
= Input(UInt(dataW.W))
28
val dob
= Output(UInt(dataW.W))
29
}
30
31
/** True dual-port memory module
32
*
33
* @param addrW the address width in bits
34
* @param dataW the data width in bits
35
*
36
* @note Inspired by true dual-port memory templates from Vivado
37
*
IP generators.
38
*/
39
class TrueDualPortMemory(addrW: Int, dataW: Int) extends RawModule {
40
val io = IO(new TrueDualPortMemoryIO(addrW, dataW))
41
val ram = SyncReadMem(1 << addrW, UInt(dataW.W))
42
43
// Port a
44
withClock(io.clka) {
45
io.doa := DontCare
46
when(io.ena) {
47
when(io.wea) {
48
ram(io.addra) := io.dia
49
}
50
io.doa := ram(io.addra)
51
}
52
}
53
54
// Port b
==PAGE:169==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
155
55
withClock(io.clkb) {
56
io.dob := DontCare
57
when(io.enb) {
58
when(io.web) {
59
ram(io.addrb) := io.dib
60
}
61
io.dob := ram(io.addrb)
62
}
63
}
64
}
Listing B.7: Implementation of a true dual-port memory module.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** IO declaration for true dual-port FIFOs
7
*
8
* @param addrW the address width in bits
9
* @param dataW the data width in bits
10
*/
11
class TrueDualPortFIFOIO(val addrW: Int, val dataW: Int) extends
Bundle {
12
require(addrW > 0, "address width must be greater than 0")
13
require(dataW > 0, "data width must be greater than 0")
14
15
// clki and clko must be of type Bool to work in ChiselTest
16
val clki
= Input(Clock())
17
val we
= Input(Bool())
18
val datai = Input(UInt(dataW.W))
19
val full
= Output(Bool())
20
21
val clko
= Input(Clock())
22
val en
= Input(Bool())
23
val datao = Output(UInt(dataW.W))
24
val empty = Output(Bool())
25
26
val rst = Input(Bool())
27
}
28
29
/** Gray counter -based true dual-port FIFO
30
*
31
* @param addrW the address width in bits
32
* @param dataW the data width in bits
==PAGE:170==
156
B Accelerator Sources
33
*
34
* @note Inspired by implementation from "RTL Hardware Design
35
*
Using VHDL" by Pong P. Chu. Alterations have been made
36
*
to _not_ include synchronization registers between clock
37
*
domains.
38
*/
39
class TrueDualPortFIFO(addrW: Int, dataW: Int) extends RawModule {
40
val io = IO(new TrueDualPortFIFOIO(addrW, dataW))
41
42
/** Increments a Gray encoded number
43
*
44
* @param c the counter value to increment
45
* @param n the width of the counter
46
*/
47
private[TrueDualPortFIFO] def grayIncrement(c: UInt, n: Int) = {
48
val b1 = Wire(UInt(n.W))
49
// Gray to Binary
50
val bVec = VecInit((0 until n).map( i => c(n-1, i).xorR()
).toSeq)
51
// Binary increment
52
b1 := bVec.asUInt + 1.U
53
// Binary to Gray
54
b1 ^ (0.U(1.W) ## b1(n-1, 1))
55
}
56
57
/** Write control module for FIFO
58
*
59
* @param addrW the address width in bits
60
*/
61
private[TrueDualPortFIFO] class WriteControl(addrW: Int) extends
RawModule {
62
val io = IO(new Bundle {
63
val clkw
= Input(Clock())
64
val resetw = Input(Bool())
65
val wr
= Input(Bool())
66
val rPtr
= Input(UInt((addrW+1).W))
67
val full
= Output(Bool())
68
val wPtr
= Output(UInt((addrW+1).W))
69
val wAddr
= Output(UInt(addrW.W))
70
})
71
72
withClockAndReset(io.clkw, io.resetw.asAsyncReset) {
73
// Internal signals
74
val wPtrNext = Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
75
val gray1 = Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
76
val wAddr = Wire(UInt(addrW.W))
==PAGE:171==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
157
77
val wAddrMsb = Wire(Bool())
78
val rAddrMsb = Wire(Bool())
79
val fullFlag = Wire(Bool())
80
81
// Write pointer register
82
val wPtr = RegNext(wPtrNext , 0.U)
83
84
// (N+1)-bit Gray counter
85
gray1 := grayIncrement(wPtr, addrW+1)
86
87
// Update write pointer
88
wPtrNext := Mux(io.wr && !fullFlag , gray1, wPtr)
89
90
// N-bit Gray counter
91
wAddrMsb := wPtr(addrW) ^ wPtr(addrW -1)
92
wAddr
:= wAddrMsb ## wPtr(addrW -2, 0)
93
94
// Full flag generation
95
rAddrMsb := io.rPtr(addrW) ^ io.rPtr(addrW -1)
96
fullFlag := (io.rPtr(addrW) =/= wPtr(addrW)) &&
(io.rPtr(addrW -2, 0) === wPtr(addrW -2, 0)) && (rAddrMsb
=== wAddrMsb)
97
98
// Output
99
io.wAddr := wAddr
100
io.wPtr
:= wPtr
101
io.full
:= fullFlag
102
}
103
}
104
105
/** Read control module for FIFO
106
*
107
* @param addrW the address width in bits
108
*/
109
private[TrueDualPortFIFO] class ReadControl(addrW: Int) extends
RawModule {
110
val io = IO(new Bundle {
111
val clkr
= Input(Clock())
112
val resetr = Input(Bool())
113
val rd
= Input(Bool())
114
val wPtr
= Input(UInt((addrW+1).W))
115
val empty
= Output(Bool())
116
val rPtr
= Output(UInt((addrW+1).W))
117
val rAddr
= Output(UInt(addrW.W))
118
})
119
==PAGE:172==
158
B Accelerator Sources
120
withClockAndReset(io.clkr, io.resetr.asAsyncReset) {
121
// Internal signals
122
val rPtrNext = Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
123
val gray1 = Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
124
val rAddr = Wire(UInt(addrW.W))
125
val rAddrMsb
= Wire(Bool())
126
val wAddrMsb
= Wire(Bool())
127
val emptyFlag = Wire(Bool())
128
129
// Read pointer register
130
val rPtr = RegNext(rPtrNext , 0.U)
131
132
// (N+1)-bit Gray counter
133
gray1 := grayIncrement(rPtr, addrW+1)
134
135
// Update read pointer
136
rPtrNext := Mux(io.rd && !emptyFlag , gray1, rPtr)
137
138
// N-bit Gray counter
139
rAddrMsb := rPtr(addrW) ^ rPtr(addrW -1)
140
rAddr
:= rAddrMsb ## rPtr(addrW -2, 0)
141
142
// Empty flag generation
143
wAddrMsb
:= io.wPtr(addrW) ^ io.wPtr(addrW -1)
144
emptyFlag := (io.wPtr(addrW) === rPtr(addrW)) &&
(io.wPtr(addrW -2, 0) === rPtr(addrW -2, 0)) && (wAddrMsb
=== rAddrMsb)
145
146
// Output
147
io.rAddr := rAddr
148
io.rPtr
:= rPtr
149
io.empty := emptyFlag
150
}
151
}
152
153
// Instantiating and interconnecting components
154
val ram
= Module(new TrueDualPortMemory(addrW, dataW))
155
val wctrl = Module(new WriteControl(addrW))
156
val rctrl = Module(new ReadControl(addrW))
157
val wAddr = Wire(UInt(addrW.W))
158
val wPtr
= Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
159
val rAddr = Wire(UInt(addrW.W))
160
val rPtr
= Wire(UInt((addrW+1).W))
161
162
// Write side (port A)
163
ram.io.clka
:= io.clki
==PAGE:173==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
159
164
ram.io.addra := wAddr
165
ram.io.dia
:= io.datai
166
ram.io.ena
:= io.we && !wctrl.io.full
167
ram.io.wea
:= io.we && !wctrl.io.full
168
169
wctrl.io.clkw := io.clki
170
wctrl.io.resetw := io.rst
171
wctrl.io.wr := io.we
172
wctrl.io.rPtr := rPtr
173
io.full := wctrl.io.full
174
wPtr := wctrl.io.wPtr
175
wAddr := wctrl.io.wAddr
176
177
// Read side (port B)
178
ram.io.clkb
:= io.clko
179
ram.io.addrb := rAddr
180
ram.io.dib
:= 0.U
181
ram.io.enb
:= io.en && !rctrl.io.empty
182
ram.io.web
:= false.B
183
io.datao
:= ram.io.dob
184
185
rctrl.io.clkr := io.clko
186
rctrl.io.resetr := io.rst
187
rctrl.io.rd := io.en
188
rctrl.io.wPtr := wPtr
189
io.empty := rctrl.io.empty
190
rPtr := rctrl.io.rPtr
191
rAddr := rctrl.io.rAddr
192
}
Listing B.8: Implementation of a true dual-port memory-based FIFO.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Input core module
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
*/
10
class InputCore(coreID: Int) extends Module {
11
val io = IO(new Bundle {
12
val pmClkEn = Output(Bool())
13
val newTS
= Input(Bool())
14
==PAGE:174==
160
B Accelerator Sources
15
// To off chip communication
16
val offCCHSin
= Input(Bool())
17
val offCCHSout = Output(Bool())
18
19
// Memory interface
20
val memEn
= Output(Bool())
21
val memAddr = Output(UInt((RATEADDRWIDTH+1).W))
22
val memDo
= Input(UInt(PERIODWIDTH.W))
23
24
// Bus interface
25
val grant = Input(Bool())
26
val req
= Output(Bool())
27
val tx
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
28
val rx
= Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
29
30
val nothing = Output(UInt(log2Up(CORES).W))
31
})
32
33
// Unique output to generate multiple copies of this module
34
io.nothing := coreID.U
35
36
// Interface to/from bus
37
val interface = Module(new BusInterface(coreID))
38
interface.io.grant := io.grant
39
io.req
:= interface.io.reqOut
40
io.tx
:= interface.io.tx
41
interface.io.rx
:= io.rx
42
43
// Spike transmission to/from interface
44
val spikeTrans = Module(new TransmissionSystem(coreID))
45
interface.io.spikeID
:= spikeTrans.io.data
46
spikeTrans.io.ready
:= interface.io.ready
47
interface.io.reqIn
:= spikeTrans.io.valid
48
49
// Control FSM internal signals
50
val idle :: firstr :: spikegen :: lastgen :: done :: Nil = Enum(5)
51
val state
= RegInit(idle)
52
val ts
= RegInit(0.U(PERIODWIDTH.W))
53
val pixCnt = RegInit(0.U(RATEADDRWIDTH.W))
54
val pixCntLate
= RegNext(pixCnt)
55
val pixCntLater = RegNext(pixCntLate)
56
57
val shouldSpike
= Wire(Bool())
58
val spikePulse
= RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(false.B)))
59
val sPulseDecSig =
WireDefault(EVALUNITS.U((log2Up(EVALUNITS)+1).W))
==PAGE:175==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
161
60
val spike
= WireDefault(false.B)
61
62
val phase = RegInit(false.B)
63
io.offCCHSout := phase
64
65
// Methods for spike generation
66
def ratePeriodSpiker() = {
67
val res = Mux(ts === 0.U || io.memDo === 0.U, 1.U, ts %
io.memDo)
68
res === 0.U
69
}
70
def rankOrderPeriodSpiker() = ts =/= 0.U && io.memDo === ts
71
72
// Spike rates are encoded with periods
73
if (RANKORDERENC)
74
shouldSpike := rankOrderPeriodSpiker()
75
else
76
shouldSpike := ratePeriodSpiker()
77
78
// Control FSM
79
io.pmClkEn := true.B
80
io.memEn
:= false.B
81
io.memAddr := Mux(phase, pixCnt + NEURONSPRCORE.U, pixCnt)
82
switch(state) {
83
// State 0 - resets counters and waits for next time step
84
is(idle) {
85
io.pmClkEn := false.B
86
ts := 0.U
87
pixCnt := 0.U
88
89
when(io.offCCHSin =/= phase && io.newTS) {
90
io.pmClkEn := true.B
91
state := firstr
92
phase := !phase
93
}
94
}
95
96
// State 1 - enables the memory for reading the first period
97
is(firstr) {
98
io.memEn := true.B
99
pixCnt := pixCnt + 1.U
100
101
state := spikegen
102
}
103
104
// State 2 - spikes for NEURONSPRCORE -1 neurons and enables the
==PAGE:176==
162
B Accelerator Sources
105
// memory for reading the last period
106
is(spikegen) {
107
io.memEn := true.B
108
pixCnt := pixCnt + 1.U
109
spike := shouldSpike
110
111
when(pixCnt === (NEURONSPRCORE -1).U){
112
state := lastgen
113
}
114
}
115
116
// State 3 - spikes the last time and increments the ts count
117
is(lastgen) {
118
ts := ts + 1.U
119
spike := shouldSpike
120
121
state := done
122
}
123
124
// State 4 - disables the clock if this block has finished
125
// transmission of all its generated spikes (i.e., based on
126
// request from its bus interface)
127
is(done) {
128
when(!interface.io.reqOut && !io.newTS) {
129
io.pmClkEn := false.B
130
}
131
132
when(io.newTS) {
133
io.pmClkEn := true.B
134
when(ts === 499.U) {
135
state := idle
136
}.otherwise {
137
state := firstr
138
}
139
}
140
}
141
}
142
143
// Generate spike decode signal
144
when(spike) {
145
sPulseDecSig := 0.U(1.W) ## pixCntLate(log2Up(EVALUNITS)-1,0)
146
}
147
148
// Spike pulse decoder
149
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
150
spikePulse(i) := false.B
==PAGE:177==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
163
151
when (sPulseDecSig === i.U) {
152
spikePulse(i) := true.B
153
}
154
}
155
156
// Transmission connections
157
spikeTrans.io.n := pixCntLater(RATEADDRWIDTH -1,
RATEADDRWIDTH -NWIDTH)
158
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
159
spikeTrans.io.spikes(i) := spikePulse(i)
160
}
161
}
Listing B.9: Input core module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
import chisel3.util.experimental.loadMemoryFromFileInline
6
import firrtl.annotations.MemoryLoadFileType
7
8
/** Split evaluation memory module
9
*
10
* @param coreID the core ID
11
* @param evalID the evaluation ID
12
* @param synth whether this module is used for FPGA synthesis or
13
*
simulation
14
*
15
* @note Address is split into two; `sel` and `pos`. `sel` selects
16
*
between the four memories , while `pos` is the address
17
*
accessed. The memories expect initialization files to be
18
*
present at the paths shown below.
19
* @note Output `nothing ` is assigned a unique value in order to
20
*
ensure proper generation of multiple copies of this
module.
21
*/
22
class EvaluationMemory(val coreID: Int, val evalID: Int, synth:
Boolean = false) extends Module {
23
val io = IO(new Bundle {
24
val addr = Input(new MemAddr)
25
val ena
= Input(Bool())
26
val wr
= Input(Bool())
27
val readData
= Output(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
28
val writeData = Input(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
29
val nothing
= Output(UInt(6.W))
==PAGE:178==
164
B Accelerator Sources
30
})
31
32
// The four different memories are mapped to the following
33
// addr.sel
| memory
34
//
const
|
constants (reset, refrac , decay)
35
//
dynamic
|
refrac counters and membrane potentials
36
//
biasthresh |
biases and thresholds
37
//
weights
|
weights
38
val constmem = SyncReadMem(4, UInt(CONSTDATAWIDTH.W))
39
val dynamem
= SyncReadMem(2*TMNEURONS , SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
40
val btmem
= SyncReadMem(2*TMNEURONS , SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
41
val wghtmem
= SyncReadMem(AXONNR*TMNEURONS ,
UInt(WGHTDATAWIDTH.W))
42
43
// Memory initialization
44
val fileType = MemoryLoadFileType.Binary
45
val (constfile , dynfile , btfile , wfile) = if (synth) (
46
s"constc${coreID}.mem",
47
s"potrefc${coreID}.mem",
48
s"biasthreshc${coreID}e${evalID}.mem",
49
s"weightsc${coreID}e${evalID}.mem"
50
) else (
51
s"mapping/meminit/constc${coreID}.mem",
52
s"mapping/meminit/potrefc${coreID}.mem",
53
s"mapping/meminit/biasthreshc${coreID}e${evalID}.mem",
54
s"mapping/meminit/weightsc${coreID}e${evalID}.mem"
55
)
56
loadMemoryFromFileInline(constmem , constfile , fileType)
57
loadMemoryFromFileInline(dynamem , dynfile , fileType)
58
loadMemoryFromFileInline(btmem, btfile , fileType)
59
loadMemoryFromFileInline(wghtmem , wfile, fileType)
60
61
// Unique output to generate multiple copies of this module
62
io.nothing := coreID.U ## evalID.U
63
64
// Control synchronous memories
65
val selPipe
= RegEnable(io.addr.sel, io.ena)
66
val addrPipe
= RegEnable(io.addr.pos(1, 0), io.ena)
67
val constRead = WireDefault(UInt(5.W), DontCare)
68
val dynaRead
= WireDefault(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W), DontCare)
69
val btRead
= WireDefault(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W), DontCare)
70
val wghtRead
= WireDefault(UInt(11.W), DontCare)
71
val memRead
= WireDefault(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W), DontCare)
72
when(io.ena) {
73
switch(io.addr.sel) {
74
is(const) {
==PAGE:179==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
165
75
constRead := constmem(io.addr.pos)
76
}
77
is(dynamic) {
78
when(io.wr) {
79
dynamem(io.addr.pos) := io.writeData
80
}.otherwise {
81
dynaRead := dynamem(io.addr.pos)
82
}
83
}
84
is(biasthresh) {
85
btRead := btmem(io.addr.pos)
86
}
87
is(weights) {
88
// Add an unused write port to force width of memory
89
when(io.wr) {
90
wghtmem(io.addr.pos) := io.writeData(10, 0)
91
}.otherwise {
92
wghtRead := wghtmem(io.addr.pos)
93
}
94
}
95
}
96
}
97
switch(selPipe) {
98
is(const) {
99
// Sign-extend
100
val res = (constRead ## 0.U(10.W)).asSInt.pad(NEUDATAWIDTH)
101
// Pad with zeros
102
val oth = constRead.pad(NEUDATAWIDTH).asSInt
103
memRead := Mux(!addrPipe.orR, res, oth)
104
}
105
is(dynamic) {
106
memRead := dynaRead
107
}
108
is(biasthresh) {
109
memRead := btRead
110
}
111
is(weights) {
112
// Convert from 6.4
113
val res = (wghtRead(wghtRead.getWidth -2, 0) ##
0.U(6.W)).asSInt.pad(NEUDATAWIDTH)
114
// Convert from 0.10
115
val oth = wghtRead.pad(NEUDATAWIDTH).asSInt
116
memRead := Mux(wghtRead(wghtRead.getWidth -1), res, oth)
117
}
118
}
119
io.readData := memRead
==PAGE:180==
166
B Accelerator Sources
120
}
Listing B.10: Evaluation memory module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Neuron evaluator module */
7
class NeuronEvaluator extends Module {
8
val io = IO(new Bundle {
9
val dataIn
= Input(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
10
val dataOut
= Output(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
11
12
val spikeIndi
= Output(Bool())
13
val refracIndi = Output(Bool())
14
15
val cntrSels
= Input(new EvalCntrSigs())
16
val evalEnable = Input(Bool())
17
})
18
19
// Internal signals
20
val sum
= Wire(SInt((NEUDATAWIDTH+1).W))
21
val sumSat
= Wire(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
22
val sumIn1
= Wire(SInt((NEUDATAWIDTH+1).W))
23
val sumIn2
= Wire(SInt((NEUDATAWIDTH+1).W))
24
val potDecay
= Wire(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
25
val refracRegNext
= Wire(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
26
val membPotRegNext
= Wire(SInt(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
27
val spikeIndiRegNext = Wire(Bool())
28
29
val membPotReg
= RegEnable(membPotRegNext ,
0.S(NEUDATAWIDTH.W), io.evalEnable)
30
val refracCntReg
= RegEnable(refracRegNext , io.evalEnable)
31
val spikeIndiReg
= RegEnable(spikeIndiRegNext , false.B,
io.evalEnable)
32
33
// Default assignments
34
io.dataOut := io.dataIn
35
sumIn1
:= membPotReg
36
sumIn2
:= Mux(io.cntrSels.decaySel , -potDecay , io.dataIn)
37
sum
:= sumIn1 + sumIn2
38
39
membPotRegNext
:= membPotReg
40
spikeIndiRegNext := spikeIndiReg
==PAGE:181==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
167
41
42
// Saturation
43
when(sum < (0 - (1 << (NEUDATAWIDTH -1))).S) {
44
sumSat := (0 - (1 << (NEUDATAWIDTH -1))).S
45
}.elsewhen(sum > ((1 << (NEUDATAWIDTH -1)) - 1).S) {
46
sumSat := ((1 << (NEUDATAWIDTH -1)) - 1).S
47
}.otherwise {
48
sumSat := sum
49
}
50
51
// Next membrane potential selection
52
switch(io.cntrSels.potSel) {
53
is(0.U) {
54
membPotRegNext := io.dataIn
55
}
56
is(1.U) {
57
membPotRegNext := sumSat
58
}
59
is(2.U) {
60
membPotRegNext := membPotReg
61
}
62
}
63
64
// Constant multiplier for estimated decay
65
// |--Shift--|--Decay --| //
66
// |
0
| 100
%| //
67
// |
1
|
50
%| //
68
// |
2
|
25
%| //
69
// |
3
|
12.5
%| //
70
// |
4
|
6.25 %| //
71
// |
5
|
3.125%| //
72
// |
6
|
1.563%| //
73
// |
7
|
0.781%| //
74
potDecay := membPotReg >> io.dataIn(2, 0)
75
76
// Next refraction count selection
77
refracRegNext := Mux(io.cntrSels.refracSel === 0.U, io.dataIn,
refracCntReg)
78
79
// Next spike indirection selection
80
switch(io.cntrSels.spikeSel) {
81
is(0.U) {
82
spikeIndiRegNext := membPotReg > io.dataIn
83
}
84
is(1.U) {
85
spikeIndiRegNext := false.B
==PAGE:182==
168
B Accelerator Sources
86
}
87
}
88
89
// Data out selection
90
switch(io.cntrSels.writeDataSel) {
91
is(0.U) {
92
io.dataOut := io.dataIn
93
}
94
is(1.U) {
95
when(~spikeIndiReg) {
96
io.dataOut := membPotReg
97
}.otherwise {
98
io.dataOut := io.dataIn
99
}
100
}
101
is(2.U) {
102
when(io.refracIndi) {
103
when(spikeIndiReg) {
104
io.dataOut := io.dataIn
105
}.otherwise {
106
io.dataOut := refracCntReg
107
}
108
}.otherwise {
109
io.dataOut := refracCntReg - 1.S
110
}
111
}
112
}
113
114
io.refracIndi := refracRegNext === 0.S
115
io.spikeIndi
:= spikeIndiReg
116
}
Listing B.11: Time-multiplexed neuron evaluator module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Neuron core control unit FSM
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
*/
10
class ControlUnit(coreID: Int) extends Module {
11
val io = IO(new Bundle {
12
val done = Output(Bool())
==PAGE:183==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
169
13
val newTS = Input(Bool())
14
15
// For evaluation memories
16
val addr
= Output(new MemAddr)
17
val wr
= Output(Bool()) //false: read, true: write
18
val ena
= Output(Bool())
19
20
// For neuron evaluator
21
val spikeIndi
= Input(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
22
val refracIndi = Input(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
23
val cntrSels
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS , new EvalCntrSigs()))
24
val evalEnable = Output(Bool())
25
26
// For axon system
27
val inOut
= Output(Bool())
28
val spikeCnt
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
29
val aAddr
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
30
val aEna
= Output(Bool())
31
val aData
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
32
33
// For spike transmission system
34
val n
= Output(UInt(NWIDTH.W))
35
val spikes
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
36
})
37
38
// Control FSM - runs once per time step
39
val idle :: rRefrac :: rPot :: rDecay :: rWeight1 :: rWeight2 ::
rBias :: rThresh :: rRefracSet :: wRefrac :: rPotSet :: wPot
:: Nil = Enum(12)
40
val state = RegInit(idle)
41
42
// For easier addressing
43
val rst :: refrac :: decay :: Nil = Enum(3)
44
45
// Used to deliver spike pulses to transmission
46
val spikePulse = RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(false.B)))
47
48
// Time multiplex counters for evaluations and axons
49
val neuron = RegInit(0.U(NWIDTH.W))
50
io.n
:= neuron
51
val axon
= RegInit(0.U(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
52
io.aAddr
:= axon
53
// Register to sample incoming spike count from axon system
54
val spikeCnt = RegInit(0.U(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
55
// Used for new time step signaling
56
val inOut = RegInit(false.B)
==PAGE:184==
170
B Accelerator Sources
57
io.inOut := inOut
58
// Vector of evaluation units active state
59
val evalUnitActive =
RegInit(VecInit(Seq.fill(EVALUNITS)(false.B)))
60
val localCntrSels
= Wire(Vec(EVALUNITS , new EvalCntrSigs()))
61
// Register storing number of neurons mapped to this core
62
val nrNeuMapped = RegInit(neuronsInCore(coreID).U)
63
64
// Default assignments
65
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
66
spikePulse(i)
:= false.B
67
localCntrSels(i).potSel
:= 2.U
68
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel
:= 2.U
69
localCntrSels(i).refracSel
:= 1.U
70
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel := 0.U
71
localCntrSels(i).decaySel
:= false.B
72
73
// Ensure evaluation units are still when done evaluating
74
evalUnitActive(i) := nrNeuMapped > ((neuron <<
log2Up(EVALUNITS)) + i.U)
75
when(evalUnitActive(i)) {
76
io.cntrSels(i).potSel
:= localCntrSels(i).potSel
77
io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel
:= localCntrSels(i).spikeSel
78
io.cntrSels(i).refracSel
:= localCntrSels(i).refracSel
79
io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel := localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel
80
io.cntrSels(i).decaySel
:= localCntrSels(i).decaySel
81
}.otherwise {
82
io.cntrSels(i).potSel
:= 2.U
83
io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel
:= 2.U
84
io.cntrSels(i).refracSel
:= 1.U
85
io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel := 0.U
86
io.cntrSels(i).decaySel
:= false.B
87
}
88
89
// Connect spike transmission system
90
io.spikes(i) := spikePulse(i)
91
}
92
93
io.addr.sel := const
94
io.addr.pos := 0.U
95
io.ena := false.B
96
io.wr
:= false.B
97
98
io.evalEnable := true.B
99
100
io.aEna := false.B
==PAGE:185==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
171
101
102
// Control FSM - runs once per time step
103
io.done := false.B
104
switch(state) {
105
// State 0 - disables evaluators and waits for next time step
106
is(idle) {
107
io.done := true.B
108
neuron := 0.U
109
axon := 0.U
110
io.evalEnable := false.B
111
when(io.newTS) {
112
io.done
:= false.B
113
spikeCnt := io.spikeCnt
114
inOut
:= ~inOut
115
state
:= rRefrac
116
}
117
}
118
119
// State 1 - read refrac counter
120
is(rRefrac) {
121
io.ena
:= true.B
122
io.wr
:= false.B
123
io.addr.sel := dynamic
124
io.addr.pos := neuron
125
126
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
127
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel := 1.U
128
129
state := rPot
130
}
131
132
// State 2 - read membrane potential
133
is(rPot) {
134
io.ena
:= true.B
135
io.wr
:= false.B
136
io.addr.sel := dynamic
137
io.addr.pos := neuron + TMNEURONS.U
138
139
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
140
localCntrSels(i).refracSel := 0.U
141
142
state := rDecay
143
}
144
145
// State 3 - read decay factor
146
is(rDecay) {
==PAGE:186==
172
B Accelerator Sources
147
io.ena
:= true.B
148
io.wr
:= false.B
149
io.addr.sel := const
150
io.addr.pos := decay
151
152
axon := axon + 1.U
153
io.aEna := true.B
154
155
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
156
localCntrSels(i).potSel := 0.U
157
158
when(spikeCnt === 0.U) {
159
state := rBias
160
}.otherwise {
161
state := rWeight1
162
}
163
}
164
165
// State 4 - read weight number 1
166
is(rWeight1) {
167
io.ena
:= true.B
168
io.wr
:= false.B
169
io.addr.sel := weights
170
io.addr.pos := (neuron * (3*256).U) + io.aData
171
172
io.aEna := true.B
173
axon := axon + 1.U
174
175
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
176
when(io.refracIndi(i)) {
177
localCntrSels(i).potSel
:= 1.U
178
localCntrSels(i).decaySel := true.B
179
}
180
}
181
182
when(spikeCnt === axon) {
183
state := rBias
184
}.otherwise {
185
state := rWeight2
186
}
187
}
188
189
// State 5 - read weight number 2
190
is(rWeight2) {
191
io.ena
:= true.B
192
io.wr
:= false.B
==PAGE:187==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
173
193
io.addr.sel := weights
194
io.addr.pos := (neuron * (3*256).U) + io.aData
195
196
axon := axon + 1.U
197
io.aEna := true.B
198
199
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
200
when(io.refracIndi(i)) {
201
localCntrSels(i).potSel := 1.U
202
}
203
}
204
205
when(spikeCnt === axon - 1.U) {
206
state := rBias
207
}.otherwise {
208
state := rWeight2
209
}
210
}
211
212
// State 6 - read bias
213
is(rBias) {
214
io.ena
:= true.B
215
io.wr
:= false.B
216
io.addr.sel := biasthresh
217
io.addr.pos := neuron
218
219
when(spikeCnt === 0.U) {
220
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
221
when(io.refracIndi(i)) {
222
localCntrSels(i).potSel
:= 1.U
223
localCntrSels(i).decaySel := true.B
224
}
225
}
226
}.otherwise {
227
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
228
when(io.refracIndi(i)) {
229
localCntrSels(i).potSel := 1.U
230
}
231
}
232
}
233
234
state := rThresh
235
}
236
237
// State 7 - read threshold set value
238
is(rThresh) {
==PAGE:188==
174
B Accelerator Sources
239
io.ena
:= true.B
240
io.wr
:= false.B
241
io.addr.sel
:= biasthresh
242
io.addr.pos
:= neuron + TMNEURONS.U
243
244
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
245
when(io.refracIndi(i)) {
246
localCntrSels(i).potSel := 1.U
247
}
248
}
249
250
state := rRefracSet
251
}
252
253
// State 8 - read refractory counter set value
254
is(rRefracSet) {
255
io.ena
:= true.B
256
io.wr
:= false.B
257
io.addr.sel := const
258
io.addr.pos := refrac
259
260
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
261
localCntrSels(i).spikeSel := 0.U
262
263
state := wRefrac
264
}
265
266
// State 9 - write refractory counter
267
is(wRefrac) {
268
io.ena
:= true.B
269
io.wr
:= true.B
270
io.addr.sel := dynamic
271
io.addr.pos := neuron
272
273
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
274
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel := 2.U
275
spikePulse(i) := io.spikeIndi(i)
276
}
277
278
state := rPotSet
279
}
280
281
// State A - read membrane potential set value
282
is(rPotSet) {
283
io.ena
:= true.B
284
io.wr
:= false.B
==PAGE:189==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
175
285
io.addr.sel := const
286
io.addr.pos := rst
287
288
state
:= wPot
289
}
290
291
// State B - write membrane potential
292
is(wPot) {
293
io.ena
:= true.B
294
io.wr
:= true.B
295
io.addr.sel := dynamic
296
io.addr.pos := neuron + TMNEURONS.U
297
298
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
299
localCntrSels(i).writeDataSel := 1.U
300
301
axon := 0.U
302
val nNext = neuron + 1.U
303
neuron := nNext
304
when((nNext << log2Up(EVALUNITS)) >= nrNeuMapped ) {
305
state := idle
306
}.otherwise {
307
state := rRefrac
308
}
309
}
310
}
311
}
Listing B.12: Control unit FSM module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
5
/** Neurons module
6
*
7
* @param coreID the core ID
8
* @param synth whether this module is used for FPGA synthesis or
9
*
simulation
10
*/
11
class Neurons(coreID: Int, synth: Boolean = false) extends Module {
12
val io = IO(new Bundle {
13
val done
= Output(Bool())
14
val newTS
= Input(Bool())
15
16
// For axon system
==PAGE:190==
176
B Accelerator Sources
17
val inOut
= Output(Bool())
18
val spikeCnt = Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
19
val aAddr
= Output(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
20
val aEna
= Output(Bool())
21
val aData
= Input(UInt(AXONIDWIDTH.W))
22
23
// For spike transmission system
24
val n
= Output(UInt(NWIDTH.W))
25
val spikes
= Output(Vec(EVALUNITS , Bool()))
26
})
27
28
val controlUnit = Module(new ControlUnit(coreID))
29
val evalUnits
= (0 until EVALUNITS).map(i => Module(new
NeuronEvaluator))
30
val evalMems
= (0 until EVALUNITS).map(i => Module(new
EvaluationMemory(coreID , i, synth)))
31
32
io.inOut
:= controlUnit.io.inOut
33
controlUnit.io.spikeCnt := io.spikeCnt
34
io.aAddr
:= controlUnit.io.aAddr
35
io.aEna
:= controlUnit.io.aEna
36
controlUnit.io.aData
:= io.aData
37
io.n
:= controlUnit.io.n
38
39
io.done := controlUnit.io.done
40
controlUnit.io.newTS := io.newTS
41
42
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
43
io.spikes(i) := controlUnit.io.spikes(i)
44
45
evalUnits(i).io.dataIn
:= evalMems(i).io.readData
46
evalMems(i).io.writeData
:= evalUnits(i).io.dataOut
47
controlUnit.io.spikeIndi(i)
:=
evalUnits(i).io.spikeIndi
48
controlUnit.io.refracIndi(i)
:=
evalUnits(i).io.refracIndi
49
evalUnits(i).io.cntrSels.potSel
:=
controlUnit.io.cntrSels(i).potSel
50
evalUnits(i).io.cntrSels.spikeSel
:=
controlUnit.io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel
51
evalUnits(i).io.cntrSels.refracSel
:=
controlUnit.io.cntrSels(i).refracSel
52
evalUnits(i).io.cntrSels.writeDataSel :=
controlUnit.io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel
53
evalUnits(i).io.cntrSels.decaySel
:=
controlUnit.io.cntrSels(i).decaySel
==PAGE:191==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
177
54
evalUnits(i).io.evalEnable
:=
controlUnit.io.evalEnable
55
56
evalMems(i).io.addr
:= controlUnit.io.addr
57
evalMems(i).io.wr
:= controlUnit.io.wr
58
evalMems(i).io.ena
:= controlUnit.io.ena
59
}
60
}
Listing B.13: Composite neurons module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Neuron core module
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
* @param synth whether this module is used for FPGA synthesis or
10
*
simulation
11
*/
12
class NeuronCore(coreID: Int, synth: Boolean = false) extends
Module {
13
val io = IO(new Bundle {
14
val pmClkEn = Output(Bool())
15
val newTS
= Input(Bool())
16
17
// Bus interface
18
val grant = Input(Bool())
19
val req
= Output(Bool())
20
val tx
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
21
val rx
= Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
22
})
23
24
// Bus interface , axon system , spike transmission , and neuron
units
25
val interface
= Module(new BusInterface(coreID))
26
val axonSystem = Module(new AxonSystem)
27
val spikeTrans = Module(new TransmissionSystem(coreID))
28
val neurons
= Module(new Neurons(coreID, synth))
29
30
interface.io.grant
:= io.grant
31
io.req
:= interface.io.reqOut
32
io.tx
:= interface.io.tx
33
interface.io.rx
:= io.rx
==PAGE:192==
178
B Accelerator Sources
34
axonSystem.io.axonIn
:= interface.io.axonID
35
axonSystem.io.axonValid := interface.io.valid
36
interface.io.spikeID
:= spikeTrans.io.data
37
spikeTrans.io.ready
:= interface.io.ready
38
interface.io.reqIn
:= spikeTrans.io.valid
39
40
axonSystem.io.inOut
:= neurons.io.inOut
41
neurons.io.spikeCnt
:= axonSystem.io.spikeCnt
42
axonSystem.io.rAddr
:= neurons.io.aAddr
43
axonSystem.io.rEna
:= neurons.io.aEna
44
neurons.io.aData
:= axonSystem.io.rData
45
46
spikeTrans.io.n
:= neurons.io.n
47
spikeTrans.io.spikes
:= neurons.io.spikes
48
49
io.pmClkEn := !neurons.io.done || interface.io.reqOut
50
neurons.io.newTS := io.newTS
51
}
Listing B.14: Neuron core module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Output core module
7
*
8
* @param coreID the core ID
9
*/
10
class OutputCore(coreID: Int) extends Module {
11
val io = IO(new Bundle {
12
val pmClkEn = Output(Bool())
13
14
// To FIFO queue
15
val qWe
= Output(Bool())
16
val qDi
= Output(UInt(8.W))
17
val qFull = Input(Bool())
18
19
// To bus
20
val grant = Input(Bool())
21
val req
= Output(Bool())
22
val tx
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
23
val rx
= Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
24
})
25
==PAGE:193==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
179
26
// Bus interface and default values
27
val interface = Module(new BusInterface(coreID))
28
interface.io.grant
:= io.grant
29
io.req
:= interface.io.reqOut
30
io.tx
:= interface.io.tx
31
interface.io.rx
:= io.rx
32
interface.io.reqIn
:= false.B // Never sends anything
33
interface.io.spikeID := 0.U
// Never sends anything
34
35
// When a valid value is received , write it to the queue
36
io.qWe := false.B
37
io.qDi := interface.io.axonID(7, 0)
38
when(interface.io.valid && !io.qFull) {
39
io.qWe := true.B
40
}
41
42
// Clock gating output
43
io.pmClkEn := io.rx.orR || interface.io.valid
44
}
Listing B.15: Output core module definition.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** UART tx module
7
*
8
* @param frequency the frequency to operate at in Hz
9
* @param baudRate the baud rate to operate at in bits/second
10
*/
11
class Tx(frequency: Int, baudRate: Int) extends Module {
12
val io = IO(new Bundle {
13
val tx = Output(Bool())
14
val ready = Output(Bool())
15
val valid = Input(Bool())
16
val data = Input(UInt(8.W))
17
})
18
19
val sampleDiv = (frequency/baudRate).U
20
val sstart :: sdata :: sstop :: Nil = Enum(3)
21
22
val clkCnt = RegInit(0.U((log2Up(frequency/baudRate)+1).W))
23
val baudtick = RegInit(false.B)
24
val state = RegInit(sstart)
==PAGE:194==
180
B Accelerator Sources
25
val data = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
26
val txBit = RegInit(true.B)
27
val bitCnt = RegInit(0.U(3.W))
28
val readyR = RegInit(false.B)
29
30
io.tx := txBit
31
io.ready := readyR
32
33
when(clkCnt === sampleDiv) {
34
clkCnt := 0.U
35
baudtick := true.B
36
}.otherwise {
37
clkCnt := clkCnt + 1.U
38
baudtick := false.B
39
}
40
41
readyR := false.B
42
43
switch(state) {
44
is(sstart) {
45
when(baudtick && io.valid) {
46
txBit := false.B
47
state := sdata
48
bitCnt := 0.U
49
readyR := true.B
50
data := io.data
51
}
52
}
53
is(sdata) {
54
when(baudtick) {
55
txBit := data(0)
56
data := true.B ## data(7,1)
57
when(bitCnt < 7.U) {
58
bitCnt := bitCnt + 1.U
59
}.otherwise {
60
bitCnt := 0.U
61
state := sstop
62
}
63
}
64
}
65
is(sstop) {
66
when(baudtick) {
67
txBit := true.B
68
state := sstart
69
}
70
}
==PAGE:195==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
181
71
}
72
}
73
74
/** UART rx module with over-sampling
75
*
76
* @param frequency the frequency to operate at in Hz
77
* @param baudRate the baud rate to operate at in bits/second
78
*/
79
class Rx(frequency: Int, baudRate: Int) extends Module {
80
val io = IO(new Bundle {
81
val rx = Input(Bool())
82
val ready = Input(Bool())
83
val valid = Output(Bool())
84
val data = Output(UInt(8.W))
85
})
86
87
val overSampleDiv = (frequency/(baudRate*16)).U
88
val gstart :: gdata :: gstop :: Nil = Enum(3)
89
90
val dataSr
= RegInit("b11".U(2.W))
91
val filter
= RegInit("b11".U(2.W))
92
val rxBit
= RegInit(true.B)
93
val spaceCnt = RegInit(0.U(4.W))
94
val data
= RegInit(0.U(8.W))
95
val clkCnt
= RegInit(0.U(log2Up(frequency/(baudRate*16)).W))
96
val baudTick = RegInit(false.B)
97
val bitTick
= RegInit(false.B)
98
val state
= RegInit(gstart)
99
val bitCnt
= RegInit(0.U(3.W))
100
val validR
= RegInit(false.B)
101
102
io.data := data
103
io.valid := validR
104
105
when(validR && io.ready) {
106
validR := false.B
107
}
108
109
// Oversampled baud tick
110
when(clkCnt === overSampleDiv) {
111
baudTick := true.B
112
clkCnt := 0.U
113
}.otherwise {
114
baudTick := false.B
115
clkCnt := clkCnt + 1.U
116
}
==PAGE:196==
182
B Accelerator Sources
117
118
bitTick := false.B
119
120
when(baudTick) {
121
// Synchronize oversample
122
dataSr := dataSr(0) ## io.rx
123
124
// Filtering oversample
125
when(dataSr(1) && filter < 3.U) {
126
filter := filter + 1.U
127
}.elsewhen(!dataSr(1) && filter > 0.U) {
128
filter := filter - 1.U
129
}
130
131
when(filter === 3.U) {
132
rxBit := true.B
133
}.elsewhen(filter === 0.U) {
134
rxBit := false.B
135
}
136
137
// Spacing to match baud rate
138
when(spaceCnt === 15.U) {
139
bitTick := true.B
140
spaceCnt := 0.U
141
}.otherwise {
142
spaceCnt := spaceCnt + 1.U
143
}
144
when(state === gstart) {
145
spaceCnt := 0.U
146
}
147
}
148
149
switch(state) {
150
is(gstart) {
151
when(baudTick && !rxBit) {
152
state := gdata
153
}
154
}
155
is(gdata) {
156
when(bitTick) {
157
data := rxBit ## data(7,1)
158
when(bitCnt < 7.U){
159
bitCnt := bitCnt + 1.U
160
}.otherwise {
161
bitCnt := 0.U
162
state := gstop
==PAGE:197==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
183
163
}
164
}
165
}
166
is(gstop) {
167
when(bitTick && rxBit) {
168
state := gstart
169
validR := true.B
170
}
171
}
172
}
173
}
174
175
/** UART top module
176
*
177
* @param frequency the frequency to operate at in Hz
178
* @param baudRate the baud rate to operate at in bits/second
179
*/
180
class Uart(frequency: Int, baudRate: Int) extends Module {
181
val io = IO(new Bundle {
182
val rxd = Input(Bool())
183
val txd = Output(Bool())
184
185
val rxReady = Input(Bool())
186
val rxValid = Output(Bool())
187
val rxByte
= Output(UInt(8.W))
188
189
val txReady = Output(Bool())
190
val txValid = Input(Bool())
191
val txByte
= Input(UInt(8.W))
192
})
193
194
val tx = Module(new Tx(frequency , baudRate))
195
val rx = Module(new Rx(frequency , baudRate))
196
197
io.txd := tx.io.tx
198
io.txReady := tx.io.ready
199
tx.io.valid := io.txValid
200
tx.io.data := io.txByte
201
202
rx.io.rx := io.rxd
203
rx.io.ready := io.rxReady
204
io.rxValid := rx.io.valid
205
io.rxByte := rx.io.data
206
}
207
208
/** UART echo module
==PAGE:198==
184
B Accelerator Sources
209
*
210
* @param frequency the frequency to operate at in Hz
211
* @param baudRate the baud rate to operate at in bits/second
212
*/
213
class UartEcho(frequency: Int, baudRate: Int) extends Module {
214
val io = IO(new Bundle {
215
val rxd = Input(Bool())
216
val txd = Output(Bool())
217
})
218
219
val valid = RegInit(false.B)
220
val ready = RegInit(false.B)
221
val data = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
222
223
val atx = Module(new Tx(frequency , baudRate))
224
val arx = Module(new Rx(frequency , baudRate))
225
226
io.txd := atx.io.tx
227
arx.io.rx := io.rxd
228
229
ready := false.B
230
atx.io.valid := valid
231
atx.io.data := data
232
arx.io.ready := ready
233
234
when(arx.io.valid) {
235
data := arx.io.data
236
valid := true.B
237
ready := true.B
238
}
239
240
when(valid && atx.io.ready) {
241
valid := false.B
242
}
243
}
Listing B.16: UART-related module definitions including a UART echo module used for
testing.
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util._
5
6
/** Off-chip communication module
7
*
==PAGE:199==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
185
8
* @param frequency the frequency to operate at in Hz
9
* @param baudRate the baud rate to operate at in bits/second
10
*/
11
class OffChipCom(frequency: Int, baudRate: Int) extends Module {
12
val io = IO(new Bundle {
13
val tx = Output(Bool())
14
val rx = Input(Bool())
15
16
// Memory interface
17
val inC0We
= Output(Bool())
18
val inC0Addr
= Output(UInt((RATEADDRWIDTH+1).W))
19
val inC0Di
= Output(UInt(PERIODWIDTH.W))
20
21
val inC1We
= Output(Bool())
22
val inC1Addr
= Output(UInt((RATEADDRWIDTH+1).W))
23
val inC1Di
= Output(UInt(PERIODWIDTH.W))
24
25
// FIFO interface
26
val qEn
= Output(Bool())
27
val qData
= Input(UInt(8.W))
28
val qEmpty = Input(Bool())
29
30
// Synchronization ports for input cores
31
val inC0HSin
= Input(Bool())
32
val inC0HSout = Output(Bool())
33
34
val inC1HSin
= Input(Bool())
35
val inC1HSout = Output(Bool())
36
})
37
38
// UART module and relevant registers and wires
39
val uart = Module(new Uart(frequency , baudRate))
40
val txBuf = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
41
val txV = RegInit(false.B)
42
43
// RX logic
44
uart.io.rxd := io.rx
45
uart.io.rxReady := false.B
46
47
// TX logic
48
io.tx := uart.io.txd
49
uart.io.txValid := txV
50
uart.io.txByte := txBuf
51
when(uart.io.txReady && txV) {
52
txV := false.B
53
}
==PAGE:200==
186
B Accelerator Sources
54
55
// From FIFO queue
56
val en = Wire(Bool())
57
val enReg = RegInit(false.B)
58
en := !io.qEmpty && !txV && !enReg
59
enReg := en
60
io.qEn := en
61
when(enReg) {
62
txBuf := io.qData
63
txV := true.B
64
}
65
66
// Data buffer registers
67
val addr1 = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
68
val addr0 = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
69
val period1 = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
70
val period0 = RegInit(0.U(8.W))
71
72
// Synchronization with input cores - init to in-phase
73
val phase = RegInit(false.B)
74
75
// IO default values
76
val defAddr
= Mux(phase, addr0, addr0 +
NEURONSPRCORE.U)(RATEADDRWIDTH , 0)
77
val defData
= (period1 ## period0)(PERIODWIDTH -1, 0)
78
io.inC0HSout := phase
79
io.inC0We
:= false.B
80
io.inC0Addr
:= defAddr
81
io.inC0Di
:= defData
82
83
io.inC1HSout := phase
84
io.inC1We
:= false.B
85
io.inC1Addr
:= defAddr
86
io.inC1Di
:= defData
87
88
// Control FSM
89
val idle :: start :: receiveW :: toCore :: Nil = Enum(4)
90
val stateReg = RegInit(idle)
91
val byteCnt
= RegInit(0.U(2.W))
92
val pixCnt
= RegInit(0.U(log2Up(INPUTSIZE).W))
93
switch(stateReg) {
94
is(idle) {
95
// When the input cores are in phase, transfers can begin
96
when(phase === io.inC0HSin && io.inC0HSin === io.inC1HSin) {
97
stateReg := start
98
}
==PAGE:201==
B.1 Chisel Source Files
187
99
}
100
is(start) {
101
// When the UART has completed a transfer , receive an image;
102
// otherwise reset the counters and transfer
103
when(uart.io.txReady) {
104
stateReg := receiveW
105
}.otherwise {
106
pixCnt := 0.U
107
byteCnt := 0.U
108
txBuf := 255.U // Start message outside spike IDs in [0,199]
109
txV := true.B
110
}
111
}
112
is(receiveW) {
113
// When a new byte has been received , shift into the registers
114
when(uart.io.rxValid) {
115
addr1 := addr0
116
addr0 := period1
117
period1 := period0
118
period0 := uart.io.rxByte
119
uart.io.rxReady := true.B
120
121
byteCnt := byteCnt + 1.U
122
123
when(byteCnt === 3.U) {
124
stateReg := toCore
125
}.otherwise {
126
stateReg := receiveW
127
}
128
}
129
}
130
is(toCore) {
131
// Transfer the received word to one of the input cores
132
when(addr1 === 0.U) {
133
io.inC0We := true.B
134
}.otherwise {
135
io.inC1We := true.B
136
}
137
pixCnt := pixCnt + 1.U
138
139
// If a full image has been received , go back to idle;
140
// otherwise , receive more words
141
when(pixCnt === (INPUTSIZE -1).U) {
142
stateReg := idle
143
phase := ~phase
144
}.otherwise {
==PAGE:202==
188
B Accelerator Sources
145
stateReg := receiveW
146
}
147
}
148
}
149
}
Listing B.17: Off-chip communication module definition.
B.2
Verilog Source Files
The following is the output of the clocking wizard tool in Vivado. The Verilog top-level
module definition is available in chapter 6 listing 6.3.
1
2
// file: clk_wiz_0.v
3
//
4
// (c) Copyright 2008 - 2013 Xilinx , Inc. All rights reserved.
5
//
6
// This file contains confidential and proprietary information
7
// of Xilinx , Inc. and is protected under U.S. and
8
// international copyright and other intellectual property
9
// laws.
10
//
11
// DISCLAIMER
12
// This disclaimer is not a license and does not grant any
13
// rights to the materials distributed herewith. Except as
14
// otherwise provided in a valid license issued to you by
15
// Xilinx , and to the maximum extent permitted by applicable
16
// law: (1) THESE MATERIALS ARE MADE AVAILABLE "AS IS" AND
17
// WITH ALL FAULTS , AND XILINX HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
18
// AND CONDITIONS , EXPRESS , IMPLIED , OR STATUTORY , INCLUDING
19
// BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY , NON-
20
// INFRINGEMENT , OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE; and
21
// (2) Xilinx shall not be liable (whether in contract or tort,
22
// including negligence , or under any other theory of
23
// liability) for any loss or damage of any kind or nature
24
// related to, arising under or in connection with these
25
// materials , including for any direct , or any indirect ,
26
// special , incidental , or consequential loss or damage
27
// (including loss of data, profits , goodwill , or any type of
28
// loss or damage suffered as a result of any action brought
29
// by a third party) even if such damage or loss was
30
// reasonably foreseeable or Xilinx had been advised of the
31
// possibility of the same.
32
//
==PAGE:203==
B.2 Verilog Source Files
189
33
// CRITICAL APPLICATIONS
34
// Xilinx products are not designed or intended to be fail-
35
// safe, or for use in any application requiring fail-safe
36
// performance , such as life-support or safety devices or
37
// systems , Class III medical devices , nuclear facilities ,
38
// applications related to the deployment of airbags , or any
39
// other applications that could lead to death, personal
40
// injury , or severe property or environmental damage
41
// (individually and collectively , "Critical
42
// Applications"). Customer assumes the sole risk and
43
// liability of any use of Xilinx products in Critical
44
// Applications , subject only to applicable laws and
45
// regulations governing limitations on product liability.
46
//
47
// THIS COPYRIGHT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER MUST BE RETAINED AS
48
// PART OF THIS FILE AT ALL TIMES.
49
//
50
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
51
// User entered comments
52
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
53
// None
54
//
55
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
56
//
Output
Output
Phase
Duty Cycle
Pk-to-Pk
Phase
57
//
Clock
Freq (MHz)
(degrees)
(%)
Jitter (ps)
Error
(ps)
58
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
59
// clk_out1__80.00000______0.000______50.0______117.460_____89.971
60
//
61
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
62
// Input Clock
Freq (MHz)
Input Jitter (UI)
63
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
64
// __primary_________200.000____________0.010
65
66
`timescale 1ps/1ps
67
68
module clk_wiz_0
69
70
(// Clock in ports
71
// Clock out ports
72
output
clk_out1 ,
73
// Status and control signals
74
input
reset,
75
input
clk_in1_p ,
76
input
clk_in1_n
77
);
==PAGE:204==
190
B Accelerator Sources
78
// Input buffering
79
//------------------------------------
80
wire clk_in1_clk_wiz_0;
81
wire clk_in2_clk_wiz_0;
82
IBUFDS clkin1_ibufgds
83
(.O
(clk_in1_clk_wiz_0),
84
.I
(clk_in1_p),
85
.IB (clk_in1_n));
86
87
// Clocking PRIMITIVE
88
//------------------------------------
89
90
// Instantiation of the MMCM PRIMITIVE
91
//
* Unused inputs are tied off
92
//
* Unused outputs are labeled unused
93
94
wire
clk_out1_clk_wiz_0;
95
wire
clk_out2_clk_wiz_0;
96
wire
clk_out3_clk_wiz_0;
97
wire
clk_out4_clk_wiz_0;
98
wire
clk_out5_clk_wiz_0;
99
wire
clk_out6_clk_wiz_0;
100
wire
clk_out7_clk_wiz_0;
101
102
wire [15:0] do_unused;
103
wire
drdy_unused;
104
wire
psdone_unused;
105
wire
locked_int;
106
wire
clkfbout_clk_wiz_0;
107
wire
clkfbout_buf_clk_wiz_0;
108
wire
clkfboutb_unused;
109
wire clkout0b_unused;
110
wire clkout1_unused;
111
wire clkout1b_unused;
112
wire clkout2_unused;
113
wire clkout2b_unused;
114
wire clkout3_unused;
115
wire clkout3b_unused;
116
wire clkout4_unused;
117
wire
clkout5_unused;
118
wire
clkout6_unused;
119
wire
clkfbstopped_unused;
120
wire
clkinstopped_unused;
121
wire
reset_high;
122
123
MMCME2_ADV
==PAGE:205==
B.2 Verilog Source Files
191
124
#(.BANDWIDTH
("OPTIMIZED"),
125
.CLKOUT4_CASCADE
("FALSE"),
126
.COMPENSATION
("ZHOLD"),
127
.STARTUP_WAIT
("FALSE"),
128
.DIVCLK_DIVIDE
(1),
129
.CLKFBOUT_MULT_F
(5.000),
130
.CLKFBOUT_PHASE
(0.000),
131
.CLKFBOUT_USE_FINE_PS ("FALSE"),
132
.CLKOUT0_DIVIDE_F
(12.500),
133
.CLKOUT0_PHASE
(0.000),
134
.CLKOUT0_DUTY_CYCLE
(0.500),
135
.CLKOUT0_USE_FINE_PS
("FALSE"),
136
.CLKIN1_PERIOD
(5.000))
137
mmcm_adv_inst
138
// Output clocks
139
(
140
.CLKFBOUT
(clkfbout_clk_wiz_0),
141
.CLKFBOUTB
(clkfboutb_unused),
142
.CLKOUT0
(clk_out1_clk_wiz_0),
143
.CLKOUT0B
(clkout0b_unused),
144
.CLKOUT1
(clkout1_unused),
145
.CLKOUT1B
(clkout1b_unused),
146
.CLKOUT2
(clkout2_unused),
147
.CLKOUT2B
(clkout2b_unused),
148
.CLKOUT3
(clkout3_unused),
149
.CLKOUT3B
(clkout3b_unused),
150
.CLKOUT4
(clkout4_unused),
151
.CLKOUT5
(clkout5_unused),
152
.CLKOUT6
(clkout6_unused),
153
// Input clock control
154
.CLKFBIN
(clkfbout_buf_clk_wiz_0),
155
.CLKIN1
(clk_in1_clk_wiz_0),
156
.CLKIN2
(1'b0),
157
// Tied to always select the primary input clock
158
.CLKINSEL
(1'b1),
159
// Ports for dynamic reconfiguration
160
.DADDR
(7'h0),
161
.DCLK
(1'b0),
162
.DEN
(1'b0),
163
.DI
(16'h0),
164
.DO
(do_unused),
165
.DRDY
(drdy_unused),
166
.DWE
(1'b0),
167
// Ports for dynamic phase shift
168
.PSCLK
(1'b0),
169
.PSEN
(1'b0),
==PAGE:206==
192
B Accelerator Sources
170
.PSINCDEC
(1'b0),
171
.PSDONE
(psdone_unused),
172
// Other control and status signals
173
.LOCKED
(locked_int),
174
.CLKINSTOPPED
(clkinstopped_unused),
175
.CLKFBSTOPPED
(clkfbstopped_unused),
176
.PWRDWN
(1'b0),
177
.RST
(reset_high));
178
assign reset_high = reset;
179
180
// Clock Monitor clock assigning
181
//--------------------------------------
182
// Output buffering
183
//-----------------------------------
184
185
BUFG clkf_buf
186
(.O (clkfbout_buf_clk_wiz_0),
187
.I (clkfbout_clk_wiz_0));
188
189
BUFG clkout1_buf
190
(.O
(clk_out1),
191
.I
(clk_out1_clk_wiz_0));
192
193
endmodule
Listing B.18: The output of the Vivado clock wizard IP generator.
B.3
Mapping Script
The following is the script to generate memory initialization files from a JSON file.
1
import neuroproc._
2
3
import java.io._
4
import spray.json._
5
6
/** Generates memory initialization files from a JSON file
7
*
8
* @param #1 the JSON file to read
9
*
10
* Run this script with SBT as
11
* {{{
12
* sbt "runMain MakeDataFiles path/to/json/file.json"
13
* }}}
14
* Output files are stored in ./mapping/meminit
==PAGE:207==
B.3 Mapping Script
193
15
*
16
* @note The encoding is custom and network specific. For now,
17
*
the following is used:
18
*
- Reset potential , refrac period , and decay are 5 bits
19
*
(converted on-the-fly)
20
*
- Potentials and refrac counts are 17 bits (7.10 and
21
*
17.0, respectively)
22
*
- Biases and thresholds are 17 bits (7.10)
23
*
- Weights are 11 bits (two different formats; learnt
24
*
weights 0.10, constant weights 6.4), MSB decides between
25
*
the two
26
*/
27
object MakeDataFiles extends App {
28
require(args.length > 0)
29
30
/** Returns a binary string representation of an integer
31
*
32
* @param x the integer to convert
33
* @param len the desired length of the string representation
34
* @return a binary string representation of `x` of length `len`
35
*/
36
def to2aryString(x: Int, len: Int) = {
37
val binStr = x.toBinaryString
38
if (binStr.length >= len) binStr.substring(binStr.length - len)
39
else s"${if (x >= 0) 0 else 1}" * (len - binStr.length) + binStr
40
}
41
42
// Fetch the parameters from the specified JSON file
43
val params = new ParameterReader(args(0))
44
45
// Create a directory for the files
46
val dir = new File("mapping/meminit")
47
dir.mkdir()
48
49
// Generate memory initialization files
50
for (core <- 2 until 4) {
51
// Constant memories
52
val cpw = new PrintWriter(new
File(s"mapping/meminit/constc${core}.mem"))
53
cpw.write(to2aryString(params.getMemData("reset", core)(0),
5)+"\n")
54
cpw.write(to2aryString(params.getMemData("refrac", core)(0),
5)+"\n")
55
cpw.write(to2aryString(params.getMemData("decay", core)(0),
5)+"\n")
56
cpw.write(to2aryString(0, 5)+"\n")
==PAGE:208==
194
B Accelerator Sources
57
cpw.close
58
59
// Potentials and refrac counters
60
val ppw = new PrintWriter(new
File(s"mapping/meminit/potrefc${core}.mem"))
61
ppw.write(Array.fill(2*TMNEURONS)(to2aryString(0,
17)).deep.mkString("\n")+"\n")
62
ppw.close
63
64
for (eval <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
65
// Biases and thresholds
66
val bpw = new PrintWriter(
67
new File(s"mapping/meminit/biasthreshc${core}e${eval}.mem")
68
)
69
bpw.write(params.getMemData("biases", core, eval).map(
70
to2aryString(_, 17)).deep.mkString("\n")+"\n"
71
)
72
bpw.write(params.getMemData("thresh", core, eval).map(
73
to2aryString(_, 17)).deep.mkString("\n")+"\n"
74
)
75
bpw.close
76
77
// Weights
78
val wpw = new PrintWriter(
79
new File(s"mapping/meminit/weightsc${core}e${eval}.mem")
80
)
81
val wghts = params.getMemWeights(core, eval)
82
wpw.write(wghts.map { p =>
83
(if (p._1) "1" else "0") + to2aryString(p._2, 10)
84
}.deep.mkString("\n")+"\n")
85
wpw.close
86
}
87
}
88
}
89
90
/** Provides easy access to a ShowCaseNet instance
91
*
92
* @param file the JSON file to read
93
*/
94
class ParameterReader(file: String) {
95
// Integer methods
96
/** Converts a JsArray to a 1D Int-array
97
*
98
* @param jarray the JsArray instance to convert
99
* @return an Array[Int] with the contents of `jarray `
100
*/
==PAGE:209==
B.3 Mapping Script
195
101
def JsArrayTo1DIntArray(jarray: JsArray) = {
102
jarray.elements.toArray.map(
103
_.asInstanceOf[JsNumber].value.toInt
104
)
105
}
106
107
/** Converts a JsArray to a 2D Int-array
108
*
109
* @param jarray the JsArray instance to convert
110
* @return an Array[Array[Int]] with the contents of `jarray `
111
*/
112
def JsArrayTo2DIntArray(jarray: JsArray) = {
113
jarray.elements.toArray.map(
114
x => JsArrayTo1DIntArray(x.asInstanceOf[JsArray])
115
)
116
}
117
118
/** Converts a JsObject's specified field to a 1D Int-array
119
*
120
* @param obj the JsObject instance to convert from
121
* @param field the specific field to look up
122
* @return an Array[Int] with the contents of `field` in `obj`
123
*/
124
def JsFieldToIntArray(obj: JsObject , field: String) = {
125
Array(JsArrayTo1DIntArray(
126
obj.getFields(field)(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray]
127
))
128
}
129
130
// Float methods
131
/** Converts a JsArray to a 1D Float-array
132
*
133
* @param jarray the JsArray instance to convert
134
* @return an Array[Float] with the contents of `jarray `
135
*/
136
def JsArrayTo1DFloatArray(jarray: JsArray) = {
137
jarray.elements.toArray.map(
138
_.asInstanceOf[JsNumber].value.toFloat
139
)
140
}
141
142
/** Converts a JsArray to a 2D Float-array
143
*
144
* @param jarray the JsArray instance to convert
145
* @return an Array[Array[Float]] with the contents of `jarray `
146
*/
==PAGE:210==
196
B Accelerator Sources
147
def JsArrayTo2DFloatArray(jarray: JsArray) = {
148
jarray.elements.toArray.map(
149
x => JsArrayTo1DFloatArray(x.asInstanceOf[JsArray])
150
)
151
}
152
153
/** Converts a JsObject's specified field to a 1D Float-array
154
*
155
* @param obj the JsObject instance to convert from
156
* @param field the specific field to look up
157
* @return an Array[Float] with the contents of `field` in `obj`
158
*/
159
def JsFieldToFloatArray(obj: JsObject , field: String) = {
160
Array(JsArrayTo1DFloatArray(
161
obj.getFields(field)(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray]
162
))
163
}
164
165
/** Generates an array with memory data for a specified (coreID ,
evalID) pair
166
*
167
* @param name the field to look up
168
* @param coreID the neuron core ID of the memory
169
* @param evalID the neuron evaluator ID of the memory
170
* @param binPoint the number of fixed-point decimals to use for
171
*
Float parameters
172
* @return an Array[Int] with the initialization data for
173
*
parameter `name` for core `coreID ` evaluator `evalID `
174
*
with Float parameters mapped to fixed-point with
175
*
`binPoint ` decimal bits
176
*/
177
def getMemData(name: String , coreID: Int, evalID: Int = 0,
binPoint: Int = 10) = {
178
require(name != "w1" && name != "w2" && name != "w")
179
require(coreID == 2 || coreID == 3)
180
require(l1.contains(name) || l1F.contains(name) ||
l2.contains(name) || l2F.contains(name))
181
var memData = Array.fill(TMNEURONS)(0)
182
183
// Fetch the data from either map, which contains the given key
184
val intData = coreID match {
185
case 2 => if (l1.contains(name)) Some(l1(name)(0)) else None
186
case _ => if (l2.contains(name)) Some(l2(name)(0)) else None
187
}
188
val floatData = coreID match {
189
case 2 => if (l1F.contains(name)) Some(l1F(name)(0)) else None
==PAGE:211==
B.3 Mapping Script
197
190
case _ => if (l2F.contains(name)) Some(l2F(name)(0)) else None
191
}
192
193
// Fill out the memory data for the specified parameters
194
(intData , floatData) match {
195
case (Some(arr), None) =>
196
// Data only available for 200 neurons
197
for (i <- 0 until TMNEURONS)
198
if (i*EVALUNITS + evalID < 200)
199
memData(i) = arr(i*EVALUNITS + evalID)
200
case (None, Some(arr)) =>
201
// Data only available for 200 neurons
202
for (i <- 0 until TMNEURONS)
203
if (i*EVALUNITS + evalID < 200)
204
memData(i) = (arr(i*EVALUNITS + evalID) * (1 <<
binPoint)).round
205
case _ => throw new IllegalArgumentException("expects either
Int or Float data, but not neither nor both")
206
}
207
memData
208
}
209
210
/** Generates an array with weight memory data for a specified
(coreID , evalID) pair
211
*
212
* @param coreID the neuron core ID of the memory
213
* @param evalID the neuron evaluator ID of the memory
214
* @param binPoint1 the number of fixed-point decimals to use for
215
*
learnt weights
216
* @param binPoint2 the number of fixed-point decimals to use for
217
*
constant weights
218
* @return an Array[(Boolean , Int)] with the initialization
219
*
weights for core `coreID ` evaluator `evalID ` with
220
*
learnt weights mapped to fixed-point with `binPoint1 `
221
*
decimal bits and constant weights with `binPoint2 `
222
*
decimals
223
*/
224
def getMemWeights(coreID: Int, evalID: Int, binPoint1: Int = 10,
binPoint2: Int = 4) = {
225
require(coreID == 2 || coreID == 3)
226
var memData = Array.fill(TMNEURONS*3*256)((false, 0))
227
val allData1 = if (coreID == 2) l1F("w1") else l2F("w")
228
val allData2 = l1F("w2")
229
230
// Fill out the memory data for the specified parameters
231
coreID match {
==PAGE:212==
198
B Accelerator Sources
232
case 2 =>
233
for (i <- 0 until TMNEURONS) {
234
val idx = i*EVALUNITS + evalID
235
// Data only available for 200 neurons
236
if (idx < 200) {
237
for (j <- 0 until 3*256) {
238
// Weights for X_to_Ae connection
239
if (j < 484)
240
memData(i*3*256 + j) = (false, (allData1(j)(idx) *
(1 << binPoint1)).round)
241
// Weights for Ai_to_Ae connection
242
else if (j >= 512 && j < 512+200)
243
memData(i*3*256 + j) = (true, (allData2(j-512)(idx)
* (1 << binPoint2)).round)
244
}
245
}
246
}
247
case _ =>
248
for (i <- 0 until TMNEURONS) {
249
val idx = i*EVALUNITS + evalID
250
// Data only available for 200 neurons
251
if (idx < 200)
252
for (j <- 0 until 256)
253
// Weights for Ae_to_Ai connection
254
if (j < 200)
255
memData(i*3*256 + j) = (true, (allData1(j)(idx) * (1
<< binPoint2)).round)
256
}
257
}
258
memData
259
}
260
261
// Initialization code
262
var l1
= Map.empty[String , Array[Array[Int]]]
263
var l1F = Map.empty[String , Array[Array[Float]]]
264
var l2
= Map.empty[String , Array[Array[Int]]]
265
var l2F = Map.empty[String , Array[Array[Float]]]
266
267
val source = scala.io.Source.fromFile(file)
268
val lines = try source.mkString.parseJson.asInstanceOf[JsObject]
finally source.close()
269
val l1Json = lines.getFields(
270
"l1"
271
)(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray].elements(0).asInstanceOf[JsObject]
272
val l2Json = lines.getFields(
273
"l2"
==PAGE:213==
B.3 Mapping Script
199
274
)(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray].elements(0).asInstanceOf[JsObject]
275
276
// L1 integer parameters
277
l1 += ("reset"
-> JsFieldToIntArray(l1Json, "reset"))
278
l1 += ("refrac" -> JsFieldToIntArray(l1Json, "refrac"))
279
l1 += ("decay"
-> JsFieldToIntArray(l1Json, "decay"))
280
281
// L1 float parameters
282
l1F += ("biases" -> JsFieldToFloatArray(l1Json, "biases"))
283
l1F += ("thresh" -> JsFieldToFloatArray(l1Json, "thresh"))
284
l1F += ("w1"
-> JsArrayTo2DFloatArray(
285
l1Json.getFields("w1")(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray])
286
)
287
l1F += ("w2"
-> JsArrayTo2DFloatArray(
288
l1Json.getFields("w2")(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray])
289
)
290
291
// L2 integer parameters
292
l2 += ("reset"
-> JsFieldToIntArray(l2Json, "reset"))
293
l2 += ("refrac" -> JsFieldToIntArray(l2Json, "refrac"))
294
l2 += ("decay"
-> JsFieldToIntArray(l2Json, "decay"))
295
296
// L2 float parameters
297
l2F += ("biases" -> JsFieldToFloatArray(l2Json, "biases"))
298
l2F += ("thresh" -> JsFieldToFloatArray(l2Json, "thresh"))
299
l2F += ("w"
-> JsArrayTo2DFloatArray(
300
l2Json.getFields("w")(0).asInstanceOf[JsArray])
301
)
302
}
Listing B.19: Mapping script for generating memory initialization files.
==PAGE:214==
200
==PAGE:215==
APPENDIX C
Hardware Testers
The following are all testing related source files. The files are split into unit tests, system
tests, and VHDL sources useful for testing in Vivado. Finally, the reference image and
expected spike results are also included here.
C.1
Unit Tests
The following are the source files for all unit tests implemented for single modules. The
files are organized following the same pattern as in appendix B.
C.1.1
Package File
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import org.scalatest.Tag
4
5
package object unittests {
6
/** Tag for marking tests that take long to execute */
7
object SlowTest extends Tag("neuroproc.unittests.SlowTest")
8
9
/** Software model of the priority mask reset encoder
10
*
11
* @param reqs array of incoming requests
12
* @return tuple of index, mask, reset vector , and valid
13
*/
14
def priorityMask(reqs: Array[Boolean]) = {
15
require(reqs.length == EVALUNITS)
16
val valid = reqs.reduce(_ || _)
17
var value = 0
18
for (i <- EVALUNITS -1 to 0 by -1)
19
if (reqs(i))
20
value = i
21
var mask = Array(value == 0)
22
for (i <- EVALUNITS -2 to 0 by -1) {
23
mask = (reqs(i+1) || mask.head) +: mask
24
}
==PAGE:216==
202
C Hardware Testers
25
val rst = (0 until EVALUNITS).map { _ == value && valid
}.toArray
26
(value, mask, rst, valid)
27
}
28
}
Listing C.1: Package file for the neuroproc.unittests package.
C.1.2
Tester Files
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the bus arbiter */
12
class BusArbiterSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Bus Arbiter"
14
15
it should "handle requests" in {
16
test(new BusArbiter()).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation))
{ dut =>
17
// No requests
18
for (i <- 0 until CORES)
19
dut.io.reqs(i).poke(false.B)
20
dut.clock.step()
21
for (i <- 0 until CORES)
22
dut.io.grants(i).expect(false.B)
23
24
// Test requests
25
for (i <- 0 until CORES)
26
dut.io.reqs(i).poke(true.B)
27
dut.clock.step()
28
dut.io.grants(CORES -1).expect(true.B)
29
for (i <- 0 until CORES -1)
30
dut.io.grants(i).expect(false.B)
31
32
for (i <- CORES -1 to 0 by -1) {
33
dut.io.reqs(i).poke(false.B)
34
dut.clock.step()
==PAGE:217==
C.1 Unit Tests
203
35
if (i > 0)
36
for (j <- 0 until CORES)
37
dut.io.grants(j).expect((j == i - 1).B)
38
}
39
}
40
}
41
}
Listing C.2: Tester class for the bus round robin arbiter with lookahead.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the bus interface under different I/O scenarios */
12
class BusInterfaceSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Bus Interface"
14
15
it should "work with all-low inputs" in {
16
test(new
BusInterface(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
17
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
18
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
19
dut.io.reqIn.poke(false.B)
20
dut.io.spikeID.poke(0.U)
21
22
dut.clock.step()
23
24
dut.io.reqOut.expect(false.B)
25
dut.io.tx.expect(0.U)
26
dut.io.ready.expect(false.B)
27
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
28
dut.io.axonID.expect(0.U)
29
}
30
}
31
32
it should "perform tx without grant" in {
33
test(new
BusInterface(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
==PAGE:218==
204
C Hardware Testers
dut =>
34
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
35
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
36
dut.io.reqIn.poke(true.B)
37
dut.io.spikeID.poke("b01010101010".U)
38
39
dut.clock.step()
40
41
dut.io.reqOut.expect(true.B)
42
dut.io.tx.expect(0.U)
43
dut.io.ready.expect(false.B)
44
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
45
dut.io.axonID.expect(0.U)
46
}
47
}
48
49
it should "perform tx with grant" in {
50
test(new
BusInterface(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
51
dut.io.grant.poke(true.B)
52
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
53
dut.io.reqIn.poke(true.B)
54
dut.io.spikeID.poke("b01010101010".U)
55
56
dut.clock.step()
57
58
dut.io.reqOut.expect(false.B)
59
dut.io.tx.expect("b01010101010".U)
60
dut.io.ready.expect(true.B)
61
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
62
dut.io.axonID.expect(0.U)
63
}
64
}
65
66
it should "perform rx without subscription" in {
67
test(new
BusInterface(4)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
68
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
69
dut.io.rx.poke("b00110101010".U)
70
dut.io.reqIn.poke(false.B)
71
dut.io.spikeID.poke(0.U)
72
73
dut.clock.step()
74
==PAGE:219==
C.1 Unit Tests
205
75
dut.io.reqOut.expect(false.B)
76
dut.io.tx.expect(0.U)
77
dut.io.ready.expect(false.B)
78
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
79
dut.io.axonID.expect("b10101010".U)
80
}
81
}
82
83
it should "perform rx with subscription" in {
84
test(new
BusInterface(4)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
85
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
86
dut.io.rx.poke("b01010101010".U)
87
dut.io.reqIn.poke(false.B)
88
dut.io.spikeID.poke(0.U)
89
90
dut.clock.step()
91
92
dut.io.reqOut.expect(false.B)
93
dut.io.tx.expect(0.U)
94
dut.io.ready.expect(false.B)
95
dut.io.valid.expect(true.B)
96
dut.io.axonID.expect("b10101010".U)
97
}
98
}
99
}
Listing C.3: Tester class for the bus interface.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the priority mask reset encoder */
12
class PriorityMaskRstEncoderSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Priority Mask Reset Encoder"
14
15
it should "handle requests" in {
==PAGE:220==
206
C Hardware Testers
16
test(new PriorityMaskRstEncoder())
17
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
18
// No requests
19
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
20
dut.io.reqs(i).poke(false.B)
21
dut.clock.step()
22
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
23
dut.io.value.expect(0.U)
24
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
25
dut.io.mask(i).expect(true.B)
26
dut.io.rst(i).expect(false.B)
27
}
28
29
// Test requests
30
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
31
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
32
dut.io.reqs(j).poke((i == j).B)
33
34
dut.clock.step()
35
dut.io.valid.expect(true.B)
36
dut.io.value.expect(i.U)
37
38
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
39
dut.io.mask(j).expect((i == 0 || i > j).B)
40
dut.io.rst(j).expect((i == j).B)
41
}
42
}
43
}
44
}
45
46
it should "match a software model" in {
47
test(new PriorityMaskRstEncoder())
48
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
49
// No requests
50
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
51
dut.io.reqs(i).poke(false.B)
52
dut.clock.step()
53
val resp = priorityMask(Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { false })
54
dut.io.valid.expect(resp._4.B)
55
dut.io.value.expect(resp._1.U)
56
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
57
dut.io.mask(i).expect(resp._2(i).B)
58
dut.io.rst(i).expect(resp._3(i).B)
59
}
60
61
// With requests
==PAGE:221==
C.1 Unit Tests
207
62
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
63
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
64
dut.io.reqs(j).poke((i == j).B)
65
66
dut.clock.step()
67
val newResp = priorityMask((0 until EVALUNITS).map { i == _
}.toArray)
68
dut.io.valid.expect(newResp._4.B)
69
dut.io.value.expect(newResp._1.U)
70
71
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
72
dut.io.mask(j).expect(newResp._2(j).B)
73
dut.io.rst(j).expect(newResp._3(j).B)
74
}
75
}
76
}
77
}
78
}
Listing C.4: Tester class for the priority mask reset encoder.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chisel3.util._
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
10
import org.scalatest._
11
12
/** Tests the transmission system */
13
class TransmissionSystemSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
14
behavior of "Transmission System"
15
16
it should "transmit spikes" in {
17
test(new TransmissionSystem(0))
18
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
19
// Without spikes
20
dut.io.ready.poke(false.B)
21
dut.io.n.poke(0.U)
22
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
23
dut.io.spikes(i).poke(false.B)
24
dut.clock.step()
==PAGE:222==
208
C Hardware Testers
25
dut.io.data.expect(0.U)
26
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
27
28
// With spikes
29
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
30
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
31
dut.io.spikes(j).poke(false.B)
32
dut.io.spikes(i).poke(true.B)
33
dut.clock.step()
34
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
35
dut.io.spikes(j).poke(false.B)
36
37
while (!dut.io.valid.peek.litToBoolean)
38
dut.clock.step()
39
dut.io.data.expect(i.U)
40
dut.io.ready.poke(true.B)
41
dut.clock.step()
42
dut.io.ready.poke(false.B)
43
}
44
}
45
}
46
47
it should "match a software model" in {
48
test(new TransmissionSystem(0))
49
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
50
// Reset inputs
51
dut.io.ready.poke(false.B)
52
dut.io.n.poke(0.U)
53
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
54
dut.io.spikes(i).poke(false.B)
55
56
// Local state variables similar to those of the module
57
var spikeRegs = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { false }
58
var neuronIdMSB = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { 0 }
59
var maskRegs = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { true }
60
61
// I/O signal values
62
var ready = false
63
var n = 0
64
var spikes = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { false }
65
var data = 0
66
67
/** Updates the software model registers */
68
def updateRegs() = {
69
// Wire values
70
val reqs = maskRegs.zip(spikeRegs).map {
==PAGE:223==
C.1 Unit Tests
209
71
e => e._1 && e._2
72
}
73
val resp = priorityMask(reqs)
74
val rstReadySel = resp._3.map {
75
e => !(e && ready)
76
}
77
val spikeUpdate = rstReadySel.zip(spikeRegs).map {
78
e => e._1 && e._2
79
}
80
81
// Next step values
82
var newMaskRegs = maskRegs
83
if (ready) {
84
newMaskRegs = resp._2
85
} else if (!resp._4) {
86
newMaskRegs = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { true }
87
}
88
val newNeuronIdMSB = spikeUpdate.zip(neuronIdMSB).map {
89
e => if (!e._1) n else e._2
90
}
91
val newSpikeRegs =
spikeUpdate.zip(spikeRegs.zip(spikes)).map {
92
e => if (!e._1) e._2._2 else e._2._1
93
}
94
95
// Store new values
96
spikeRegs = newSpikeRegs
97
neuronIdMSB = newNeuronIdMSB
98
maskRegs = newMaskRegs
99
}
100
101
/** Generates data for the bus */
102
def genData() = {
103
val reqs = maskRegs.zip(spikeRegs).map {
104
e => e._1 && e._2
105
}
106
val resp = priorityMask(reqs)
107
data = (neuronIdMSB(resp._1) << log2Up(EVALUNITS)) | resp._1
108
}
109
110
/** Advances the clock, updates the registers and the bus */
111
def step() = {
112
dut.clock.step()
113
updateRegs()
114
genData()
115
}
==PAGE:224==
210
C Hardware Testers
116
117
// Without spikes
118
dut.io.ready.poke(true.B)
119
ready = true
120
for (_ <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
121
step()
122
dut.io.data.expect(data.U)
123
}
124
125
// With different n
126
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
127
for (_ <- 0 until TMNEURONS/2) {
128
n = rng.nextInt & ((1 << NWIDTH) - 1)
129
dut.io.n.poke(n.U)
130
131
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
132
spikes = (0 until EVALUNITS).map { _ == i }.toArray
133
for (j <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
134
dut.io.spikes(j).poke(spikes(j).B)
135
step()
136
137
while (!dut.io.valid.peek.litToBoolean) {
138
step()
139
println("Model values:")
140
println("\tspikeRegs
= " + spikeRegs.deep.mkString("
"))
141
println("\tneuronIdMSB = " +
neuronIdMSB.deep.mkString(" "))
142
println("\tmaskRegs
= " + maskRegs.deep.mkString("
"))
143
println("\tdata
= " + data)
144
println()
145
}
146
dut.io.data.expect(data.U)
147
}
148
}
149
}
150
}
151
}
Listing C.5: Tester class for the transmission system.
1
// Please note, this test uses very experimental clock peek/poke
constructs
2
package neuroproc.unittests
3
==PAGE:225==
C.1 Unit Tests
211
4
import neuroproc._
5
6
import chisel3._
7
import chisel3.util._
8
import chiseltest._
9
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPoke._
10
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPeek._
11
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
12
import chiseltest.internal.{WriteVcdAnnotation ,
VerilatorBackendAnnotation}
13
import org.scalatest._
14
15
/** Tests the latch-based clock buffer */
16
class ClockBufferSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
17
behavior of "Clock buffer"
18
19
it should "enable/disable clock" in {
20
test(ClockBuffer())
21
.withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
22
// Default values
23
dut.reset.poke(false.B)
24
dut.io.I.low()
25
dut.io.CE.poke(false.B)
26
dut.clock.step()
27
28
// Force transition with CE=0
29
dut.io.I.high()
30
dut.clock.step()
31
assert(!dut.io.O.peekClock , "expected low output clock when
CE=false")
32
33
// Take I low again
34
dut.io.I.low()
35
dut.clock.step()
36
assert(!dut.io.O.peekClock , "expected low output clock when
CE=false")
37
38
// Assert CE, wait a little and then force a clock transition
39
dut.io.CE.poke(true.B)
40
dut.clock.step()
41
dut.io.I.high()
42
assert(dut.io.O.peekClock , "expected high output clock when
CE=true")
43
}
44
}
==PAGE:226==
212
C Hardware Testers
45
}
Listing C.6: Tester class for the latch-based clock gate. Beware that this implementation
uses experimental clock poke and peek functionality that is subject to change in
upcoming Chisel updates.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPoke._
9
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPeek._
10
import chiseltest.internal.{WriteVcdAnnotation ,
VerilatorBackendAnnotation}
11
import org.scalatest._
12
13
/** Tests the true dual-port memory
14
*
15
* @note Currently executes two tests:
16
*
- Test of anonymous module with RAM declared outside
17
*
`withClock `
18
*
- Test of true dual-port memory with random inputs
19
*/
20
class TrueDualPortMemorySpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
21
behavior of "True dual port memory"
22
23
val addrW = 10
24
val dataW = 32
25
val numTests = 256
26
27
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
28
val writeAddrAs = Array.fill(numTests) { BigInt(addrW, rng) }
29
val addrBs = writeAddrAs.map {
30
x => (x + BigInt(addrW, rng)) & ((BigInt(1) << addrW) - 1)
31
}
32
val writeAddrBs = writeAddrAs.zip(addrBs).map {
33
x => if (x._1 == x._2) (x._1 + 1) & ((BigInt(1) << addrW) - 1)
else x._2
34
}
35
val weAs = Array.fill(numTests) { rng.nextBoolean }
36
val weBs = Array.fill(numTests) { rng.nextBoolean }
37
val writeDatas = Array.fill(numTests) {
==PAGE:227==
C.1 Unit Tests
213
38
BigInt(dataW, rng) & ((BigInt(1) << dataW) - 1)
39
}
40
41
it should "work with special clock" in {
42
test(new Module {
43
val io = IO(new Bundle {
44
val inClk = Input(Bool())
45
val en = Input(Bool())
46
val we = Input(Bool())
47
val ad = Input(UInt(10.W))
48
val dI = Input(UInt(8.W))
49
val dO = Output(UInt(8.W))
50
})
51
52
val ram = SyncReadMem(1024, UInt(8.W))
53
54
withClock(io.inClk.asClock) {
55
io.dO := DontCare
56
when(io.en) {
57
when(io.we) {
58
ram(io.ad) := io.dI
59
}
60
io.dO := ram(io.ad)
61
}
62
}
63
}).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
64
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
65
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
66
dut.io.ad.poke(0.U)
67
dut.io.dI.poke(0.U)
68
dut.io.dO.expect(0.U)
69
dut.io.inClk.poke(false.B)
70
71
// Write something
72
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
73
dut.io.we.poke(true.B)
74
dut.io.ad.poke(42.U)
75
dut.io.dI.poke(13.U)
76
dut.io.inClk.poke(true.B)
77
dut.clock.step()
78
dut.io.inClk.poke(false.B)
79
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
80
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
81
dut.io.ad.poke(0.U)
82
dut.io.dI.poke(0.U)
83
dut.io.inClk.poke(true.B)
==PAGE:228==
214
C Hardware Testers
84
dut.clock.step()
85
dut.io.inClk.poke(false.B)
86
87
// Read it back
88
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
89
dut.io.ad.poke(42.U)
90
dut.io.inClk.poke(true.B)
91
dut.clock.step()
92
dut.io.inClk.poke(false.B)
93
dut.io.dO.expect(13.U)
94
}
95
}
96
97
it should "work" in {
98
test(new Module {
99
val io
= IO(new TrueDualPortMemoryIO(addrW, dataW))
100
val ram = Module(new TrueDualPortMemory(addrW, dataW))
101
io <> ram.io
102
}).withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
103
dut.clock.setTimeout(10 * (1 << addrW))
104
val clka = dut.io.clka
105
val clkb = dut.io.clkb
106
107
def stepAndAdvance(clk: Clock) = {
108
clk.high()
109
dut.clock.step()
110
clk.low()
111
}
112
113
// Model the memory as a mutable array
114
var ram = Array.fill(1 << addrW) { BigInt(0) }
115
116
// Default values
117
dut.io.ena.poke(false.B)
118
dut.io.wea.poke(false.B)
119
dut.io.addra.poke(0.U)
120
dut.io.dia.poke(0.U)
121
clka.low()
122
123
dut.io.enb.poke(false.B)
124
dut.io.web.poke(false.B)
125
dut.io.addrb.poke(0.U)
126
dut.io.dib.poke(0.U)
127
clkb.low()
128
==PAGE:229==
C.1 Unit Tests
215
129
// Check that the memory is all zeros
130
val portBc = fork {
131
dut.io.enb.poke(true.B)
132
for (i <- 0 until (1 << addrW)) {
133
dut.io.addrb.poke(i.U)
134
stepAndAdvance(clkb)
135
dut.io.dob.expect(0.U)
136
}
137
dut.io.enb.poke(false.B)
138
}
139
dut.io.ena.poke(true.B)
140
for (i <- 0 until (1 << addrW)) {
141
dut.io.addra.poke(i.U)
142
stepAndAdvance(clka)
143
dut.io.doa.expect(0.U)
144
}
145
dut.io.ena.poke(false.B)
146
portBc.join
147
148
// Fork a handler for port b
149
val portBw = fork {
150
dut.io.enb.poke(true.B)
151
(writeAddrBs , writeDatas , weBs).zipped.toArray.foreach { x
=>
152
dut.io.addrb.poke(x._1.U)
153
dut.io.dib.poke(x._2.U)
154
dut.io.web.poke(x._3.B)
155
if (x._3)
156
ram(x._1.toInt) = x._2
157
stepAndAdvance(clkb)
158
}
159
dut.io.enb.poke(false.B)
160
}
161
162
// Write on port a
163
dut.io.ena.poke(true.B)
164
(writeAddrAs , writeDatas , weAs).zipped.toArray.foreach { x =>
165
dut.io.addra.poke(x._1.U)
166
dut.io.dia.poke(x._2.U)
167
dut.io.wea.poke(x._3.B)
168
if (x._3)
169
ram(x._1.toInt) = x._2
170
stepAndAdvance(clka)
171
}
172
dut.io.ena.poke(false.B)
173
portBw.join()
==PAGE:230==
216
C Hardware Testers
174
175
// Fork a handler for port b
176
val portBr = fork {
177
dut.io.enb.poke(true.B)
178
for (i <- 0 until (1 << addrW)) {
179
dut.io.addrb.poke(i.U)
180
stepAndAdvance(clkb)
181
dut.io.dob.expect(ram(i).U)
182
}
183
dut.io.enb.poke(false.B)
184
}
185
186
// Read out values on port a
187
dut.io.ena.poke(true.B)
188
for (i <- 0 until (1 << addrW)) {
189
dut.io.addra.poke(i.U)
190
stepAndAdvance(clka)
191
dut.io.doa.expect(ram(i).U)
192
}
193
dut.io.ena.poke(false.B)
194
portBr.join
195
}
196
}
197
}
Listing C.7: Tester class for the true dual-port memory module.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chisel3.util._
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPoke._
10
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPeek._
11
import chiseltest.internal.{VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation}
12
import org.scalatest._
13
14
/** Tests the true dual-port FIFO
15
*
16
* @note Currently executes two tests:
17
*
- Check empty and full flag generation
18
*
- Operate FIFO with random inputs
==PAGE:231==
C.1 Unit Tests
217
19
*/
20
class TrueDualPortFIFOSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
21
behavior of "True dual port FIFO"
22
23
val numElements = 8
24
val dataW = 32
25
26
it should "flag empty and full" in {
27
test(new Module {
28
val io
= IO(new TrueDualPortFIFOIO(log2Up(numElements),
dataW))
29
val fifo = Module(new TrueDualPortFIFO(log2Up(numElements),
dataW))
30
io <> fifo.io
31
}).withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
32
val clki = dut.io.clki
33
val clko = dut.io.clko
34
35
def stepAndAdvance(clk: Clock) = {
36
clk.high()
37
dut.clock.step()
38
clk.low()
39
}
40
41
// Default values
42
clki.low()
43
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
44
dut.io.datai.poke(0.U)
45
46
clko.low()
47
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
48
49
// Reset to get the right flags
50
dut.io.rst.poke(true.B)
51
fork { stepAndAdvance(clko) }
52
stepAndAdvance(clki)
53
dut.io.rst.poke(false.B)
54
55
// Check flags
56
dut.io.empty.expect(true.B)
57
dut.io.full.expect(false.B)
58
59
// Fork a handler for the read port
60
var read = false
==PAGE:232==
218
C Hardware Testers
61
val rPort = fork {
62
while (!read)
63
stepAndAdvance(clko)
64
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
65
for (_ <- 0 until numElements) {
66
stepAndAdvance(clko)
67
dut.io.datao.expect(42.U)
68
}
69
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
70
}
71
72
// Fill up the queue from the write port
73
dut.io.we.poke(true.B)
74
for (i <- 0 until numElements) {
75
dut.io.datai.poke(42.U)
76
stepAndAdvance(clki)
77
}
78
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
79
80
// Check flags
81
dut.io.empty.expect(false.B)
82
dut.io.full.expect(true.B)
83
84
// Empty the queue
85
read = true
86
for (_ <- 0 until numElements)
87
stepAndAdvance(clki)
88
rPort.join
89
90
// Check flags again
91
dut.io.empty.expect(true.B)
92
dut.io.full.expect(false.B)
93
}
94
}
95
96
it should "operate with random inputs" in {
97
test(new Module {
98
val io = IO(new TrueDualPortFIFOIO(log2Up(numElements),
dataW))
99
val fifo = Module(new TrueDualPortFIFO(log2Up(numElements),
dataW))
100
io <> fifo.io
101
}).withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
102
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
103
val data = Array.fill(256) { BigInt(dataW, rng) }
==PAGE:233==
C.1 Unit Tests
219
104
105
val clki = dut.io.clki
106
val clko = dut.io.clko
107
108
def stepAndAdvance(clk: Clock) = {
109
clk.low()
110
dut.clock.step()
111
clk.high()
112
}
113
114
// Default values
115
clki.low()
116
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
117
dut.io.datai.poke(0.U)
118
119
clko.low()
120
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
121
122
// Reset to get the right flags
123
dut.io.rst.poke(true.B)
124
fork { stepAndAdvance(clko) }
125
stepAndAdvance(clki)
126
dut.io.rst.poke(false.B)
127
128
// Fork a reader
129
val rPort = fork {
130
for (v <- data) {
131
while (dut.io.empty.peek.litToBoolean)
132
stepAndAdvance(clko)
133
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
134
stepAndAdvance(clko)
135
dut.io.datao.expect(v.U)
136
println(s"Read ${dut.io.datao.peek.litValue}, expected
$v")
137
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
138
}
139
}
140
141
// Write random values to the FIFO at random points in time
142
for (v <- data) {
143
while (!rng.nextBoolean)
144
stepAndAdvance(clki)
145
while (dut.io.full.peek.litToBoolean)
146
stepAndAdvance(clki)
147
dut.io.we.poke(true.B)
148
dut.io.datai.poke(v.U)
==PAGE:234==
220
C Hardware Testers
149
stepAndAdvance(clki)
150
println(s"Wrote $v")
151
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
152
}
153
rPort.join
154
}
155
}
156
}
Listing C.8: Tester class for the true dual-port FIFO module, which is based on the true
dual-port memory module.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the input core
12
*
13
* @note Only works with rate encoding thus far.
14
* @todo Update with rank-order encoding.
15
*/
16
class InputCoreSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
17
behavior of "Input Core"
18
19
/** Resets inputs of the DUT
20
*
21
* @param dut an `InputCore ` instance
22
*/
23
def resetInputs(dut: InputCore) = {
24
dut.clock.setTimeout(CYCLESPRSTEP)
25
26
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
27
dut.io.offCCHSin.poke(false.B)
28
dut.io.memDo.poke(0.U)
29
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
30
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
31
32
dut.io.pmClkEn.expect(false.B)
33
dut.io.offCCHSout.expect(false.B)
34
}
==PAGE:235==
C.1 Unit Tests
221
35
36
/** Inputs spike periods on request
37
*
38
* @param dut an `InputCore ` instance
39
*/
40
def inputPeriods(dut: InputCore , v: Int) = {
41
for (i <- 0 until NEURONSPRCORE) {
42
dut.io.memAddr.expect((i + (1 << 8)).U)
43
dut.clock.step()
44
dut.io.memDo.poke(v.U)
45
}
46
dut.clock.step()
47
dut.io.memDo.poke(0.U)
48
}
49
50
it should "load data and generate spikes" in {
51
test(new InputCore(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation))
{ dut =>
52
resetInputs(dut)
53
54
// Force a change of phase
55
// Phase should not change till a new time step
56
dut.io.offCCHSin.poke(true.B)
57
dut.clock.step()
58
dut.io.offCCHSout.expect(false.B)
59
dut.io.memEn.expect(false.B)
60
// New time step
61
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
62
dut.clock.step()
63
dut.io.offCCHSout.expect(true.B)
64
dut.io.memEn.expect(true.B)
65
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
66
println("Started a new phase and new time step")
67
68
// Deliver spike periods and expect outputs
69
var expectedOutput = Array(0, 1, 3, 2, 6, 5, 4, 9, 8, 7, 0xc,
0xb, 0xa, 0xf, 0xe, 0xd)
70
for (i <- 16 until 256 by 16) {
71
for (j <- 0 until 4) {
72
val ofs = i + j * 4
73
expectedOutput ++= Array(ofs + 3, ofs + 2, ofs + 1, ofs)
74
}
75
}
76
77
val mem = fork {
78
inputPeriods(dut, 1)
==PAGE:236==
222
C Hardware Testers
79
}
80
81
var index = 0
82
for (i <- 0 until CYCLESPRSTEP) {
83
if (dut.io.req.peek.litToBoolean) {
84
dut.io.grant.poke(true.B)
85
dut.io.tx.expect(expectedOutput(index).U)
86
index += 1
87
dut.clock.step()
88
} else {
89
dut.clock.step()
90
}
91
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
92
}
93
mem.join
94
println("Generated spikes")
95
96
// Core should be in done state and request disabling the
clock
97
dut.io.pmClkEn.expect(false.B)
98
for (_ <- 0 until 100) {
99
dut.clock.step()
100
dut.io.pmClkEn.expect(false.B)
101
}
102
// Should start reading periods in a new time step
103
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
104
dut.io.pmClkEn.expect(true.B)
105
dut.clock.step()
106
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
107
dut.io.memEn.expect(true.B)
108
println("Disabled and re-enabled clock when done")
109
}
110
}
111
112
it should "not request the bus when not spiking" in {
113
test(new InputCore(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation))
{ dut =>
114
resetInputs(dut)
115
116
// Force a change of phase
117
dut.io.offCCHSin.poke(true.B)
118
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
119
dut.clock.step()
120
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
121
122
Array(0, 127).foreach { v =>
==PAGE:237==
C.1 Unit Tests
223
123
// Feed in periods
124
val mem = fork {
125
inputPeriods(dut, v)
126
}
127
128
// Check for requests
129
for (i <- 0 until NEURONSPRCORE + 1) {
130
dut.io.req.expect(false.B)
131
dut.clock.step()
132
}
133
mem.join
134
135
// New time step
136
while (dut.io.pmClkEn.peek.litToBoolean)
137
dut.clock.step()
138
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
139
dut.clock.step()
140
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
141
}
142
}
143
}
144
}
Listing C.9: Tester class for the input core.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.{VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation}
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the evaluation memory for both neuron cores */
12
class EvaluationMemorySpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Evaluation Memory"
14
15
/** Fetches the content of a memory initialization file
16
*
17
* @param file the path to the file to fetch data from
18
* @return the contents of the file parsed as an array
19
*
==PAGE:238==
224
C Hardware Testers
20
* @note Expects the contents of the file to be integers in
21
*
binary format.
22
*/
23
def fetch(file: String) =
scala.io.Source.fromFile(file).getLines.map {
24
Integer.parseInt(_, 2)
25
}.toArray
26
27
/** Tests R/W functionality of an evaluation memory
28
*
29
* @param dut an `EvaluationMemory ` instance
30
* @param core the core ID
31
* @param eval the evaluation ID
32
*/
33
def rwTest(dut: EvaluationMemory , core: Int, eval: Int) = {
34
val constLines
= fetch(s"mapping/meminit/constc${core}.mem")
35
val dynaLines
= fetch(s"mapping/meminit/potrefc${core}.mem")
36
val weightLines =
fetch(s"mapping/meminit/weightsc${core}e${eval}.mem")
37
val btLines
=
fetch(s"mapping/meminit/biasthreshc${core}e${eval}.mem")
38
39
// Reset input signals
40
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(const)
41
dut.io.addr.pos.poke(0.U)
42
dut.io.wr.poke(false.B)
43
dut.io.ena.poke(true.B)
44
dut.io.writeData.poke(0.S)
45
46
// Read a few random addresses
47
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
48
for (_ <- 0 until 1024) {
49
val sel = rng.nextInt(4)
50
val pos = sel match {
51
case 0 => rng.nextInt(constLines.length)
52
case 1 => rng.nextInt(dynaLines.length)
53
case 2 => rng.nextInt(btLines.length)
54
case _ => rng.nextInt(weightLines.length)
55
}
56
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(sel.U)
57
dut.io.addr.pos.poke(pos.U)
58
dut.clock.step()
59
println(s"Reading select=${sel} position=${pos}")
60
dut.io.readData.expect(
61
sel match {
62
// Reset potential is converted to 7.10, others are kept
==PAGE:239==
C.1 Unit Tests
225
63
case 0 =>
64
if (pos == 0) (constLines(pos) << 10).S else
constLines(pos).S
65
case 1 => dynaLines(pos).S
66
case 2 => btLines(pos).S
67
case _ =>
68
if ((weightLines(pos) & (1 << 10)) > 0) {
69
// Weight is in 6.4 format and _may_ be negative
70
val shift = ((weightLines(pos) & ((1 << 10) - 1)) << 6)
71
if (shift > ((1 << 15) - 1)) (shift - (1 << 16)).S else
shift.S
72
} else {
73
// Weight is in 0.10 format and is never negative
74
weightLines(pos).S
75
}
76
}
77
)
78
}
79
80
// Write a few random addresses in the dynamic memory
81
val windexes = Array.fill(32) { rng.nextInt(2*TMNEURONS) }
82
var mem
= dynaLines.clone.map(BigInt(_))
83
val data = Array.fill(32) {
84
BigInt(NEUDATAWIDTH , rng) - (BigInt(1) << (NEUDATAWIDTH -1))
85
}
86
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(dynamic)
87
dut.io.wr.poke(true.B)
88
for (elem <- windexes zip data) {
89
dut.io.addr.pos.poke(elem._1.U)
90
dut.io.writeData.poke(elem._2.S(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
91
dut.clock.step()
92
mem(elem._1) = elem._2
93
}
94
95
// Read the values back
96
dut.io.wr.poke(false.B)
97
for (elem <- windexes zip data) {
98
dut.io.addr.pos.poke(elem._1.U)
99
dut.clock.step()
100
dut.io.readData.expect(mem(elem._1).S(NEUDATAWIDTH.W))
101
}
102
}
103
104
/** Tests select functionality of an evaluation memory
105
*
106
* @param dut an `EvaluationMemory ` instance
==PAGE:240==
226
C Hardware Testers
107
* @param core the core ID
108
* @param eval the evaluation ID
109
*/
110
def selTest(dut: EvaluationMemory , core: Int, eval: Int) = {
111
val constLines
= fetch(s"mapping/meminit/constc${core}.mem")
112
val dynaLines
= fetch(s"mapping/meminit/potrefc${core}.mem")
113
val weightLines =
fetch(s"mapping/meminit/weightsc${core}e${eval}.mem")
114
val btLines
=
fetch(s"mapping/meminit/biasthreshc${core}e${eval}.mem")
115
116
// Reset input signals
117
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(const)
118
dut.io.addr.pos.poke(0.U)
119
dut.io.wr.poke(false.B)
120
dut.io.ena.poke(true.B)
121
dut.io.writeData.poke(0.S)
122
123
// Read out from one memory and then another
124
dut.clock.step()
125
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(dynamic)
126
dut.io.readData.expect((constLines(0) << 10).S)
127
dut.clock.step()
128
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(biasthresh)
129
dut.io.readData.expect(dynaLines(0).S)
130
dut.clock.step()
131
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(weights)
132
dut.io.readData.expect(btLines(0).S)
133
dut.clock.step()
134
dut.io.addr.sel.poke(const)
135
dut.io.readData.expect(
136
if ((weightLines(0) & (1 << 10)) > 0 )
137
((weightLines(0) & ((1 << 10) - 1)) << 4).S
138
else
139
weightLines(0).S
140
)
141
}
142
143
// Generate tests for each core ID and two evaluation IDs
144
Seq(2, 3).foreach { core =>
145
it should s"read and write for core $core" in {
146
test(new EvaluationMemory(core, core -2))
147
.withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
148
dut => rwTest(dut, core, core -2)
149
}
==PAGE:241==
C.1 Unit Tests
227
150
}
151
152
it should s"work with changing selects for core $core" in {
153
test(new EvaluationMemory(core, core -2))
154
.withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
155
dut => selTest(dut, core, core -2)
156
}
157
}
158
}
159
}
Listing C.10: Tester class for the evaluation memory module.
Notice how tests are
actually generated with a for loop here.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the neuron evaluator */
12
class NeuronEvaluatorSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Neuron Evaluator"
14
15
/** Resets inputs of the DUT
16
*
17
* @param dut a `NeuronEvaluator ` instance
18
*/
19
def resetInputs(dut: NeuronEvaluator) = {
20
val cntr = dut.io.cntrSels
21
dut.io.evalEnable.poke(true.B)
22
cntr.potSel.poke(2.U)
23
cntr.spikeSel.poke(1.U)
24
cntr.refracSel.poke(1.U)
25
cntr.decaySel.poke(false.B)
26
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(0.U)
27
}
28
29
it should "disable" in {
30
test(new NeuronEvaluator())
==PAGE:242==
228
C Hardware Testers
31
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
32
val cntr = dut.io.cntrSels
33
34
// Reset inputs
35
resetInputs(dut)
36
37
// Load membrane potential
38
cntr.potSel.poke(0.U)
39
dut.io.dataIn.poke(42.S)
40
dut.clock.step()
41
42
// Apply a weight and check that the result has not changed
43
dut.io.evalEnable.poke(false.B)
44
cntr.potSel.poke(1.U)
45
dut.io.dataIn.poke(1.S)
46
dut.clock.step()
47
cntr.potSel.poke(2.U)
48
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(1.U)
49
dut.io.dataOut.expect(42.S)
50
}
51
}
52
53
it should "operate and spike" in {
54
test(new NeuronEvaluator())
55
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
56
val cntr = dut.io.cntrSels
57
val startPot = BigInt(12)
58
59
// Reset inputs
60
resetInputs(dut)
61
dut.clock.step()
62
63
// Load membrane potential
64
cntr.potSel.poke(0.U)
65
dut.io.dataIn.poke(startPot.S)
66
dut.clock.step()
67
dut.io.spikeIndi.expect(false.B)
68
dut.io.refracIndi.expect(true.B)
69
70
// Load some weights
71
cntr.potSel.poke(1.U)
72
var total = startPot
73
for (i <- -1000 until 1000 by 50) {
74
dut.io.dataIn.poke(i.S)
75
dut.clock.step()
76
total += i
==PAGE:243==
C.1 Unit Tests
229
77
}
78
cntr.potSel.poke(2.U)
79
dut.io.dataIn.poke(0.S)
80
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(1.U)
81
dut.io.dataOut.expect(total.S)
82
83
// Check spiking - no spike first
84
dut.io.dataIn.poke((total + 10).S)
85
cntr.spikeSel.poke(0.U)
86
dut.clock.step()
87
cntr.spikeSel.poke(1.U)
88
dut.io.dataIn.poke(0.S)
89
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(1.U)
90
dut.io.dataOut.expect(total.S)
91
dut.io.spikeIndi.expect(false.B)
92
dut.clock.step()
93
94
// - now a spike
95
dut.io.dataIn.poke((total - 10).S)
96
cntr.spikeSel.poke(0.U)
97
dut.clock.step()
98
cntr.spikeSel.poke(1.U)
99
dut.io.dataIn.poke(0.S)
100
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(1.U)
101
dut.io.dataOut.expect(0.S)
102
dut.io.spikeIndi.expect(true.B)
103
}
104
}
105
106
it should "decay" in {
107
test(new NeuronEvaluator())
108
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
109
val cntr = dut.io.cntrSels
110
111
// Reset inputs
112
resetInputs(dut)
113
114
// Load membrane potential
115
cntr.potSel.poke(0.U)
116
dut.io.dataIn.poke(42.S)
117
dut.clock.step()
118
119
cntr.decaySel.poke(true.B)
120
cntr.potSel.poke(1.U)
121
cntr.writeDataSel.poke(1.U)
122
==PAGE:244==
230
C Hardware Testers
123
// Perform 50% decay
124
dut.io.dataIn.poke(1.S)
125
dut.clock.step()
126
dut.io.dataOut.expect(21.S)
127
128
// Perform 12.5% decay
129
dut.io.dataIn.poke(3.S)
130
dut.clock.step()
131
dut.io.dataOut.expect(19.S)
132
}
133
}
134
}
Listing C.11: Tester class for the neuron evaluator module.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the neuron core control unit FSM */
12
class ControlUnitSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Control Unit"
14
15
it should "operate" in {
16
test(new
ControlUnit(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
17
// Reset input signals
18
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
19
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
20
dut.io.spikeIndi(i).poke(false.B)
21
dut.io.refracIndi(i).poke(false.B)
22
}
23
24
// Assume 0 spikes
25
dut.io.spikeCnt.poke(0.U)
26
dut.io.aData.poke(0.U)
27
28
// Check initial signal values
29
dut.io.done.expect(true.B)
==PAGE:245==
C.1 Unit Tests
231
30
31
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(const)
32
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
33
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
34
dut.io.ena.expect(false.B)
35
36
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
37
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(2.U)
38
dut.io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel.expect(2.U)
39
dut.io.cntrSels(i).refracSel.expect(1.U)
40
dut.io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel.expect(0.U)
41
dut.io.cntrSels(i).decaySel.expect(false.B)
42
}
43
dut.io.evalEnable.expect(false.B)
44
45
dut.io.inOut.expect(false.B)
46
dut.io.aAddr.expect(0.U)
47
dut.io.aEna.expect(false.B)
48
49
dut.io.n.expect(0.U)
50
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
51
dut.io.spikes(i).expect(false.B)
52
}
53
54
// Run through a full cycle of the FSM loop
55
// State 0
56
dut.io.done.expect(true.B)
57
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
58
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
59
do {
60
dut.clock.step()
61
} while (!dut.io.inOut.peek.litToBoolean)
62
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
63
println("Run through FSM")
64
dut.io.evalEnable.expect(true.B)
65
66
// State 1
67
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
68
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
69
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(dynamic)
70
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
71
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
72
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
73
dut.io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel.expect(1.U)
74
dut.clock.step()
75
==PAGE:246==
232
C Hardware Testers
76
// State 2
77
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
78
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
79
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(dynamic)
80
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(TMNEURONS.U)
81
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
82
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
83
dut.io.cntrSels(i).refracSel.expect(0.U)
84
dut.clock.step()
85
86
// State 3
87
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
88
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
89
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(const)
90
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(2.U)
91
dut.io.aEna.expect(true.B)
92
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
93
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
94
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(0.U)
95
dut.clock.step()
96
97
// Because spikeCnt = 0, skip some states
98
// ...
99
// State 6
100
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
101
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
102
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(biasthresh)
103
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
104
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
105
dut.clock.step()
106
107
// State 7
108
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
109
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
110
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(biasthresh)
111
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(TMNEURONS.U)
112
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
113
dut.clock.step()
114
// Some outputs unchanged because spikeCnt = 0
115
116
// State 8
117
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
118
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
119
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(const)
120
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(1.U)
121
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
==PAGE:247==
C.1 Unit Tests
233
122
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
123
dut.io.cntrSels(i).spikeSel.expect(0.U)
124
dut.clock.step()
125
126
// State 9
127
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
128
dut.io.wr.expect(true.B)
129
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(dynamic)
130
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
131
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
132
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
133
dut.io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel.expect(2.U)
134
dut.io.spikes(i).expect(false.B)
135
}
136
dut.clock.step()
137
138
// State A
139
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
140
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
141
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(const)
142
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
143
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
144
dut.clock.step()
145
146
// State B
147
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
148
dut.io.wr.expect(true.B)
149
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(dynamic)
150
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(TMNEURONS.U)
151
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
152
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
153
dut.io.cntrSels(i).writeDataSel.expect(1.U)
154
dut.clock.step()
155
156
// State 1
157
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
158
}
159
}
160
161
it should "handle spikes" in {
162
test(new
ControlUnit(0)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
163
// Reset input signals
164
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
165
val spikes = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { rng.nextBoolean }
==PAGE:248==
234
C Hardware Testers
166
val refrac = Array.fill(EVALUNITS) { rng.nextBoolean }
167
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
168
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
169
dut.io.spikeIndi(i).poke(spikes(i).B)
170
dut.io.refracIndi(i).poke(refrac(i).B)
171
}
172
173
// Assume some spikes
174
dut.io.spikeCnt.poke(3.U)
175
dut.io.aData.poke(0.U)
176
177
// Run through a full cycle of the FSM loop
178
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
179
do {
180
dut.clock.step()
181
} while (!dut.io.inOut.peek.litToBoolean)
182
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
183
println("Run through FSM")
184
dut.io.evalEnable.expect(true.B)
185
186
// State 1
187
dut.clock.step()
188
189
// State 2
190
dut.clock.step()
191
192
// State 3
193
dut.clock.step()
194
195
// State 4
196
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
197
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
198
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(weights)
199
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
200
dut.io.aEna.expect(true.B)
201
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
202
if (refrac(i)) {
203
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(1.U)
204
dut.io.cntrSels(i).decaySel.expect(true.B)
205
}
206
}
207
dut.clock.step()
208
209
// State 5 - 3 times over
210
dut.io.ena.expect(true.B)
211
dut.io.wr.expect(false.B)
==PAGE:249==
C.1 Unit Tests
235
212
dut.io.addr.sel.expect(weights)
213
dut.io.addr.pos.expect(0.U)
214
dut.io.aEna.expect(true.B)
215
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
216
if (refrac(i))
217
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(1.U)
218
}
219
dut.clock.step(3)
220
221
// State 6
222
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
223
if (refrac(i))
224
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(1.U)
225
}
226
dut.clock.step()
227
228
// State 7
229
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS) {
230
if (refrac(i))
231
dut.io.cntrSels(i).potSel.expect(1.U)
232
}
233
dut.clock.step()
234
235
// State 8
236
dut.clock.step()
237
238
// State 9
239
dut.clock.step()
240
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
241
dut.io.spikes(i).expect(spikes(i).B)
242
243
// State A
244
dut.clock.step()
245
246
// State B
247
dut.clock.step()
248
}
249
}
250
}
Listing C.12: Tester class for the control unit FSM.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
==PAGE:250==
236
C Hardware Testers
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
9
import org.scalatest._
10
11
/** Tests the neurons */
12
class NeuronsSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
13
behavior of "Neurons"
14
15
it should "handle a spike" in {
16
test(new Neurons(2)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) {
dut =>
17
// Reset inputs
18
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
19
dut.io.spikeCnt.poke(1.U)
20
dut.io.aData.poke(0.U)
21
22
dut.io.done.expect(true.B)
23
dut.io.inOut.expect(false.B)
24
dut.io.aAddr.expect(0.U)
25
dut.io.aEna.expect(false.B)
26
dut.io.n.expect(0.U)
27
for (i <- 0 until EVALUNITS)
28
dut.io.spikes(i).expect(false.B)
29
30
// Wait for the control unit to activate the axon memory
31
dut.io.newTS.poke(true.B)
32
dut.io.done.expect(false.B)
33
dut.clock.step()
34
dut.io.newTS.poke(false.B)
35
while (!dut.io.aEna.peek.litToBoolean)
36
dut.clock.step()
37
// State 3
38
dut.io.aAddr.expect(0.U)
39
dut.clock.step()
40
// State 4
41
dut.io.aAddr.expect(1.U)
42
dut.clock.step()
43
// State 6
44
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
45
dut.clock.step()
46
// State 7
47
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
48
dut.clock.step()
49
// State 8
==PAGE:251==
C.1 Unit Tests
237
50
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
51
dut.clock.step()
52
// State 9
53
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
54
dut.clock.step()
55
// State A
56
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
57
dut.clock.step()
58
// State B
59
dut.io.aAddr.expect(2.U)
60
dut.clock.step()
61
// State 1
62
dut.io.aAddr.expect(0.U)
63
dut.io.n.expect(1.U)
64
}
65
}
66
}
Listing C.13: Tester class for the neurons module. Note that no tester has been developed
specially for the neuron core as it simply wraps the neurons module with a bus interface
and spike transmission system.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chisel3.util._
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
10
import org.scalatest._
11
12
/** Tests the output core */
13
class OutputCoreSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
14
behavior of "Output Core"
15
16
it should "accept and transfer spikes" in {
17
test(new OutputCore(4))
18
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
19
dut.io.qFull.poke(false.B)
20
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
21
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
22
23
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
24
==PAGE:252==
238
C Hardware Testers
25
// Check that spikes are passed through correctly
26
var spikes = List[BigInt]()
27
val inj = fork {
28
for (_ <- 0 until 1024) {
29
if (rng.nextInt(10) <= 1) {
30
val rand = BigInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH , rng)
31
dut.io.rx.poke(rand.U)
32
if ((rand >> (GLOBALADDRWIDTH - log2Up(CORES))) == 2) {
33
spikes = spikes :+ rand
34
println(s"Injected $rand")
35
}
36
}
37
dut.clock.step()
38
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
39
}
40
}
41
42
for (_ <- 0 until 1024) {
43
if (dut.io.qWe.peek.litToBoolean) {
44
val rand = spikes.head & 0xFF
45
dut.io.qWe.expect(true.B)
46
dut.io.qDi.expect(rand.U)
47
println(s"Read $rand")
48
spikes = spikes.tail
49
}
50
dut.clock.step()
51
}
52
inj.join
53
}
54
}
55
56
it should "ignore spikes when full" in {
57
test(new OutputCore(4))
58
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
59
dut.io.qFull.poke(false.B)
60
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
61
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
62
63
// Check that a spike is passed through first
64
dut.io.rx.poke(599.U)
65
dut.clock.step()
66
dut.io.qWe.expect(true.B)
67
dut.io.qDi.expect(87.U)
68
69
// Flag that queue is full and check nothing is passed through
70
dut.io.qFull.poke(true.B)
==PAGE:253==
C.1 Unit Tests
239
71
dut.io.qWe.expect(false.B)
72
dut.io.qDi.expect(87.U)
73
}
74
}
75
}
Listing C.14: Tester class for the output core.
1
// Inspired by
https://github.com/schoeberl/chisel -examples/blob/master/src/test/scala/uar
2
package neuroproc.unittests
3
4
import neuroproc._
5
6
import chisel3._
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
10
import org.scalatest._
11
12
/** Tests the UART rx module */
13
class RxSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
14
behavior of "UART Rx"
15
16
val bitDelay = FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1
17
18
it should "receive a byte" in {
19
test(new Rx(FREQ, BAUDRATE))
20
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
21
val testData = 42.U
22
dut.clock.setTimeout(10*bitDelay)
23
24
// Reset the receive line to the default value
25
dut.io.ready.poke(false.B)
26
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
27
dut.clock.step()
28
29
// Receive start bit
30
dut.io.rx.poke(false.B)
31
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
32
33
// Receive the data
34
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
35
dut.io.rx.poke(testData(i))
36
println(s"Received bit $i")
37
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
==PAGE:254==
240
C Hardware Testers
38
}
39
40
// Receive stop bit
41
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
42
while (!dut.io.valid.peek.litToBoolean)
43
dut.clock.step()
44
dut.io.data.expect(testData)
45
46
// Read out the data
47
dut.io.ready.poke(true.B)
48
dut.clock.step()
49
dut.io.valid.expect(false.B)
50
}
51
}
52
}
53
54
/** Tests the UART tx module */
55
class TxSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
56
behavior of "UART Tx"
57
58
val bitDelay = FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1
59
60
it should "send a byte" in {
61
test(new Tx(FREQ, BAUDRATE))
62
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
63
val testData = 42.U
64
dut.clock.setTimeout(10*bitDelay)
65
66
// Load a byte of data into the Tx module
67
dut.io.valid.poke(true.B)
68
dut.io.data.poke(testData)
69
70
// Wait for ready signal to be asserted
71
while (!dut.io.ready.peek.litToBoolean)
72
dut.clock.step()
73
74
// Perform handshake
75
dut.clock.step()
76
dut.io.valid.poke(false.B)
77
dut.io.data.poke(0.U)
78
println("Loaded data")
79
80
// Wait for start bit
81
while (dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean)
82
dut.clock.step()
83
println("Start bit transmitted")
==PAGE:255==
C.1 Unit Tests
241
84
85
// Check remaining bits
86
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
87
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
88
dut.io.tx.expect(testData(i))
89
println(s"Found bit $i")
90
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
91
}
92
dut.io.tx.expect(true.B)
93
}
94
}
95
}
96
97
/** Tests the UART by echoing */
98
class UartEchoSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
99
behavior of "UART Echo"
100
101
val bitDelay = FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1
102
103
it should "echo a byte" in {
104
test(new UartEcho(FREQ, BAUDRATE))
105
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
106
val testData = 42.U
107
dut.clock.setTimeout(20*bitDelay)
108
109
// Receive start bit
110
dut.io.rxd.poke(false.B)
111
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
112
113
// Receive the data
114
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
115
dut.io.rxd.poke(testData(i))
116
println(s"Received bit $i")
117
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
118
}
119
120
// Receive stop bit
121
dut.io.rxd.poke(true.B)
122
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
123
124
// Transfer start bit
125
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
126
dut.io.txd.expect(false.B)
127
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
128
129
// Transfer the data
==PAGE:256==
242
C Hardware Testers
130
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
131
dut.io.txd.expect(testData(i))
132
println(s"Found bit $i")
133
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
134
}
135
136
// Transfer stop bit
137
dut.io.txd.expect(true.B)
138
}
139
}
140
}
Listing C.15: Tester class for the UART-related modules.
1
package neuroproc.unittests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chisel3.util.log2Up
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
10
import chiseltest.internal.VerilatorBackendAnnotation
11
import org.scalatest._
12
13
/** Tests the off-chip communication
14
*
15
* @note Currently executes three tests:
16
*
- Receive a single spike period
17
*
- Transmit a single spike
18
*
- Receive a full image
19
*
Uses scaled frequency and baud rate to run faster.
20
*/
21
class OffChipComSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
22
behavior of "Off-chip Communication"
23
24
// Change these values for the tests
25
val SCALE
= 8192
26
val FREQ_L
= FREQ / SCALE
27
val BAUDRATE_L = BAUDRATE / (SCALE / 8)
28
val bitDelay
= FREQ_L / BAUDRATE_L + 1
29
30
/** Resets inputs of the DUT
31
*
32
* @param dut an `OffChipCom ` instance
==PAGE:257==
C.1 Unit Tests
243
33
*/
34
def resetInputs(dut: OffChipCom) = {
35
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
36
dut.io.qData.poke(0.U)
37
dut.io.qEmpty.poke(true.B)
38
dut.io.inC0HSin.poke(false.B)
39
dut.io.inC1HSin.poke(false.B)
40
}
41
42
/** Transfer a byte _to_ the DUT
43
*
44
* @param dut an `OffChipCom ` instance
45
* @param byte the byte to transfer
46
*/
47
def receiveByte(dut: OffChipCom , byte: UInt) = {
48
byte.widthOption match {
49
case Some(value) => require(value == 8)
50
case None => throw new IllegalArgumentException("the byte
must be 8 bits")
51
}
52
// Start bit
53
dut.io.rx.poke(false.B)
54
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
55
// Byte
56
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
57
dut.io.rx.poke(byte(i))
58
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
59
}
60
// Stop bit
61
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
62
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
63
}
64
65
it should "receive a frequency" in {
66
test(new OffChipCom(FREQ_L , BAUDRATE_L))
67
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
68
dut.clock.setTimeout(FREQ_L)
69
resetInputs(dut)
70
71
// For the first input core
72
print("Receiving word for core 0 --- ")
73
var index = 151.U(16.W)
74
var freq
= 42.U(16.W)
75
76
val c0w = fork {
77
while (!dut.io.inC0We.peek.litToBoolean)
==PAGE:258==
244
C Hardware Testers
78
dut.clock.step()
79
dut.io.inC0Addr.expect((index.litValue + NEURONSPRCORE).U)
80
dut.io.inC0Di.expect(freq)
81
dut.clock.step()
82
}
83
84
receiveByte(dut, index(15, 8))
85
receiveByte(dut, index( 7, 0))
86
receiveByte(dut, freq(15, 8))
87
receiveByte(dut, freq( 7, 0))
88
print("received --- ")
89
c0w.join
90
println("data written to memory")
91
92
// For the second input core
93
print("Receiving word for core 1 --- ")
94
index = 333.U(16.W)
95
freq
= 197.U(16.W)
96
97
val c1w = fork {
98
while (!dut.io.inC1We.peek.litToBoolean)
99
dut.clock.step()
100
dut.io.inC1Addr.expect(((index.litValue & 0xff) +
NEURONSPRCORE).U)
101
dut.io.inC1Di.expect(freq)
102
dut.clock.step()
103
}
104
105
receiveByte(dut, index(15, 8))
106
receiveByte(dut, index( 7, 0))
107
receiveByte(dut, freq(15, 8))
108
receiveByte(dut, freq( 7, 0))
109
print("received --- ")
110
c1w.join
111
println("data written to memory")
112
}
113
}
114
115
it should "transfer a spike" in {
116
test(new OffChipCom(FREQ_L , BAUDRATE_L))
117
.withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
118
dut.clock.setTimeout(FREQ_L)
119
resetInputs(dut)
120
dut.io.inC0HSin.poke(true.B)
121
122
val testData = 42.U
==PAGE:259==
C.1 Unit Tests
245
123
124
// Load a spike into the module
125
dut.io.qEmpty.poke(false.B)
126
dut.io.qData.poke(testData)
127
while (!dut.io.qEn.peek.litToBoolean)
128
dut.clock.step()
129
dut.clock.step() // synchronous memory delay
130
dut.clock.step() // buffer data
131
dut.io.qData.poke(0.U)
132
println("Loaded data")
133
134
// Wait for start bit
135
while (dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean)
136
dut.clock.step()
137
println("Start bit transmitted")
138
139
// Check remaining bits
140
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
141
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
142
dut.io.tx.expect(testData(i))
143
println(s"Found bit $i = ${dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean}")
144
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
145
}
146
dut.io.tx.expect(true.B)
147
}
148
}
149
150
it should "receive a full image" taggedAs(SlowTest) in {
151
test(new OffChipCom(FREQ_L , BAUDRATE_L)) { dut =>
152
dut.clock.setTimeout(FREQ_L)
153
resetInputs(dut)
154
155
// Receive a full image - in phase 0
156
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
157
for (i <- 0 until INPUTSIZE) {
158
print(s"Receiving word $i --- ")
159
val index = i.U(16.W)
160
val freq
= BigInt(PERIODWIDTH , rng).U(16.W)
161
162
val cw = fork {
163
if (i < NEURONSPRCORE) {
164
while (!dut.io.inC0We.peek.litToBoolean)
165
dut.clock.step()
166
dut.io.inC0Addr.expect((index.litValue +
NEURONSPRCORE).U)
167
dut.io.inC0Di.expect(freq)
==PAGE:260==
246
C Hardware Testers
168
dut.clock.step()
169
} else {
170
while (!dut.io.inC1We.peek.litToBoolean)
171
dut.clock.step()
172
dut.io.inC1Addr.expect(((index.litValue & 0xff) +
NEURONSPRCORE).U)
173
dut.io.inC1Di.expect(freq)
174
dut.clock.step()
175
}
176
}
177
178
// Receive the index
179
receiveByte(dut, index(15, 8))
180
receiveByte(dut, index( 7, 0))
181
receiveByte(dut, freq(15, 8))
182
receiveByte(dut, freq( 7, 0))
183
print("received --- ")
184
cw.join
185
println("data written to memory")
186
}
187
188
// Check that the phase has updated
189
dut.io.inC0HSout.expect(true.B)
190
dut.io.inC1HSout.expect(true.B)
191
192
// Change phase
193
dut.io.inC0HSin.poke(true.B)
194
dut.io.inC1HSin.poke(true.B)
195
196
// Receive a full image - in phase 1
197
for (i <- 0 until INPUTSIZE) {
198
print(s"Receiving word $i --- ")
199
val index = i.U(16.W)
200
val freq
= BigInt(PERIODWIDTH , rng).U(16.W)
201
202
val cw = fork {
203
if (i < NEURONSPRCORE) {
204
while (!dut.io.inC0We.peek.litToBoolean)
205
dut.clock.step()
206
dut.io.inC0Addr.expect(index)
207
dut.io.inC0Di.expect(freq)
208
dut.clock.step()
209
} else {
210
while (!dut.io.inC1We.peek.litToBoolean)
211
dut.clock.step()
212
dut.io.inC1Addr.expect((index.litValue & 0xff).U)
==PAGE:261==
C.2 System Tests
247
213
dut.io.inC1Di.expect(freq)
214
dut.clock.step()
215
}
216
}
217
218
// Receive the index
219
receiveByte(dut, index(15, 8))
220
receiveByte(dut, index( 7, 0))
221
receiveByte(dut, freq(15, 8))
222
receiveByte(dut, freq( 7, 0))
223
print("received --- ")
224
cw.join
225
println("data written to memory")
226
}
227
228
// Check that the phase has updated
229
dut.io.inC0HSout.expect(false.B)
230
dut.io.inC1HSout.expect(false.B)
231
}
232
}
233
}
Listing C.16: Tester class for the off-chip communication module, which includes both
memory interfaces and a UART.
C.2
System Tests
The following are the source files for all system tests implemented for the top-level
NeuromorphicProcessor class and combinations of other modules.
C.2.1
Package File
1
package neuroproc
2
3
import org.scalatest.Tag
4
5
package object systemtests {
6
/** Tag for marking tests that take long to execute */
7
object SlowTest extends Tag("neuroproc.systemtests.SlowTest")
8
9
/** Implicitly converts a Scala Boolean to a Scala Int */
10
implicit def boolean2int(bool: Boolean) = if (bool) 1 else 0
11
}
==PAGE:262==
248
C Hardware Testers
Listing C.17: Package file for the neuroproc.systemtests package.
C.2.2
Tester Files
1
package neuroproc.systemtests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chisel3.util._
7
import chiseltest._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9
import chiseltest.internal.VerilatorBackendAnnotation
10
import org.scalatest._
11
12
/** Tests a derived -clock system
13
*
14
* @note Tests an anonymous module with two clock domains in a
15
*
similar configuration to that of the accelerator.
16
*/
17
class DerivedClocksSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester
{
18
behavior of "Derived clock system"
19
20
it should "work with multiple clocks" taggedAs(SlowTest) in {
21
test(new Module {
22
val io = IO(new Bundle {
23
val uartTx = Output(Bool())
24
})
25
26
// First clock
27
val clock1 = Wire(Clock())
28
val buf1
= Module(ClockBuffer())
29
buf1.io.CE := true.B
30
buf1.io.I
:= clock
31
clock1 := buf1.io.O
32
33
// Second clock
34
val en2
= WireDefault(true.B)
35
val clock2 = Wire(Clock())
36
val buf2
= Module(ClockBuffer())
37
buf2.io.CE := en2
38
buf2.io.I
:= clock
==PAGE:263==
C.2 System Tests
249
39
clock2 := buf2.io.O
40
41
// A test memory
42
val mem = Module(new TrueDualPortFIFO(4, 8))
43
mem.io.clki := clock2
44
mem.io.clko := clock1
45
mem.io.rst
:= reset.asBool
46
47
// First clock domain manages transfers
48
val newTS = Wire(Bool())
49
withClock(clock1) {
50
val tsCycleCnt = RegInit(CYCLESPRSTEP.U)
51
newTS := tsCycleCnt === 0.U
52
tsCycleCnt := Mux(newTS, CYCLESPRSTEP.U, tsCycleCnt - 1.U)
53
54
val occ = Module(new OffChipCom(FREQ, BAUDRATE))
55
io.uartTx := occ.io.tx
56
occ.io.rx := true.B
57
58
mem.io.en := occ.io.qEn
59
occ.io.qEmpty := mem.io.empty
60
occ.io.qData
:= mem.io.datao
61
62
occ.io.inC0HSin := true.B
63
occ.io.inC1HSin := false.B
64
}
65
66
// Second clock domain produces inputs values
67
withClock(clock2) {
68
val cnt = RegInit(255.U(8.W))
69
mem.io.we := false.B
70
mem.io.datai := cnt
71
72
val idle :: enq :: Nil = Enum(2)
73
val state = RegInit(idle)
74
switch(state) {
75
is(idle) {
76
en2 := false.B
77
when(newTS && !mem.io.full) {
78
en2 := true.B
79
state := enq
80
}
81
}
82
is(enq) {
83
mem.io.we := true.B
84
cnt := (cnt ^ (cnt(4,0) ## 0.U(3.W))) + 1.U
==PAGE:264==
250
C Hardware Testers
85
state := idle
86
}
87
}
88
}
89
}).withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation)) { dut =>
90
val nTests = 10
91
dut.clock.setTimeout((nTests+2)*CYCLESPRSTEP)
92
93
val bitDelay = FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1
94
95
def transferByte() = {
96
var byte = 0
97
// Assumes start bit has already been seen
98
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
99
// Byte
100
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
101
byte = (dut.io.uartTx.peek.litToBoolean << i) | byte
102
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
103
}
104
// Stop bit
105
dut.io.uartTx.expect(true.B)
106
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
107
byte
108
}
109
110
// Receive 100 values from the circuit
111
dut.reset.poke(true.B)
112
dut.clock.step()
113
dut.reset.poke(false.B)
114
dut.clock.step()
115
dut.io.uartTx.expect(true.B)
116
var nextV = 255
117
for (_ <- 0 until nTests) {
118
while (dut.io.uartTx.peek.litToBoolean)
119
dut.clock.step()
120
val v = transferByte()
121
println(s"Received ${v}, expected ${nextV}")
122
assert(v == nextV)
123
nextV = ((nextV ^ (nextV << 3)) + 1) & 0xff
124
dut.clock.step()
125
}
126
}
127
}
128
}
Listing C.18: Tester class for a composite module with two clock domains in a similar
arrangement to those of the neuromorphic processor.
==PAGE:265==
C.2 System Tests
251
1
package neuroproc.systemtests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPoke._
9
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPeek._
10
import org.scalatest._
11
12
/** Tests the off-chip communication with memories attached
13
*
14
* @note Two anonymous system tests are executed here:
15
*
- OCC to dual-port input core memory
16
*
- Dual-port FIFO to OCC
17
*
The same configurations are part of the neuromorphic
18
*
processor , but these tests execute much faster than the
19
*
full system test.
20
*/
21
class OCCtoMemSpec extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
22
behavior of "Off-chip Communication with memory"
23
24
val SCALE
= 8
25
val FREQ_L
= FREQ / SCALE
26
val BAUDRATE_L = BAUDRATE / (SCALE / 4)
27
28
it should "work with dual-port memory" taggedAs(SlowTest) in {
29
test(new Module {
30
val io = IO(new Bundle {
31
val rx = Input(Bool())
32
val inC0HSin
= Input(Bool())
33
val inC1HSin
= Input(Bool())
34
35
val clkb
= Input(Clock())
36
37
val enb0
= Input(Bool())
38
val addrb0 = Input(UInt((RATEADDRWIDTH+1).W))
39
val dob0
= Output(UInt(PERIODWIDTH.W))
40
41
val enb1
= Input(Bool())
42
val addrb1 = Input(UInt((RATEADDRWIDTH+1).W))
43
val dob1
= Output(UInt(PERIODWIDTH.W))
44
})
45
46
// Off-chip communication
==PAGE:266==
252
C Hardware Testers
47
val oc = Module(new OffChipCom(FREQ_L, BAUDRATE_L))
48
oc.io.rx
:= io.rx
49
oc.io.qData
:= 0.U
50
oc.io.qEmpty := true.B
51
oc.io.inC0HSin := io.inC0HSin
52
oc.io.inC1HSin := io.inC1HSin
53
54
// True dual port memories
55
val mem0 = Module(new TrueDualPortMemory(RATEADDRWIDTH+1,
PERIODWIDTH))
56
mem0.io.clka
:= clock
57
mem0.io.clkb
:= io.clkb
58
mem0.io.web
:= false.B
59
mem0.io.dib
:= 0.U
60
mem0.io.enb
:= io.enb0
61
mem0.io.addrb := io.addrb0
62
io.dob0 := mem0.io.dob
63
64
val mem1 = Module(new TrueDualPortMemory(RATEADDRWIDTH+1,
PERIODWIDTH))
65
mem1.io.clka
:= clock
66
mem1.io.clkb
:= io.clkb
67
mem1.io.web
:= false.B
68
mem1.io.dib
:= 0.U
69
mem1.io.enb
:= io.enb1
70
mem1.io.addrb := io.addrb1
71
io.dob1 := mem1.io.dob
72
73
// Interconnect
74
mem0.io.ena
:= oc.io.inC0We
75
mem0.io.wea
:= oc.io.inC0We
76
mem0.io.addra := oc.io.inC0Addr
77
mem0.io.dia
:= oc.io.inC0Di
78
79
mem1.io.ena
:= oc.io.inC1We
80
mem1.io.wea
:= oc.io.inC1We
81
mem1.io.addra := oc.io.inC1Addr
82
mem1.io.dia
:= oc.io.inC1Di
83
84
}) { dut =>
85
val delay = FREQ_L / BAUDRATE_L + 1
86
val numTests = 64
87
88
def recByte(byte: UInt) = {
89
dut.io.rx.poke(false.B)
90
dut.clock.step(delay)
==PAGE:267==
C.2 System Tests
253
91
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
92
dut.io.rx.poke(byte(i))
93
dut.clock.step(delay)
94
}
95
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
96
dut.clock.step(delay)
97
}
98
99
def stepClkb(cycles: Int = 1) = {
100
for (_ <- 0 until cycles) {
101
dut.io.clkb.high()
102
dut.io.clkb.low()
103
}
104
}
105
106
// Reset inputs
107
dut.clock.setTimeout(10*numTests*delay)
108
dut.io.rx.poke(true.B)
109
dut.io.inC0HSin.poke(true.B)
110
dut.io.inC1HSin.poke(true.B)
111
dut.io.clkb.low()
112
dut.io.enb0.poke(false.B)
113
dut.io.addrb0.poke(0.U)
114
dut.io.enb1.poke(false.B)
115
dut.io.addrb1.poke(0.U)
116
dut.clock.step()
117
118
// Force a phase change
119
dut.io.inC0HSin.poke(false.B)
120
dut.io.inC1HSin.poke(false.B)
121
dut.clock.step()
122
123
// Receive a frequency for each memory and check that they are
124
// correctly received in either
125
var mem0 = Array.fill(1 << (RATEADDRWIDTH+1))(BigInt(0))
126
print("Receiving word for memory 0 --- ")
127
val ind0 = 151.U(16.W)
128
val frq0
= 42.U(16.W)
129
recByte(ind0(15, 8))
130
recByte(ind0( 7, 0))
131
recByte(frq0(15, 8))
132
recByte(frq0( 7, 0))
133
println("received")
134
mem0(ind0.litValue.intValue + NEURONSPRCORE) = frq0.litValue
135
136
var mem1 = Array.fill(1 << (RATEADDRWIDTH+1))(BigInt(0))
==PAGE:268==
254
C Hardware Testers
137
print("Receiving word for memory 1 --- ")
138
val ind1 = 333.U(16.W)
139
val frq1 = 197.U(16.W)
140
recByte(ind1(15, 8))
141
recByte(ind1( 7, 0))
142
recByte(frq1(15, 8))
143
recByte(frq1( 7, 0))
144
println("received")
145
mem1((ind1.litValue.intValue & 0xff) + NEURONSPRCORE) =
frq1.litValue
146
147
// Read out the values again
148
dut.io.addrb0.poke((ind0.litValue + NEURONSPRCORE).U)
149
dut.io.enb0.poke(true.B)
150
dut.io.addrb1.poke(((ind1.litValue & 0xff) + NEURONSPRCORE).U)
151
dut.io.enb1.poke(true.B)
152
dut.clock.step()
153
stepClkb()
154
dut.io.enb0.poke(false.B)
155
dut.io.enb1.poke(false.B)
156
dut.io.dob0.expect(frq0)
157
dut.io.dob1.expect(frq1)
158
159
// Repeat the above for random inputs
160
println("Receive some random inputs")
161
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
162
val testInds = Array.fill(numTests) {
rng.nextInt(INPUTSIZE).U(16.W) }
163
val testFrqs = Array.fill(numTests) { BigInt(PERIODWIDTH ,
rng).U(16.W) }
164
for (v <- testInds.zip(testFrqs)) {
165
recByte(v._1(15, 8))
166
recByte(v._1( 7, 0))
167
recByte(v._2(15, 8))
168
recByte(v._2( 7, 0))
169
if (v._1.litValue >= NEURONSPRCORE)
170
mem1((v._1.litValue.intValue & 0xff) + NEURONSPRCORE) =
v._2.litValue
171
else
172
mem0(v._1.litValue.intValue + NEURONSPRCORE) =
v._2.litValue
173
}
174
175
// Check the memories
176
println("Check the memory content")
177
for (i <- 0 until (1 << (RATEADDRWIDTH+1))) {
==PAGE:269==
C.2 System Tests
255
178
dut.io.enb0.poke(true.B)
179
dut.io.addrb0.poke(i.U)
180
dut.io.enb1.poke(true.B)
181
dut.io.addrb1.poke(i.U)
182
dut.clock.step()
183
stepClkb()
184
dut.io.dob0.expect(mem0(i).U)
185
dut.io.dob1.expect(mem1(i).U)
186
}
187
}
188
}
189
190
it should "work with FIFO queue" in {
191
test(new Module {
192
val io = IO(new Bundle {
193
val clki
= Input(Clock())
194
val we
= Input(Bool())
195
val datai = Input(UInt(8.W))
196
val full
= Output(Bool())
197
198
val tx
= Output(Bool())
199
})
200
201
// Off-chip communication
202
val oc = Module(new OffChipCom(FREQ_L, BAUDRATE_L))
203
oc.io.rx
:= true.B // \
204
oc.io.inC0HSin := true.B // Force staying in idle state
205
oc.io.inC1HSin := true.B // /
206
io.tx
:= oc.io.tx
207
208
// True dual port memory -based FIFO
209
val fifo = Module(new TrueDualPortFIFO(4, 8))
210
fifo.io.clki
:= io.clki
211
fifo.io.we
:= io.we
212
fifo.io.rst
:= reset.asBool
213
fifo.io.datai := io.datai
214
io.full
:= fifo.io.full
215
fifo.io.clko
:= clock
216
217
// Interconnect
218
fifo.io.en
:= oc.io.qEn
219
oc.io.qData
:= fifo.io.datao
220
oc.io.qEmpty := fifo.io.empty
221
222
}) { dut =>
223
val delay = FREQ_L / BAUDRATE_L + 1
==PAGE:270==
256
C Hardware Testers
224
val numTests = 64
225
226
def transferByte() = {
227
var byte = 0
228
// Assumes start bit has already been seen
229
dut.clock.step(delay)
230
// Byte
231
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
232
byte = (dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean << i) | byte
233
dut.clock.step(delay)
234
}
235
// Stop bit
236
dut.io.tx.expect(true.B)
237
dut.clock.step(delay)
238
byte
239
}
240
241
def stepClki(cycles: Int = 1) = {
242
for (_ <- 0 until cycles) {
243
dut.io.clki.high()
244
dut.io.clki.low()
245
}
246
}
247
248
// Reset inputs
249
dut.clock.setTimeout(10*numTests*delay)
250
dut.io.clki.low()
251
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
252
dut.io.datai.poke(0.U)
253
dut.reset.poke(true.B)
254
dut.clock.step()
255
stepClki()
256
dut.reset.poke(false.B)
257
dut.io.full.expect(false.B)
258
dut.io.tx.expect(true.B)
259
260
// Write one value to the FIFO and check it's output correctly
261
dut.io.we.poke(true.B)
262
dut.io.datai.poke(42.U)
263
dut.clock.step()
264
stepClki()
265
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
266
dut.clock.step()
267
stepClki()
268
while (dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean)
269
dut.clock.step()
==PAGE:271==
C.2 System Tests
257
270
val recB = transferByte()
271
assert(42 == recB)
272
273
// Repeat the above test with a number of random inputs
274
val rng = new scala.util.Random(42)
275
val testVals = Array.fill(64) { BigInt(8, rng).U(8.W) }
276
277
// Write the bytes to the queue
278
val writer = fork {
279
for (v <- testVals) {
280
dut.io.we.poke(false.B)
281
dut.io.datai.poke(v)
282
while (dut.io.full.peek.litToBoolean) {
283
dut.clock.step()
284
stepClki()
285
}
286
dut.io.we.poke(true.B)
287
dut.clock.step()
288
stepClki()
289
println(s"Wrote ${v.litValue} to FIFO")
290
}
291
}
292
293
// Receive the transmitted bytes
294
for (v <- testVals) {
295
while (dut.io.tx.peek.litToBoolean)
296
dut.clock.step()
297
val b = transferByte()
298
assert(v.litValue == b)
299
println(s"Received ${b}")
300
}
301
writer.join
302
}
303
}
304
}
Listing C.19: Tester class for a composite module between off-chip communication and
input memory or output queue, respectively.
1
package neuroproc.systemtests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
==PAGE:272==
258
C Hardware Testers
8
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPoke._
9
import chiseltest.experimental.UncheckedClockPeek._
10
import chiseltest.internal.WriteVcdAnnotation
11
import org.scalatest._
12
13
/** Tests the output core to dual-port FIFO configuration
14
*
15
* @note The same configuration is part of the neuromorphic
16
*
processor , but this test executes much faster.
17
*/
18
class OutputCoretoMemSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
19
behavior of "Output core to memory"
20
21
it should "work with FIFO queue" in {
22
test(new Module {
23
val io = IO(new Bundle {
24
val grant = Input(Bool())
25
val req
= Output(Bool())
26
val tx
= Output(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
27
val rx
= Input(UInt(GLOBALADDRWIDTH.W))
28
29
val clko
= Input(Clock())
30
val en
= Input(Bool())
31
val datao = Output(UInt(8.W))
32
val empty = Output(Bool())
33
})
34
35
// Output core
36
val oc = Module(new OutputCore(4))
37
oc.io.grant := io.grant
38
io.req
:= oc.io.req
39
io.tx
:= oc.io.tx
40
oc.io.rx
:= io.rx
41
42
// True dual port memory -based FIFO
43
val fifo = Module(new TrueDualPortFIFO(4, 8))
44
fifo.io.clki := clock
45
fifo.io.clko := io.clko
46
fifo.io.rst
:= reset.asBool
47
fifo.io.en
:= io.en
48
io.datao
:= fifo.io.datao
49
io.empty
:= fifo.io.empty
50
51
// Interconnect
52
fifo.io.we
:= oc.io.qWe
==PAGE:273==
C.2 System Tests
259
53
fifo.io.datai := oc.io.qDi
54
oc.io.qFull
:= fifo.io.full
55
56
}).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
57
def stepClko(cycles: Int = 1) = {
58
for (_ <- 0 until cycles) {
59
dut.io.clko.high()
60
dut.io.clko.low()
61
}
62
}
63
64
// Reset inputs
65
dut.io.grant.poke(false.B)
66
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
67
dut.io.clko.low()
68
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
69
dut.reset.poke(true.B)
70
dut.clock.step()
71
stepClko()
72
dut.reset.poke(false.B)
73
dut.io.req.expect(false.B)
74
dut.io.tx.expect(0.U)
75
76
dut.io.datao.expect(0.U)
77
dut.io.empty.expect(true.B)
78
79
// Input a spike
80
dut.io.rx.poke(599.U)
81
dut.clock.step() // one cycle to pass interface
82
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
83
dut.clock.step() // ... and one to write to FIFO
84
85
// Read it out - checking flag first
86
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
87
stepClko()
88
dut.io.datao.expect(87.U)
89
dut.io.empty.expect(false.B)
90
dut.clock.step() // advance time for VCD
91
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
92
93
// Fill up FIFO
94
dut.clock.step() // advance time for VCD
95
dut.io.rx.poke(599.U)
96
for (_ <- 0 until 16) {
97
dut.clock.step() // one to pass interface , one to write
98
}
==PAGE:274==
260
C Hardware Testers
99
dut.io.rx.poke(0.U)
100
dut.clock.step() // write last spike to FIFO
101
102
// Empty FIFO
103
dut.io.en.poke(true.B)
104
dut.io.empty.expect(false.B)
105
for (_ <- 0 until 16) {
106
dut.clock.step() // advance time for VCD
107
stepClko()
108
dut.io.datao.expect(87.U)
109
}
110
dut.io.en.poke(false.B)
111
dut.io.empty.expect(true.B)
112
}
113
}
114
}
Listing C.20: Tester class for a composite module between output core and output queue.
1
package neuroproc.systemtests
2
3
import neuroproc._
4
5
import chisel3._
6
import chiseltest._
7
import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
8
import chiseltest.internal.{VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation}
9
import org.scalatest._
10
import java.io.{FileNotFoundException , IOException}
11
12
/** Tests the neuromorphic processor */
13
class NeuromorphicProcessorSpec extends FlatSpec with
ChiselScalatestTester {
14
behavior of "Neuromorphic Processor"
15
16
val bitDelay = FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1
17
18
def fetch(file: String) = {
19
val src = scala.io.Source.fromFile(file)
20
val lines = try {
21
src.mkString
22
} catch {
23
case e: FileNotFoundException => {
24
println("Incorrect path to image file")
25
""
==PAGE:275==
C.2 System Tests
261
26
}
27
case e: IOException => {
28
println("Cannot open image file")
29
""
30
}
31
} finally {
32
src.close
33
}
34
lines.split(",").map(_.toInt)
35
}
36
37
it should "process an image" taggedAs(SlowTest) in {
38
test(new NeuromorphicProcessor())
39
.withAnnotations(Seq(VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,
WriteVcdAnnotation)) { dut =>
40
dut.clock.setTimeout(FREQ)
41
42
// Reference image and results
43
val image =
fetch("./src/test/scala/neuroproc/systemtests/image.txt")
44
val results =
fetch("./src/test/scala/neuroproc/systemtests/results.txt")
45
46
def receiveByte(byte: UInt) = {
47
// Start bit
48
dut.io.uartRx.poke(false.B)
49
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
50
// Byte
51
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
52
dut.io.uartRx.poke(byte(i))
53
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
54
}
55
// Stop bit
56
dut.io.uartRx.poke(true.B)
57
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
58
}
59
60
def transferByte() = {
61
var byte = 0
62
// Assumes start bit has already been seen
63
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
64
// Byte
65
for (i <- 0 until 8) {
66
byte = (dut.io.uartTx.peek.litToBoolean << i) | byte
67
dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
68
}
==PAGE:276==
262
C Hardware Testers
69
// Stop bit
70
dut.io.uartTx.expect(true.B)
71
//dut.clock.step(bitDelay)
72
byte
73
}
74
75
// Reset inputs
76
dut.io.uartRx.poke(true.B)
77
dut.io.uartTx.expect(true.B)
78
dut.reset.poke(true.B)
79
dut.clock.step()
80
dut.reset.poke(false.B)
81
dut.io.uartTx.expect(true.B)
82
83
// Spawn a receiver thread
84
var spikes = Array[Int]()
85
var receive = true
86
val rec = fork {
87
while (receive) {
88
if (!dut.io.uartTx.peek.litToBoolean) {
89
val s = transferByte()
90
if (s < 200)
91
spikes = spikes :+ s
92
println(s"Received spike ${s}")
93
}
94
dut.clock.step()
95
}
96
}
97
98
// Load an image into the accelerator ...
99
println("Loading image into accelerator")
100
for (i <- 0 until image.length) {
101
// Write top byte of index, bottom byte of index, top byte
102
// of rate, and bottom byte of rate
103
receiveByte((i >> 8).U(8.W))
104
receiveByte((i & 0xff).U(8.W))
105
receiveByte((image(i) >> 8).U(8.W))
106
receiveByte((image(i) & 0xff).U(8.W))
107
}
108
print("Done loading image - ")
109
110
// ... get its response
111
println("getting accelerator's response")
112
dut.clock.step(FREQ/2)
113
receive = false
114
rec.join
==PAGE:277==
C.3 VHDL Testbench
263
115
116
println("Response received - comparing results")
117
118
println(spikes.deep.mkString(","))
119
120
assert(spikes.length == results.length, "number of spikes
does not match expected")
121
assert(spikes.zip(results).map(x => x._1 == x._2).reduce(_ &&
_), "spikes do not match expected")
122
}
123
}
124
}
Listing C.21: Main tester class of the project; testing the neuromorphic processor.
C.3
VHDL Testbench
The following is the top-level VHDL testbench. Image and spike files are available on
Github.
1
-- Inspired by
https://github.com/ricardo -jasinski/vhdl-csv-file-reader/blob/master/hdl/pa
2
3
library ieee;
4
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
5
use ieee.numeric_std.all;
6
use std.textio.all;
7
8
entity neuroproc_tb is
9
end neuroproc_tb;
10
11
architecture rtl of neuroproc_tb is
12
constant T_clk : time := 5 ns;
13
constant FREQ
: natural := 200_000_000;
14
constant BAUDRATE : natural := 115_200;
15
constant BITDELAY : time := (FREQ / BAUDRATE + 1) * T_clk;
16
17
signal sysclk_n , sysclk_p , reset, uartRx, uartTx : std_logic;
18
19
component NeuroTop is
20
port (
21
sysclk_n : in std_logic;
22
sysclk_p : in std_logic;
23
reset
: in std_logic;
24
uartRx
: in std_logic;
==PAGE:278==
264
C Hardware Testers
25
uartTx
: out std_logic
26
);
27
end component;
28
29
shared variable timeCount : time := 0 sec;
30
31
begin
32
33
dut : NeuroTop
34
port map ( sysclk_n=>sysclk_n ,
35
sysclk_p=>sysclk_p ,
36
reset=>reset,
37
uartTx=>uartTx ,
38
uartRx=>uartRx );
39
40
stimuli : process is
41
file image
: text open read_mode is "image.txt";
42
variable L
: line;
43
variable val : integer;
44
variable index, rxRate : std_logic_vector(15 downto 0);
45
46
procedure skip_sep is
47
variable c : character;
48
begin
49
read(L, c);
50
end;
51
52
impure function read_integer return integer is
53
variable rV : integer;
54
begin
55
read(L, rV);
56
skip_sep;
57
return rV;
58
end;
59
60
procedure trans_byte(b : std_logic_vector(7 downto 0)) is
61
begin
62
-- Transmit start bit
63
uartRx <= '0';
64
wait for BITDELAY;
65
66
-- Transmit byte
67
for i in 0 to 7 loop
68
uartRx <= b(i);
69
wait for BITDELAY;
70
end loop;
==PAGE:279==
C.3 VHDL Testbench
265
71
72
-- Transmit stop bit
73
uartRx <= '1';
74
wait for BITDELAY;
75
end;
76
begin
77
78
-- Reset the accelerator
79
reset
<= '1';
80
uartRx <= '1';
81
wait for 10*T_clk;
82
wait until falling_edge(sysclk_p);
83
reset
<= '0';
84
wait for T_clk;
85
86
-- Write image to processor
87
readline(image, L);
88
inp : for i in 0 to 483 loop
89
index := std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(i, 16));
90
91
-- Read rate
92
val := read_integer;
93
report "inputting rate " & integer 'image(val);
94
rxRate := std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(val, 16));
95
96
-- Transmit index
97
trans_byte(index(15 downto 8));
98
trans_byte(index( 7 downto 0));
99
100
-- Transmit rate
101
trans_byte(rxRate(15 downto 8));
102
trans_byte(rxRate( 7 downto 0));
103
end loop inp;
104
report "Done inputting rates. Phase changed." severity note;
105
106
-- Wait for the response and end simulation when done
107
timeCount := 0 sec;
108
wait for 500 ms;
109
std.env.stop(0); -- replace with std.env.finish;
110
111
end process stimuli;
112
113
response : process is
114
file results : text open read_mode is "results.txt";
115
variable L
: line;
116
variable val : integer;
==PAGE:280==
266
C Hardware Testers
117
variable txByte : std_logic_vector(7 downto 0);
118
119
procedure skip_sep is
120
variable c : character;
121
begin
122
read(L, c);
123
end;
124
125
impure function read_integer return integer is
126
variable rV : integer;
127
begin
128
read(L, rV);
129
skip_sep;
130
return rV;
131
end;
132
133
procedure rec_byte is
134
begin
135
-- Go to middle of transmitted bit
136
wait for BITDELAY / 2;
137
-- Expected the start bit to have been received already
138
wait for BITDELAY;
139
for i in 0 to 7 loop
140
txByte(i) := uartTx;
141
wait for BITDELAY;
142
end loop;
143
144
-- Receive stop bit
145
assert uartTx = '1'
146
report "stop bit not received"
147
severity note;
148
end;
149
begin
150
-- Read out spikes and verify according to results file
151
readline(results , L);
152
outp : while timeCount < 500 ms loop
153
if uartTx = '0' then
154
rec_byte;
155
if (to_integer(unsigned(txByte)) < 200) then
156
val := read_integer;
157
assert txByte =
std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(val, 8))
158
report "expected spike " &
integer 'image(val) & " but got " &
integer 'image(to_integer(unsigned(txByte)))
159
severity note;
==PAGE:281==
C.3 VHDL Testbench
267
160
end if;
161
end if;
162
wait for T_clk;
163
end loop outp;
164
end process response;
165
166
clk : process is
167
begin
168
sysclk_p <= '1'; sysclk_n <= '0'; wait for T_clk / 2;
169
sysclk_p <= '0'; sysclk_n <= '1'; wait for T_clk / 2;
170
timeCount := timeCount + T_clk;
171
end process clk;
172
173
end rtl;
Listing C.22: VHDL testbench for simulation of the top-level module with a reference
image and reference results in separate files. Three processes are used to simulate the
independent nature of the UART’s RX and TX channels, and to generate the clock
signal.
==PAGE:282==
268
==PAGE:283==
APPENDIX D
Other Sources
The following are source files of more general kind that do not fit into the other categories.
D.1
Makefile
The following is a makefile, which is included in the project’s repository to make it even
easier for anyone new to Chisel or Vivado to build the accelerator.
1
# Environment variables
2
SBT := sbt
3
4
.PHONY : all
5
all : proc vivado
6
7
proc :
8
python netwkdev/export.py netwkdev/pretrained/network.pt
9
$(SBT) "runMain MakeDataFiles netwkdev/pretrained/network.json"
10
$(SBT) "runMain neuroproc.NeuromorphicProcessor"
11
python mapping/synthesis.py
12
13
vivado :
14
./mapping/gentcl.sh
15
16
.PHONY : clean
17
clean :
18
$(SBT) clean
19
-rm netwkdev/pretrained/network.json
20
-rm -rf build
21
-rm -rf mapping/meminit
22
-rm -rf target
23
-rm -rf test_run_dir
24
-rm build.tcl
25
-git clean -fd
26
27
.PHONY : test
28
test : unittest systemtest
29
30
unittest :
==PAGE:284==
270
D Other Sources
31
$(SBT) "testOnly neuroproc.unittests.*"
32
33
systemtest :
34
$(SBT) "testOnly neuroproc.systemtests.*"
Listing D.1: The project’s makefile which includes the all label which generates all
required files.
D.2
Build Script
The following is the SBT build script, which sets of package requirements and builds
the accelerator. Any Scala project must have a build script in this style called build.sbt.
1
scalaVersion := "2.12.12"
2
3
scalacOptions := Seq("-Xsource:2.11", "-deprecation")
4
5
resolvers ++= Seq(
6
Resolver.sonatypeRepo("snapshots"),
7
Resolver.sonatypeRepo("releases")
8
)
9
10
addCompilerPlugin("edu.berkeley.cs" % "chisel3 -plugin" % "3.4.3"
cross CrossVersion.full)
11
12
libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
13
"edu.berkeley.cs" %% "chisel3" % "3.4.3",
14
"edu.berkeley.cs" %% "chiseltest" % "0.3.3",
15
"io.spray" %%
"spray-json" % "1.3.5"
16
)
Listing D.2: SBT build script for the accelerator.
D.3
Github Actions CI Script
This is the full CI script covered in section 6.3.4.
1
name: NeuromorphicProcessor CI
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
pull_request:
6
==PAGE:285==
D.3 Github Actions CI Script
271
7
jobs:
8
test:
9
name: Unit Tests
10
runs-on: ubuntu -20.04
11
12
steps:
13
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
14
15
- name: Install Verilator
16
run: |
17
sudo apt-get install -y verilator
18
verilator --version
19
- name: Set up JDK 11
20
uses: actions/setup-java@v1
21
with:
22
java-version: 11
23
- name: Set up Python
24
uses: actions/setup-python@v2
25
with:
26
python -version: 3.7
27
- name: Install dependencies
28
run: |
29
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
30
pip install -r requirements.txt
31
32
- name: Compile
33
run: sbt compile
34
35
- name: Export pretrained network
36
run: python netwkdev/export.py netwkdev/pretrained/network.pt
37
38
- name: Create memory initialization
39
run: sbt "runMain MakeDataFiles
netwkdev/pretrained/network.json"
40
41
- name: Unit Tests
42
run: sbt "testOnly neuroproc.unittests.** -- -l
neuroproc.unittests.SlowTest"
43
44
integration:
45
name: System Tests
46
runs-on: ubuntu -20.04
47
48
steps:
49
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
50
==PAGE:286==
272
D Other Sources
51
- name: Install Verilator
52
run: |
53
sudo apt-get install -y verilator
54
verilator --version
55
- name: Set up JDK 11
56
uses: actions/setup-java@v1
57
with:
58
java-version: 11
59
60
- name: Compile
61
run: sbt compile
62
63
- name: System Tests
64
run: sbt "testOnly neuroproc.systemtests.** -- -l
neuroproc.systemtests.SlowTest"
Listing D.3: Github actions CI script with both unit tests and system tests flows.
D.4
Flawed Chisel Top-level
The following is the Chisel top-level and MMCM blackbox declarations, which were
not used in the final version of the source code due to inexplicable higher resource
consumption.
1
import neuroproc._
2
3
import chisel3._
4
import chisel3.util.HasBlackBoxResource
5
6
class NeuroTop extends RawModule {
7
val io = IO(new Bundle {
8
val sysclk_n = Input(Clock())
9
val sysclk_p = Input(Clock())
10
val reset
= Input(Bool())
11
val uartRx
= Input(Bool())
12
val uartTx
= Output(Bool())
13
})
14
15
// Clock generator
16
val clkGen = Module(new ClkGen)
17
clkGen.io.reset := io.reset
18
clkGen.io.clk_in1_p := io.sysclk_p
19
clkGen.io.clk_in1_n := io.sysclk_n
20
21
// Neuromorphic processor
==PAGE:287==
D.4 Flawed Chisel Top-level
273
22
withClockAndReset(clkGen.io.clk_out1 , io.reset) {
23
val np = Module(new NeuromorphicProcessor(true))
24
io.uartTx := np.io.uartTx
25
np.io.uartRx := io.uartRx
26
}
27
}
28
29
object NeuroTop extends App {
30
(new chisel3.stage.ChiselStage)
31
.emitVerilog(new NeuroTop , Array("--target -dir", "build"))
32
}
33
34
class ClkGenIO extends Bundle {
35
val clk_out1
= Output(Clock())
36
val reset
= Input(Bool())
37
val clk_in1_p = Input(Clock())
38
val clk_in1_n = Input(Clock())
39
}
40
41
class clk_wiz_0 extends HasBlackBoxResource {
42
val io = IO(new ClkGenIO)
43
addResource("/clk_wiz_0.v")
44
}
45
46
class ClkGen extends RawModule {
47
val io
= IO(new ClkGenIO)
48
val wiz = Module(new clk_wiz_0)
49
io <> wiz.io
50
}
Listing D.4: Chisel top-level module and MMCM blackbox declarations.
==PAGE:288==
274
==PAGE:289==
==PAGE:290==
