==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Study of a full 3D rotating wind turbine wing using CFD 
 
 
Shamik Mitra Mustafi 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0449 
June 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Shamik Mitra Mustafi 
Title: Study of a full 3D rotating wind turbine wing using CFD 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0449 
June 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January – June 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Martin O. L. Hansen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Jens Honore Walther 
DTU Mechanical Engineering 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
c
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis is to study wind turbine aerodynamics on a 10MW wind turbine blade by
solving the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations in a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) code
STAR CCM+. The calculations are carried out by solving the Navier-Stokes equations while assuming
a steady flow field. The SST k −ω turbulence model is implemented with the RANS equations to re-
solve the turbulence. The γ −Reθ model is used to count for the laminar-turbulent transition inside the
boundary layer. First, the capability of the selected mathematical models is tested by simulating the
aerodynamic performance of the airfoil FFA-W3-241, present on the wind turbine using 2-dimensional
simulations. The accuracy of the models is validated by comparing the results of the airfoil simulation
to experimental data and with another CFD code, EllipSys. The accuracy of the models are further
validated by simulating the aerodynamic performance of the airfoil DU08-W-210. Then, the mathemat-
ical models are implemented on the 10MW wind turbine and is simulated for different wind speeds. A
moving reference frame is used to model the rotating aspect of the wind turbine, and the consequences
of the rotation on the flow field are investigated. The results from the simulation are verified by compar-
ing with EllipSys and HAWCStab2 results published by DTU wind energy. And finally, the models are
implemented on the NREL phase VI wind and is simulated for different wind speeds using a rotating
reference frame. The simulation’s results are validated by comparing them to measurements from the
NASA Ames wind tunnel’s Unsteady Aerodynamic Experiment.
It is found that STAR CCM+ can accurately estimate the aerodynamic parameters of a wind turbine
in both two and three dimensions. When compared to fully turbulent model simulations, the γ −Reθ
model simulations improved the results, specially for the 2-D airfoils. However, the γ −Reθ model
produced very similar results with respect to the fully turbulent model when used for simulating the
10MW and NREL Phase VI wind turbine. The simulation results for the both the 2-D airfoils matched
well with the experimental data with small deviations. The pressure coeﬀicients and the low speed shaft
torque predictions for the 3-dimensional simulation of the NREL Phase VI wind turbine compare well
to the experimental values. And finally, the thrust and the power predicted for the 10MW wind turbine
matched well with the EllipSys and HAWCStab2 results, indicating that STAR CCM+ CFD solvers
is capable in simulating big wind tubrine simualtions, especially with the turbulence model, whereas,
further investigation is required to understand the functioning of the transition model.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I take this opportunity to express my sincere graditude and deep regards to my supervisors Jens Honore
Walther and Martin Otto Laver Hansen for their exemplary guidance, monitoring, constant advising
and giving support during the course of the project. I would also like to extend my gratitude towards
Stig Staghøj Knudsen who frequently helped me by solving my doubts related to Star CCM+. I would
like to express my gratitude towards DTU for allowing me to take up this project. And finally I would
to express my gratitude towards my parents, who gave me their constant love, confidence and support
during the whole period of this project.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Aerodynamics related to 2D airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Wind turbine Aerodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
16
3.1
Mathematical Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Turbulent and transition modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Importance of adding a Source Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
CFD Simulation and Analysis
27
4.1
Airfoil FFA-W3-241
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Airfoil DU08-W-210
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
10MW wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
NREL Phase VI wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Conclusion
83
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the current era, the primary goal for all energy sectors around the world is to phase out the usage of
fossil fuels and shift to renewable energy sources for power generation. With increased worry about cli-
mate change and global warming, it is critical that the world take steps toward finding more sustainable
energy solutions. From a report published by the Wind Europe [8], in 2020, it has been found out that,
harvesting of wind energy as a clean and renewable energy source has undergone a rapid growth within
the last 10 years and now it accounted for almost 16% of the total energy production from renewable
in EU. It is also expected that this percentage of contribution from wind energy will increase and will
account for at least 43 to 45% of all renewable energy by 2030 in most of the countries inside EU, like
Denmark, where the total energy production from wind energy was around 40% in 2018, [9]. In 2020,
it was estimated that the total wind power capacity installed was 745 GW across the globe, [6]. De-
spite such rapid development in the wind energy sector and increased use of wind power, the challenge
remains within the wind energy sector to reduce the cost per unit energy produced, particularly from
offshore wind energy, because the cost per unit energy produced from conventional power plants is still
quite low. Many studies have been undertaken in various disciplines of engineering to minimize this
cost value. One way of addressing this diﬀiculty is to optimize the aerodynamic design and develop
novel ways that can contribute towards lowering the cost of per unit produced energy for wind turbines.
There are many factors that influences the aerodynamic design of the wind turbine but one of the main
contributing factor is the airfoil shape used in the wind turbine rotor. Since the eﬀiciency of the wind
turbine depends on the high lift to drag ratio, so many researches are conducted to design the airfoil
with specific aerodynamic shape to maintain a high lift to drag ratio [24, 19]. Together with all of the
research in the field of aerodynamic design, the development and implementation of Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) can be said to have a considerable impact on the aerospace, aviation, wind, and
motor sport industries. CFD provides design engineers with an analysis tool capable of easily simulating
and analyzing numerous aerodynamic studies. It is reasonable to state that the use of CFD is critical
since aerodynamic simulations are critical for designing and manufacturing cost-effective wind turbines.
1.1
Motivation
Computational Fluid Dynamics provides the designers with many different analysis tool to carry out
study on rotor wing aerodynamics. Today, there are wide range of turbulence model which are been
used to simulate and analyse the viscous turbulent aerodynamic flow [35, 21]. The most widely used
approach is to use the fully turbulent computations to capture the entire boundary layer over the wind
turbine rotors or airfoils. But according to Niels N. Sørensen from the Wind Energy Department at
Risø DTU, it is also important to take into account the laminar-turbulent transition process while
predicting the flow over the airfoils or wind turbine rotors to analyse the aerodynamic performance
[37]. Accurately predicting this laminar-turbulence transition process is fundamental in predicting the
aerodynamic performance of airfoil profiles and wind turbine rotors. Flow simulations of wind turbine
using fully turbulent models have shown to over or under predict the aerodynamic performance and
hence negatively impacting the design of airfoils. Since most of the turbulent model doesn’t take into
account the laminar-turbulent transition, they often fails to locate the point of separation. Whereas
implementing different correlation based transition models with the existing fully turbulent models,
allows the designers to predict the location of the separation and exploit it to enhance the performance
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Literature Review
2
of the wind turbine rotors. There are many commercial CFD codes like STAR CCM+, ANSYS CFX
12.1, FLUENT, OpenFOAM, EllipSys etc available for carrying out wind turbine rotor simulation [44,
19, 37, 25, 7]. But it is reported that implementing the turbulence models may give different output
from different commercial CFD codes [41].
Thus, implementing the fully turbulent and laminar-turbulent transition model in different commercial
CFD codes for wind turbine simulation is very much interesting in terms of understanding the mech-
anism involved and also possibly discovering new ways to improve wind turbine performance. This
project is therefore inspired from this idea and sets out to investigate the effect of using the fully tur-
bulent and laminar-turbulent transition models using commercial CFD solver STAR CCM+ for airfoils
FFA-W3-241 [3], DU08-W-210, NREL Phase VI wind turbine [14] and DTU’s own 10MW wind turbine
[3]. The eﬀiciency of commercial code STAR CCM+ is validated by comparing with the experimental
data and DTU’s in-house CFD code EllipSys. But before defining the objective of this project, it is
interesting to see the current progress made in the within this domain.
1.2
Literature Review
M.M.Hand et al. [14], at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) conducted experiments
on the Phase VI rotor for various wind turbine designs using the wind tunnel at NASA Ames Research
Center in May 2000. The objective of this wind tunnel test was to get precise quantitative aerodynamic
and structural measurements on a wind turbine that was geometrically and dynamically equivalent
of fullscale machines in an environment devoid of significant inflow abnormalities. The results of the
field experiments demonstrated that wind turbines exhibit extremely complex aerodynamic reaction
phenomena when operating in the field, as well as that 3-Dimensional effects are common in wind
turbine operation. Furthermore, they revealed that wind turbines were subjected to highly dynamic
load conditions due to turbulent inflow and shear across the rotor plane.
The experimental data
published for the NREL Phase VI wind turbine in the report will be used for validating the CFD
models in this project which will be discussed in the later chapters.
Niels N. Sørensen [37], made an effort to derive two non-public empirical relation to make the
correlation based transition model complete.
These two non-public empiric relations were for the
Critical Momentum Thickness Reynolds Number and for the Transition Length Factor. He coupled
these new relations with the standard k −ω Shear Stress transport (SST) eddy viscosity model [28],
to make the model complete.
The implementation of the new model was done using the in-house
flow solver EllipSys. The eﬀiciency of the new model was tested for flow over flat plate, airfoil S809,
NACA63-415 airfoil, flow over a prolate spheroid for 0◦& 30◦angle of attack, and over the NREL Phase
VI wind turbine rotor for the zero yaw upwind cases from the NREL/NASA Ames wind tunnel test.
Notable outcome from this investigation was that the in-house flow solver EllipSys had good ability to
perform flow simulations for airfoils and wind turbine rotors as it gave good results when compared
with the experimental data. This investigation showed that fully turbulent models over predicts from
the experimental data and it proved that implementation of correlation based transition model had a
major influence in the final output.
Junling Hu et al. [19], carried out investigation for the turbulent flow over NACA 23012 airfoil with
an NACA 23012 external airfoil flap at the trailing edge. The simulation of the turbulent flow was
carried out in STAR CCM+. The goal of this experiment was to simulate the flow over this airfoil
using the three available turbulence models (i,e k −ϵ, k −ω and Reynolds Stress Transport turbulence)
to assess the eﬀiciency of the different turbulent models. For low angles of attack, the results show good
agreement with the experimental data, but when the flow separated from the external flap, the results
became inconsistent. It also indicated that the Reynolds Stress Transport turbulence model provided
the best results, but also that the computation cost was incredibly expensive. Whereas k−ω turbulence
produced good results at a reasonable computational cost.
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Literature Review
3
Peyman Khayatzadeh et al.
[23], used the γ −Reθ transition model to perform the laminar-
turbulent flow simulation over airfoils and wind turbines. The focus of this investigation was to address
various modifications needed to make the transition model robust and also, to study the accuracy of
the transition model for a wide range of angles of attack and Reynolds numbers to validate the use of
correlation-based transition model for airfoil and wind turbine simulations. The transition model was
implemented with RANS solver and the k −ω turbulence model in order to simulate the transitional
flow around two airfoil profiles and a wind turbine wing. The airfoils NLF(1)-0416 and S809 along
with S809 wind turbine were used to predict the location of transition to analyse the various transition
mechanisms, Reynolds number effects, sectional characteristics and aerodynamic performance. Results
from the simulation showed that the model was able to correctly predict the laminar separation bubbles
(LSB) and attached boundary layer transition for wide range of Reynolds number and angles of attack.
It proved the effectiveness of using transition model over fully turbulent model for doing airfoil and wind
turbine simulations. It also stated that re-calibrating the Fonset function inside the transition model
can improve the accuracy of the model in the predicting of the transition point and drag coeﬀicients at
equivalent lift coeﬀicients for higher Reynolds number and angles of attack.
Thomas hansen [16], investigated the flow over the S809 airfoil and NREL phase VI wind turbine
using STAR CCM+. The focus of project was to implement the fully turbulent and the transitional
model in STAR CCM+ and see the effectiveness of the code by comparing the simulation results with
the experimental data. The γ −Reθ transition model was tested in this investigation to study the
aerodynamic properties for airfoil but it was not used for studying the aerodynamics related to wind
turbines. The results obtained following the flow simulation over the airfoil showed good agreement with
the experimental data when both fully turbulent and transition model were used. The results obtained
from the wind turbine simulation showed that fully turbulent model complied well the experimental
data but emphasized that the implementation of γ −Reθ transition model is necessary to make the
results more accurate.
Rohith Giridhar [13], investigated the flow over NREL phase VI wind turbine using STAR CCM+
to predict the the source of noise generation from the wind turbine. The goal of this project was to
implement the turbulence model in STAR CCM+ to simulate the flow over the wind turbine. The
RANS model with the SST k −ω turbulence model was used in the project to model the turbulent
flow. The results of the simulation were validated by comparing with the experimental data. Once
the results of the flow simulation over the wind turbine showed good agreement with the experimental
data, the Curle-Broadband noise source model was used to pinpoint the source of the noise generation.
The aero-acoustic analysis showed that the tip of the blade was major source of noise and it gradually
decreased upon moving towards the root. It further claimed that as the wind speed increased, the
intensity of noise generated by the blade increased, resulting in an increase in the Sound Power Level
throughout the blade.
Mukesh M. Yelmule et al.
[44], carried out an investigation to determine the flow over NREL
phase VI wind turbine using the ANSYS CFX 12.1 CFD solver. The aim of this investigation was to
validate the ability of ANSYS CFX 12.1 CFD solver to solve complex 3D wind turbine simulation. In
this investigation, RANS with turbulent model approach was used to model the turbulent flow over the
wind turbine and analyse some of the mechanical parameters like power, thrust and span-wise force
distribution for different wind speeds. The results from this investigation showed reasonable agreement
with the experimental data. This investigation proved that ANSYS CFX 12.1 CFD solver can be used
to carryout simulations for 3D wind turbines.
LU Qunfeng et al. [25], investigated the flow over a roof-top scaled experimental wind turbine using
the FLUENT CFD solver. The RANS model with k −ω SST turbulence model was used to model the
turbulent flow over the wind turbine. To carryout the investigation, a suitable mesh along with specific
settings inside FLUENT were defined to make the simulation accurate. The simulation was used to
analyse the power coeﬀicient at different tip speed ratios along with pressure distribution and the flow
in the far field. The results showed good arrangement with the experimental data and proved that with
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Literature Review
4
suitable mesh and proper settings, FLUENT CFD solver can be reliable to carryout simulations for 3D
wind turbines.
Dnyanesh A. Digraskar [7], carried out an investigation to determine the flow over NREL phase
VI wind turbine using the OpenFOAM CFD solver. The aim of this investigation was to validate the
ability of openFOAM CFD solver to solve complex 3D wind turbine simulation. In this investigation,
the steady state in-compressible flow solver for Multiple Reference Frames (MRFSimpleFoam) was used
for carrying out the simulations. The Spalart-Allmaras turbulence model was implemented to solve
for the turbulent flow over the blade.
The results obtained from the simulation were agreeable to
some extent but there were much discrepancies between the CFD results and experimental data. The
investigation stated that using Spalart-Allmaras turbulence model was not a good choice to model for
the turbulent flow over the wind turbine blades.
Giada Abate et al. [1], did an investigation for the flow over the NREL phase VI wind turbine using
STAR CCM+. In this investigation, it was proposed to make a sinusoidal modification (tubercles) to
the leading of the wind turbine blade. The RANS model with the k−ω SST turbulence model was used
to model the turbulent flow over the wind turbine. The results obtained from this investigation showed
good resemblance with the experimental data. It also showed considerable improvement towards the
power and annual energy produced (AEP) from the modified NREL phase VI wind turbine at high
wind speeds compared to the regular NREL phase VI wind turbine.
Hao Chen et al. [5], carried an investigation for for the flow over the NREL phase VI wind turbine
using FLUENT CFD solver. This investigation was about analysing the performance of the trailing
edge flow control devices like micro jets, micro tabs and divergent trailing edge on the NREL phase VI
wind turbine. The RANS model with k −ω SST turbulence model was used to model the turbulent
flow over the wind turbine. The results obtained from this investigation showed reasonable resemblance
with the experimental data. Adding the trailing edge control devices showed considerable improvement
towards the power coeﬀicient (29% higher) from the modified NREL phase VI wind turbine compared
to the regular NREL phase VI wind turbine. Also, it stated that using unsteady simulation gave better
results than steady simulations for higher wind speed.
Kanin Homsrivaranon [18], carried out an investigation regarding the flow over thick airfoils using
the STAR CCM+ CFD solver. The idea behind this investigation was to the analyse aerodynamic
performance of the thick airfoils because most of the large wind turbines consist of very thick airfoils
near the rotor hub to provide structural stability. In this investigation, the flow over the airfoils NREL
825 and FX77-W-343 were modelled in STAR CCM+ to analyse the aerodynamic performances of
these airfoils. The RANS model with k −ω SST turbulence model was used to model the turbulent
flow over both the airfoils. The results obtained for airfoil NREL 825 from the simulations showed good
agreement with the experimental data. Whereas, the flow over the thick airfoil FX77-W-343 showed
that, using co-flow active jet control, can help improve the aerodynamic performance of thick airfoils.
Also, this investigation imparted the idea of using badge 2D meshing technique for airfoils for making
a 2-dimensional mesh.
Jørgen Jensen Tande [40], did an investigation to study the flow over a 10MW offshore wind tur-
bine and a 1MW tidal turbine using the ANSYS 12.1 CFD solver. The RANS model with k −ω SST
turbulence model was used to model the turbulent flow over the wind turbine. To carryout the inves-
tigation over the 10MW offshore wind turbine and tidal turbine, a designated CAD model of the wind
turbines with defined airfoils were made. Before carrying out the simulation for the 10MW and 1MW
wind turbines, the selected models were validate by simulating the NREL phase VI wind turbine. The
CAD model made by Thomas Hansen [16] was used in this project. Then different suitable mesh along
specific settings inside ANSYS CFX 12.1 were defined to make the simulations accurate for all the wind
turbines. The simulation was used to analyse mechanical parameters like the power coeﬀicient at differ-
ent angles of attack and compare them with the power coeﬀicient derived using the BEM model. The
results from the simulation for the 10MW didn’t show promising results for the 10MW wind turbine
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Objective of thesis
5
as the angle of attacks along the blade from the CFD solver didn’t match with the BEM model. This
investigation suggested that carrying out big blade wind turbine simulation in CFD solver can be a
diﬀicult task since it requires very high computational cost to get accurate results.
Christian Bak et al. [3] from the Department of Wind Energy Risø, designed a 10MW offshore wind
turbine and carried out an investigations regarding the aerodynamic performance of the wind turbine.
This wind turbine was designed using five different airfoils like FFA-W3-241, FFA-W3-301, FFA-W3-
360, FFA-W3-480 and FFA-W3-100. Airfoil FFA-W3-241 was used at the tip of the blade whereas
airfoil FFA-W3-100 was used near the rotor hub. Using different models like BEM, HAWC2 and RANS,
the aerodynamic performance of the blade was estimated. Results from all the three models were then
compared to validate the eﬀiciencies of the different models. The RANS modelling was carried out in
the in-house EllipSys3D CFD solver. The k −ω SST turbulence model was coupled with the RANS
model for modelling the turbulent flow over the wind turbine and estimating the thrust and power
through the CFD approach. The results obtained from the CFD simulation compared well with the
results obtained from the BEM and HAWC2 models. This investigation proved that EllipSys3D CFD
solver can be used to carryout simulations for large wind turbines.
1.2.1
Overview of the Literature Survey
From all the above presented literature, some of the important points that are taken in consideration
for this project are:
• For carryout simulations over the airfoils and wind turbines, many different CFD code are available
which can give dependable results.
• The fully turbulent model is effective but laminar-turbulent correlation model is important to
take into account while studying the aerodynamic performance of the airfoils and wind turbines.
• It is very important to decided which turbulent model should be implemented with RANS model to
model the turbulent flow over the airfoils and wind turbines. From the above presented literature
survey it can be said that the k −ω SST turbulence model is the most commonly used one as it
gave good and dependable results.
• The γ −Reθ transition model is best suited to perform the laminar-turbulent flow simulation over
airfoils.
• There is a standard way of modelling the domain or defining the boundary conditions to carryout
the CFD simulations for wind turbines. In most of the above mentioned literature survey, the
domain used to carryout the simulations for wind turbine, was slit by a velocity inlet, pressure
outlet, two periodic interfaces and a slip wall. The use of two periodic interfaces allowed to model
the simulation with respect to a rotating reference frame. This allowed to carryout the simulations
using one blade, hence reducing the computation cost.
• Conducting simulations for large wind turbines can be a daunting task in terms of computational
cost.
1.3
Objective of thesis
Inspired from the use of many different commercial CFD codes to perform aerodynamic simulation of
wind turbines, this projects sets out to investigate the possibility of simulating the flow over FFA-W3-
241 [11] and DU08-W-210 airfoils along with DTU’s own 10MW wind turbine [3], and NREL Phase
VI wind turbine [14], using STAR CCM+ CFD code. The focus of this project will be to answer the
following questions:
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Objective of thesis
6
1. The importance of adding a turbulence source term to avoid the decay of the turbulence intensity
from the inlet condition to the leading edge of the airfoil and the wind turbine.
2. Eﬀiciency of the STAR CCM+ CFD code in simulation the flow over 2D airfoils and wind turbines
by comparing the results the experimental data and ElliSys CFD code.
3. To implement the correlation based transitional model while simulating the flow over the 2D
airfoils, NREL Phase VI wind turbine and DTU’s 10MW wind turbine.
4. To comment on the eﬀiciency of the transition model while doing the flow simulation over the 2D
airfoils and 3D wind turbines.
5. To comment on the importance of Reynolds number over the correlation based transition model.
6. To specify a new modelling method for the domain to carryout large wind turbine simulation in
STAR CCM+ which will give good and dependable results but with low computational cost.
But, before getting into the methodology and CFD simulations, let’s have a look at some of the funda-
mental theories and concepts of airfoils and wind turbines.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter deals with discussing some of the fundamental concepts, physical attributes and phe-
nomenon’s related to airfoils and wind turbines.
2.1
Aerodynamics related to 2D airfoil
An airfoil is commonly thought to be the shape of a wing cross section because it has a rounded leading
edge in front and a sharp trailing edge. The chord c is the straight line that connects the leading edge’s
center of curvature to the trailing edge, and the angle formed between the chord and the direction of
the incoming flow is known as the angle of attack, α, as seen in Figure 2.1. When fluid flows over an
airfoil, it encounters an aerodynamic force that splits into two components: a component perpendicular
to the direction of the incoming flow, the Lift force L, and a component parallel to the direction of the
incoming flow, the Drag force D, as shown in Figure 2.1. This lift and drag force are mostly expressed
in dimensionless form, as illustrated in Equations 2.1 and 2.2,
CL =
L
1
2ρV∞
2c
(2.1)
and
CD =
D
1
2ρV∞
2c
(2.2)
where ρ is the density, V∞is the free stream velocity and c is the chord length [15]. The lift force
is created by the pressure difference between the suction side (upper) of the airfoil, which has a low
pressure, and the pressure side (lower), which has a high pressure. Flow streamlines over an airfoil is
shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.1: Definition of lift and drag [15]
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Aerodynamics related to 2D airfoil
8
Figure 2.2: Representation of the curved streamlines and pressure distribution around an airfoil. The
pressure on the suction side (upper) is lower than the atmospheric pressure Po, whereas the pressure
on the pressure side (lower) is higher than the atmospheric pressure Po [15]
The physical explanation for the lift caused by this pressure difference can be found by observing that
the airfoil geometry forces the flow streamlines to curve around the airfoil, i.e. the flow is pushed in
the downward direction suggesting that the pressure gradient is acting as a centripetal force. As the
pressure gradient direction is from the higher region to lower, it can be said that the pressure must be
higher than the atmospheric pressure on the pressure side of the airfoil while the pressure must be lower
than the atmospheric pressure on the suction side of the airfoil. On the other hand, the drag force over
the airfoil is created due the interaction of airfoil’s surface with the air (friction) and form drag over the
surface of the airfoil. When the airfoil is aligned in the direction of the incoming flow (very less angle
of attack), the flow over the airfoil is very smooth as the boundary layer remain intact, so the drag is
generated only from the friction with the air but when the angle of attack increases, the pressure drops
rapidly when the flow passes over the leading edge curvature and then suddenly increases as the flow
moves towards the trailing edge. This drastic increase in pressure leads to the deceleration of the flow
(from Bernoulli’s Principle) and separation takes place increasing the drag significantly. The separation
happens when the velocity becomes almost zero. Because of the separation of the flow vortexes are
developed which opposes the flows giving rise to very high pressure. This pressure distribution is called
as the form drag which increases the drag force over the airfoil surface [15], as seen in Figure 2.3.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Aerodynamics related to 2D airfoil
9
Figure 2.3: Representation of flow streamlines over the airfoil for low (5◦) angle of attack (above) and
high (15◦) angle of attack below respectively [15]
Figure 2.4: Viscous boundary layer over the surface of an airfoil [15]
When a fluid flows over an airfoil or any solid object, a boundary layer is developed due to the interaction
between the surface of the airfoil and viscous layers of the fluid, as shown in Figure 2.4. This boundary
layer may be laminar or turbulent based on the Reynolds number can be the flow, Equation 2.3,
Re = ρV∞c
µ
(2.3)
where ρ is the density, V∞is the free stream velocity, c is the chord length and µ is the dynamic
viscosity.
Depending on the surface conditions and the value of the Reynolds number of the free
stream, instabilities begin to occur and grow in the laminar boundary layer flow and after a certain
Reynolds number, Recritical, the flow becomes unstable and the laminar boundary layer gradually
becomes turbulent.
This process of changing from the laminar to turbulent flow is called as flow
transition. This flow transition very much depends on the Reynolds number of the free stream and
the surface conditions of the airfoil. A schematic representation of the flow transition over an airfoil is
shown in Figure 2.5.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Aerodynamics related to 2D airfoil
10
Figure 2.5: Schematic representation transition process, [15]
Apart from the Reynolds number, the laminar and turbulent boundary layers differ in other aspects
including the shape of the velocity profile of the boundary layer and in the amount of friction drag
generated. The friction drag generated by the turbulent boundary layer is much higher than the laminar
boundary layer, because the turbulent fluctuations increases the velocity gradient at the wall causing
the friction drag to increase. Whereas in the laminar boundary layer, the velocity gradient remains zero
or constant causing the friction drag to be minimal. Another significant distinction between laminar
and turbulent boundary layer is their sensitivity to pressure gradients. As stated before, when the
fluid flows over the airfoil, a pressure gradient is created and this pressure gradient can be favourable
or adverse depending how the pressure is behaving. If the pressure gradient is negative i,e ( ∂p
∂x < 0),
it means that the pressure is decreasing and the velocity is increasing along the direction flow. This
condition is considered to be favourable as the flow over the airfoil happens smoothly without stalling.
On the other hand, if the the pressure gradient is positive i,e ( ∂p
∂x > 0), it means that the pressure is
increasing and the velocity is decreasing along the direction flow. This condition is considered to be
adverse or unfavourable as the flow over the airfoil have a high chances of going into stall and separation.
Considering the momentum equation for a steady, stream-wise boundary layer flow with zero velocity
components at the wall,
(∂2u
∂y2 )wall = 1
µ
∂p
∂x
(2.4)
where u is the curvature, y height of the boundary layer and ∂p
∂x is the pressure gradient. From Equation
2.4, it can be observe that for ∂p
∂x < 0, the wall has a negative curvature ∂2u
∂y2 , whereas on the other hand
∂p
∂x > 0, leads to a positive curvature at the wall. Since the velocity profile of the boundary layer must
blend smoothly with the free stream, it is necessary for the pressure gradient just below the boundary
layer edge to drop as y approaches the edge, resulting in a negative curvature in this region. So, during
favourable pressure gradient ∂p
∂x < 0, the sign of the curvature remains the same near the boundary
layer edge and at the wall, and supposedly throughout the boundary layer. Whereas, for the adverse
pressure gradient ∂p
∂x > 0, the wall has a positive curvature, meaning that the sign of the curvature
changes within the boundary layer indicating the presence of a inflexion point ∂2u
∂y2 = 0. So, during
the adverse pressure gradient condition, the flow decelerates and creates a point of inflexion, and if the
gradient is strong or acts long enough, the flow adjacent to the surface reverses direction. An illustration
of the favourable and adverse condition is shown in Figure 2.6, where, ∂(x) indicates the boundary layer
thickness, u(y) is the boundary layer flow and y is the normal distance from the wall of the airfoil surface
in local coordinate system [15]. Point S indicates the local stagnation point (Separation Point), where
the forward flow meets the reverse flow and result in pushing the forward flow away from the wall
of the airfoil. Because boundary layer separation is linked to airfoil stall and higher form drag, and
since both of them reduce airfoil performance, avoiding separation is critical. But avoiding separation
can be a diﬀicult, because for flow over airfoil with high angles of attack, as shown in Figure 2.3 or
flow around thick airfoils will separate and will cause decrease in the aerodynamic performance. One
strategy, is to delay the formation of this separation point and this can done by changing the flow from
laminar to turbulent before the laminar separation point as turbulent boundary layer more capable in
withstanding adverse pressure gradient than laminar boundary layer. This is because, the turbulent
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Wind turbine Aerodynamics
11
boundary layer causes more high-speed fluid to be concentrated towards the surface of the airfoil which
makes the turbulent boundary layer more stable in adverse pressure gradient conditions.
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of the shape of the boundary layer for favourable and adverse
pressure gradient [15]
2.2
Wind turbine Aerodynamics
In simple terms, the main purpose of wind turbines are to produce electrical energy by converting the
kinetic energy present in the wind. The maximum available energy that can be extracted from the wind
is given as:
Pmax = ˙mVo
2
2
= ρAVo
3
2
(2.5)
where, ˙m is the mass flow through the rotor, Vo is the wind speed, ρ the density of the air and A the
area of the rotor. Equation 2.5, indicates that the maximum available power increases with the cube of
the wind speed and linearly with the area and density. So, it is important to take into account the wind
resources available at the installation site before starting a project. In theory, Pmax can be maximum if
the wind is reduce to zero but it is not possible to reduce the wind speed to zero in reality, so a power
coeﬀicient Cp is defined instead. This Cp, is defined as the ratio of the actual power to the maximum
power available, as shown in Equation 2.6. According to Albert Betz, the wind turbines at most are
able to extract 59.3% of the maximum energy from the wind and cannot exceed more this value [15].
Most of the present day wind turbines are optimized to operate around this value.
Cp =
P
1
2ρAVo
3
(2.6)
In present day, the most commercially used wind turbines are the horizontal-axis wind turbine (HAWT)
but vertical-axis wind turbines (VAWT) are also used for energy production. Since this projects deals
with only HAWT, so following section will discuss in brief about the HAWT and its functioning.
2.2.1
Horizontal-axis wind turbine
In horizontal-axis wind turbines (HAWT), the main rotor shaft along with the electrical generator is
situated on the top a tower and the blades are connected to this horizontal shaft. Figure 2.7, shows the
schematic representation of a HAWT. The hub height along with the rotor diameter plays an important
role while designing the HAWT. Since the wind speed increases as the distance from the ground increases,
it is necessary to have the hub at a great height from the ground to utilize high wind speed. Whereas,
the rotor diameter is used to estimate the area under the wind used in the Equation 2.5. The ratio
between the hub height and rotor diameter is often kept close to 1 while designing the HAWT. This is
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Wind turbine Aerodynamics
12
why modern day HAWT are very long and consist of long blades. The rated power is the maximum
power allowed for the installed generator, and the control system must ensure that this power is not
exceeded in high winds [15]. The power output and rotor speed of the wind turbines are regulated by
pitching the blades about its longitudinal axis. The design of the blades are aerodynamically optimized
by twisting them along its horizontal axis. This helps to maintain a high lift to drag ratio since this
lift force is the main driving force in generating high torque. Depending on the position of the rotor
with respect to the wind, these wind turbines are classified as upwind and downwind HAWT. When
the rotor is facing the direction of wind then it is said to be a upwind HAWT and when the nacelle &
tower is facing the wind followed by the rotor, then it is said to be a downwind HAWT. The downward
HAWT are more noisy compared to the upward HAWT since the blades operate in the wake region [15].
Wind turbine configurations can be grouped into three types based on their mechanical configurations.
1. Wind turbines with gear box: This is based on the Danish concepts of wind turbine design,
in which a gearbox is utilized inside the wind turbine to connect the low and high speed shafts.
This high-speed shaft is then linked to the generator in order to extract electrical energy. These
wind turbines are usually stall-regulated and had a fixed rotational speed, [15].
2. Wind turbines without gear box: In this type of wind turbine, the axle of the wind turbine is
directly connected to the generator. This way of designing wind turbines allowed the incorporation
of large multi-pole generators inside the wind turbines to extract electrical energy even at low
rotating speeds.
3. Hybrid wind turbines: The design of these wind turbine is a hybrid of the two designs discussed
above. This wind turbine is made out of a small gearbox and a small generator that rotated the
wind turbine at a desired angular speed to extract energy.
Furthermore the modern day wind turbines can be categorized into:
Figure 2.7: Horizontal-axis wind turbine, HAWT [17]
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Wind turbine Aerodynamics
13
1. Fixed Speed wind turbine: Wind turbines of this type have a fixed angular speed and cannot
be changed in response to changing operating conditions or wind speeds. This is because the
machine lacks the variable transmission mechanism needed for rotor speed adjustments.
2. Variable Speed wind turbine: Wind turbines of this type on the other hand, can operate at
various rotor speeds in order to extract the most power from the occurring wind. Because they
require additional components to regulate rotor speed, these turbines are more expensive than
fixed-speed machines. These wind turbines can operate in a variety of wind speeds ranging from
3-5m/sec to 24-25m/sec.
Generally, these wind turbines starts to operate from their cut-in wind speed (3-5m/sec) and
as the wind speed increased, the power extracted by the wind turbine also increased until it
reached the wind turbine’s rated power ( the maximum power the turbine is capable of capturing
from the incoming wind). From this wind speed (rated wind speed) to the cut-off wind speed
(24-25m/sec), the extracted power from the wind turbine is kept at a constant value near the
rated power. After this point the turbine is brought to a rest i,e kept stationary using appropriate
braking devices to avoid blade damage or generator breakdown. To make sure that the wind
turbine operate at there maximum eﬀiciency before and after the rated speed different control
mechanisms are implemented mainly:
• Pitch regulation: In pitch regulated wind turbines there is an active control system in place
which allows the blades to be pitched about their axis with the help of electrical motors. This
adjusts the angular speed at which the blade rotates, altering the torque produced and hence
the power extracted. So, when the wind speed is below the rated wind speed, the controller
inside the wind turbine vary the generator torque in order to keep the wind turbine working
at its optimum power coeﬀicient Cp, Equation 2.6. Once the wind turbine enters the rated
wind speed, the controller starts to pitch the blade using the electrical motor accordingly to
reduce the power generated and keep the wind turbine working at its rated power. Figure 2.8
illustrates the working of the controller at different wind speed. It is seen that when the wind
turbine is operating below the rated wind speed, that time the controller is increasing the
power extracted from the wind turbine by varying the rotor speed and not by pitching the
blade but as soon as the wind speed reaches the rated value the controller starts to pitch
the blade and make the rotor speed constant to maintain the power extracted from the wind
turbine at its rated value. This illustration is for the controller used inside the DTU 10MW
wind turbine [3] since it is a variable speed-pitch regulated wind turbine. In general, most
of the controller used in wind turbine consist of two operating regions but this wind turbine
consisted of three operating regions where the second region is regarded as the transitional
region between torque controller and pitch controller. So, while carryout the CFD simulation
for the 10MW wind turbine in this project, the different pitch angles and rotor speeds are
used in the inlet boundary conditions which will be discussed in details in the later chapters.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Wind turbine Aerodynamics
14
Figure 2.8: Representation of the different operating regions of the controller with respect to the wind
speed
• Stall regulation: These type of wind turbines function in such a way that when wind speeds
are high, the rotor angular velocity decreases as wind speeds increase. This is because the
blades are built in such a way that, significant flow separation occurs at high wind speeds. So
when the wind speed increases, because of the blade design, the flow separation starts to occur
near the root region and slowly moves towards the tip and as explained in the previous section
that, when the separation occurs the lift force decreases and the drag increases drastically,
so the power extracted from wind turbine is less. An illustration of flow separation over
stall regulated wind turbine blade is shown in Figure 2.9. Since in the stall regulated wind
turbines there are no active control system present, so they are usually cheaper than the pitch
regulated wind turbines. Also, as the eﬀiciency of this type wind turbines are less compared
to the pitch regulated ones, most of the modern day wind turbine are pitch regulated. The
power curve for pitch and stall regulated wind turbine is shown in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.9: Flow streamlines illustrating the flow separation near the hub region of the blade during
high wind speeds [15]
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Wind turbine Aerodynamics
15
Figure 2.10: Representation of the power curve for the NTK 500/41 wind turbine with a pitch and a
stall regulated controller [15]
Figure 2.11: Wind turbine size evolution over time [20]
Commercial HAWT wind turbines have grown dramatically in size during the last thirty-forty years as
shown in Figure 2.11. The wind turbine industry has come a long way from wind turbines with a rated
power of 75kW and a rotor diameter of 17m to today’s wind turbines with rotor diameters as large as
125m and a rated power of 5MW and it is believed that the size of the wind turbine will continue to
increase in the near future.
A variety of aerodynamic models have been developed in order to examine wind turbines and some of
them are listed below:
1. Blade Element Momentum Method (BEM)
2. Lifting line, Panel and Vortex Method
3. Actuator-rotor Disc Method
4. Navier-Stokes Solvers (CFD approach)
In this investigation, the Navier-stokes approach is used to study the aerodynamic performance of the
airfoils and wind turbines which is discussed in the following section.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is a branch of fluid mechanics that uses numerical analysis to
solve problems involving fluid motions. The motion of the fluid can be mathematically defined using
equations for conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. These equations are essentially partial
differential equations that are based on the assumption that the fluid is a continuous medium. The
methods implemented to solve the problem replaces these partial differential equations with a set of
algebraic equations by splitting the physical domain into a large number of discrete control volumes
known as elements or cells (meshes). These algebraic relations within these cells define how the flow
variables such as velocity, temperature, and pressure vary locally with space coordinates. This is the
general concept underlying CFD. Since the early 1980s, CFD has been utilized to study wing and
rotor configurations.
Around those days, the unsteady Euler solvers were mainly used to carryout
the CFD analysis.
Then during the late 90’s, the Navier-Stokes equations were used to solve the
motion of fluid over the helicopter rotors taking into account the viscous effect of the fluid. And more
recently, the Detached Eddy Simulation and Large Eddy Simulation approaches have been employed
for computational studies. Even though the new models have high accuracy in flow predictions, they
require large computational costs.
3.1
Mathematical Models
As previously stated, the motion of the fluid is governed by the conservation laws mainly conservation
of mass, momentum, and energy.
• Conservation of mass: It states that the mass of the fluid is conserved throughout fluid motion,
which indicates that all mass entering must go out.
• Conservation of momentum: It states that the sum of forces acting on a fluid particle equals the
rate of change of momentum (Newton’s 2nd law).
• Conservation of energy: It states that the total energy of an isolated system remain conserved
over time, indicating that energy can neither be created or destroyed but only be transferred from
one form to another.
The continuity equation is used to express the conservation of mass, whereas the conservation of mo-
mentum is expressed using the Navier-Stokes’s equation. The equations of conservation of mass and
conservation of momentum are defined as Equations 3.1 and 3.2 ,
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρv) = 0
(3.1)
∂(ρv)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρv ⊗v) = ∇· σ + fb
(3.2)
where ρ is the density, v is the continuum velocity, ⊗denote the outer product, fb is the external force
(i,e gravity and centrifugal force) acting per unit volume on the continuum and σ is the stress tensor,
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Mathematical Models
17
[34]. For a Newtonian fluid, this stress tensor is often defined as the sum of normal and the shear
stresses i,e Equation 3.3,
σ = −pI + T
(3.3)
where T is the viscous stress tensor, I is the identity tensor and p is the pressure. Now replacing this
value of σ in Equation 3.2, give the momentum equation as,
∂(ρv)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρv ⊗v) = −∇· (pI) + ∇· T + fb
(3.4)
For Newtonian fluid, this viscous stress tensor is defined as Equation 3.5,
T = 2µD −2
3µ(∇· v)I
(3.5)
where, µ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid, and D is the rate of deformation(strain) tensor [34], given
as Equation 3.6,
D = 1
2(∇v + (∇v)T )
(3.6)
In Equation 3.1, the first term on the left side ( ∂ρ
∂t ) denotes the rate of change of density and the second
term (∇·(ρv)) is the convective term, which denotes the net movement of mass out of an element across
its boundaries. When the flow is assumed to be incompressible, i,e the density is constant, Equation
3.1, can be modified as,
∇· (ρv) = 0
(3.7)
Upon applying this Equation 3.7 in Equation 3.5, simplifies the viscous stress tensor, as the term
( 2
3µ(∇·v)I) becomes 0 and thus helps to simplify the momentum Equation 3.4. The modified momentum
equation is given Equation 3.8,
∂(ρv)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρv ⊗v) = −∇· (pI) + µ∇2v + fb
(3.8)
When the flow is considered to be in a steady state, i.e. not varying with time, the first term ( ∂ρv
∂t )
in the left side of Equation 3.8 is equal to 0 and if the force term (fb) at the end of the right side is
omitted, the Equation 3.7, modifies to Equation 3.9,
∇· (ρv ⊗v) = −∇· (pI) + µ∇2v
(3.9)
The last term on the right side of the Equation 3.9, is called as the diffusion term. In the Equation 3.9,
the velocity component (v), alone with the pressure (p) are the unknowns. These equations along with
appropriate boundary conditions build a mathematical model for a CFD simulation.
In order to solve this Equations 3.1 and 3.4 numerically, they need to be discretised into sets of al-
gebraic equations. This discretisation process can be accomplished using a variety of approaches such
as the Gauss-Seidel method, the finite difference method, the finite volume method, and the spectral
element method. For the discretisation process, STAR CCM+ employs the finite volume approach
which takes the equations in integral form from the starting point, [34]. In this finite volume method,
the solution domain is discretised by dividing it into a finite number of small, contiguous control vol-
umes (numerical grid/mesh) and the conservation equations are implemented over each control volume.
Unlike other approaches, such as the finite difference technique, the control volumes establish the bound-
aries rather than the computational nodes, which are instead assigned to the volume’s center. At these
nodes, the variable values like velocity, temperature, pressure etc are calculated and they are expressed
as mean over the control volumes. Then, interpolation is done to express these variables at the surface
as nodal values. These control volumes and their surfaces are made up of cells and faces in the numer-
ical grid/mesh. This approach of solving the Navier-Stokes equations numerically using discretisation
is called as Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS).
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
18
3.2
Turbulent and transition modelling
As mentioned in the previous sections, the nature of the fluid flow can be either laminar or turbulent
depending on the Reynolds number carried by the fluid flow, hence it is necessary to consider the
transition and turbulence modelling during flow simulations.
3.2.1
Turbulence Modelling
A turbulent flow can be modelled using the Navier-Stokes equations, but resolving the large variety
of length scales found in a turbulent flow is very diﬀicult. The Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) is
the most accurate approach to model the turbulent flow but since it requires too much computational
resources, other methods are also considered. There are approximation approaches like Large Eddy
Simulation (LES), Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) etc to model the turbulent flow.
The Large Eddy Simulation (LES) is based on solving the large flow scales while only modeling the small
ones. The Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) on the other hand is based averaging the
flow equations, under the assumption that they are numerically stable, [10]. The RANS methodology
is used for this investigation since the main focus is on the pressure distributions and forces acting on
the introduced geometry rather than the unstable aspects of the wake, which would necessitate a LES
method or something similar.
The RANS equations are basically the fluid flow equations of motion (i,e Navier-Stokes equations) that
consist of time-averaged components of the variables. It is based on Reynolds decomposition, which
divides an instantaneous variable into time averaged and fluctuating components as shown in Equation
3.10,
ϕ = ˜ϕ + ϕ′
(3.10)
where ϕ represents the instantaneous variables like velocity components, pressure, energy etc, [34]. So,
Equation 3.10 in terms of pressure and velocity component can be written as,
p = ˜p + p′
(3.11)
and
v = ¯v + v′
(3.12)
where, ¯v represents the time-averaged part of v and v′ represents the fluctuating part of v.
The
fluctuating component, v′, is specified in such a manner that its average is 0 and ¯v is defined as shown
in Equation 3.13,
¯v = 1
T
Z t0+T
t0
vdt
(3.13)
Upon applying the 3.12 on Equations 3.1 & 3.4 and averaging, results in the RANS equations,
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρ¯v) = 0
(3.14)
∂(ρ¯v)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρ¯v ⊗v) = −∇· (¯pI) + ∇· (¯T + TRANS) + fb
(3.15)
The equations 3.14 and 3.15 are almost identical to the original Navier-Stokes equations, with the
exception of a new term (TRANS), appearing in the equations. This new term is defined as the stress
tensor [34], and it is given by Equation 3.16,
TRANS = −ρ


u′u′
u′v′
u′w′
u′v′
v′v′
v′w′
u′w′
v′w′
w′w′

+ 2
3ρkI
(3.16)
where k is the turbulent kinetic energy, [34]. This stress tensor (TRANS) which is developed from the
averaging process, cannot be described in terms of mean flow quantities, and additional modelling is
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
19
required in order to achieve a closed system of equations. One solution to this closure problem is to
utilize the eddy viscosity model to connect the stress tensor to the mean velocity components. In 1877
Boussinesq proposed that momentum transfer generated by fully turbulent eddies can be represented
using an eddy viscosity, [33]. In other words, it meant that the turbulent eddy viscosity allowed to
model the stress tensor as a function of mean flow quantities.
The eddy viscosity model based on
Boussinesq approximation is given as Equation 3.17,
TRANS = 2µtS −2
3µt(∇· v)I
(3.17)
where S is the mean strain rate tensor , ¯v is the mean velocity component, and I is the identity tensor,
[34]. The strain rate tensor is defined as,
S = 1
2(∇¯v + ∇¯vT )
(3.18)
From Equations 3.17 and 3.18, it can be said that, inside an eddy viscosity model, the Reynolds stresses
are connected to the mean flow components through the means of turbulent kinetic energy k and
turbulent viscosity µt. To define this turbulent viscosity term, different transport equations are used,
which depends on the type of turbulence model selected. Some of the RANS turbulence models are
shown given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Different RANS turbulence model [34]
Name
Number of extra transport equations
Mixing length model
0
Spalart Allmaras model
1
k −ϵ model
2
k −ω model
2
Reynolds stress model (RMS)
7
For this investigation, the k −ω SST model [27], is used to model the turbulence. This k −ω SST is
a modified model of the k −ω model [43], which is a two equations eddy viscosity model as shown in
Table 3.1.
Dimensional analysis show that this turbulent viscosity term µt is the ratio between the turbulent
length scale lt and the turbulent velocity scale ut, both of which are believed to be characteristics of
turbulent flow. The turbulent velocity is defined using the turbulent kinetic energy k and the length
scale is defined using the specific dissipation rate ω. So, the k −ω model provides with two additional
transport equations i,e one for the k and another for ω, to close the system of equations. This model
is similar to the k −ϵ model [22], with the difference being that the length scale in the k −ϵ model is
defined by dissipation rate ϵ and not by specific dissipation rate ω as in the k −ω model. The transport
equations for the kinetic energy k and the specific dissipation rate ω are given as Equations 3.19 and
3.20,
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρk¯v) = ∇· [(µ + σkµt) ∇k] + Pk −ρβ∗fβ∗(ωk −ω0k0) + Sk
(3.19)
and
∂(ρω)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρω¯v) = ∇· [(µ + σωµt) ∇ω] + Pω −ρβfβ(ω2 −ω0
2) + Sω
(3.20)
where, ¯v is the mean velocity, µ is the dynamic viscosity, σk and σω are the Model Coeﬀicients, Pk
and Pω are the production terms, fβ∗is the free-shear modification factor, fβ is the vortex-stretching
modification factor, Sk and Sω are the user specified source terms and K0 and ω0 are the ambient
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
20
turbulence values that counteract turbulence decay. The details about the turbulence decay will be
discussed in details the later sections.
This k −ω model is effective in modelling the turbulence but it has been found out that it is highly
sensitive towards the flow conditions unlike the k −ϵ model.
Menter [27] addressed this issue by
proposing a new model that modifies the existing model by applying the k −ω model in the inner
boundary layer region and changing to the k −ϵ model in the outer region through the use of a blending
function. Also in this same model, Mentor defined a new transport equation to take into account the
turbulent shear stress which lead to the shear-stress transport (SST) model. Compared to the original
k −ω model, this SST k −ω model significantly improved adverse pressure gradient flow, [27]. Mentor
also stated that this SST k −ω model provided the best agreement with the experimental data when
compared to the other three eddy viscosity models, [29].
So, for this investigation, the SST k −ω model was implemented along with the RANS model to define
the turbulent flow. The Equations 3.21 and 3.22 forms the mathematical model for this investigation.
∂(ρ¯v)
∂t
+ ∇· (ρ¯v ⊗v) = −∇· (¯pI) + ∇· (¯T + TRANS) + fb
(3.21)
and
TRANS = f(∇· ¯v, k, ω)
(3.22)
3.2.2
Transition modelling with γ −
g
Reθt model
Using the SST k−ω model, allows to eﬀiciently model the turbulent flow, but depending on the Reynolds
number carried by the flow, the flow might be laminar in the beginning and then make a transition to
turbulent flow and this transition process is often ignored. So, taking into account this transition is
important because it has an impact on the aerodynamic performance of airfoils and wind turbines, [37].
So a transition model is required in addition to the turbulence model to predict the onset of transition
inside boundary layer. To account for transition, STAR-CCM+ presently supports two approaches:
one is the Turbulence Suppression model and the other one is the Gamma ReTheta and Gamma Theta
transition models. For this project the Gamma ReTheta transitional model is implemented since it
is mainly based on evaluating the local variables hence making it compatible with unstructured grid
offered by STAR CCM+.
The Gamma ReTheta transition (γ −g
Reθt) model is a two-equation, correlation-based transition model
that provides a semi-local way to predict the onset of transition in a turbulent boundary layer, [34].
One transport equation inside the model is an intermittency equation, used for triggering the start
of transition in the boundary layer. The other equation inside the model is used to avoid non-local
operations and is developed based on the transition onset momentum thickness Reynolds number, Reθt.
So, the basic idea behind this model is to connect the local momentum thickness momentum Reynolds
number Reθ, based on Equation 3.23, to the critical value Reθc, and then turn on the intermittency
production when Reθ surpasses the local critical value Reθc. Unlike turbulent models, these transport
equations are provided to offer a framework for implementing correlations based models in CFD methods
rather than to model the physics behind the transition.
Reθ = Reν,max
2.193
(3.23)
where Reν is the vorticity (strain-rate) Reynolds number and is given as Equation 3.24,
Reν = ρy2S
µ
(3.24)
where y is the distance from the nearest wall and S is the modulus of the mean strain rate tensor given
as S =
√
2S : S, and S is given as Equation 3.18.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
21
The transport equation for intermittency γ, is given as Equation 3.25,
d(ργ)
dt
+ ∇· ργ¯v = ∇·

µ + µt
σf

∇f

+ Pγ −Eγ
(3.25)
where, ρ is represents the density, ¯v is the mean velocity vector, µ is the dynamic viscosity, µt is the
turbulent eddy viscosity, σf is the model coeﬀicient, Pγ is the production term and Eγ is the destructive
term. The production term and the destructive term are defined as Equations 3.26 and 3.27 respectively,
Pγ = FlengthCa1ρS[γFonset]1/2(1 −Ce1γ)
(3.26)
Eγ = Ca2ρWγFturb(Ce2γ −1)
(3.27)
Fturb = exp
"
−
Rt
4
4#
(3.28)
W = |W| =
√
2W : W; W = 1
2(∇¯v + ∇¯vT )
(3.29)
where Flength represent the function to control transition length [26], Ca1, Ca2, Ce1 and Ce2 are Model
Coeﬀicients, W is the modulus of mean vorticity tensor, and the Fonset is the trigger function that
represent the initiation of intermittency and is given as Equation 3.30.
Fonset = max (Fonset2 −Fonset3, 0)
(3.30)
Fonset2 = min

max((F 4
onset1, Fonset1), 2)

(3.31)
Fonset3 = max
"
1 −
 Rt
2.5
3
, 0
#
(3.32)
Fonset1 =
Reν
Conset1Reθc
(3.33)
where, Conset1 is a Model Coeﬀicient and Reθc is the the critical momentum thickness Reynolds number
and Rt represents the viscosity ratio.
The critical Reynolds number Reθc and the virtual parameter Flength is defined using empirical relation
in-terms of the transition momentum thickness Reynolds number g
Reθt are shown in Equations 3.34 and
3.35,
Reθc = min

0.625 g
Reθt + 62, g
Reθt

(3.34)
and
Flength = min
h
0.01exp

−0.022 g
Reθt + 12

+ 0.57, 300
i
(3.35)
where Reθc represent the critical momentum thickness Reynolds number where the intermittency starts
to increase, [26].
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
22
This intermittency function, γ, is set to 0 in the laminar flow region and to 1 in the turbulent flow
region. The production term Pγ, of the intermittency transport equation shown in Equation 3.26 is
triggered by a function which is formulated based on the strain-rate Reynolds number, Reν and the
critical momentum thickness Reynolds number, Reθc.
The model is extremely simple to apply in the context of forced transition, as the intermittency can
be purposefully made to adopt a value of 1 in the region of the desired transition point and the
intermittency equation given in Equation 3.25 can be modified as a function of transition momentum
thickness Reynolds number as shown in Equation 3.36,
d(ρ g
Reθt)
dt
+ ∇· (ρ g
Reθt¯v) = ∇·
h
σθt (µ + µt) ∇g
Reθt
i
+ Pθt + DSF
(3.36)
where, ρ is represents the density, ¯v is the mean velocity vector, µ is the dynamic viscosity, µt is the
turbulent eddy viscosity, σθt is the model coeﬀicient, Pθt is the production term and DSF is the cross
flow term. The production term is given as Equation 3.37,
Pθt = Cθt
ρ
t

Reθt −g
Reθt

(1 −Fθt)
(3.37)
t = 500µ
ρU 2 ; U = |v|
(3.38)
Fθt = min


max

Fwakeexp

−
 
ρU 2
375Wρ g
Reθt
!4
, 1 −
Ce2γ −1
Ce2 −1
2

, 1



(3.39)
Fwake = exp
 
−
Reω
105
2!
(3.40)
Reω = ρωy2
µ
(3.41)
In addition, a correction to handle the separation-induced transition is also implemented, as indicated
in Equation 3.42,
γsep = min

s1max

0,
Reν
3.235Reθc
−1

Freattach, 2

Fθt
(3.42)
Freattach = exp

−Rt
15
4
(3.43)
γeff = max(γ, γsep)
(3.44)
where Cθt is represents the Model Coeﬀicients, Reθt is the transition onset Reynolds number, t is
the time scale.
y is the distance from the nearest wall.
s1 is a Model Coeﬀicient and γeff is the
effective intermittency that enters the turbulence transport equations.
The values of the different
model coeﬀicient is given in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Values of the different Model Coeﬀicient used in the transition model
Model Coeﬀicients
σf
Ce1
Ca1
Ca2
Ce2
s1
Cθt
σθt
Conset1
Values
1
1
2
0.06
50
2
0.3
2
2.193
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Turbulent and transition modelling
23
Generally, the transition onset Reynolds number Reθt, is tentatively related to the flow quantities
such as turbulent intensities and assessing it for intermittency in the boundary layer is thus a non-
local operations i,e it can not be evaluated at cell centers directly, [34]. This problem is resolved by
introducing the second transport equation in the model and treating the transition onset momentum
thickness Reynolds number as a scalar transmitted quantity. This implies that the transition onset
Reynolds number Reθt is estimated using empirical relation in the free stream and this free-stream
value is transported into the boundary layer by a local variable i,e transition momentum thickness
Reynolds number, g
Reθt, [34].
According to Mentor [27], the empirical relation used to define the
transition onset momentum thickness Reynolds number is given as Equation 3.45,
Reθt = 803.73(Tu + 0.6067)−1.027F(λθ, K)
(3.45)
F(λθK) =



1 + Fλexp(−Tu/3); λθ ≤0
1 −FK [1 −exp(−Tu/5))] + 0.556

1 −e−23.9λθ
e−T u/15; λθ > 0
(3.46)
Fλ = 10.32λθ + 89.47λ2
θ + 265.51λ3
θ
(3.47)
FK =

0.0962(K · 106) + 0.148(K · 106)2 + 0.0141(K · 106)3
(3.48)
for numerical robustness the following limits are used,
−0.1 ≤λθ ≤0.1; −3x10−6 ≤K ≤3x10−6; Reθt ≥20
(3.49)
Tu = 100
p
(2/3)k
V∞
(3.50)
At far-field boundaries, γ equals 1, whereas the boundary condition at the wall is 0. The far-field value
for g
Reθt is defined using Equation 3.45, assuming the pressure gradient parameter λθ to be 0 while the
wall boundary condition is 0. The farfield value for g
Reθt is defined by Equation 3.45, with the pressure
gradient parameter λθ and the wall boundary conditions are set to 0, [37]. Furthermore, when combined
with SST k −ω model, the intermittency function is used to initiate the production of turbulent kinetic
energy at the transition point, shown in Equation 3.51.
∂(ρk)
∂t
+ ∇· [ρk(¯v −vg] = ∇· [(µ + σkµt)∇k] + Pk −γ′ρβ∗fβ∗(ωk −ω0k0) + Sk
(3.51)
where, Pk is the production term which is given as Equation 3.52,
Pk = γtrans(Gk + Gnl + Gb) + Glim
k
(3.52)
where, γtrans is given as Equation 3.53,
γtrans =
γeff
γ′
(3.53)
where, γeff is provided from the Gamma Retheta transition model and γ′ is provided from the Gamma
transition model. The values for γeff and γ′ is set to 1 when the transition model is not used. The
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Importance of adding a Source Term
24
Glim
k
is an additional production term introduced by the gamma transition model to make sure proper
generation of k at the transition point for low stream turbulence, [34] and it is given as Equation 3.54,
Glim
k
= 5max(γ −0.2)(1 −γ)F lim
on max(3µ −µt, 0)SW
(3.54)
F lim
on
= min

max

Reν
22 · 1100 −1, 0

, 3

(3.55)
When the Gamma ReTheta transition model was first presented, it was incomplete because two im-
portant correlations were proprietary and hence removed. One argument for this omission is because
the model provides a framework for users to implement their own correlations, [34]. So basically, the
model is implemented in STAR CCM+ in such a way that custom correlations can be specified using
field functions. But since calibrating the required correlations is a hard and time-consuming operation,
generic correlations are provided by default within the model, [34]. The user must give a so called
Free-stream edge function that defines the free stream in such a way that the function returns 1 in the
free stream and 0 inside the boundary layer. In order to determine the value of Reθt in the free stream
using an empirical correlation, it is essential to define the location of the free stream edge. Because there
is no entirely generic way to define the free stream boundary, the definition in terms of wall distance
proposed in [34] is used. The free stream edge function is defined as shown in Equation 3.56,
$WallDistance > XXX?1 : 0
(3.56)
where XXX is the boundary layer height, [34]. In this project the value for the boundary thickness
XXX, will be specified according to the type of investigations which will be discussed in the next
chapter.
3.3
Importance of adding a Source Term
The Menter SST k −ω turbulence model with the Gamma ReTheta transition (γ −Reθ) model is
very effective in modelling the turbulence flow and predicting the transition. However, the SST k −ω
turbulence model frequently suffer from decaying of the turbulence variables (such as turbulent intensity
and turbulent viscosity ratio) in the free stream. And since the transition onset is strongly influenced
by the turbulent intensity present in the free stream, as shown in Figure 3.1, it is necessary to tackle
this decay.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Importance of adding a Source Term
25
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the influence of turbulence intensity on the the transition
The free stream turbulence decay is governed by the Equations 3.57 and 3.58, which are derived from
the kinetic energy and specific dissipation rate transport equations from the SST k −ω model as stated
in Equations 3.19 and 3.20.
k = kinlet

1 + 0.0828 x
V∞
ωinlet
−1.087
(3.57)
and
ω = ωinlet

1 + 0.0828 x
V∞
ωinlet
−1
(3.58)
where, x is the stream-wise distance and V∞is the free stream velocity which is assumed as constant.
The Equations for turbulence instensity I, and turbulent viscosity ratio TV R =
µt
µ , are given as
Equations 3.59 and 3.60 respectively.
I =
p
(2/3)k
V∞
(3.59)
and
TV R = k
ωµ
(3.60)
The Equations 3.57 and 3.58 is now modified by substituting the Equations 3.59 and 3.60 in terms
of turbulent intensity and turbulent viscosity ratio, which are shown as the Equations 3.61 and 3.62
respectively,
I = Iinlet

1 + 0.1242xρV∞I2
inlet
µTV Rinlet
−0.5435
(3.61)
and
TV R = TV Rinlet

1 + 0.1242xρV∞I2
inlet
µTV Rinlet
−0.087
(3.62)
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Importance of adding a Source Term
26
Because high values of effective viscosity induce excessive diffusion, the turbulent viscosity ratio at the
input must be carefully specified. Equation 3.62, has a small exponent, therefore the turbulent viscosity
does not decay significantly, permitting the inlet values to travel downstream. However, the lesser the
turbulent viscosity ratio, the faster is the turbulence decays. Without the measured data, determining
the right turbulent inflow boundary conditions becomes a diﬀicult balancing act between an acceptable
turbulent decay rate and an acceptable turbulent viscosity ratio. Because the turbulent viscosity ratio
is essentially a turbulent Reynolds number, specifying an appropriate value for any particular flow is
impossible, but an acceptable value can prevent the high levels of effective viscosity from infiltrating
the laminar boundary layer and influencing the prediction of laminar skin friction, [34].
While this decay is suitable for wind tunnels, it is not physically applicable to real-world atmospheric
circumstances. An ambient source can be utilized to get around this problem, [38]. The addition of the
ambient source term allows for better fine-tuning of turbulence intensity without requiring excessively
large turbulent viscosity ratios, which is particularly important for the transition model as turbulent
intensity influences the point of transition. This ambient source term is added to the model by specifying
it in the inlet boundary conditions. The terms K0 and ω0 in Equations 3.19 and 3.20, are the ambient
turbulence values that counteract turbulence decay.
The Figure 3.2 shows that having an ambient
source term helps to maintain the turbulence intensity from the inlet till the hitting the airfoil.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the influence ambient source on turbulence intensity
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
CFD Simulation and
Analysis
This chapter will go over the numerical modeling and physics models that were used to simulate the
flow over the FFA-W3-241 and DU08-W-210 airfoils, as well as the DTU’s 10MW wind turbine. This
section will also go into the analysis of the results produced from the simulations for each of these
studies.
4.1
Airfoil FFA-W3-241
4.1.1
Numerical modelling for Airfoil FFA-W3-241
According to the report published by the department of wind energy [3], the 10MW wind turbine was
designed using multiple airfoils at different portions of the blade to make it aerodynamically eﬀicient and
structurally stable. It stated that, the airfoils FFA-W3-241, FFA-W3-301, FFA-W3-360, FFA-W3-480,
and FFA-W3-100 were present inside the 10MW wind turbine. The airfoils FFA-W3-100 and FFA-W3-
480 were used in the root of the blade because they were thick and could provide structural stability.
The airfoil FFA-W3-241, on the other hand, was used near the blade’s tip region because it had high
aerodynamic performance. As the experimental data for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 were available from the
report published by Risø National Laboratory [31] and [11], this airfoil was chosen to carryout the study
and validate the models stated in the previous section before implementing it for the flow simulation
of the 10MW wind turbine. Another reason for choosing this airfoil was that the report [31], presented
simulation results using the in-house EllipSys2D solver. Choosing this airfoil provided the opportunity
to investigate the eﬀiciency of STAR CCM+ in modelling turbulent and transition flow over the airfoil
by comparing simulation results from a different CFD solvers and experimental data.
4.1.1.1
Geometry
The coordinates for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 was taken from the university airfoil database. This coordi-
nates were imported in STAR CCM+ and were connected using the spline curve. The airfoil generated
had a chord length of 1m and it consisted a gap in the trailing edge which was joined manually in the
3D-geometry operations. The airfoil was extruded to give a thickness of 0.4m because STAR CCM+
operates in a 3-dimensional space.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
28
Figure 4.1: Airfoil FFA-W3-241
Figure 4.2: Airfoil FFA-W3-241 with width of 0.4c
This created airfoil was imported to parts and a cubical domain with dimesions 30m x 30m x 0.1m was
created around the airfoil for defining the flow field. Subtract operation between the cubical domain
and airfoil was done in order make a unified fluid domain. The inlet of the domain was set at a distance
of 10m from the leading edge, whereas the outlet was specified at a distance of 20m behind the trailing
edge of the airfoil. The flow domain generated is shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the flow domain
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
29
4.1.1.2
Mesh generation
Mesh for the flow domain was created using badge 2D meshing and automated mesh 2D operations,
to make the mesh generation completely 2-dimensional [18]. The importance of using this 2D meshing
instead of the 3D meshing was that it helped, to reduced the computational cost and run the simulations
much faster. Each surface of the flow domain were assigned with respective boundary conditions to
make the simulation feasible. The front, top and bottom surface of the flow domain were assigned
as velocity inlet whereas the back surface was assigned as the pressure outlet. The airfoil itself was
designated as a wall with non-slip boundary conditions. Once the flow domain was ready for executing
the mesh operation, polygonal mesher along with the prism layer mesher were defined as the mesh type.
The polygonal mesh was chosen over the tetrahedral mesh because it had a smoother growth away from
the body and the polyhedral mesh required far less cells to cover the fluid domain than the tetrahedral
mesh, lowering the computing cost. The prism layer mesher was used near the walls of the airfoil to
capture the boundary layer since it is very important for the transition model as stated in the previous
sections. The values for the polygonal mesher and prism layer mesher should be specified accordingly
to make a smooth transition between the two mesher because it is important for getting good results
for the lift and drag coeﬀicient. The mesh base size for the entire fluid domain was set to 0.5m. Surface
control with wake refinement was added to the airfoil’s surface to create a finer mesh around the airfoil
in order to resolve the RANS equation well to achieve good results. Summary of the the values used to
carryout the mesh operations are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Mesh Settings used in STAR CCM+
Surface Control over the Airfoil Surface
Target Surface Size (m)
0.0025
Minimum Surface Size (m)
0.001
Surface curvature (Pts/circ)
120
Number of Prism Layers
100
Prism Layer Stretching
1.05
Prism Layer Total Thickness (m)
0.01
The generated mesh for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 using the mentioned settings in Table 4.1, is shown
in Figure 4.4. In Figure 4.5, the polyhedral mesh with 1004 faces around the airfoil FFA-W3-241 is
shown. Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7 illustrates the details of the leading and the trailing edge of the airfoil
respectively.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
30
Figure 4.4: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the flow domain
Figure 4.5: Polygonal mesh around the airfoil FFA-W3-241
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
31
Figure 4.6: Mesh near the leading edge region
Figure 4.7: Mesh near the trailing edge
4.1.1.3
Implementation of the Physics model
The physics models used to carryout the simulation for the flow over the airfoil FFA-W3-241 is shown
in Table 4.2,
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
32
Table 4.2: Physics Model used in STAR CCM+
Physics Model
Space
Two Dimensional
Time
Steady
Material
Gas
Flow
Segregated Flow
Equation of State
Constant Density
Viscous Regime
Turbulent
Turbulence Model
Reynolds-Average Navier-Strokes (RANS)
Reynolds-Average Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence Models
Shear Stress Transport (SST) K-Omega
K-Omega Wall Treatment
Low y+ Wall Treatment (Wall y+ < 1)
The flow simulation was carried out using steady state solver with constant density. However, as the
simulations were done for different angle of attack it was found out that for higher angles of attack the
simulation had to be done using unsteady state solver to get accurate results. The density and dynamic
viscosity of the gas was taken as 1.18415 kg/m3 and 3.55245E-5 Pa-s respectively. The inlet velocity was
taken as 45 m/sec with turbulent intensity of 1%. This value were taken in accordance to the reports
[31] and [11]. The Reynolds number used for the simulation was 1.5 millions. The RANS model was
used to govern the motion of the fluid inside the fluid domain. The k −ω SST turbulence model was
implemented with the RANS model to resolve the turbulence flow over the airfoil and γ −f
Reθ model
was used for capturing the transition. Since the simulation was carried out at a low Reynolds number,
low wall y+ treatment was used for the wall treatment. So, the prism layer mesh around the airfoil was
made fine enough to achieve a wall y+ value less than 1. The Gamma Retheta transition model was
implemented by inserting the free stream edge function, Equation 3.56, and the boundary layer height
(XXX) value was taken as 0.05. And an ambient source term was added in the inlet conditions.
4.1.2
Simulation results of airfoil FFA-W3-241
The flow simulation for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 with the aforementioned physics condition, was carried
out for different angles of attack. The flow simulation over the airfoil was performed at the following
angles of attack: 6.661◦, 9.869◦, 13.339◦and 15.405◦. The lift and drag coeﬀicients generated from
the different angles of attack were collected and was compared with the experimental data, shown in
Figure 4.8.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
33
Figure 4.8: Comparison of Lift-Drag Coeﬀicient obtained from STAR CCM+ and the experiment
According to the Figure 4.8, both the lift and drag coeﬀicients generated from the turbulence model
and the transition model for different angles of attack do not correspond exactly with the experimental
data but follow a similar trend. The turbulence model predicted the lift and drag coeﬀicient more
close to the experimental data than the transition model for low and high angles of attack. The lift
coeﬀicient predicted by the turbulence model for low angles of attack, for example, is extremely close
to the actual data, whereas the drag coeﬀicient predicted by the turbulence model for high angles of
attack is extremely near to the experimental data. However, the transition model was able to predict the
transition quite well, resulting in a peak in the lift coeﬀicient at angle of attack 13.388◦when compared
to the lift coeﬀicient value for the turbulence model at same angle of attack. Similarly, because the
transition model predicted the transition accurately, the drag coeﬀicient at 13.388◦angle of attack
is lower than the drag coeﬀicient value for the turbulence model at the same angle of attack. This
result demonstrates that taking the transition into consideration helps to improve the aerodynamic
performance of the airfoils as stated by Niels N. Søersen, [37].
A probable explanation for the disparity in the lift and drag coeﬀicients with experimental data is
found by examining the pressure coeﬀicient plot at various angles of attack, as shown in Figure 4.9.
The pressure coeﬀicient is defined using the Equation 4.1
Cp =
p0 −p∞
1
2ρ∞(V 2
r + (ωr)2))
(4.1)
where, p0 is the absolute pressure, p∞is the ambient pressure, Vr is the local Relative flow velocity, ω
is the rotational speed and r is the radial postion.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
34
Figure 4.9: Comparison of Pressure distribution obtained from STAR CCM+ with the experimental
data.
The pressure generated on the pressure side of the airfoil corresponded well with the experimental data
from both the turbulence and transition models for different angles of attack, as shown in Figure 4.9.
However, for both models, the pressure generated on the suction side of the airfoil is greater than the
experimental data. Because of this, the pressure difference between the suction and pressure side is
higher for both the models compared to the experimental data. As stated in the theory section of the
airfoil, the lift is generated because of this pressure difference. This explains the reason for generating
higher values for the lift and drag coeﬀicient from both the models causing they deviate from the
experimental data.
As stated before, the lift coeﬀicient for the turbulence model was close to the experimental data for the
low angles of attack, and this can be also be seen in the pressure coeﬀicient plot, Figure 4.9 . For low
angles of attack, the pressure doesn’t drop as significantly when the flow travels over the leading edge
curvature. And as the flow moves toward to the trailing edge the pressure increase but not significantly,
indicating that the pressure gradient is low. Because of the low pressure gradient, the pressure difference
between the suction and the pressure side is high hence lift generated by the turbulence model is also
high but since the pressure difference is not that big compared to the experimental pressure difference,
the lift generated is more closer to the experimental values. However, for the high angles of attacks i,e
13.388◦and 15.405◦, it can be seen that, the pressure drops significantly when the flow travels over the
leading edge curvature. Then when the flow travels inward towards the trailing edge of the airfoil, the
pressure increase significantly indicating that the pressure gradient is high and after a certain point the
pressure gradient becomes positive giving rise to separations. This is the reason why the drag increases
drastically and the lift decreases for the turbulence model for the high angles of attack.
Whereas for the transition model, it can be seen that for all the angles of attack, the pressure drops
are higher than the turbulence model when the flow travels over the leading edge curvature. But as
the flow travels inward towards the trailing edge the pressure increases gradually over the suction side
of the airfoil indicating that the pressure gradient is low. So for all the angle of attacks the pressure
difference generated between the suction and pressure side of the airfoil is higher for the turbulence
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
35
model explaining the reason for higher lift. It can be also seen that, for the 13.388◦angle of attack, the
turbulence model is showing separations whereas the transition model is still having the flow attached
which explains that the transition model is able to capture the laminar-turbulent transition in the
boundary layer effectively. Because of this reason the lift generated by the transition model is much
higher than the lift generated by the turbulence model. However, for 15.405◦, it can be seen that, the
pressure drops significantly when the flow travels over the leading edge curvature. Then when the flow
travels inward towards the trailing edge of the airfoil, the pressure increase significantly indicating that
the pressure gradient is high and after a certain point the pressure gradient becomes positive giving rise
to separations for the transition model.
These pressure plots are also consistent with the airfoil theory presented in the preceding chapter. So,
based on these plots, it can be inferred that, beyond the stagnation point, the pressure begins to
decrease when the flow passes over the leading edge curvature and begins to increase when the flow
reaches the trailing edge of the airfoil. And when the angle of attack is very high, the pressure on the
trailing edge increases so much that the pressure gradient becomes positive and leads to separation
which then increases the form drag significantly hence reducing the airfoil’s aerodynamic performance.
Implementing the transition model, on the other hand, serves to delay the separation process while
also improving the aerodynamic performance of the airfoil. The skin friction coeﬀicient plots, shown
in Figure 4.10, helps to visualize better the different transition points for different angles of attack. As
the angle of attack increased the transition point on the suction side shifted towards the left whereas
the transition point on the pressure side shifted more towards the right suggesting that for high angles
of attack the flow became turbulent close to the leading edge of the airfoil. Also, for the low angles
of attack the skin friction predicted is lower compared to those for the high angles of attack which
corresponds well with the drag results shown in Figure 4.8. The static pressure scene generated over
the airfoil for different angles of attack shown in Figure 4.11, helps to visualize the pressure gradient
better and support the aforementioned explanation.
Figure 4.10: Skin friction coeﬀicient plot for the the transition and turbulence model for different angles
of attack
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
36
Figure 4.11: Static pressure generated over the airfoil FFA-W3-241 for different angles of attack for the
transition model
In Figure 4.11, the pressure generated on the suction side is lower than the pressure generated on the
pressure side of the airfoil. It is observed that the pressure generated at the stagnation point is very
high and then the pressure decreases as the flow travels over the leading edge and then again increases
as the flow nears the trailing edge. For the low angles of attack the pressure generated over the suction
side of the airfoil don’t have any drastic increase of pressure from the leading edge to the trailing edge
compared to high angles of attack where very low pressures are generated near the leading of the airfoil
and very high pressures near the trailing edge depicting separation. This correspond well with the
velocity flow scene as shown in Figure 4.12. The flow velocity is higher in low-pressure zones and low
in the high-pressure zones which is consistent with the Bernoulli’s principle [42], which stated that an
increase in a fluid’s speed occurs simultaneously with a decrease in static pressure or a decrease in the
fluid’s potential energy.
In Figure 4.12, the flow velocity at the stagnation point is very low and it increases as the flow travel
over the leading edge and then again it decreases as the flow nears the trailing edge. Because there is no
drastic change in pressure over the suction side of the airfoil at low angles of attack, the velocity difference
between the leading and trailing edges is small, resulting in a smooth flow. However, with high angles of
attack, the flow velocity changes dramatically due to the large pressure difference between the leading
and trailing edges. And, when the velocity near the trailing edge drops almost to 0, the separation
occurs. This separation of flow results in the formation of a turbulent eddy structure immediately aft
of the airfoil body as shown in Figure 4.13. The wake formed behind the airfoil is relatively less at
6.661◦angle of attack since the flow is largely attached and laminar. However, as the angle of attack
of the airfoil increases, so does the wake generated behind it. The separation causes turbulent eddies
to form behind the airfoil at 15.405 ◦angle of attack.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
37
Figure 4.12: Velocity flow field over the airfoil FFA-W3-241 for different angles of attack for the tran-
sition model
Figure 4.13: Vorticity generated over the airfoil FFA-W3-241 for different angles of attack for the
transition model
The simulation results from EllipSys2D for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 were included in the report, [31].
As a result, the report’s results were compared to the results acquired from STAR CCM+. Figure 4.14
demonstrate the differences in lift and drag coeﬀicient obtained from STAR CCM+ and EllipSys2D
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
38
CFD solvers. It is observed that the lift and drag predicted by STAR CCM+ are more close to the
experimental data than the results of the EllipSys2D CFD solver.
The lift and drag predicted by
the transition model of STAR CCM+ correspond very well with the EllipSys2D results with little
deviation for high angles of attack. However, the lift and drag predicted by the turbulence models of
STAR CCM+ and EllipSys2D differ significantly. Both CFD solvers’ transition models can predict the
transition well, causing the lift to improve, with EllipSys2D’s transition model predicting the lift slightly
higher, despite the fact that both CFD solvers use the identical transition models. The probably theory
for this difference in between the two transition model is the values used for the model coeﬀicients. The
values of the model coeﬀicient used for the two transition models are shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Values of the model coeﬀicients used in the transition models in the two CFD solvers
Model Coeﬀicients
σf
Ce1
Ca1
Ca2
Ce2
s1
Cθt
σθt
Conset1
Values in STAR CCM+
1
1
2
0.06
50
2
0.3
2
2.193
Values in EllipSys
1
1
1
0.03
50
2
0.3
2
2.193
Figure 4.14: Comparison of Lift-Drag Coeﬀicient obtained from STAR CCM+, EllipSys2D and the
experiment
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
39
Figure 4.15: Comparison of Pressure distribution obtained from STAR CCM+ with the EllipSys2D
Figure 4.15, depicts the difference in the pressure coeﬀicients predicted by the two CFD solvers. For
both the CFD solvers, pressure generated on the pressure side of the airfoil by both the transition and
turbulence model matches well with little deviations. However, the pressure generated on the suction
side of the airfoil by the transition and turbulence model don’t agree that well with each other. For
low angles of attack, the transition and turbulence model of STAR CCM+ is generating more pressure
difference compared to the transition and turbulence model of EllipSys2D whereas for high angles of
attack the transition and turbulence model of EllipSys2D are generating more pressure difference than
the transition and turbulence model of STAR CCM+ explaining the cause for the difference in lift and
drag predicted by both the CFD solvers.
Figure 4.16, depicts skin friction coeﬀicient plot, illustrating the difference between the transition models
used in both the CFD solvers. The transition model in STAR CCM+ predicts the point of transition
a bit earlier than the transition model implemented in EllipSys2D. Since, the transition model in
EllipSys2D is able to delay the point of transition a bit longer along the surface of the airfoil, the lift
coeﬀicient predicted by EllipSys2D is slightly higher than the lift coeﬀicient predicted by Star CCM+.
It also illustrates that the skin friction coeﬀicient value for the transition model of STAR CCM+ is
higher for all the angles of attack when compared to the transition model of EllipSys2D explaining the
difference in the drag coeﬀicient between the two CFD solvers.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
40
Figure 4.16: comparison skin friction coeﬀicient obtained from STAR CCM+ and EllipSys2D [31]
A validity check is done to see whether the changing the value of the model coeﬀicient would have
a impact on the skin-friction coeﬀicient plot. Figure 4.17 shows that the model coeﬀicient values do
not have as much of an impact on the transition model in STAR CCM+ as was previously supposed,
as there is very slight variation between the skin friction coeﬀicient plots for both transition models.
Based on this observation, it can be concluded that the transition model implemented in the STAR
CCM+ CFD code behaves differently than the transition model programmed in EllipSys2D, and further
research into the implementation of the transition model in STAR CCM+ is required.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Airfoil FFA-W3-241
41
Figure 4.17: Illustration of the skin friction coeﬀicient derived by STAR CCM+ for various model
coeﬀicient values in the transition model
4.1.3
Mesh Convergence study for Airfoil FFA-W3-241
For the values predicted under the applied steady conditions, a mesh convergence analysis was performed.
It is essential because mesh convergence specifies how many elements are needed in a model to ensure
that changing the size of the mesh has little or no effect on the outcomes of a study. In this investigation,
the mesh convergence study was conducted by changing the base size of the polygonal mesher as shown
in Table 4.4. The mesh convergence for the lift and drag coeﬀicients was investigated in relation to the
number of meshes for the airfoil FFA-W3-241, which is shown in Figure 4.18.
From the study, it is observed that both the lift and drag coeﬀicients changes drastically on decreasing
the base size of the polygonal mesh from A1 to A3 for both the lift and drag coeﬀicients. From A3 to
A4, there is a slight rise in the lift coeﬀicient, as well as a slight drop in the drag coeﬀicient. And it can
be seen that the lift and drag coeﬀicients vary very little from A4 to A5. It’s safe to conclude that the
mesh structure has no effect on the solution for the lift and drag coeﬀicients beyond point A3, so point
A3 was selected for the analysis to keep the computational resource at reasonable limit.
Table 4.4: Lift and drag coeﬀicient values for different base size of the mesh
Name
Base Size [m]
Number of cells
Lift coeﬀicient
Drag Coeﬀicient
A1
0.7
118285
1.1350
0.01323
A2
0.5
196500
1.1354
0.01319
A3
0.3
498630
1.1357
0.01311
A4
0.2
723563
1.13578
0.01309
A5
0.1
1034891
1.13581
0.013086
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
42
Figure 4.18: Illustration of the mesh convergence study of lift and drag force with respect to the number
of cells for the airfoil FFA-W3-241
4.2
Airfoil DU08-W-210
4.2.1
Numerical modelling for Airfoil DU08-W-210
The flow simulation over airfoil FFA-W3-241 validated the eﬀiciency of the selected mathematical
models, but as the experimental data and findings stated in the reports [11] and [31] for the airfoil FFA-
W3-241 were relatively old, it was decided to use another airfoil with more recent experimental data. The
airfoil DU08-W-210 was chosen to carry out the flow simulation using the same mathematical models
to further validate the models by comparing the simulation results with the experimental data. The
aerodynamic measurements for this airfoil was done at a wind tunnel at LM wind power in connection
with an EUDP project AdvancedVG journal number 64019-517. Furthermore, the outcomes of STAR
CCM+ was compared with the EllipSys2D outcomes. The experimental data along with the airfoil
geometry and EllipSys results were provided to me by one of my supervisors.
4.2.1.1
Geometry
A 3D model of the airfoil was provided for the investigation. The given airfoil consisted a chord length
of 1m.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
43
Figure 4.19: Airfoil DU08-W-210
Figure 4.20: Airfoil DU08-W-210
The airfoil was imported to parts and a cubical domain with dimensions 30m x 30m x 0.1m was created
around the airfoil for defining the flow field. Subtract operation between the cubical domain and airfoil
was done to create an unified flow domain. The inlet of the domain was set at a distance of 10m from
the leading edge, whereas the outlet was specified at a distance of 20m behind the trailing edge of the
airfoil. The flow domain generated is shown in Figure 4.21.
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
44
Figure 4.21: Illustration of the flow domain
4.2.1.2
Mesh generation
Mesh for the flow domain was created using badge 2D meshing and automated mesh 2D operations,
to make the mesh generation completely 2-dimensional, as stated for the previous airfoil. Each surface
of the flow domain were assigned with respective boundary conditions to make the simulation feasible.
The front, top and bottom surface of the flow domain were assigned as velocity inlet whereas the back
surface was assigned as the pressure outlet. The airfoil itself was designated as a wall with non-slip
boundary conditions. Once the flow domain was ready for executing the mesh operation, polygonal
mesher along with the prism layer mesher were defined as the mesh type. The mesh base size for the
entire fluid domain was set to 0.4m. Surface control with wake refinement was added to the airfoil’s
surface to create a finer mesh around the airfoil. Summary of the the values used to carryout the mesh
operations are shown in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Mesh Settings used in STAR CCM+
Surface Control over the Airfoil Surface
Target Surface Size (m)
0.002
Minimum Surface Size (m)
0.001
Surface curvature (Pts/circ)
120
Number of Prism Layers
100
Prism Layer Stretching
1.05
Prism Layer Total Thickness (m)
0.008
The generated mesh for the airfoil DU08-W-210 using the above mentioned settings are shown in
Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
45
Figure 4.22: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the flow domain
In Figure 4.23, the polyhedral mesh with 1190 faces around the airfoil DU 08-W-210 is shown.
Figure 4.23: Polygonal mesh around the airfoil DU08-W-210
4.2.1.3
Implementation of the Physics model
The physics models used to carryout the simulation for the flow over the airfoil DU08-W3-241 is shown
in Table 4.6. The flow simulation was carried out using steady state solver with constant density, but
as the simulations were done for different angle of attack it was found out that for higher angles of
attack the simulation had to be done using unsteady state solver to get accurate results. The Reynolds
number used for the simulation was 0.2 millions. The RANS model was used to govern the motion of
the fluid inside the fluid domain. The k −ω SST turbulence model was implemented with the RANS
model to resolve the turbulence flow over the airfoil. Since the simulation was carried out at a low
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
46
Reynolds number, low wall y+ treatment was used for the wall treatment. So, the prism layer mesh
around the airfoil was made fine enough to achieve a wall y+ value less than 1. The Gamma Retheta
transition model was implemented by inserting the free stream edge function, Equation 3.56, and the
boundary layer height (XXX) value was taken as 0.05. And an ambient source term was added in the
inlet conditions.
Table 4.6: Physics Model used in STAR CCM+
Physics Model
Space
Two Dimensional
Time
Steady
Material
Gas
Flow
Segregated Flow
Equation of State
Constant Density
Viscous Regime
Turbulent
Turbulence Model
Reynolds-Average Navier-Strokes (RANS)
Reynolds-Average Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence Models
Shear Stress Transport (SST) K-Omega
K-Omega Wall Treatment
Low y+ Wall Treatment (Wall y+ < 1)
4.2.2
Simulation results of airfoil DU08-W-210
The flow simulation for the airfoil DU08-W-210 with the aforementioned physics condition, was carried
out for different angles of attack. The lift and drag coeﬀicients generated from the different angles of
attack were collected and was compared with the experimental data. According to the Figure 4.24, both
the lift and drag coeﬀicients generated from the transition model for different angles of attack correspond
well with the experimental data below 10◦angle of attack, whereas the turbulence model predicts lower
lift and higher drag coeﬀicient when compared with the experimental data.
The transition model
predicts a higher lift coeﬀicient and a lower drag coeﬀicient compared the turbulence model, indicating
that the transition model is working properly and effectively.
This result again demonstrated that
taking the transition into consideration helps to improve the aerodynamic performance of the airfoils
as stated by Niels N. Søersen, [37]. It is also seen that, the lift predicted by the turbulence model in
both the CFD solvers have the same results. However, the lift coeﬀicient for the transition model used
in STAR CCM+ is predicting a higher value than the transition model used in EllipSys2D consisting of
a similar transition model. The drag predicted by both the transition and turbulence model in STAR
CCM+ agree quite well with the drag predicted by both the models in EllipSys2D CFD solver.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
47
Figure 4.24: Comparison of Lift-Drag Coeﬀicient obtained from STAR CCM+, EllipSys2D and the
experiment
Figure 4.25: Comparison of Pressure distribution obtained from STAR CCM+ with the experimental
data
Figure 4.25 depicts that the pressure generated on the pressure side of the airfoil corresponded well
with the experimental data for both the turbulence and transition models for the different angles of
attack except for the 12.107◦angle of attack where it completely differs. However, for both models, the
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
48
pressure generated on the suction side of the airfoil differ from the experimental data. The pressure
difference generated between the suction and pressure side is lower for the turbulence model compared
to the experimental data for different angles of attack which explains why the lift coeﬀicient values
are lower than the experimental data for the turbulence model.
Whereas, the pressure difference
generated is lower for the transition model for low angles of attack but as the angles of attack increases,
the pressure generated on the suction side of the airfoil increases and hence increasing the pressure
difference generated by the transition model. So, the lift predicted by the transition model matches
well with the experimental data resulting in a similar lift coeﬀicient. But for 12.107◦angle of attack the
pressure difference generated over the airfoil is much higher than the experimental data. Also it can be
seen that the experimental data shows that separation whereas the transition model is able to bypass
this separation even though there is high pressure gradient on the suction side. This explains why the
lift coeﬀicient predicted by the transitional model is very high compared to the experimental data.
These pressure plots are also consistent with the airfoil theory presented in the preceding chapter. So,
based on these plots, it can be inferred that, beyond the stagnation point, the pressure begins to
decrease when the flow passes over the leading edge curvature and begins to increase when the flow
reaches the trailing edge of the airfoil. The static pressure scene generated over the airfoil for different
angles of attack shown in Figure 4.26, helps to visualize the pressure gradient better and support
the aforementioned explanation. The pressure generated on the suction side is lower than the pressure
generated on the pressure side of the airfoil. It is observed that the pressure generated at the stagnation
point is very high and then the pressure decreases as the flow travels over the leading edge and then
again increases as the flow nears the trailing edge. For the low angles of attack the pressure doesn’t
drop to very low values while for high angles of attack the pressure drops to very low values when the
flow travels over the leading edge curvature. For low angles of attack, there is no drastic increase of
pressure from the leading edge to the trailing edge compared to high angles of attack where very low
pressures are generated near the leading of the airfoil and very high pressures near the trailing edge.
This correspond well with the velocity flow scene as shown in Figure 4.27. The flow velocity is higher in
low-pressure zones and low in the high-pressure zones which is consistent with the Bernoulli’s principle
[42].
Figure 4.26: Static pressure generated over the airfoil DU08-W-210 for different angles of attack for the
transition model
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Airfoil DU08-W-210
49
Figure 4.27: Velocity flow field over the airfoil DU08-W-210 for different angles of attack for the
transition model
4.2.3
Mesh Convergence study for Airfoil DU08-W-210
For the values predicted under the applied steady conditions, a mesh convergence analysis was performed.
It is essential because mesh convergence specifies how many elements are needed in a model to ensure
that changing the size of the mesh has little or no effect on the outcomes of a study. In this investigation,
the mesh convergence study was conducted by changing the base size of the polygonal mesher as shown
in Table 4.7. The mesh convergence for the lift and drag coeﬀicients was investigated in relation to the
number of meshes for the airfoil DU08-W-210, which is shown in Figure 4.28.
From the study, it is observed that both the lift and drag coeﬀicients changes very little on decreasing
the base size of the polygonal mesh from A1 to A3. However, from A3 to A4, there is a rapid rise in
the lift coeﬀicient, as well as a rapid drop in the drag coeﬀicient. It is also seen that the lift coeﬀicients
vary very little from A4 to A5 whereas the drag coeﬀicient decreases further. And from A6 to A7, both
the lift and drag coeﬀicient vary very little. It’s safe to conclude that the mesh structure has no effect
on the solution for the lift and drag coeﬀicients beyond point A4, but because the number of cells for
point A3 is relatively large, point A4 was selected for the analysis to keep the computational resource
at reasonable limit.
Table 4.7: Lift and drag coeﬀicient values for different base size of the mesh
Name
Base Size [m]
Number of Cells
Lift Coeﬀicient
Drag Coeﬀicient
A1
0.7
135464
1.5392
0.0155
A2
0.6
163841
1.5430
0.0153
A3
0.5
209608
1.5432
0.0152
A4
0.4
280698
1.5740
0.0147
A5
0.3
436152
1.5738
0.0145
A6
0.2
818334
1.5741
0.0143
A7
0.1
1125467
1.5743
0.0142
==PAGE:56==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
50
Figure 4.28: Illustration of the mesh convergence study of lift and drag force with respect to the number
of cells for the airfoil DU08-W-210
4.3
10MW wind turbine
4.3.1
Numerical modelling for 10MW wind turbine
This wind turbine had a rated capacity of 10MW, was designed for offshore installation in an IEC class
1A wind condition, and was a standard three-bladed, upwind HAWT wind turbine [3].
4.3.1.1
Geometry
The 3D CAD model for the wind turbine was taken from the university database and was imported to
STAR CCM+. The overall length of the imported blade was 89m, with airfoils extending to 86m, a
hub height of 3m, and a blunt trailing edge.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
51
Figure 4.29: CAD model of the 10MW wind turbine blade
A 120◦cylindrical wedge with periodic boundary conditions was used to model the fluid domain. This
allowed to model the fluid flow in a rotational reference frame rather than a moving mesh which reduced
the computational cost significantly as only one blade could be used to carryout the simulation instead
of using three blades. The cylindrical domain measured 600m in length and 200m in radius. The inlet
of the domain was set at a distance of 360m in front of the blade geometry whereas the outlet was set
at a distance of 240m behind the blade geometry. The top surface of the cylinder was set at a distance
of 200m from the root of the blade. Figures 4.30 and 4.31 represents the view of the fluid domain.
==PAGE:58==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
52
Figure 4.30: Illustration of the fluid domain from outside
Figure 4.31: Illustration of the fluid domain from inside
In this investigation, the flow simulation for this turbine was performed for wind speeds of 8m/sec, 10
m/sec, 11m/sec, 12 m/sec, and 16 m/sec and according to the report [3], the wind turbine was operated
==PAGE:59==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
53
at different pitch angles for these wind speeds. As discussed in the preceding section, pitching the blade
at higher wind speeds serves to minimize thrust generated and prevent generator breakdown as well as
blade damage. These pitch angles were introduced for this project by rotating the blade in the direction
of the flow. The illustration of the pitch angles for different wind speeds are shown in Figures 4.32.
Figure 4.32: Illustration of the different pitch angles implement for different wind speeds
4.3.1.2
Mesh generation
Mesh for the flow domain was created using automated mesh operations, to make the mesh generation
completely 3-dimensional because the flow over a wind turbine rotor is 3-dimensional. When fluid flows
over the rotor of a wind turbine, it begins to separate from the root to the tip of the blade. This
happens because the pressure gradient operates in a radial direction, forcing the fluid to separate into
3-dimensions across the wind turbine blade. So, a 3-dimensional flow simulation is needed to account for
this phenomenon and to provide a more realistic estimate of the flow field around a wind turbine and to
have a 3-dimensional flow a 3-dimensional mesh is required for resolving flow’s governing equation. Each
surface of the flow domain were assigned with respective boundary conditions to make the simulation
feasible. The front surface of the flow domain was assigned as velocity inlet whereas back surface were
assigned as the pressure outlet. The top surface was assigned as the walls with slip conditons. The
two bottom surfaces were defined as symmetric planes with periodic interfaces. The hub cylinder was
defined as a wall with slip boundary conditions and the blade itself was designated as a wall with no-slip
boundary conditions. Once the flow domain was ready for executing the mesh operation, polygonal
mesher along with the surface remesher and prism layer mesher were defined as the mesh type. The
values for the polygonal mesher and prism layer mesher should be specified accordingly to make a
smooth transition between the two mesher because it is important for getting good results. The mesh
base size for the entire fluid domain was set to 3m. A Surface control was added to the blade surface
to create a finer mesh around the blade in order to resolve the RANS equation well and achieve good
results. Summary of the the values used to carryout the mesh operations are shown in the following
Table 4.8.
==PAGE:60==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
54
Table 4.8: Mesh Settings used in STAR CCM+ for the surface control of the blade
Surface Control over the Airfoil Surface
Target Surface Size (m)
0.03
Minimum Surface Size (m)
0.024
Surface curvature (Pts/circ)
120
Surface Growth Rate
1.2
Number of Prism Layers
20
Prism Layer Stretching
1.2
Prism Layer Total Thickness (m)
0.072
A volumetric control was added around the blade to create a smooth transition from the prism layers
on the blade’s surface to the mesh surrounding the blade. The mesh of the volumetric control had a cell
size of 0.036m. The generated mesh for the fluid domain and blade using the above mentioned settings
consisted of 32 millions cells and are shown in Figures 4.33 and 4.34.
Figure 4.33: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the flow domain
==PAGE:61==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
55
Figure 4.34: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the over the blade
4.3.1.3
Implementation of the Physics model
The physics models used to carryout the simulation for the flow over the wind turbine blade is shown
in Table 4.9,
Table 4.9: Physics Model used in STAR CCM+
Physics Model
Space
Three Dimensional
Time
Steady
Material
Gas
Flow
Segregated Flow
Equation of State
Constant Density
Viscous Regime
Turbulent
Turbulence Model
Reynolds-Average Navier-Strokes (RANS)
Reynolds-Average Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence Models
Shear Stress Transport (SST) K-Omega
K-Omega Wall Treatment
All y+ Wall Treatment
According Ece Sagol et al. [32], if a flow simulation was carried in a rotating reference frame, the
unsteady state flow is converted to steady state flow, so the flow simulation was carried out using steady
state solver with constant density. The density and dynamic viscosity of the gas was taken as 1.225
kg/m3 and 1.78406E-5 Pa-s respectively. The RANS model was used to govern the motion of the fluid
inside the fluid domain. The k −ω SST turbulence model was implemented with the RANS model
to resolve the turbulence flow over the blade. The γ −Reθ model was implemented with SST k −ω
==PAGE:62==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
56
turbulence model to model for the transition. As previously stated, the flow simulation for this project
was performed for five winds, and the wind turbine had varying rotational speeds for different wind
speeds, just as the pitch angle. According to the report [3], the rotor speed of the turbine was 6.426
rpm for wind speed of 8m/sec, 8.032 rpm for wind speeds of 10m/sec, 8.836 rpm for wind speeds of
11m/sec, and 9.600 rpm for wind speeds of 12m/sec and 16m/sec respectively. Since the wind turbine
had a rated wind speed of 11.4 m/sec, therefore after this wind speed, the rotor speed became constant
to keep the wind turbine working at the rated power and to prevent the generator from breaking down
[3]. A summary of the values specifed in the boundary conditions for doing the simulation are shown
in Table 4.10. An ambient source term was added in the inlet conditions.
Table 4.10: Pitch angle and rotational speed used for different wind speeds
Parameters
Case-1
Case-2
Case-3
Case-4
Cas-5
Wind Speed (m/sec)
8
10
11
12
16
Pitch Angle (deg)
0
0
0
4.502
12.499
Rotational Speed (rpm)
6.426
8.032
8.836
9.6
9.6
4.3.2
Simulation results of 10MW wind turbine
The flow simulation for the 10MW wind turbine with the aforementioned physics conditions was carried
out for the various wind speeds listed in Table 4.10, with the specified pitch angles and rotational speeds
for the respective wind speeds. The flow simulation was performed using the turbulence model first,
and subsequently the transition model. The simulation was performed using a single blade to decrease
computational costs, and the results were then multiplied by three to represent three blades. The thrust
and mechanical power generated by the flow simulation using the both the models are gathered and
displayed alongside the EllipSys3D and BEM based HAWCStab2 simulation results provided in the
report, [3].
Figure 4.35: Thrust and power as a function of wind speed estimated using STAR CCM+ versus
EllipSys3D and HAWCStab2 simulations.
According to the preceding Figure 4.35, the thrust and mechanical power generated by the simulation
in STAR CCM+ with both the turbulent and transition models are greater than the results obtained
from both the EllipSys3D and the BEM-based HAWCStab2 simulations, [3]. It is also worth noting
==PAGE:63==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
57
that the results from the turbulent and transition models are nearly identical for both CFD solvers. A
summary of the results of the thrust and power generated from both the turbulent and transition model
from the STAR CCM+ CFD solver is presented in Table 4.11.
Table 4.11: Comparison of the thrust and power generated by the STAR CCM+ turbulence and tran-
sition models
STAR CCM+ Results
Fully Turbulent
Transitional model
Wind Speeds [m/sec]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
8
905.85351
4683.88
917.85351
4740.96
10
1421.6412
9120.031911
1430.641
99195.73542
11
1725.0789
12205.9279
1731.02
12301.62
12
1457.568
12407.30988
1472.568
12521.91408
16
917.79225
11603.18981
929.7923
11702.71452
The preceding Table 4.11 shows that the thrust and power outputs for the turbulence and transition
models do not differ significantly, with the transition model providing slightly higher values. A probable
explanation is that, because the wind turbine blade is huge, the Reynolds number carried by the flow is
also quite large across the wind turbine blade. The local Reynolds number carried by the flow is given
as Equation 4.2,
Re = ρV∞c
µ
(4.2)
where ρ is the density, V∞is the free stream velocity, c is the chord length and µ is the dynamic viscosity.
According to the aforementioned Equation 4.2, the Reynolds number solely depends on the chord length
of the airfoil present inside the wind turbine at a given wind speed because density and dynamic viscosity
are constant. When the wind turbine is large, long chord length airfoils are employed to make the wind
turbine structurally stable. As a result, the Reynolds number for large wind turbines automatically
increases. Because the Reynolds number is very high, the flow becomes practically turbulent or may
be separated from the leading edge of the airfoil.
As stated in the previous chapter, the transition model is implemented in STAR CCM+ using the
Equation 3.56.
This equation checks for the boundary layer height and depending on the value it
triggers the intermittency which initiates the transition process. But since the Reynolds number is
very high near the root region and the flow is turbulent from the leading edge, the intermittency value
is always 1. The transition model is not used if the value of intermittency is set to 1, as indicated
previously in the preceding chapter. However, because the Reynolds number decreases as from the root
to the tip because of the rotation effect, the flow is attached and laminar near the tip region, so for this
region, there might be a possibility that transition model is getting activated and hence increasing the
lift generated. This may be a possible explanation for why the transition model is giving higher values
than the turbulence model. The results of the EllipSys3D simulation presented in the report [3] are
shown in Table 4.12, and it can be observed that there is also very little difference between the thrust
and power generated using the turbulence and transition models for the flow simulation.
==PAGE:64==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
58
Table 4.12: Comparison of the thrust and power generated by the EllipSys3D turbulence and transition
models [3]
EllipSys3D Results
Fully Turbulent
Transitional model
Wind Speeds [m/sec]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
8
817.0
3848.2
822.9
3887.9
10
1282.60
7561
1288.30
7610.7
11
1555.0
10088.5
1560.4
1560.4
12
1325
11170.2
1329
11228.80
16
853.59999
10875.80
857.60
10961
Based on these two observations, it is possible to conclude that the transition model is ineffective for
modelling the transition during flow simulation over large wind turbine blades and that the turbulence
model is suﬀicient for performing flow simulations. However, the transition model is checked again by
simulating the flow over a small wind turbine to ensure that the presented theory is correct. The NREL
phase VI wind turbine blade was chosen, and the experimental data was used to validate the proposed
theory of the effect of Reynolds number, which will be detailed later in this section.
Since the rated power of the wind turbine is stated in the report [3] as 10MW, and according to Fig-
ure 4.35, the most accurate results are derived from the BEM-based HAWCStab2 simulations, whereas
both CFD solvers predict high power for high wind speeds. However, when compared to the STAR
CCM+ CFD solver, the EllipSys3D CFD solver estimates power that’s still closer to the rated power.
The normal and tangential load distribution over the wind turbine blade generated for different wind
speeds as shown in Figure 4.36 is examined to understand the possible reason for this difference in the
thrust and power values between the two CFD solvers.
Figure 4.36: Normal and tangential loads as a function of radius computed for the transition model
using STAR CCM+ and compared to the EllipSys3D results given in the report [3]
==PAGE:65==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
59
The normal and tangential load distribution across the blade for STAR CCM+ is considerably high
when compared to the normal and tangential load distribution of EllipSys3D’s, as seen in the Figure 4.36.
This is the probable explanation for the greater thrust and power generated by STAR CCM+ CFD
solver when compared to the EllipSys3D CFD solver. It is also worth noting that the trend of the
curves for the normal and tangential load generated by STAR CCM+ CFD solver follows exactly the
same trend with the results from the EllipSys3D CFD solver but with higher values, specially near the
tip region of the blade.
A physical explanation to this problem is that, this wind turbine wing experiences excessive thrust
in STAR CCM+ CFD solver because the domain size defined to carryout the flow simulation is not
large enough to allow the flow to flow as a free-stream. Since the top surface of the domain cylinder
is placed at a distance of 200m from the root of the blade, the domain size is insuﬀicient. As a result,
the top surface (wall- no slip) exerts pressure on the incoming flow, making it a pressurized flow and
not a free-stream flow, which increases the loads distributions across the blade specially near the tip
region as shown in Figure 4.36, and hence increasing the thrust and power generated from the wind
turbine. This problem can be solved by expanding the domain size, however doing so greatly increases
the computational costs. The current simulation includes 32 million cells, and increasing the domain
size will further increase the number of cells, hence increasing the computing cost and making the
simulation more time consuming.
A simple solution to this problem is achieved by changing the boundary condition of the top surface
from wall to pressure outlet. Using this boundary condition facilitates in converting the incoming flow
to a free stream rather than a pressured flow because it allows the incoming flow to exit the domain
after passing through the wind turbine rotor.
4.3.3
Modified Boundary Condition
Same as the initial case, a 120◦cylindrical wedge with periodic boundary conditions was used to model
the fluid domain. The inlet of the domain was set at a distance of 360m in front of the blade geometry
whereas the outlet was set at a distance of 240m behind the blade geometry. The top surface of the
cylinder was set at a distance of 200m from the root of the blade. Each surface of the flow domain
were assigned with respective boundary conditions to make the simulation feasible. The front surface of
the flow domain was assigned as velocity inlet whereas the top and back surfaces were assigned as the
pressure outlet. The two bottom surfaces were defined as symmetric planes with periodic interfaces. The
hub cylinder was defined as a wall with slip boundary conditions and the blade itself was designated as a
wall with no-slip boundary conditions. With this new boundary conditions and the mesh setting stated
in Table 4.8, the new flow domain was created. The generated mesh for the fluid domain and blade
using the above mentioned settings again consisted of 32 millions cells and are shown in Figure 4.37.
==PAGE:66==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
60
Figure 4.37: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the flow domain
4.3.4
Simulation results for 10MW wind turbine with the modified boundary
conditions
The flow simulation for the 10MW wind turbine with the new boundary conditions and aforementioned
physics conditions stated in Table 4.9, was carried out for the various wind speeds listed in Table 4.10,
with the pitch angle and rotational speed as shown. But this time, the flow simulation was performed
only using the turbulence model since the transition model was not that effective as stated before. As
previously indicated, the simulation was performed using a single blade to decrease computational costs,
and the results were then multiplied by three to represent three blades.
The thrust and mechanical power generated by the flow simulation using the fully turbulent model
are collected and plotted with the EllipSys3D results provided in the report, [3]. Figure 4.38 depicts
that, the thrust and mechanical power generated by the flow simulation in STAR CCM+ with the new
boundary conditions are very similiar to the EllipSys3D results. A summary of the results of the thrust
and power generated from the STAR CCM+ CFD solver is presented in Table 4.13.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
61
Figure 4.38: Thrust and power as a function of wind speed estimated using STAR CCM+ versus
EllipSys3D and HAWCStab2 simulations.
Table 4.13: The thrust and power as a function of wind speed generated by the STAR CCM+ and
EllipSys3D, [3].
STAR CCM+
Results
EllipSys3D
Results
Fully Turbulent
Fully Turbulent
Wind Speeds [m/sec]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
Thrust [kN]
Power [kW]
8
816.99
3875.95
817.0
3848.2
10
1288.29
7521.91
1282.60
7561
11
1554.99
10053.62
1555.0
10088.5
12
1329.09
11078.73
1325
11170.2
16
857.02
11009.55
853.59
10875.80
The normal and tangential load distribution over the wind turbine blade generated for different wind
speeds as shown in Figure 4.39 is examined to understand the possible reason for this difference in
the thrust and power values between the two CFD solvers. From Figure 4.39, it can be stated that
the normal and tangential loads are almost identical for both the solvers. This is because, the revised
boundary condition allows the flow to exit after passing over the blade through the top surface. So,
there are no additional forces impacting on the blade surface at the tip region, resulting in a lower load
distribution compared to the Figure 4.36. The radial velocity scene shown in Figure 4.40, illustrate the
flow going out of the top of the cylinder after flowing over the wind turbine blade
==PAGE:68==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
62
Figure 4.39: Normal and tangential loads as a function of radius using STAR CCM+ and compared to
the EllipSys3D results given in the report, [3]
Figure 4.40: Illustration of the radial velocity over the top surface of the flow domain
The pressure coeﬀicients at different location on the wind turbine blade for free stream velocity of 10
m/sec, 12 m/sec and 16 m/sec are shown in Figures 4.41, 4.43 and 4.44 respectively. It can be noticed
in all of them that the pressure decreases substantially near the root region of the blade when compared
to the tip region of the blade.
Also, in all of them, the flow separates near the root of the blade,
==PAGE:69==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
63
whereas the flow near the tip blade remains attached. This outcome makes sense because the blade’s
root region is made up of thick and circular airfoils to give structural stability whereas the its tip region
is made up of thin airfoils to increase the aerodynamic performance. Because the thick airfoils near the
root region have very high angles of attack, a very high pressure is generated at the stagnation point,
and as the flow passes over the airfoil’s circular leading edge curvature, the pressure rapidly decreases
after the stagnation point, causing the flow velocity to increase drastically. The pressure rises rapidly
as the flow moves inward over the airfoil, causing the pressure gradient to increase significantly and
after a certain point over the surface of the airfoil the pressure gradient becomes positive hence causing
the flow velocity to fall drastically and forcing the flow to separate at that point. The separated flow
then gradually moves from the root of the blade to the tip because of the centrifugal acceleration and
pressure gradient acting in the radial direction. However, because of the the rotation effect [4], the
flow gets reattached as it moves near the tip region of the blade. The rotation effect reduces the angles
of attack, resulting in a smaller pressure drop after the stagnation point for airfoils at the tip region
compared to airfoils in the root region.
The velocity scene at the root and tip of the blade for the different wind speed in Figure 4.45 shows
that the flow is getting separated at the root region and the flow remains attached in the tip region
which is consistent with the pressure plots. It can be also seen that because of the circular curvature of
the airfoils near the root region the velocity of the flow is very high after the stagnation point whereas
for the airfoils near the root region doesn’t generated that much high velocity. This happens because
the angle of attack is very high for the airfoils near the root region as it consist of high thickness to
chord ratio (t/c) compared to the airfoils near the root region whose thickness to chord ratio is not that
very high hence the angle of attack is low. The Flow streamlines over the suction side of the blade for
different wind as shown in Figure 4.46, also illustrate that the flow is getting separated near the root
of the blade and develops a complex flow near the root region whereas the flow is attached near the tip
region of the blade because of the rotation effect.
Figure 4.41: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 10m/sec
==PAGE:70==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
64
Figure 4.42: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 11m/sec
Figure 4.43: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 12m/sec.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 10MW wind turbine
65
Figure 4.44: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 16m/sec
Figure 4.45: Velocity flow field over the airfoils present near the root and tip of the blade for different
wind speeds
==PAGE:72==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
66
Figure 4.46: Illustration of the flow streamlines over the suction side of the blade
As the experimental data for the 10MW wind turbine was not available, the accuracy of the mathemat-
ical model cannot be properly validated. So, the NREL Phase VI wind turbine was simulated using the
same mathematical models, since the experimental data for this wind turbine was available. Also, the
NREL wind turbine blade simulation was done to validate the effectiveness of the boundary condition
specified for the top surface of the domain and check whether this boundary condition can produce
good results with less number of cells in the domain.
4.4
NREL Phase VI wind turbine
M.M.Hand et al. [14], at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) conducted experiments
on the Phase VI rotor for various wind turbine designs using the wind tunnel at NASA Ames Research
Center in May 2000. Figure 4.47, shows the wind tunnel facility located at the NASA Ames Research
Center in Moffett Field. This was the only wind tunnel significant large enough to accommodate a wind
turbine with a diameter of 10m. The wind tunnel facility had a dimension of 24.4m x 36.6m. Because
the large cross-section size, the wind tunnel’s blockage effects were insignificant.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
67
Figure 4.47: NASA Ames Research Center Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex, including a close-up of
the fan motors and a (24.4m x 36.6m) test section [14]
.
The wind turbine used in the NREL Ames Phase VI tests was a 2-bladed, stall-regulated HAWT with
a power rating of nearly 20 kW. Figure 4.48, illustrates the NREL Phase VI rotor placed inside the
wind tunnel facility. The rotor diameter of the wind turbine was approximately 10.056m with length of
each blade begin 5.028m, as shown in Figure 4.49. The blade consisted of 21% thick laminar-flow S809
airfoils from root to tip. This airfoil was designed by Dan M. Somers from State College of Pennsylvania
specially for wind turbine applications, [36].
The tapered and twisted blades were optimized by P.
Giguere and M. Selig at the University of Illinois, [12]. The twist angle along the blade is shown in
Figure 4.50.
Figure 4.48: NREL wind turbine rotor inside the wind tunnel facility [14]
==PAGE:74==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
68
Figure 4.49: NREL Phase VI wind turbine blade design [14]
Figure 4.50: Twist angle of the NREL Phase VI wind turbine blade [30]
As the aerodynamic and aero-elastic measurements for the wind turbine was available for this wind
turbine it was used to validate the CFD models stated in the previous section.
The experimental
data sets for 7m/sec, 10m/sec, 13m/sec and 15m/sec were colleted from the NREL database and were
compared with simulation results to validate the models and to state the eﬀiciency of STAR CCM+
CFD solver in regards to carrying out wind turbine simulations. Futhermore, the outcomes from STAR
CCM+ were also compared with the results from EllipSys2D CFD solver given by Neils N. Sørensen,
[37].
4.4.1
Numerical modelling for NREL wind turbine
4.4.1.1
Geometry
The 3D CAD model for the wind turbine was made using the description stated in Figures 4.49 and
4.50 using solidworks and was imported to STAR CCM+. The blade was constructed with the S809
==PAGE:75==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
69
airfoil and the airfoils were present from 25% section of the blade to the tip of the blade. The overall
length of the imported blade was 5.028m. By adding 2mm of thickness to the trailing edge of the blade,
it was transformed into a blunt trailing edge. A blunt trailing edge is required because it enhances the
lift characteristics of the airfoil and also provides more structural volume than a sharp trailing edge,
[39]. A comparison of the mechanical power and toque between a blunt trailing edge blade and a sharp
trailing edge blade will be discussed later in the section to validate the importance of having a blunt
trailing edge.
Figure 4.51: CAD model of the NREL wind turbine blade
A 180◦cylindrical wedge with periodic boundary conditions was used to model the fluid domain. This
allowed to model the fluid flow in a rotational reference frame rather than a moving mesh which reduced
the computational cost significantly as one only blade could be used to carryout the simulation instead
of using two blades. The cylindrical domain measured 55m in length and 25m in radius. The inlet of
the domain was set at a distance of 25m in front of the blade geometry whereas the outlet was set at
a distance of 30m behind the blade geometry. The top surface of the cylinder was set at a distance of
20m from the root of the blade. Figures 4.52 and 4.53 illustrated the outside and inside view of the
fluid domain.
==PAGE:76==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
70
Figure 4.52: Illustration of the fluid domain from outside
Figure 4.53: Illustration of the fluid domain from inside
4.4.1.2
Mesh generation
Mesh for the flow domain was created using automated mesh operations, to make the mesh generation
completely 3-dimensional because the flow over a wind turbine rotor is 3-dimensional. When fluid flows
over the rotor of a wind turbine, it begins to separate from the root to the tip of the blade. This
==PAGE:77==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
71
happens because the pressure gradient operates in a radial direction, forcing the fluid to separate into
3-dimensions across the wind turbine blade. So, a 3-dimensional flow simulation is needed to account for
this phenomenon and to provide a more realistic estimate of the flow field around a wind turbine and to
have a 3-dimensional flow a 3-dimensional mesh is required for resolving flow’s governing equation. Each
surface of the flow domain were assigned with respective boundary conditions to make the simulation
feasible. The front surface of the flow domain was assigned as velocity inlet whereas the top and the
back surface were assigned as the pressure outlet. The two bottom surfaces were defined as symmetric
planes with periodic interfaces. The hub cylinder was defined as a wall with slip boundary conditions
and the blade itself was designated as a wall with no-slip boundary conditions. Once the flow domain
was ready for executing the mesh operation, polygonal mesher along with the surface remesher and
prism layer mesher were defined as the mesh type. The values for the polygonal mesher and prism layer
mesher should be specified accordingly to make a smooth transition between the two mesher because it
is important for getting good results for the lift and drag coeﬀicient. The mesh base size for the entire
fluid domain was set to 1m. A Surface control was added to the blade surface to create a finer mesh
around the blade in order to resolve the RANS equation well and achieve good results. Summary of
the values used to carryout the mesh operations are shown in the following Table 4.14.
Table 4.14: Mesh Settings used in STAR CCM+ for the surface control of the NREL blade
Surface Control over the Airfoil Surface
Target Surface Size (m)
0.004
Minimum Surface Size (m)
0.003
Surface curvature (Pts/circ)
120
Surface Growth Rate
1.2
Number of Prism Layers
20
Prism Layer Stretching
1.2
Prism Layer Total Thickness (m)
0.008
A volumetric control was added around the blade to create a smooth transition from the prism layers
on the blade’s surface to the mesh surrounding the blade. The mesh of the volumetric control had a cell
size of 0.005m. The generated mesh for the fluid domain and blade using the above mentioned settings
consisted of 10.34 millions cells and are shown in Figures 4.54 and 4.55.
==PAGE:78==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
72
Figure 4.54: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the flow domain
Figure 4.55: Illustration of polygonal mesh generated for the over the blade
4.4.1.3
Implementation of the Physics model
The physics models used to carryout the simulation for the flow over the wind turbine blade is shown
in Table 4.15,
==PAGE:79==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
73
Table 4.15: Physics Model used in STAR CCM+
Physics Model
Space
Three Dimensional
Time
Steady
Material
Gas
Flow
Segregated Flow
Equation of State
Constant Density
Viscous Regime
Turbulent
Turbulence Model
Reynolds-Average Navier-Strokes (RANS)
Reynolds-Average Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence
K-Omega Turbulence Models
Shear Stress Transport (SST) K-Omega
K-Omega Wall Treatment
All y+ Wall Treatment
According Ece Sagol et al. [32], if a flow simulation was carried in a rotating reference frame, the
unsteady state flow is converted to steady state flow, so the flow simulation was carried out using steady
state solver with constant density. The density and dynamic viscosity of the gas was taken as 1.246
kg/m3 and 1.7962E-5 Pa-s respectively.The RANS model was used to govern the motion of the fluid
inside the fluid domain. The k −ω SST turbulence model was implemented with the RANS model
to resolve the turbulence flow over the airfoil. The γ −Reθ model was implemented with SST k −ω
turbulence model to model for the transition. The flow simulation for this investigation was performed
for four winds with a fixed rotational speeds of 72 rpm for all different wind speeds and a fixed pitch
angle of 3◦in the direction of the flow, [14].
And an ambient source term was added in the inlet
conditions.
4.4.2
Simulation results of NREL Phase VI wind turbine
The flow simulation for the NREL wind turbine with the aforementioned physics conditions was carried
out for 7m/sec, 10m/sec, 13m/sec and 15m/sec wind speeds with the fixed pitch angle and rotational
speed stated before. The flow simulation was performed using the turbulence model first, and subse-
quently the transition model. The simulation was performed using a single blade to decrease compu-
tational costs, and the results were then multiplied by two to represent two blades. The torque and
mechanical power generated from the flow simulation using the the turbulence model were collected
and displayed alongside the experimental data as shown in Figure 4.56. The torque and mechanical
power generated by the simulation in STAR CCM+ with the turbulent model gave a good agreement
with the experimental data for 7m/sec and 10m/sec wind speeds. However for 13m/sec and 15m/sec
wind speeds there is a big deviation between the experimental data and obtained results. A plausible
explanation is that the flow separates from the leading edge of the airfoils at high wind speeds because
the angle of attack is very large.
==PAGE:80==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
74
Figure 4.56: Torque and power as a function of wind speed calculated in STAR CCM+ using the
turbulence model vs the experimental data
In Figure 4.57, the pressure coeﬀicient plot for a wind speed of 7m/sec correspond well with the ex-
perimental data.
The pressure generated on the pressure side of the airfoil is consistent with the
experimental data. For the airfoils present at 30% and 47% r/R, it can be noticed that the pressure
decreases when the flow travels over the leading edge curvature of these airfoils. And as the flow travels
inward toward the trailing edge of the airfoil, the pressure increases gradually till a certain point on
the suction side of the airfoil but then rapidly increases. Even though there is high pressure gradient,
separation doesn’t take place indicating high lift is generated at these section of the blade. Whereas, for
the airfoils present at at 95% r/R, it can be noted that the pressure gradient generated over the suction
side of these airfoils is almost constant indicating that the flow is separated at the tip of the blade
indicating lower generation of lift. But, for the experimental data there is a small pressure gradient
over the suction side near the leading edge. So, the lift generated by the experimental data is a bit
higher and this may be the reason for the very the little deviation in the torque and power generated
between the turbulence model and the experimental data.
Figure 4.58 illustrates that the pressure coeﬀicient plot for a wind speed of 10m/sec have a good
agreement with the experimental data. However, it can be noticed that a high pressure is generated on
the suction side of the airfoil at 30% r/R, because of which the pressure difference is higher and hence
the generated torque and power is slightly higher than the experimental one.
However, for the 13m/sec and 15m/sec wind speeds shown in Figures 4.59 and 4.60, the results predicted
by the turbulence model is not corresponding well with the experimental data. The pressure generated
on the pressure side is somewhat equivalent to the experimental data, but the pressure generated on the
suction side does not agree well with the experimental data. It can be noticed that the flow is mostly
separated from the leading edge of the airfoils which explains the reason for having lower torque and
power generated at these wind speeds. For the 13m/sec and 15m/sec wind speeds a strange behaviour
is observed for the flow over the blade. Because of the high angle of attack, the flow separates near the
root area of the blade, but because to the rotation effect, the flow becomes attached and then separates
again due to the large pressure gradient near the tip region. The flow streamlines generated on the
suction side of the blade for 7m/sec, 10m/sec, 13m/sec and 15m/sec as shown in Figure 4.61, shows that
the behaviour of the flow over the surface of the blade becomes very complex as the wind speed increases.
The streamline distribution on the suction side of the blade for a wind speed of 7m/sec demonstrates
that flow near the blade’s root is separated and a radial flow is created due to the influence of centrifugal
==PAGE:81==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
75
acceleration and the pressure gradient in the radial direction. The separated flow gradually moves till
a certain span-wise length. However, after that point, the flow is attached due to the rotation effect
and steadily passes over the blade surface. As the wind speed increases, the streamlines on the blade
surface generate increasingly complex flow patterns due to high angles of attack and radial flow in the
spanwise direction.
Figure 4.57: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 7 m/sec
Figure 4.58: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 10 m/sec
==PAGE:82==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
76
Figure 4.59: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 13 m/sec
Figure 4.60: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 15 m/sec
==PAGE:83==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
77
Figure 4.61: Illustration of the flow streamlines on the suction side of the blade for the turbulent model
Based on these results, it is possible to conclude that the turbulence model is capable of producing
acceptable results, showing that the turbulence model is operating properly. Figure 4.62, illustrates the
comparison between the obtained results of the turbulence model in this project with some of the CFD
results done by others, [37, 45, 44, 2, 30]. It is observed that the results for torque generated is very
close to the experimental data for this experiment when compared to the other results. Now that the
validity of the turbulence has been established, the γ −Reθ transition model is implemented and its
performance is evaluated.
Figure 4.62: Shaft torque comparison between the present study with some of the recent experiment
done by others
==PAGE:84==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
78
Figure 4.63: Torque and power as a function of wind speed calculated in STAR CCM+ using both
turbulence and transition model vs the experimental data
In Figure 4.63, the torque and mechanical power generated by the transition model is having a good
agreement with the turbulence model and experimental data, especially for low wind speeds. It can be
see that for 7m/sec and 10m/sec, the transition model is predicting slightly higher value than both the
turbulence model and experimental data. So, it can be said that the transition model is able to delay
the laminar-turbulent transition helping to increase the torque and power. However, for the higher wind
speeds the transition model is predicting lower values for torque and power. The possible explanation
for the lower values in torque and power is because, for these wind speeds the separation is taking place
near the leading edge of the airfoil.
In Figure 4.64, the pressure coeﬀicient plot for 7m/sec illustrate that the pressure generated on the
suction and pressure side of the airfoil are identical from both the models.
The pressure gradient
generated over the suction side of the airfoils present near the root region are almost identical except
for the pressure gradient generated near the tip region. The pressure gradient is higher for the transition
model near the tip region. Also, it can be seen that separation is taking place near the tip region for
the turbulence model but for the transition model there is no separation taking place. This is probably
the reason for higher torque and power from the transition model at 7m/sec than the turbulence model.
For 10m/sec wind speed, the pressure generated on the suction and the pressure side of the airfoils at
different section of the blade are almost identical except for minor difference in the pressure gradient for
the airfoils near the root section as shown in Figure 4.65. It can be seen that for the transition model
the pressure difference between the suction and pressure side is higher than the turbulence mode. Also,
in case of the turbulence model, there is separation in the root region because of the drastic increase
of pressure, whereas the for the transition model avoids this separation. So these may be the possible
reason for the transition model to predict higher values. In this article by Niels N. Sørensen [37], stated
that, for 10m/sec wind the transition model doesn’t encounter any separation near the root region but
for 10.5m/sec wind speed separation is observed near the root region of this NREL blade.
However, for the 13m/sec and 15m/sec wind speeds shown in Figures 4.59 and 4.60, the results predicted
by the transition model is somewhat corresponding with the turbulence model but not at all with the
experimental data. The pressure generated on the pressure side is somewhat equivalent to the turbulence
model and experimental data, but the pressure generated on the suction side does not agree well with
the experimental data. It can be noticed that the flow is mostly separated from the leading edge of the
airfoils which explains the reason for having lower torque and power generated at these wind speeds.
==PAGE:85==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
79
Figure 4.64: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 7 m/sec
Figure 4.65: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 10 m/sec
==PAGE:86==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
80
Figure 4.66: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 13 m/sec
Figure 4.67: Pressure Coeﬀicient for different r/R at 15 m/sec
The obtained results from STAR CCM+ CFD solver is then compared with the results the EllipSys3D
CFD solver provided in the article, [37]. In Figure 4.68, the torque generated by the turbulence and
the transition model from STAR CCM+ CFD solver is completely different from the results predicted
by the Ellipsys3D solver. The turbulence model in STAR CCM+ is able to provide values much closer
to the experimental data whereas the turbulence model implemented in EllipSys3D over predicted the
==PAGE:87==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
81
torque values. However, the transition model in both the CFD solvers are able to give somewhat more
similar results.
Figure 4.68: Comparison of the torque as a function of wind speed calculated in STAR CCM+ using
both turbulence and transition model vs EllipSys3d results and the experimental data
Figure 4.69: Comparison of the torque and power as a function of wind speed calculated in STAR CCM+
using both turbulence and transition model vs the experimental data for blunt and sharp trailing edge
==PAGE:88==
4.4 NREL Phase VI wind turbine
82
Figure 4.69, shows that a blade with a blunt trailing edge produces more torque and power than a
blade with a sharp trailing edge. Also it can be noticed that the blade with blunt trailing edge gives
results much closer to the experimental on compared to the sharp trailing edge where it under predicts
from the experimental data. This result shows that a blunt trailing edge is more effective than a sharp
trailing edge when conducting flow simulation over a wind turbine blade and should be used since it
improves the lift characteristics of the airfoil, as mentioned in [39].
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The main purpose of the project was to analyze the flow through a 10MW offshore wind turbine blade
designed by DTU Wind Energy using numerical RANS simulation in STAR CCM+ in order to evaluate
its aerodynamic performance and to verify STAR CCM+’s capabilities to perform large wind turbine
simulations. The mathematical model for carrying out the flow simulation was developed by assuming
the flow field to be steady, and the turbulent flow was modelled using the k −ω SST turbulence
model. Furthermore, the Gamma ReTheta transition (γ −g
Reθt) model was implemented to capture the
laminar portion of the flow field on the airfoils and wind turbines. Flow simulation for two airfoils and
two wind turbines was done using the developed mathematical model and its eﬀiciency was validated
by comparing with the experimental datas and with results from EllipSys2D/3D CFD solvers.
All of the flow simulations were conducted using an ambient source term in the inlet to help neutralize
the degradation of the turbulent intensity. Because turbulent intensity was necessary for the transition
model, the incorporation of the ambient source term was critical for running the simulations.
The flow simulation for the airfoil FFA-W3-241 using the selected mathematical showed that the turbu-
lence model was able to provide good results when compared to the experimental data. The transition
model also gave good and dependable results with slight over prediction at high angles of attack, in-
dicating the transition model was able to predict the laminar-turbulent transition point and delayed
this transition process improving the lift characteristic of the airfoil. This indicated that the transition
model is very effective for doing flow simulation with low Reynolds number. The static pressure and
the velocity plot indicated that for the low angles of attack, the flow remained attached and for high
angle of attack the flow separated leading to the generation of vortexes and decreasing the aerodynamic
performance of the airfoil. Furthermore, upon comparing the obtained results with the EllipSys2D CFD
solver, it was understood that the transition model behaved differently for both the CFD solvers and
further investigation needs to done to understand the working of transition model in STAR CCM+.
To validate the selected mathematical model furthermore, flow simulation for the airfoil DU08-W-210
was done. The outcomes of the flow simulation using the selected mathematical showed that the turbu-
lence model was able to provide good results with slight under-predicted values when compared to the
experimental data. The transition model also gave good and dependable results with slight over predic-
tion at high angles of attack, indicating the transition model was able to predict the laminar-turbulent
transition point and delayed this transition process improving the lift characteristic of the airfoil.
The mathematical model was then implemented to carryout the flow simulation for the 10MW wind
turbine. The flow simulation was done by using a rotating reference frame with periodic boundary
to reduce the computational cost. The simulation results for both the model showed over predicted
values for the thrust and power when slip wall boundary condition was used on the top surface of the
domain. Whereas using the modified boundary condition with pressure outlet in the top surface helped
to reduce the thrust and power generated and give similar results to the EllipSys3D and HAWCStab2
simulations. Also, the flow simulation showed that the turbulence model and transition model predicted
almost similar values with the latter showing a slight higher values. The possible explanation was that,
the Reynolds number carried by the flow was very high indicating the flow became turbulent from the
leading edge of the blade surface. So using the transition model for big wind turbine simulation in STAR
CCM+ is not very effective and only turbulence model can be more than enough to get dependable
==PAGE:90==
5 Conclusion
84
results. Furthermore, it showed that to carryout flow simulation for large wind turbine a very high
domain with fine meshing was required in order to get accurate results. The implementation of the
pressure outlet boundary helped to use a smaller domain with reasonable mesh to give accurate and
dependable results. Since the experimental data for this wind turbine was not available it was not
completely convincing whether the turbulence model was working properly or not even though it gave
very good results when compared to the EllipSys and HAWCStab2 results. So the turbulence model and
the transition model was validated by carrying flow simulation over the NREL Phase VI wind turbine
blade whose experimental data were available.
The simulations result for the NREL blade showed
that the turbulence model was working very well as it predicted value very close to the experimental
data. This results also validated that the results predicted by the turbulence model for the 10MW wind
turbine was dependable and can be trusted.
However, the transition model predicted slightly higher values than the turbulence model for low angle
of attacks but when very low values for high angles of attack. This trend was a bit different from the
trend observed for the 10MW wind turbine. The probable explanation for this was that, the 10MW
consisted of different pitch angles which helped to reduce the angles of attack whereas the NREL blade
had the same pitch angle for the high wind speeds which increased the angles of attack and caused
separation that reduced the eﬀiciency of the transition model. The flow streamlines over the surface of
the NREL blade showed that the separated flow was strongly influenced by the rotational effects. The
flow simulation for the NREL wind turbine was done using the pressure outlet boundary condition for
the top surface of the fluid domain and it showed that using this boundary condition for flow simulation
can help to reduce the domain size without affecting the results. And finally the flow simulation showed
the importance of having a blunt trailing edge instead of a sharp trailing edge of wind turbine blades.
As blunt trailing edge increased the aerodynamic characteristic of the wind turbine.
Even though the turbulence and transition models functioned well in STAR CCm+, further research
should be conducted concentrating on the implementation of the γ −g
Reθt transition model to high
angle of attacks. Since in this investigation the wake behind the turbine blade was not taken into
consideration, future research can be conducted on the production of wake behind the wind turbine in
details using the RANS model and high fidelity LES model.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Giada Abate, Dimitri N Mavris, and Lakshmi N Sankar. “Performance effects of leading edge
tubercles on the nrel phase vi wind turbine blade.” In: Journal of Energy Resources Technology
141.5 (2019).
[2]
Aniket Aranake, Vinod Lakshminarayan, and Karthik Duraisamy. “Assessment of transition
model and CFD methodology for wind turbine flows.” In: (2012), page 2720.
[3]
Christian Bak. Description of the DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine. Technical University of
Denmark: Department of Wind Energy, 2013.
[4]
Simon-Philippe Breton. “Study of the stall delay phenomenon and of wind turbine blade dynamics
using numerical approaches and NREL’s wind tunnel tests.” In: (2008).
[5]
Hao Chen and Ning Qin. “Trailing-edge flow control for wind turbine performance and load
control.” In: Renewable Energy 105 (2017), pages 419–435.
[6]
Global Wind Energy Council. GLOBAL WIND REPORT 2019. 2020. url: https://gwec.net/
global-wind-report-2021/.
[7]
Dnyanesh A. Digraskar. Simulations of Flow Over Wind Turbines. University of Massachusetts
Amherst: Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, 2010.
[8]
wind Europe. Wind energy in Europe - 2020 Statistics and the outlook for 2021-2025. 2020. url:
https://windeurope.org/intelligence-platform/product/wind-energy-in-europe-in-
2020-trends-and-statistics/.
[9]
Eurostat. Energy, transport and environment statistics. 2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/web/products-statistical-books/-/ks-dk-20-001.
[10]
Joel H Ferziger, Milovan Perić, and Robert L Street. Computational methods for fluid dynamics.
Volume 3. Springer, 2002.
[11]
Peter Fuglsang. Wind tunnel tests of the FFA-W3-241, FFA-W3-301 and NACA 63-430 airfoils.
Rosklide: Risø National Laboratory, 1998.
[12]
P Giguere and Michael S Selig. Design of a tapered and twisted blade for the NREL combined
experiment rotor. 1999.
[13]
Rohith Giridhar. Prediction of aerodynamic noise generated by wind turbine blades. University of
Kansas School of Engineering: Department of Aerospace Engineering, 2016.
[14]
MM Hand et al. Unsteady aerodynamics experiment phase VI: wind tunnel test configurations and
available data campaigns. 2001.
[15]
Martin O. L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon,
Oxon OX14 4RN: Routledge, 2015.
[16]
Thomas Hansen. Wind Turbine Simulations Using Navier-Stokes CFD. Royal Institute of Tech-
nology: Department of Aerospace Engineering, 2010.
[17]
Erich Hau. Wind turbine Fundamentals, Technologies, Application, Economics. Berlin: Springer,
2006.
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
86
[18]
Kanin Homsrivaranon. Investigation of Active Flow Control on an Extremely Thick Wind Turbine
Airfoil. University of Kansas School of Engineering: Department of Aerospace Engineering, 2016.
[19]
Junling Hu et al. “Validation of turbulence models in STAR-CCM+ by NACA 23012 airfoil
characteristics.” In: (2009).
[20]
IEA. Technology Roadmap, Wind Energy. 2013.
[21]
Forrester T Johnson, Edward N Tinoco, and N Jong Yu. “Thirty years of development and
application of CFD at Boeing Commercial Airplanes, Seattle.” In: Computers & Fluids 34.10
(2005), pages 1115–1151.
[22]
WP Jones and Brian Edward Launder. “The prediction of laminarization with a two-equation
model of turbulence.” In: International journal of heat and mass transfer 15.2 (1972), pages 301–
314.
[23]
Peyman Khayatzadeh and Siva Nadarajah. “Laminar-turbulent flow simulation for wind turbine
profiles using the γ–transition model.” In: Wind Energy 17.6 (2014), pages 901–918.
[24]
Cecilia Mortensen Kobæk. Investigation of wavy surface blade sections. Technical University of
Denmark: Department of Wind Energy, 2016.
[25]
Qunfeng Lu et al. “Study of CFD simulation of a 3-D wind turbine.” In: 1 (2011), pages 596–600.
[26]
P Malan, K Suluksna, and E Juntasaro. “Calibrating the-re transition model for commercial cfd.”
In: AIAA Paper 1142 (2009).
[27]
Florian R Menter. “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications.”
In: AIAA journal 32.8 (1994), pages 1598–1605.
[28]
Florianr Menter. “Zonal two equation kw turbulence models for aerodynamic flows.” In: (1993),
page 2906.
[29]
FR Menter. “A comparison of some recent eddy-viscosity turbulence models.” In: (1996).
[30]
Jang-Oh Mo and Young-Ho Lee. “CFD Investigation on the aerodynamic characteristics of a small-
sized wind turbine of NREL PHASE VI operating with a stall-regulated method.” In: Journal of
mechanical science and technology 26.1 (2012), pages 81–92.
[31]
Jeppe Johansen Niels N. Sørensen Franck Bertagnolio and Peter Fuglsang. Wind turbine airfoil
catalogue. Rosklide: Risø National Laboratory, 2001.
[32]
Ece Sagol, Marcelo Reggio, and Adrian Ilinca. “Assessment of two-equation turbulence models
and validation of the performance characteristics of an experimental wind turbine by CFD.” In:
International Scholarly Research Notices 2012 (2012).
[33]
François G Schmitt. “About Boussinesq’s turbulent viscosity hypothesis: historical remarks and a
direct evaluation of its validity.” In: Comptes Rendus Mécanique 335.9-10 (2007), pages 617–627.
[34]
Siemens. Simcenter STAR-CCM+ Documentation. 2020.
[35]
Marilyn J Smith et al. “Evaluation of Computational Fluid Dynamics to Determine Two-Dimensional
Airfoil Characteristics for Rotorcraft Applications.” In: Journal of the American Helicopter Society
51.1 (2006), pages 70–79.
[36]
Dan M Somers. Design and experimental results for the S809 airfoil. 1997.
[37]
Niels N Sørensen. “CFD modelling of laminar-turbulent transition for airfoils and rotors using
the γ- model.” In: Wind Energy: An International Journal for Progress and Applications in Wind
Power Conversion Technology 12.8 (2009), pages 715–733.
[38]
Philippe R Spalart and Christopher L Rumsey. “Effective inflow conditions for turbulence models
in aerodynamic calculations.” In: AIAA journal 45.10 (2007), pages 2544–2553.
[39]
KJ Standish and CP Van Dam. “Aerodynamic analysis of blunt trailing edge airfoils.” In: J. Sol.
Energy Eng. 125.4 (2003), pages 479–487.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
87
[40]
Jørgen Jensen Tande. CFD Study of a 10 MW Offshore Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine Blade.
Norwegian University of Science and Technology: Department of Physics, 2011.
[41]
James L Tangler. “The nebulous art of using wind tunnel aerofoil data for predicting rotor perfor-
mance.” In: Wind Energy: An International Journal for Progress and Applications in Wind Power
Conversion Technology 5.2-3 (2002), pages 245–257.
[42]
Martin Widden. Fluid dynamics: continuity principle and Bernoulli’s equation. Springer, 1996,
pages 151–200.
[43]
David C Wilcox et al. Turbulence modeling for CFD. Volume 2. DCW industries La Canada, CA,
1998.
[44]
Mukesh Marutrao Yelmule and Eswararao Anjuri Vsj. “CFD predictions of NREL phase VI ro-
tor experiments in NASA/AMES wind tunnel.” In: International Journal of Renewable Energy
Research (IJRER) 3.2 (2013), pages 261–269.
[45]
Ri-Kui Zhang and Van Dam Jie-Zhi Wu. “Aerodynamic characteristics of wind turbine blades
with a sinusoidal leading edge.” In: Wind Energy 15.3 (2012), pages 407–424.
==PAGE:94==
