==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Computer Science and Engineering
Deep learning based Gesture Determina-
tion Method for Contactless Fingerprint De-
tection
Mengge Hu (s192113)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Deep Learning based Gesture Determination Method for Contactless Fingerprint Detection
Author:
Mengge Hu (s192113)
Local supervisor:
Christian D. Jensen, Associate Professor
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
First supervisor:
Christoph Busch, Prof. Dr.
Department of Information Security and Communication Technology
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Second supervisor:
Jannis Priesnitz, Ph.D.
ATHENE – National Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Project period: January 2021 - June 2021
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Computer Science and Engineering
Field: Artificial Intelligence and Algorithms
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Fingerprint identification is a high-tech security facility based on biometric technol-
ogy, among which contactless fingerprint identification has the advantages of high
acceptance and high hygiene. It is a hot research topic in the field of biometric iden-
tification at present. However, compared with traditional fingerprint processing, the
image background of contactless fingerprint processing is more complicated. Robust
fingertip detection is a very important pre-processing in contactless fingerprint recog-
nition.
The task of this project is to deal with several types of diﬀicult samples during
fingertip segmentation in contactless fingerprint recognition, such as distinguishing
the inside of the finger from the nail cap and the degree of looseness between fingers.
The project simulates the architecture of a cascade system and designs a series of fil-
ters to filter erroneous samples. Among them, Single Shot Multibox Detector (SSD)
is used to detect the number of nails in the images with an accuracy of 98.00%, and
the hand key point recognition API is used to detect the coordinates of 21 key points
on the hand with an accuracy of 94.00%. Due to the specificity of the data for this
project, the publicly available dataset was not fully compliant with the requirements
of the project. Therefore, the database for this project is a combination of separately
collected data and publicly available data. By building multiple classifiers, such as
logistic regression, support vector machine, and multi-layer perceptron, the final data
aggregated after processing were trained separately for classification, and the best ac-
curacy of the final classifier was 78.00% using 10 fold and 20 fold cross-validation for
multi-angle cross-sectional comparison. Thus, the final accuracy of the whole project
is 71.85%. The modules designed for the project have been tested successfully, and
the entire project runs correctly and returns the correct output.
Keywords: Contactless fingertip recognition, Nail detection, Hand keypoint detec-
tion, Object Detection
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis is prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements to obtain a Master’s degree in Artificial Intelligence and Algorithms in
Computer Science. The workload of the thesis is 30 ECTS, from January 25, 2021, to
June 25, 2021. The work presented in this paper was supervised by Prof. Christoph
Busch and Dr. Jannis Priesnitz.
This project was approved by Assoc. Prof. Christian D. Jensen, the section leader of
system security section at DTU Informatics.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Mengge Hu (s192113)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
After completing my dissertation, I would like to express my gratitude to those who
have encouraged and supported me during my studies.
Deepest thanks to my supervisors Jannis and Christoph. without their patient guid-
ance and insightful feedback, it would have been diﬀicult for me to complete this
project. I would especially like to thank Jannis again for the weekly online meetings
and his generous help with my job search.
In addition, I would like to express my gratitude to my closest and most impor-
tant friends Yi, Shujun, and Wenhao for their companionship and encouragement,
without which I would not have been able to complete my studies alone in a foreign
country. I would also like to mention my parents for their full support and comfort
throughout my graduate studies. Finally, I would also like to thank my friend Manxi
for supervising and encouraging each other to complete our theses.
In addition, I would like to thank the scholars whose academic papers and mono-
graphs have inspired me in this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
9
3
Preliminaries
13
3.1
Object Detection Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Classifier Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Contributed Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Database
33
4.1
Nail Detection Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Hand Classifier Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Implementation and Discussion
43
5.1
Nail Detection Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Hand Keypoint Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Hand Position Classifier Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Result Discussion and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
With the continuous innovation and development of technology, the mobile storage
industry is also facing new opportunities and challenges. Storage security is receiving
more attention and expectation, among which is biometric technology.
Biometric
technology has a long history and has developed to include the identification of var-
ious different human biometric features. The downstream application field has also
penetrated from the initial criminal investigation to many different industries, espe-
cially the application on mobile terminals, and the role and convenience of biometric
technology in personal identification is even more prominent, while the expansion of
demand has formed a promotion role for the development of the industry and realized
a good The positive feedback effect is achieved.
Facilitated by artificial intelligence analysis technology, biometrics will rapidly change
the traditional mode of human-computer interaction in various life scenes, thus form-
ing a closed loop of positive feedback loop. Biometric identification is a method of
personal identification by using the inherent physiological characteristics of the hu-
man body, such as fingerprint, face, iris, etc., and behavioral characteristics, such
as handwriting, voice, gait, etc., closely combined by computer and high-tech means,
such as optical, acoustic and biological sensors, etc. Therefore, it can be roughly
divided into two categories from biometric identification technology: physiological
special identification and behavioral characteristics identification.
The commonly
used biometric identification technologies mainly include face recognition, fingerprint
recognition, iris recognition, behavior recognition and gait recognition.
From the point of view of the successive time of appearance of different technologies,
the fingerprint is the earlier one which is effectively discovered and utilized by people,
so it also obtains a longer time of development and evolution. Fingerprint recognition
is an identification technology based on the difference of fingerprint patterns on the
finger surface. Fingerprints are textures formed by the distribution of sweat glands
on the surface of the human finger, and currently optical and semiconductor finger-
print recognition technologies are commonly used, both of which obtain fingerprint
images based on the characteristics of sweat in sweat glands. Optical technology is
based on the absorption of light by sweat, while semiconductor fingerprint recogni-
tion technology is based on the electrical effect of sweat as an electrolyte to obtain
fingerprint images. Fingerprint identification technology, by its high practicality and
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
feasibility, has become the most commonly used and legally valid biometric technol-
ogy. This technology system is a pattern recognition system that includes modules
for fingerprint image acquisition, processing, feature extraction and comparison. It is
commonly used in places that require personnel identification, such as access control
systems, time and attendance systems, laptop computers, internal bank processing,
bank payments, etc.
Nevertheless, there are still problems in traditional fingerprint recognition such as
fingerprint deformation, residue of lines, sensitivity to skin conditions, and bacteria
transmission due to the collection process by contacting optical or capacitive sensors.
There are currently two types of fingerprint recognition on the market, optical and
capacitive fingerprint recognition, and these technologies require contact between the
human body and the recognition instrument. Thus this technology is very easy to be
obtained illegally, and the material for forging fingerprints can be used as long as it
has a light-absorbing effect or conductive effect, which is very easy to do under the
present technical conditions, for example, it is easy to crack optical and semiconduc-
tor fingerprint identification products as long as the bionic fingerprint film is made
of silicone material containing carbon.
As new technologies in the biometric market continue to emerge and land, biometric
scenarios tend to diversify, product services tend to customize development, multi-
modal biometric technologies will be applied in large numbers, and system security is
enhanced. In recent years, the biometric identification industry has developed rapidly,
the industry chain has formed, and the market scale has grown rapidly. 5G, artificial
intelligence, big data, cloud computing and other technologies combined with bio-
metric identification lead to industrial upgrading and further digital and intelligent
development.
(a) Traditional [Hou17]
(b) Contactless [IDE19]
Figure 1.1: Tow Fingerprint Detection Methods: (left) the traditional fingerprint
detection which needs touching; (right) the contactless fingerprint de-
tection which needs some pre-processes to detect.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
With the growing awareness about hygiene and biometric information leakage, new
biometric technologies for contactless fingerprint identification have started to emerge.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 incident in 2020 prompted an increasing demand for
the contactless biometric market. Contactless fingerprint identification has the ad-
vantages of high acceptance, anti-counterfeiting, and high hygienic properties, and
on the point of hygienic properties, it stands out under the influence of COVID-19.
Contact fingerprint identification has a high risk of cross-contamination because it
requires finger contact, so all contactless technologies become especially important
under the general requirement of epidemic prevention.
However, the background
area of contactless fingerprint images is relatively more complex than that of contact,
fingerprint images are affected by rotation and translation, and the contrast of ridges
and valleys is low, all of which seriously affect the recognition performance of con-
tactless fingerprints. It is diﬀicult to achieve good processing results using contact
fingerprint image processing methods [Kej+17b].
Compared with the traditional touch-based system, contactless fingerprint recognition
has higher security and anti-information leakage, shown in Figure 1.1(a) and Figure
1.1(b). Especially in the current situation of COVID-19, all contactless technology
is particularly important and safe. But the contactless fingerprint image, whether
it is background division or fingertip detection, is relatively more complicated than
the touch-bases type. For more accurate recognition, a lot of pre-processing is partic-
ularly important, among which is indispensable to segment hand areas for fingertip
detection. In ordinary fingertip detection, since most of it is used for gesture detec-
tion, the front and back of the hand, the rotation angle of the finger, and other related
factors are not fully distinguished. However, in the pre-processing of contactless fin-
gerprint recognition, these have become the important factors affecting the accuracy
of fingerprint recognition.
1.1
Motivation
Since contactless fingerprint recognition is used in a wide range of applications, there
are two ways to read fingerprints: in real-time and from a photo. The fingerprint
reading from a photo has a wider range of applications. In the process of reading
fingerprints from pictures, there are many pre-processing operations, one of which is
very important: hand recognition and segmentation.
A paper by Jannis Priesnitz published on 21 February 2021 [Pri+20] is the moti-
vation for this project. In his paper, he presents a proposal to use deep learning
techniques for fingertip segmentation. The system proposed from his paper process
consists of two phases (1) data preparation and preprocessing, and (2) semantic seg-
mentation of hands and fingertips based on the DeepLabv3 + model, as shown in
Figure 1.2.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Overview of the proposed system: (a) in the training stage, the skin-
based ground truth of a hand gesture recognition database is extended
by incorporating a fingertip class and data augmentation employed; (b)
in the evaluation stage a comprehensive evaluation of the semantic seg-
mentation network based on DeepLabv3+ for hand and fingertip seg-
mentation is performed [Pri+20].
The paper mentions that all subsets of the database used in his project were used
for the gesture recognition HGR created by the Silesian Technical University. The
original purpose of the database was to provide gestures in Polish and American Sign
Language. A total of 53 gestures were represented. The system proposed in the paper
allows to submit the fingertip region in the finger image directly to the processing
pipeline. For this purpose, the deep learning model DeepLabv3 + is used to adapt
to the requirements of fingertip segmentation. the DeepLabv3 + model can process
square input images and has an image size of powers of 2. In addition, the basic
facts of overextended fingertip were trained on it in a Hand Gesture Recognition
(HGR) database. The project also performed a tenfold cross-validation, including a
comparison with a well-established color-based segmentation scheme. Comparisons
with the color-based baseline system showed superior segmentation results for hand re-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Motivation
5
gions and demonstrated the feasibility of direct fingertip segmentation. The proposed
method is expected to reduce errors compared to the conventional contrast-based fin-
gertip detection methods. In particular, the proposed system is expected to be more
robust in unconstrained environments with challenging heterogeneous backgrounds
and illumination.
In his paper, this system was compared with a well-established color-based baseline
approach and showed more accurate hand segmentation results, especially on chal-
lenging images. Therefore, to make the HGR database suitable for training semantic
hand and fingertip segmentation networks, the following improvements are also men-
tioned in the paper. First, the ground truth mask is extended by the fingertip class.
For this purpose, feature points representing the fingertips and the first knuckle are
used. Precisely, a circular region is defined with the fingertip as the center and the
distance between the fingertip and the first knuckle as the radius. This circular region
intersects with the pixels of the hand marker and only the pixels of the hand region
are considered as fingertips. During the manual revision process, the labels of sev-
eral fingertips were manually post-processed to improve their accuracy. In particular,
fingertips that were not visible at the bottom of the fingers were discarded. Finally,
the performance of the segmentation on fingertips was evaluated in detail. The hand
gestures provided in the database are divided into three categories according to their
relevance to contactless fingerprint recognition use cases. The segmentation perfor-
mance on fingertips, in terms of ”cross union” (IoU), is up to 68.03% (overall: 86%).
In the most relevant category, the segmentation performance on the fingertips is up
to 68.03% (overall: 86.13%), which confirms the soundness of the approach.
However, some diﬀicult cases are also presented in his article, as shown in the Figure
1.3 below. He proposed that some cases cannot be distinguished by semantic segmen-
tation and gesture recognition alone in the process of hand fingerprint segmentation.
For example, it is not easy to distinguish between the front (with fingerprints) and
the back (with nail caps) of the palm during semantic segmentation; when the palm
is closed, it is not possible to segment all fingerprints correctly, but rather to segment
a whole area containing all fingerprints, etc. The examples of errors in the picture
can be classified into three categories:
1. The fingertip area can only be accurately segmented, but it is not possible to de-
termine whether the image of the hand in the picture is the front side (containing
the fingerprint) or the backside (containing the nail), so the nail is incorrectly
segmented as a fingerprint, failing subsequent fingerprint recognition.
2. Some of the fingers in the picture are tightly closed, resulting in the segmenta-
tion of the fingertip area with all fingertips in one place.
3. In some images, the hand state is rotated, so the fingertip range cannot be
included in the whole fingerprint, but the fingertip is still recognized in the
system, which will lead to the failure of the subsequent fingerprint recognition.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Obviously, among these three types of errors, only the third type can be improved
on Jannis’ original design based on more complex designs, such as calculating the
segmentation area and the area of the whole hand, while the first and second types
of errors cannot be improved based on semantic segmentation.
Figure 1.3: Examples of inaccurately segmented fingertips: falsely segmented fin-
gertips on the back of the hand, and connected fingertip areas [Pri+20].
In this project, the main purpose of the improved and reliable fingertip detection
system is to perform contactless fingerprint recognition better and more accurately.
Hence, the measurement criteria for fingertip detection in this project require more
constraints than traditional fingertip detection for gesture recognition. The project
summarizes the unsolvable cases given in Jannis’ paper [Pri+20].
The above-mentioned cases presented in Jannis’ paper contain several different direc-
tions of image analysis processing. Using traditional methods for image processing,
such as Gaussian filtering or Sobel filtering, it is possible to determine whether the
state of the hand in the image is the palm or the back of the hand based on the palm
print. However, the palm print state is not the same for different genders and ages,
and there is no way to achieve a robust classification model by only relying on vari-
ous traditional methods to process the image. Machine learning classification training
can systematically learn the corresponding features, but there is no way for a single
classification model to distinguish between the palm and the back of the hand, and
whether the fingers are tightly closed. The project was also initially designed with
training classification of images uniformly in mind. However, for the mirror gesture,
it is diﬀicult to distinguish the difference between the palm and the back of the hand
without high definition.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Motivation
7
For this reason, in response to the diﬀicult cases presented in that article, the project
designed a series of filtering mechanisms similar to the cascade system to address
the above-mentioned cases in a targeted manner. ”Cascade” means that the final
classifier is composed of a cascade of several simple classifiers. For instance, in image
detection, the inspected windows pass through each cascade in turn, so that most of
the candidate regions are eliminated in the previous cascades, and the regions that
all pass through each cascade are the target regions.
However, due to the specificity of the target solved in this project, the ordinary
cascade system is not applicable, and can only be designed as a stacked image pro-
cessing architecture similar to the cascade system, as shown in the following Figure
1.4. The SSD and external API are used to perform a series of processing and filtering
on the input images, and finally, the classification is done in a unified manner. All
data are collected and filtered independently.
Figure 1.4: Project Overview.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
In the 2015 Bhuyan’s paper [Bhu+15], he and his colleagues have proposed a new
algorithm for fingertip detection and finger type recognition, a probabilistic model of
abduction and adduction movements of fingers. This algorithm is applied to fingertip
localization of hand region extracted by skin color segmentation based the Bayesian
rule. Perform morphological operations in the segmented hand region by observing
key geometric features. The image is processed through a series of segmentation pro-
cesses. First, the color distribution is found by two-class classifiers according to the
color histogram of the image in the RGB color space. Then, the mask of the split
hand is obtained from the skin color segmentation method, and one of the most rel-
evant information is extracted, the center of mass of the mask. The direction of the
hand can then be estimated by using the position information of the fingertips and
the center of mass relative to the image frame. Finally, the thickness of the contour
of the skin region is used to separate the hand from the forearm region, to obtain
reliable palm information. After a series of calibrations to obtain the final fingertip in-
formation. In this paper, it is demonstrated that the finger type recognition process is
very powerful by using a probabilistic model of the geometric features of finger motion.
Then in 2017, Quan Wei and his team members proposed an effective method for
real-time hand tracking using Kinect to extract the hand region and use Kinect sen-
sor to detect the fingertip in real-time [Kej+17a].
In the hand region extraction
process, based on the hand points captured by Kinect, they proposed a novel two-
scan method based on connectivity analysis and recursion, which can roughly extract
the target hand area in the first scan. After obtaining the rough hand region, a novel
connectivity analysis method based on a recursive algorithm was applied to refine the
hand region pixels in real-time during the second scan. Thereafter, to determine the
fingertips, they first implemented a fast hand bump extraction algorithm to obtain
the main candidate points. The main candidate points were obtained by a fast hand
bump extraction algorithm, and then the final fingertips were determined based on
two typical constraints of hand shape features. The experiment in this paper proves
that the proposed strategy has a great effect on improving the eﬀiciency and accuracy
of hand tracking.
In the 2017 Tomas Simon’s paper [Sim+17], they propose a robust method to de-
tect 21 key points of the hand that appear in pictures and videos with high accuracy,
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related Work
especially for cases where the hand is partially occluded or the gesture is complex.
This method is a way to improve the performance of key point detectors using a multi-
camera setup for some key points that are easily occluded, such as hand joints, and
is also referred to as ’multiview bootstrapping’ in the paper. The proposed method
is mainly based on the conjecture and observation that even if a particular image
of the hand is significantly occluded, there is often an unobscured view. Multiview
bootstrapping also systematically confirm this idea and yields a more powerful hand
detector, while also proving its universality outside the capture setup. In particular,
it allows a weak detector trained on a small notational dataset to locate a subset of
key points in a good view and use powerful 3D triangulation to reject false detections.
Images with severe occlusions are then labeled by reprojecting triangulated 3D hand
joints. In the paper, the project is divided into three steps: 1. an initial key point
detector is used to generate noisy labels in multiple views of the hand. 2. the noisy
detections are triangulated in 3D using multi-view geometry, or labeled as outliers.
3. the reprojected triangles are used as training data for new labeling to improve the
detector. By incorporating these newly generated annotations into the training set,
the detector is iteratively improved to obtain more and more accurate detections in
each iteration. This approach uses multi-view constraints as an external supervised
source to generate geometrically consistent annotations of hand key points. In this
way, the method can very accurately annotate images that are diﬀicult or impossible
to annotate due to occlusion. The paper thus demonstrates that the performance
of the hand key point detector for RGB images generated by multi-view guidance is
comparable to that of the RGB-D hand key point detector. In addition, the paper
further demonstrates that applying this single-view detector in a multi-camera setup
allows for label-free 3D hand reconstruction in unprecedented scenes, including chal-
lenging object manipulations, musical performances, etc.
In 2020, Liu and his colleagues made a summary of many popular object detection
methods in his paper to provide a comprehensive survey of the latest achievements
brought by deep learning techniques in this area [Liu+20]. The survey includes more
than 300 research contributions covering many aspects of generic object detection:
detection frameworks, object feature representation, object suggestion generation,
contextual modeling, training strategies, and evaluation metrics. Object detection
can be divided into two types: detection of specific instances and detection of large
categories. In this project, the focus is on the model comparison of the second type
of objects.
In this literature, three criteria are evaluated for the performance of each model:
1. detection speed in frames per second (FPS), 2. average accuracy (mAP) for all
object classes, and 3.
recall rate.
The models evaluated also cover a wide range
of meta-detection frameworks such as RCNN, Fast RCNN, YOLO and SSD, etc.;
backbone networks such as VGG, ResNet, etc.; multilayer feature combinations and
deformable convolutional networks, etc. The data used for model evaluation is also
very wide, both for object-specific recognition data and recognition data of a wide
==PAGE:21==
2 Related Work
11
range of objects.
This paper compares the performance and computational cost of all popular models
for object recognition in recent years using various perspectives in a cross-sectional
and longitudinal manner. Among them, the backbone network, the detection frame-
work and the availability of large-scale datasets are the three most important factors
for detection accuracy. The combination of multiple models, the incorporation of
contextual features, and the enhancement of data all contribute to better accuracy.
Ultimately, it is concluded that object detection is much more diﬀicult than image
classification. The accuracy and robustness achieved by state-of-the-art detectors fall
far short of the requirements of real-world applications, so there is still much room
for future improvement.
They also combined with the practical requirements of the project, the most at-
tention is still being paid to the performance comparison between a series of meta
detection frameworks, two-stage detectors and single-stage detectors for target recog-
nition. Through a series of tables and images shown in the paper, it can be seen that
when large computational costs are allowed, two-stage detectors, due to their more
flexible structure and better suitability for region-based classification, typically yield
higher detection accuracy than single-stage detectors. However, single-stage detectors
like YOLO and SSD, due to the use of lightweight backbone networks, prediction with
fewer candidate regions, and full convolution of the classification sub-network, usu-
ally require less time and have a lower operating cost than two-stage detectors. Most
notably, in that paper, the authors give the conclusion that single-stage frameworks
like YOLO and SSD typically perform much worse than two-stage architectures like
Faster RCNN and RFCN in detecting small objects, but are competitive in detecting
large objects.
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Preliminaries
The project is divided into three modules and involves a lot of background knowledge,
such as target detection, various classifiers in machine learning, neural networks, and
external interface calls. The section is divided into two main categories to introduce
the preliminaries required for the project separately: machine learning and other tech-
niques.
Machine learning is the process of using some algorithm to guide a computer to
derive an appropriate model using known data and to use this model to give judg-
ments about new situations. Machine learning can be classified into several types,
such as supervised learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning and re-
inforcement learning, depending on the kind of data being processed. The series of
machine learning methods applied in this project all belong to the category of super-
vised learning. Supervised learning means that the data sample will tell the computer
the correct output result in that situation, hoping that the computer can give reliable
output results even in the face of unseen input samples, thus achieving the purpose
of predicting the unknown. Supervised learning can be divided into two main cat-
egories, classification problems and regression problems, depending on whether the
output results are discrete or continuous values. They have wide applications in text,
speech, and image recognition, spam classification and interception, web retrieval,
stock prediction, etc. In this project, based on the project idea and framework it can
be seen that supervised learning is divided into two types of Object detection models
and classification models in this project.
3.1
Object Detection Method
Object detection is a computer technology related to computer vision and image pro-
cessing for detecting instances of a certain class of semantic objects (e.g., people,
buildings, or cars) in digital images and videos. Research areas of object detection
include multi-category detection, edge detection, salient Object detection, pose detec-
tion, scene text detection, face detection, pedestrian detection, etc. As an important
part of scene understanding, object detection is widely used in many areas of modern
life, such as security, military, transportation, medical, and lifestyle [Jia+19].
Object detection has made important progress in recent years, and the mainstream
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Preliminaries
algorithms are mainly divided into two types: (1) the two-stage methods, such as the
R-CNN [Gir+14], and Fast R-CNN [Gir15] algorithm, whose main idea is to first gen-
erate a series of sparse candidate frames through a heuristic (selective search) or CNN
network (RPN), and then classify and regress these candidate frames. The advan-
tage of two-stage method is high accuracy; (2) the one-stage method, such as YOLO
[Red+16] and SSD [Liu+16a], the main idea is to uniformly and densely sample differ-
ent positions of the image, and the sampling can be done at different scales and aspect
ratios, and then use CNN to extract features for classification and regression directly,
the whole process only takes one step, so its advantage is fast, but An important
disadvantage of uniform dense sampling is that it is more diﬀicult to train, mainly be-
cause of the extreme imbalance between positive and negative samples (background)
[Lin+18], which leads to a slightly less accurate model. The performance of the dif-
ferent algorithms is shown in Figure 3.1, which shows the difference in accuracy and
speed between the two types of methods
Figure 3.1: The performance of the different algorithms [Liu+16b].
R-CNN abstracts detection into two processes: first, using the Selective Search algo-
rithm, we propose several regions that may contain objects based on the image (i.e., a
local crop of the image, called Region Proposal); second, we run the best-performing
classification network (AlexNet) at the time on these proposed regions and obtain
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Object Detection Method
15
the class of objects in each region [Gir+14]. The proposal of R-CNN has two major
contributions: 1) CNN can be used for region-based localization and segmentation
of objects; 2) when the number of supervised training samples is tight, pre-trained
models on additional data can be fine-tuned to achieve good results. The first con-
tribution has influenced almost all two-stage methods since then, while the second
contribution of using the trained model in the classification task (Imagenet) as a base
network for fine-tuning on detection problems has been followed in subsequent work.
However, because of this design, the training of R-CNN is extremely time consuming.
The main reason for this is that the CNN is performed on each Proposal individually
and does not share the computation. As a result, Fast R-CNN was proposed, whose
algorithm passes the base network into the R-CNN sub-network after it has been
run on the image as a whole, sharing most of the computation, hence the name Fast
[Gir15]. Unlike two-stage detectors, the one-stage model has no intermediate region
detection process and obtains the prediction results directly from the images, which
is also known as the region-free method.
YOLO is the pioneer of one-stage methods. It formulates the detection task as a
unified, end-to-end regression problem, and is named after the fact that it processes
the image only once to obtain both the position and the classification [Red+16].
YOLO proposes a new idea of one-stage, which has a significant speed advantage
over two-stage methods and an impressive real-time feature. However, YOLO itself
has some problems, such as dividing the grid more roughly and the number of boxes
generated per grid, which limits the detection of small-scale objects and similar ob-
jects. This led to the introduction of the SSD [Liu+16a], an early set of single-stage
models that achieved accuracy close to that of the two-stage models while being an
order of magnitude faster than the two-stage models. Most of the subsequent work
on single-stage models has been based on SSD improvements.
The nail detection module in this project is also based on the SSD model for the
ultra-superiority of small object detection.
3.1.1
Single Shot Multibox Detector
SSD (Single Shot MultiBox Detector) [Liu+16a] is a popular and powerful target de-
tection network with a network structure consisting of three parts: Base Network to
extract low-scale feature mapping maps, Auxiliary Convolutions to extract high-scale
feature mapping maps and Prediction Convolutions to output location and classifica-
tion information of the feature mapping maps.
According to the full name of SSD, Single Shot MultiBox Detector, the two most
important features of the algorithm are: Single Shot specifies that the SSD algorithm
is a one-stage method; MultiBox specifies that SSD is a multi-box prediction. From
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Preliminaries
Figure 3.1, it’s very clear to see that the SSD algorithm is much better than YOLO
in terms of accuracy and speed.
Compared to YOLO, SSD uses CNN to do the
detection directly, instead of doing it after the fully connected layer like YOLO. In
addition, SSD has two important changes compared to YOLO. One is that SSD ex-
tracts feature maps of different scales to do the detection, large scale feature maps
(more forward feature maps) can be used to detect small objects, while small scale
feature maps (more backward feature maps) are used to detect large objects; the sec-
ond is that SSD uses Prior boxes (Default boxes) of different scales and aspect ratios.
The differences between these two algorithms show in Figure 3.2 below.
Figure 3.2: The network structure of SSD300 vs YOLO [Liu+16a].
Figure 3.3: Basic Structure of SSD [Liu+16b].
The disadvantages of the YOLO algorithm are the diﬀiculty in detecting small
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Object Detection Method
17
targets and the inaccurate localization, but these few important improvements allow
SSD to overcome these disadvantages to some extent. SSD uses a CNN network for
detection just like YOLO but uses a multi-scale feature map, and its basic architec-
ture is shown in Figure 3.3.
There are three core ideas in the SSD algorithm:
(1) Using Multi-scale feature maps for detection
This is one of the cores of the SSD algorithm, the original image is transformed by
convolutional layers and the data is called Feature Map, which contains the informa-
tion of the original image.SSD network contains multiple convolutional layers, and
the feature map after multiple convolutional layers is used to locate and detect objects
in the original image. The convolutional layer generally has a larger feature map in
the front and gradually uses stride=2 convolution or pool to reduce the feature map
size later, as shown in Figure 3.3. A relatively large feature map and a relatively
small feature map are both used for detection. The advantage of this is that the
larger feature map is used to detect relatively small targets, while the smaller feature
map is responsible for detecting large targets, as shown in Figure 3.4, the 8x8 feature
map can be divided into more units, but the prior frame scale of each of its units is
relatively small.
Figure 3.4: Multi-Scale Feature Maps [Liu+16b].
(2) Using Convolutional Layer for Detection
Unlike YOLO which finally uses a fully connected layer, SSD directly uses convo-
lution for different feature maps to extract the detection results. For feature maps
with the shape m × n × p, only such 3 × 3 × p relatively small convolution kernels
need to be used to obtain detection values.
(3) Using Prior Box
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Preliminaries
SSD borrows the idea of anchor in Faster R-CNN [Gir15], where each unit sets a
prior box with different scales or aspect ratios, and the predicted bounding boxes
are based on these prior boxes to reduce the training diﬀiculty to a certain extent.
A prior box is the pre-selected box of some targets. Both subsequent operation of
classification and bounding box regression are used to obtain the position of the real
target. In general, each cell sets multiple prior boxes with different scales and aspect
ratios. SSD generates prior box according to the following rules:
• Generate several concentric prior boxes centered on the midpoint of each point
on the feature map.
• The minimum and maximum length of the square prior box are min_size and
√min_size × max_size
• Set an aspect ratio in each prototxt, then generate two rectangles with width
1
√
2×min_size and height
√
2 × min_size, shown in Figure 3.5
• The min_size and max_size of each feature map corresponding to the prior
box are determined by the following formula:
sk = smin + smax −smin
m −1
(k −1), k ∈[1, m]
(3.1)
The m in the formula(3.1) is the number of feature maps used to make the
prediction.
Figure 3.5: Size of Prior Box [Liu+16b].
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Classifier Method
19
3.2
Classifier Method
Classification is a technique for determining the category to which a dependent vari-
able belongs based on one or more independent variables. Classification problems
generally arise when models need to be trained to predict qualitative goals, such as
classifying junk mail, identifying whether an object is a car or a train or another
object, or going to the hospital to diagnose whether a tumor in a patient’s body is
malignant, all of which fall under the category of classification problems. Classifica-
tion is a supervised learning process. Based on the known categories in the target
database, all the classification process needs to assign each record to the correspond-
ing category. Since the information of each category must be known in advance and
all data entries to be classified have corresponding categories by default, the classifi-
cation algorithm also has its limitations, and when the above conditions cannot be
satisfied, it is necessary to try the method of cluster analysis.
3.2.1
Logistic Regression
Although Logistic Regression is called regression, it is a classification model and is
often used for dichotomous classification. The essence of logistic regression is to do
the estimation of parameters by assuming that the data obeys this distribution and
then using the great likelihood estimation. Both logistic regression and linear regres-
sion are generalized linear models. Logistic regression assumes that the dependent
variable y follows a Bernoulli distribution, while linear regression assumes that the
dependent variable y follows a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, it has many similar-
ities with linear regression, and the logistic regression algorithm is a linear regression
if the Sigmoid mapping function is removed. It can be said that logistic regression
is theoretically supported by linear regression, but logistic regression introduces non-
linear factors through the Sigmoid function, so it can easily handle 0/1 classification
problems.
The Sigmoid function is also called logistic function, and the formula is below [WZM18]
[GLM+18]:
g(z) =
1
1 + e−z
(3.2)
The range of formula(3.2) is g(z) ∈[0, 1], in which positive infinity converges to 1
and negative infinity converges to 0. This property is important for solving binary
classification problems. Then the hypothesis function of logistic regression is below:
hθ(x) = g(θT x)
(3.3)
Then combine the formula(3.2) and formula(3.3), the final hypothesis function is
below:
hθ(x) =
1
1 + e−θT x
(3.4)
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Preliminaries
x represents the input value and θ represents the requested parameters.
As stated above, the essence of logistic regression is to assume that the data follows a
certain distribution and then use the maximum likelihood estimation to estimate the
parameters. Thus, in other words, the logistic distribution is a continuous type of
probability distribution with a distribution function and a density function like the
formulas below [Pro18]:
F(x) = P(X ≤x) =
1
1 + e−(x−µ)\γ
(3.5)
f(x) = F
′(X ≤x) =
e−(x−µ)\γ
γ(1 + e−(x−µ)\γ)2
(3.6)
where µ represents the position parameter and the γ > 0 represents the shape param-
eter. The image features show on the Figure 3.6 below.
Figure 3.6: Density Function and Distribution Function of the Logistic Distribution
[Pro18].
From the above Figure 3.6, it is clear to see that the logistic distribution is a con-
tinuous distribution defined by its location and scale parameters. The shape of the
logistic distribution is similar to that of the normal distribution, but the tails of the
logistic distribution are longer, so the logistic distribution can be used to model data
distributions with longer tails and higher peaks than the normal distribution. The
Sigmoid function, which is commonly used in deep learning, is a special form of the
distribution function of logistic in µ = 0, γ = 1.
Since logistic regression is used for classification problems, binary classification is
used as an example, assuming that there exists a straight line w1x1 + w2x2 + b = 0
that can completely classify a certain data set into two categories. Then the decision
boundary of this logistic regression is w1x1 + w2x2 + b = 0.
Assume there exists a sample hw(x) = w1x1 + w2x2 + b > 0, then it can return
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Classifier Method
21
this sample’s category is 1. This process is the perception machine. Logistic regres-
sion still needs to find out the relationship between classification probability P(Y = 1)
and input vector x, and then compare the probability to return the category.
Hence, assuming the database D = (x1, y1), . . . , (xN, yN), xi ⊆Rn, yi ∈0, 1, i =
1, 2, . . . , N. Because wT x + b takes continuous values, it cannot fit discrete variables.
It can be considered to fit the conditional probability p(Y = 1|x), since the probabil-
ities also take continuous values. If w equals to zero vector then there is little value
in solving. So for w ̸= 0, set wT x + b = R of which the probability is not compliant
to take values from 0 to 1, so a generalized linear model is considered. Hence the
optimal one is the unit step function below:
p(y = 1|x) =





0,
z < 0
0.5,
z = 0
1,
z > 0
(3.7)
where z = wT x + b. However, this step function is not differentiable and the logarith-
mic odds function is a common alternative function: y =
1
1+e−(wT x+b) . Then:
ln
y
1 −y = wT x + b
(3.8)
Consider y as the probability that x is a positive sample, and 1 −y as the proba-
bility that x is its negative sample. The ratio of the two is called odds and refers to
the ratio of the probability that the event will occur or not occur, if the probability
of the event occurring is p. Then the odds ratio is:
ln(odds) = ln
y
1 −y
(3.9)
Treat y as a class of posterior probability estimates, the rewritten formula is:
wT x + b = ln
P(Y = 1|x)
1 −P(Y = 1|x)
(3.10)
P(Y = 1|x) =
1
1 + e−(wT x+b)
(3.11)
It is clear to know that the log odds of the output Y = 1 is a model represented
by a linear function of the input x , which is the basic idea of the logistic regression
model. The closer the value of wT x + b is to positive infinity, the closer the value of
the probability of P(Y = 1|x) is to 1. Therefore, the idea of logistic regression is to
fit a decision boundary (not limited to linear, but also polynomial) and then establish
a probability link between this boundary and the classification, thus obtaining the
probability in the dichotomous case.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Preliminaries
It is very clear from the above derivation that logistic regression uses the predicted
values of a linear regression model to approximate the log odds of the true labeling
of the classification task, which has the following advantages:
1. the probability of the classification is modeled directly without the need to im-
plement an assumed data distribution, thus avoiding the problems associated
with inaccurately assumed distributions (as distinguished from generative mod-
els).
2. the ability to predict not only the category but also the probability of that
prediction, which is useful for several tasks that use probability to assist in
decision making.
3. the log odds function is a convex function of arbitrary order derivable, and many
numerical optimization algorithms that can find the optimal solution.
3.2.2
Supported Vector Machine
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is mainly used to solve data classification problems
in the field of pattern recognition and belongs to a kind of supervised learning al-
gorithm. SVM belongs to a two-class classification model, whose basic model is the
linear classifier with the maximum interval defined on the feature space, and the
learning strategy of SVM is interval maximization. Assuming that some samples in
a space can be partitioned into two classes by a hyperplane, several key points that
support this partitioned hyperplane are the support vectors in SVM. The derivation
of the optimization objective of the SVM algorithm can be carried out according to
the above.
Suppose there are a bunch of sample points (x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn). In SVM,
the binary classification problem is no longer represented by 0 and 1, but by +1 and
-1 to distinguish the categories. Assume that the hyperplane (w, b) can classify the
training samples correctly, i.e., for any sample, xi is said to be a positive case if
yi = +1 , and xi is said to be a negative case if yi = −1 . The goal of learning is to
find a separating hyperplane in the feature space that can partition the sample points
into different spaces. So the objective function of the SVM model, which is such a
hyperplane, can be expressed by as below [Shm05]:
wtΦ(x) + b = 0
(3.12)
where the Φ(x) is a kernel function, which is equivalent to a dimensional transforma-
tion of x. In other words, Φ(x) can be replaced by x. If there exists a hyperplane that
can correctly classify all the samples, then it is possible to predict the new sample’s
category, and the corresponding decision function is the function used for prediction
as below:
y(x) = sign(wtΦ(x) + b)
(3.13)
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Classifier Method
23
where the sign function is the symbol function:
sign(x) =





−1,
x < 0
0,
x = 0
1,
x > 0
(3.14)
The combination of the SVM objective function (3.12) and decision function (3.13)
mentioned above is the total SVM algorithm. According to the SVM algorithm, if
the samples are classified correctly, then:
y(xi) > 0,yi = +1
(3.15)
y(xi) < 0,yi = −1
(3.16)
According to the above two equations can be derived: y · y(xi) > 0.
In the case where the presence of a hyperplane is confirmed, the distance of a point
from the separating hyperplane can generally indicate the degree of certainty of the
classification prediction. |w · Φ(x) + b| can relatively represent the distance of point
x from the hyperplane. Whether the sign of |w · Φ(x) + b| agrees with the sign of
class marker y represents whether the classification is correct or not (i.e., when the
classification is correct, y · y(xi) > 0). So y(w · Φ(x) + b) can be used to represent the
correctness of the classification as well as the degree of certainty (i.e., the distance
of the sample from the classification hyperplane). Because of the existence of this
distance, the concept of function margin can be defined as follows: for a given data
set and hyperplane (denoted by w, b), define the function margin from the hyperplane
(w, b) to the sample point (xi, yi) as the formula below:
y(xi) = y(w · Φ(xi) + b)
(3.17)
where the Φ is equivalent to a dimensional transformation of x, and Φ(x) can be
replaced by x.
Margin can indicate the correctness and certainty of the classification prediction. How-
ever, when choosing the hyperplane, if it is just to change w to 2w, the hyperplane
itself does not change, but the margin becomes twice the original one. To prevent
this situation, it is necessary to do normalization of w, and the margin becomes as
below:
y(xi) =
1
∥w∥y(wΦ(xi) + b)
(3.18)
As shown in Figure 3.7 below, there is an infinite number of linearly separable hyper-
planes, but the hyperplane with the largest margin is the only one. Therefore, a core
idea of support vector machines is proposed [Shm05]: to find the hyperplane (w, b)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Preliminaries
that maximizes the separation of the nearest sample points from that hyperplane. In
other words, SVM is to find the hyperplane that can divide the two types of data
correctly and with the maximum interval. Such a hyperplane will not only separate
the positive and negative sample points but also the most diﬀicult sample points (i.e.,
the points closest to the hyperplane) can be separated with large enough confidence
to open them.
Figure 3.7: Maximum-margin hyperplane. Training data (instance) on the margin
are called the support vectors [PS16].
According to the above analysis, it can be defined that the margin of the hyperplane
(w, b) about the dataset is the minimum of the hyperplane (w, b) about all samples
(xi, yi) in the dataset, that is:
y(x) = mini=1,...,N
1
∥w∥y(wΦ(xi) + b)
(3.19)
The SVM solves the objective, which is to find a maximum interval separation hy-
perplane. Then the optimization problem is maxw,b(y(x)). That is, the result of the
SVM should be such that the closest point to the hyperplane is as far away from the
hyperplane as possible. Hence, the optimization objective formula is below:
argmaxw,b{ 1
∥w∥mini[yi(wT · Φ(xi) + b)]}
(3.20)
In the case of correct classification, scince yi(wT ·Φ(xi)+b) > 0 (because y·y(xi) > 0)
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Classifier Method
25
exists, it must be possible to make yi(wT · Φ(xi) + b) ≥1 by scaling and transform-
ing. Then it is possible to directly set min[yi(wT · Φ(xi) + b)] = 1. The exact value
of min[yi(wT · Φ(xi) + b)] does not affect the solution of the optimization problem.
Hence the actual optimization object is argmaxw,b
1
||w||.
In optimization problems, solving the maximum value is more diﬀicult, and it is
better to transform it into a problem of finding the minimum value. So this object
function can be transfer to the minimum type:
minw,b
1
2||w||2
(3.21)
yi(wT · Φ(xi) + b) ≥1
(3.22)
Note that the formula(3.22) condition is not to be omitted. The principle of support
vector machines is to first separate the different classes of sample points, and then
optimize the distance between them.
The formula(3.22) condition represents the
ability to separate the samples.
3.2.3
Artificial Neural Network
Artificial Neural Network (ANN), abbreviated as neural network or neural-like net-
work, is a concept that can be said to be bionic. The concept of the artificial neu-
ral network was introduced for information processing after humans discovered that
neurons can collaborate with each other to accomplish information processing and
transmission. In other words, ANN, in the field of machine learning and cognitive sci-
ence, is a data model or computational model that mimics the structure and function
of biological neural networks (the central nervous system of animals, especially the
brain) for estimating or approximating functions. Neural networks are computed by
linking a large number of artificial neurons. In most cases, artificial neural networks
can change their internal structure based on external information and are adaptive
systems, which in layman’s terms are equipped with learning functions.
ANN is a classification algorithm, similar to plain Bayesian, Bayesian networks, etc.
They are based on data objects in the training set. They all get a classification model
based on the attributes and categories of data objects in the training set, so that
it can classify new data objects based on the attributes. The difference lies in the
principle of their implementation. Bayesian classifiers are essentially estimating prob-
abilities. Neural networks, on the other hand, are more like constructing an optimal
mathematical expression.
A neural network, as the name suggests, is a simple abstraction of the nervous system
of the human brain. The nervous system consists of a large number of neurons. Neu-
rons are connected to other neurons to form a vast network for processing information.
Neurons consist of cell bodies that receive and process information and synapses that
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Preliminaries
transmit information to other neuronal cell bodies.
ANN, however, is a nonlinear statistical data modeling tool abstracted by simulating
the human brain nervous system. Neural networks are usually optimized by a math-
ematical statistical type of learning method, so they are also an application of math-
ematical statistical methods. On the other hand, in the field of artificial perception
in artificial intelligence, the application of mathematical statistics can be used to do
decision problems in artificial perception, i.e., through statistical methods, artificial
neural networks can have the ability to make simple decisions and simple judgments
like human beings. This approach is more advantageous than formal logical reasoning
and calculation.
Figure 3.8: The structure of an artificial neuron, the basic component of artificial
neural networks [Dic19].
As shown in Figure 3.8, artificial neuron models have made a highly abstract sym-
bolic generalization of the complexity of natural neurons. The neuron model consists
of multiple inputs (similar to synapses) that are each multiplied by different weights
(received with different signal strengths) and then used by a mathematical function
to compute the decision whether to excite the neuron or not. There is also a function
(perhaps invariant, that is, replicated) that calculates the output of the artificial neu-
ron (sometimes dependent on some threshold). Artificial neural networks fuse these
artificial neurons for processing information.
The core components of an artificial neural network are artificial neurons, also called
perceptrons. Each neuron receives inputs from several other neurons, multiplies them
by the assigned weights, sums them, and passes the sum to one or more neurons. Some
artificial neurons may apply an activation function to the output before passing it
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Classifier Method
27
on to the next variable. In the simplest perceptron model (single-layer perceptron
model), each output is conventionally given two options of 0 and 1, determined by a
combination of inputs, weights, and thresholds. The formula shows as below:
output =
{
0
if ∑
j wjxj ≤threshold
1
if ∑
j wjxj > threshold
where x represents input values and w represents relative weights.
A single perceptron constitutes a simple decision model that can already be used.
In the real world, the actual decision model is much more complex, being a multi-
layer network of multiple perceptrons, shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: A hypothetical example of Multilayer Perceptron Network [Has+15].
In a multilayer neural network, there is a functional relationship between the output
of the upper layer nodes and the input of the lower layer nodes, and this function is
called the activation function, shown in Figure 3.8. If no activation function is used
(in fact, the activation function is f(x) = x), then the input of each layer is a linear
function of the output of the upper layer. Then no matter how many layers there
are in the neural network, the output is a linear combination of the inputs. This
is comparable to the effect of no hidden layers, and this case is the most primitive
perceptron. The approximation capability of such a network is quite limited. For the
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Preliminaries
above reason, some nonlinear functions are introduced as activation functions, so that
deep neural networks are more expressive (no longer linear combinations of inputs,
but can approximate almost any function).
Assume that there are k(k > 1) layers in the artificial neuron network, and the
nodes from the input layer to the output layer (without bias) are m0, m1, . . . , mk.
Then the dimension of the input vector is m0, and the output is mk. The output
vector of each layer is:
yi = [yi
1, yi
2, . . . , yi
mi]T , i ∈k
(3.23)
and the weight matrix and bias vector for each layer are:
wi ∈Rmi×mi−1,i ∈[1, k]
(3.24)
bi ∈Rmi×1,i ∈[1, k]
(3.25)
Then, the activation function of each layer is f i. Next, the formulas for the output
vectors of the first hidden layer are derived by deriving the formulas for all layers
except the input layer in general. For the first hidden layer:
net1
i =
m0
∑
j=1
w1
i,jy0
j + b1
i , (1 ≤i ≤m1)
(3.26)
net1 = W1Y0 + b1 = [net1
1, net1
2, . . . , net1
m1]T
(3.27)
y1 = f 1(net1) = [y1
1, y1
2, . . . , y1
m1]T
(3.28)
where each element in net1 represents a weighted sum of the input layer vectors as
well as the bias vectors, which can also be referred to as the input vectors of the
neurons in layer 1 (hidden layer 1). Hence, for the t layer (t ∈1, 2, . . . , k):
nett
i =
mt−1
∑
j=1
wt
i,jyt−1
j
+ bt
i, (1 ≤i ≤mt)
(3.29)
nett = WtYt−1 + bt = [nett
1, nett
2, . . . , nett
mt]T
(3.30)
yt = f t(nett) = [yt
1, yt
2, . . . , yt
mt]T
(3.31)
Through the forward layer-by-layer calculation of the above equations, the nett and
yt of each layer in the network, and the input vector and output vector of each layer
can be obtained, and thus the input and output values of each neuron are also ob-
tained. Hence the neural network can be represented as a function y = fw(x), where
x is input and y is output and w is the parameter of f. Then it is very clear to know
that the final aim is to return the value of w, so x and y = f(x) should be used to
estimate the w truth value.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Contributed Technologies
29
This problem can be seen as an optimization problem. This optimization problem is
just to find the minimum value of the function. So this problem can be represented
as:
arg min
w
∑
x
||fw(x) −y||2
(3.32)
Set E = ∑
x ||fw(x) −y||2 as error term. Thus, the final goal translates into finding
a set w such that E is minimized. The classical method for solving such problems is
called Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which starts by generating a random w
and then continuously updates the value of w using the following formula, eventually
approximating the true result, as the formula below:
w+ = w −η · ∂E
∂w
(3.33)
where the ∂E
∂w is the current error. Its physical meaning is the magnitude of the change
in E when w is changed. η is the learning rate, which is used to control and update
the rate of learning.
3.3
Contributed Technologies
In addition to the technical background related to machine learning, there are some
other technologies used in this project, such as general annotation format for object
detection, and the invocation of external interfaces.
Pascal VOC XML
One of the most important tasks in computer vision is the annotation of data. After
loading the image by using the tools, the most important step is to label the objects
using segmentation of each instance. This helps to use bounding boxes for precise
object localization, or polygons for masking. This information is stored in an anno-
tation file, such as COCO or Pascal VOC data formats [Kha19].
The PASCAL Visual Object Class (VOC) Challenge is a benchmark in visual ob-
ject class recognition and detection, providing the vision and machine learning com-
munity with a standard dataset of images and annotations, as well as a standard
evaluation procedure. The challenge has been held annually since 2005 and its as-
sociated dataset has been recognized as a standard in the field of vision recognition
and detection [Eve+10]. Among others, Pascal VOC XML, the annotation format
originally created for VOC, has become the common interchange format for object
detection labels. It is well specified and can be exported from many labeling tools, in-
cluding CVAT, VoTT, and RectLabel. Nowadays, the most popular data annotation
file formats are mainly VOC_2007 and VOC_2012 from Pascal VOC XML, which
have become the important benchmarks to measure the ability of image classification
and recognition.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Preliminaries
Figure 3.10: Sample of VOC_2007 Standard Data File.
As shown in Figure 3.10, Pascal VOC provides standardized image data sets for object
detection, which creates a XML file for each image in database. The most important
part in Pascal VOC XML file is the bounding box, axis-aligned rectangle specifying
the extent of the object visible in the image via xmin-top left, ymin-top left, xmax-
bottom right, ymax-bottom right [Kha19].
Baidu PaddlePaddle
Baidu Inc. is a Chinese multinational technology company specializing in Internet-
related services and products and artificial intelligence (AI). The Baidu search engine
is currently the fourth largest site in the Alexa Internet rankings and originated
from RankDex, an early search engine developed in 1996. Based on Baidu’s years of
deep learning technology research and business applications, PaddlePaddle integrates
deep learning core training and inference framework, basic model library, end-to-end
development kit, and rich tool components. It is China’s first self-developed, fully
functional, open-source and industrial-grade deep learning platform. AI Studio is an
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Contributed Technologies
31
AI learning and training community based on Baidu’s deep learning platform Pad-
dlePaddle, which provides an online programming environment, free GPU computing
power, massive open-source algorithms and open data to help developers quickly cre-
ate and deploy models.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Database
The system framework of this project is designed by simulating a cascade system
shown in Figure 1.4, where images are first processed and filtered sequentially by nail
cap detection and hand key point detection, followed by targeted classification by a
classifier. Therefore, the project requires a collection of databases dedicated to nail
recognition for nail detection training, and a database dedicated to special gesture
classification for classification training. 1
4.1
Nail Detection Database
The quality of the target detection model is directly related to the quality of the
training data. The target detection database is targeted, so the data set required by
the nail detection module in this project is also very targeted. There is no specific
data for nail detection in the public data set, and some public pictures and videos
about nails cannot uniformly control their sharpness and pixel value, as well as the
distance between the hand and the camera, and other related factors.
Thus, the
sampling of the picture database are participants in the collection module according
to uniform standards.
4.1.1
Sample Metrics
The nail detection module is one of the most critical steps in the whole project for
image processing. The accuracy of this module directly affects the number of samples
that enter the classifier training and the final accuracy of the project. Therefore, the
dataset of this module is not only required to show the nails completely, but also to
include nails of different ages, genders and angles.
To ensure the coexistence of consistency and diversity in the dataset, a series of
dataset collection criteria were unified after several tests:
• The distance between the palm and the camera varies is 40 cm.
• Make sure the light is even and there is no reflection on the nail.
1Note: The consent of the participant has been sought for the pictures to be dis-
played.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Database
• The background is kept clean, not required to be a solid color, but required not
to be cluttered.
• The background color should not be similar to the skin tone, but should have
a large contrast.
• Nails without nail polish with other decorations.
• Since it is to detect the nail target in the hand image, it is important to ensure
that the image is complete to reveal the hand.
• Each picture has and has only one hand (no matter how many nails are showing).
4.1.2
Data Analysis
The dataset for nail detection has a total of 396 images, with 512x512 pixels, of which
132 are original images, and each image is subjected to the data augmentation oper-
ation of 90-degree rotation and mirror flip, show as Figure 4.1 below.
Since the module is designed for nail detection, and nails are of similar shape, the
small dataset is also capable of producing good results. Moreover, although there
are only 396 pictures, the number of nails shown in each picture is not less than one,
so the average number of samples that can be marked ground truth far exceeds the
number of pictures in the dataset, which is predicted to be 1188. The dataset was
completed by photographing the left and right hands of each of the five participants.
Figure 4.1: Data Augmentation for 90 degree Rotation and Mirror Flip.
The requirement regarding the distance is 40 cm, but distances between 40 cm and
45 cm are all acceptable. The main reason for keeping the distance in the range of 5
cm is that it allows the nail detection module to be more robust. A certain degree of
variation in the distance between the hand and the camera shot will lead to a change
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Nail Detection Database
35
in the percentage of nail size in the image, thus enhancing the adaptiveness of the
model during training and thus increasing the generalization ability of the model to
be able to recognize more validation sets rather than simply only one distance (one
nail percentage size) of the image.
Figure 4.2: Samples for Nail Detection Database: each picture is taken under the
same background and light, and each column of pictures is a comparison
of left and right hands with the same gesture.
The distance setting of 40 cm, and the setting of the complete hand shape must be
shown in the picture, is the best solution after various data collection and testing.
Initially, the data was collected from images of just a few fingers containing nails,
however, after initial testing it was found that this training sample did not identify
the number of nails in the entire hand. It is clear that the target recognition is not
only training the ground truth of the marker, but also the whole sample image is
being trained. Therefore, in the subsequent tests, hand distances of 30 cm, 35 cm, 40
cm and 45 cm containing the complete hand shape were collected respectively. Each
of these distances has 50 images for mini-training. The best final results were 40 cm
and 45 cm. Thereby the distance requirement for the final data collection was set
between 40 cm and 45 cm.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Database
The dataset contains five different hand gestures (gestures from one to five). Each
gesture is captured separately in four cases: palm and back of the hand, left hand and
right hand. The reason why participants were asked to use different hand gestures for
filming, instead of showing all five nails on the back of the hand, was because the angle,
shadow, light, and position of each finger nail would be different for different gestures.
Figure 4.2 is a sample of the different gestures and the distinction between the left
and right hands. The purpose of the whole project is not only for nail detection, but
also to solve the diﬀicult fingertip detection problem in many different situations. To
this end, the training of samples for multiple situations can effectively strengthen the
generalization ability of the system and improve the robustness.
As shown in Figure 4.2, the first row shows the left hand in two different gestures,
and the second row shows the right hand in the same position as the first row. The
first two columns show the difference between the palm and the back of the hand for
the same gesture. It can be further seen that different hand gestures, palm and back
of the hand, left and right hand, in the same light and at the same distance, affect
the position of the nail in question, the angle of presentation, the area covered by the
shadow, the forward or reverse direction.
4.2
Hand Classifier Database
The main purpose of this project is to classify whether the hand morphology in the
images is palm or back, and whether the fingers are tightly closed, and the hand
morphology classification module is the final classification filter module. Hence, the
hand morphology of the collected data is divided into three main categories: palm
with fingers separated (good), palm with fingers closed (split), and back of hand
(back). The reason for this classification is that if the hand form is back, then it is
meaningless whether the fingers are closed or separated.
Due to the impact of the city closure brought about by COVID-19, it was not pos-
sible to gather enough participants for a unified shooting to collect data. The data
transmitted through the Internet, because of communication errors, shooting errors,
understanding errors and other external factors, the collected data images are not all
usable, and often half of the unqualified photos have to be filtered out. In addition,
it is diﬀicult to gather enough volunteers to collect data through online inspiration
because of the inability to gather. Thus, the final data of the module is a final data set
consisting of a partial filtering of the public data Hand Gesture Recognition [GKG16]
[Kaw+14] [NK14] and a partial filtering of the data taken by volunteers.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Hand Classifier Database
37
4.2.1
HGR Database
The Hand Gesture Recognition (HGR) database contains gestures in Polish Sign
Language and American Sign Language. In addition, it includes some other special
gestures. The database was developed as part of the Hand Detection and Posture
Estimation project, like skin region detection and segmentation, hand detection and
localization, hand feature point detection, hand modeling and pose estimation and
tracking of feature points in video sequences, which is supported by the Polish Min-
istry of Science and Higher Education [Kaw13].
The HGR database consists of three series (HGR1, HGR2A, and HGR2B), each
containing a different number of images and participants, as well as different im-
age specifications. HGR1 database contains 899 images from 12 individuals and 25
kinds of gestures, which image dimensions are from 174x131 up to 640x480. HGR2A
database contains 85 images from 3 individuals and 13 kinds of gestures, which image
dimensions are 4672x3104. HGR2B database contains 574 images from 18 individuals
and 32 kinds of gestures, which image dimensions are 3264x4982 with only green tone
background.
Each of which includes the original RGB images with ’jpg’ files, ground truth bi-
nary skin presence masks with ’bmp’ files and hand feature point locations with ’xml’
files, shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The first one is the original image, the second one is the ground truth
binary skin presence surface, and the third one is the hand feature point
location [Kaw13].
4.2.2
Sample Metrics
The data collection of the contention hand state classification module should be tai-
lored to the classification needs to design the collection metrics. In addition to that,
the optimal data specification should be adjusted according to the model compliance
of the first two steps (nail detection model and hand critical point model). The data
selected for all specifications are the best data based on a combination of multiple
module tests. Since the whole dataset is composed of the publicly available HGR
database and 10 participants shooting data together, the collection metrics for this
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Database
dataset are divided into two types.
First one is for HGR database filtering:
• The background is kept clean and contrasts well with skin tones.
• The hand posture reveals the nails intact.
• Nails are free of nail polish and other decorations.
• Complete exposure of the hand and wrist out, and no decorations.
• After zooming in so that the hands and wrists make up about 70% to 80% of
the picture, the nail outline and hand contours can still be clearly seen.
Second one is for individual collection filtering:
• The distance between the hand and the camera is kept at about 20cm.
• The background is clean and the color contrasts with the skin tone.
• The light is evenly distributed to avoid reflections on the nails.
• Complete exposure of hands and wrists, without decorations and nail polish.
• The nine cases should be collected separately via the same hand posture for
three-by-three combinations of left or right hand, palm or back of the hand,
finger closed or not.
• Regardless of the gesture, if there is a part of the nail showing, it is important
to show the full shape of the nail as completely as possible.
4.2.3
Data Analysis
The dataset on the hand part of the class has a total of 1200 images from the HGR
dataset and images collected by 10 participants, including 400 original images, 400
images after a 90-degree rotation and 400 images after a mirror flip.
There are two reasons why the number of original images in the dataset is small.
One is that it should be COVID-19 resulting in participants only being able to trans-
fer data via the network. As a consequence, the equipment, location, and light used
by different individuals to collect data are different, and because of the inability to
communicate face-to-face, different individuals have different understanding of the
collection rules, resulting in almost half of the data not meeting the requirements to
be used after collecting all the images.
The second is that the project is used to target functions to solve specific situa-
tions, so the publicly available dataset on the web is not fully usable, and most of
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Hand Classifier Database
39
the non-compliant images have to be filtered out according to a set of rules that meet
the project requirements. In addition, to ensure stability and high confidence in the
final classification training, the sample classification needs to be maintained relatively
evenly, so although some gestures would be more common or better collected, there
is no way to select them all into the dataset.
As shown in Figure 4.4, these six samples are all from HGR database, and Figure
4.4(a) illustrate cases where errors are not available, such as unclear gestures and
nails not fully displayed, while Figure 4.4(b) shows a selection of samples that can be
selected, with clear nail outlines and hand postures.
Due to the different adaptations of the images from module to module, in other
words the image format that enables the nail detection model to achieve the highest
accuracy is not the same as the size of images that enable the hand critical point
model to achieve the highest accuracy. Consequently, several unit tests and combi-
nation tests need to be performed separately to achieve the highest accuracy of hand
keypoint detection with relatively high accuracy of nail detection. This is designed
so that each image that can correctly detect the number of nails can obtain the hand
keypoint information of that image with maximum probability, thus maximizing the
amount of data available for classification training in the end.
(a) Error Samples
(b) Correct Samples
Figure 4.4: Samples from HGR Database.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Database
Therefore, keeping the distance between the hand and the camera at around 20 cm
for individual data collection, as well as zooming in on the HGR available images
to about 70% of the image for hand contours, are the collection criteria that yield
the highest accuracy through multiple unit module tests and combined tests (nail
detection and hand keypoint detection) combining the above mentioned guidelines.
The final filtered data is shown in the Figure 4.5 below. Since this dataset is used in
a supervised learning dataset for classification, each image is subjected to a uniform
normative labeling process, also shown in Figure 4.5. The label format used for this
data is ”id + label + number of nails + number of fingertips .jpg”. For instance,
’0s23.jpg’ means that the category of this first image is ’split ’ (the fingers are tightly
closed and need to be separated) and the first image contains two nails and three
fingertips. The labels in the label are divided into ”g”, ”s”, ”b”, which represent good
(palm and fingers separated, meaning that it is a very good sample can be directly
non-contact fingertip recognition semantic segmentation model ), split (palm and fin-
gers tightly closed, need to output a reminder to separate the fingers), back (back of
the hand, does not contain fingerprints, unqualified samples) respectively. The reason
why the number of fingertips is included in the label is to make it easier to verify the
accuracy of fingertip detection, and the second is that the final classification training
module is to input common information about the key points of the hand and the
number of nails for training the intrinsic relationship, so it is crucial that the label
in the dataset contains the number of nails.
Figure 4.5: Three categories of the same gesture and their corresponding labels, i.e.,
the label of left image means that the category of the sample with id
420 is ”g” (good), which contains one nail and four fingertip areas that
may contain fingerprints..
As mentioned above, the recognition accuracy of the nail detection module and the
hand key point module could not reach 100%, despite the 1200 images available after
filtering. This also means that not all images can correctly pass the detection of the
first two models and become the data that finally enter the classification training.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Hand Classifier Database
41
After nail detection and keypoint detection, the final dataset has 1078 samples. Each
sample is stored in a csv format file as the final training data file, which has total
44 data via 42 data (21 coordinate values of keypoints) with 1 nail number and 1
category tag. Figure 4.6 illustrates the category distribution of the final data.
It can be clearly seen from Figure 4.6 that the three categories are not very evenly
distributed, with 304 samples in the good category, 444 samples in the back category,
and 330 samples in the split category.
The number of each category is relatively
different, with the back category having the most samples, more than 100 samples
more than the least good category. This uneven distribution leads to sparse labeling,
i.e., long-tailed recognition, which is one of the parts that need to be improved in the
future, and there are various channels for improvement.
Figure 4.6: Final Data Categories Visualization.
Figure 4.7: The distribution of the number of different nails in each category.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Database
Since the final classification of this data is done by training the 21 key points of the
hand and the intrinsic relationship between the number of nails and the categories,
the distribution of the data categories that need to be looked at is not only the dis-
tribution of the three categories only, but also the distribution of the different kinds
of gestures in each category. Since the number of images is too large and the number
of gestures is too many, and each gesture consists of a collection of nine forms: palm
and back of hand, left hand and right hand, and fingers separated and closed, the
distribution of gestures can be shown side-by-side by visualizing the status of the
number of nails in each category species.
It can be seen from the Figure 4.7 that the distribution of gestures is very uneven in
either category, but relatively speaking, the ’back’ and ’good’ categories contain the
number of nails for all possible cases, while in ’split ’ has no gestures with three nails
at all. This is also a part that can be continued improved in the future.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation and
Discussion
The project is designed by simulating the framework of a cascade system, where the
input images are processed and filtered sequentially by a nail detection module and
a hand key point module, and then finally by a classifier for final classification.
The project is designed to address two situations mentioned in Jannis’ paper [Pri+20]
that are diﬀicult to solve by semantic segmentation for contactless fingertip recogni-
tion. The first one is that although the fingertip region in the image can be accurately
segmented, it is not possible to distinguish whether the hand posture in the image is
the palm or the back of the hand, so some of the segmented fingertips contain finger-
prints and some are nails, which cannot be used for subsequent contactless fingerprint
recognition. The second one is that it is impossible to segment the fingertips accu-
rately for each gesture, and the most diﬀicult part is that when the fingers are tightly
closed, the segmented area is a whole area of all fingers together, not a separate area
of each fingertip.
Therefore, it is clear that this project is a highly targeted solution.
To this end,
all the design and data collection had to be designed and implemented in a way that
was extremely relevant to the project requirements. After designing and modifying
the framework and solution several times, a detailed framework flow was finally de-
veloped as shown in the Figure 5.1 below.
The framework is based on the design of a cascade system, where nail detection
and hand key point detection are sequentially used as the image processing flow, and
the categories of special cases are logically filtered out in advance. The images that
are not filtered in advance are input to the final classifier by combining the returned
data from the first two models for classification.
The reason for designing such a framework process is that the images of the palm and
the back of the hand are so similar that they cannot be discriminated based on other
information about the hand, such as palm prints or knuckle prints, etc., if images do
not reach very high pixel values. Hence, the image classification models like CNN are
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation and Discussion
not applicable. By simulating the thought process of the human brain in discriminat-
ing between the palm and the back of the hand for pictures, it is possible to classify
by the intrinsic relationship between hand gestures and the number of fingertips of
nails, in addition to discriminating and thus classifying features such as palm lines.
For instance, when there are five fingernails in the picture, it is 100% certain that it
is the back of the hand, and similarly, when there are no fingernails in the picture, it
is the palm. When the hand gesture in both pictures is international gesture ”four”,
the picture with only one nail is the palm, and the picture with four nails is the back
of the hand.
Consequently, by using hand keypoints to represent hand postures, combined with
the number of nails identified by the nail detection model, the intrinsic relationship
between the data can be trained to achieve the classification effect. In addition, the
distance between the fingers, i.e., the degree of finger tightness, can also be trained
to classify by the key points of the fingers.
Figure 5.1: Detail Structure.
5.1
Nail Detection Module
The nail detection module is a object detection module based on the SSD algorithm.
SSD, Single Shot MultiBox Detector, is a object detection algorithm proposed by Wei
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Nail Detection Module
45
Liu at ECCV 2016 [Liu+16a], which is one of the main popular detection frameworks.
The dataset used in this module is the nail detection dataset mentioned in Chapter
4, which consists 396 images via collected autonomously by multiple participants.
The nail detection module is divided into several steps: labeling the data, building a
network model, training the model and validating it.
5.1.1
Data Annotation
To train a object detection model using its own data, the first thing to do is data
annotation, which means that the machine must first be told what objects are inside
the image and where the objects are located, and only after having this information
can it come to train the model. Therefore, the first step to implement nail detection
is to add ground truth to each image in the database, i.e., to mark the target to be
recognized in each image, which can be used for subsequent model training. There
are various ways to add ground truth, and this project uses the labelImg1 framework
to process each image manually.
Figure 5.2: Interface of LabelImg Annotation Tool.
The interface of labelImg is written in ’PyQt’, and the base environment built by nail
detection uses the latest version of ’Anaconda’, which already has ’PyQt5’. Hence in
the python3 environment, the thing only need to is install ’lxml’ package to enter the
1https://github.com/tzutalin/labelImg
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation and Discussion
labelImg for compilation. Interface of labelImg annotation tool is shown as Figure 5.2
below.
Shown as Figure 5.2, the five green vertex boxes are the ground truth of the nail
in the picture, which is marked by using ’Create RectBox’ for the target. In fact,
labelImg is an open source data annotation tool via python coding language that can
perform the above-mentioned frame annotation through a visual interface, and after-
wards automatically generate ”xml” files in VOC format. Therefore, in this module,
the nail targets are annotated and generated as VOC_2007 data format files, which
are stored in ”xml” format files.
5.1.2
VGG Based SSD Model
The paper proposing the SSD model [Liu+16a] also discloses a series of model li-
braries for this model. This model library contains a TensorFlow re-implementation
of the original Caffe code. Currently, it only implements the VGG-based SSD net-
work (with 300 and 512 inputs), but the project’s architecture is modular and very
easy to implement and train other SSD variants, such as ResNet or Inception-based.
based on the TF-Slim model library, which contains popular architectures (ResNet,
Inception, and VGG) for implementations. Thereby it is divided into three main
parts: interfaces to popular datasets such as Pascal VOC, COCO, etc., and scripts
for converting TF-Records; definitions of SSD networks, as well as common encoding
and decoding methods; and preprocessing and data enhancement procedures based
on VGG and Inception implementations.
The project builds an SSD model based on the VGG module. As described in Chapter
3, the SSD network contains a base network to extract bottom-scale feature mapping
maps, such as ShuffleNet, an auxiliary convolutional layer to extract high-scale fea-
ture mapping maps, and a predictive convolutional layer to output the location and
classification of the feature mapping maps. To this end, the framework design of SSD
is to be based on the design of convolution.
VGG is a classical convolutional neural network structure proposed by the group
of Visual Geometry Group in Oxford [SZ15].
The network is a related work at
ILSVRC 2014, and the main work is to demonstrate that increasing the depth of the
network can affect the final performance of the network to some extent. there are
two structures of VGG, VGG16 and VGG19, which are not fundamentally different,
only the depth of the network is different. VGGNet explores the relationship between
the depth of convolutional neural networks and their performance, and successfully
constructs convolutional neural networks with 16 to 19 layers deep, proving that in-
creasing the depth of the network can affect the final performance of the network to
a certain extent, resulting in a significant decrease in the error rate, while being very
scalable and generalizing very well to other image data, shown as Figure 5.3. So far,
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Nail Detection Module
47
VGG is still used to extract image features.
This model, shown as Figure 5.3 uses simple convolutional blocks to transform the
input image to a 1000 class vector representing the classes of the ILSVRC [NDB18]￿
Thus, after dividing the training and test sets, the training network is constructed
as a VGG-16-based SSD model as described above and deployed in the deep learning
framework of TensorFlow.
Figure 5.3: An Overview of the VGG-16 Model Architecture [NDB18].
5.1.3
Model Training and Validation
As mentioned above, the deep learning framework for training the model is Tensor-
Flow, so before inputting the data, the voc_2007 format file is converted to tfrecord
format. ’tfrecord’ data file is a binary file in TensorFlow that stores image data and
labels in a unified way, enabling faster copy, move, read, store, etc. Converting all
the files will result in a ’tfrecord’ type file as the input file for training the SSD model.
Once the target annotated in the model is set, i.e. the nail, the model begins train-
ing.
The model was trained on Google Colaboratory platform, where the model
parameters were tested several times and the final super-reference was selected as
’batch_size=32, learning_rate=0.0001, weight_decay=0.0005 ’, where the optimizer
is chosen as Adam. Finally, the model with minimum loss will be choose as the final
model to validate new samples.
In this project, the final accuracy of nail detection is 98%. The model will display
the images containing the target feature box after the new input image is recognized.
The location of each recognized nail is marked with a feature box, which not only
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Implementation and Discussion
shows the nail, but also the ID of the detected target, and the probability of similarity
of the target. Since the module needs to detect only one kind of target, the id of all
the feature boxes is 1, which represents the nail. The recognition threshold of the
module is 0.5, which means that only those with a probability of similarity greater
than 0.5 to nails will be recognized and marked as nails. In general, the probability of
recognized nails is 0.8 or more, which can be considered as strong similarity. Figure
5.4(a) illustrates some correct sample detected by nail detection model.
(a) Correct Nail Detection Samples
(b) Error Nail Detection Samples
Figure 5.4: Nail Detection Sample.
The module can recognize most of the nail pictures, but there are some cases that
cannot be recognized. As shown in the Figure 5.4(b), the first picture should have
recognized 3 nails, but only two were recognized because the nail of the thumb was
not fully displayed and the model recognized less than 0.5 similarity of the nail in
that area. The second picture will have more influencing factors. Five nails should
have been identified in the picture, but only three were identified. In addition to
the fact that the nail of the thumb is not completely shown, the light in the whole
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Hand Keypoint Module
49
picture is neither suﬀicient nor uniform, such as overshadowing, so the biggest factor
for the similarity of the small thumb to be less than 0.5 is shadow occlusion. The
reason why only two of the three nails are identified in the third image is obvious:
the unidentified nail is obscured and not clearly and completely shown. These are
the majority of the reasons why the nail recognition module does not recognize the
nails correctly.
5.2
Hand Keypoint Module
The hand key point module is designed for two purposes. One is to allow the iden-
tification of the categories of fingers tightly closed or not, and the second is to allow
the representation of the gesture state so that the categories of palm and back of
the hand can be identified in combination with the number of nails. Ensuring the
correct recognition rate of hand keypoints as much as possible has a great impact on
the robustness of the whole project. When designing the project framework, after
various conjectures and experiments, the correct rate of the whole project can only
reach the maximum if the images with correctly identified nails can have the max-
imum possibility to be recognized as hand keypoints. As a consequence, the image
adaptation and correctness of the hand keypoint recognition module are crucial.
This module is implemented using the public API of Baidu PaddlePaddle (AI stu-
dio). The hand keypoint recognition interface2 is a publicly available free interface in
the AI studio’s series on human body analysis. It is worth noting that before calling
the API, it need to get the signature calculation exclusive to Baidu Cloud firstly,
so that Baidu Smart Cloud can identify the user’s ID. The signature calculation is
performed by Baidu Smart Cloud’s access key, which includes Access Key Id (AK)
and Secret Access Key (SK).
The interface for hand keypoint recognition is to detect the hands in the image for
an input image (which can be decoded normally and has a suitable aspect ratio),
and output the coordinate frame of each hand and the coordinate information of 21
bone nodes. The current interface is mainly applicable to the case of a single hand
in the image, and the recognition effect may be poor when there are multiple hands
in the image at the same time. The input of the interface is the string conversion
format of the image, according to the base64 encoding and then urlencode, where the
requirements to be observed is that the size of the base64 encoding and urlencode
does not exceed 4M.
In addition, the interface supports image formats: ’jpg’, ’bmp’, ’png’, at least 50px
on the shortest side and 4096px on the longest side. After the hand is recognized,
the interface outputs a file in ’json’ format, which contains the number of detected
2https://ai.baidu.com/ai-doc/BODY/Kk3cpyxeu
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Implementation and Discussion
hands (hand_num), the hand keypoint information (hand_info), the 21 keypoints of
the hand (id, coordinates and keypoint confidence score), and the hand confidence
score. The current value range for the hand confidence score is 0 to 21, while the
value range for the keypoint confidence score is 0 to 1.
Figure 5.5 shows the correct detection sample image and the hand information, includ-
ing part of 21 keypoint like ids, locations and score (0 to 1), and total hand location
information like hand size and score (0 to 21). But Figure 5.5(b) illustrates a typical
case of recognition error. Images can be incorrectly identified with two or more hand
targets due to lighting or hand gestures. This is a typical but infrequent occurrence.
This figure shows that the confidence scores of the two recognized targets are very
different. Thus, the model also implements a relevant error avoidance function and
selects the target with the highest hand confidence score as the final hand target.
(a) Correct Hand Keypoint Detection Samples
(b) Error Hand Keypoint Detection Samples
Figure 5.5: Two samples of 21 hand keypoints detection and detail information
with hand location and some keypoints information using VOC2007
standard.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Hand Position Classifier Module
51
5.3
Hand Position Classifier Module
The purpose of the hand posture classification module is to train and classify three
situations, the back of the hand, the palm and the fingers are separated, and the
palm and the fingers are tightly closed. This module performs horizontal comparison
through three different classifiers, logistic regression, support vector machine and
multi-layer perceptron. Among them, each classifier will also use different parameters
and types for longitudinal comparison. The external interfaces and methods used in
the implementation of this module are all from scikit-learn [Ped+11] [Bui+13].
5.3.1
Classifiers Implementation
Since the datasets on which the classifier is trained are small, the module uses three
different classification models for comparison: logistic regression, support vector clas-
sification, and multilayer perceptual classification.
Among them, both linear and
nonlinear models are used for support vector classification, and multilayer perceptual
classification shows the results of two different superparameters.
Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is a linear model used for classification.
Logistic regression is
also called logit regression, maximum entropy classification (MaxEnt) or log-linear
classifier. In this model, the probability of describing the possible outcome of a sin-
gle experiment is modeled using logistic functions [Ped+11]. A logistic function and
logistic curve is always a sigmoid curve as below:
f(x) =
L
1 + e−k(x−x0)
(5.1)
where the x represents the value of sigmoid curve which x0 is the midpoint; L repre-
sents the maximum value and k represents the logistic growth rate.
In sklearn, Logistic regression is implemented in function ”LogisticRegression”. This
implementation can use optional binary, one-to-one or multiple logistic regression to
fit l1, l2 or Elastic-Net regularization. Elastic-Net regularization is a combination of l1
and l2. The solvers implemented in this function are “liblinear”, “newton-cg”, “lbfgs”,
“sag” and “saga” [Bui+13].
In this module, the combinations is used: ”lbfgs” solver with l2 penalty. The Limited-
memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (L-BFGS) approximates the Broyden–
Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) algorithm using a limited amount of computer
memory, which belongs to quasi-Newton methods. This solver is more suitable for
small data sets, but for larger data sets, its performance will be affected [Fu16]. In
addition, the ”ldfgs” solver only support binary class l2 regularization to penalize
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Implementation and Discussion
logistic regression minimizes the cost function as below:
minw,c
1
2wT w + C
n
∑
i=1
log(exp(−yi(XT
i w + c)) + 1)
(5.2)
Hence, logistic regression method has been used to train the database by 500 itera-
tions taken for the solvers to converge via ”lbfgs” solver and l2 penalty, and the mean
accuracy on the given test data and labels is 0.7592592592592593.
Support Vector Classification
Support vector machine (SVM) is a set of supervised learning methods for classi-
fication, regression and outlier detection. Among them, support vector classification
(SVC) is divided into linear SVC and non-linear SVC, both of which can perform two-
class and multi-class operations on the data set. SVC solves the following problem:
minw,b,ζ
1
2wT w + C
n
∑
i=1
ζi
(5.3)
w ∈Rp, b ∈R, ζi ≥0, i = 1, . . . , n
which subjects to yi(wT ϕ(xi) + b) ≥1 −ζi, and y represents a vector y ∈{1, −1}n.
In scikit-learn, linear SVC has two kinds of models, ”LinearSVC” and SVC with
”linear” kernel as < x, x
′ >, which have some different decision boundaries. ”Lin-
earSVC” minimized the squared hinge loss and used the One-vs-All multiclass re-
duction, while SVC with ”linear” minimizies the regular hinge loss and used the
One-vs-One [Ped+11].
Linear SVC models have very clear linear decision boundaries on 2D projection from
the training dataset, which means both models will have intersection hyperplanes
in real multiple features dataset. But the non-linear SVC models with polynomial
and Gaussian Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel have non-linear boundaries which
shapes are depended on different kernels and parameters. Hence, in this project, lin-
ear SVC function ”LinearSVC” and non-linear SVC function ”SVC” with RBF have
been used to make a longitudinal comparison.
Linear SVC can be equivalently formulated as the formula below:
minw,b
1
2wT w + C
∑
i=1
max(0, yi(wT ϕ(xi) + b))
(5.4)
where the hinge loss l(y) = max(0, 1 −t · y) and l2 penalty have been used in this
module. Hence, linear SVC method has been used to train the database by 1000
iterations to run via regularization parameter C = 1.0, and the mean accuracy on
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Hand Position Classifier Module
53
the given test data and labels is 0.7361111111111112.
Non-linear SVC with RBF kernel model also be used to train the training data. RBF
kernel function in SVC is exp(−γ||x−x
′||2), where γ is specified bu parameter gamma
which must be greater than 0. In RBF kernel, there are two important parameters:
C and gamma. C represents the regularization parameter which common to all SVM
models. C is used as a trade-off between the misclassification of training examples
and the simplicity of the decision-making surface. A low C will result in a smooth
decision surface, while a high C means that all training examples are likely to be
correctly classified. gamma defines how much impact a single training example has.
The larger the gamma, the other samples must be affected [Ped+11].
For these reasons, the function ”GridSearchCV” has been used to make a exhaus-
tive search over different kinds of C and gamma by cross-validation grid-search over
a parameter grid. In this module, an estimator of C: [1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1, 1, 10, 100] and
gamma: [0.01, 0.1] has been set by using 5 folds cross-validation, and the best model
parameter combination is C = 100, gamma = 0.01. Hence, non-linear SVC method
with RBF kernel has been used to train the database by 1000 iterations to run via
the best parameter combination, and the mean accuracy on the given test data and
labels is 0.8796296296296297.
Multi-layer Perceptron Classifier
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is a supervised learning algorithm, which is a nonlinear
function approximator that can be used for both classification and regression. The
algorithm is to train the data set through the function f(X) : Ri →Ro, where i is
the dimension of the input data and o is the dimension of the output. It is different
from logistic regression that between the input layer and the output layer, there can
be one or more non-linear layers, called hidden layers.
In scikit-learn, the function ”MLPClassifier” implements MLP algorithm for clas-
sifier via using Backpropagation algorithm [RHW86] for gradient descent and Cross-
Entropy loss function [De +05] to give a vector of probability estimates P(y|x). The
Cross-Entropy formula in binary case shows below:
Loss(ˆy, y, W) = −y ln ˆy −(1 −y) ln(1 −ˆy) + α||W||2
2
(5.5)
where α||W||2
2 represents the l2 penalty in scikit-learn and α > 0 is to control the
magnitude of the penalty. Gradient descent is always used, and the loss gradient
∇LossW is computed as the following formula:
W i+1 = W i −ϵ∇Lossi
W
(5.6)
where i represents the iteration and ϵ represents learning rate which will always be
larger than 0. Softmax function awlways be used in ”MLPClassifier” as the output
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Implementation and Discussion
function to return the probability of each category as following formula:
softmax(z)i =
exp(zi)
∑k
l=1 exp(zl)
(5.7)
where zi represents the ith element of input data and the ith category.
In this module, two kinds of hyperparameters combinations have been chosen to
make a longitudinal comparison for MLP classifier.
The first hyperpatameters combinations case is to use ”relu” as activation function
which is the rectified linear unit function as f(x) = max(0, x). The solver for weight
optimization is ”adam”, which is a stochastic gradient-based optimizer. Three hid-
den layers with (13, 13, 13) size has been tried to run 800 iterations, and the final
mean accuracy is 0.8194444444444444. The second case has been changed to (16, 64,
16) three hidden layers size to make 1000 iterations. ”lbfgs” solver has been used in
this case, which in an optimizer in the family of quasi-Newton methods, while the
activation function also changed to ”tanh”, which is the hyperbolic tan function as
f(x) = tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x . Hence, the mean accuracy of the second hyperpatameters
combinations case is 0.8379629629629629.
5.3.2
10 Folds vs 20 Folds Cross Validation
In the above-mentioned various machine learning modeling processes, the way to ver-
ify the model is to randomly select test data from the data set at a ratio of 0.2. This
means that the data of the test set and the training set are completely independent,
and the test data will not participate in the training process at all, but is only used for
the final model evaluation. Because in the process of model training, the problem of
overfitting often occurs, that is, the model too matches the training data, but it can-
not predict the data outside the training set well. Hence, if you use non-independent
test data to verify the model parameters, it is equivalent to using part of the data
information known during training, which will affect the accuracy of the final evalu-
ation result.
However, since such a split data set is randomly sampled, there will be random-
ness, and the final evaluation of the model will also be random. In other words, the
selection of the final model and parameters will greatly depend on the method of
dividing the training set and the test set. In addition, the most important thing for
a model is the amount of data used for training. When the amount of data used for
model training is larger, the trained model usually performs better. Therefore, the
division of training set and test set means that it is impossible to make full use of
all the data, especially the small data set of this project. Thereby, the model effect
obtained will also be affected to a certain extent.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Hand Position Classifier Module
55
For these reasons, Cross-Validation [Koh+95] has been used in this project. Cross-
validation, also known as cyclic validation, groups the original data, each subset of
data is used as a validation set, and the remaining subsets of data are used as the
training set, so that multiple models can be obtained in a loop. These models are
evaluated in the verification set, and the final error Mean Squared Error (MSE) is
added and averaged to obtain the final cross-validation error. Cross-validation can
effectively use all data to the greatest extent, and the evaluation result can be as
close as possible to the performance of the model on the test set, which can be used
as an indicator for model optimization.
Cross-Validation contains many kninds of functions.
One is called Leave-one-out
cross-validation (LOOCV), which means use only every one data as testing and the
rest as training. LOOCV has many advantages. First of all, it is not affected by the
method of dividing the training set of the test set, because each data has been tested
separately. At the same time, almost all the data is used to ensure that the bias of the
model is smaller. However, the disadvantage of LOOCV is also obvious, that is, the
amount of calculation is too large, which is n−1 times the time-consuming of the con-
ventional segmentation method (n is the total amount of data set). Hence, the other
function is K-fold cross-validation which means each test set will no longer contain
only one data, but multiple, and the specific number will be determined according to
the selection of K. Then the final error is calculated as following formula:
CV(k) = 1
k
k
∑
i=1
MSEi
(5.8)
where MSE represents the average error for each iteration model.
Hence in this hand position classifier, 10 folds and 20 folds cross validation have
been trained to make a longitudinal comparison for each above-mentioned machine
learning model.
Shown as Figure 5.7, Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.8 below, the small red dots in each
sub-graph represent the final average accuracy of each iteration of the model, and
the line chart can better reflect the fluctuations in the accuracy of the model in cross-
validation. The blue dashed line in each subgraph represents the summed average
of all dropped models, and also represents the final accuracy of the model’s cross-
validation.
From these three figures, the 20 folds cross-validation of all models accuracy rate
fluctuates more than 10 folds. The highest value of 20 folds cross-validation accuracy
of all models can be higher than 0.90, and the lowest value can be less than 0.60. The
difference between the highest accuracy rate and the lowest accuracy rate is close to
0.3, which further confirms that in this module, the final result of the model that
divides the data set by routine will be very dependent on the data division.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Implementation and Discussion
In addition, although the fluctuation of 20 folds cross-validation is generally larger
than that of 10 folds, the final average sum of the two cross-validation is gener-
ally very similar. This means that the stability and accuracy of the final results of
cross-validation can reflect the performance and evaluation results of the model more
accurately than conventional segmentation data sets.
(a) Linear SVC with 10 folds
(b) Linear SVC with 20 folds
(c) Non-linear SVC with 10 folds
(d) Non-inear SVC with 20 folds
Figure 5.6: Cross Validation Plot Charts for Linear and Non-linear SVC.
(a) Logistic Regression with 10 folds
(b) Logistic Regression with 20 folds
Figure 5.7: Cross Validation Plot Charts for LR.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Result Discussion and Validation
57
(a) MLPC (13,13,13) with 10 folds
(b) MLPC (13,13,13) with 20 folds
(c) MLPC (16,64,16) with 10 folds
(d) MLPC (16,64,16) with 20 folds
Figure 5.8: Cross Validation Plot Charts for MLPC with different Parameters.
5.4
Result Discussion and Validation
It can be seen from the structure diagram as Figure 5.1 of the project that the final
accuracy of the entire project is the product of the final accuracy of the three modules.
Figure 5.9 illustrates the comparison table about each model’s final mean accuracy
for three validation ways. Through the above analysis, although the final accuracy
rate of the conventional division in the table is the highest value, the accuracy rate
obtained through cross-validation is more accurate and stable. Therefore, the highest
model among all cross-validation results is selected as the final verification model,
namely MLPC, and its corresponding highest accuracy rate is the accuracy rate of
the final classification module, which is 0.78.
Hence, according to the detailed frame diagram Figure 5.1, when the input image
is recognized as containing five nails, it returns the ’back’ category directly, because
this particular case is only possible to map this one category. From this, there are
three cases in which the input image can be correctly classified: (1) the image contains
five nails and is correctly identified in nail detection model; (2) the image contains
five nails but is not correctly identified, and then as the next input processed via
subsequent modules and finally is correctly classified; (3) the image does not contain
five nails and is correctly classified by the whole model. The accuracy rates of the
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Implementation and Discussion
three models are:
• the accuracy of nail detection module: PN = 0.98
• the accuracy of hand keypoints detection module: PK = 0.94
• the accuracy of hand position classification module: PC = 0.78
There are six types of nails that will appear in the picture, from 0 to 5. The prob-
ability that the picture contains five nails is
C5
5
C0
5+C1
5+C2
5+C3
5+C4
5+C5
5 =
1
32 (C represents
the permutation.). Hence the final accuracy of whole project is:
Pf = 1
32 · PN + 31
32 · PN · PK · PC + 1
32 · (1 −PN) · PK · PC
= 1
32 × 0.98 + 31
32 × 0.98 × 0.94 × 0.78 + 1
32 × 0.02 × 0.94 × 0.78 = 0.727165
Figure 5.9: Comparison Table for Final Accuracy for each model via 10 and 20 folds
Cross Validation and 0.20 percent testing data..
It can be seen from the project structure diagram that the project is verified by
inputting images that have never been trained. After the nail detection module is
processed and suggested and filtered, the hand key points module will continue to
process and summarize the information of the image into the hand position classifier.
As a consequence, as shown in the Figure 5.10, there are three types of pictures have
been verified, which the total number is eight. The first line in this figure is the eight
original images input, and the second line is the eight images processed by the nail
detection module, and the third line is the images processed by the hand key points
module. At the end of this figure, the final predicted classification category and the
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Result Discussion and Validation
59
actual category of each picture are also shown.
These three sets of pictures are very typical. The first, second and third columns
are the first group of different categories of pictures with the same gesture. As can
be seen in the Figure 5.10, the third picture contains five nails, but only four nails
are detected in the nail detection module. But this will not affect the subsequent
classification results. It is worth noting that in the second set of data (columns 4,
5 and 6), the predicted category of the second picture does not match the actual
category. The original classification of the graph should be ”s”, but the predicted
class of the model is ”g”. This is because the Figure 4.7 shows that there is not too
much training data for this type of gesture in the ”s” category.
Figure 5.10: Verification and display of 8 pictures: each column illustrates the pic-
ture after the entire project is processed and displayed, also the pre-
diction category and the actual category. These 8 pictures are divided
into three groups. The first, second and third columns are the first
group of three categories of the same gesture; the fourth, fifth and
sixth columns are the second group; the last two columns are the
third group.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The project designed a targeted solution to the problems raised in Jannis’s paper by
simulating the cascade system. The database on which the project relies is based on
the sampling of participants and the selection of some public data sets. The ultimate
goal of the project is to be able to predict that the hand gesture in the picture is the
back of the hand (”back”), the palm with open fingers (”good”) and the palm with
fingers closed (”split”).
The whole project is divided into three modules, nail detection module, hand key
point module and hand posture classification module. The sequence of image pro-
cessing by each module is fixed. The input picture will first be processed by the nail
detection module. The purpose of this module is to identify the number of hand nails
in the input data. The module will perform simple filtering based on the number
of nails. If it recognizes that the picture contains five nails, it will directly output
the ”back” category, because a category containing five nails is only possible. After
the nail module has processed the data, the unfiltered data will continue to be input
into the hand key point module for the second step of processing. Finally, the data
processed by the first two models are integrated into the final image data to classify
the hand pose, and finally predict the hand category.
6.1
Further Work
Most of the data set of this project is collected through filtering and processing after
sampling by participants. Due to COVID-19, it is impossible to collect data on a
large scale and can only be collected through online data transmission. Hence, there
are deviations in the equipment and images that do not meet the standards, resulting
in small numbers and uneven data classification in the dataset. In view of the uneven
distribution of data types, the most direct improvement method is data augmenta-
tion. Targeted data augmentation operations can be performed on the basis of the
expansion of the entire data set. It is worth noting that in addition to maintaining
the balance of the three types of ”back”, ”good” and ”split” among the data set, the
number of different gestures in each category must also be balanced. This kind of
operation is also called resampling, which directly changes the distribution of the orig-
inal data by reducing the majority of samples or increasing the minority of samples,
forcing the data to change from imbalance to balance.
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Conclusion
In addition, the accuracy rate of the hand posture classification module in this project
is only 0.78, which means that it can be improved in the follow-up work. Since this
module finally uses a three-layer neural network MLP, a deeper network architec-
ture can be used for this situation. However, when using deep network training, it is
necessary to prevent gradient disappearance or overfitting, such as using a suitable ac-
tivation function (relu, etc.), constructing batch normalization and setting drop out.
In addition, deep neural network can be used to implement an end-to-end fashion
model, so there is no need to divide the project into three modules for implementa-
tion.
Finally, considering the robustness of the system, we can specifically collect some
”challenging” pictures, such as nails or fingers partially blocked or truncated, nail
reflections, etc., to train the model to enhance the generalization ability of the model.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[Bhu+15]
Manas Bhuyan et al. “Fingertip Detection for Hand Pose Recognition.”
In: International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering (Septem-
ber 2015).
[Bui+13]
Lars Buitinck et al. “API design for machine learning software: experi-
ences from the scikit-learn project.” In: ECML PKDD Workshop: Lan-
guages for Data Mining and Machine Learning. 2013, pages 108–122.
[De +05]
Pieter-Tjerk De Boer et al. “A tutorial on the cross-entropy method.”
In: Annals of operations research 134.1 (2005), pages 19–67.
[Dic19]
Ben Dickson. What are artificial neural networks (ANN). [EB/OL]. https:
//bdtechtalks.com/2019/08/05/what- is- artificial- neural-
network-ann/ Accessed August 2019. 2019.
[Eve+10]
Mark Everingham et al. “The pascal visual object classes (voc) chal-
lenge.” In: International journal of computer vision 88.2 (2010), pages 303–
338.
[Fu16]
Zihao Fu. Comparison of Gradient Descent, Stochastic Gradient Descent
and L-BFGS. [EB/OL]. http://www.fuzihao.org/blog/2016/01/16/
Comparison-of-Gradient-Descent-Stochastic-Gradient-Descent-
and-L-BFGS/ Accessed 2016. 2016.
[Gir+14]
Ross Girshick et al. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection
and semantic segmentation. 2014. arXiv: 1311.2524 [cs.CV].
[Gir15]
Ross Girshick. Fast R-CNN. 2015. arXiv: 1504.08083 [cs.CV].
[GKG16]
Tomasz Grzejszczak, Michal Kawulok, and Adam Galuszka. “Hand land-
marks detection and localization in color images.” In: Multimedia Tools
and Applications 75.23 (2016), pages 16363–16387.
[GLM+18]
Joyee Ghosh, Yingbo Li, Robin Mitra, et al. “On the use of Cauchy prior
distributions for Bayesian logistic regression.” In: Bayesian Analysis 13.2
(2018), pages 359–383.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[Has+15]
Hassan Hassan et al. “ASSESSMENT OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NET-
WORK FOR BATHYMETRY ESTIMATION USING HIGH RESOLU-
TION SATELLITE IMAGERY IN SHALLOW LAKES: CASE STUDY
EL BURULLUS LAKE.” In: International Water Technology Journal 5
(December 2015).
[Hou17]
PBS New Hour. Silicon Valley jumps into biometric gold rush for Trump’s
‘other border wall’. [EB/OL]. https : / / www . pbs . org / newshour /
politics/silicon-valley-jumps-biometric-gold-rush-trumps-
border-wall Accessed 2017. 2017.
[IDE19]
IDEMIA. MorphoWave Compact by IDEMIA, pushes the boundaries
again. [EB/OL]. https://www.idemia.com/press-release/morphowave-
compact-idemia-pushes-boundaries-again-2019-09-09 Accessed
2019. 2019.
[Jia+19]
Licheng Jiao et al. “A Survey of Deep Learning-Based Object Detection.”
In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pages 128837–128868. issn: 2169-3536. doi:
10.1109/access.2019.2939201. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2939201.
[Kaw+14]
Michal Kawulok et al. “Self-adaptive algorithm for segmenting skin re-
gions.” In: EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing 2014.1
(2014), pages 1–22.
[Kaw13]
Michal Kawulok. Database for hand gesture recognition. [EB/OL]. http:
//sun.aei.polsl.pl/~mkawulok/gestures/ Accessed 2013. 2013.
[Kej+17a]
Kejun et al. “Fingertip detection and gesture recognition method based
on Kinect.” In: Acta Electronica Sinica (2017). doi: 10.3969/j.issn.
0372-2112.2017.11.009.
[Kej+17b]
Kejun et al. “Recognition Algorithm Research of the Touchless Finger-
print Images.” In: Acta Electronica Sinica (2017).
[Kha19]
Renu Khandelwal. COCO and Pascal VOC data format for Object de-
tection. [EB/OL]. https://towardsdatascience.com/coco- data-
format-for-object-detection-a4c5eaf518c5 Accessed 2019. 2019.
[Koh+95]
Ron Kohavi et al. “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accu-
racy estimation and model selection.” In: Ijcai. Volume 14. 2. Montreal,
Canada. 1995, pages 1137–1145.
[Lin+18]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection. 2018. arXiv:
1708.02002 [cs.CV].
[Liu+16a]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector.” In: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (2016), pages 21–37. issn: 1611-3349. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-46448-0_2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-46448-0_2.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[Liu+16b]
Wei Liu et al. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector. [EB/OL]. http://
www.cs.unc.edu/~wliu/papers/ssd_eccv2016_slide.pdf Accessed
2016. 2016.
[Liu+20]
Li Liu et al. “Deep learning for generic object detection: A survey.” In:
International journal of computer vision 128.2 (2020), pages 261–318.
[NDB18]
Will Nash, Tom Drummond, and Nick Birbilis. “A review of deep learn-
ing in the study of materials degradation.” In: npj Materials Degradation
2.1 (2018), pages 1–12.
[NK14]
Jakub Nalepa and Michal Kawulok. “Fast and accurate hand shape clas-
sification.” In: International conference: beyond databases, architectures
and structures. Springer. 2014, pages 364–373.
[Ped+11]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” In: Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pages 2825–2830.
[Pri+20]
J. Priesnitz et al. “Deep Learning-Based Semantic Segmentation for
Touchless Fingerprint Recognition.” In: ICPR Workshops. 2020.
[Pro18]
ProgrammerSought. Machine learning algorithm series (3): Logistic re-
gression. [EB/OL]. https://www.programmersought.com/article/
50124387440/ Accessed 2018. 2018.
[PS16]
Krupal S. Parikh and Trupti P. Shah. “Support Vector Machine – A
Large Margin Classifier to Diagnose Skin Illnesses.” In: Procedia Technol-
ogy 23 (2016). 3rd International Conference on Innovations in Automa-
tion and Mechatronics Engineering 2016, ICIAME 2016 05-06 February,
2016, pages 369–375. issn: 2212-0173. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.protcy.2016.03.039. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2212017316300408.
[Red+16]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object
Detection. 2016. arXiv: 1506.02640 [cs.CV].
[RHW86]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learn-
ing representations by back-propagating errors.” In: nature 323.6088
(1986), pages 533–536.
[Shm05]
Armin Shmilovici. “Support Vector Machines.” In: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery Handbook. Edited by Oded Maimon and Lior Rokach.
Boston, MA: Springer US, 2005, pages 257–276. isbn: 978-0-387-25465-4.
doi: 10.1007/0-387-25465-X_12. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/0-
387-25465-X_12.
[Sim+17]
Tomas Simon et al. Hand Keypoint Detection in Single Images using
Multiview Bootstrapping. 2017. arXiv: 1704.07809 [cs.CV].
[SZ15]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Net-
works for Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[WZM18]
HaiYing Wang, Rong Zhu, and Ping Ma. “Optimal subsampling for large
sample logistic regression.” In: Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation 113.522 (2018), pages 829–844.
