==PAGE:1==
Simulation of the eCommerce Last - Mile
Delivery Operations
MSc Industrial Engineering and Management Thesis
Atilla AKPINAR - s190053
Supervisor: Allan LARSEN
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The growth of online shopping especially after the Covid - 19 outbreak has led to dramatic
increase in the logistics operations. The parcel delivery companies are encountering the chal-
lenge of meeting customer expectations and fulﬁlling soared demand while maintaining the
operational efﬁciency every day. Last – mile delivery has been infamous for being the bottle-
neck of the eCommerce supply chain and operational solutions are continuously introduced
to improve the performance of last – mile operations. In this study, two prevailing delivery
modes (i.e. Home Delivery and Customer Pick – up Point Delivery) of last - mile delivery are
assessed on a case study area by using simulation modelling.
Agent – Based modelling is applied to investigate the operations of the delivery services and
the simulation methodology of Rosetti (2016) is used as a framework to conduct the simulation
study. The study could not use actual data therefore much of the input data used in the study
is generated based on the observations of the researcher and the guidance of the supervisor.
Certain assumptions have been made to create input for the research and the last – mile
delivery system is modelled on a simulation software.
The results of the experiments reveal that combined modes of delivery signiﬁcantly improve
the operational efﬁciency of the deliveries by reducing the distance and the time travelled by
the parcel carrying truck on route and by decreasing the service time of the driver at the de-
livery location. Moreover, the missed deliveries are avoided in the combined delivery service
and the trips by the recipient to collect the missed deliveries are evaded. However, the sim-
ulation study presents that the customer pick – up points need to be designed carefully in
order to provide convenience for the recipients to pick – up the parcels and to maintain the
environmental sustainability of the system. Additional trips by the recipients to the pick – up
locations could contribute to the car use which may lead to increased congestion and higher
emissions when pick – up location is not in a close proximity to the recipients.
The study concludes that using combined mode of service for the last – mile delivery in a case
– study zone like area could assist in improving the performance of the delivery operations
and beneﬁt the urban logistics systems by simplifying the delivery for parcel carriers. Further
studies could be made on the subject with actual data and the results of this study could be
used for comparison in a more advanced and detailed research.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is the ﬁnal project of my MSc Industrial Engineering and Management programme
at the Technical University of Denmark. I would like to thank my supervisor Allan Larsen from
DTU Management for his guidance and supervision throughout the project.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim and Objectives / Problem Deﬁnition / Research Question . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
6
2.1
Last – Mile Delivery for eCommerce
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Customer PickUp Mode - Nærboks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Geographical Area of Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Simulation
12
3.1
Simulation and Agent - Based Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Simulation Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Anylogic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Parcel Demand and Destinations
20
4.1
Customer Locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Travelling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Simulation Project
24
5.1
Deﬁne the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Deﬁne the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Establish Performance Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
iii
==PAGE:5==
5.4
Build Conceptual Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5
Documenting Model Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Simulation Modelling
32
6.1
Model Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.1.1
Parcel Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.2
Truck Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.3
Recipient Agent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.4
Home Customer Agent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.1.5
Nearbox Customer Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.6
Other Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Input Data Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Veriﬁcation and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Experimental Study
46
7.1
Experimental Study Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Replications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3
Preliminary Simulation Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.5
Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.6
Scenario 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.7
Analysis of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8
Discussion and Outlook
59
9
Conclusion
61
iv
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Retail eCommerce sales have been growing rapidly over the last decade and the worldwide
value of the trade has been reported as over $4 trillion in 2020 (Kerick, Fru 2019). Traditional
retail stores are increasingly being replaced by eCommerce outlets as the commanding form
of trade is shifted towards online sales rather than the physical buyer – seller interaction espe-
cially in North America and Western Europe. Value of online retail sales have been reported
as around £76 billion in the UK in 2019 with almost a ﬁfth of share of the total sales by vol-
ume (EdgeByAscential 2020). In Denmark, the revenue of the eCommerce sector was $4
billion in 2019, with one in four customers ordering goods online a few times in a month. In
addition, it has been stated that more than half of the Danish consumers shop online abroad
(eCommerceDB 2020).
The growth in eCommerce business have led to a surge in the logistics operations of the
transporters and fulﬁlling customers’ needs in a cost efﬁcient and reliable way has become
more challenging. Additionally, consumers require high level service with fast and effective
delivery, therefore many professional package delivery companies offer expedited and express
services for small to large scale packages with the same day delivery promise (Ni et al. 2018).
A survey concludes that 85% of buyers who are satisﬁed with the delivery performance of
their orders would purchase online again compared with those 33% of buyers who received
delayed orders, and this brings the need for accomplishing efﬁcient deliveries (Esper et al.
2003 cited in Zhou et al. 2016).
Although the parcel carriers are addressing the demand of the consumers with competent
delivery services, the explosive growth in online shopping has increased the number of freight
movements in urban areas and the efﬁciency of the delivery operations is becoming more
critical (Larsen and Woensel 2019). Last – mile delivery operations are stated as the last
step of the distribution of goods to the ﬁnal destination and the ﬁnal leg of delivery is argued
to be the bottleneck of eCommerce supply chain (L. Zhou et al. 2016). Moreover, last - mile
distribution of freight is regarded as one of the most expensive and least efﬁcient part of supply
chain that accounts for 50% of the total cost of the package delivery sector (Wang et al. 2014).
1
==PAGE:7==
The rise in online shopping and the delivery of online purchases to the buyers replace the
trips to the retailers and shopping centres. Freight movement to the private households of
consumers may increase the total freight trafﬁc and the effect of parcel transportation on envi-
ronmental sustainability remains questionable (Patella et al. 2021). Growth in trafﬁc of goods
and accumulated distance of the vehicles lead to increased road congestion and overall, the
delivery operations result in higher energy consumption with increased CO2 emissions (Si-
moni et al. 2020). Last – mile delivery concept, expressed one of the “weakest links of the
supply chain” is also stated as the most pollutive phase of the whole eCommerce supply chain
(Gavears cited in (Wang et al. 2014)).
In order to develop sustainable solutions for maintaining the efﬁciency of the last - mile eCom-
merce delivery process, the delivery choices need to be examined and evaluated carefully.
Traditional door - to - door delivery service generates many trips within a particular area with
higher loads of parcels and less frequent deliveries. Although this type of delivery choice is
convenient for the consumers, it is often considered as complex and expensive with consid-
erable efforts put on the logistics planners. Recently, smart parcel boxes that are placed in
convenient, accessible areas of districts with proximity to the large - scale convenience stores
such as petrol stations or shopping centres have been increasingly used in Denmark. The
smart parcel box infrastructure is installed on open area and deliveries are handled digitally to
ensure ﬂexible and reliable delivery. This solution simpliﬁes the complex door – to – door de-
livery operations and is considered as efﬁcient in terms of time management for the couriers.
Consumers, on the other hand, need to access the parcel boxes and the effect of the trips
completed by eCommerce shoppers are unclear.
1.1. Aim and Objectives / Problem Deﬁnition / Research Question
This thesis will focus on how the different type of delivery services affect the efﬁciency of the
eCommerce last - mile delivery operations on a particular area such as the immediate north
– east zone of Copenhagen (parts of Gladsaxe and Lyngby – Taarbek Kommune). Also, the
thesis will evaluate how the last - mile deliveries could be performed more effectively and
operational solutions such as smart package delivery boxes (i.e. Nærboks) could assist in
reducing the service time of the driver with the load / unload operations and in decreasing
GHG emissions in the area. The stakeholders of the last - mile delivery are considered in the
research (i.e. Package delivery companies, customers) and the performance of the delivery
services are assessed from the perspectives of the stakeholders.
The aim is to study the parcel ﬂows of the last leg of delivery in the case study zone in an
Agent – Based Simulation (ABS) model in different scenarios with the delivery service type
adjustments. The disperse of the customer locations in the map will also be assessed to
evaluate service time of the driver and parcel ﬂows in the deliveries.
The study will also
2
==PAGE:8==
research whether implementing smart delivery boxes in the last mile logistics systems is going
to provide any beneﬁcial results for the efﬁciency and sustainability.
The following research question is going to be studied throughout the thesis:
Can an agent – based simulation model be used to evaluate the efﬁciency and environmental
effects of last – mile delivery of an e-Commerce parcel carrier in order to decrease the
service time of the driver for each recipient and reduce the CO2 emissions of the system?
There are several sub-questions that are part of this research question and these are:
• How can a simulation framework be designed to illustrate the last – mile delivery details
of parcel ﬂows to the recipient locations and customer pick - up points?
• Does the customer pick - up point Nærboks in Denmark assist in improving efﬁciency
for the parcel delivery company and result in overall reduced emissions for parcel deliv-
eries?
• What are the environmental effects of delivery modes and how the delivery mode choice
of the recipients might affect greenhouse gas emissions, as evaluated by the different
designed scenarios in the simulation study?
The thesis attempts to generate answers to the stated objectives by using an ABS model. The
simulation model will try to illustrate the parcel ﬂows and operations in the last – mile package
delivery and it will be beneﬁcial in evaluating multiple scenarios by gauging the outputs of the
system. Simulation modelling could be used to predict the performance of a system in the
real world and to optimise the operations in the parts of the system. Moreover, modelling the
details of the last - mile leg of the delivery operations would provide gaining insights to the
fundamentals of the system.
The data used in the simulation model is created by the researcher with the guidance of the
supervisor and observations are made to present realistic data to be used for input modelling.
Project speciﬁc objectives are presented in Appendix A.
1.2. Scope and Limitations
The scope of the study is to focus on the efﬁciency of last - mile delivery operations in the
case study area and to evaluate the effect of customer pick - up delivery mode on improving
the performance of delivery operations and on maintaining environmental sustainability. The
limitations of the study are as follows:
• Due to the framework of the thesis, the study only covers the ﬁrst four phases of the
general simulation methodology of Rosetti (2016).
3
==PAGE:9==
• The study is limited on gauging the environmental sustainability of the delivery service
types. GHG emissions are not calculated throughout the research and the simulation
study is going to provide details on the vehicle distances and start - stops of the vehicle
engines in the model.
• The project does not involve ﬁnancial analysis of the service types on the last - mile
delivery system. Analysis of the costs require high level of complexity and the elements
of the simulation model are simplistic to represent the ﬁnancial aspect of the last - mile
deliveries.
1.3. Structure of the Report
The current chapter introduces the topic to the readers and states the objectives of the project
together with the scope and limitations.
Chapter 2 provides the background of the research and presents the elements of the study
with the geographical area in which the simulation model is going to be performed.
In Chapter 3, the simulation theory and methodology are discussed to solve the problem
statement. The simulation approach of the thesis is explained, a brief literature review of
simulation studies are presented and the method used is stated. Also, the simulation software
that is chosen for the experiments is described.
Chapter 4 presents the parcel demand and destinations. It is crucial to create realistic data
for the input as the simulation results are highly dependent on the data used in the model.
Travelling salesman problem is used to create optimal route for the last - mile delivery.
Chapter 5 covers the ﬁrst phase of the simulation methodology. The problem, system are
deﬁned and performance metrics are stated. Also, the conceptual model is presented and the
modelling assumptions are documented.
In Chapter 6, the translation of the conceptual model to the simulation software is discussed.
The input data is described and the model is veriﬁed.
In Chapter 7, the experiments are designed and conducted. The results of the experiments
are analysed thoroughly.
Chapter 8 provides the discussion of the simulation model and the assumptions made during
the creation of the model. Chapter 9 is the ﬁnal part of the report where the conclusion of the
thesis is presented.
4
==PAGE:10==
1.4. Audience
The study is targeted for academics and researchers who are interested in last mile logistics
planning and green logistics. Basic knowledge of simulation modelling and route optimisation
is required from the audience to comprehend the concepts which are thoroughly investigated
in this research. Moreover, familiarity with agent – based modelling and the simulation soft-
ware that is used (i.e. AnyLogic) is an advantage but not a necessity as these will be discussed
in the coming chapters.
5
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter provides the background of the study and the last – mile delivery concept is
described comprehensively. Firstly, the last – mile delivery modes are stated and these modes
are discussed regarding their effects on both the parcel carriers and the recipients. Also, the
prevailing customer pick-up mode in Denmark is introduced and ﬁnally, the geographical area
of the case study is given.
2.1. Last – Mile Delivery for eCommerce
Last – mile delivery of goods, where the goods are transported from a hub to their designated
ﬁnal destination, is one of the most crucial stages of parcel delivery services and there are
several elements that are vital to be regarded in the last mile delivery processes. Speed of
the delivery, accuracy of tracking, convenience, product delivery precision and cost are some
of the key factors that needs to be taken into consideration for the parcel carriers and with the
growing demand for online orders, the performance of last – mile logistics of eCommerce de-
liveries is highly critical (Ilchenko and Kotova 2020). As last – mile delivery has a major impact
on customer experience, it is crucial for parcel carriers to provide reliable delivery options to
ensure ﬂexibility for customers and it is a signiﬁcant challenge to balance the proﬁtability with
the customer satisfaction (Xu, Li, and Tang 2019).
In addition to the customer experience and proﬁtability, last – mile delivery operations are also
drawing attention to investigate the effect of parcel carriers on GHG emissions. As fossil fuel
combustion of the road transport is a signiﬁcant contributor to the CO2 emissions, several
efforts such as introducing cleaner fuels and developing new operational modes have been
made to reduce the usage of fossil fuels by road transport (F. Zhou, Yandong, and L. Zhou
2019). Parcel delivery companies are also encouraged to become greener by reducing the
GHG emissions of their ﬂeet and this challenge brings the focus on optimising the operations
of the last – mile delivery in urban and suburban areas. Efﬁcient delivery modes with reduced
6
==PAGE:12==
kilometers (i.e. The distance that the parcel carrier truck travels) are signiﬁcant in optimising
the last – mile delivery operations as reducing the travel distance would decrease the fos-
sil fuel usage and allow parcel carriers to maintain high service level while becoming more
sustainable with fewer vehicles and decreased delivery times.
There are two predominant delivery modes in the last – mile delivery that are used by the
parcel carriers and these are home delivery (i.e. Door - to - door delivery) and customer
pickup (F. Zhou, Yandong, and L. Zhou 2019). Home delivery is the most fundamental service
of parcel delivery companies, where the parcel is shipped by the parcel carrier directly to the
recipient’s location and delivered by the courier driver. Although this type of service is highly
popular among the customers, it is subject to doubt for the efﬁciency of the deliveries due
to the rate of unsuccessful deliveries caused by the absence of the recipients at the location
are considerably high (Ozarik et al. 2021). Almost two-thirds of the parcel carriers stated that
absence is critical for the low hit rates (i.e. Successful deliveries) and this is a major issue
that they encounter during the last – mile delivery service. In addition to the inefﬁciency, low
hit rates cause high costs to the carrier and inconvenience to the recipients as the individuals
need to rethink and invest time to collect their parcels from the collection points (ibid.). The
other type of the delivery mode that is widely used is the customer pickup and this mode is
discussed further in the following section.
2.2. Customer PickUp Mode - Nærboks
In order to reduce the distance of the vehicles that are travelling to deliver the customers’
orders, customer pick-up mode has been developed as a new operational mode for managing
the operations of last – mile delivery processes smoothly. Customer pick-up mode is where
the parcel carrying vehicle delivers the customers’ orders to smart and autonomous boxes and
the customers pick-up their parcels any time suitable for them in a period of time. Nowadays
in Denmark, innovative Nærboks is the smart customer pick-up box that have been widely
used by the parcel carriers and these unmanned, intelligent boxes are particularly beneﬁcial
for minimising the missed deliveries that cause high costs to the delivery companies (F. Zhou,
Yandong, and L. Zhou 2019).
Nærboks has been set up by Nordic Infrastructure in 2019 with the purpose of creating a
network of customer pick-up boxes and it has been functioning as a new delivery mode par-
ticularly in the last – mile delivery of eCommerce parcels (Nordic Infrastructure A/S 2021).
Nærboks have already delivered more than 1 million packages in less than two years and is
being increasingly used by the distributors. In Figure 2.1, a standard Nærboks is shown.
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Nærboks that is placed in a residential area. The picture is taken from a residential
area
These smart boxes are placed around the residential areas or frequently visited urban / sub-
urban zones and provides ﬂexibility both for the parcel carriers and customers. Also, Nærboks
could serve up to 12-13 recipients and this provides reduced travelled distances in the last –
mile delivery operations.
While the smart parcel boxes provide time ﬂexibility for the customers and diminishes second
delivery of the parcel carrying vehicle by reducing the missing deliveries, the precise effect
of the customer pick-up mode on environment is unclear as the mode could lead overall cus-
tomers in the system to use more vehicles and this could lead to increased urban congestion
and higher emissions.
Customer pick-up mode has become prominent both in academic literature and the practical
industry and the effects of this mode on last – mile delivery operations are being increasingly
researched. L. Zhou et al. (2016) and Baldacci et al. (2018) assert that customer pick-up
service mode plays a key role in reducing the operational costs and adding sufﬁcient pick – up
points in the network is important in lowering the costs. Furthermore, by reducing the travelling
distance, it is suggested that the carbon emissions would be lowered as the emissions are
highly related to the distance. Moreover, F. Zhou, Yandong, and L. Zhou (2019) studied the
8
==PAGE:14==
delivery options in the last – mile distribution in Shangpingba district of Chongqing in China
and argue that using only one type of delivery mode in the study of delivery results in higher
distances and more vehicles being used therefore combining the service modes would enable
the parcel carrier to maintain cost efﬁciency and high service level. Also, the customised
service for delivery to the customer is one of the important factors in determining the customer
experience and distinct needs of customers need to be met to design an efﬁcient last – mile
delivery system (Agatz, Fleischmann, and Nunen 2008).
The operational efﬁciency and environmental effects of home delivery mode and Nærboks,
which is used as a customer pick-up point in Denmark by parcel delivery companies and
customers, have not been researched yet and as the last – mile distribution of parcels has
become high critical for avoiding bottlenecks in the eCommerce parcel delivery supply chain,
types of delivery methods and insights on the service time at the customer, travelled distance
by the vehicle and the time that the vehicle spends on route in each delivery mode are going
to be researched in this study. The following section presents the research area where the
simulation model is going to be implemented and further in the report in chapter 7, the results
of the study are going to be examined.
2.3. Geographical Area of Case Study
The study for designing the simulation framework to investigate the insights on the last - mile
delivery of eCommerce parcels is going to be researched on the immeadiate north / north -
east of Copenhagen municipality area. This area has been chosen as the setting of the study
due to the fact that the area is urban / suburban so there would be considerable demand
for parcels among the customers and it is less congested compared to the central zones of
Copenhagen. Three municipalities have been selected as the initial focus of the setting and
these are Gentofte Municipality, Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality and Gladsaxe Municipality. The
total population living in the municipalities is over 200,000 and the span of the areas is almost
90 km2. In order to reduce the size of the setting for building a realistic simulation model
as a part of the framework, smaller zones in each of the municipalities are examined and a
combination of zones shown in Table 2.1 are chosen as the research area of the study.
The research area is composed of 6 parts that are adjacent to each other and a total number
of 62,710 inhabitants live in the area. The chosen area for the study is shown in Figure 2.2.
9
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: Table of sub-zones in three municipalities
The area has many residential building with active districts and as the area is a mix of urban
/ suburban part of Greater Copenhagen, there are plenty of building complexes, townhouses
(i.e. Rekkehus) and detached villas. The area neighbours Jægersborg Sogn and Gentofte
Sogn on the east which are parts of Gentofte Municipality, Virum Sogn and Lundtofte Sogn
on the north which are parts of Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality, Bagsværd Sogn and Gladsaxe
Sogn on the west which are parts of Gladsaxe Municipality, Emdrup Sogn and Dyssegård
Sogn on the south which are parts of Copenhagen Municipality and Gentofte Municipality
respectively.
There are two S-train lines (i.e. A line and B line) passing through the area where several
s-train and local train stations are located (e.g. Vangede St, Buddinge St, Lyngby St). These
train stations are considered to be used as customer pick-up points where several nærboks
could be placed.
There is a new light - rail network that is constructed on the area and
currently the ﬂow of the trafﬁc has been affected by the road works and the maintenance of
the infrastructure. The study is going to ignore the current construction of the light - rail system
and the prevailing routes in the map feature of the simulation software are going to be used
as the delivery route of parcel carrying vehicle.
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: The geographical area where the study is conducted shown in Google Maps
11
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Simulation
This chapter of the report covers thorough evaluation of the state of the art of modelling
and simulation used in the thesis.
Firstly, simulation is described, brief use of simulation
on logistics systems are discussed and the Agent - Based Simulation as well as the other
types of simulation models are explored. Next, the simulation methodology is presented and
ﬁnally the software applied in the study is explained.
3.1. Simulation and Agent - Based Modelling
Simulation modelling is the simpliﬁed representation of a complex system within a computer
environment. The modeller attempts to imitate the behaviour of the system for generating
insights of the system in question and for producing predictions of the performance metrics
(Rosetti 2014). The process of building a simulation model of a real system involves choosing
the abstraction level so that the details of the complex system that are perceived as irrelevant
are excluded and focusing on the crucial aspects that are believed to be signiﬁcant in using
models to generate solutions to the problems (Grigoryev 2018).
In addition to the descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytics that the simulation model
brings to the modeller, it allows to simulate particular scenarios that would be cheaper and
easier to experiment compared to the real life. Also, simulation modelling aids the designer
to rank the multiple designed cases and to further analyse entire operations and the complex
inter-relationships of the processes. It is also safer with the simulation modelling to experiment
and analyse the constructed scenarios for testing the overall performance and tracking the
behaviour of the details in the system (Altiok and Melamed 2007). The statistical analysis
of the details would enable the researcher to analyse those details further and ﬁnd and/or
improve the solutions related to the analysis. Furthermore, simulation modelling facilitates the
researcher in gaining complete control of the progression and interaction between the parts
of the system. The dynamic behaviour of the real system within the components and changes
12
==PAGE:18==
on the model could be analysed and predictions on how the system might behave with respect
to the scenarios in the simulated time and could be generated (Rosetti 2014).
One of the major drawbacks of the use of simulation modelling as a representation of the
complex system is the reliance on detailed data and the issue that the output of the simulation
model is dependent on the input data used in the simulation runs. Nevertheless, simulation
models have been widely used in logistics and transportation of the goods to test the scenarios
and to determine the potential improvements in the system. Especially in recent years, there
is an ongoing urbanisation which results in increasing large ﬂows of goods in the cities and
gaining insights into the effects of urban logistics could be provided with simulation modelling
(Heeswijk et al. 2020).
Trott, Viebahn, and Auf der Landwehr (2020) used agent - based simulation study to evaluate
the environmental impact of e-grocery shopping compared to the stationary shopping and
discovered that increasing the share of e-grocery rate would provide reduced driving distance
in the system and the CO2 emissions could be decreased by up to 50%. The simulation model
in the study involves many agents and presents high level of details.
Simoni et al. (2020) used a simulation - based evaluation for assessing the last - mile impacts
of crowdshipping services and argued that the effect of crowdshipping is unclear and several
factors determine the actual impact of crowdshipping services as opposed to traditional de-
livery systems. Freight trips are replaced by crowdshippers in the study and it is stated that
transport mode employed by crowdshippers to deliver the parcels is highly signiﬁcant for the
sustainability of the system. Moreover, it is argued that the crowdshipping deliveries by car
have higher negative impacts than the deliveries by public transport.
There are three main simulation modelling methods and these are: Discrete – Event Simu-
lation (DES), Agent – Based Modelling (ABM) and System Dynamics (SD) (Grigoryev 2018).
These three simulation modelling methods differ in their abstraction level as each serves its
own abstraction level. The summary of the abstraction levels and ranges of methods is shown
in Figure 3.1.
Agent – Based Modelling has been adopted in this study as the transportation of the eCom-
merce parcels require broader level of details and therefore lower abstraction level. Moreover,
the ﬂow of parcels between the warehouse of the parcel carrier, the truck that is carrying them
to the recipients’ home or to the smart boxes (i.e. Nærboks) with the movement of the car/bike
of the customers from their locations to the boxes and back require high level of details in
the operational level and several agents are interrelated so their interactions are believed to
represent an entire last mile delivery system in the model.
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: Simulation modelling types
ABM is a newer method compared to the other two methods mentioned in the simulation mod-
elling methods and has been used in the research by the academics for about two decades.
The objects in the real system that are signiﬁcant for solving the problems are identiﬁed and
the behaviour of these objects are modelled. There are three main agents that are used in this
simulation study and these are the parcels, the truck and the recipient of the parcels that are
denoted as the customers. The movement of the truck in several scenarios provides thorough
insight in comprehending the behaviour of the agent and additionally, customers decide on
the delivery methods (i.e. Home delivery or Nearbox delivery) and the mode of transport to
pick up the parcels from the boxes. The interaction between the parcels and the customers is
modelled in order to ensure delivery of the correct parcels to their recipients. Further details
of the agents of the simulation model is explained in section 6.1. The driver of the truck with
the load / unload operations of the parcels from the truck and delivery to the customers is also
added to the system with a discrete event method as using combining different methods and
representing the system in a multi-method model for various parts of the system is believed to
best match the needs of a real-life system of e-Commerce last mile delivery (Grigoryev 2018).
3.2. Simulation Methodology
Building a successful simulation model for the last - mile delivery is undoubtedly one of the
most crucial elements in analysing the parcel ﬂows to the recipients and the effects of trans-
14
==PAGE:20==
portation of the eCommerce parcels to the parcel delivery company. In order to achieve this,
it is essential to divide the entire process into smaller steps to follow and this study applies
the modiﬁed general problem - solving methodology DEGREE that Rosetti (2016) suggests in
(Rosetti 2014). The steps of DEGREE methodology are as follows:
• Deﬁne the problem
• Establish measures of performance for evaluation
• Generate alternative solutions
• Rank the alternative solutions
• Evaluate and iterate during process
• Execute and evaluate the solution
The ﬁrst letter of each step is used in the acronym for DEGREE and this problem - solving
methodology is modiﬁed to suit the needs of a simulation study and to perform the neces-
sary actions in the overall problem - solving process (ibid.). Figure 3.2 shows the modiﬁed
simulation methodology that is used in this study.
The ﬁrst phase of the simulation methodology is problem formulation. It secures the ﬁrst two
steps of the DEGREE problem – solving methodology and these are deﬁning the problem
and establishing measures of performance for evaluation. There are ﬁve main activities in the
problem formulation phase and these are as follows:
• Problem deﬁnition, where a problem deﬁnition statement is fundamental and clariﬁca-
tion of the problem that is going to be addressed by the researcher is crucial. In addition,
it is necessary to document all the assumptions made during modelling. The effect of the
assumptions could later be examined during the veriﬁcation, validation and experimental
design steps of the study. Moreover, the objectives of the study should be detailed in the
problem formulation phase and the types of scenarios that are going to be examined,
the expected outputs of the model and the predictions that could be made should be
stated.
• System deﬁnition, in which the boundaries of the system are clearly determined and
the key elements of the system that is going to be represented in the research are
expressed. This step is critical in focusing on the right elements of the system in the
study and in comprehending the scope of the project.
• Performance metrics creation, where the vital performance measures are introduced
and the simulation project could explicitly compare alternative scenarios to gauge the
performance of the system. The S.M.A.R.T technique is used for the creation of mean-
ingful performance metrics (Doran 1981). S.M.A.R.T goals signify Smart, Measurable,
Attainable, Relevant and Time – bound goals. These criteria are employed to plan and
guide the performance metrics for the study.
15
==PAGE:21==
• Building conceptual models, where detailed description of the system is made by us-
ing ﬂowcharts or conceptual diagrams. This is conducted in order to translate the model
to a representation on the computer in a clear and concise manner. It is also useful in
developing the simulation model and assisting in the progress of coding. Initially, the ba-
sic aspects of the system are added in the conceptual model and gradually, the details
such as behaviour of the agents and interactions between them are added to represent
the complexity of the system.
• Modelling assumptions documentation, in which the assumptions for building the
model are documented. Signiﬁcant elements of the real system that affect the problem
are considered in this part and in order to scope the study, some assumptions have been
made to simplify the complex processes of last mile delivery.
The second phase of the simulation methodology is the simulation model building and there
are four activities in this phase that have to be followed. Model translation is the one of ﬁrst
steps in the conceptual model, which was built in the ﬁrst phase of the simulation methodology.
The model is coded into the computer software and the simulation software that is used in this
study is AnyLogic. The features of AnyLogic are going to be discussed in a comprehensive
way later in this chapter in section 3.3. Input data modelling is the other ﬁrst step of the
second phase where the input data is analysed to evaluate the extent of data that needs to
be collected. As mentioned earlier, dependence on reliable data for the results is a crucial
factor in the simulation study therefore this step is highly signiﬁcant in building a realistic
representation of the system. The input data is generated by the researcher as useful data
was not available in this study. Part of input data modelling is explained in the next chapter
and the overall input data modelling process is explained in section 6.2 of chapter 6 along with
the other activities of this phase.
Veriﬁcation is the step that checks whether the program is built correctly and this step is done
throughout the simulation model building as it involves debugging of the errors. Validation is
the ﬁnal step where the model is checked in order to ensure that it represents the real system.
While the veriﬁcation step ensures that the model is built correctly and the program works
accurately, the validation step determines how appropriate the ﬁnal model is for the system
(Rosetti 2014).
The third phase of the methodology is the experimental design and the analysis of the results.
The scenarios are going to be made in this phase and results are obtained. The results of the
model are further analysed in chapter 7.
The fourth phase is performing more simulation runs to determine adequate results and anal-
ysis for the problem.
The documentation and reporting of the results is the ﬁfth phase and implementation of the
simulation model is the ﬁnal phase of the methodology. These two phases are not conducted
in this thesis.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Rosetti’s Simulation Methodology
17
==PAGE:23==
3.3. Anylogic
AnyLogic is a multimethod simulation modelling software that supports the three simulation
methodologies (i.e. ABM, Discrete – Event Based Simulation and System Dynamics) men-
tioned earlier in section 3.1 of this chapter. It provides many visual languages such as process
ﬂowcharts, statecharts, rail and road trafﬁc and material handling library to simulate complex
business systems for the researcher. Also, AnyLogic enables the modeler to use Geograph-
ical Information Systems (GIS) maps within the simulation study therefore, it is particularly
useful to model the systems that are related to routes and logistics. It offers free license to
the students, so it is particularly available for building simulation models for educational pur-
poses and thesis research. Agent - based modelling is relatively simple with the framework
and graphical interface provided by AnyLogic as the statecharts are used mainly for ABM and
these statecharts are the visual constructs allows the modeler to determine the interaction
and behaviour of the various objects (i.e. Agents). The statecharts have the entry points, the
states, transitions and ﬁnal states and reactions in a speciﬁc state that deﬁnes the activities of
the agents in the model.
In an ABM of a logistics system, agents could represent many things. Warehouse or distribu-
tion centre, recipients, driver, parcels, and the transport unit of the parcels could all be agents
in the simulation of a logistics network. Agents have several states that they spend some time
in where actions take place. Based on a condition, message or the arrival of the agent deﬁned
in the actions in the particular state, a transition is completed by the agent to move into a
different state. An example of a statechart model of an agent in AnyLogic is shown below in
Figure 3.3.
In this example for a parcel object, 6 states (i.e. Initialising the parcel attributes, Waiting to be
dispatched, On delivery to the customer, Delivered to the customer at home, Delivered to the
box and Picked – up by the customer at the box) are deﬁned and 7 transitions are made to
move the agent between the states. The states are presented by the yellow rectangles and
the transitions are illustrated by the arrows. The parcel agent is scanned and the data of the
attributes of the agent are stored in the initialising stage. The clock between the arrow after
the initialising state is the “timeout” where a time is given for the transition to be executed
and transition is used to move the parcel agent to the next state and the agent is in the
“WaitingShift” state after the time passes in the model. As mentioned earlier, there could
be several transition triggers and the ﬂag that is shown in the example is the “agent arrival”
trigger where the transition is executed once parcel agent arrives to the recipient location or
to the box. The “message” trigger is the one with the envelope just before the pick - up state
of the agent and it is completed by a particular message. When the parcel is collected by
the customer, the customer agent sends a speciﬁc message to the parcel to complete the
transition to the pick – up state for the parcel and after some time, the parcel agent enters the
ﬁnal state.
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Anylogic Example
Each of the state shown in Figure 3.3 contains Java coding where the actions of the state that
are intended to be done are completed and the Java coding is the part where the behaviour
and interaction of agents are deﬁned in ABM. Also, variables and collections are used to
store data this data could be used both for following logical ﬂow of the operations in agent
statecharts and for output analysis. Events are also used in the AnyLogic model to update
the variables based on a speciﬁc time. The features of AnyLogic and detailed use of agent
statecharts are discussed in section 6.1 of chapter 6.
19
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Parcel Demand and Destinations
In this chapter, the demand for eCommerce parcels and the destinations are presented. In
order to investigate the parcel ﬂows and gain an understanding of the last – mile deliveries,
the number of orders from households in a time period would be necessary to establish the
delivery route of a parcel carrier truck. Also, the choice of delivery mode by the customer
would be useful to create a probability distribution among recipients for their preferred type
of delivery methods. In this study data was not available from a parcel delivery company to
establish demand and destinations of the parcels therefore several assumptions were made.
Firstly, the customer demand is going to be generated and the locations of the customers
based on the demand in each sub - area (i.e. The destination of parcels) are stated. Next, the
travelling salesman problem that is used in the study is introduced to get the optimal path for
the parcel delivery and the distances between locations are extracted from Anylogic. Finally,
the optimal route for the parcel carrier truck is found by using an integer linear model coded in
Julia and this route is going to be used in the study as the input for the truck movements.
4.1. Customer Locations
The study uses the population size of each area given in Table 2.1 in section 2.3. Each of the
sub - area is evaluated and in order to create realistic demand, certain number of recipient
locations in each sub-area are generated. Table 4.1 below shows the number of recipient
locations in each sub – area where demand for online shopping, hence eCommerce parcels,
is assumed to be abundant.
20
==PAGE:26==
Table 4.1: Number of Recipient Locations in each sub - area
The recipient locations vary from 3 to 6 in each sub – area and this is due to presenting a
realistic scenario of a last – mile delivery day. It is assumed that there is demand for at least
one delivery in these recipient locations each day for eCommerce parcels. The number of
inhabitants in each recipient location area is given in the last column of the Table 4.1. The
exact distribution of the number of inhabitants in each sub - are is unknown and the recipient
locations are assumed to be representing the number of inhabitants per location.
Next, the addresses of the recipient locations in each sub – area are given and these are
based on the individual observations of the researcher.
There are totally 26 recipient locations in 6 sub - areas of Gladsaxe, Gentofte and Lyngby-
Taarbæk municipalities. Also, 5 customer pick - up (i.e. Nærboks) points located in s-train and
local train stations of the sub - areas are given in Table 4.2. The customer pick - up points are
assumed to be located in the train stations in this study as the stations are frequently visited
locations by the individuals living in the municipalities.
A package centre is used in the study to collect the missed deliveries at the end of the day.
This is further discussed in section 5.5. The package centre is located at Buddingevej 81 - 83,
2800 Kongens Lyngby.
21
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.2: The addresses of the recipients
It should be noted that each recipient location actually covers a large area of detached houses
or a building complex where many number of households are present and therefore it is rea-
sonable to assume demand for last - mile delivery every day from each of the locations. For in-
stance Tinghøjvej 56, 2860 covers a large building complex with the addresses from Tinghøjvej
36 - 56 where 254 households are abundant. The locations are used in the next section to
ﬁnd the optimal route that is going to be used in the simulation model.
4.2. Travelling Salesman Problem
Last - mile delivery of eCommerce parcels by the parcel carrying vehicle is modelled as a
travelling salesman problem where each of the recipients are visited each day and only once
in the shortest route. The parcels are prepared for the delivery and loaded in the vehicle in
the warehouse of the parcel delivery company and this is the origin of the truck where it starts
its journey of parcel deliveries. After completing the route with the shortest distance travelled,
the truck comes back to the origin to be dispatched for the next day. In addition to ﬁnding
the optimal route for the vehicle, the travelling salesman problem allows the truck to spend
shortest time on the route. Trafﬁc congestion between certain locations in the route, road
blocks and infrastructure maintenance that would cause the vehicle to change its designated
22
==PAGE:28==
route, are not included in this study.
The distances between the locations are extracted by using the GIS interface of AnyLogic and
the mathematical model given in 4.1 and 4.2 below is used to solve the problem in Julia.
xij = { 1
the route goes from location i to location j
0
otherwise
.
cij > 0 ; is the distance from location i to location j
min
Ín
i=1
Ín
j≠i,j=1 cijxij :
Ín
i=1,i≠j xij = 1
j = 1, . . . , n
Ín
j=1,j≠i xij = 1
i = 1, . . . , n
(4.1)
uj – ui ≥dj – C

1 – xij

∀i, j ∈V\{0}, i ≠j
s.t. di + dj ≤C
0 ≤ui ≤C – di
∀i ∈V\{0}
(4.2)
ui, i ∈V\{0}V
uj, j ∈V\{0}V
di and dj, are the demands of location i and j. ui and uj are additional continuous variables
which represents the load left in the vehicle after visiting customer. C is the capacity of the
vehicle.
It should be noted that the load constraints given in 4.2 are generally used in vehicle routing
problems and the equation has been adopted particularly for this study as it provides excluding
sub - tours in the optimal solution.
The warehouse of the parcel delivery company is assumed to be located at Naverland 7 - 9,
2600 Glostrup in this study. The truck is loaded with the eCommerce parcels of the recipients
at this location and ﬁnishes the day by returning to this location. Therefore the origin point is
the warehouse and the last destination is also warehouse in the travelling salesman problem.
The optimal route is presented in Appendix B.
23
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Simulation Project
This chapter of the report covers the ﬁrst phase of simulation methodology presented by
Rosetti (2016). First of all, the problem and the system are clearly deﬁned to provide pre-
cise and coherent understanding of the problem that is going be sought to be studied with
the simulation model. Next, the performance metrics that are related to the objectives of the
study are expressed and the conceptual model is presented. Finally, the assumptions that
narrow down the scope of the study for the simulation modelling are documented and these
assumptions would be reviewed in the further chapter during the validation and veriﬁcation
steps.
5.1. Deﬁne the Problem
The motivation behind this simulation study is the desire to get a complete apprehension of
the parcel ﬂows in the last mile delivery. In addition to this, the study aims to gauge the ef-
fectiveness of the different delivery methods, such as the smart box delivery and door to door
delivery, in an urban residential area. It is imperative to focus on achievable objectives within
this problem therefore performance metrics would be introduced according to the S.M.A.R.T
goals further in this chapter. The study is expected to provide insights on how the parcel de-
livery truck of a package delivery company could be more efﬁcient and how the overall system
would be affected in different types of delivery methods. The objectives of the simulation study
are:
• Investigating how the parcel ﬂows happen during the last mile delivery and gain an
understanding on the behaviour of the system while the parcel carrier truck is performing
the deliveries
• Comparing the scenarios regarding the distances of the carrier truck and the service
time of the driver
24
==PAGE:30==
• Comparing the customers’ distances in the scenarios where the behaviour is ﬁxed and
where the customer dynamically decides on the choice of delivery method
It should be noted that the scenarios are going to be reviewed thoroughly during the simulation
study. The simulation study is modelled based on an imaginary case therefore the input data
was not available, so the demand of the parcels and the customer locations used as input
data in the scenarios are uncertain. Due to this uncertainty, it is believed that testing several
scenarios on the representation is system is necessary to gain insights on the performance
and the behaviour of the system under different cases. Some of the scenarios are going to be
used as benchmarks for the evaluation of the performance of the system.
5.2. Deﬁne the System
The other step of the ﬁrst phase in the simulation methodology proposed by Rosetti (2016) is
the deﬁnition of the system. The system is composed of a warehouse where the eCommerce
parcels are prepared for the delivery for the day, a parcel carrier truck which is loaded with the
parcels and dispatches from the warehouse to drive the parcels to their recipients’ location,
customer who chooses the method of delivery before the dispatch and receives the package
either at home (i.e. Home delivery) or collects the package from the smart boxes (i.e. Nærboks
delivery), the driver of the truck who unloads the parcel from the truck and delivers the parcel
and the parcel that is carried along the way. It should be stated that the customer decides
the mode of the transport to collect the parcel from the box, so it is either by a car or bike /
walking. The system deﬁnition is presented in Figure 5.1.
It could be observed from the ﬂowchart shown in Figure 5.1 that the system consists of three
sub - sytems that are interlinked to each other. The parcel sub – system is shown with the
green colour and each parcel appears in the system in the warehouse.
The appearance
of the parcel is illustrated with a cloud shape. The truck collects the parcels waiting at the
warehouse and once the parcels are loaded, the truck leaves the warehouse and drives to
its next destination to unload the parcels there. The truck in the blue sub - system shown in
Figure 5.1 is already in the system and never leaves the system. It starts the trips each day
at the warehouse and ends its trips at the warehouse for the day. Truck driver is used as a
resource in the system and the driver is responsible for the unload operations and the delivery
of the parcels at the destinations. The detailed version of the system and the sub – systems
are going to be presented in the further in section 5.4 of this chapter.
When the truck unloads the parcels at the destination, the parcel enters the parcel sub –
system again and is expected to be picked up by the customer. If the delivery is home delivery,
the customer collects the parcel in his/her own customer location and leaves the system. If the
delivery is a box delivery, the customer goes to the box to pick up the parcel. After receiving
the parcel, the customer returns to the customer location and leaves the system. The parcel
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.1: Flowchart representing the system
delivery and the collection decisions of the customer are going to be illustrated in a detailed
way in section 5.4.
The ﬂowchart that is presented in Figure 5.1 does not contain all of the factors that might
affect the system. Exogenous factors such as trafﬁc congestion, road works and maintenance,
weather conditions could affect the delivery of the parcels for the truck and driver as well as
the customers’ collection decisions. These exogenous factors are not included in the system
as it would further complicate the modelling of the system and the degree of the effects of
these exogenous factors are not clear.
26
==PAGE:32==
5.3. Establish Performance Metrics
The objectives of the study are presented earlier in this chapter in section 5.1. The perfor-
mance metrics will be introduced in this part of the report and these performance metrics are
developed with the intention of measuring the performance of the system. The performance
metrics are as follows:
• The distance the parcel carrier truck covers
• Total service time of the truck driver (i.e. Both home and box delivery)
• The time the parcel carrier truck spends on route
• Number of home delivered parcels and recipients
• Number of box delivered parcels and recipients
• Number of missed deliveries
• Number of start-stops of the parcel carrier truck engine
The performance metrics are formed based on the S.M.A.R.T goals mentioned earlier in sec-
tion 3.2 of chapter 3. They are speciﬁc and measurable and at the same time attainable using
AnyLogic. Also, the performance metrics are going to be explained further in this section to
provide details for the relevancy for the objectives and time-bound criteria.
The distance of the parcel carrier truck is the total distance starting from the warehouse and
ending at the warehouse the truck accumulates in a day. This is relevant for the comparison
of the scenarios and by calculating the distance of the truck, the model would provide insights
on how the parcels are delivered in the given area in the shortest distance. ALso, it would be
useful to compare the scenarios to achieve green delivery for the parcel delivery company.
The total service time of the truck driver is the time that the driver spends on unloading the
parcel from the truck, delivering it to the customer location or the box and going back to the
car to move the next destination on the route in a day. This performance metric is highly
signiﬁcant and relevant for the objectives stated earlier in section 5.1 as it is going to provide
useful insights on the delivery methods and by comparing the scenarios, the effectiveness of
the boxes in saving time and money for the parcel carrier company in the system could be
gauged.
The time that the parcel carrier truck spends on route is the time that the truck’s engine is
working and the truck is accumulating distance in a day. By collecting this metric, the share
of time that the truck is working is expected to be calculated and this is going to be compared
to the time that the truck is idle (i.e. Service Time of the truck driver). Also, the relationship
between the number of home customers served and the time the truck spends on route in
different scenarios could be analysed and the details of the time that is spent by the parcel
27
==PAGE:33==
carrier truck in a day could be evaluated further.
The number of parcels that were delivered to recipients’ home are the recipients that choose
the home delivery method in a delivery day. It is crucial to obtain these statistics as it would
provide details on how many recipients have been delivered parcels to their home in the
system and also to see the variation of the demand between different scenarios.
The number of parcels that were delivered to the boxes are the recipient parcels that are
picked up by the recipients from the boxes in a delivery day and observing this performance
metrics is intriguing to analyse the number of necessary boxes in their speciﬁed locations and
to compare the truck distances in various scenarios. Also, the recipients pick-up the parcels
from the boxes and their mode of transport could have negative effect on the emissions of the
overall system. Scenarios are going to be used to compare the truck distance in a day as well
as the distance of the recipients who use cars to pick-up the parcels.
Number of missed deliveries are the parcels that are failed to be delivered at the recipient
location due to the recipient not being at home in a day. Missed deliveries cause inefﬁciency
for the last - mile delivery operations of the parcel delivery companies and it brings additional
costs. Moreover, missed deliveries results in inconvenience for the recipients as they need to
reschedule time and effort for the collection of the parcels in another location.
The number of start - stops of the vehicle in a day would provide insights for emissions and
scenarios are going to be compared for analysing the environmental sustainability of each
scenario and achieving greener deliveries.
5.4. Build Conceptual Model
The problem and the system where the problem is going to be studied thoroughly are ex-
plained earlier in this chapter and in this part of the report, detailed formulation of the model
will be made. The ﬂowchart used in Figure 5.1 is going to be used as the base of the model
formulation and a detailed description of the system for the translation of the model into the
computer software is attempted to be established. The conceptual model is going to include
some of the details of the system that are necessary to be studied to meet the objectives of
the research. Figure 5.2 presents the conceptual model where the processes and operations
in the system are highlighted for each element of the simulation study and the decision areas
are given.
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.2: Conceptual Model
The parcel carrier truck is at the warehouse in the beginning of the day and once the parcels
arrive and loaded, the truck leaves the warehouse to go to the destination of the parcels that
are speciﬁed in its route. When the unloading process of parcels for the recipients at the
destination is completed (i.e. For all the recipients at the destination), the truck leaves for the
29
==PAGE:35==
next destination of the delivey in the deﬁned route until there are no more deliveries left in
the system for the given day. The truck comes back to the warehouse ﬁnally to wait for the
delivery operations of the next day.
The parcels arrive in the warehouse each day and loaded in the truck. When all of the parcels
of the recipients for the given day are loaded in the truck, the truck dispatches from the ware-
house and the parcels are unloaded at the parcel destinations. If the recipient requests a
home delivery, the parcel is delivered home and the recipient receives it immediately, so the
parcel is marked as a received parcel that is collected by recipient. If the recipient requests
a box delivery, the parcel is marked as a delivered parcel to the box and once the recipient
collects it from the box, it is observed in the model that the recipient collected the parcel and
the parcel leaves the system.
The recipients appear in the system in the recipient locations and each recipient decides the
type of delivery, so the ﬁrst decision of the recipient is made for the delivery type of their order.
The decision - making process of the recipient for the delivery is signiﬁcant at this part and it
could be affected by various factors. Due to the fact that it is difﬁcult to predict the decision of
each recipient, a probability is going to be used in the model to deﬁne the chances of decision
for each recipient. If the recipient chooses the home delivery of the parcel, it is labelled in
the model as a home delivery customer and when the parcel is delivered, the home delivery
customer leaves the system.
The recipient who choose the box delivery for their parcels have a decision making for the
mode of transport to the box location and two options are given in the system based on the
probability. The box customer could go to the box by car or on foot / by bike. The box customer
goes to the box according to their preferred mode of transport and picks up the parcel from
the box when the parcel is waiting for collection. The box customer leaves the system once
the collection of the order is ﬁnalised.
5.5. Documenting Model Assumptions
The ﬁnal step in the ﬁrst phase of Rosetti’s (2016) simulation methodology is documenting
modelling assumptions. It should be noted that several assumptions based on demand mod-
elling are already explained in section 4.1 in chapter 4. The following assumptions have been
made in the model to reduce the complexity:
• The recipients are moving from their home locations to pick - up the parcels at the
customer pick - up point and returns to back to the home locations.
• The parcels are picked up from the nærboks in the same day of delivery for easier track
of the statistics of that day. Also, the missed delivered are collected in the same day by
the recipient for the same purpose.
30
==PAGE:36==
• At least one last - mile delivery to each recipient location given in section 4.2 is performed
every day
• The truck visits the package center to drop the missed delivery parcels after completing
all the other deliveries.
• If the recipient is not at home, the home delivery is recognised as "Missed Delivery" and
the delivery is not going to be performed at the customer pick - up point.
• The simulation model is based on the case - study area and is limited with the operations
in that area. Interactions with other areas are not part of the model.
Apart from these assumptions, there are several more assumptions made for the input data
and these are documented and explained in section 6.2 in chapter 6.
31
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6
Simulation Modelling
This chapter is going to be based on the second phase of Rosetti’s (2016) simulation method-
ology and it focuses on developing the accurate model for generating answers to the objectives
of the simulation study. The chapter consists of model building and data collection, translation
of the model into the simulation software and ﬁnally veriﬁcation of the model as well as the
validation processes.
6.1. Model Translation
The conceptual model is translated into the simulation model in this section of the chapter.
The simulation software used in this study is AnyLogic as explained in section 3.3 of the
report and the process of the translation and building the model in AnyLogic is going to be
explained thoroughly.
A network is created initially in AnyLogic to proceed with the simulation model and this network
is a part of the GIS maps integration that AnyLogic provides for the modeller to use on systems
like logistics. The network system is the immediate north / north-east of central Copenhagen
and the recipients are located and established by using GIS points. Recipient locations are
used as destination points for the unloading of the parcels and also as the origin points for the
recipients if they need to get to a box to collect the parcel that is designated for them. The
details of the network were already provided in Chapter 2 and in Chapter 4. The elements of
the model are going to be moving along the existing roads and routes of the map.
The parcel carrying vehicle is one of the agents moving in the system. Incoming parcels
are stored in the warehouse and loaded in the truck to be dispatched from the warehouse.
The parcels move in the system inside the trucks and when the truck reaches its destination,
the driver agent unloads the parcel from the truck that belongs to the speciﬁed recipient. A
“Source” block is used to get the parcels into the system. Source block is a process modelling
block that is used mainly in the discrete – event models to bring the agents into the system
32
==PAGE:38==
to further process them in the model. However, in this study, the source block is only used
to bring the parcels into the model and the parcels are further processed in the system using
the statecharts designed for ABM. The parcels are brought into the model according to an
Excel ﬁle based on the speciﬁed date of the delivery of the orders. A “Sink” block is used just
after the source block to dispose the parcels from the process modelling blocks. Figure 6.1
presents the source and sink blocks used in the model.
Figure 6.1: Source and Sink blocks
After leaving the source block, the parcels are in the parcel agent’s statechart and the id,
quantity and destination of each parcel is linked to each of the agent. Id, quantity and des-
tination are all attributes of the parcel agent and once the parcels are in the warehouse and
are ready for the delivery in that day, they are transferred to the statechart of the agent. The
parcel agent statechart is presented in Figure 6.2 below in subsection 6.1.1.
6.1.1. Parcel Agent
Parcel agent is composed of 10 states, 12 transitions and a ﬁnal state where the parcel is dis-
posed from the statechart of the ABM. Each of the state has the necessary coding completed
for the agent to behave based on the conceptual model illustrated in Figure 5.2. The parcel is
in the “Initialise” state when it enters the statechart and the id, quantity and the destination of
the parcel is scanned in the warehouse for the collection of the data. Afterwards, the parcel is
on the “Scan_Load” state where it is waiting either on a conveyor belt or on the queue of the
truck to be scanned for the last - mile delivery and loaded. When the loading is completed, the
truck sends a message (i.e. “Loaded”) to the parcel and the agent moves to the “WaitingDis-
patch” state and as soon as the truck dispatches from the warehouse to start the last - mile
delivery of the day, the truck agent sends "Dispatched" message to the parcel and the parcel
agent is transitioned into the "OnDelivery" state.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.2: States of Parcel Agent
As mentioned earlier in chapter 5, the truck system, the parcel system and the recipient sys-
tem are interlinked to each other and the transitions of the states for the parcel agents are
determined by the messages of the trucks speciﬁed for each agent. The statechart of the
truck agent is presented below in Figure 6.5 in subsection 6.1.2. While the parcel is on de-
livery, there are three options for the parcel agent to be transitioned into and one of this is
“DeliveredToCustomer” state, where the parcel is unloaded at the customer destination and
delivered to the customer by the truck driver. This option is transitioned with the “Delivered”
message from the truck to the agent.
The other option is that the parcel is delivered to the box and the truck sends “Delivered to
the Nearbox” to complete the transition to the “DeliveredToTheNearbox” state. As soon as the
parcel is delivered to the nærboks, the recipient of the parcel is notiﬁed by the parcel agent
34
==PAGE:40==
and a message is sent to speciﬁc recipient that the parcel is designated for (i.e. "Nearbox
Customer" agent).
If the delivery is not successful at the customer location, the parcel agent receives the "Missed
Delivery" message from the truck agent and is transitioned into the "MissedDelivery" state.
The parcel agent moves into the "DeliveredToPackageC" state once the missed deliveries
are dropped at the package center and the truck sends "Delivered to the Package Center"
message to the agent. Parcels at the package center are ready to be collected by the "Home
Customer" agent and when the parcels that are in the package centers due to the missed
deliveries are collected, the parcel agent moves into the "CollectedByCustomer" state. The
transition is triggered by the message from the home customer agent.
The parcel agent
moves into the ﬁnal state after some time of the delivery, pick-up and collection states and are
disposed from the system.
6.1.2. Truck Agent
The truck agent is composed of 8 states, 16 transitions and 4 decisions without a ﬁnal state
in the model translation. The agent starts in the system at the warehouse (i.e. “AtWarehouse”
statechart) and as mentioned earlier in the conceptual model, the truck never leaves the sys-
tem and returns to the warehouse at the end of its operations in a given day. When the shift
starts in the morning at 05:00 each day, all of the parcels of the recipients are waiting to be
loaded in the truck and the agent moves into the “Loading” state where the loading of the
parcels are completed. In order to store the data of the parcels’ attributes and deliver the cor-
rect parcel to the designated customer, the model uses “Collection” component of the agent
library. In this agent, "parcels_in" is used for storing the parcels which are loaded in the truck
from the warehouse. Figure 6.3 and Figure 6.4 shows the collection components used in the
model.
Figure 6.3: Collections in Truck Agent
Figure 6.4: Collection in Warehouse
The parcels that are ready for delivery are stored in the “waitingParcels” collection of the
warehouse agent and when the parcels are being loaded, the parcel data is taken from the
warehouse agent’s collection and transferred in the “parcels_in” collection of the truck agent.
35
==PAGE:41==
The parcels that are not delivered successfully in the home delivery are stored in the "missed-
Delivery" collection and dropped at the package center for the collection of the recipients at a
further time.
When the loading of a parcel is completed, the truck agent sends a message to the parcel
agent to trigger its transition. As soon as the loading is completed, the truck is ready for the
last - mile delivery of parcels and the agent moves to the next state where the decision to
move to the next destination is made.
Figure 6.5: States of Truck Agent
The truck agent is one of the moving agents in the system and its moving between the cus-
tomer and box destinations based on the optimised route stated earlier in section 4.2. The
statecharts of the truck agent’s customer or box deliveries are built separately in this model
due to the fact that the delivery at the boxes consists of several customers’ parcels and sep-
36
==PAGE:42==
arate messages are triggering the transition of the parcel (i.e. “Delivered” for door to door
delivery and “Delivered to Nearbox” for box delivery). Actually, “MoveToCustomer” and “Move-
ToNearbox” states represent the movement to the next destination along the optimal route
and “Unloading” and “UnloadingAtBox” states represent the stopping / holding and unloading
parcels block of the conceptual model. Each time truck arrives to its destination, it enters the
statechart of the customer and the truck driver completes its unload and delivery operations
in the statecharts of the speciﬁc agent. Missed deliveries are unloaded at the package center
at the end of the day. When all of the parcels are delivered at the recipient’s location, the
truck agent moves back to the warehouse and waits there for the the last - mile delivery of
eCommerce parcels of the next day.
6.1.3. Recipient Agent
The recipient agent is composed of 5 statecharts, 6 transitions and a ﬁnal state where the
agent is disposed. The agent is created dynamically in the model when the parcels arrive,
and the location of each agent is speciﬁed by the destination of the parcel. The recipient
agent is also interlinked with the parcel agent and the truck agent and the statecharts of the
recipient agent is given below in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: States of Recipient Agent
The agent’s location is determined in the "Initialise" stage. Also, the customer pick-up point
37
==PAGE:43==
(i.e. Nærboks) that is closest to the location of the agent is determined and stored as this
nærboks is going to be the point if the recipient decides to pick-up its packages. Also, the
location and the nærboks is particularly used in storing distance when if the recipient moves
to the pick-up point. The delivery choice of the recipient is made by an "Enter - Exit" block that
is used only to distribute the type of delivery mode according to the given probability. Enter -
exit block used in the agent is presented below in Figure 6.7
Figure 6.7: Enter - Exit block for type of delivery
If the recipient chooses home delivery mode, the agent moves to the “HomeDelivery” state
where a new agent (i.e. “Home Customer agent”) is created dynamically and the attributes
of the recipient agent such as name and origin are transferred to the created home customer
agent. If the recipient chooses customer pick-up mode, the agent moves to the “NearboxDe-
livery” state where another new agent (i.e. “Nearbox Customer agent”) is created dynamically
and in addition to the attributes stated above for home customer agent, nearbox attribute is
also transferred to the created nearbox customer agent. The agent is transitioned into “Parcel-
Received” state when the respective agents that are created dynamically (i.e. Home customer
agent and nearbox customer agent) receive or pick-up their parcels. After some time, the
agent is disposed from the system.
6.1.4. Home Customer Agent
Each home customer agent is created dynamically based on the recipient’s decision of the
delivery mode of the parcel. Home customer agent is composed of 7 states, 9 transitions, 1
decision and a ﬁnal state in which the agent is disposed from the model. The statecharts of
the nearbox customer agent is shown below in Figure 6.8.
As soon as the agent is created, it is in the “Initialise” state where speciﬁcally the eCommerce
parcel that is designated to be delivered to the agent is marked as a “Home” delivery. The
agent is in the “WaitingParcel” state after the initialisation and waiting for parcel to be delivered.
Home customer agent has two optional states and these are “AtHome” and “NotAtHome”
states and the transition of the agent into these states are deﬁned by a probability distribution.
38
==PAGE:44==
The transition is completed with an “Enter-Exit” block in the agent which is similar to the one
used in subsection 6.1.3.
If the home customer agent is in “AtHome” state, the truck driver delivers the parcel and the
parcel send a particular message (i.e. “Parcel is delivered to the customer location”) so the
home customer agent is transitioned ﬁnally into the “ParcelReceived” state in the model. If
the home customer is in “NotAtHome” state, the parcel is not delivered and the parcel of the
home customer will be dropped of at the package center. When the parcel is dropped off at
the package center, the truck sends a message to the parcel agent (i.e. “Delivered to Package
Center”) and subsequently the parcel agent sends the notiﬁcation message (i.e. "Parcel is
ready for collection") to the home customer agent so the parcel collection could be sched-
uled. When the home customer agent collects its parcel, the home customer agent sends
another message (i.e. “Collected”) to the parcel agent and home customer is transitioned into
the “ParcelReceived” state where the data of the home customer agent is transferred to the
recipient agent.
Figure 6.8: States of Home Customer Agent
39
==PAGE:45==
6.1.5. Nearbox Customer Agent
Each nearbox customer agent is created dynamically based on the recipient’s decision of the
delivery mode of the parcel. Nearbox customer agent is another moving agent in the model
and is composed of 9 states, 10 transitions, 1 decision and a ﬁnal state in which the agent is
disposed from the model. The statecharts of the nearbox customer agent is presented below
in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: States of Nearbox Customer Agent
Each nearbox customer agent is created dynamically based on the recipient’s decision of the
delivery mode of the parcel. Nearbox customer agent is another moving agent in the model
and is composed of 9 states, 10 transitions, 1 decision and a ﬁnal state in which the agent is
disposed from the model. The statecharts of the nearbox customer agent is presented below.
As soon as the agent is created, it is in the “Initialise” state where speciﬁcally the eCommerce
parcel that is designated to be delivered to the agent is marked as a “Box” delivery. In order
40
==PAGE:46==
to achieve precise delivery of the parcels to the nærboks by the truck, the parcel delivery
type is deﬁned at this state and after this state the nearbox customer is in the “WaitingParcel”
state where the agent waits for the parcel to be delivered to the nærboks. When the parcel
agent sends a speciﬁc message (i.e. “Parcel is Ready for Pick Up”) to the nearbox customer
agent, the agent is transitioned into the “ParcelAtNearbox” state and after some time, the
agent chooses the mode of transport to move to the customer pick-up point. The choice of
mode of transport is done with an “Enter-Exit” block in the agent which is similar to the one
used in subsection 6.1.3.
After the transport mode for going to the customer pick-up point is chosen by the agent, the
agent moves to the nærboks where the parcel is waiting to be picked up. When the parcel is
picked – up by the nearbox customer, the agent sends a message (i.e. “Picked Up”) to the
parcel agent and after picking up the parcel, the agent moves back to the origin. The pick –
up process of the parcel by the nearbox customer is shown with a time transition in the agent
statechart and it is assumed to be 5 minutes. When the agent arrives to its origin point, the
data of the nearbox customer agent is transferred to the recipient agent before nearbox agent
is disposed from the model.
6.1.6. Other Agents
In addition to the agents stated above, there are some other agents used during the translation
of the model. However, these agents do not have statecharts and they are mainly used in the
model because they are part of the interaction between other agents. Driver agent is one
of the agents used in the model and is used during unloading of the parcels at the recipient
locations. The detailed use of agent in the model is shown in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Unloading and Delivery of the Driver
One of the noteworthy agents that is used in the model translation is nearbox agent and this
agent represents the smart boxes used for customer pick-up mode of delivery. This agent is
used to complete the unload and delivery of the parcels for the customer pick-up delivery mode
and the blocks presented in Figure 6.10 is also used as a translation of delivery operations by
41
==PAGE:47==
the driver.
The driver agent is used as a resource and performs the delivery of the parcel to the recipient.
The time statistics of the delivery operations for the home delivery and nærboks delivery are
collected with the time blocks.
Also, warehouse agent is the another agent used for possessing and loading of the parcels
that are prepared for the last - mile delivery of the day.
6.2. Input Data Modelling
In order to perform a realistic model for the last – mile delivery of eCommerce parcels, it is
crucial to use reasonable and genuine input data as the output of the simulation model is
dependent on the input data used in the simulation runs. It would be useful to collect data
from parcel delivery companies for determining demand and the frequency of orders in the
area that is used as research setting; however, this was not available in this study therefore
data and demand have been created by the researcher with the guidance of the supervisor.
The details of the parcel destinations have been given earlier in the report in section 2.3 and
in section 4.1. Based on the contacts with the industry professionals, it is believed that there
would be 30 to 40 deliveries in a typical delivery day of a parcel carrying vehicle and input
data is generated subsequently determined within the context of these insights. The recipient
locations are illustrated in Figure 6.11 with pinpoints.
5 customer pick-up points are also deﬁned in the map and these points are next to Stengården,
Buddinge, Vangede, Lyngby S-train stations and Lyngby Lokal train station. Only one truck
is visiting these destinations each day based on the optimal route and the delivery choice of
the recipients. If the recipient chooses the home delivery method, the vehicle is visiting the
location and if the recipient chooses pick-up delivery method (i.e. Nærboks), the truck does
not visit the location of the recipient. It should be noted that there could more than one more
delivery (i.e. More than one recipient) in these locations therefore the routing of the truck is
based on the individual decision of each recipient in their locations.
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.11: Sample of the population with parcel orders
Removal of a location could affect the optimal route of the vehicle as there would be less
destinations in the travelling salesman model and the optimal route could be changing in each
delivery day. As the recipients have the decision of delivery mode, the route of the parcel
carrying vehicle changes dynamically each day and it is not possible to solve the mathematical
problem of ﬁnding optimal route on AnyLogic. The simulation model has been tested to check
the distance of the vehicle versus distance of the optimal route of the vehicle for various
scenarios. The results were within 2-7% of the optimal route with the minimum distance;
therefore, the minimum distance route based on travelling salesman problem is applied as an
input data in the simulation model. The problem is explained in brieﬂy in section 4.2.
There is a single truck performing the deliveries in the model and the driving speed of the
truck is deﬁned as 50 km/h between the warehouse and the recipient location. In addition, the
43
==PAGE:49==
delivery speed of the truck is assumed to be 20 km/h based on the road and trafﬁc conditions.
The delivery speed is given as an input while the vehicle is moving between recipient locations.
Car use as the mode of transport for recipients in customer pick - up delivery service is critical
in gauging the sustainability of the system. The recipients use bike, walk and car in the model
to pick - up their parcels from the nærboks and the input for choosing the mode of transport
is given based on the data from 42178 - Transport Systems Analysis and Planning (2020)
course exercise where 8450 individuals with the travel mode choice is analysed. It should be
noted that the weather and the individual conditions might affect the decision of mode choice
and these are not part of the model. Also, use of public transport is not a part of the model
therefore if the recipient is not using car, the choice of transport is automatically bike or walk.
The probability of choice of car use is as follows:
• 8% for trips under 1 km
• 14% for trips between 1 km - 1.5 km
• 22% for trips between 1.5 km - 2 km
• 31% for trips between 2 km - 2.5 km
• 44% for trips more than 2.5 km
The unload time of the parcel at the recipient addresses, the home delivery time and package
center service time is another crucial input that is estimated in the study. This data is deﬁned
as three separate input and is based on assumptions. Realistically, the home delivery time
would take signiﬁcantly longer than the nærboks delivery of the parcels. Total service time of
the driver including scan, unload and delivery of the parcel is given as follows:
• Triangular (2, 4.5, 3.5) minutes + (0.25 * quantity) minutes for home delivery
• Triangular (1, 3, 2) minutes for nærboks delivery for each recipient
• Triangular (2, 3.5, 5) minutes at the package center for missed deliveries
The quantity is the number of parcels in the delivery and it is believed that if the recipient
expects more than one parcel as a result of eCommerce purchase, it would take slightly longer
to scan and deliver them.
Triangular distribution is used for delivery operations as it is a
common distribution that is employed in the operations management practices. In addition,
the rate of missing delivery is deﬁned as 1 in 20 delivery (i.e. 0.05%) and this rate is particularly
essential for observing home delivery mode (Ozarik et al. 2021).
6.3. Veriﬁcation and Validation
The next step in phase 2 of Rosetti’s simulation methodology (2016) is veriﬁcation and val-
idation of the model. During the veriﬁcation, the model is checked whether it is working as
44
==PAGE:50==
expected by the modeller. Initially, the errors on the simulation code are solved with model
debugging and eventually the model is veriﬁed at this part of the study.
The model is tested to check the performance of the program based on the logical ﬂow of the
conceptual model and this has been completed by setting up a limited data set to observe the
movements of the agents in the system. Delivery of the parcels to the recipients need to be
precise in the model as the accurate parcel should be delivered to the recipient. Also, routing
is another crucial part of the study as the truck is expected to follow the given optimal route
and deliver the parcels at the ﬁnal stage of the routing before moving to the next destination.
The assignment of the parcels to the recipients shows the sequence of the events as the
statecharts of the agents need to follow the transitions in a proper order and synchronisation.
There were several errors that halted the progress of the study during this stage; nevertheless,
the truck, parcel, recipient agents were ﬁnally performing as anticipated.
Also, the model has been tested in case of increased orders from the recipient locations and
this would illustrate the functionality of the model. The service time of the driver for unload
and delivery in a day were higher in this case and the movement of truck, recipient agents in
the model were as expected. Moreover, the statecharts of parcel agent were observed to see
the ﬂow of the operations.
Validation is the next step in the second phase of the simulation methodology and in this step,
the model is shared and validated with the stakeholder of the system that is associated to the
study. Building the correct model for reﬂecting realistic aspects of the system is signiﬁcant in
ensuring the validity of the simulation and the behaviour of the agents as well as the results
are compared to the real-life scenario. The validation of the model could not be completed as
the study is not performed with the collaboration of a parcel delivery company and the model
input is based on assumptions and observations of the researcher.
45
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Experimental Study
This chapter is based on the third phase of Rosetti’s (2016) simulation methodology and an
experimental study is going to be performed to investigate the objectives of the study. Firstly,
the experimental study is designed and various scenarios are established to compare the
output in the simulation model. The scenarios are going to be replicated with random seeds to
collect the statistics with stochasticity. Finally, the experimental runs are conducted, and the
results are analysed thoroughly.
7.1. Experimental Study Design
It is essential to carefully design the experiments prior to conducting the experimental study
and analysis.
Preliminary simulation experiments are planned initially to collect statistical
benchmarks. Preliminary simulation experiments are conducted to generate insights on the
performance of the system and in this study, preliminary runs are going to be collecting statis-
tics and comparing the two types of delivery modes (i.e. Home Delivery and Customer Pick-Up
Delivery).
The experimental study is going to investigate three distinct scenarios for last – mile delivery of
the eCommerce parcels and the input data discussed in section 6.2 is used for the scenarios.
The scenarios are expressed below:
• Scenario 1 where dynamic choice of delivery mode by the recipients with 70% proba-
bility for home delivery and 30% probability for nærboks delivery is experimented
• Scenario 2 where ﬁxed delivery mode for recipients is experimented
• Scenario 3 where dynamic choice of delivery mode by the recipients with 50% proba-
bility for home delivery and 50% probability for nærboks delivery is experimented
In the preliminary run, home delivery mode and customer pick-up mode are investigated to
46
==PAGE:52==
get insights of the system. Firstly all the parcels are going to be delivered to the locations of
the recipients (i.e. Home Delivery) and the performance of the vehicle as well as the service
time are going to be used as benchmarks for the comparison of three scenarios. In the second
part of the preliminary run, all the parcels are going to be delivered to the nærboks locations
so that the recipients will pick up the parcels from the smart boxes. The statistics are collected
to compare the delivery modes used in the system.
Preliminary runs are going to provide crucial information about the distance that the parcel
delivery truck accumulates in a day and the time that is spent by the parcel delivery truck
on route. Also, the service times are going to be used to evaluate the effect of the choice
of delivery mode on the performance of last - mile delivery operations. Moreover, the use of
private vehicles and the distance that is covered by these private vehicles in the pick - up mode
are signiﬁcant in evaluating the effect of customer pick - up delivery mode on environmental
sustainability.
The number of sufﬁcient replications to achieve steady - state is going to be determined in
the next section and the experiment is going to use the determined number of replications to
collect vital statistics for the KPIs.
7.2. Replications
In order to analyse the system performance with adequate replications, the necessary number
of replications for the experiment are determined by using a practical approach in this study.
The experimental run function of AnyLogic is used for generating ﬁxed number of replications
and initially 20 replications are used in the experiment. The replication statistics are analysed
for inspecting the steady - state and mean of the mean is observed to check the variability in
the results. Average service time of the driver for unload and delivery operations in a day and
average time that the truck spends on route (i.e. Driving time of the truck) are studied to check
the necessary number of replications for the experiment.
Due to the limitation of 50,000 dynamically created agents in the free personal learning edition
of AnyLogic, 8 days of the input data for the parcel delivery is going to be used in determin-
ing the number of replications. The number of replications and the steady - state graph is
illustrated in Figure 7.1
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.1: Steady - state plot of KPIs
It should be noted that replications are done for the third scenario where the choice of delivery
mode is dynamically made with 50% of probability for home delivery and 50% of probability
for nærboks delivery.
After initial ﬁxed 20 replications, the number of replications is increased to 50 and a steady -
state is found at 30 replications. 8 working days of the last - mile parcel delivery data was used
to determine the replications and the steady - state is found to be reached at 30 replications.
23 working days of parcel delivery data that corresponds to a calendar month is generated to
be used in the model to investigate the performance of the system and the generated data for
the calendar month is going to be used in the evaluation of the scenarios as the number of
dynamically created agents do not exceed 50,000 limitation.
7.3. Preliminary Simulation Experiments
Scenario 0 is planned both for only home deliveries and for only nærboks deliveries in the
calendar month. The base scenario is performed in the study to collect benchmark statistics
and to compare the results of the designed scenarios stated in section 7.1.
One of the objectives of this simulation study expresses the need for investigating the parcel
ﬂows during the last – mile delivery and to gain insights on the performance of the elements
in the last – mile delivery operations. The analysis of the base scenario is going to provide
48
==PAGE:54==
signiﬁcant statistics in accomplishing this objective.
Major statistics that are designed to be collected for evaluation at the end of the simulation
experiment are as follows:
• Average number of deliveries in a day
• Average parcel carrying vehicle distance in a day
• Average parcel carrying vehicle driving time in a day
• Average driver service time for parcel delivery in a day
• Total missed deliveries in a month
759 deliveries are performed by the parcel carrying vehicle and the results of different modes
of delivery are shown below in Table 7.1. The experiment is completed with the simulation
model that is run with 23 days of delivery data.
Table 7.1: Results of Scenario 0
It could be observed from the table that the average truck distance in a day in home delivery
mode is signiﬁcantly lower than the nærboks delivery mode. Delivering all the recipient pack-
ages to the 5 deﬁned customer pick-up points at the train stations resulted in reduction of more
than a third of travel distance of the truck for each day. 39.9 km is the lower bound of the truck
49
==PAGE:55==
distance accumulated of last - mile delivery trip of this study. The reduction in distance was
expected prior to the beginning of the experiment as the truck is visiting 26 locations in only
home delivery mode compared to 5 locations in only customer pick-up point delivery mode.
The distance of the truck in each scenario is going to be compared to the distances of this
experiment and the results will be analysed.
The time spent by the driver on a last - mile delivery day is 263.3 minutes in home delivery
mode compared to 134.3 minutes in customer pick - up mode. The share of time spent in
a delivery day is illustrated in the pie - chart in Figure 7.2 for home delivery mode and in
Figure 7.3 for customer pick - up mode.
Figure 7.2: The share of time spent in a delivery day in home delivery mode
In a delivery day, more than half of the time is spent for driving truck to the recipient locations
and the service time of the driver at the recipient accounts for 46% of the time. The driver
spends 3.7 minutes for each recipient in home delivery mode. Also, as missed deliveries
occur in the home delivery mode, the service time spent at the package center to drop the
missed delivery parcels is 2% on average. The time it takes to complete a delivery in the
studied area is 8 minutes when the all the deliveries are completed in home delivery mode.
Similar to the home delivery mode, the share of time spent for driving the truck in customer pick
- up mode is observed as 50%. The service time of each nærboks delivery is 2 minutes and it
takes 4.1 minutes on average to complete a delivery when all the deliveries are performed as
nærboks delivery. The reduction in service time is also the result of avoiding missed deliveries
in the customer pick-up mode.
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure 7.3: The share of time spent in a delivery day in customer pick-up mode
The driving time of the truck is expected to be lower for the customer pick-up mode as there
are signiﬁcantly less locations to be visited (i.e. 5 compared to 26). However, the reduction in
service time and avoiding missed deliveries are enlightening and these are going to be further
evaluated. Although the same number of deliveries are performed, the service time is reduced
by more than 45% for each delivery in the customer pick - up mode and this observation is
highly critical in analysing the scenarios in the following experiments.
7.4. Scenario 1
Scenario 1 assesses the performance of the system when the choice of delivery mode is
selected by the recipients dynamically in the model. An input parameter of 70% home delivery
preference is deﬁned in the model and the effects of the choice of delivery on truck distance,
service time, missed deliveries are evaluated.
Furthermore, the combination of the delivery modes for last - mile distribution of eCommerce
parcels are analysed regarding the use of car, walk / bike of the recipients to collect their
orders.
As stated earlier in section 2.2, the effect of customer pick-up mode delivery on
emissions is unclear as the mode of travelling to the pick-up point of the recipient could lead
to congestion and higher emissions overall in the system.
The results of the experiment are presented below in Table 7.2. All the results are averages
of the replications and indicate the given value in a day unless stated otherwise.
51
==PAGE:57==
Table 7.2: Results of Scenario 1
Average truck distance in a delivery day is reported as 57.1 km and 233.3 minutes is spent on
delivery on average by the parcel carrying vehicle and its driver. This means that 7.1 minutes
is spent to complete each delivery, starting with the dispatch from the warehouse and ending
at the warehouse after the completion of last - mile trips. The driving time of the truck is 54%
of the entire last - mile delivery operations in a day and the average is noted as 126.5 minutes.
The allocation of the time for each operation is presented below in Figure 7.4. It should be
noted that x - axis illustrates the minutes of each operation on average in a delivery day.
23 deliveries on average are completed at the recipient locations and 10 deliveries are per-
formed at the 5 nærboks. In a day, 1.2 deliveries on average are missed deliveries and these
are dropped off at the package center so it accumulates additional distance and service time
to the truck and driver.
52
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.4: The allocation of time of a last - mile delivery day
Out of 7.1 minutes spent for each delivery, 3.8 minutes is spent on route and 2.6 minutes is
spent for unloading and delivering the parcels of the home recipient in a day. 0.59 minutes is
spent for delivering the parcels at the customer pick-up points and the time spent for handing
the missed delivery parcels is 0.1 minutes.
Average car distance in a day is calculated as 10.4km. Although the truck distance is reduced
in the combined delivery model for the last - mile trips, compared to the base scenario where
only the home delivery mode is practised, the trips by the recipients to the pick - up points
bring additional kilometers in the system. Additional kilometers could lead to a surge in emis-
sions and would negatively affect the environmental sustainability of the combined modes of
delivery.
7.5. Scenario 2
In order to optimise the additional trips by the recipients to the pick - up points, scenario 2 is
performed in the study. The recipients who are 1km or less in reach of a customer pick-up
point are served as nearbox customers and their orders are delivered to the pick - up points
in scenario 2. Also, the recipients who are located 1km or further than a customer pick - up
point are served as home delivery customers and their orders are delivered to their locations.
The results of the experiment are given below in Table 7.3. All the results are averages of the
replications and indicate the given value in a day unless stated otherwise.
This experiment is conducted to assess the trips by the recipients to the pick - up points
and the variation of the additional kilometers by car mode of transport is analysed. Overall
53
==PAGE:59==
distance covered by any vehicle in the system is critical in determining the sustainability of the
combined delivery modes and in scenario 1, although the truck distance is reduced by 5.6%
compared to the home delivery mode employed in scenario 0, the total distance covered by
vehicles in the system has risen. The doubt of adopting combined modes of delivery modes
on environmental sustainability is evaluated in this scenario.
Table 7.3: Results of Scenario 2
The results show that 16.7 home deliveries and 16.3 nærboks deliveries are performed on
average each day. It is clear to mention that the experiment resulted in 50% of home delivery
compared to 50% customer pick - up point delivery. Average truck distance in a day is reduced
by 1.1% compared to scenario 1 and the time spent for each last - mile delivery is decreased
by 5.6%. The primary reason of this reduction is in the service time of the driver for unloading
and delivering the parcels as the time on route for each delivery has not changed signiﬁcantly.
Missed deliveries are decreased by more than a quarter compared to the previous scenario
with the ﬁgures showing 19.6 missed deliveries on average in scenario 2 and 27.1 missed
deliveries on average in scenario 1 in a month.
Adopting customer pick - up delivery mode is clearly beneﬁcial for the parcel delivery company
in terms of efﬁciency as the mode is particularly useful in avoiding missed deliveries which
cause increased operational costs. Moreover, the last - mile deliveries are completed in a
54
==PAGE:60==
shorter time as the service time for each delivery is decreased by more than 10%. Similar to
scenario 1, driving time of the truck is the major time consuming operation when almost 50%
recipients are served as nærboks customers.
One of the critical variables in evaluating the environmental sustainability of logistics opera-
tions is the number of start - stops of the vehicle engine and in scenario 2, 19 start - stops
of the engine in a day is recorded. This number corresponds to 24.3% decrease compared
to the start - stops in scenario 1. Also, the experiment results reveal that the car distance of
the recipients is 5.9 km in a last - mile delivery day compared to the 10.4 km in scenario 1.
Although the car use in a day is almost similar in both scenarios, the proximity of customer
pick - up point to the recipient induces decreased distance accumulated by recipient car trips.
It could be argued that when the nærboks is closer to the recipients, more bike and walk trips
are chosen and these sustainable means of transport would contribute to greener deliveries
overall.
The delivery mode is ﬁxed in scenario 2 and the recipients who are in close proximity (i.e. Less
than 1km distance) to the customer pick - up points are served with the nærboks deliveries.
However, this may not be ideal for convenience for recipients and a recipient who is located
even in a very close proximity to the customer pick - up point could prefer the home delivery
mode.
7.6. Scenario 3
Scenario 3 is performed to observe the performance metrics of the combined delivery mode
when the choice is 50% for each mode by the recipients. The delivery type is dynamically
chosen in this scenario by the recipients and the results are going to be compared with the
ﬁxed delivery mode in scenario 2.
The results of the experiment is shown below in table Table 7.4. All the results are averages
of the replications and indicate the given value in a day unless stated otherwise.
The results reveal that 16.6 home deliveries and 16.4 customer pick - up point deliveries are
completed on average in a day. These are similar to the results in scenario 2 where 16.7 home
deliveries and 16.3 nærboks deliveries are completed in a day. The truck distance is further
reduced by 5.3% and this also resulted in reducing the time spent on delivery.
55
==PAGE:61==
Table 7.4: Results of Scenario 3
Although the number of home and box deliveries are highly similar to scenario 2, the start -
stops of truck vary almost by 10%. This is due to the choice of the recipients for the mode
of delivery, as two recipients at the same location could choose different modes of delivery
and the delivery truck may visit a recipient location for home delivery while delivering the other
recipient’s order in the same location at the customer pick - up point. In the previous scenario,
the delivery mode is ﬁxed and customer pick - up points are designed to serve the recipients
who are in proximity to the nærboks.
Furthermore, the biggest difference is in the car use and car distance in a day. This measure
as well as the others are evaluated in the next section.
7.7. Analysis of Results
The results of the all the experimented scenarios are presented in Table 7.5.
The table
presents the reduction in truck distance in a delivery day with the higher use of customer
pick - up point service by the recipients. Also, the time spent on delivery is decreased when
the deliveries are performed at the nærboks as the service time of accomplishing a delivery is
56
==PAGE:62==
signiﬁcantly lower at the customer pick - up point compared to the home delivery mode.
Table 7.5: Results of Scenarios
Another critical measure among the last - mile delivery trips in different scenarios is the missed
deliveries as the missed deliveries are the major contributor to inefﬁciency in the last - mile
delivery operations and cause problems such additional trips and wasted delivery operations
both for the delivery company and the recipients. One of the greatest beneﬁt of using the
customer pick - up mode is the avoidance of missed deliveries as the results suggest that
avoiding missed deliveries reduce the service time for each delivery and decreases the truck
driving distance and time in a delivery day.
On the other hand, the use of customer pick - up points for last - mile delivery needs to be
evaluated carefully for the environmental sustainability, as the trips of the recipients to the
designed pick - up points may soar the GHGs emissions in the area. The scenarios illustrate
that optimising the distance for recipients to reach the pick - up points is necessary and highly
crucial in maintaining green deliveries. When a combined delivery mode is chosen (e.g. The
ﬁrst scenario), although the truck distance in the system decreases compared to only home
delivery scenario, the high use of car and the increase in total vehicle distance in the system
may outweigh the reduction of truck distance.
57
==PAGE:63==
In scenario 1 and 3, each nærboks delivery recipient makes a 2.5 km trip on average in a day
to pick - up the parcels from the customer service points. This would bring the question of
ﬂexibility to the customer and the use of customer pick - up point as the delivery mode could
be perceived as inconvenient. When the delivery type is ﬁxed for the recipients, the trip for
each recipient is recorded as 1.6 km and this is due to the proximity of the recipient to the pick
- up point. Car use and distance is subsequently reduced as the shorter trips are more likely
to be completed by bike or on foot.
Both scenario 2 and scenario 3 generate similar service time in the results as the share of
customer pick - up mode is similar in the scenarios. The major difference between them is
that scenario 2 is ﬁxed where a recipient who is in close proximity to a nærboks (i.e. Less than
1 km distance) is served as a nearbox customer and the others are home delivery customers.
The results prove that not only increasing the share of customer pick - up mode in deliveries
results in increased car use and car distance by the recipients, but also the convenience of
reaching the pick - up point and the location of the recipient has a pivotal role in maintaining
sustainability of deliveries. In scenario 3, reduced number of car travels to collect the orders
accumulated only 5.9 km on average in a day while the same number of nærboks deliveries
almost tripled the car distance due to the increased use of cars by the recipients.
To summarise the analysis, adopting customer pick - up mode in deliveries improves the
efﬁciency of the last - mile distribution of eCommerce parcels by reducing the service time for
each delivery and decreasing the chance of missed deliveries. Also, as the share of customer
pick - up deliveries increases, the truck driving time and distance decreases and the recipient
deliveries are accomplished at the customer pick - up points. Nevertheless, increasing the
share of customer pick - up point delivery needs to be planned carefully as the rise in customer
trips to the pick - up points could lead to additional kilometers by the recipient vehicles in the
system.
58
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 8
Discussion and Outlook
In this chapter, the results of the simulation model are assessed and the use of the simulation
framework for possible future work is discussed.
The demand for eCommerce parcels is modelled based on the recipient locations stated in
chapter 4. Observations have been made on the case study area and large residential areas
are determined to be used as locations for parcel deliveries. Population data of the munici-
palities is used to scale down the area to the sub – zones and numerous recipient locations
are set for last – mile delivery each day. Also, customer pick – up points are set at the train
stations in the area to provide accessibility for the recipients.
Input data is highly crucial in performing simulation studies as outputs are dependent on the
given input data used in the simulation runs. The assumption that each day a recipient location
receives at least one last – mile delivery is made to create demand in the system and to
model effects of different delivery service types with the experiments. It was also assumed
that precise recipient points are consolidation of the population in the district and a delivery
performed on the district would resemble a delivery to the selected recipient location. The
number of parcels for each delivery and the number of recipients in a day is created by the
researcher to create a realistic setting for last – mile delivery operations. Each day 29 to
35 recipients are served in the system and the number of parcels delivered were 45 to 50,
depending on the order of the recipient.
The input data used for service times establish the results of the efﬁciency in the experiments.
Reasonably, the service time of a driver at the customer pick – up point would be signiﬁcantly
lower than the service time at the recipient location for home delivery and the input data
presented in section 6.2 is determined with the guidance of the supervisor.
All of the assumptions made are based on the observations have an impact on the results
and actual demand data for the study of last – mile delivery effects would be more accurate in
comprehending the analysis.
The results of the experiments are presented in chapter 7.
The results reveal that using
59
==PAGE:65==
customer pick – up point service provides improved operational efﬁciency in the last – mile
delivery. The service time of the driver at the nærboks is lower compared to the service time
of the driver at the recipient location and the missed deliveries are avoided in the customer
pick – up point service. The truck start – stops illustrate the number of locations visited in a
day and in scenario 0 with only home delivery mode, the locations were 27 on average while
in scenario 1, it was 25.1 and 8% of truck driving time on average was saved each day. This
result indicates that compared to using only home delivery in the last – mile, the customer pick
– up service also provides reduced truck distance and truck driving time although number of
locations visited are similar. Similarly, F. Zhou, Yandong, and L. Zhou (2019) revealed in their
study that that customer pick - up point service beneﬁts in decreasing travel distances. It was
also argued that combining the delivery mode would better suit the diverse needs of recipients
and would provide the balance between cost - efﬁciency and service level.
In the experimental study, it was also found that increasing the share of customer pick – up
mode deliveries result in additional trips by the recipients and these additional trips could
impair the environmental sustainability of the system. Although the reduced truck distance
contributes to green delivery concept, additional trips may cause increased congestion and
higher emissions in the area. The location of the customer pick - up points are highly crucial
when the share of customer pick – up deliveries are increased, as the proximity of a recipient to
nærboks determines the convenience of the delivery for the recipient and car use for collection
of the parcel at the pick – up point would be avoided. In scenario 2 and 3, the potential effect
of customer pick – up mode on the environment is tested and it was clear that the pick – up
points need to be carefully designed to maintain the environmental sustainability. The car
distance on average was reported as 15 km each day in scenario 3 where in scenario 2, the
average was 5.9 km.
Further analysis and experiments on the use of home delivery mode and customer pick – up
mode would be intriguing as the delivery performance of the combined mode could be im-
proved further with the optimal designed pick – up points for the recipients. Convenience of
delivery is one of the key factors on customer experience and by improving efﬁciency and
maintaining environmental sustainability, the parcel delivery companies could balance the
proﬁtability with the customer satisfaction. The study would provide initial analysis and in-
sights for a more advanced research.
60
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
In conclusion, the last – mile delivery of eCommerce parcels in a case study area is performed
with an Agent – Based simulation model in this study. The aim of the study was to research
how the two different type of delivery services (i.e. Home Delivery and Customer Pick – Up
Point Delivery) could be used effectively to serve the demand for deliveries in the case study
area and to evaluate the effects of these delivery modes on operational efﬁciency of the parcel
deliveries and the sustainability of the system in terms of GHGs emissions.
The simulation methodology proposed by Rosetti (2016) is used as the main framework to
develop the simulation model for the study and the case study area is observed by the re-
searcher to create demand data for the last – mile delivery operations. 26 recipient locations
are determined in the case study area with the assumption that at least one last – mile deliv-
ery is performed at each recipient location every day. The route of the last – mile delivery is
generated by using travelling salesman problem (TSP) model and the optimal route is deﬁned
in the simulation software.
AnyLogic is used as the simulation software in the study and Agent – Based simulation model
is built with relevant agents to model the parcel delivery operations. The scenarios are created
to research effect of the different shares of combined delivery modes on truck and service
time efﬁciency and on environmental sustainability. The scenarios are tested by using the
simulation model.
The results revealed that adopting only home delivery service is not efﬁcient in the last – mile
delivery operations and the time spent on each delivery is considerably high as both the truck
time on route and service time of the driver to deliver the parcels constitute costly operations.
The service time in home delivery consumes 48% of the time for delivery of a parcel and
furthermore, missed deliveries cause additional trips to a different service location.
A combined delivery service which consists of 70% home delivery and 30% nærboks delivery
is evaluated as an alternative to the home delivery service. A system where recipients dynam-
ically choose the delivery type and generate 70% choice of home delivery and 30% nærboks
61
==PAGE:67==
delivery overall resulted in 11.4% decrease on the time spent on delivery and 5.6% reduction
in the accumulated truck distance.
The trip of the recipients to the pick – up point is recorded as 24.6 km on a day in scenario
1 and this impairs the environmental sustainability of the combined delivery mode and the
effectiveness would be undermined as each recipient on average generates an additional trip
of 2.5 km in a day. Ensuring convenience for the customers and maintaining green deliveries
are essential in accomplishing successful last – mile deliveries.
Scenario 2 and scenario 3 both generated 50% of the share of each delivery mode and re-
sulted in improved efﬁciency. Scenario 3 produced the best results in terms of efﬁciency of
the last – mile delivery operations with the time spent for each delivery is further reduced to
6.4 minutes. Sustainability is also doubtful in scenario 3 with high accumulated car distance
by the recipients as in scenario 1.
The delivery choices are ﬁxed in scenario 2 (i.e. The recipients who are 1 km or less in reach
of nærboks are serviced at the pick – up point) and the scenario performs efﬁcient and more
sustainable delivery operations in the system. The distance of each recipient’s trip to the pick
– up points were reduced by 35.8% in this case and the accumulated distance of the car
trips in a day were reduced by almost a half. Although the scenario generated almost 50% of
nærboks deliveries in this scenario, it was observed the effect on environmental sustainability
of customer pick – up service is signiﬁcantly lower when the pick – up points are in close
proximity to the recipients.
The study reveals that combining the two delivery modes and increasing the share of customer
pick – up service use improves operational efﬁciency of the deliveries. In order to maintain
environmental sustainability, availability of customer pick – up points (i.e. Nærboks) in close
proximity to the recipients is highly critical for ensuring the convenience and reducing the CO2
emissions.
The research is limited to the case study area and further studies could be made in other areas
to compare the results and to comprehend the effects of customer pick – up point delivery
service. Increasing the number of pick – up points could be analysed further for operational
efﬁciency as well as ﬁnancial and environmental sustainability. For future research, it would
be worth gauging different number and locations of customer pick - up points to improve the
efﬁciency and determine the optimal use of nærboks service.
62
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
42178 - Transport Systems Analysis, Demand and Planning (2020). Transport Systems Anal-
ysis, Demand and Planning.
Agatz, N., M. Fleischmann, and J. van Nunen (2008). “E-fulﬁllment and multi-channel distribu-
tion - A review”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 187.2, pp. 339–356.
Altiok, T. and B. Melamed (2007). Simulation Modeling and Analysis with Arena. London:
Elsevier.
Baldacci, R. et al. (2018). “A Multi-Depot Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem with Delivery
Options Arising in the Last Mile Distribution”. In: European Journal of Operational Research
265, pp. 765–778.
Doran, G. (1981). “There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objectives”. In:
Management Review 70, pp. 35–36.
eCommerceDB (2020). E-Commerce Market Analysis: The eCommerce market in Denmark.
https://ecommercedb.com/en/markets/dk/all. "Accessed: 2020-02-06".
EdgeByAscential (2020). UK ecommerce in 2020. https : / / www . prnewswire . com /
news- releases/covid- 19- to- add- 5- 3bn- to- uk- ecommerce- in- 2020--
301080427.html.. "Accessed: 2020-02-06".
Grigoryev, I. (2018). AnyLogic in Three Days. Anylogic.
Heeswijk, W. van et al. (2020). “Evaluating Urban Logistics Schemes Using Agent-based Sim-
ulation”. In: Transportation Science 54.3, pp. 651–675.
Ilchenko, N. B. and M. V. Kotova (2020). “Last Mile Delivery for e-Commerce: Challenges,
Beneﬁts and Future”. In: Business Inform 3.506, pp. 148–154.
Kerick, Fru (2019). The Growth of Ecommerce: The rise of online stores. https://medium.
com/swlh/the-growth-of-ecommerce-2220cf2851f3. "Accessed: 2020-02-06".
63
==PAGE:69==
Larsen, A. and T. von Woensel (2019). Freight, logistics and the delivery of goods in cities.
Tech. rep. DTU International Energy Report 2019: Transforming Urban Mobility, pp. 62–71.
Ni, M. et al. (2018). “Same-day delivery with crowdshipping and store fulﬁllment in daily op-
erations”. In: 23rd International Symposium on Transportation and Trafﬁc Theory. Vol. 38,
pp. 894–913.
Nordic Infrastructure A/S (2021). Nærboks - Parcels close to you. https://www.xn--
nrboks-pua.dk/. "Accessed: 2020-03-15".
Ozarik, S. S. et al. (2021). “Optimizing e-commerce last-mile vehicle routing and scheduling
under uncertain customer presence”. In: Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 148, p. 102263.
Patella, S. M. et al. (2021). “The adoption of green vehicles in last mile logistics: A systematic
review”. In: Sustainability 13.1, p. 6.
Rosetti, M. (2014). Simulation Modeling and Arena. New Jersey: Wiley.
Simoni, M. D. et al. (2020). “Potential last-mile impacts of crowdshipping services: a simulation-based
evaluation”. In: Transporation 47.4, pp. 1933–1954.
Trott, M., C. von Viebahn, and M. Auf der Landwehr (2020). “Towards A More Sustainable
Future? Simulating the Environmental Impact of Online and Ofﬂine Grocery Supply Chains”.
In: Winter Simulation Conference. Vol. 2020, p. 9383987.
Wang, X. et al. (2014). “How to choose "last mile" delivery modes for E-fulﬁllment”. In: Mathe-
matical Problems in Engineering 2014, p. 417129.
Xu, X., Y. Li, and R. Tang (2019). “Simulation Optimization of Discrete Logistics Processes: A
Cas Study on Logistics of an E-Commerce Enterprise in Shanghai”. In: Discrete Dynamics
in Nature and Society 2019, p. 2493638.
Zhou, F., H. Yandong, and L. Zhou (2019). “Last Mile Delivery With Stochastic Travel Times
Considering Dual Services”. In: IEEE Access 7, p. 8887148.
Zhou, L. et al. (2016). “Location-Routing Problem with Simultaneous Home Delivery and Cus-
tomer’s Pickup for City Distribution of Online Shopping Purchases”. In: Sustainability 8.8,
p. 828.
64
==PAGE:70==
APPENDICES 
Appendix A – Optimal Route 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Route 
 
 
0 
Naverland 7 – 9, 2600 
1 
Tinghøjvej 56, 2860 
2 
Vandtårnsvej 2, 2860 
3 
Søborg Park Alle 82, 2860 
4 
Niels Finsens Alle 4, 2860 
5 
Vangede Station, 2820 
6 
Plantagevej 153, 2820 
7 
Kildebakkegårds Alle 79, 2820 
8 
Solnavej 60, 2860 
9 
Buddinge Station, 2860 
10 
Toftekærsvej 104, 2860 
11 
Vangede Bygade 77, 2820 
12 
Niels Steensvej 8, 2820 
13 
Christian X's Alle 16, 2800 
14 
Lyngby Station, 2800 
15 
Nørgårdsvej 29, 2800 
16 
Toftebæksvej 14, 2800 
17 
Lyngby Lokal Station, 2800 
18 
Trongårdsvej 48, 2800 
19 
Lyngbygårdsvej 133, 2800 
20 
Carlshøjvej 45 - 43, 2800 
21 
Kongevejen 72, 2800 
22 
Gammel Bagsværdvej 22, 2800 
23 
Nybrovej 271, 2800 
24 
Enighedsvej 2, 2880 
25 
Fort Alle 14, 2800 
26 
Mogans Alle 42, 2880 
27 
Triumfvej 67, 2880 
28 
Bagsværd Hovedgade 48, 2880 
29 
Stengården Station, 2800 
30 
Gammelmosevej 239, 2880 
31 
Stengårds Alle 159, 2860 
32 
Naverland 7 – 9, 2600 
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B – Project Specific Learning Objectives 
 
• 
Describe and outline the e-commerce fulfillment and deliveries within the logistics concept. 
• 
Analyse data and generate insights based on the literature review. 
• 
Construct a conceptual model that illustrates the various aspects of the system. 
• 
Design and develop an agent - based simulation model in AnyLogic. 
• 
Verify and validate the model with the simulation framework. 
• 
Design scenarios and comprehend the outcomes of the scenarios. 
• 
Discuss the results of the model and assess the results with KPIs. 
• 
Evaluate and apprehend the environmental implications of the e-commerce delivery choices 
as well as the monetary cost of the various operations. 
 
