==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Optical Sensors on
Subwavelength Silicon Gratings
for Protein Detection
Candidate:
Giovanni Finco
Supervisors:
Osamu Takayama
Andrei V. Lavrinenko
Peter E. Andersen
External supervisor:
Domenico De Ceglia
Kongens Lyngby, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
Plasmonics and Metamaterials group
DTU Fotonik
Building 343
Ørsteds Plads 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Phone +45 45256352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This M.Sc. thesis illustrates the development of advanced biosensor designs based on
the so-called high-contrast grating (HCG) resonators. These are subwavelength one-
dimensional periodic structures which, if properly designed, may exhibit extraordinary
sharp photonic resonances that are known to express remarkable sensitivity to perturba-
tions of the structure surroundings.
The ﬁrst half of this thesis starts from the theoretical background required to under-
stand biosensing mechanisms and the physics of high-contrast gratings, then it continues
by illustrating previously unreported conﬁgurations of such structures, optimised by
means of diﬀerent numerical methods. Building from the state-of-the-art research con-
ducted by other groups in the sensing community, two novel designs were developed by
focusing on maximising the resonance quality-factor and sensitivity to the presence of
thin dielectric layers coating the resonator. The two new implementations are based
on diﬀerent underlying mechanisms, which make them suitable not only for biosensing,
yet also for other applications where narrow spectral responses and ﬁeld-enhancement
capabilities are required, from signal ﬁltering to nonlinear optics.
The second half of this thesis focuses on technology. In particular, the processes
required to produce such structures are described, namely the most advanced nanofabrica-
tion techniques, followed by the discussion on manufactured samples and their subsequent
optical characterisation in free-space and liquid environment. Preliminary sensing experi-
ments were conducted but limited to detections of bulk refractive index variations, with
encouraging results.
Although the work could not be completed in time, great progresses were made
in the optimisation of the fabrication processes, and expertise in the implementation
of measurement protocols was acquired. Indeed, this thesis, part of a larger project
still being conducted by the research group, did allow to advance the knowledge on
the produced structures from all the aspects: theoretical and practical. In light of the
project ﬁndings, manufacturing with greater precision and extended expertise samples of
excellent quality will be easier, and it will likely lead to positive results in the context of
biosensing, hopefully going beyond the state-of-the-art reported in the literature.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), speciﬁcally the
work was conducted at the department of Photonics Engineering (DTU Fotonik) and
at the Danish National Centre for Micro- and Nanofabrication (DTU Nanolab). This
dissertation was developed in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science degree in Photonics Engineering. Additionally, the thesis will be defended a
second time by the candidate in order to acquire another M.Sc. title in ICT for Internet
and Multimedia Engineering - former Telecommunication Engineering - at the University
of Padova (UniPD), Italy, as a result of the successful completion of the requirements
for a double degree scholarship in the context of the Top International Managers for
Engineering1 (TIME) double-degree programme. In this work, the author has performed
all the tasks: from numerical simulations (with diﬀerent methods) to nanofabrication
and optical characterisation.
This M.Sc. project was supported and conducted in the framework of DFF - Inde-
pendent Research Fund Denmark, Project 2 (8022-00387B) "PhotoHub" - which is still
being carried out by the research group. Furthermore, the project has led to a conference
presentation: G. Finco, M. Ziaee Bideskan, L. Beliaev, R. Malureanu, L. René Lindvold,
O. Takayama, P. Andersen, and A. Lavrinenko, "Improved Sensitivity of Subwavelength
Silicon Gratings for Protein Detection," (Oral) 2021 OSA Optical Sensors and Sensing
Congress (virtual/on-line), Th7B.4 (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, July 19 - 23,
2021). To conclude, the preparation of a theoretical journal publication resuming the
project ﬁndings is currently in progress.
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2021
Giovanni Finco
1https://timeassociation.org
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
To start with, I would like to thank my supervisors: Dr. Osamu Takayama, Prof(s).
Andrei V. Lavrinenko, Peter E. Andersen and Domenico de Ceglia for their guidance
throughout the project, words of support, encouragements in the most diﬃcult times,
the constructive criticism that is necessary when handling a research project, and for
introducing me to the research world.
In particular, I thank Osamu Takayama for constantly providing feedbacks, sugges-
tions, ideas, help in the optical laboratory and his thorough supervision of my work in
each step. I thank Andrei V. Lavrinenko and Domenico de Ceglia for supporting my
theoretical understanding of the subject, having taught me almost everything I know
about nanophotonics, for being the ﬁrsts believing in my abilities as a researcher and for
their recommendations for my future career. I thank Peter E. Andersen for sharing his
expertise in the ﬁeld of biosensing and for pointing out the most theoretical and practical
critical aspects of the subject. Many thanks to Dr. Radu Malureanu, for teaching me how
to behave in cleanroom facilities, walking me trough good practices and best approaches
in the ﬁeld of nanofabrication, performing some very delicate steps on my behalf, and
always being available for doubts and clariﬁcations in this and other contexts. I would
also like to thank: Dr. Lars René Lindvold for his expertise in the ﬁeld of lab-on-chip
technologies and for performing FTIR measurements of a used material; the whole DTU
Nanolab staﬀ, which trained me on operating the complicated machinery I needed; and
in particular Dr. Evgeniy Shkondin for his support during problematic processes and
the many trainings. I would also like to thank the Ph.D. students of the Plasmonics
and Metamaterials group, Leonid Beliaev and Mehri Ziaee Bideskan, and Dr. Larissa
Vertchenko, without whose collaboration the project would have hardly reached the
results about to be presented, and because we also had some fun!
A special thanks to my girlfriend Geraldine, who always supported my choices and
patiently awaits the end of my studies to start our life together. Thanks to my friends,
in Italy and Denmark, with whom I share unforgettable memories, but also pain and
troubles during our studies, and especially to those who prevented me from having a
mental breakdown during isolation in the COVID-19 pandemic.
I conclude by expressing my endless gratitude to my family for their support, moral
and ﬁnancial, during the six challenging years of university studies between Italy and
Denmark. Without them, none of this would have been possible and I would not have
acquired the invaluable knowledge that prepared me to undertake a career as a scientiﬁc
researcher in the exciting ﬁeld of photonics.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure and timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Principles of optical biosensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Refractive index and molecular sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Cardiac troponin I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
High-Contrast Grating resonators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Mathematical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Simulations of the ideal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Numerical simulations
29
3.1
Numerical methods: introduction and convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.1
Finite-diﬀerence time domain method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.2
Rigorous coupled-wave analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Design of high-Q HCG in serum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
The analyte model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
Advanced designs for biosensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4.1
Pedestalled HCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4.2
Half-buried HCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4.3
Comparison between designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5
Bulk refractive index sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
51
4.1
Wafer and sample cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Thin ﬁlm deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Low-pressure chemical vapour deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.2
Atomic layer deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2.3
Thermal oxidation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
Spin-coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Optical lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.4.1
Deep-UV lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.5
Etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.5.1
Dry etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Experimental
73
5.1
Fabrication of the designed structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.1.1
DUV lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.1.2
Dry etch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.1.3
Pedestalled HGCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.1.4
Half-buried HCGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.1.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.2
Optical characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.2.1
Free-space characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.2.2
BRIS experiments with ﬁbre-based setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
6
Conclusion
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Sensors are widely used in many applications for the most various kinds measurands. Op-
tical sensors typically provide compact, fast and precise means of performing quantitative
measures for almost any kind of measurand that is usually probed electronically. This is
due to the fact that light, used both as probe and as measurable quantity, oﬀers extremely
high sensitivity to any change of the surroundings. Amongst the plethora of applications,
biomedical optical sensors constitute a very large portion of the market, as there is the
need of improving sensitivity and response time beyond the standard values provided by
electronics. Moreover, the rapid development of micro and nanofabrication techniques,
mostly due to a fast diﬀusion of low-cost optical telecommunication components, renders
photonic nanostructures progressively cheaper, easier, and commonly produced on a
mass-scale level [1].
This work builds upon the research conducted by Sun et al. [2], who made use of
silicon high-contrast grating (HCG) resonators to detect and quantify biomarkers of
a cardiac disease in human serum down to clinically relevant low concentrations and
in extremely short time. Indeed, they reported detection of cardiac biomarkers in a
complex biological matrix with a limit-of-detection (LOD) of 100 pg/mL within only
four minutes; which is as sensitive, but incomparably faster than the classical electronic
counterpart. HCGs are one-dimensional periodic arrangements of high-index inclusions
which allow, thanks to a complex interplay between optical modes of diﬀerent nature, to
achieve extremely high-quality photonic resonances which turn out to be very sensitive
to perturbations of their surroundings. They have been thoroughly studied during the
years for many diﬀerent applications [3–21], which will be mentioned in a subsequent
chapter, and they received consensus from the sensing community about their particular
suitability for applications in that ﬁeld.
The goal of this project was the identiﬁcation of novel HCG designs allowing to
improve the sensitivity of such devices beyond the reported values, their nanofabrication
in the state-of-the-art DTU Nanolab cleanroom, and ﬁnal characterisation by means of
reﬂection spectroscopy. The most important features of an optical biosensor, typically
based on photonic resonances, are trivially its sensitivity with respect to changes of its
environment and the spectral width of the resonant feature. The latter not only is related
to the resonance quality-factor (Q), but speciﬁcally for biosensing to the feasibility of
the detection protocol and its limitations, as narrower resonances allow to monitor shifts
in the spectral response with higher accuracy, hence with greater sensor performance.
First, diﬀerent numerical methods have been used to optimise the basic structure to
be sharply resonant, when immersed in human serum, around the telecommunication
wavelength, i.e., 1550 nm. Then, the same methods were used to simulate the structure
of interest in order to improve its biosensing performances by exploiting a simple, but
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
eﬀective, model of interaction between resonant ﬁelds and biological entities. This ﬁrst
optimisation stage led to the identiﬁcation of two innovative, and previously unreported to
the author’s knowledge, very promising designs which indeed manifest higher sensitivity
and improved sensing performances. Such designs, as it will be discussed in greater detail
below, consist on two diﬀerent approaches relying on diﬀerent mechanisms: pedestalling
and burying the grating bars. Subsequently, starting from the most simple structure,
the fabrication of HCGs was thoroughly optimised compatibly with what the cleanroom
conditions allowed. Structures of good quality were produced and a detailed protocol for
their manufacturing was developed. Pedestalled HCGs, that is one of the two advanced
designs, were produced and also in this case a reproducible protocol was developed for
their fabrication. Buried HCGs could not be produced in useful time due to complications
arisen in the cleanroom, that is homogeneity issues and failures of the machines did not
allow to complete the process. Furthermore, quite late during the project it was realised
that some critical inconveniences occurred both at the moment of purchasing the phase
mask for the optical lithography step, which is crucial in nanofabrication, and also in
the manufacturing of the used wafers. These unexpected events introduced enormous
complications which eventually led to non-negligible reproducibility issues during the
optical characterisation, and as such the implementation of biosensing experiments could
not be completed either. Moreover, two major power cuts, occurred in January and
May 2021, seriously aﬀected the delicate conditions of the cleanroom, with the result
that the start of fabrication activities had to be delayed, and it had to prematurely
end due to faulty equipments. These are the reasons why neither samples of excellent
quality, nor all the three designs could be produced in time. Nevertheless, good samples
were characterised by means of reﬂection spectroscopy in both free-space and liquid
environment. Excellent correspondence between the measured spectral response and
numerical simulations was found for samples characterised in air, while less accurate,
yet qualitatively acceptable measurements of photonic resonances could be obtained
with samples immersed in suitable ﬂuids. Additionally, sensitivity experiments towards
variations of the environmental refractive index were conducted with decent results, hence
further proving the validity of numerical simulations and the nanofabrication process.
Eventually, the developed devices are meant to perform label-free detection of bio-
logical markers. To do so in the most accurate and appropriate way, there is the need
of combining the fabricated sensors with microﬂuidic networks to controllably deliver
reagents, create homogeneous environments, and ensure a reproducible measurement
protocol as it can be found in the literature [22–26]. This aspect is being, and will be,
handled by the research group during the following months, as it requires components
and expertise which were not available at the moment of conducting this thesis work.
1.1
Structure and timeline
This thesis reports the results of a Master of Science dissertation project conducted by the
author during the period January-June 2021. The project covered 30 ECTS and followed
the project plan illustrated in ﬁgure 1.1. Nevertheless, some of the presented results were
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Structure and timeline
3
based on a preliminary analysis conducted still by the author during the Fall semester
2020 as part of a special course undertaken with the Plasmonics and Metamaterial group,
at DTU Fotonik. Indeed, one of the greatest personal satisfactions that the candidate
is proud to share is having had the possibility of actively participating in a research
activity of interest for the group for nine months, and the hope of having brought a
tangible and worth contribution to the project development. This thesis has provided the
author with a clear insight on the most complicated and intrigued aspects of scientiﬁc
research and experimental physics, with the advantage of having gained expertise in all
the disciplines concerning nanophotonics. In particular, having undertaken all the tasks,
from simulation to fabrication and characterisation of the devices surely constitute the
main achievement of the project as it gave the candidate a broad picture of the beauty
and main challenges in this ﬁeld.
Figure 1.1: Schematic timetable of the M.Sc. project with the main milestones and achieve-
ments highlighted.
The report writing was distributed over the months and it is structured as follows.
The second chapter tackles mostly literature review, theoretical aspects behind optical
biosensing and the description of the physics governing high-contrast grating resonators.
The third chapter instead focuses on the description of numerical results which led to
the identiﬁcation of novel advanced designs and their comparison in terms of sensing
performances. The fourth chapter covers the theoretical background required to under-
stand nanofabrication and its most intricate aspects. The ﬁfth chapter describes the
experimental activities conducted during the project, from the nanofabrication of the
simulated devices to their optical characterisation. The report is concluded by a sixth
chapter, which resumes the ﬁndings.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical background
The following chapter aims at describing the theoretical background behind this work. In
particular, as anticipated in the introduction, the project concerns the design, fabrication
and characterization of one-dimensional silicon gratings for biosensing. The chapter is
organised as follows: ﬁrst an overview of the optical biosensing mechanisms is given
then the theoretical analysis of high-contrast grating resonators is presented. The next
chapter will be instead dedicated to the numerical modelling of the fabricated structures
by diﬀerent methods. Speciﬁcally, numerical simulations were used at ﬁrst to identify
the design parameters needed for having resonant features in the wavelength range of
interest, when the structure is immersed in suitable liquids. Consequently, using the
designed structure as starting point, two advanced designs were found to provide an
advantage in terms of sensing performance by exploiting the properties that uniquely
characterise high-contrast grating resonators.
2.1
Principles of optical biosensing
Optical biosensing is a well established sensing technique that exploits the sensitivity
of guided or resonant modes conﬁned in photonic nanostructures to the environmental
conditions. In this context, there are several diﬀerent approaches for realising an optical
biosensor and the choice of the most suitable one depends on the speciﬁc application’s
needs. In particular, there are mainly four common techniques used nowadays to perform
the task of optical biosensing [27–29]:
1. Refractometric sensing: the measurand is detected as it induces a variation of
the surrounding refractive index, and thus a shift in the optical response of the
device [30];
2. Fluorescent sensing: suitable ﬂuorescent markers are attached to the analyte1
and the detection is performed by means of ﬂuorescence monitoring [31];
3. Mid-infrared absorption sensing: surface-enhanced infrared absorption spec-
troscopy (SEIRA) detects the presence of molecules by means of the characteristic
molecular absorption (i.e., vibrational modes) in the mid-infrared region [32];
4. Surface-enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS): detects the presence of an-
alyte by means of the Raman shift that is characteristic of the target species
[16].
1An analyte is the target of an analytical chemical procedure, a molecule for instance.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theoretical background
This study focuses on the ﬁrst technique, which is refractometric sensing. In this context,
there are two main approaches: angular and wavelength interrogation [30]. The former
detects the presence of an analyte by means of a resonance shift as a function of the
incidence angle (i.e., a wavenumber variation at ﬁxed wavelength), while the latter
works by monitoring the shift of resonance wavelength at a ﬁxed angle of incidence.
Angular interrogation is more complicated to implement and usually suﬀers of poor
angular resolution, hence wavelength interrogation was selected as preferred technique.
Nevertheless, both methods rely on a very similar concept: a perturbation of the sensor’s
surrounding alters the response of the device by introducing a shift of the resonance
wavelength (or wavenumber) in such a way that the shift can be associated with a
change of the surrounding condition, hence to a measurable quantity of interest (e.g.,
temperature, pressure, presence of small bodies, etc.). An important class of optical
bio- and biochemical sensors is without any doubt represented by the ﬁeld of integrated
photonics, that is the use of photonic nanostructures to perform the detection task.
Integrated photonics is a widely used sensing platform that is attracting a great deal
of interest because of its compatibility with well-established fabrication protocols based
on electronics, characteristic compactness, reliability and measurement precision due to
the intrinsic properties of light. Integrated photonics biosensors rely on the sensitivity
of a conﬁned mode in waveguides and nanophotonic structures to the environmental
conditions. In this context, an important distinction between diﬀerent classes of integrated
biosensors is to be sought in the nature of the optical mode characterising the device:
guided resonance or non-propagating mode. When a guided resonant mode is used, the
sensing action is performed by the evanescent tail of the mode itself that extends outside
the guiding structure. As the mode propagates inside the waveguide, the eﬀective index
of the guided mode depends not only on the refractive index of waveguide (core) and
substrate (lower cladding), but also on that of the environment in which the sensor
is placed (upper cladding). When the waveguide’s surrounding is perturbed by any
external agent, the eﬀective index of the guided mode changes and can be thus detected
by monitoring the waveguide’s output by means of spectral analysis. Careful calibration
of the device allows to associate the change of the guided mode’s eﬀective index to a
measurable quantity, hence performing the sensing task. The magnitude of the mode’s
index variation depends on several factors, but most importantly on the extent to which
the evanescent tail of the conﬁned mode spreads outside the waveguide itself and how
it interacts with the perturbation of the environmental conditions. Examples of guided
mode-based sensors are: slab and ridge waveguides, surface plasmon polaritons, line
defects in photonic crystal slabs and almost any kind of light-guiding nanostructures.
Extensive reviews on this topic can be found in the literature, for instance in [33–37].
Non-propagating modes act as eﬃcient biosensors as well, and the working principle is
very similar to guided mode-based sensors, with the main diﬀerence being, indeed, that
the mode is localised inside resonant nanostructures and does not propagate. The non
propagating feature of the sensing modes provide a series of advantages, among which
the most relevant are related to device compactness and simplicity of the excitation
and detection setups [22–24, 38]. It is important to stress that the sensing mechanism
relies on the sensitivity of resonant modes to the environmental conditions, hence on
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Principles of optical biosensing
7
the extent to which the evanescent tails of the resonant modes spread outside the
nanostructures thus probing any perturbation that is present in close proximity of the
sensor. The most used and commonly accepted sensing nanostructures in this ﬁeld
are metallic nanoparticles supporting localised surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) as
they exhibit extraordinary sensitivity to the surroundings, are suitable for impressive
miniaturization and are compatible with very simple excitation and detection setups.
However, the intrinsic optical losses of metals render the LSPR very broad, hence limiting
the sensing performance for a reason that will be soon discussed. In order to overcome the
issues related to the intrinsic optical losses of metals, there is a general tendency in the
sensing community to move towards dielectric nano-resonators which manifest extremely
low optical losses, especially in the near-infrared (NIR) spectral region.
Dielectric
nanostructures, indeed, when properly designed, exhibit very sharp resonances which
make the sensing protocol more eﬀective and easier to implement. Moreover, dielectric
resonators are often scalable, owing to the scalable nature of Maxwell’s equations when
the materials can be approximated as lossless in the wavelength range of interest, meaning
that diﬀerent geometries provide diﬀerent resonance wavelengths which are useful, for
instance, when aiming at performing parallel detection of diﬀerent measurands [22, 24].
The latter arguments are highly relevant for the purpose of this work, which indeed
makes use of dielectric nanostructures manifesting extremely narrow resonant features,
which happen to be indeed re-positionable in the NIR spectral region thanks to the
lossless nature of silicon in such wavelength range.
To conclude this introductory section, it is important to describe and highlight the
main properties that must be optimised when designing a biochemical sensing platform.
As mentioned above, typical sensing protocols are based on the detection of a wavelength
shift in the response to a perturbation of its surroundings. Moreover, virtually all sensing
platforms rely on monitoring sharp resonances detectable by spectral analysis when
performing experiments. Therefore, from a practical point of view the detection of small
wavelength shifts is greatly eased by employing ad-hoc designed structures which exhibit
extremely narrow resonances (few nanometres or even narrower features). Incidentally,
the width of a resonance feature is deﬁned as the full-width half-maximum (FWHM)
of a resonance peak (or dip) and is one of the properties that needs to be minimised
when designing the target nanostructures. The second, obviously very important aspect
to consider when designing an optical sensor, is the sensitivity of the structure to a
change of the surrounding conditions. The sensitivity, S, of a biosensor is deﬁned as
the rate at which the resonance wavelength is displaced in response to a variation of
the environmental conditions, regardless of the measurand being probed by the device.
S is typically quantiﬁed in nanometres per unit of measurand, e.g., nanometre per
refractive index unit (nm/RIU) when the background refractive index is being probed
(cm-1/deg in case of angular interrogation), or nanometre per degree Celsius (nm/oC)
when temperature is being measured, etc. Furthermore, it is customary in the sensing
community to deﬁne a ﬁgure of merit (FOM) that relates these two described quantities,
typically by taking the ratio of sensitivity and FWHM of the resonance [30, 39]:
FOM =
S
FWHM
[unit of measurand−1].
(2.1)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theoretical background
Such FOM is very important when one wants to compare diﬀerent sensing platforms,
because even though a given nanostructure responds extremely well to slight changes
of the surrounding conditions, provided its resonance is not narrow enough, such small
variations would hardly be detected due to the limitations of the measurement scheme,
e.g., resolution and sensitivity of an optical spectrum analyser (OSA).
2.1.1
Refractive index and molecular sensors
The discussion so far has described in general the working principle of an optical sensor
and the most relevant aspects to consider when tackling a sensing problem. There is,
however, another very important distinction to be made between diﬀerent sensors, and
it is related speciﬁcally to the characteristic properties of the measurand of interest,
which eventually inﬂuences the optical mode performing the sensing task. Standard
measurands, such as pressure or temperature, are somehow easier to probe and quantify,
because they are related to a variation of the bulk refractive index of the surrounding
medium, meaning that when, e.g., the temperature of a liquid is increased, its refractive
index typically decreases2 as a whole, with local eﬀects being not so critical - except
for metallic structures which locally dissipate energy in terms of heat. On the other
hand, the characteristic properties of highly conﬁned resonant optical modes make their
supporting nanostructures suitable for probing extremely small objects such as molecules
(proteins in the case of this study). In this context, the contribution to the wavelength
shift from the surrounding bulk refractive index must be ruled out in order to have a
reliable sensor capable of detecting only the target foreign bodies. Therefore, the lossless
properties of dielectric materials in the NIR make such media ideal platforms to perform
targeted biosensing of small bodies such as molecules. This is due to the (almost) absent
Joule heating associated with energy dissipation that ensures a negligible contribution
to the resonance shift due to the local heating of the sensing medium, hence a reliable
response of the device related solely to the measurands of interest. This argument further
supports the tendency of moving from metallic to dielectric structures.
Refractive index sensing has been described in the previous section to rely on the
variation of the eﬀective index of a resonant mode supported by the structure due to
a change in the surrounding conditions, e.g., a guided mode "feels" the environment
due to its evanescent tail spreading outside the conﬁnement region. As such, the main
requirement for having an eﬃcient refractive index sensor (that can be related to other
measurands) is that the mode must spread to the largest possible extent in the outside
region, where the perturbation takes place. This is not true, however, for optical modes
meant to probe extremely small bodies such as proteins in a certain environment. Indeed,
an eﬃcient refractive index sensor not always can perform eﬀective detection of single
molecules, as such eﬀectiveness depends on the spatial extent to which the evanescent
tail of a conﬁned mode overlaps with the target analyte, or more speciﬁcally in the decay
length of the evanescent ﬁeld in the environment that needs to match the characteristic
size of the target analyte. Figure 2.1 illustrates a cartoon picture of the two sensing
2When a standard ﬂuid is heated up, its density and viscosity decrease, causing light to travel faster
in the medium due to a decrease of its refractive index.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Principles of optical biosensing
9
mechanisms in case of an optical mode guided by a slab waveguide immersed in a liquid.
The working principle is essentially the same but for the measurand to be probed, hence
diﬀerent requirements apply on the sensing mode depending on the application: weak or
strong conﬁnement for bulk refractive index or molecular sensing, respectively.
Figure 2.1: Schematic of the sensing mechanism for refractive index and molecular sensing in
case of an optical mode in an integrated slab waveguide.
At this point, for the rest of the chapter the bulk refractive index will be left aside
as the focus of this work is related to the detection of proteins, hence small analytes
probed by strongly conﬁned optical modes in a suitable environment. Detecting small
foreign bodies is not a trivial task, because even though such analytes are present in
the environment, being them so small, and being the optical mode strongly conﬁned
in the structure, there is no guarantee that proteins will actually interact with the
electromagnetic ﬁeld conﬁned in the sensing platform. In order to overcome this issue
there is the need of immobilising the target analytes at the surface of the nanostructure,
and this is done by coating the sensing structure with chemically selective species prior
to introducing the actual analyte. This procedure is called surface functionalisation,
and is a fundamental component of any biosensing protocol aimed at detecting speciﬁc
molecules and must be carefully chosen in terms of compatibility with the materials the
sensing platform is made of in order to have an eﬃcient binding events of the target
analytes to the sensor’s surface. Furthermore, functionalising the surface also allows to
improve the speciﬁcity of a sensing protocol, that is the need of being absolutely certain
that the induced wavelength shift is solely due to the speciﬁc analyte of interest, and
not to a spurious measurand that the protocol is not aimed at detecting. For the record,
referring to ﬁgure 2.1 the blue layer on top of the core medium in the right-hand panel is
precisely the just described functionalisation layer.
The biosensing protocol, no matter how it is performed, is called assay, and is an
analytic procedure focused on the quantiﬁcation, or detection of presence, of a target
entity or functional activity in the sample. The gold-standard technique for detecting
small quantities of biological molecules, widely used in diagnostic medicine, is the so-
called enzyme-linked immunoassorbent assay (ELISA) procedure, extensively review in
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theoretical background
the literature and commonly accepted as the most used assay protocol. ELISA is a kind
of ﬂuorescent sensing technique, previously introduced. It relies on the basic immunology
concept of an antigen binding to its speciﬁc antibody: an array of (typically) 96 well-
plates is arranged in a rectangular lattice and the bottom of such wells is functionalised
to capture the speciﬁc analyte of interest. The analyte diﬀuses into the well and binds
to the speciﬁc antibody, then a secondary antibody is introduced to form the so-called
sandwich assay, i.e., the analyte is sandwiched between two diﬀerent antibodies. Finally,
a ﬂuorescent molecule (label) is introduced, and it binds to the secondary antibody. The
presence of the target analyte is detected (electronically) by the colour change in the well-
plates, which happen only if the analyte is successfully bound to the antibody, otherwise
the ﬂuorescent label, in turn, would not bind to it, thus not producing any colour change
in the well [31]. ELISA is an important example of labelled analyte detection, meaning
that it requires a speciﬁc sequence of molecules and ﬁnally a ﬂuorescent label to perform
the quantiﬁcation task. As a further supporting argument to the importance of developing
eﬃcient optical biosensors is that, typically, with nanophotonic-based biosensors the
assay can be performed without any ﬂuorescent label (label-free assay), and this not only
highly simpliﬁes the detection protocol, but renders it also cheaper and faster (provided
the fabrication of the nanostructure can be carried out with cheap and simple techniques,
as is the case of this study). The label-free character of this technology is due to the
properties of light and its sensitivity to the environmental conditions: the device response,
due to the interaction between electromagnetic ﬁeld and analyte, is perfectly capable
of detecting small entities without the need of supporting ﬂuorescent molecules. Figure
2.2 illustrates the basic steps in the implementation of a biosensing assay by means of a
nanophotonic structure supporting a non-propagating resonant mode. In the ﬁgure, a
single resonator is depicted and the three steps of the assay are described: excitation of
the resonant mode, detection of surface’s functionalisation, and detection of the analyte
binding events.
In the context of biosensing and immunoassay procedures, an important mathematical
model has to be described as it constitutes the analytic approach that needs to be
implemented in order to correlate the experimental data to the actual quantiﬁcation of
an analyte in the biological sample. Such model is typically referred to as four-parameter
logistic equation, that is an S-shaped (sigmoid) curve used as calibration model for any
known biosensing protocol. However, depending on the device response, kind of sample,
target concentrations and data-points distribution, the model is often modiﬁed to a
ﬁve-parameter curve that is known to provide higher ﬁtting accuracy, especially for
asymmetric datasets [40]. The logistic equation is usually deﬁned as:
y(x) = d +
a −d

1 +

x
c
bg ,
(2.2)
where in case of a four-parameter curve the coeﬃcient g is set to 1, x is the concentration of
a given analyte to be measured, y is the sensor’s response to such a probed concentration
(the units depends on the nature of the sample, nanometres in case of a photonic biosensor
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Principles of optical biosensing
11
Figure 2.2:
Schematic of the label-free biosensing mechanism based on non propagating
resonant optical modes. The diﬀerent steps of a biosensing assay are illustrated, commented,
and associated with the corresponding variation of the optical signal.
monitoring a redshift in the optical signal). a to g are the ﬁtting parameters, which are
used to deduct the relevant sensor’s performances from the calibration curve:
▷a represents the minimum detectable value, hence the device response at dose zero;
▷b represents the slope of the curve, hence the sensitivity of the device;
▷c is the inﬂection point, when the curvature changes from rising to falling curve;
▷d represents the maximum detectable value, hence the device response at maximum
dose;
▷g is used as a correction parameter to compensate lack-of-ﬁt errors for certain
datasets.
Importantly, the model is used to calibrate a sensor in a concentration range from a to d,
thus samples having concentrations outside such range cannot be quantiﬁed with the
same calibration curve. Moreover, in the sensing community it is quite common to refer
to typical values to quantify the performance of a device, besides its sensitivity. These
are: the limit-of-detection, deﬁned as the concentration of analyte triggering the 10%
of the device’s response, and the dynamic range, deﬁned as the range of concentrations
where the device’s response is approximately linear. Figure 2.3 depicts an example of
logistic curve used to calibrate a biosensor and subsequently to quantify an unknown
sample’s content.
When designing a sensor, one typically aims at extending the dynamic range as much
as possible, and also to bring the LOD value to the smallest possible quantity, with the
very strict requirement of meeting the clinical needs associated to typical concentrations
of a speciﬁc biomarker in ill patients.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.3: Example of calibration logistic curve and relevant parameters to account for.
To conclude the section, a critical limitation of ELISA systems is that the machinery
is typically available only in dedicated healthcare facilities, is expensive and need trained
personnel to perform the procedure. What the nanophotonic-based biosensors community
aims at realising in the near future are the so-called point-of-care (POC) devices for
such assay techniques. That is the realisation of a simple, on-chip platform capable of
carrying out the ELISA’s tasks in a faster and simpler way, eventually providing patients
with a compact device allowing them to perform the screening at home, by themselves,
in an easy and safe way. A groundbreaking example of simple photonic POC device
that revolutionised the healthcare system is the pulse oximeter [41]. In the context on
POC devices, great progresses are being made in the ﬁeld of lab-on-chip devices, namely
small chips capable of performing all the tasks associated to an immunoassay in an
automatised way. Examples can be found for instance in [22–26]. The main concept
behind a lab-on-chip sensor is that an assay procedure requires a precise sequence of
steps and a controllable delivery of chemical species to the sensing sites in order to
improve the accuracy, ease the protocol and reduce the chemical waste associated to the
procedure. Washing steps are also needed for re-usable sensors and to remove non-speciﬁc
analytes which may lie on the sensing surface without being actually bound to it. This
is nowadays performed by embedding the sensing platform in a microﬂuidic environment
that is used to precisely deliver the reagents, perform the washing steps, and automatise
the procedure. Indeed, great eﬀort is being put in order not only to reduce size and cost
of the sensing platform, but also to study the most innovative and eﬀective microﬂuidic
networks in order to achieve true lab-on-chip POC devices to be placed immediately on
the market.
2.1.2
Cardiac troponin I
The sensing platforms studied and fabricated in this work are meant to perform label-free
detection of a speciﬁc biomarker related to hearth diseases, namely cardiac troponin
I (cTnI - 23.9 kDa protein, and can be approximated as an ellipsoid with size of 2×7
nm, roughly [42]). Speciﬁcally, cTnI is a protein residing in our cardiac muscle, in the
myocardium, that mediates the interaction between actin and myosin (proteins related to
cell movement). When a patient is subject of an hearth condition, hence consequently to
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Principles of optical biosensing
13
a damage of the cardiac muscle, such protein is released into the bloodstream and thereby
its concentration increases. Patients with high concentration of cTnI in their blood feel a
strong chest pain that is sometimes associated to a risk of acute myocardial infarction
(AMI). Before the advent of immunoassay techniques, AMI was typically diagnosed by
electrocardiogram (ECG), which has however an accuracy of only 50%. Nevertheless,
researchers have discovered that there is a strong correlation between AMI and cTnI
concentration when the latter rises above 0.04 ng/mL, meaning that patients with greater
or equal concentrations of cTnI are likely to have just experienced and episode of AMI
[43, 44].
The cTnI concentration increases after a patient has experienced a coronary disorder,
but could take up to 4h to be suﬃciently abundant in the bloodstream. The test should be
carried out after 12h from the manifestation of chest pain, and should the concentration
be above the threshold value after such time-interval, the subject is likely to be at risk
of AMI, which may be fatal in certain cases. Therefore, an important aspect to be
considered when designing and manufacturing a sensor meant to quantify cTnI is the
assay time, as long as a too long procedure may not lead to a reliable result and the
patient could be erroneously dismissed while being at high death risk. In this context,
ELISA protocols to detect cTnI are highly diﬀused and well-developed, although they still
carry the limitations related to ELISA systems, mainly cost, reagent waste, and execution
time (4-12 hours [2]). Furthermore, contrarily to many other deleterious diseases such
as cancer, that requires many diﬀerent biomarkers to be contemporarily monitored in
order to assess the stage of progression of the condition, AMI and related pathologies
can be eﬀectively diagnosed by screening only cardiac troponins, which makes the assay
procedure clearly easier to implement [23, 45].
In their study, Sun et al.[2] made use of silicon high-contrast grating (HCG) resonators
as integrated dielectric resonant platform to perform label-free detection of cTnI with
an LOD of 100 pg/mL and an execution time of only 4 minutes. This study is aimed
at describing advanced HCG designs that enable to improve the sensitivity of such
simple biosensing platforms beyond the values reported in the literature for the beneﬁt
of patients aﬀected by dangerous hearth conditions.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theoretical background
2.2
High-Contrast Grating resonators
This section is focused on the mathematical and physical description of the chosen
sensing platform, namely high-contrast grating resonators. HCGs are well know and
thoroughly studied dielectric nanostructures which have been used for many years
for the most various applications, from light manipulation to telecommunications and
biosensing. HCGs consist of a one-dimensional periodic array of high-index structures
(typically rectangular bars, but also tubes or sinusoidal modulations of the refractive
index), surrounded by a low-index medium, from which the name high-contrast gratings.
Robert Magnusson pioneered the study of applications of such sub-wavelength periodic
structures in the 90s, and developed a complete mathematical model to describe their
physics [3–5, 14]. The physical behaviour of such structures rely on the concept of leaky-
mode resonances (LMR) or equivalently guided-mode resonances (GMR). The underlying
meaning of LMR is that, should the structure be free of refractive index modulations, it
would be nothing more than a standard slab waveguide, hence the guided mode could
not be excited by a plane wave impinging on the structure at normal incidence. However,
when a perturbation of the dielectric constant is introduced, this provides a transverse
momentum that causes the guided mode to leak energy to the outside environment
(the operating point in the dispersion diagram is brought inside the light cone of the
bulk medium), and as such a guided mode can be excited at normal incidence by an
incoming plane wave. Furthermore, HCGs are dramatically polarisation dependent in
their response (obvious being one-dimensional periodic structures), and as such they
can be eﬃciently used as ﬁlters and polarisers. Indeed, there is a clear distinction in
the grating’s behaviour under TE (electric ﬁeld transverse to the periodicity axis, thus
parallel to the grating bars) or TM (same for the magnetic ﬁeld) polarisation: given a set
of parameter, the structure manifests a very sharp resonance or a broadband near-unit
reﬂection depending on the polarisation. High-contrast subwavelength gratings are also
often referred to as resonant waveguide gratings (RWGs) in a general description. In
reality, HCGs are a sub-class of RWGs with the main distinction residing in the number
of modes being conﬁned in the vertical direction, which happen to be only two in the
case of HCGs (more on this will follow) [21].
During the years, RWGs have been extensively used for many applications, for
instance ﬁlters and polarisers (as previously anticipated) [3–8], broadband mirrors [9],
electro optic switches [4], biosensors [1, 2, 10–19] and many other applications with the
most innovative designs [20]. Thorough reviews exist on the topic, e.g., [20, 21], and in
particular [20] provides a complete and simple mathematical analysis to describe the
physics behind such devices. In the remaining part of the section, their study will be
resumed and adapted to the case of interest for the sake of completeness. Afterwards,
the numerical simulations developed in this work to identify the most suitable design
and advanced versions will be presented.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
15
2.2.1
Mathematical analysis
Before going through the analytical description of the structure it is important to clearly
visualise the problem, deﬁne the polarisation states, set a reference frame and deﬁne
the needed hypothesis. To simplify the description, in line with [20], the analysis will
be carried out by considering an ideal structure: a one dimensional array of high-index
bars suspended in air (or any equivalent homogeneous and isotropic medium of suitable
refractive index). Figure 2.4 illustrates the most simple model that can be used to
describe the physics of HCGs. The two polarisations are graphically reported for the
sake of clarity. The reference frame and grating’s parameters are deﬁned as well and the
notation will be used throughout the rest of the chapter. For completeness, the grating’s
parameters are deﬁned as: w is the width of the grating bars, Λ is the pitch of the periodic
structure, h is the grating’s thickness and nb the refractive index of the grating’s material.
The structure is assumed to be suspended in air, hence the background refractive index
will always be n = 1, and is also considered as inﬁnite along the y-direction.
Figure 2.4: Simpliﬁed HCG model for the analytical treatment of the structure. The two
polarisations are deﬁned as well as parameters determining grating geometry. The reference
frame is deﬁned as well and will be used throughout the rest of the thesis.
It is worth mentioning that, at normal incidence, a symmetry-protected bound state in
continuum (BIC)[46] mode exists (Γ point) in the symmetric grating illustrated in ﬁgure
2.4. BICs are waves that remain localised even though they coexist with a continuous
spectrum of radiating waves carrying energy away. They cannot be excited with optical
waves and as such they are most often observed as quasi-BICs by varying the angle of
incidence and observing the ﬂattening of the spectral response close to normal incidence.
A plane wave is considered as excitation source, and for simplicity normal incidence
is assumed. The wave thus propagate from the negative z-direction towards the grating,
travels through the periodic medium and out-couple to air at z = h. The width of an
air gap is obviously a = Λ −w, and three propagation regions are naturally deﬁned
as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.5. In Region 1, a superposition of incoming plane wave and
back-reﬂected diﬀractive waves is present, while in Region 2 the electromagnetic ﬁeld
can be pictured as a superposition of diﬀerent Bloch’s waves, excited by impinging
plane wave and sustained by the grating’s momentum, and ﬁnally in Region 3 an
ensemble of diﬀracted transmitted waves constitute the transmitted optical mode. The
incoming plane wave is characterised by a wavevector k0 = 2π/λ, while the superposition
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theoretical background
of diﬀracted waves is characterised by a propagation constant γn, with n being the
diﬀraction order (n = 0, ±1, ±2, ...). It is important to highlight that the propagation
constant of transmitted and reﬂected diﬀractive waves is identical in Regions 1 and 3.
Upon incidence of the incoming plane wave onto the grating’s surface, the latter imparts
a transverse momentum to the optical mode that is given by the grating’s momentum
itself, hence Gn = n · 2π/Λ is the only contribution to the optical momentum along
the periodicity axis, and depends on the considered diﬀraction order though the integer
n. The most interesting region is of course Region 2, where the origin of the grating’s
physical behaviour resides. The incoming plane wave excites a set of grating modes
characterised by a propagation constant, β = 2π/λ · neff, with neff being the mode’s
eﬀective index, which depends once again on the considered optical mode number (neff,m
is a more appropriate notation, with m = 0, 1, 2, ... being the grating’s mode number).
Moreover, the transverse momentum provided by the grating introduces a transverse
momentum component for the HCG modes as well, which are deﬁned as ka,m and kb,m
for the air gaps and grating bars, respectively. Importantly, the transverse momentum in
Region 2 is not simply given by the refractive index of the corresponding medium, yet it
is actually an eﬀective mode index along the periodicity axis and must be determined
via the grating’s dispersion.
Figure 2.5: Two dimensional representation of the ideal grating’s model. The wavenumbers
outside and inside the grating are deﬁned, as long as the three diﬀerent propagation region in
the domain of interest.
As previously anticipated, what follows is an adaptation from [20] to the case of
interest. Speciﬁcally, the mathematical analysis will be described for a TE-polarised
plane wave as excitation source, as that is the polarisation that gives rise to extremely
high-quality resonances (high-Q) which are of interest for this work. On the other hand,
TM-polarisation is used when the structure is meant to operate as a broadband mirror,
as will be shown later. Furthermore, as implicitly illustrated in ﬁgure 2.5, the analytical
domain is two-dimensional, being the grating inﬁnite along the y-direction, hence one can
safely set all the derivatives ∂/∂y = 0 when applying Maxwell’s equations (direction of
invariance). The reason why TE polarisation enables the excitation of high-Q resonances
has to be sought in the continuity of the electric ﬁeld at the interface between grating
bars and air gaps: having the E-ﬁeld polarised parallel to the grating bars means that it is
continuous across the interface with an air gap, hence the energy build-up inside the bars
==PAGE:27==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
17
is possible. On the other hand, when the incoming plane wave is TM-polarised, the E-ﬁeld
is orthogonal to the same interface, and by continuity of the normal component of the
displacement ﬁeld one can easily see that the electric ﬁeld is mainly concentrated in the
low-index inclusions. Indeed, by applying the boundary conditions and the constitutive
relations for a wave in an isotropic medium it turns out that:
Db = Da ⇒ϵbEb = ϵaEa = Ea ⇒Eb = Ea
ϵb
,
(2.3)
where the subscripts a and b stand for apertures (air in this case) and bars, respectively;
D is the displacement ﬁeld and it is immediate to observe that under TM-excitation the
electric ﬁeld is mainly concentrated in the air-gaps, hence preventing a strong energy
build-up in the grating bars3. From this simple argument one may argue that TM modes
should provide an higher sensitivity to external bodies, as they should better overlap
with the analyte. However, the high-Q feature pertaining to TE modes renders them
more suitable for this purpose as will be discussed later on.
At this point of the discussion the mathematical analysis can be undertaken with
all the needed assumptions. Since the interest of this study is related to the high-Q
resonances excitable by a linearly polarised TE plane wave, such polarisation will be
considered here. The electromagnetic ﬁeld components pertaining to TE polarisation are
Ey, Hx and Hz, which can be easily veriﬁed by applying the Faraday-Lenz equation to
the problem under consideration. Moreover, the analysis can be limited to the lateral
ﬁeld components only, namely (x, y), as the z-component is easily retrieved by them, in
the same way as done by [20]. Incidentally, it is eﬀective to deal with the description of
each of the three regions independently, in the same way as done to treat slab waveguides
[47].
Starting from Region 1, the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be written as a superposition of
incident monochromatic plane wave and inﬁnite reﬂected diﬀracted waves, that is:
E(1)
y (x, z) = e−jk0z −
∞
X
n=0
rnE(1)
y,n(x)ejγnz,
H(1)
x (x, z) =
s ϵ0
µ0
e−jk0z −
∞
X
n=0
rnH(1)
x,n(x)ejγnz,
(2.4)
E(1)
y,n(x) = cos [Gn(x −a/2)] ,
H(1)
x,n(x) = −γn
k0
s ϵ0
µ0
E(1)
y,n(x),
(2.5)
where ϵ0 and µ0 are the vacuum permittivity and permeability, respectively, and rn is
the reﬂection coeﬃcient for the nth diﬀraction order (diﬀraction eﬃciency). Eq. (2.5)
describes the envelope functions of electric and magnetic ﬁeld, respectively, which retain
an even symmetry about the centre of the domain (which in this case is set to be x = a/2)
due to the geometry of the problem, the plane wave nature of the source and its normal
3The reader is reminded that the grating is assumed to be constituted by a high-index material,
hence ϵb is a large number, ∼12 for silicon at the telecommunication wavelength.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theoretical background
incidence. Now, by momentum conservation one can write that the propagation constant
of the nth diﬀracted mode must satisfy:
γ2
n = k2
0 −G2
n =
2π
λ
2
−
2πn
Λ
2
,
(2.6)
which means that, in the subwavelength regime (Λ < λ), only the zeroth diﬀraction
order propagates by carrying energy in the far-ﬁeld (γ0 is the only real), while all the
higher order diﬀracted modes have imaginary propagation constants, hence they exist as
evanescent waves in the near-ﬁeld but do not transport energy.
A very similar argument applies to the transmitted ﬁeld in Region 3, with the
exception that the incoming plane wave is here absent:
E(3)
y (x, z) =
∞
X
n=0
τnE(3)
y,n(x)e−jγn(z−h),
H(3)
x (x, z) =
∞
X
n=0
τnH(3)
x,n(x)e−jγn(z−h),
(2.7)
E(3)
y,n(x) = E(1)
y,n(x),
H(3)
x,n(x) = H(1)
x,n(x),
(2.8)
where τn is the transmission coeﬃcient for the nth diﬀraction order, and eq. (2.8) is valid
because of the even symmetry of the modes.
Regarding Region 2, the argument is a bit more complicated. Upon interaction
of the incoming plane wave with the grating’s surface, a set of m = 0, 1, 2, ... grating
modes is excited by the transverse momentum provided by the HCG itself. Such modes
have a transverse momentum determined by the grating’s dispersion, and propagate in
the forward and backward direction with a propagation constant βm. It is important
to highlight that both forward and backward propagating modes exist in Region 2 as
the interaction with the modes in Regions 1 and 3 will cause the grating modes to be
reﬂected back into the structure, with an extent that is determined by suitable coupling
coeﬃcients, which will be discussed afterwards. Forward and backward propagating
modes can be described by a set of coeﬃcients am and bm, respectively, and read:
E(2)
y (x, z) =
∞
X
m=0
E(2)
y,m(x)
h
ame−jβm(z−h) + bmejβm(z−h)i
,
H(2)
x (x, z) =
∞
X
m=0
H(2)
x,m(x)
h
ame−jβm(z−h) + bmejβm(z−h)i
,
(2.9)
0 < x < a :



E(2)
y,n(x) = A cos [ka,m(x −a/2)] + B sin [ka,m(x −a/2)] ,
H(2)
x,n(x) = βm
k0
q ϵ0
µ0E(2)
y,n(x),
(2.10)
a < x < Λ :



E(2)
y,n(x) = C cos {kb,m [x −(a + Λ)/2]} + D sin {kb,m [x −(a + Λ)/2]} ,
H(2)
x,n(x) = βm
k0
q ϵ0
µ0E(2)
y,n(x),
(2.11)
which is the general description of the ensemble of forward and backward propagating
grating modes. Given the nature of the structure, that is the one-dimensional periodicity,
==PAGE:29==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
19
the ﬁeld envelopes must retain the same periodicity, according to the Bloch’s theorem.
This is indeed the case, as:
E(2)
y,m(x) = E(2)
y,m(x + lΛ),
H(2)
x,m(x) = H(2)
x,m(x + lΛ), l being integer,
(2.12)
represents the periodic boundary condition to be applied to the system, which leads to
the identiﬁcation of the coeﬃcients A and C, while B = D = 0 due to the even symmetry.
The math can be worked out to yield:
A = cos (kb,mw/2) , B = 0, C = cos (ka,ma/2) , D = 0,
(2.13)
and a further condition, in the only case of normal incidence, is that the modes’ envelope
is equal to zero for odd mode orders. Regarding instead the propagation constant, once
again the momentum conservation law states that:
β2
m =
2π
λ
2
−k2
a,m =
2πnb
λ
2
−k2
b,m,
(2.14)
which represent the dispersion relation of the HCG. The relationship between kb and ka
is however still unknown, yet it can be found by matching the boundary conditions at
x = 0 and x = a, hence leading to:
kb,m tan (kb,mw/2) = −ka,m tan (ka,ma/2) .
(2.15)
The interesting aspect of eq. (2.15) is that it is very similar to the dispersion relation
of a slab waveguide. Indeed, the HCG can be described as an equivalent slab waveguide
modulated by the periodic arrangement of high dielectric inclusions. This is not strictly
speaking an eﬀective medium that would require the periodicity to be much smaller
than the operating wavelength, but nevertheless an incoming mode sees the structure
as an equivalent slab waveguide. Even more interesting is the fact that the equivalent
waveguide modes can be excited at normal incidence thanks to the transverse momentum
provided by the grating. Considering a common slab waveguide it would be impossible
to excite its modes with a plane wave impinging normally onto the waveguide’s core.
Provided one pushes the grating period to inﬁnity, the right-hand side of eq. (2.15)
converges to a constant value and the whole equation becomes exactly the dispersion
relation of a slab waveguide, i.e., in the form of x tan(x) = const. [47]. The reader is
referred to [20] for a more complete analysis of this aspect, and they will ﬁnd that the
dispersion diagram is almost identical to that of a slab waveguide, but for the fact that
an HCG supports only a discrete set of modes, instead of the continuum observed in its
classical counterpart.
Another very important aspect that this analysis reveals is indeed related to the
number of supported modes by the grating. The interesting physical properties of HCGs
happen in the so-called dual-mode regime, that is when, at normal incidence, the structure
supports only two even modes due to the characteristic geometrical parameters and their
relationship with the operating wavelength. Again, [20] provide a complete description
of the phenomenon and they even describe how to analytically calculate the reﬂectivity
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theoretical background
of the HCG based on the above calculations. Here, for the sake of compactness, only the
main result is reported by jumping to the conclusion and by limiting the discussion to
the case of interest, hence the origin of high-Q resonances.
Upon reﬂection at the grating’s surface, the incident plane wave excites a set of optical
modes inside the HCG. These propagate downwards, in the +z direction, described by a
set of coeﬃcients, am, which can be collected in a column vector, a. Such modes propagate
until they encounter the second grating-air interface at z = h, where they interact with
the modes in Region 3 and are reﬂected back into the HCG. The back-reﬂected modes
are described by a set of coeﬃcients, bm, which can be collected again in a vector, b. The
relationship between a and b is a simple linear relationship mediated by an interaction
matrix, ρ, which has the role of a reﬂection matrix:
b ≡ρa.
(2.16)
The matrix ρ is typically non-diagonal, meaning that coupling between diﬀerent grating
modes is possible due to the interaction with the modes in Region 3. The reﬂection
matrix can be calculated element-by-element by considering the overlap integral of the
grating modes with the diﬀracted waves in Regions 1 and 3, i.e., the overlaps between
eqs. (2.4)-(2.11), as shown in [20]. Furthermore, when propagating along the z-direction,
each mode cumulates a certain phase determined by the respective propagation constant
and the HCG thickness. This allows to deﬁne a diagonal propagation matrix, φ, which
reads:
φm,n = e−jβmhδm,n,
(2.17)
with δm,n being the Kronecker delta function. The matrices ρ and φ fully determine the
HCG properties and the origin of high-Q resonances, as will be now shown.
The two grating’s interface with the environment constitute the boundaries of a cavity,
where the grating modes can resonate with a Fabry-Perót (FP) mechanism (matrix FP
mechanism [48]). In the dual-mode regime, the HCG physics is governed by only two
grating modes, hence the sizes of the matrices ρ and φ are reduced to 2×2 and the
problem is greatly simpliﬁed. The two grating modes can be labelled TE0 and TE2
(odd modes do not exist at normal incidence), and are non-orthogonal because they
can interact with each other at the input and output planes. This can be shown by
calculating the matrix ρφ that fully determines the HCG properties, and turn out to
be indeed non-diagonal [20]. The matrix ρφ however can be diagonalised, and the
corresponding eigenvectors are deﬁned as the HCG supermodes, which is a common
practice in coupled-mode theory. The supermodes represent an ensemble of grating modes
and form an orthogonal basis for the vector space describing the HCG. The eigenvalues
of the matrix ρφ represent propagation of such supermodes, i.e., cumulated phase and
reﬂection dynamics. A supermode reaches the FP condition when the phase it cumulates
in half a round-trip is an integer multiple of π, i.e.:
ψm = mth eigenvalue of ρφ = nπ,
n = 0, 1, 2, ...
(2.18)
Reaching a Fabry-Perót condition has the usual sense: an integer number of ﬁeld
proﬁle nodes ﬁts the cavity, hence a resonance occurs as the mode reproduces itself
==PAGE:31==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
21
at each round-trip. Now, each of the two supermodes can reach the FP condition
independently of the other, however there are certain values of HCG refractive index,
geometrical parameters, and operating wavelength for which the two supermodes reach
the FP condition simultaneously: this is the origin of the high-Q resonances. Figure 2.6
reports a schematic of the physical principle behind the characteristic FP resonances:
when a plane wave is incident onto the grating’s surface, it excites the HCG supermodes,
which can be described by a vector coeﬃcient ⃗C and are visually represented by the blue
mode proﬁles4 in the ﬁgure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Schematic of the dynamics originating a simultaneous Fabry-Perót resonance for
the HCG modes.
The supermodes propagate through the HCG and cumulate a certain phase, given
by the matrix φ. Before being reﬂected from the bottom interface, the supermodes are
then described by the vector φ⃗C. The reﬂection from the bottom interface corresponds,
mathematically, to a multiplication by the reﬂection matrix ρ, hence the supermodes
are described by the vector ρφ⃗C after half a round-trip. The process is repeated for the
second half of round-trip, after which the supermodes can be described by the vector
ρφρφ⃗C. Should the HCG thickness and refractive index be such that:
ρφρφ⃗C = ⃗C,
(2.19)
the supermodes have reached the FP condition simultaneously, meaning that the HCG
modes repeat themselves at each round-trip and are thus self-sustainable due to a
constructive interference between the assembly of modes, which is precisely the so-called
matrix Fabry-Perót condition [48]. Equation (2.19) can be reformulated as:
(I −ρφρφ)⃗C = 0,
(2.20)
with I being the unit matrix. A non-zero solution of such equation exists provided that:
det
h
I −(ρφ)2i
= 0,
(2.21)
4The ﬁeld proﬁles do not retain that speciﬁc shape, it should be intended as a qualitative modal
description of the HCG supermodes. This is a common practice in coupled-mode theory.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theoretical background
which is the equation determining the HCG resonance condition and has been shown
to excellently match numerical simulations and experiments about HCGs [20, 48]. The
spectral locations where eq. (2.21) reaches zero are places of resonances with inﬁnite
Q-factors (hence the BIC). Obviously, inﬁnite Q-factors are impossible to achieve experi-
mentally due to the optical extinction that characterises any real device (absorption and
scattering). The study is indeed ideal and does not take into account optical losses or
practical scenarios, it does however give a qualitative idea of the potential applications
of HCGs, from signal ﬁltering to biosensing and even nonlinear applications. Again, a
complete description of the phenomenon, including a more realistic study about ﬁnite-Q
resonances in HCGs, can be found in [20, 48].
To conclude this section, ﬁgure 2.7 displays a reﬂectivity contour plot of an idealised
array oh high-index bars in air (ﬁgure 2.7a) as a function of the incident wavelength
and HCG thickness, and the detail of a reﬂection spectrum for a speciﬁc HCG thickness
(h = 0.5732Λ) in the dual-mode region (ﬁgure 2.7b). It is immediate to notice the
beautiful "chessboard" pattern that arises especially in the dual-mode region. Speciﬁcally,
by referring to ﬁgure 2.7a, one can identify three regions, from left to right: the diﬀraction
regime (λ < Λ) where the presence of many diﬀraction order renders the pattern harder to
deﬁne and the reﬂectivity is somehow low, the dual-mode regime (highlighted by the black
dashed lines) where indeed only two modes exist in the HCG, and the eﬀective medium
regime (λ >> Λ) where the HCG behaves as an uniform layer of suitable eﬀective index.
A detailed analysis reveals that such characteristic pattern arises from the phase diﬀerence
of the HCG supermodes, and as such the contour plot can be seen as the dispersion
diagram of an HCG. The careful reader will notice that an usual dispersion diagram is
typically displayed in the ω −β space, with ω being the angular frequency and β the
propagation constant. However, β is related to the phase cumulated by the mode as it
propagates through the structure via the thickness of the layer, h, i.e., φ = βh. Similarly,
the angular frequency is related to the optical wavelength through the relationship
ω = 2πc/λ, and as such the reported reﬂectivity contour plot can be seen as the the
dispersion diagram in the ω−1 −β−1 space. Speciﬁcally, as previously anticipated the
chessboard pattern arises from the phase diﬀerence between the propagating supermodes,
and it can indeed be observed how the "cells" of such pattern seem to be deﬁned by a set
of quasi-linear and parabolic monotone lines. Such lines can be shown to be solutions of
eq. (2.18) for the ﬁrst two supermodes (TE0-like, the quasi-linear ones and TE2-like, the
parabolic ones), hence solutions of:
ψ0 = nπ,
ψ2 = nπ,
(2.22)
which represent the FP condition of ﬁrst and second order supermodes, in the dual-mode
region. Furthermore, the nodes of the chessboard pattern correspond to the spectral
positions where the FP condition is reached simultaneously by both the propagating
modes, hence they constitute points of matrix FP resonance. The contemporary resonance
of both supermodes occurs when:
|∆ψ|= |ψ0 −ψ2|= mπ,
m = 0, 1, 2, ...,
(2.23)
==PAGE:33==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
23
hence when the phase diﬀerence between the two supermodes is an integer multiple
of π. High-Q resonances occur when |∆ψ|= 2mπ, meaning that the FP resonances
have the same parity, thus the modes signiﬁcantly spatially overlap and strongly couple
with each other. This strong-coupling phenomenon is well-known in physics and is
typically observed from the dispersion diagrams when the dispersion curves of the modes
undergoing coupling anti-cross each other. In that case, the two FP resonances overlap
signiﬁcantly and the resulting spectral shape is the well-known Fano resonance [49] (e.g.,
Rabi-splitting in cavity quantum electrodynamics), observable for instance in ﬁgure 2.7b.
On the other hand, when the phase diﬀerence between supermodes is an odd multiple
of π, the diﬀerent resonance parity leads to a weak-coupling of the supermodes, which
result in a much lower-Q resonance [20].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a) Reﬂectivity contour plot for an array of high-index bars in air versus grating
thickness and wavelength, (b) reﬂectivity spectrum in the dual-mode region for h = 0.5732Λ, the
spectrum was obtained by cutting the contour plot along the white horizontal line depicted in
(a). nb = 3.48, Λ = 850 nm, w = 0.47Λ. TE polarisation.
By referring to the contour reﬂectivity plot one can easily see how, besides the anoma-
lies due to the strong-coupling between diﬀerent modes which lead to high-Q resonances,
there are some clearly deﬁned broad-bands of high reﬂection. This phenomenon is
strongly enhanced by switching to TM polarisation, which is commonly used to realise
broadband mirrors without the need of thick anti-reﬂection coatings. This is to say
that the reﬂectivity contour plot is a powerful tool that can be used to design an HCG
depending on the application of interest. One has only to visualise the surface plot for
the two polarisations, identify the operating point of interest (thickness of the grating),
and use such parameter to develop the HCG design that ﬁts to their needs.
A ﬁnal remark is to make the reader aware of the fact that, in the numerical cal-
culation that led to the generation of ﬁgure 2.7, the refractive index has been set to a
constant value corresponding to that of silicon at the telecommunication wavelength.
This is obviously unphysical and does not represent the real behaviour of the HCG
over the whole spectral range, but within the wavelength region where silicon can be
approximated as lossless, the spectrum well represents the reality and can be considered
reliable.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theoretical background
The above discussion has been focused on the description of the HCG physics by
considering a plane-wave impinging on the structure at normal incidence. This assumption
allows to reveal the most peculiar behaviour of high-contrast gratings, for instance the
existence of a symmetry-protected BIC. The same analysis may be carried out with a
generic inclined incidence, obviously leading to much more cumbersome calculations. In
reality, dealing with oblique incidence is highly relevant and important when studying
these kind of structures, especially in a real scenario where true normal incidence is
practically impossible to achieve. Should the plane-wave be incident on the structure at a
certain angle, ﬁrst of all the considerations about symmetry would not hold any more, and
as such the structure would only support a quasi-BIC. Furthermore, odd grating modes
would be supported as well, hence the dual-mode regime would not strictly-speaking be
such, with the consequence that high-Q resonances would be weakened by the non-perfect
phase matching condition required for the simultaneous resonance. In conclusion, normal
incidence is an important pre-requisite to be able to observe the most peculiar HCG
features, yet provided that the incident wave impinges with a small angle, most of the
HCG physics could still be appreciated.
2.2.2
Simulations of the ideal structure
Before going through the simulations which allowed to identify the most suitable designs
to be fabricated, it is important to show some preliminary results which further clarify
the physics of high-contrast gratings5. In this regards, ﬁrst of all it is relevant to visualise
the spectral behaviour of the structure under the excitation of the two diﬀerent previously
discussed linear polarisations in chapter, and this can be done for the ideal structure
of a one-dimensional array of high-index bars in air. Figure 2.8 displays the spectral
response of an HCG made of amorphous silicon, for diﬀerent values of the periodicity,
ﬁxed thickness and width, in the NIR. It is immediate to notice how the reﬂection spectra
are completely uncorrelated with each other: on the one hand, a sharp Fano-resonance
characterises the response, and it red-shifts as the grating’s period increases (ﬁgure
2.8a); on the other hand, a ﬂat band of near-unit reﬂectance extends for more than 100
nm (ﬁgure 2.8b) from 1500 to 1600 nm for a speciﬁc grating geometry. Incidentally,
since HCGs rely on the concept of Fabry-Perót resonance modality, in the reasonable
approximation of lossless material the transmission spectrum is mirrored about the x-axis.
Indeed, forgetting for a moment the desired high-Q resonance, HCGs can be indeed
designed to be broad-band mirrors or transmission ﬁlters. The former is exactly the case
illustrated in ﬁgure 2.8b, while for a diﬀerent set of geometrical parameter the mirrored
response, hence a broad-band transmission ﬁlter, can be easily obtained.
Another key aspect of the nanostructure being studied is its characteristic ﬁeld proﬁle,
as it is the most important feature that renders HCGs highly suitable for biosensing.
Figure 2.9 shows a reﬂection spectrum of the same ideal structure under TE polarisation,
5These results are part of the numerical simulations conducted to study the device, they are reported
here for the sake of consistency, the simulation details will be discussed in the next chapter. The
simulated material that the gratings is made of is amorphous silicon, which will be deﬁned in the next
chapter as well.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
25
(a) TE excitation.
(b) TM excitation.
Figure 2.8: Spectral behaviour of an amorphous silicon HCG in air under (a) TE, and (b)
TM polarisation for diﬀerent one-dimensional periodicities: (a) h = 500 nm, w = 400 nm, and
(b) h = 425 nm, w = 635 nm.
and in particular the Fano-shape of the resonance pattern is highlighted. The four insets
in the ﬁgure represent the intensity (calculated as the y-component of the electric ﬁeld,
i.e., directed along the grating bars, modulus-squared) distribution of light in three unit
cells. In particular, the intensity proﬁle at the Fano-resonance peak is of main interest:
it is evident how, at the corresponding wavelength, Bloch waves are excited by the
transverse momentum provided by the grating in the horizontal direction. Furthermore,
the standing wave pattern typical of a Fabry-Perót resonance can also be easily seen in
the vertical direction if one looks inside the grating bars.
As can be easily seen, a strong energy build-up characterises the structure at resonance,
which is signature of an high-Q resonance taking place. Moreover, the strong-coupling
between adjacent grating bars, that is the presence of Bloch waves in the grating plane,
hence the excitation of a guided mode propagating along the eﬀective slab waveguide
will be shown later to provide a clear advantage in terms of sensing performance and can
be exploited in order to boost the sensitivity of the structure beyond standard reported
values. To some extent, this eﬀect is diﬀerent from the working principle of many other
sensing platform, for instance those based on LSPR [23]. Indeed, in plasmonic nanoarrays
the near and far-ﬁeld coupling between adjacent resonators is typically avoided in order
not to have the resonant ﬁeld widening and extending on a large scale due to a collective
resonance, as this would blind the resonators from to the arrival of small foreign bodies.
Contrarily, in HCGs the structures need to collectively resonate in virtue of a strong
coupling, and being the ﬁeld extremely well conﬁned in the grating plane, this can
be exploited as an important advantage. Reversely, no particularly interesting feature
characterises the ﬁeld proﬁle far from the resonance peak, and especially no clear energy
build-up is observed outside such narrow spectral interval. For the record, the input
plane wave was set to unit amplitude, hence the colour-scale indicates the ﬁeld-intensity
enhancement factor.
Importantly, the ﬁeld proﬁles correspondent to dip and peak of the Fano resonance
do not show particularly diﬀerent features, besides from a slight variation in the ﬁeld
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.9: Reﬂection spectrum of an ideal array of amorphous silicon grating bars in air. The
insets show the ﬁeld proﬁle in diﬀerent spectral positions, in particular the most relevant intensity
distribution occurs at the peak of the Fano-resonance and is highlighted in red. Λ = 850 nm,
h = 500 nm, w = 400 nm.
intensity, i.e., the ﬁeld conﬁguration is in good approximation the same. As such, it is
interesting to quantify the energy stored in the grating bars at such spectral positions in
order to estimate the energy concentration and identify which feature would be more
promising for biosensing. To do so, the Poynting vector was calculated and integrated
ﬁrst in a ﬁxed volume (area in this case as it was done in a two-dimensional mesh), and
then only inside the grating bars. Taking the ratio of these two calculated quantities
conﬁrmed that no great diﬀerence exists between the two resonance features, with an
energy concentration in the grating bars of C ≃39.9% for the dip, and C ≃40.5% for
the peak. This implies that the dip feature corresponds to a slightly higher concentration
of ﬁeld in the environment, hence it may be more promising for biosensing. However, the
diﬀerence is so small that would hardly play an relevant role during experiments, thus
the two features can be expected to show almost identical sensitivity.
To conclude this section, a ﬁnal remark is to visually prove that the physical mechanism
standing behind HCGs is indeed the excitation of a guided mode in the grating plane due
to the peculiarities of such structures. Figure 2.10 illustrates the Poynting vector of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld in the ideal structure. From ﬁgure 2.10a it is possible to appreciate
how the energy is mostly ﬂowing along the periodicity axis, i.e., along x, due to the
guided mode excited by the transverse grating momentum. From ﬁgure 2.10b instead
one can see that there is a net energy ﬂow along the grating bars, but no radiation leaks
==PAGE:37==
2.2 High-Contrast Grating resonators
27
outside the structure, nor there is any energy ﬂowing along the direction of excitation.
These aspects conﬁrm the theoretical predictions, prove the nature of total reﬂection
from the grating’s surface, and show the tight light conﬁnement inside the structure,
which is the most important aspect for the intended application.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.10: Poynting vector representation: direction of propagation of the energy ﬂow in the
structure. Note that the grating bars are identiﬁed by the red shaded box, while the white areas
represent air. (a) is the cross-sectional view of view of a unit cell, while (b) is the unit cell seen
from the top, i.e., from the excitation direction. Λ = 850 nm, h = 500 nm, w = 400 nm.
Although the structure described above is an idealised version of what can be
manufactured in practice, it will be shown that the behaviour of actual structures
is very close. This is once again due to the tight light conﬁnement that allows to
preserve the most important features even though the grating will obviously lay on a
substrate, as long as the high index contrast between grating bars and its surrounding is
maintained. Nevertheless, an accurate design procedure must take into account all of
these aspects, especially since the structure is very extremely sensitive and would easily
behave diﬀerently to what is desired in the context of biosensing. The next sections will
illustrate the design procedure and all the considerations which led to the identiﬁcation
of the most suitable designs.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Numerical simulations
The subject of this section will be the numerical study conducted in order to identify the
most suitable designs which allow to obtain optimal biosensing performances of silicon
high-contrast gratings. The structures were fabricated on home-made silicon-on-insulator
(SOI) wafers, and as such the material dispersion implemented during the simulations
was taken from ellipsometry data obtained after the deposition of such layers. Speciﬁcally,
SOI wafers were realised by depositing 1.1 µm of silicon dioxide (SiO2) on 6" crystalline
silicon (cSi) wafers, and subsequently a suitable thickness of amorphous silicon to be
patterned in order to realise the structures. More on this will be discussed in chapter 4,
which is dedicated to the theory about micro and nanofabrication.
The ﬁrst important concept to be clariﬁed is related to the nature of the deposited
material, as the deposition technique allows to obtain either polycrystalline or amor-
phous silicon (polySi or aSi, respectively). Speciﬁc details will be given in chapter
4, while here the discussion will be limited to the measured permittivity values as
they are relevant when implementing simulations that reﬂects a real case situation.
Figure 3.1: Dielectric permittivity dispersion
of diﬀerent silicon crystal states in the near-
infrared region.
Figure 3.1 displays the dispersion curves
of the dielectric permittivity (real part)
for the three possible crystal states of sil-
icon:
crystalline, polycrystalline, amor-
phous.
The dielectric function of crys-
talline silicon (as well as that of SiO2),
were calculated by using a typical Sellmeier
equation, with coeﬃcients taken from Pa-
lik [50], while the polySi and aSi data were
ﬁtted from the ellipsometry measurements
conducted after the deposition in the clean-
room. Furthermore, although the dielectric
permittivities are complex functions, the
imaginary part is safely negligible in the
NIR region, where silicon is highly trans-
parent, hence the imaginary part was included during the simulations, but it is not
shown here. From ﬁgure 3.1 it is immediate to observe that the permittivity values for
diﬀerent silicon states are not identical, and in general the refractive index increases due
to the randomness of atom arrangement in the lattice. Crystalline silicon would be the
best choice from the fabrication and characterisation point of view, as it provides very
good fabrication accuracy and low scattering due to spurious dislocations. However, SOI
wafers made of crystalline silicon are very expensive, thus it was decided to manufacture
them in the cleanroom and as such the choice was limited to polySi and aSi. Among
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Numerical simulations
these, polycrystalline silicon is optically worse in terms of signal extinction, as the random
crystal dislocation may be exposed during the etching process and cause a non negligible
amount of scattering. Amorphous silicon in this sense performs better, and was chosen as
target material. Therefore, in all the simulations presented the aSi data were used unless
otherwise indicated. Nevertheless, during the ﬁrst stages of the project the analysis was
conducted by simulating a polySi grating, hence some comparisons will be discussed
when deemed interesting.
3.1
Numerical methods: introduction and
convergence
The numerical simulations were conducted by using the commercial ﬁnite-diﬀerence
time-domain method (FDTD) by Ansys Lumerical Inc. (version 2020 R2.2), and an
home-made rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) MATLAB® code1 (version R2020a).
The theoretical description of FDTD algorithms can be found for instance in [51], while
RCWA is thoroughly described in [52, 53]. Additionally, the simulations were conﬁrmed
by means of a third numerical method, the method of lines (MoL)2 [54]. The convergence
of any algorithm has always been guaranteed by running appropriate tests. Diﬀerent
numerical methods are known to provide slightly diﬀerent results in terms of resonance
wavelength and Q-factor, especially when examining strongly resonant structures [55], yet
excellent agreement was found among all the three methods, hence conﬁrming the validity
of the simulations. Before describing the numerical design process of the target structures,
it is important to highlight the main diﬀerence, advantages and drawbacks of the used
simulation methods, i.e., FDTD and RCWA (the details about implementation are beyond
the scope of this work). In the following, when discussing algorithm convergence, the
error introduced on a quantity x due to the ith level of accuracy of a suitable parameter
will be calculated according to:
∆=
v
u
u
t(xi −xN)2
x2
i
,
i = 1, 2, ...., N,
(3.1)
where xi is the resulting value from a simulation run with the ith level of accuracy. This
error estimation assumes that the most accurate simulation, the Nth, gives an exact result.
Obviously, no numerical result is exact, but the error can be reduced to a negligible value
with modern software, at the expense of increasing the computational eﬀort.
1Kindly provided by Prof. Dr. Domenico De Ceglia, Department of Information Engineering,
University of Padova, Italy.
2Conducted by Mehri Ziaee Bideskan, visiting PhD student in the Plasmonics and Metamaterials
group, DTU.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Numerical methods: introduction and convergence
31
3.1.1
Finite-diﬀerence time domain method
Starting from FDTD, the ﬁnite diﬀerence method is based on the solution of Maxwell’s
equations in a discretised fashion, that is the reduction of diﬀerential operators to ﬁnite
diﬀerences between adjacent (in time and space) values of electric and magnetic ﬁeld. In
particular, it can be shown [51] that ﬁnite diﬀerences are aﬀected by a degree of inaccuracy
with respect to the discretisation step, and this can be reduced by considering both the
previous and subsequent points of the ﬁeld in the mesh, i.e., the central diﬀerence scheme.
Due to the nature of Maxwell’s equations, which by extension is the electromagnetic ﬁeld
characteristics, a speciﬁc conﬁguration of the simulation domain exists - how electric
and magnetic ﬁeld are sampled across the grid - and allows to reduce the numerical
error and computational time, i.e., the staggered grid. Moreover, a speciﬁc criterion
(Courant criterion) can be determined between spatial and temporal discretisation steps,
and guarantees stability of the numeral method. Furthermore, in FDTD simulations it
is often desired to simulate an inﬁnite domain (e.g., along the excitation propagation
direction, to represent an open-space), and this is done by implementing the so-called
perfectly-matched layers (PML). PML are layers at the computational domain boundaries
which match the impedance of the adjacent simulated medium in order to avoid any
unphysical back-reﬂection from the edges, which are supposed to be open. This is done
by setting PML (or open) boundary conditions, which gradually absorb the incoming
signal by means of a ﬁctitious medium (ad-hoc numerically designed) with suitable
absorption properties. Moreover, since the structure of interest is periodic, a single unit
cell can be simulated by setting up periodic boundary conditions in the grating plane, so
that the algorithm will reproduce the simulated structures at the boundaries along the
periodicity axis. Once the boundary conditions are set, commercial software take care
of all the stability aspects automatically, but there are situations in which the default
numerical accuracy provided by the algorithm is not enough to reliably simulate the
desired structure. Among the most critical aspects to take care of when setting up an
FDTD simulations there are: reﬂections from the PML, distance between PML and
structures, mesh accuracy and energy depletion.
First of all, PML-related artefacts were tamed by monitoring the reﬂection spectrum
of the structure, which presents oscillations due to Fabry-Perót resonances in case of a
net back-reﬂection from the boundaries, 12 PML layers were found to provide the desired
accuracy. Secondly, the unit cell of the simulation domain must be small enough to reduce
the approximation of the desired geometry to the smallest possible value. Incidentally,
when studying subwavelength periodic structures, a mesh override (i.e., the mesh is forced
to be ﬁner) along the periodicity axis is often suggested, and was applied also in this case.
Non-uniform meshing was set as well to increase the resolution inside resonant structures
while easing the calculations in free-space. Thirdly, an FDTD simulation is typically
set to last for a pre-deﬁned time-interval. However, in order to accurately simulate the
relevant phenomena, the energy in the system must be depleted to the greatest possible
extent by the end of the simulation, otherwise a transient eﬀect is calculated rather than
the response at regime. Highly resonant structures fall exactly in this category: having
the capability of storing great amounts of energy and slowing light down (high Q-factor
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Numerical simulations
and long photon lifetime), it takes much longer time to deplete completely the energy
from the system, and this leads to unreliable results if not handled properly. HCGs are
indeed extremely high-Q structures which require long FDTD simulations to be properly
studied. In this regard, instead of optimising the simulation time, it was chosen to set
a very long time-span (ts > 1 ns, depending on the design and its Q-factor), and let
the simulation run until the normalised residual energy reached a suﬃciently low value.
This is done because the resonance lasts long time due to the its high-Q nature (narrow
resonance means low damping, hence a long photon lifetime) but stores only a little
portion of the injected energy. As such, the default automatic shutoﬀsetting would
terminate the simulation too early, leading to inaccurate power measurements3. Indeed,
high-Q factor resonances require ﬁne frequency resolution and therefore long simulation
time. An example of convergence study for the FDTD method is reported in ﬁgure 3.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: Convergence study of the FDTD algorithm. (a) Reﬂection spectra for increasingly
ﬁne mesh, (b) numerical error on the resonance wavelength as a function of mesh accuracy, (c)
reﬂection spectra as a function of the auto shutoﬀlevel and (d) Electric ﬁeld in the computational
domain as a function of the simulation time.
Figures 3.2a and 3.2b show an example of convergence study as a function of the
mesh accuracy, which in Lumerical can span from 1 (coarse - minimum 6 points per
wavelength) to 8 (very ﬁne - minimum 34 points per wavelength). From such result, the
optimum mesh accuracy was chosen to be 6 throughout the work unless noted otherwise.
3https://support.lumerical.com/hc/en-us/articles/360042089353
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Numerical methods: introduction and convergence
33
Figure 3.2c instead shows the role played by the energy shutoﬀlevel: when the simulation
stops with a large amount of energy left in the system, the result is clearly unphysical
as the resonance is not resolved (energy left > 10−4), or it presents ripples due to the
inaccurate power measurement (energy left between 10−4 −10−6). The default value set
by Lumerical is 10−5, which is clearly not suﬃcient for a satisfying result. Depletion of
energy from the resonant system allows for a better resolution of the spectral feature,
thus the auto shutoﬀlevel was set to 10−9 in order to compensate for this eﬀect. With
such level of accuracy the ﬁeld completely decays both inside the grating and at the
reﬂection monitor, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.2d.
3.1.2
Rigorous coupled-wave analysis
Regarding instead RCWA, the implementation is based on a completely diﬀerent mecha-
nism. The concept behind RCWA is the solution of a set of coupled diﬀerential equations
in a periodic structure, and makes use of the very same equations presented during the
mathematical description of the HCG (chapter 2.2.1) to describe the electromagnetic
ﬁeld outside and inside the grating. As such, the method is particularly suitable for the
kind of structures in this work. The analytical formulation of the grating modes in the
three grating regions, hence a decomposition in an inﬁnite number of plane waves in each
region, is combined with the wave equation (Helmholtz) for an arbitrary shaped dielectric
distribution with an approach similar to that of coupled-mode theory. The propagation
of both forward and backward travelling modes is handled by linear algebraic systems
of equations which can be reduced, in matrix formulation, to a transfer matrix method
(TMM). The original work by Moharam and Gaylord [52] was limited to the analysis of
planar grating diﬀraction, yet Khavasi et al. [53] provided in their work an extended
method capable of simulating arbitrarily-shaped gratings. Figure 3.3 illustrates how the
computational domain of an RCWA algorithm looks like, and as such the reason why
this method is particularly indicated for analysing the structures of interest should be
evident.
Figure 3.3: Layered structure of the RCWA computational domain in a unit cell, the incident
wave (⃗k0) excites a set of diﬀraction orders reﬂected by the structure, which is deﬁned by the
transition points where the dielectric function changes its value.
The domain is segmented in three regions: the input Region 1, the grating Region 2,
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Numerical simulations
and the output Region 3; exactly how it was done to describe the physics of HCGs. The
extended RCWA formulation makes use of Legendre polynomials (Legendre polynomials
expansion method - LPEM) to deﬁne a basis for a Hilbert space where the coupled
equations can be projected and solved by means of algebraic calculations. In order to
simulate deep periodic structures, a large number of polynomial terms would be required
not to encounter numerical instabilities, but this can be overcome by cutting the structure
in several subsequent thin layers in the vertical (z) direction that the modes propagate
through by means of a TMM algorithm. From an implementation point of view, the
structure is described in a single unit cell by explicitly deﬁning each of these subsequent
layers with their own thickness, while the periodicity axis is described by transition
points (xi, i = 1, 2, ...) where the dielectric function changes its value. Incidentally, it is
clear from ﬁgure 3.3 that the computational domain structure is particularly suitable to
naturally deﬁne arbitrary structures with the use of a standard staircase approximation.
Obviously, a real implementation cannot make use of inﬁnite terms required for an
exact solution, hence it must be optimised to reach the most accurate approximation. In
regards to algorithm convergence, the main parameters be taken care of are the number
of polynomial terms used in the Legendre expansion (M) and the truncation order of
the Fourier series (N). The M parameter can be set to M = 3, as this is enough for the
structure of interest, while the truncation order was studied in order to ﬁnd a suitable
trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and computational time. Figure 3.4 shows an example of
convergence study as a function of the truncation order, from which it was decided to set
N = 18.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Convergence study of the RCWA algorithm as a function of the Fourier series
truncation order N. (a) Reﬂection spectra for diﬀerent values of N and (b) numerical error on
the resonance wavelength as a function of N.
For the record, there is an enormous diﬀerence, in terms of computational eﬀort,
between FDTD and RCWA execution for simulating the structures subject of this work.
The device can be simulated in at least 30 minutes with FDTD (up to two hours,
depending on the required mesh accuracy and Q-factor), while RCWA hardly takes
more than 2-3 minutes4. As such, RCWA was chosen as the preferred method and
4104 points over a 100 nm bandwidth, Intel® core i5, 3.1 GHz Dual-Core, 8GB RAM LPDDR3.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Design of high-Q HCG in serum
35
was used for almost the entirety of the simulations discussed below. It is important
to mention, however, that while the FDTD complexity is set by the simulation time,
mesh accuracy/structure and bandwidth, RCWA is strongly aﬀected by the number of
layers needed to model the structure, and as such the execution time rapidly grows for
arbitrarily-shaped devices.
3.2
Design of high-Q HCG in serum
The ﬁnal goal of the designed structures is, as previously anticipated, the detection of
cardiac biomarkers in an actual biological sample. In order to design the target structures
it is obviously important to simulate the experimental condition with the maximum
achievable degree of accuracy. There are two main aspects to consider:
1. The structures will be fabricated on SOI wafers, where in particular the layer to
be patterned will be made of amorphous silicon. In order to render the numerical
simulations as accurate as possible, the wafer structure must be taken into account:
the substrate made of SiO2 and crystalline silicon needs to be implemented with
suitable material dispersions; this was done by means of Sellmeier equations.
Moreover, almost any simulation has been carried out by employing an ideal inﬁnite
crystalline silicon substrate (i.e., the wafer), which is obviously far from a real
scenario. As it will be discussed later, the ﬁnite size of the substrate does introduce
some cavity eﬀects that need to be taken into account. However, as it will be shown
at the end of this section, the absence of electromagnetic ﬁeld in the substrate,
at resonance, guarantees that the resonance features are preserved even in this
idealised scenario;
2. The liquid environment that represents a biological sample must be taken into
account, in particular the refractive index must be correctly set. In this context,
the ﬁnal goal is to quantify cardiac troponin I in human serum, that is the liquid
matrix mostly constituting blood, hence a true biological sample. No dielectric
dispersion data was available for human serum, but the refractive index is known
to be nserum ∼1.35, and was always kept constant. Furthermore, the measurement
protocol foresees probing the samples by means of a ﬁbre tip dipped into the liquid,
hence the light source has always been placed inside the liquid environment during
the simulations.
Eventually, the goal of the design procedure was the identiﬁcation of a suitable geometry
that allowed to manufacture an HCG with the sharpest possible resonance at the
telecommunication wavelength when immersed in serum. Hence, what follows resumes
the main results which led to the selection of the grating parameters for this purpose.
In order to fabricate the structure there is the need of designing and purchasing a
reticle that works as mask for the lithography process (see chapter 4.4). The optimum
design was initially identiﬁed for a polySi grating, and in particular the periodicity of the
ﬁnal product, that is ﬁxed by the design of the lithography mask, was set according to
such results. Unfortunately, when it was decided to switch to aSi for the sake of keeping
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Numerical simulations
scattering to the lowest possible level, a diﬀerent periodicity was needed. Luckily (and
intelligently), the designed mask comprised of diﬀerent designs with three diﬀerent values
of the pitch, which allowed to identify a new design based on amorphous silicon. However,
the optimum period was not present on the mask, and as a consequence the design had to
be adapted to the available reticle, with the closest value being Λ = 820 nm. Therefore,
the reader will need to bear this aspect in mind when observing the following ﬁgures,
especially ﬁgure 3.5a, as they show the ﬁnal results based on all these considerations.
Figure 3.5a shows the reﬂectance spectrum of an aSi-HCG on an SOI wafer. The
magnitude of the resonance peak decreases due to a diﬃculty of resolving such a narrow
response and can be used as reliable indicator of the narrowest resonance. From the
ﬁgure it is clear that, with the given geometrical parameters, a periodicity of Λ = 820 nm
provides indeed a very narrow resonance in close proximity to the telecommunication
wavelength. Figure 3.5b instead shows the reﬂectance contour plot as a function of
grating thickness and wavelength under TE polarisation for a semi-real structure. The
simulated grating cannot be considered to be realistic as the refractive index of amorphous
silicon, silicon dioxide and crystalline silicon were set to a constant value (naSi = 3.76,
nSiO2 = 1.45, ncSi = 3.48) as previously discussed to obtain a ﬁgure that can be eﬀectively
compared to ﬁgure 2.7a (the low-wavelength region is aﬀected by large optical losses,
hence the simulation is ideal only in that region). In the dual-mode regime - NIR, where
materials are almost lossless - the simulation is reliable. For the sake of comparison, by
inspecting ﬁgures 2.7a and 3.5b it can be seen that the presence of a substrate and the
surrounding liquid environment evidently modiﬁes the reﬂectance contour plot. First
of all, the "real" structure manifests a higher average reﬂectance due to the interfaces
between layers. Secondly, the dual-mode region is redshifted and narrowed down due to
the decrease of the eﬀective wavelength in a medium with refractive index higher than
one. Finally, the chessboard pattern seems to be to some extent less ordered, especially
in the low-wavelength region.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Reﬂectance spectra of amorphous silicon HCGs on a real substrate, in serum,
for diﬀerent periodicities, h = 500 nm, w = 390 nm, and (b) contour reﬂectance plot in serum
versus grating thickness and wavelength, Λ = 820 nm, w = 390 nm. TE polarisation.
From ﬁgure 3.5b the ﬁrst geometrical parameters can be identiﬁed. In particular,
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Design of high-Q HCG in serum
37
given the periodicity of Λ = 820 nm, the reﬂectance contour allows to select the thickness
of the amorphous silicon layer to be deposited, and such thickness corresponds to
h = 0.615Λ = 504.3 nm (ﬁrst anti-crossing point). Moreover, further simulations (not
reported here) show that the actual value of silicon thickness is slightly lower due to
material dispersion. Additionally, from a practical point of view a nanometre precision is
hardly achievable during the fabrication, hence the target thickness was approximated to
h = 500 nm (this argument will be applied also in the incoming discussion).
Figure 3.6 instead shows the result of a sweep over the width of the grating bars.
Speciﬁcally, ﬁgure 3.6a displays a reﬂectance contour plot as a function of bars width
and wavelength for the set values of pitch and thickness, while ﬁgure 3.6b illustrates the
trend of the resonance’s Q-factor as a function of the grating bars width, along with a
numerical ﬁt based on a Lorentzian model (R2 = 0.98932 - a Gaussian model with high
kurtosis would work as well). The Q-factor was calculated according to:
Q =
λ0
FWHM ,
(3.2)
with λ0 being the resonance vacuum wavelength.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Reﬂectance contour plot of amorphous silicon HCGs on a real substrate for
diﬀerent widths of the grating bars, and (b) calculated quality factor of the Fano resonance
versus width of the grating bars, in serum, Λ = 820 nm, h = 500 nm.
It is clear from the ﬁgure that an optimum value of the bars width exist and is related
to the phase cumulated by the Bloch waves along the periodicity axis. Indeed, for a sharp
resonance to occur, not only a suitable cavity must be formed in the vertical direction,
but also the phase of the Bloch modes must be matched in the grating plane in order to
maximise the mode overlap, hence to boost the Q-factor. A careful inspection of ﬁgure
3.6b shows that the simulation points are not perfectly distributed across the ﬁtted curve.
Such eﬀect is due to resolution issues when sweeping over a wide range of parameters and
has to be interpreted as numerical inaccuracy rather than a physical eﬀect - hence the
need of ﬁtting. However, this aspect might be helpful when studying the performance of a
structure with such huge Q-factor as it indicates a clear range of bars width where a very
sharp resonance occurs, and can be thus used to identify a fabrication tolerance range. In
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Numerical simulations
this regard, the optimum value of bars width corresponds to w = 0.478Λ = 392 nm, but
the peak of the curve extends for around 2 nm (range over which the Q-factor is greater
than 3.9 × 104). Furthermore, should one want to identify a fabrication tolerance range
to target during the manufacturing process, they could set Q = 3×104 as threshold value
(a very high Q-factor indeed) and in that case the tolerance range would be widened to
4 nm. In the end, according to the aforementioned complexity of having a nanometre
precision during the fabrication process, the target width of the grating bars was set for
simplicity to w = 390 nm. Importantly, there might be other diﬀerent combinations of
geometrical parameters leading to an equivalently suitable design; this was chosen for
simplicity and because it was compatible with the lithography mask already available.
To conclude this section, ﬁgure 3.7 illustrates the intensity proﬁle (calculated as
|Ey|2 - the contribution from other ﬁeld components is minimal and does not change
the ﬁgure appreciably) of a real aSi-HCG in serum, at resonance, and a cartoon picture
of how the ﬁnal sensing chip would look, including the relevant sizes and the presence
of antibodies and analytes. Figure 3.7a is obviously of main interest, as it constitutes
the most important result based on which all the conclusions about applications of such
structure for biosensing can be drawn.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: (a) Intensity proﬁle (|Ey|2) at resonance in a unit cell calculated by FDTD,
Λ = 820 nm, h = 500 nm, w = 390 nm and (b) cartoon picture of the ﬁnal HCG-based sensing
chip (not to scale).
First of all, the reader should be aware that the colorbar also in this case can be
associated to the ﬁeld-intensity enhancement as the electric ﬁeld exciting the resonance
was set to a value of 1 V/m. The ﬁeld-intensity enhancement factor, also known as Purcell
factor, is proportional to the Q-factor via the operating wavelength and mode volume.
Incidentally, the reported ﬁeld-intensity enhancement may be aﬀected again by numerical
inaccuracy due to diﬃculties of resolving such a narrow resonance. Nevertheless, from
a practical point of view it would be impossible to precisely replicate the simulation
conditions (plane wave excitation, perfect normal incidence, absence of roughness, etc.),
hence the reported intensity proﬁle can be considered to eﬀectively resemble a practical
experimental scenario where the observed Q-factor would surely be lower than the
==PAGE:49==
3.3 The analyte model
39
theoretical prediction.
Regarding the considerations for biosensing, as previously mentioned the ﬁeld proﬁle
is the main actor in this context. In the case under investigation, there are mainly
three aspects that is worth highlighting, as an eﬃcient protein sensor must maximise the
overlap between ﬁeld proﬁle and analyte:
1. The ﬁeld is found to be strongly enhanced at the top and bottom interfaces of
the grating with environment and substrate, respectively, which is related to the
standing-wave proﬁle due to the vertical conﬁnement;
2. The hot-spot located at the bottom interface cannot be used for biosensing, as
obviously no protein could reach such position;
3. The Bloch components of the grating modes give rise to a strong ﬁeld concentration
at the middle-height of the grating bars.
These three considerations will be used in the following to comment on the eﬃciency of
the HCG as a sensor, and most importantly to walk the reader through the hypothesis
that led to the identiﬁcation of novel and more sensitive designs. A ﬁnal remark is to
make evident that, at resonance, the ﬁeld is extremely conﬁned in the grating plane and
does not penetrate the substrate. This implies that the resonance feature and position is
actually independent of the thickness of the SiO2 layer beneath the structure (as long
as the evanescent tail of the ﬁeld at the bottom interface does not interact with the
cSi substrate), which is used to increase the index contrast between grating bars and
environment. Indeed, further simulations (not reported here) would show that such layer
can be thinned down to hundreds of nanometres, but at some point a cavity may be
formed and this would cause a FP eﬀect that would inﬂuence the reﬂection spectrum.
For the record, 1.1 µm of SiO2 layer is a safe option for the case of interest, and was
chosen also due to compatibility with the deposition process which is quite long.
3.3
The analyte model
In order to identify the most suitable geometry and grating design that improves the
sensitivity of the structure towards biomarkers there is the need of simulating the sensing
conditions with an appropriate model. As discussed in chapter 2.1, the sensing protocol
foresees at ﬁrst the the functionalisation of the grating’s surface with speciﬁc antibodies
(depending on the target analyte) by means of surface chemistry. Secondly, the biological
sample containing the target analyte is ﬂown or poured on the sensor in order for the
biomarkers to be captured by the antibodies. The redshift on the resonance wavelength
induced by the biomarkers arrival is used to quantify the concentration of analyte in the
spiked sample in virtue of a calibration curve obtained prior, or during the experiment.
Therefore, the resonance redshift to be monitored during the sensing procedure is only
the one induced by the biomarkers, and not by the antibodies which constitute the
experimental baseline. As such, in order to evaluate the sensor performance from a
numerical point of view, functionalisation and immobilisation events must be disconnected
in some way.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Numerical simulations
The developed numerical model made use of the following hypotheses, similarly to
what can be found in the literature [56, 57]:
1. Proteins are simulated as thin coating layers, and no distinction is made between
antibodies and biomarkers. According to the literature [58], proteins typically have
a refractive index ranging from n = 1.35 to 1.6, and it was set for simplicity to
n = 1.5;
2. The functionalisation layer is assumed to be a uniform, homogeneous and isotropic
coating layer covering the whole structure, both grating bars and substrate (a
suitable surface chemistry is oxide-selective, and silicon structures always present a
very thin layer - 1/2 nm - of native oxide, hence a uniform coating is a reasonable
assumption), with a thickness of ta = 5 nm. Such number was extracted from the
study in [59], who determined the thickness of molecular linker-antibody complex
to be around that value;
3. Cardiac troponin I has a molecular structure that can be very simplistically reduced
to an oblate spheroid 7 nm in diameter and ta = 2 nm thick. The structure
of the formed layer was studied by [59], who revealed that a cTnI monolayer is
approximately 3.7 nm thick. The biomarker arrival was simulated by increasing
the thickness of the protein layer by only 3 nm, in the tentative of accounting for
the non-perfectly close packing of proteins on the substrate (they are spongy-like
structures) and the yet unknown refractive index;
4. The redshift induced by the increase of protein layer thickness is used to estimate
the sensitivity of the device towards biomarkers.
Obviously, during a simulation that is desired to last a reasonably short time, it is
impossible to simulate the real conditions of random protein immobilisation. Therefore,
the employed model is a rough approximation that in the best case scenario would be
able to decently resemble a situation where the maximum detectable concentration of
biomarkers is immobilised at the sensor’s surface; hence a single uniform monolayer of
analyte molecules is assumed to be formed as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.8. Clearly, there is
large room for improving such numerical model; for instance distinguishing the protein
layers by means of diﬀerent refractive indices would allow for a better accuracy, but this
would require a careful and very precise study of optical properties of speciﬁc proteins,
which to the author’s knowledge is not available yet with the required degree of precision.
Nevertheless, the original experimental plan foresaw preliminary tests of the sensor’s
performance by coating the fabricated structure with thin layers of alumina by means of
atomic layer deposition (see chapter 4.2.2), and this could be eﬃciently simulated with
the described model (including the material dispersion). A reproducible implementation
of such protocol could not be found in the available time frame and will be the subject
of a future investigation.
The research for the most suitable geometry allowing to improve the device sensitivity
towards biomarkers was carried out by means of usual sweeps over the grating parameters.
The main conclusion that can be drawn from investigating the role of grating pitch,
thickness and width is that none of these parameters should be modiﬁed from the values
==PAGE:51==
3.3 The analyte model
41
Figure 3.8: Schematic representation of the protein numerical model.
obtained while optimising the resonance Q-factor. Indeed, the very rapid broadening of
the resonance when these are varied causes the ﬁgure of merit - eq. (2.1) - to immediately
drop, hence destroying the sensor’s performance when it would come to experimental
results. The sweeps over pitch and thickness are not shown here as they do not highlight
any interesting advantage. Instead, it is worth commenting on the grating bars width
role. Figure 3.9a reports a combined diagram of resonance Q-factor (left y-axis) and
wavelength redshift induced by the increase of the protein layer thickness (right y-axis)
from which one can clearly observe how the induced redshift grows with a linear trend as
a function of the grating bars width. The most reasonable explanation for such a linear
trend5 is to be sought in the fact that, as the bars get wider, more and more proteins
can accommodate on the top-surface of the grating elements where an intensity hot-spot
is present. However, it can be clearly seen that the gain in sensitivity is not large enough
to compensate for the loss of Q-factor, hence of sensor’s FOM. The optimal geometry
was hence left untouched from the one described in the previous section for the sake of
keeping the resonance peak as narrow and sharp as possible, hence easing the detection
protocol. Figure 3.9b instead shows the three resonance peaks corresponding to the
grating free of any coating (black line), the functionalised grating (blue line), and the
ﬁnal response to the arrival of biomarkers (red line).
The analyte model will be further discussed in the following section to compare the
performance of the simplest design with the advanced versions which are about to be
described.
Before concluding the section, a ﬁnal remark about the suitability of one or another
numerical method for implementing this model is due. During the simulations, it was
found that FDTD gave an unphysical spiking pattern in the wavelength redshift diagram.
After a long troubleshooting procedure, it was concluded that such an unphysical pattern
(which sometimes even gave a blueshift of the resonance upon increase of the coating layer
thickness) was due to mesh inaccuracy in the FDTD domain. Indeed, in order to resolve
such an extremely thin protein layer, an extremely ﬁne inner mesh should be set (mesh
5A somehow mysterious staircase pattern can be observed when looking at the single simulation
points. The origin of such eﬀect is unclear and may be due to numerical inaccuracy (resonance resolution).
Overall, however, the trend is clearly linear as testiﬁed by the linear ﬁt that accompanies the ﬁgure -
R2 = 0.9854.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Numerical simulations
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: (a) Q-factor (left axis) and resonance wavelength redshift (right axis) for an HCG
in serum as a function of the grating’s bars width; the shaded area represents the range of target
grating’s geometry. (b) Reﬂection spectra of an HCG without any coating layer (black line),
with functionalisation layer (blue line) and with immobilised biomarker (red line) for HCG
parameters of Λ = 820 nm, h = 500 nm, w = 390 nm.
cells with 1 nm edge). The computational time required for convergence was unpractical,
especially due to the need of running wide parametric sweeps in order to identify the
most suitable design. For this reason, FDTD was not used for this kind of simulation.
Finite-element method (FEM) [51], e.g., COMSOL Multiphysics®, would be the best
option for this purpose if one would like to use a commercial software. Nevertheless,
RCWA is structured in a way that perfectly ﬁts the scenario of interest as discussed
at the beginning of the chapter (see ﬁgure 3.3). The method of lines provides a good
accuracy as well, yet it is clearly outperformed by RCWA in terms of computational
eﬀort.
3.4
Advanced designs for biosensing
So far is nothing but the standard grating structure that has been thoroughly studied
by many groups during the past decades, optimised to suit the application of interest
for this work has been described. Nevertheless, in order to further improve the grating
performance for biosensing, there is the need of identifying innovative designs. As
previously anticipated, the main considerations that the new designs are based on are
related to the characteristic ﬁeld proﬁle of high-contrast grating resonators. In particular,
two novel designs will be now presented, and these are based on the following results:
1. The refractive index contrast can be increased even further by partial etching the
substrate beneath the grating, hence suspending the grating bars on glass pedestals.
Such conﬁguration allows for narrowing down the resonances and increasing their
Q-factor. Furthermore, in this way the sensing area increases as well, as a larger
portion of the grating surface will be exposed to the environment and the intensity
proﬁle hot-spot at the bottom interface of the grating may be thus used for probing
additional biomarkers binding events;
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Advanced designs for biosensing
43
2. The ﬁeld proﬁle outside the grating bars (i.e. in the air gaps) is more intense at
the middle of the grating bars height, as shown in ﬁgure 3.7a. Indeed, numerical
simulations show that proteins binding to the substrate only minimally contribute
to the sensitivity of the device due to a low ﬁeld-proteins overlap. Therefore, half-
burying the grating bars in the glass substrate increases the interaction between
ﬁeld and analyte layers, resulting in improved sensitivity.
3.4.1
Pedestalled HCG
The ﬁrst novel design that will be discussed is the pedestalled HCG, which is a grating
suspended on glass pedestals, obtainable by partial etching the SiO2 substrate with a
suitable process. Pedestalled structures are becoming more and more popular in the
sensing community [25, 60–62] due to the same concepts about to be illustrated, but no
reported case of pedestalling an entire grating structure is present in the literature to the
author’s knowledge. The index contrast between grating bars and their surrounding plays
a major role on the extremely-high-Q feature of the structure under investigation, hence
the main idea is to increase the eﬀective index contrast even further in order to enhance
the Q-factor and extend the grating area exposed to the environment. These two aspects
indeed provide a mean to improve the sensor’s FOM by both boosting the Q-factor and
also expanding the active sensor surface. Figure 3.10 shows the intended design by taking
into account that the glass substrate can be etched isotropically - this gives the rounded
pedestals proﬁle - when exposed to hydroﬂuoric acid (more on this will follow), and a
scanning electron micrograph of one of the fabricated structures as an anticipation of
chapter 5. Note, however, that in the numerical implementation, pedestals have been
simulated with a rectangular shape in order not to introduce further numerical artefacts,
yet this does not change the performance of the device as the ﬁeld is very localised at
the top-base of the pedestal, hence the rounded geometry would not aﬀect the behaviour
appreciably.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a) Schematic design of the target structure by considering an isotropic etching
of the glass substrate. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of one fabricated structure to attest the
qualitative proﬁle of real structures.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Numerical simulations
In order to optimise the structure for the target application, the usual parametric
sweep over the grating’s geometry was performed. With no surprise it was found that the
target geometry corresponds to the one of the simple grating, as the only diﬀerence is the
bottom edge of the grating bars being exposed to the environment, but no perturbation
of the ﬁeld proﬁle is introduced by this kind of design. Figure 3.11a shows the Q-factor
of pedestalled HCGs for a total etch depth of s = 50 and 100 nm. It is clear how the
prediction was correct: the increased index-contrast between grating bars and surrounding
causes an evident improvement of the grating’s Q-factor as the structure is more similar
to the ideal implementation of completely suspended grating bars. Resolving such narrow
resonances is a diﬃcult task from a simulation point of view, as the narrowest feature
was found to have a FWHM of ∼0.1Å - which incidentally corresponded to twice the
algorithm spectral resolution in that speciﬁc run (the minimum measurable width).
Nevertheless, from this result the Q-factor trend is clear and it can be safely said that
the actual resonance would be even narrower than the calculated value, which is aﬀected
by numerical inaccuracy, hence Q > 15.5 × 104 for a 100 nm etch depth. Furthermore,
from the diagram a rule of thumb for the fabrication of such structures can be postulated:
the deeper the etch, the better the performance, which is reasonable considering that an
ideal implementation would make use of a completely suspended array of high-index bars.
Indeed, during the fabrication it was observed that an etch depth as high as 180 nm can
be achieved without having the structures collapse, but this will be topic of chapter 5.
Figure 3.11b instead shows the calculated reﬂection spectra for a 100 nm-pedestalled
grating, with the usual geometry and simulation conditions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: (a) Q-factor as a function of the grating’s bars width for an HCG in serum
suspended on rectangular glass pedestals with decreasing size.
(b) Reﬂection spectra of a
pedestalled HCG without any coating layer (black line), with functionalisation layer (blue line)
and with immobilised biomarker (red line) for HCG parameters of Λ = 820 nm, h = 500 nm,
w = 390 nm, s = 100 nm.
Regardless the clear improvement in Q-factor, and thus in the sensor’s FOM, the
pedestalled design is not the most promising for biosensing, although it clearly provide
an advantage over the standard design. This structure is expected to better serve in
applications where the bulk refractive index needs to be sensed (increased sensing area),
and where extremely-high-Q-resonances are needed, for instance in nonlinear optics.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Advanced designs for biosensing
45
3.4.2
Half-buried HCG
The second enumerated result in the beginning of the section has led instead to the
identiﬁcation of another innovative design, namely the half-buried HCG. Given the
characteristic ﬁeld proﬁle of the HCG in ﬁgure 3.7a, it is clear that proteins eventually
sitting on the substrate do not substantially contribute to the sensing features of the
device, and this can be conﬁrmed by further numerical simulations (not shown here). In
order to exploit the in-plane component of the ﬁeld proﬁle for biosensing, it is needed
to maximise the overlap between ﬁeld and proteins in the middle of the air-gaps, where
the intensity distribution show a very strong electric ﬁeld. To do so, the second design
features grating bars buried in the glass substrate in order to enhance the interaction
between ﬁeld and biomarkers immobilised at the substrate level. Figure 3.12 shows the
schematic design of the target structures, and the SEM image of a fabricated sample
prior to etching the ﬁlling material (BCB, see chapter 5.1) down.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: (a) Schematic design of the target structure by considering ﬁlling the air gaps
with further SiO2. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of one HCG which was covered by BCB,
prior to etching. The dashed lines show how the ﬁnal etch result would be desired.
The usual parametric sweep routine was implemented to identify the most suitable
geometry, and in this case it was found that the optimum bars width is shorter for the
buried design. The reason why this is observed has to be sought once again in the ﬁeld
proﬁle distribution: while the pedestalled version does not introduce any disturbance
in the ﬁeld proﬁle, half-buried the grating bars into the substrate does. As a matter of
fact, the eﬀective index contrast between grating bars and surrounding is substantially
lowered, and the broken symmetry along the vertical axis aﬀects the phase cumulated
by the Bloch modes along the periodicity axis. In order to restore the HCG properties,
the grating bars must be made slightly smaller in order to compensate for the decreased
eﬀective wavelength in the grating plane. Figure 3.13a shows the usual Q-factor diagram
as a function of the grating bars width, from which it is clear how the previous statements
are correct: the curve now peaks with a lower value and in correspondence of a diﬀerent
geometrical parameter, yet the tolerance range is extended as the curve is less peaked,
i.e., w = 380 −390 nm. The target width was set to w = 380 nm as the resonance
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Numerical simulations
is closer to the telecommunication wavelength and the sensitivity to proteins is higher.
The next step in the optimisation procedure is the identiﬁcation of the optimum buried
grating thickness, that is how deep or shallow the air gaps should be in order to maximise
the ﬁeld-protein interaction. Such result is shown in ﬁgure 3.13b, where the Q-factor is
displayed along with the induced redshift on the resonance position by the immobilisation
of biomarkers. The Q-factor is maximised when the grating is 60-65% buried, due to
the Bloch component being completely submersed by the additional glass layer (hence
an improved phase matching condition). However, the maximum wavelength shift is
observed for a 30-40% buried grating due to a maximised ﬁeld-protein overlap as can
be seen from ﬁgure 3.13c. In order to ﬁnd a trade-oﬀbetween these two aspects, the
shaded region in ﬁgure 3.13b was set as target for the fabrication of such structures, as it
provides the best combination of Q-factor and wavelength shift. Figure 3.13d illustrates
the reﬂection spectra of the target structure under the usual simulation conditions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.13: (a) Q-factor of a 40% buried HCG in serum as a function of the grating’s bars
width. (b) Q-factor (left axis) and resonance wavelength redshift (right axis) as a function of the
percentage of buried grating thickness; the shaded area represents the range of target grating’s
geometry. (c) Field proﬁle at resonance. (d) Reﬂection spectra of an HCG without any coating
layer (black line), with functionalisation layer (blue line) and with immobilised biomarker (red
line) for HCG parameters of Λ = 820 nm, h = 500 nm, w = 380 nm, d = 40%.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Advanced designs for biosensing
47
3.4.3
Comparison between designs
The section is concluded by carrying out a comparison between the diﬀerent identiﬁed
designs and by highlighting advantages and drawbacks of the investigated structures. From
the previous discussion, it is clear that both the novel designs provide an improvement of
the device performance in the context of biosensing. Table 3.1 resumes the main results
presented so far to directly compare the diﬀerent designs. As previously mentioned, while
the pedestalled version does provide an advantage in all the aspects, from the biosensing
point of view this is not so pronounced (+12% in ∆λ for s = 100 nm) although the FOM
is more than double with respect to the standard design. On the other hand, the buried
grating loses the sharp resonance feature (still it is very narrow) hence manifesting a
much lower FOM, but the induced redshift is greatly enhanced (+58% in ∆λ).
Table 3.1: Comparison of the device performance between the three diﬀerent designs. The
pedestalled grating was simulated with an etch depth of s = 100 nm, while the buried grating
was simulated with d = 40% buried thickness.
Design
∆λ [nm]
FWHM [nm]
Q [×104]
FOM
Simple HCG
0.43
0.04
3.9
10.8
Pedestalled HCG
0.48
< 0.01
>15.5
> 22.8
Half-buried HCG
0.68
0.27
0.7
2.5
Figure 3.14 shows a sensitivity diagram towards thin coating layers of proteins for
the three diﬀerent designs.
Figure 3.14: Sensitivity curves of the three diﬀerent designs as a function of the protein layer
thickness, from 0 to 10 nm. The pedestalled gratings manifest a decrease in sensitivity as the
etch depth increases.
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Numerical simulations
The linear trend is maintained by all the three curves, which suggests that the
simulation is accurate and can be used to estimate the performance of the designed
devices. One unexpected result can be observed in the red lines trend, that is the
pedestalled design: for an etch depth greater than 50 nm, an initial jump brings the
sensitivity curve quite higher with respect to the other designs for very thin coating
layers (< 1 nm), which can only be due to the ﬁeld-proﬁle hot-spot at the bottom edge
which comes in contact with proteins, while for the other designs it never happens. The
absence of initial jump when the etch depth is s = 50 nm conﬁrms this hypothesis as
the etch is too shallow to expose the bottom hot-spot and have it interact with the
analyte. Furthermore, as the etch depth increases, the initial jump gets larger, hence
conﬁrming the role of the pedestals size in this regard. However, it is clear that the slope
of the line for such particular design is slightly lower (and decreases for increasing etch
depths), which suggests that this grating version is not suitable to probe thick coating
layers, but highly relevant to recognise single interactions with small bodies. The reason
why this happens is still unclear, but the simulation was repeated many times with ﬁner
discretisation steps and the same result always occurred. There is to say, however, that
a coating layer thinner than 1 nm is not realistic and the model could be improved
by simulating randomly oriented and distributed ellipsoids and by employing eﬀective
medium theory (EMT).
From this analysis, the prediction about sensing performance of the devices is respected
and the results are in line with the expectations: the buried version of the grating
outperforms the other two with a clear advantage due to the increased overlap between
ﬁeld proﬁle and analyte, which results in a steeper sensing curve.
3.5
Bulk refractive index sensitivity
Before concluding the discussion about the sensitivity performances of the proposed
designs, in the context of refractometric biosensing it is important to compare the diﬀerent
structures in terms of bulk refractive index sensitivity (BRIS), that is the sensitivity of
the device to variations of the environmental refractive index (e.g., due to temperature
ﬂuctuations), as this might aﬀect an experiment on analyte detection if not properly
controlled and studied. First of all, a curious eﬀect was observed when simulating the
BRIS of the various structures: the material that the gratings are made of plays an
important role on BRIS, while it does not when dealing with detection of small bodies.
The latter is an expected result, as it is solely determined by the overlap between analyte
and ﬁeld proﬁle, which is not aﬀected by the change of material. However, the BRIS is
clearly inﬂuenced by the choice of constitutive grating material for a not yet clear reason.
Figure 3.15a shows the result of a simulation aimed at studying this eﬀect. The BRIS
was calculated as:
BRIS = ∆λ
∆n [nm/RIU],
(3.3)
i.e., the slope of the shown lines, with ∆n being the variation of bulk refractive index.
Figure 3.15b instead shows the calculated BRIS for the three diﬀerent designs,
from which the previous assumptions are proved to be correct: the pedestalled grating
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Bulk refractive index sensitivity
49
shows an improvement of the BRIS due to the extended grating area exposed to the
environment - deeper etch corresponds to progressively improved performance (although
not dramatically); conversely, the buried version suﬀers of a decrease in BRIS due to the
opposite eﬀect. This has to be taken into account when performing sensing experiments
as the sensitivity towards bulk refractive index variations and local sensitivity towards
nanometre objects usually do not coincide and the former must be ruled out from the
data. Indeed, BRIS is often used to quantify the sensing performance of a given platform,
yet it is typically not informative in terms of sensitivity towards small foreign bodies as
this depends on the overlap between ﬁeld proﬁle and analyte, hence the decay length of
the evanescent tail outside the resonator. In this case the concept of surface sensitivity
should be considered, as discussed in eq. (5) and ﬁgure 5 of B. ˆSpacková et al. [34].
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: BRIS simulations: (a) simple grating constituted of crystalline, polycrystalline
and amorphous silicon - the grating was rescaled to manifest the same resonance features while
using diﬀerent materials; (b) comparison between the three diﬀerent designs presented in the
previous section.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
This chapter aims at describing the theoretical knowledge standing behind the fabrication
protocols used in this work. The discussion will be limited to the used techniques and
machinery, with particular emphasis on the relevant protocols needed to produce the
previously described nanostructures. On the one hand, it is important to stress that
many of the techniques of interest are suited for many diﬀerent materials and target
structures. On the other hand, adjustments and optimization are needed to address
diﬀerent materials with the same technique, and as such an extensive description is
beyond the scope of this work that will be limited to the processes of interest. Detailed
information can be found in the literature; [63] for instance provides an overview of any
known nanofabrication technique, as well as [64] which however focuses on III-V-based
integrated circuits, yet nonetheless thoroughly describing many techniques and machinery
of interest. What follows has been written by referring mainly to [63], and completed
by the use of [64], the DTU Nanolab Wiki1, lecture notes from the Cleanroom training
lectures (DTU Nanolab) and the course "34055 - Fabrication of Nanophotonic Devices"
held in the Fall semesters at DTU.
The chapter will provide an overview of the used nanofabrication techniques by
focusing on the critical aspects and peculiarities of each of them. The starting point will
be the most basic step, that is wafer and sample cleaning. Then the discussion will move
to the actual fabrication techniques in order to already provide an idea of the employed
process ﬂow during the experimental activity. The structures were fabricated on home-
made SOI wafers realized by means of low-pressure chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD)
in suitable furnaces. The pattern transfer was achieved by means of deep-ultraviolet
lithography (DUV), ultimately etched by means of a deep reactive-ion etching (DRIE)
process. Eventually, the fabricated structures are meant to perform label-free biosensing.
To test their behaviour as protein detectors they can be coated with 5 and 8 nm of Al2O3
by means of atomic layer deposition (ALD). Such thin layers eﬃciently resemble the
presence of an analyte (5 nm) and subsequent immobilization of a protein monolayer
(8 nm)[65], and could be thus used as ﬁrst test for the quality of the fabricated sensors.
However, reproducibility issues did not allow to perform this step, yet it is reported
for completeness as the training was done by the author and some test depositions
were performed. The outline of the chapter hence is: cleaning, thin ﬁlm deposition,
spin-coating, optical lithography and etching.
1http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php/Main_Page
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
4.1
Wafer and sample cleaning
In order to maintain a sterile environment in cleanroom facilities, it is of vital importance
that any sample, being it a wafer or a single chip that have been exposed to the outer
world, undergoes a thorough cleaning procedure in order to remove any contaminant
traces which may corrupt the controlled cleanroom environment and potentially endanger
ongoing experiments. Nevertheless, the cleaning procedure about to be discussed is
highly suitable for removing dust, organic traces and fabrication by-products which might
inﬂuence further processing or a necessary characterization.
Wafer and sample cleaning is a two-step process. First, the sample must undergo the
so-called soap-sonic bath, which is a bathing procedure in a diluted aqueous solution
of Triton X-100. The latter is a non-ionic detergent which lowers the surface tension
and thereby eases the removal of small particles and contaminants. The bath is made
in an ultrasonic container which uses pressure waves to detach small particles from the
sample surface. Typical bathing time is around 10 minutes. Most often, however, the
soap-sonic bath is not enough to clean up the sample from every contaminant trace.
Indeed, as previously anticipated the sample cleaning is a two step process, with the
second procedure being a standard Piranha clean. Piranha is a 4:1 (other mixtures like
3:1 or even 7:1 might also be used) mixture of sulphuric acid (H2SO4) and hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) used to clean organic residues oﬀthe substrates. Piranha is highly
corrosive and a strong-oxidizing agent that dissolves polymers almost immediately; it is
therefore not compatible with photoresist or similar common compounds in semiconductor
nanofabrication. Furthermore, being a strong oxidizer, one should be aware that cleaned
samples might be more diﬃcult to inspect with e.g., a scanning electron microscope
(SEM), as the oxidized surface might charge up and therefore the structure’s image
will most likely result distorted. This aspect is highly dependent on the material being
processed. Samples must be typically left in the Piranha solution for around 10 minutes,
then thoroughly rinsed with deionized (DI) water and blow dried with nitrogen. A ﬁnal
remark about this cleaning step is about safety: the reaction is highly exothermic, hence
the mixture will start bubbling almost immediately, thus releasing high quantities of
corrosive fumes. It can reach temperatures as high as 100 oC and must therefore always
be let cool down before disposing it.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Thin ﬁlm deposition
53
4.2
Thin ﬁlm deposition
Thin ﬁlms made out of the most various materials, from metals to insulators and polymers,
are indispensable in micro and nanofabrication, especially yet not only in optics. In
this context, they are extensively used to produce anti-reﬂection coatings, protective or
insulating layers, sacriﬁcial layers to eventually realize advanced structures, and many
others. Several diﬀerent techniques exist to realize thin ﬁlms: they are distinguished
based on the deposition scheme, which is highly related to both the material choice
and ﬁnal product properties. The most important ﬁlm properties are related to the
crystal structure of the deposited material, stress levels (mechanical forces) which is
subjected to, electrical properties (conductivity or insulation characteristics), composition,
homogeneity, porosity and so on. Diﬀerent deposition techniques are distinguished ﬁrst
on the underlying mechanism. Chemical processes such as electroplating, chemical vapour
deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition rely on chemical reactions occurring
between precursors in a reactor chamber. The products of such reactions diﬀuse to
the surface to be coated and eventually bind to the present atoms hence producing a
solid-phase material as a result of a well engineered process. The mentioned techniques
typically have several diﬀerent implementation variants distinguished on the way energy
is delivered to promote the reaction or the set of parameters (pressure, temperature,
initial phase of the precursors, etc.). Physical vapour deposition (PVD) instead is a class
of techniques relying on physical mechanisms for the generation of the target atoms that
will constitute the ﬁnal product. The term physical is related to the fact that the material
source is vaporised by means of physical processes such as collision with high-energy
particles (electrons or non-reactive atoms) or heat-transfer. PVD processes are typically
used for depositing metallic ﬁlms, oxides, nitrides, alloys and almost any kind of ﬁlms may
also be deposited by means of these techniques. However, when it comes to conformity,
purity, stoichiometry or doping, then CVD processes are much more controllable and
provide a higher product quality. Last, thermal oxidation is used to grow oxides starting
from a pure material (e.g., SiO2 growth on silicon substrate) in order to create insulating,
protective or sacriﬁcial layers. The term growth refers to the underlying diﬀerence with
the previously described techniques: while the deposition processes actually deposit
materials on a target substrate, thermal oxidation gradually converts a material into its
oxidised version, and in this sense the oxide is grown. Importantly, all the aforementioned
processes result in a material structure that is amorphous (thus with no particular
atoms arrangement) or at most polycrystalline (some degree of atoms arrangement, but
randomised from site to site). When instead the target material must retain a crystalline
structure, another class of thin ﬁlm deposition techniques must be used, namely epitaxy.
In this work, three thin ﬁlm production techniques have been used for diﬀerent
purposes: LPCVD, ALD and thermal oxidation. The former was used to manufacture
homemade silicon-on-insulator wafers, and the latter to coat the fabricated structures
with thin layers of Al2O3 in order to simulate the presence of proteins, although eventually
they could not have been used. The incoming subsections will focus on describing these
processes.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
4.2.1
Low-pressure chemical vapour deposition
Low-pressure CVD is a particular implementation of a chemical deposition process
occurring indeed at low pressure (vacuum) and high temperature (from ∼550 to 850 oC).
While the high temperature is required to initiate the precursors reaction, vacuum is
needed in order to achieve a good uniformity, decrease the occurrence rate of spurious
gas-phase reactions, and obtain a very controllable process. The major diﬀerence with
another, well-known CVD process called plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) is to be sought
on the way energy is delivered to trigger the reaction: by means of temperature (LPCVD)
or an electric discharge (plasma - PECVD). The overall reaction mechanism is thus
essentially the same, as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1: the process gasses are introduced in
the chamber with controlled ﬂow, and their gas-phase reaction is initiated by one of the
two methods. This forms the reactive species that will constitute the ﬁlm, along with
some by-products to be pumped out. The reactive species diﬀuse to the surface, where
they are adsorbed by the substrate atoms. The binding process produces some further
by-products, which must be volatile so they can be pumped out from the chamber in a
controlled way through the exhaust line.
Figure 4.1: Reaction mechanism of a chemical vapour deposition process.
For the record, typical reactions taking place in the gas-phase during a CVD process
are:
SiH4 (g) −→Si (s) + 2H2 (g) at ∼600 oC
(4.1)
Si(C2H5O)4 (l) −→SiO2 (s) + 4C2H4 (g) + H2O (g) at ∼700 oC
(4.2)
SiH2Cl2 (g)+4NH3 (g) −→Si3N4 (s) + 6H2 (g) + 6HCl (g) at ∼800 oC
(4.3)
Where eq. (4.1) is the standard reaction for silicon deposition, eq. (4.2) is the so-called
TEOS (tetraethoxysilane) silicon dioxide reaction to deposit SiO22, and eq. (4.3) is the
2In this case TEOS is evaporated at 75 oC in a bubbler from a liquid phase, then the vapour is
introduced into the chamber.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Thin ﬁlm deposition
55
reaction used for depositing silicon nitride (Si3N4). Process temperature and pressure,
as well as gas ﬂows and precursors’ volume ratio determine the ﬁnal product properties
such as refractive index, tensile stress and crystal structure. In this context, one of
the most notable diﬀerence in silicon deposition is the ﬁnal arrangement of Si atoms
in the lattice: when deposited at temperatures below 600 oC the resulting silicon layer
will be amorphous, yet upon increasing the temperature to 650 oC the thin ﬁlm will
undergo annealing3, hence the atoms will arrange themselves towards a polycrystalline
conﬁguration.
Figure 4.2 illustrates how an LPCVD furnace is made. It consists of a quartz tube
(the actual furnace) equipped with a cantilever where a quartz boat carrying the wafers
to be processed can slide. The choice of quartz as constituent material is due to the fact
that it is very clean and can be heated up to over 1000 oC. The cantilever is attached to
the door in order not to create particles during the loading and unloading process. It is
typically made of silicon carbide (SiC), possibly coated with quartz tubes. A series of
heating coils run along the furnace to ensure a stable and highly controllable temperature,
which is however uniform only at the centre of the furnace, where wafers lie during the
process. Gas inlets are used to inject precursors and nitrogen in the chamber with a
controllable ﬂow (mass ﬂow controllers - MFC). Pressure is continuously checked by
sensors and controlled by a mechanical valve that ensures a stable atmosphere. The
exhaust line is equipped with a scrubber which contains some granulate that reacts with
the by-products from the furnace before these enter the drain. LPCVD furnaces must
be extremely controlled environments, typically only one recipe (chemical precursors)
are used in a speciﬁc furnace. Any modiﬁcation to the recipe may introduce unwanted
particles in the furnaces, hence resulting in an unpredictable outcome of the process.
Figure 4.2: Overview of an LPCVD furnace.
3Annealing is a heat treatment that alters some of the material properties, like the atoms arrangement.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
4.2.2
Atomic layer deposition
Atomic layer deposition is a thin ﬁlm deposition technique oﬀering ultimate thickness
control, that is with monolayer4 precision, i.e., this means an accuracy down to the
Ångstrom. ALD has been a groundbreaking technique for many ﬁelds of science, especially
semiconductor processing as it provides an eﬀective and reliable way to conformally coat
even high aspect ratio structures with excellent step coverage and uniformity [66]. ALD
works in pulsed mode: a reactor chamber is equipped with injectors of speciﬁc precursors
in gas phase; these are injected into the chamber with a very short pulse which alternate
each other in time. The technique is similar to chemical vapour deposition, and it can
indeed categorised in the same class of processes. However, there is one outstanding
diﬀerence: ALD is free of one of the mechanisms of irreproducibility in CVD, that is
homogeneous gas-phase reaction. Only one gas is introduced into the chamber per pulse,
this means that there cannot be a gas-phase reaction between precursors [63]. ALD
typically uses binary self-limited surface reactions, which means that the reaction stops
by itself when the surface has been saturated by the speciﬁc material. This aspect is the
one that mostly contribute to the ultimate thickness control and excellent step coverage
of the technique. Moreover, the self-limiting nature of the process, along with the purging
steps that are about to be described, produces the smooth and conformal to the substrate
product that one is most likely interested in. The amount of possible materials produced
by ALD is remarkable and continuously expanding. The main limitation to the technique
can be identiﬁed to be almost solely the size of the reactor chamber [66, 67].
Figure 4.3 depicts the process sequence for an ALD operational cycle that uses
suitable precursors. First of all, the surface to be coated needs to be reactive towards
the ﬁrst precursors being injected into the chamber, otherwise the reaction will simply
not begin. A ﬁrst pulse of speciﬁc precursor in gas-phase is injected in the reactor
(ﬁgure 4.3a) the reaction sites on the surface will start being saturated by the deposited
material until all the available locations are ﬁlled (ﬁgure 4.3b), and then a pulse of inert
gas (typically nitrogen, blue molecules in ﬁgure 4.3c) is introduced to purge away the
un-reacted precursor and the reaction by-products. This completes the ﬁrst half-cycle,
hence the deposition of the ﬁrst monolayer of ﬁnal product constituents. Subsequently
to the ﬁrst pulse, the second precursor is introduced in the chamber. This has, of course,
to be reactive towards the previously deposited material, otherwise the reaction will not
take place. The evolution of this second half-cycle occurs precisely as for the ﬁrst one
(ﬁgure 4.3d-f). The sequence of such two half-cycles constitute an ALD cycle and results
in the deposition of the ﬁrst layer of target material. The process then continues until
it is set to stop, hence depositing the target material monolayer after monolayer. Once
again, the thickness of the ﬁnal product is determined by the number of ALD cycles in
virtue of the self-limiting nature of the reactions taking place.
Two main kinds of ALD machines exist: thermal and plasma-enhanced ALD (PEALD).
The former trivially uses heat to provide the energy required to the surface reaction
to occur. The limitations here are to be sought on the variety of materials that can
be deposited (binary compounds with speciﬁc precursors and chemical reaction, with
4A layer of material composed by a single sheet of atoms.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Thin ﬁlm deposition
57
Figure 4.3: Schematic of a full atomic layer deposition operational cycle.
melting points outside the chamber regime) and the need of having a reactive surface.
In PEALD instead a very reactive plasma is used to provide the activation energy to
the reaction, and this allows many materials to be deposited, at low temperature, with
better control of ﬁlm stoichiometry, yet at the cost of a much more expensive tool which
has lower throughput and poorer step-coverage.
Figure 4.4: Overview of a thermal
ALD reactor chamber.
The machinery used in this work is the most
traditional thermal version of an ALD reactor, illus-
trated in ﬁgure 4.4. The setup is relatively simple:
a reactor chamber is equipped with a sample holder
(that typically can accommodate more than one
wafer) placed at its centre. The temperature is
risen and kept constant by an heat wall running
all around the reactor to maintain the tempera-
ture constant everywhere. In reality there are an
outer and an inner chamber - only the latter having
heated walls - which are separated by an interme-
diate region constantly purged with nitrogen for
isolating the ALD reactor from air. Two precursor
lines, which intersect the nitrogen ones by means of
valves, are connected to a showerhead from which
they are injected into the reactor. Finally, a vacuum
pump maintains a correct atmosphere and has also
the role of exhaust line.
A last remark is about a standard deposition
process, used in this work, to coat samples with alumina (Al2O3) by means of thermal
ALD. The used precursors are trimethylamine (TMA - 2Al(CH3)3) and water, with the
overall reaction being:
2Al(CH3)3+3H2O −→Al2O3+3CH4.
(4.4)
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
4.2.3
Thermal oxidation
Thermal oxidation is used to convert materials in their oxide form, hence to grow oxide
starting from a native substrate such a wafer. Here, only thermal oxidation of silicon is of
interest. There are two possible implementations of such process: dry and wet oxidation.
The main diﬀerence between the two consists on the kind of gas injected in the chamber
and reﬂects on the properties of the grown material. Dry oxidation uses oxygen in a
furnace to promote oxide growth on the target material, while wet oxidation makes use
of water vapour in the same furnace. Water vapour is produced by igniting hydrogen and
oxygen with a torch at 800 oC (dangerous, H2 is explosive), or by means of a steamer,
or bubbling it in a tank by ﬂowing oxygen and nitrogen. The method of evaporating
water has inﬂuence on the ﬁnal product quality as it inﬂuences the steam quality and
hence the oxide uniformity. The furnace itself is very similar to that used for LPCVD
(ﬁgure 4.2), with the exception that it uses diﬀerent gasses and the temperature is higher
(around 1000 oC).
The oxidation method aﬀects the quality of the grown oxide as well. In this context, dry
oxidation produces very dense ﬁlms of good quality, excellent uniformity and absence
of defects, however the rate is quite slow and as such only thin layers can be produced.
Wet oxidation instead produces a less dense ﬁlm of lower quality due to the inclusions of
H2 molecules in the lattice, yet it is much faster and allows to grow thick ﬁlms. Since
the substrate crystal quality was not a main concern for the purpose of this project, and
since a thick (1 µ m) layer was needed, wet oxidation was used to realise SOI wafers.
Very advanced and complicated analytical models (e.g., Deal-Grove model) exist to
describe the oxidation process, especially its rate which is kinetic or diﬀusion limited
depending on the process and desired thickness, yet this is beyond the scope of this
introduction. The oxidation rate is also inﬂuenced on the kind of wafer being processed
(crystal orientation). Nevertheless, one important aspect worth mentioning is that since
the oxide is grown and not deposited, hence the reaction takes always place at the Si-SiO2
interface. For this reason, contaminants present at the Si surface gradually diﬀuse to the
outer SiO2 interface, thus the glass matrix is inherently clean of dust and particles due
to the intrinsic properties of the process.
A ﬁnal comment is to highlight that this process grows oxide on both sides of the wafer,
and as SiO2 has a larger steric hindrance (occupied molecular volume) than Si, the ﬁnal
obtained thickness is roughly twice thicker than the amount of oxidised silicon.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Spin-coating
59
4.3
Spin-coating
Spin-coating is another indispensable procedure in micro and nanofabrication. It is
extensively used primarily to coat wafers and chips with photoresist prior to a lithography
step, but also to coat samples with many diﬀerent materials for various applications.
In this work, spin coating has been used to spin-coat bottom anti-reﬂection coatings
(BARC), photoresist5, but also benzocyclobutane (BCB), a polymer used to partially ﬁll
up the grating grooves in order to manufacture the half-buried grating design described
in chapter 3.
Figure 4.5:
Cartoon picture of a spin-
coating procedure and system.
Figure 4.5 shows a schematic of a spin-
coating procedure. The system consists of a
vacuum chunk that holds the wafer (or sample)
steady while spinning. The chunk is indeed
connected to a spinning support that makes
the sample rotate at a ﬁxed speed (typically
thousands of revolutions per minute - rpm) for
the duration of the process. A nozzle6 pours a
predetermined quantity of material to be spun
on the sample, then the rotation evenly dis-
tributes the material to achieve an uniform
coating. Depending on the target process or
the desired outcome, spin-coating systems may
be manual or fully automatized (handled by
a robotic arm) in order to reduce the human
factor in the ﬁnal process result. Furthermore,
most often the spun material needs to be soft- or hard-baked on a hotplate to improve its
adhesion to the substrate. Once again, this step may be manual or automatic depending
on the speciﬁc process. Details about the spun materials and process parameters will be
given when discussing the relevant procedure, and mostly in chapter 5.
5BARC and photoresist will be described in the following section.
6This refers to an automatic system, mostly used in this work. The material can also be poured
manually on the sample and then placed on the spinning plate afterwards.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
4.4
Optical lithography
In semiconductor technology lithography is extensively used to inscribe microns or even
nanometre sized features onto a wafer or small chip. It is an essential step included in
almost any kind of process ﬂow, especially in electronics and optics. The transferred
pattern is used to select speciﬁc areas on the chip for many diﬀerent purposes, from
etching to ion implantation. There are several ways of performing a lithography, and they
are distinguished based on the method used to transfer the pattern on the target structure.
The selected method might have advantages or limitations with respect to another one,
and the critical dimension (CD), i.e., the smallest feature of the target pattern, of the
ﬁnal structure must be taken into account before proceeding with the process. Among the
many diﬀerent lithography techniques, the most relevant for semiconductor technology are
optical (or more commonly photolithography) and electron beam lithography (EBL). The
main diﬀerence between them is the physical process used to inscribe the target pattern;
moreover, they allow to achieve progressively ﬁner resolution steps. A fundamental
ingredient for both the techniques is the so-called resist, which is a polymeric compound
with light- or electric charge-sensitive properties that is exposed to either light or electron
beams in order to accomplish the desired pattern transfer. Speciﬁcally, a resist is made
of a resin (the polymeric component), a photo- or electron-active component, and a
solvent (∼70%) to dissolve the polymer and thus enable the sample coating. The resist
is ﬁrst spun on the sample in order to have an uniform coating of suitable thickness,
and then exposed to ultraviolet light (UV) or an electron beam through a phase mask
that reproduces the pattern to be inscribed. More details will follow in the next section.
Furthermore, as previously mentioned the lithography method determines the maximum
achievable resolution. The main limitation to the resolution of a lithography process
has to be sought in the diﬀraction phenomenon. Light shone through narrow apertures
undergoes diﬀraction, hence limiting the accuracy of the pattern transfer process when
the critical dimension becomes comparable to the operating wavelength. In this context,
optical lithography (or photolithography) uses either a soft UV (315-400 nm, typically by
means of a mercury vapour lamp) or deep UV (also called hard UV, 150-250 nm, typically
an excimer laser) light source. The resolution in these cases is around 1.5 µm for soft
UV, and 200 nm for deep UV. When instead the critical dimension of the target pattern
is below 100-200 nm, the choice often falls on EBL, where the fundamental wavelength
limitation is substantially lowered by the use of an electron instead of photon beam7.
Optical lithography, and speciﬁcally deep UV (DUV) lithography, is of main interest
for this work and will therefore be discussed in the remaining of this section. Being
essentially the same process no matter which light source is used to run the procedure,
optical lithography will be discussed in general to ﬁnally describe the DUV variant.
The ﬁrst step of a photolithography process is the surface preparation to improve the
photoresist (speciﬁc name for the class of UV-sensitive resists) adhesion to the substrate.
7Many aspects contribute to the resolution limit of both an optical lithography, but especially an
EBL process, besides diﬀraction. Among the most common are: refractive index contrast, aspect ratio,
shape, stability, resist adhesion and many others.
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Optical lithography
61
Pre-treating of the surface, or priming, means processing the sample in order to get rid of
water residues (adsorbed at the surface) in dedicated ovens. One very common technique
is called hexamethyl disilazane vapor (HMDS) priming, which consists of a baking step
at 100-200 oC in a HMDS atmosphere. Most of the exposed OH groups are substituted
by Si(CH3)3 that renders the surface hydrophobic, hence promoting the resist adhesion.
Another common priming technique, suitable for silicon, is a hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) bath
that removes the native silicon oxide and terminates the dangling bonds by hydrogen
atoms, hence once again rendering the surface hydrophobic.
Following the pre-treatment, the sample has to be coated with an uniform layer of
the selected photoresist by means of a suitable technique, such as spin coating, described
in section 4.3. This step is of primary importance as it will determine the quality of the
ﬁnal product. Several issues may arise in the spin coating procedure, and special care
must be paid to the ﬁnal outcome of the process, especially regarding: the presence of
defects like comets (particles on the surface or in the resist create smeared spots that
will result in a fabrication defect), non-uniform coating (may be due to poor adhesion or
a too viscous ﬂuid) or uncoated areas due to too little quantity of spun resist. Another
common issue is the creation of the so-called edge-beads, that is a thicker coating at
the sample edges, due to the unbalance of resist viscosity and centrifugal forces in the
spinning step. This will cause issue when aligning the lithography mask, and may result
in a large gap between mask and sample, which is all related to further limitations to the
resolution due to diﬀraction. Edge beads are typically wiped out with solvent prior to the
actual lithography step. Subsequently to the resist spinning, a soft-baking procedure of
the sample at typically 90 oC is required to have the solvent residual evaporate from the
resist ﬁlm. This improves the mechanical stability (hardens) of the resist and prevents
it from sticking to the mask. A too high temperature will cause the resist to lose its
photosensitivity (photoactive compound is decomposed), hence rendering it useless for
the incoming step.
Once the photoresist is coated and baked, the exposure to UV light can ﬁnally
occur. Light is typically shone onto the sample through a photomask, that is a plate
where the pattern to be transferred is reproduced with chromium in order to stop the
radiation where no pattern has to be inscribed. The mask pattern can be either a
reproduction of the target one, or its negative version (an opposite pattern), depending
on the application. The mask has to be aligned with the sample prior to the exposure,
especially if an underlying structure is present. This is done with a special equipment
called mask aligner that uses special marks on mask and wafer pattern to correctly align
the two. This step requires extreme accuracy and is most often done by automatized
machines, although manual aligners exist as well. When mask and sample are properly
aligned, the photoresist is exposed to a suitable dose (J/m2) of UV light coming from an
adequate light source. UV light carries enough energy to promote a chemical reaction
of the photoactive resist component that renders part of the resist soluble, hence ready
for the ﬁnal step. Here an important distinction has to be highlighted: photoresists can
be either positive or negative tone. Positive tone resist means that the exposed parts
become soluble and can be etched away, while for negative resists the opposite holds: the
resist itself is soluble in a speciﬁc developer, but the exposed parts cross-link and become
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
stable. The resist polarity refers to the fact that for positive resist the pattern transfer is
a replica of the exposed one, while for negative resists the pattern is inverted. They are,
however, used for diﬀerent purposes and are not always interchangeable. Following the
exposure a ﬁnal step has to be performed, namely the resist development. Developing
the resist means removing the exposed (or unexposed) resist regions to ﬁnally obtain the
desired pattern. This is done by ﬁrst post-exposure baking (PEB) the resist (not all the
resists require this step) on a hotplate because the photo-chemistry is a catalytic process
that is assisted by heat. Furthermore, PEB promotes the diﬀusion of the photogenerated
molecules, which helps on minimizing interference eﬀects during the lithography. Finally,
the actual development is a chemical reaction in which the exposed (or unexposed)
resist is dissolved by a suitable solvent, the most common being tetramethyl ammonium
hydroxide (TMAH), hence leaving some gaps on the resist layer which represent the ﬁnal
pattern. A very ﬁnal step, namely a hard-baking on a hotplate at 120-150 oC, may be
required to improve adhesion and mechanical stability before the incoming fabrication
step.
A ﬁnal remark on the most common observed features and encountered issues is
needed. First of all, as displayed in ﬁgure 4.6, the resist polarity determines which kind
of ﬁnal proﬁle the resist will have after the process. The resist will always be to some
degree tapered with positive or negative sidewalls angle, depending on the polarity, as a
consequence of diﬀraction: part of the light will expose the resist even beneath an opaque
part of the mask due to diﬀraction. This causes the resist to become soluble (positive
tone) or cross-link (negative tone) in small regions where light is not supposed to shine.
Additionally, the light’s intensity decreases as it travels through the resist layer. Other
issues may arise from under- or over-exposure of the resist, which results in features
with larger or smaller size than intended, yet it can be used to tune the size of the ﬁnal
structure to some degree (although with lower accuracy). Similarly, the development time
is critical for the ﬁnal lithography outcome: should the developer not dissolve the whole
exposed pattern, then the substrate might not be exposed to air (under-development),
or the features might enlarge (over-development). The kind of contact between sample
and mask is important as well, as light diﬀracts from the aperture a large gap between
sample and mask will result in rounded corners, loss of small connection points and
similar eﬀects.
Figure 4.6: Typical ﬁnal proﬁles of a) positive and b) negative tone resist after being exposed
and developed. The sidewalls angle is exaggerated on purpose to highlight the eﬀect.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Optical lithography
63
4.4.1
Deep-UV lithography
The lithography technique discussed so far is the most standard and generic one, often
referred to as 1x optical lithography, meaning that the pattern is transferred in 1:1 scale
with respect to what is drawn on the mask. DUV lithography not only makes use of
a laser operating at a shorter wavelength to achieve higher resolution limits, it also
operates with the so-called reduction projection lithography technique in a step-and-repeat
framework, and DUV machines are indeed often called DUV steppers.
Figure 4.7: Overview of a
projection optical lithography
system.
In projection optical systems a set of lenses and mirrors
is used to inscribe a reduced version of the mask image onto
the resist as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.7. DUV light at 193 or
248 nm is emitted from a laser and shone through the ﬁrst
set of optical elements (I in ﬁgure) and then through the
mask. The image of the mask is then collected by another
set of optical elements (II in ﬁgure) and especially by a lens
of suitable numerical aperture (NA). This last lens provides
the actual reduced image of the pattern to be inscribed and
has to be so precisely manufactured that often constitutes a
large portion of a stepper ﬁnal cost. In order to reduce the
cost, the optical elements are now made smaller and only
small size chips are exposed one at a time (typically 1 cm ×
1 cm or smaller) over the wafer’s surface. In this context, the
wafer is usually handled by a robotic alignment stage that
translates it after each exposure shot. Lithography masks
for reduction projection systems are usually referred to as
reticles and can accommodate several designs. Each design
can be independently selected and inscribed in the resist by
means of blades in the stepper setup, hence ensuring that the correct portion of the mask
is used and preventing light from shining through the unwanted ones. The chromium
patterns on the reticles are at least four times larger than the size of the ﬁnal chip to be
exposed, and this eases the mask manufacturing process.
Another important aspect has to be considered when reducing the critical dimension
of the pattern to be inscribed: light interference. The photoresist forms a an optical thin
ﬁlm that light has to pass through, and as such it forms a Fabry-Perót cavity due to
the reﬂection at the wafer’s surface, where standing waves and interference can occur. A
standing wave has peaks of maximum and minimum intensity, and this relates to the
amount of light that will eﬀectively trigger the photochemical reaction in the photoresist
layer, meaning that interference can lead to an incorrect pattern transfer, especially
in reduction projection lithography systems, when this phenomenon is present. This
problem is overcome by coating the sample with antireﬂective coatings, hence thin coating
layers of suitable refractive index and thickness that match the optical impedance of the
incoming light wave and avoid interference eﬀects by preventing reﬂection. Such coatings
are referred to as top antireﬂective coatings (TARC) or bottom antireﬂective coatings
(BARC) to be distributed on top (TARC) or beneath (BARC) the photoresist layer.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
BARC are more common (more materials are available to provide the desired refractive
index), but they must be carefully chosen to tolerate the resist developer, or the process
would end up with a strong mask undercut when proceeding with the next step, e.g.,
etching. To conclude, ﬁgure 4.8 illustrates the basic steps of a DUV lithography process
when employing a positive tone resist.
Figure 4.8: Overview of the typical steps to be performed in a DUV lithography process. For
simplicity, the pattern magniﬁcation setup is not illustrated but it is always present.
4.5
Etching
The pattern transfer can be completed after the lithography step by means of etching of
the underlying material, therefore it is another essential step in semiconductor technology.
Etching consists of controlled removal of a target material through the openings left on
the photoresist layer, and can be performed by several diﬀerent means and with the
use of diﬀerent physical mechanisms. The main distinction between etching processes is
whether the material is eroded in the unprotected areas by means of physical mechanisms
(such as ion bombardment) or chemical reactions. Some materials are naturally etched
by speciﬁc chemicals, like silicon by ﬂuorine and oxides by hydroﬂuoric acid, but other
need assistance of ions or highly energetic particles. Hence, most often the etching
process includes both a physical and chemical component. In principle, high-energy ion
bombardment etches away any material, yet it etches the photoresist as well and must
therefore be somehow controlled. Indeed, the main target of an etching process is to
achieve selectivity, which means etching only the desired material in the correct resist
openings in order to accomplish an accurate pattern transfer. Importantly, etching is an
irreversible process contrarily to lithography that can be repeated after having stripped
the resist, should there be an unacceptable defect.
The purpose of this section is to give an overview of the main etch processes exploited in
micro and nanofabrication with particular emphasis on the processes used during the devel-
opment of this work. Etching is divided in two main classes: wet and dry etching. The for-
mer consists of dipping the sample in a chemical solution that will erode the material in the
selected regions, while the latter consists of exposing the sample to a plasma constituted
by suitable chemical precursors. For this reason, wet etching is always a chemical process,
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Etching
65
while dry etching can be either chemical, physical, or a combination of the two. No matter
which etching mechanism is used, the main steps are the same: transport of etchants to
the surface by diﬀusion, surface processes (adsorption, reaction, desorption), and removal
of the by-products. Diﬀusion is much slower in the liquid phase than in the gas phase,
and dry processes oﬀer plenty of mechanisms to provide additional energy to the reaction,
while in wet etching the reaction enhancement is performed by heating up the solution.
Figure 4.9:
The two achievable
etch proﬁles.
The ﬁrst important aspect to be considered when
selecting an etch mechanism is whether the process
must be isotropic or anisotropic. An isotropic etch oc-
curs especially in wet processes, where etchants erode
the target material in all directions with the same rate,
and this results in rounded etch proﬁle8 with strong
undercuts beneath the photoresist layer as illustrated
in ﬁgure 4.9a. Conversely, an anisotropic etch, de-
picted in ﬁgure 4.9b presents straight sidewalls, no
undercut, and is due to a combination of chemical and
physical mechanisms as it etches only in one preferen-
tial direction.
4.5.1
Dry etching
Dry etching, or plasma etching, uses a plasma composed of suitable chemical agents to
remove the exposed parts of substrate by a photoresist mask. The plasma is created
in a reactor by electric discharge between two electrodes, which ionise the precursors
and generate free radicals (the chemical etch component) and ions (the physical etch
component). Indeed, dry etching typically consists of a combination of physical and
chemical mechanisms to achieve the desired selectivity and anisotropy. Weakly ionised
(10-6-10-4% of gas ionisation) low pressure plasma have been extensively used for this
purpose for decades. Due to the presence of radical and ions, the process is called
reactive-ion etching (RIE) and has been continuously used in this work.
Figure 4.10 depicts a schematic overview of the main steps characterising a dry etch
procedure. First, the precursors are injected into the chamber in gas phase and are
ionised by an electric discharge that creates the plasma. Second, the generated radicals
diﬀuse to the surface to be etched and get adsorbed by the atoms. Here heat plays the
role of catalytic agent, hence providing energy to the reaction with material constituents,
which result in the generation of volatile by-products. Furthermore, a potential diﬀerence
between plasma and substrate accelerates ions towards the surface and the bombardment
is used to aid the by-product desorption. Finally, the volatile by-products are pumped
out of the chamber through the exhaust line.
8Anisotropic wet etch processes exist as well but they rely on the crystal structure of the target
material rather than the actual mechanism taking place. e.g., Potassium hydroxide (KOH) etch of
silicon.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
Figure 4.10: Schematic of the major steps in a dry etch process.
Figure 4.11 illustrates the main etch mechanisms exploited in plasma etching. Figure
4.11a shows a pure physical sputtering etch mechanism in which high-energy ions bombard
the target surface and remove material by ablation, i.e., collisions with energetic particles
cause the atomic bonds to break and the material is thus progressively eroded. Physical
sputtering results in sloped sidewalls due to material redeposition; the etch by-products
are indeed non-volatile. Figure 4.11b shows instead a purely chemical etch with its
corresponding proﬁle. Figure 4.11c displays the most generic process, namely ion-assisted
energetic etch, which is what has just been described in ﬁgure 4.10. Finally, ﬁgure 4.11d
shows a variant of ion-assisted energetic etch that makes use of surface passivation: a
cyclic process alternates an etch step with coating the surface with a thin layer of material
that protects the sidewalls from the erosion in order to achieve vertical sidewalls.
Figure 4.11: Overview of the diﬀerent etch mechanisms and related etch proﬁles. The green
spheres represent high-energy ions, while the red ones are radicals and chemically active species.
Furthermore, depending on which kind of material is being etched and the process
parameters being used, several aspects need to be taken into account as they will
inﬂuence the ﬁnal etch product. The most notable eﬀects are illustrate in ﬁgure 4.12
and will be now described. The careful reader might notice that in the drawings the
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Etching
67
photoresist proﬁle is not tapered; this was done on purpose to highlight the eﬀect of
speciﬁc etch processes such as faceting.
a) Faceting: The mask will erode as a result of ion bombardment, and since the
sputter rate is higher at an inclined trajectory, the mask will be progressively
consumed thus ending up with a clear sidewalls angle. Moreover, ions may be
deﬂected from the faceted mask and re-directed inside the trenches, which will then
present a bow due once again to ion bombardment;
b) Trenching: Another result of ion bombardment that happens when ions are either
deﬂected from a slightly-oﬀ-vertical sidewalls or impinge on the target structure
with an oﬀ-normal trajectory. This leads to a local enhancement of the etch rate
at the bottom corners of the structure being etched;
c) Tapering: A tapered etch proﬁle is created as a result of re-deposition of material
on the sidewalls. This is a result of a physical etch (sputtering) in which non-
volatile products might re-deposit, or due to polymers re-deposition in a process
that includes sidewalls passivation;
d) Undercutting: Is a result of an isotropic etching, that happens when the process
relies on a purely chemical process or, in a process that includes passivation, when
the latter is not correctly performed in order to achieve an anisotropic etch;
e) Notching: It happens when the structure to be etched is layered and an isolating
layer exist at the bottom of the target material. Here an isolating layer means a
stop-etch layer, which is a material "immune" to the etch process being performed.
In this case the layer might charge up as a result of ion bombardment, and the
accumulated charges deﬂect the incoming ions towards the sidewalls. This causes
small trenches to be dug in the horizontal direction and is typically signature of a
too long etch process;
f) Overcutting: There are two main reasons behind this eﬀect. It happens when
one etches down in a trench with an isotropic etch chemistry combined with a
passivation step that is not long enough to protect the sidewalls from the incoming
etch step. As the trench gets deeper the passivation layer starts getting thinner at
the point that the etch rate starts having a lateral component. The second reason
is a divergent ion ﬂux, as depicted in ﬁgure 4.12f. Divergent ions sputter material
from the sidewalls and result in an enlarged trench. This happens if the potential
diﬀerence between plasma and substrate is not large enough, or when the structure
to be etched is so narrow that impinging ions will repel each other as they approach
the aperture.
Other notable eﬀects, not illustrated in the drawings are related to the etch rate. One
usually aims at having an uniform etch rate over the whole sample or wafer, but this
is typically not the case. The ﬁrst aspect to be considered is the aspect ratio, i.e., the
ratio of depth over width of the target structure, and the loading of target material. The
former causes the etch rate to decrease for high aspect ratio structures, while the latter
causes the rate to be dependent on the amount of available target material. The loading
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
Figure 4.12: Notable eﬀects and issues frequently encountered during a dry etch process.
eﬀect is due to the limited amount of available reactive species: when a large amount of
material is exposed to the plasma the reactive species will distribute over the surface to
be etched, hence resulting in a lower rate. On the other hand, when just a little of target
material is exposed to the plasma, the abundance of available reactive species causes the
rate to increase.
To conclude the section, it is important to give an overview of a reactive-ion etching
system. An RIE chamber is a parallel plate capacitive coupled plasma system. The
top electrode is grounded while the bottom one is connected to a radiofrequency (RF)
generator through a capacitive matching network. The alternating potential diﬀerence
will attract electrons to the bottom plate, called platen, when the potential is positive
and ions when the polarization is negative. However, when the AC frequency is high
(typically 13.56 MHz), then ions are too heavy to follow the oscillations and only electrons
will reach the electrode. Furthermore, due to the blocking capacitor a negative charge
builds up on the bottom electrode, and at equilibrium the platen potential has a net
negative DC component, while the plasma is slightly positively biased. The negative
charge on the platen repels the incoming electrons such that a region depleted of charges
exists between plasma and platen: this is called ion sheat region. The ion sheat is
where the potential diﬀerence drops, and therefore is used to accelerate ions towards
the substrate: this is the origin of ion bombardment. This implementation of an RIE
chamber is called capacitive-coupled RIE and has some limitations on the maximum
tolerable power as the electrodes will progressively corrode due to the abundance of
reactive species which increases with the supplied RF power. An alternative to this
approach is called inductively-coupled plasma RIE (ICP-RIE), which uses a coil wound
around the upper part of the chamber that is made of a non-metallic material (e.g.,
ceramic). The non-metallic nature of the materials allows the generated magnetic ﬁeld to
penetrate the chamber, and should one connect an RF generator to the coil, the magnetic
ﬁeld would retain a cylindrical symmetry and oscillate with the AC potential. When
gasses are injected into the chamber, electrons are ripped oﬀby the generated azimuthal
electric ﬁeld and a higher density plasma is created (again, the high frequency prevents
ions to follow the oscillations) due to the circular path electrons follow. In this case
no electrode is present in the chamber, and this allows to achieve high-density plasmas
without encountering the corrosion issue. In this framework, another RF generator is
connected to the platen in a way such that the coil power is used to generate the plasma,
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Etching
69
while the completely de-coupled platen power is used to accelerate ions towards the
surface to be etched. A schematic representation of an ICP-RIE system is depicted in
ﬁgure 4.13. The chiller, reported in the ﬁgure, is an injector of helium that is connected
to the platen in order to cool down the substrate and thus avoid that photoresist, or other
heat-sensitive components of the sample, burn due to the high eﬀective temperature in
the chamber, and on the substrate.
Figure 4.13: Schematic of an ICP-RIE system.
4.5.1.1
Deep reactive-ion etching of silicon
Prior to undertaking the fabrication of micro and nanostructures it is extremely important
to carefully identify the processes, and thus the reactive species, which are most suitable
not only for the material, but also for the speciﬁc structures one is about to fabricate. In
this context, anisotropic dry etching of silicon is a special case, not only because it has
been extensively studied and optimised during the years, but also because it makes use
of a peculiar and well known fabrication protocol that this section aims to describing.
Deep reactive-ion etching (DRIE) is an extension of an RIE process for deep etching
and precise sidewalls proﬁle control. Indeed, when etching high aspect ratio structures
the rate drastically lowers in standard RIE machines, and this has consequences on
the structure’s proﬁle as well. Moreover, while the etch rate of silicon decreases as the
process continues, the mask erosion proceeds with the same rate, and this ends up causing
problems with the proﬁle control for long etches. This in known as the RIE lag [68].
DRIE uses a higher density plasma to increase the density of radicals used for etching
the material, and a low ion current that allows high mask selectivity in order to maintain
an accurate proﬁle of the sidewalls. DRIE is possible thanks to the ICP-RIE technology
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
that enables an independent control of plasma and ion bombardment, respectively.
The most famous and diﬀused DRIE protocol for silicon etching is referred to as Bosch
process [69] (from Robert Bosch GmbH, the notorious German company that patented
the process in 1996). The Bosch sequence is a two (at least) step process that alternates
a passivation step to an isotropic etch of silicon, typically with sulphur hexaﬂuoride (SF6)
to achieve very high aspect ratio structures while maintaining excellent control of the
sidewalls proﬁle. Speciﬁcally, the usual steps are described below and illustrated in ﬁgure
4.14:
I. Deposit: The plasma dissociate a ﬂuorocarbon gas such as octaﬂuorocyclobutane
(C4F8) and form a -(CF2)x containing polymer that covers (passivates) the whole
surface. Gas ﬂow, pressure and power need to be optimised but not with strict
limitations;
II. Break: The polymer is removed from the horizontal surface, and kept on the
vertical sidewalls, by using SF6, low pressure to maximize the ions free path such
that they can reach deep structures without being scattered, and high platen power
to impart a strong directionality to the ion ﬂux towards the surface;
III. Etch: SF6 eﬃciently and isotropically etches silicon where it has been exposed
by the break step. The platen power is lowered in order to preserve the mask,
while SF6 ﬂow and pressure are increased signiﬁcantly to provide an abundance of
radicals that enhance the etch rate.
Figure 4.14: Overview of the diﬀerent step and parameters in a Bosch process for silicon
etching.
The most critical aspect of a Bosch process is the equilibrium between the steps,
that is optimised through the process parameters, and especially the duration of each
step. The characteristic signature of a Bosch process are the so-called scallops, which is
a modulation of the sidewalls proﬁle due to the isotropic nature of ﬂuorine etch of silicon.
Indeed, although the sidewalls are passivated, the polymer lying on the sidewalls is eroded
during the etch step and as such the proﬁle presents small indentations that resemble a
cosine-squared-like function. This phenomenon is well-known and unavoidable, however
years of improvement of the technique allow nowadays to achieve almost negligible
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Etching
71
sidewalls modulation that is practically irrelevant for the ﬁnal device’s performance9.
For the sake of completeness it is worth brieﬂy describing a further modiﬁcation of
the Bosch process known as DREM (Deposit, Remove, Etch, Multistep), thoroughly
described in [68], developed at DTU Nanolab, and extensively used in this work. The
standard Bosch process still suﬀers of the RIE lag somehow, and most importantly the
mask selectivity is limited. It also leads to non-uniformly distributed scallops which are
most often a serious problem. The DREM process is a three step cyclic Bosch process
that alternates passivation with ﬂuorocarbon, bottom removal by argon sputtering, and
isotropic silicon etch with SF6. The careful tuning of the process parameters allow to
achieve inﬁnite mask selectivity, uniform scallops distribution, and >50 aspect ratio
structures can be manufactured [68]. One of the most important modiﬁcation is the
ramping of parameters such as the duration of each step as the process goes on. The
extremely high mask selectivity is possible thanks to a non-conformal deposition of
ﬂuorocarbon that is thicker (due to the depletion of species inside the trenches) on top
of the structure in order to protect the resist. The downside of this approach is that,
for the same reason, the smallest apertures tend to close while etching proceeds. This
aspect can be solved by including an ashing (cleaning step with oxygen plasma) step to
remove the excess of ﬂuorocarbon from the apertures. In this case the process is called
DREAM (Deposit, Remove, Etch, Ash, Multistep) but is of no concern for this work,
as the DREM process is perfectly capable of obtaining the structures of interest. The
DREM process is not strictly speaking necessary to manufacture the subject structures of
this work, however the process is very common at DTU Nanolab, is well-documented and
present in all the silicon DRIE, hence it was extensively used as it provided a relatively
easy way to produce high-quality structures.
To conclude the section, ﬁgure 4.15 reports the typical sequence of a DREM process
at DTU Nanolab, speciﬁcally adapted for samples processed with a DUV stepper during
the lithography procedure (positive DUV resist, as can be seen from the positive sidewalls
angle). Indeed, it includes a BARC etch by means of an oxygen plasma that is needed
prior to starting the actual silicon etch. The ﬁgure also shows a cartoon picture of the
ﬁnal structure by highlighting the scallops due to the cyclic process. These are uniformly
distributed thanks to the just described DREM sequence.
9In optics, where small defects cause scattering, the eﬀect is more pronounced and sometimes
problematic. It can nonetheless be controlled and does not limit the achievable performance of standard
devices and structures.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Introduction to
Micro and Nanofabrication
Figure 4.15: Complete employed process ﬂow for fabricating the structures of interest. The
process is referred to as DREM: Deposit, Remove, Etch, Multistep.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental
This chapter aims at describing details of the nanofabrication process that led to manufac-
turing the target structures and their subsequent characterisation by means of reﬂection
spectroscopy. As previously anticipated, the fabricated structures were not of the best
possible quality, and this was due to a series of unexpected complications which arose
during some processes. Nevertheless, great eﬀort was put in order to improve the quality
of the structures, and indeed a detailed fabrication protocol was developed in order to
minimise the side-eﬀects originated due to the aforementioned complications. Further-
more, the thorough series of tests performed in order to identify the optimum process
parameters allowed to understand the origin of the encountered issues and to gain a clear
insight on the various aspects. Unfortunately, due to time constraints it was not possible
to produce the best structures, and the intended series of experiments could not be
performed either due to reproducibility issues and diﬃculty on implementing a perfectly
functional setup for the application of interest. However, good structures were produced
and characterised in order to prove the correspondence between numerical simulations
and experimental observations. Overall, this chapter is meant as an illustration of the
employed process ﬂow and machinery in order to highlight the most critical aspects and
take-home messages which will be extremely useful in the future of the project, yet also
in the experimental background of the author. The discussion will start by describing
the typical processes and tools used during the fabrication of the structures, then the
description of the encountered issues and related solutions will follow, and ﬁnally the
experimental results concerning optical characterisation of the produced devices will be
presented.
5.1
Fabrication of the designed structures
In this section, ﬁrst an overview of the speciﬁc processes used to produce the target
structures will be given along with the details about each relevant process parameter.
Then, the actual framework and the performed tests will be discussed to walk the reader
through the fabrication process that led to the identiﬁcation of the correct recipe.
The ﬁrst step in the fabrication process was the production of home-made SOI wafers
by means of thermal oxidation and LPCVD1 starting from monocrystalline, single-side
polished (SSP), 6 inch silicon wafers (SN 597 - from Siegert Wafer GmbH). The framework
in this case consists of ﬁrst oxidising around 1 µm of SiO2 layer, and then depositing a
1This step was performed by Dr.
Radu Malureanu, Senior researcher at the Plasmonics and
Metamaterials group, DTU Fotonik, as the training requires long time and quite some expertise is
needed to produce good-quality wafers.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Experimental
suitable thickness of amorphous silicon (aSi) depending on the ﬁnal target design. The
procedure is standard and follows what was described in chapter 4.2, yet it is not always
a smooth process, and may indeed result in a bad quality of the deposited ﬁlm as will be
discussed later on the chapter. For completeness, the following table lists the employed
process parameters for the deposition of aSi (and SiO2, although it was not used).
Table 5.1: Process parameters for the LPCVD deposition of 1.1 µm silicon dioxide and 500 nm
amorphous silicon layers.
Deposited material
SiO2 (TEOS)
Amorphous silicon
Gas - ﬂow [sccm]
TEOS - 50
Silane - 70
Pressure [mTorr]
190
200
Temperature [oC]
712-720
562-565
Time [hh:min]
∼2:15
∼4:00
Once the SOI wafers were ready, the next step on the process ﬂow was the lithography
of the target structures by means of DUV photolithography with positive tone resist.
Even in this case, the procedure is standardised and was already available from the
DTU Nanolab database. Nevertheless, it is worth reporting that process parameters for
spinning BARC and photoresist are relevant for reproducibility purposes, as achieved
thickness and uniformity are highly dependent on them. Spinning both materials was
done in an automatic spin-coater (Süss model Gamma 2M, S/N GAMMA-000156), and
the following table lists the detailed process steps for coating the wafers with BARC and
photoresist. The ﬁnal thicknesses are within < 15% deviation and < 5% uniformity.
Table 5.2: Process parameters for the spin-coating of BARC and positive DUV resist.
Material
Amount [mL]
Spin-oﬀspeed [rpm]
Spin-oﬀtime [s]
Soft-baking
Thickness [nm]
BARC DUV 42S-6
3
4700
30
60 s @ 175 oC
65
Resist KRF M230Y
3 @ 1000 rpm
2500
30
90 s @ 130 oC
360
For this speciﬁc process and kind of BARC, a priming step (HMDS) is not necessary
to improve resist adhesion as the BARC itself eﬃciently binds to the surface and acts as
primer.
Subsequently to coating the wafers with BARC and positive tone resist, the actual
lithography step could be performed, and this was done with the Canon FPA-3000 EX4
Stepper in proximity lithography, with a variable dose depending on the desired pattern
size to be imprinted. The exposure test is indeed a crucial step and will be discussed
after the summary on the most used processes. Importantly, the resist development
must be performed in the shortest possible time right after having exposed the wafers in
order to achieve the best result. Even in this case the operation is carried out by a robot
(Süss MicroTec model Gamma 2M, S/N GAMMA-000232) controlled by the user, and a
standard recipe from the DTU Nanolab database was used. The development steps are
listed in the following:
1) Post-exposure bake for 60 s at 130 oC;
2) Pre-wetting with water for 2.5 s spinning at 10000 rpm;
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
75
3) Dispense TMAH developer (9 mL) while spinning for 2.5 s at 40 rpm;
4) Development for 60 s at 0 rpm;
5) Water rinse for 5 s at 3000 rpm, nitrogen drying while spinning for 7 s at 4000 rpm.
With the correct pattern imprinted on the developed photoresist, the structures are
ready to be etched. Indeed, DRIE of silicon by means of the already described DREM
sequence was the next step to perform. Etching of silicon at DTU Nanolab is available
in three diﬀerent reactors named DRIE-Pegasus 1, 2 and 3, from SPTS Technology
Ltd (Serial numbers MP0636, MP0641 and CP0170, respectively). The three tools are
diﬀerent in terms of the substrate size they can uniformly etch (4" for Pegasus 1, 6" for
Pegasus 2 and 3), and in the allowed processes they can run: (Pegasus 1 and 3 run the
DREM sequence, while Pegasus 2 runs the CORE process [70]. The substrate size had
to be kept 6" as it is the best option in terms of compatibility with the DUV Stepper,
hence the preferred solution would have been to process the wafers in Pegasus 3 as the
DREM sequence was needed. Unfortunately, the tool was not capable of running the
desired process due to a faulty MFC that could not handle the low SF6 ﬂow required for
the recipe. The CORE sequence on Pegasus 2 was attempted, but it turned immediately
out that making use of such process would have required a very lengthy and complicated
optimisation procedure as it is designed to operate very precisely on extremely high (∼
100%) silicon loading conditions. Since the ﬁnal goal was the production of batches made
of a considerable amount of chips (typically 66 5x5 mm chips per wafer), the load was
estimated to be around 5%, and this causes the etch rate to considerably increase with
several consequences on the process controllability. For this reasons, the choice eventually
fell on Pegasus 1, with the main drawback being the limitation to 4" substrates, hence the
6" wafer had to be processed one quarter at a time. This obviously slowed down the entire
fabrication process. Furthermore, the DREM sequence is available in several diﬀerent
versions which diﬀer in some of the process parameters, mainly the coil generator power
which can be set to 0.5, 1 or 2 kW. Increasing the coil power produces a denser plasma
if combined, as it is, with a higher ﬂow of precursors. However, high plasma densities
are only needed if one needs to anisotropically etch high aspect-ratio structures, which
was clearly not the case for the target of this work (aspect ratio around 0.9). Hence,
the selected sequence was the so-called DREM 0.5kW process in the DRIE-Pegasus 1;
the process parameters are listed in table 5.3. Incidentally, the process is typically run
at the very low temperature of -19 oC in order to maintain a high selectivity towards
the photoresist (which easily burns when exposed to high energy). However, the process
temperature was found to be a crucial parameter to optimise and will be discussed further
afterwards. The duration of etch and deposition steps can be chosen and even ramped
up or down to compensate for tilted sidewalls or to realise them on purpose.
This concludes the preliminary introduction to the standard processes and the
fabrication results will be now discussed.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Experimental
Table 5.3: Process parameters for the DREM 0.5 kW sequence to anisotropically etch silicon.
Steps
Deposition
Etch
Delay
Boost
Main
Delay
Boost
Main
Time
3.2 s - start with deposition
2.5 s - possible ramping
Pressure
100% control gauge - lowest pressure during bottom removal 1.8 mTorr
Gases
C4F8
0.3 s / 5 sccm
0.15 s / 15 sccm
25 sccm
0.3 s / 40 sccm
0
5 sccm
SF6
0.3 s / 30 sccm
0.5 s / 20 sccm
10 sccm
1.9 s / 10 sccm
0.3 s / 25 sccm
30 sccm
Ar
0
0
100 sccm
1.5 s / 75 sccm
0
100 sccm
Generators
Coil
0
0
500 W
0
0
500 W
Platen
0
0
1 W
0.9 s / 1 W
1 s / 40 W
1 W
5.1.1
DUV lithography
In the context of optical lithography, it is important to check the pattern quality after
exposure, and this can be performed with a microscope (optical or electronic depending
on the characteristic pattern size) in order to visually inspect if there are evident defects
or damages which would inﬂuence the ﬁnal result afterwards. Imaging photoresist with
an SEM is relatively complicated as it is a charging material, hence the acceleration
voltage has to be kept to a low value (1.2-1.5 kV) in order to observe the resist feature
and not risk to burn it with the electron beam. Figure 5.1a shows how a wafer looks
like after having performed a lithography step, while ﬁgure 5.1b is a scanning electron
micrograph of the resist pattern, taken with the secondary electron detector (hence the
poor resolution) in order to avoid distortions due to charging.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: (a) How a wafer looks like after having spun, exposed and developed the photoresist
(which gives the red colour), and (b) SEM image of a resist pattern where the tapered proﬁle
typical of a positive tone can be observed as the blurred shade surrounding the grating bars.
As previously anticipated, once the reticle is available a crucial step to be performed
is an exposure test in order to identify the process parameters which allow to achieve
the desired pattern transfer. Since the target geometries were not present on the reticle,
the DUV dose was used to tune the grating parameters according to the needs. The
used design on the DUV mask was manufactured with a periodicity of Λ = 820 nm and
w = 400 nm, hence the dose needed to be calibrated in order to provide −10 or −20 nm
oﬀset on the width, w, to produce the geometries of interest; i.e., applying an overexposure
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
77
on purpose to ﬁne tune the grating geometry. Figure 5.2 reports the ﬁrst exposure test
result, done on a blank cSi 6" wafer, with a diagram that illustrates the trend of imprinted
geometries in terms of deviation from the nominal pattern (width of the grating bars),
and two scanning electron micrographs of the ﬁnal structures corresponding to the lowest
(180 J/m2) and highest doses (220 J/m2). A linear ﬁt accompanies the measured data
points (taken from the SEM images and conﬁrmed by counting the pixels afterwards),
yet this has to be taken with a grain of salt as the linear trend is valid only within a
relatively narrow dose interval and eventually saturates. From such a test it was thus
concluded that the optimum lithography doses to be used were 183 J/m2 to achieve
w = 390 nm and 188 J/m2 to achieve w = 380 nm. The SEM images are shown after
the etch as this is the best way to truly observe the ﬁnal dimensions. The wafer was
etched with 25 cycles of the standard DREM sequence described in table 5.3, a slight
sidewalls angle can be seen especially in ﬁgure 5.2c. The tapered resist proﬁle should be
even clearer from the stripes on top of the etched structures.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.2: (a) Lithography test result on a cSi blank wafer along with a linear ﬁt of the
measured data-points, (b) SEM image of the after-etching result for the lowest used dose of
180 J/m2, and (c) after-etching result for the highest used dose of 220 J/m2.
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Experimental
5.1.2
Dry etch
The optimum lithography doses were identiﬁed, and with such parameters the wafers
could already be imprinted with the desired pattern. The next step in the process ﬂow
optimisation was the ﬁne tuning of the DREM sequence in order to provide the desired
grating proﬁle. A ﬁrst batch was produced by employing the standard sequence with 30
s of BARC etch (by means of an oxygen plasma, O2 injected at 200 sccm) to remove
the bottom layer which would otherwise prevent the trenches to be etched. Figure 5.3
illustrates the result of the ﬁrst acceptable batch that was produced. In particular, from
ﬁgure 5.3a the grating and wafer structures can be observed, while ﬁgures 5.3b to 5.3d
show the structural details after having stripped the resist and performed a series of
cleaning steps. The produced grating clearly retained a well deﬁned and correct geometry,
but it is also evident how the sidewalls were aﬀected by an unacceptable amount of
roughness which would produce plenty of scattering during the characterisation. Great
eﬀort was put in order to identify the origin of such roughness, which in the beginning was
thought to be leftovers of carbon-based materials originated while etching the passivation
layer. This hypothesis was discarded after having run a series of cleaning steps (oxygen
plasma and piranha) with no success.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: (a) Detailed SEM view of the grating and wafer layered structure after the etch,
(b) cross-sectional image of the HCG after having stripped the resist, (c) sidewalls roughness
detail from the cross-sectional view and (d) top view of the grating sidewalls after oxygen and
piranha clean.
The origin of the observed sidewalls roughness has to be sought in the nature of
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
79
the deposited material, that is amorphous silicon. Non-monocrystalline layers typically
present a certain amount of roughness at their surface, and it may be problematic
especially with the employed process as it requires BARC spinning prior to resist
deposition. Once spun, BARC penetrates the small depressions on the surface creating
small ponds of material as illustrated in ﬁgure 5.4a-b. When baked, the BARC hardens
and is strongly bound to the surface, hence when the BARC etch is performed some
small islands may be left especially in the regions close to the resist edges (ﬁgure 5.4c).
Such small islands, if not removed, transfer the defects to the resist, and then all the
way down along the sidewalls when silicon etch is carried out as shown in ﬁgure 5.4d.
Figure 5.4: Cartoon picture about the origin of the sidewalls roughness.
The roughness issue can be partially overcome by increasing the BARC etch time,
which in the standard recipe is set to 30 seconds. A series of tests was performed in
order to prove this statement and achieve smoother structures, the result of such study
is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Resulting structures from the optimisation of the BARC etch process using the
DREM sequence at -19oC. Diﬀerent durations of BARC etch time: (a) 30 s, (b) 60 s, (c) 80 s,
(d) 100 s, and (e) 120 s.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Experimental
It is evident that the BARC etch time plays a major role when dealing with DUV-
patterned non-crystalline substrates, and indeed by increasing the duration of the oxygen
plasma prior to etching does allow to reduce the sidewalls roughness. There is, however,
a limit: as can be seen from ﬁgures 5.5d and 5.5e, a too long BARC etch causes the
grating bars to shrink, due to the fact that photoresist is eaten as well by oxygen. This
prevents the achievement of perfectly smooth sidewalls, unless one would combine a
lithography underexposure with a prolonged BARC etch time. This approach is not
advised, however, as it would most likely lead to non-reproducible results. The optimum
BARC etch time was set to 80 seconds according to the observed proﬁles.
In light of the series of performed tests, the optimum recipe was identiﬁed and good
structures were ready to be produced. However, an umpteenth unfortunate event occurred:
during the whole time when the process tests were performed, the dry etcher was not
behaving according to speciﬁcs, meaning that the quality checks of known structures were
not giving the correct outcome. This was a known issue, due to a scheduled maintenance
that introduced some problems. The issue could nevertheless be overcome simply by
running appropriate tests as it was done, and indeed the process was giving the expected
results. The unfortunate event was the following: the very same morning of the day when
the ﬁnal etch process was scheduled, the machine was repaired and restarted behaving as
it was supposed to, yet this had the inevitable consequence that the developed process
was not valid any more. As a result, indeed, the developed recipe introduced some further
unwanted results, which are about to be discussed.
Figure 5.6 shows the cross-sectional view of the resulting structures, from the fourth
and ﬁfth batches of samples, which were designated to simple and pedestalled gratings,
respectively. Whilst the structure geometry was perfectly achieved, besides a slight
(∼1.5o) sidewalls angle, with measured width of the grating bars w = 393 nm (target
being 390 nm) on the top edge, it is evident that the substrate was polluted by grassy
structures (pillars) or re-deposited material, highlighted by red boxes in ﬁgure 5.6. The
origin of such grassy structures was thoroughly studied, and once again they could not
be removed by standard cleaning processes. Silicon and ﬂuorine-based materials are
very hard to remove, and indeed it was concluded that such grassy structures were
originated by the sidewalls roughness being etched by high energy ions: the etch process
caused sputtering of the related by-products, which eventually would sit on the substrate
and cumulate, hence creating such pillars. Most likely, the prolonged BARC etch time
enhanced such eﬀect as it further exposed the rough sidewalls, which indeed turned out to
be smoother than previously seen, with the consequence of the just described re-deposition
of material. Eventually, the produced structures can deﬁnitely be considered a good
result, as the deposited pillars were randomly scattered over the chips with quite low
density. Furthermore, the evidently small dimensions would not introduce unacceptable
side-eﬀects at the moment of optical characterisation as they were clearly much smaller
than the operating wavelength. There is to say, however, that the produced devices were
meant to perform high sensitivity experiments on protein detection, and as such they
are very sensitive to the presence of small foreign bodies. For this reason, such devices
would deﬁnitely not be the best option for sensing applications and it was thus decided
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
81
to carry out another series of tests to improve their quality.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Scanning electron cross-sectional micrographs of HCGs from the fourth and ﬁfth
batches of produced samples. (a) Low magniﬁcation overview of a portion of chip and (b) high
magniﬁcation image of two grating bars. The red boxes highlight the grassy pillars originated
due from redeposition of sputtered material.
Thanks to the expertise of the DTU Nanolab staﬀ, it was discovered that increasing
the chamber temperature during the etch step allows the plasma to progressively eat the
unwanted re-deposited structures on the substrate. Furthermore, the higher temperature
eases to a great extent the roughness removal from the sidewalls, hence providing a way
to greatly improve the structures’ quality. The reason why DREM processes are run
at -19 oC is related to the selectivity towards photoresist, which is much more robust
at low temperatures. However, this aspect is relevant when attempting to etch deep
trenches with high aspect ratio, yet this was not the case for the structures of interest as
the etch was quite shallow and as such the selectivity was not a main concern. Indeed,
running the sequence at 0 oC does introduce some side-eﬀects on the resist proﬁle, but
it was found to be clearly an option to pursue. Nevertheless, the DUV exposure and
etch tests were not valid any more at an increased chamber temperature due to the
aforementioned lowering of resist selectivity. As such, it was decided to run a test which
consisted of a combination of lithography underexposure and prolonged oxygen plasma
prior to the actual etch step. Figure 5.7 illustrates the result of such a combined test,
from which it is clear that the described process does provide optimal outcomes in terms
of both surface roughness (which could be greatly reduced by employing only 60 seconds
of BARC etch), and absence of grassy structures on the substrate (they could be seen
already from top-view images, and were totally absent in that speciﬁc run). Importantly,
the resist proﬁle (not shown here) showed considerably wider grating bars prior to the
etch, speciﬁcally the measured width was wR ∼425 nm, which means that the oxygen
plasma had eaten more than 30 nm of photoresist in the lateral direction. The optimum
parameters were thus identiﬁed to be: dose 150 J/m2 for simple and pedestalled gratings,
154 J/m2 for the buried versions, 60 seconds of oxygen plasma, chamber temperature 0
oC.
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Experimental
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Scanning electron top-view micrographs of test samples resulting from a com-
bination of exposure and oxygen plasma test, after etch. DUV dose: (a) 150 J/m2 and (b)
155 J/m2. The BARC etch time was set to 60 seconds for this speciﬁc run.
The careful reader will notice that the just described framework is exactly the kind of
process that was discouraged at the beginning of the section due to possible reproducibility
issues related to relying on oxygen to eat a speciﬁc amount of resist prior to etch. Further
tests needed to be carried out, and in particular it would have been interesting to see
if, processing at 0 oC, the standard 30 seconds of BARC etch would provide smooth
sidewalls as well. In that case it would deﬁnitely be the preferred option. Unfortunately,
a major power-cut of the area surrounding the cleanroom aﬀected most of the tools (the
old electronics governing them was subjected to stress due to a prolonged power glitch),
and in particular the DRIE-Pegasus 1, workhorse for this project, went out of use for long
time due to issues related to the vacuum pump. As a result, the planned series of tests
could not be completed and neither the production of some ﬁnal structures of excellent
quality could be carried out in useful time. For this reason, the further processed and
characterised devices were picked from the fourth and ﬁfth batches of samples, which are
those of ﬁgure 5.6, unfortunately polluted by grassy pillars but with relatively smooth
sidewalls.
5.1.3
Pedestalled HGCs
In order to realise the pedestalled version of HCGs, described in chapter 3.4.1, there is
the need of controllably etch the silicon dioxide substrate with a low rate. SiO2 is known
to be eﬃciently etched by hydroﬂuoric acid (HF) according to the reaction:
SiO2+6HF −→H2SiF6+2H2O,
(5.1)
where usually HF is buﬀered (BHF) with NH4F to avoid depletion of ﬂuorine ions. This is
typically a wet process, meaning that it is done in a solution diluted with water as H2SiF6
is soluble in such medium. The standard wet process foresees dipping the sample in a
BHF solution with opportune concentration (which determines the etch rate). However,
given the small dimensions and therefore the fragility of the target structures, one of the
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
83
main issues with wet etching of suspended structures is that they would collapse when
they are underetched due to surface tension of water bubbles which would be left in the
gaps between adjacent grating bars. In order to overcome this issue, the typical protocol
includes the so-called critical-point drying, which consists in drying the samples in a CO2
atmosphere at high temperature and pressure to gradually release the surface tension of
water and extract the liquid medium in a gentle and controlled way.
There is, however, another option to etch the glass substrate beneath the structures,
which consists in a single-step process: the HF vapour phase etch. Such process uses
vapoured anhydrous (no water) hydroﬂuoric acid mixed with alcohol - ethanol (EtOH)
in this case - to act as catalyst as anhydrous HF alone does not etch SiO2. Figure 5.8
depicts a schematic of the Primaxx uEtch (from SPTS Technology Ltd.) HF vapour
phase chamber during a standard run. The process was not discussed in chapter 4 as no
thorough documentation is yet available from DTU Nanolab, nor could it be found on
the manufacturer’s website2.
Figure 5.8: Schematic overview of the Primaxx uEtch vapour phase HF etch chamber.
The process is typically referred to as "dry", yet it actually is a wet process occurring
in a dry atmosphere: when HF and EtOH are introduced in the chamber, they get
absorbed by the surface, react and the product condense on the sample’s surface, thus
forming a very thin layer of etchant uniformly distributed across the structures. This
layer is continuously fed by the injected gases and progressively eat through the glass
substrate. The pink cloud represent the gaseous atmosphere created during an etch step,
and the blue layer on top of the wafer is to be seen as the etchant layer formed due to the
reaction between EtOH and HF. The chamber is heated up to further supply energy for
the reaction to take place. Nitrogen is used as an inert purging medium and the process
is carried out in vacuum at the typical operating pressure of ∼130 mTorr. Importantly,
prior to inserting the samples in the etching chamber, they must be hard-baked at 200-250
oC on a hotplate for few minutes in order to have carbon-based chain materials (naturally
present even in a cleanroom environment) evaporate. Indeed, organic compounds may
act as micro-mask for the etch, hence they might prevent an uniform etching of the target
structures. Obviously, being an HF-based process it is extremely selective to silicon and
as such it perfectly suited the purpose. Vapoured HF was chosen as a preferred option to
realise the pedestalled gratings as it is a single-step process, hence it required less testing
steps to identify the correct recipe. Table 5.4 lists the process parameters of the used
recipe for etching pedestals. The process is divided in steps, which include stabilisation
2https://www.spts.com/product/uetch-hf-release-etch
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Experimental
(pressure and temperature), whose duration depends on the chamber condition, etch
(when HF is ﬂown into the chamber) with a duration set by the user, and pumping (to
purge the chamber from dangerous chemicals). The etch steps should not last more than
15 minutes, in case of longer required etch time, multiple cycles are advised.
Table 5.4: Process parameters for the used recipe in the HF vapour phase etcher.
Gas
Stabilisation
Etch
Pump
N2 [sccm]
1425
1425
0
EtOH [sccm]
210
210
0
HF [sccm]
0
190
0
Several tests were required in order to determine the optimal recipe (mainly the
etch time) and its reproducibility. The etch rate is mostly given by the ﬂow of HF and
EtOH in the camber, but an important role is played by the kind of etched oxide as well
(thermal oxide typically etch slower than TEOS). It was found that the etch rate was not
really constant from day to day, hence the best framework consists of etching a single
chip ﬁrst to estimate the rate, and then set the process time accordingly for another run
immediately after the test, on many chips. Indeed, from the manufacturer it was known
that the machine is designed in order to present almost negligible loading eﬀects due to
the uniformity of the chamber atmosphere and gas ﬂow: many tests proved that almost
no loading eﬀect occurred, nor the rate was dependent on the chip orientation (being 1D
it may be relevant) with respect to the gas ﬂow. For the record, a typical value of the
measured etch rate is from 6 to 8 nm per minute.
Figure 5.9 illustrates some examples of fabricated pedestalled gratings for diﬀerent
etch depths, corresponding to roughly s ≃60, 120 and 180 nm. They were obtained
by setting the etch time to 600, 1050 and 1500 seconds, respectively, with the widest
pedestals being etched in one single cycle, while the thinner ones were produced with a
two-cycle process in the HF vapour phase etcher. There is to say, however, that while
the samples in ﬁgure 5.9a and 5.9b were found to be quite reproducible (with the usual
approach of testing a single chip ﬁrst), the thinner pedestals were found to be much
harder to make, as the mechanical stability of such thin pillars is trivially lower and they
may easily collapse. Reproducibility issues are an important concern in this case since
the process slightly ﬂuctuates and does not give always the same result. Nevertheless,
the protocol was optimised and obtaining such samples turned out to be relatively easy
after the ﬁrst testing stage.
To conclude the section, a curious advantage of pedestalled gratings is that when, as
in this case, the samples’ substrate is polluted by grassy re-deposited structures, etching
the glass layer allows to have them laying at the bottom of the etched material, hence
bringing them far from the interface with the grating’s ﬁeld proﬁle. This renders such
structures optically more robust as the amount of introduced scattering and disturbance
to the measurement would surely be lower.
==PAGE:95==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
85
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.9: Scanning electron cross-sectional micrographs of pedestalled gratings with etch
depth of: (a) s ≃60 nm, (b) s ≃120 nm and (c) s ≃180 nm.
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Experimental
5.1.4
Half-buried HCGs
In order to realise the half-buried versions of HCGs there is the need of ﬁlling the air gaps
with some suitable material to be processed. The ideal design foresees ﬁlling the trenches
with 200 nm of SiO2, however there is no suitable process capable of doing that with
simple processing steps. One option would be to cover the whole structure by means of
PECVD, yet this does not allow to uniformly cover the whole grating and has a limited
step-coverage capability. This issue can be overcome by employing PEALD, yet the
deposition rate is extremely slow and the resulting layer would be uniform everywhere,
hence a mean of etching the deposited material only on top of the grating bars would
be required. This is extremely diﬃcult to implement. A valid alternative is to employ
benzocyclobutene (BCB - C8H8), also called cyclotene 3000 ®, which is an organic material
highly used to realise microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and vertical-cavity surface-
emitting lasers (VCSELs). BCB is advantageous as it usually is available diluted in
a solvent, hence in a liquid phase, and can be spun on the target structure to have it
penetrate inside air gaps which need to be planarised. Prior to pouring BCB on the
sample, it is customary to deposit an adhesion promoter, e.g., AP300, which shall be
spun and baked at 160 oC. Before spinning BCB, a crucial step is to let it sit and rest
for a yet unidentiﬁed amount of time in order to have it ﬂowing into the trenches. Once
spun, BCB is baked on a hotplate at 90 oC for few minutes to promote the solvent
evaporation and eliminate oxygen (which is highly sensitive to), then is cured in a oven
at 250 oC for ﬁve hours in order to promote its ﬂow-ability and eventually to trigger a
transition to a glassy phase. Indeed, BCB is highly used in optoelectronics because it is
optically very similar to glass, once cured, and as such is used when SiO2 is not suitable
for some reason. Figure 5.10 illustrates a Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR)
measurement3 of a microns-thick BCB layer deposited on silicon substrate. The inset
shows the spectral region of interest.
Figure 5.10:
FTIR measurement of a microns-thick BCB layer on a crystalline silicon
substrate. The inset shows absorbance in the spectral range of interest.
From the measurement it is clear that no absorption peak characterises BCB in the
wavelength range of interest, hence such material is indeed suitable for the purpose of
3Kindly performed by Dr. Lars René Lindvold, Senior researcher, DTU Health-Tech.
==PAGE:97==
5.1 Fabrication of the designed structures
87
this project. For the record, the sharp peak around 1 µm is to be attributed to Fresnel
loss, i.e., loss of signal due to the reﬂection on a high index-contrast interface, while the
oscillations in the NIR shall be attributed to interference in the BCB thin ﬁlm.
The framework to follow to realise buried gratings thus consist in: spinning/curing
an uniform layer of BCB on the samples and then dry etch the latter down to the desired
thickness. The dry etch recipe is constituted by a cyclic process alternating an oxygen
plasma and freon. In the DTU Nanolab’s cleanroom, the process can be monitored in
real time by means of a laser interferometer which allows to calculate the rate and stop
the etch on demand. Unfortunately, the power cut aﬀected the dedicated dry etcher
as well, hence it was not possible to reach that stage. Furthermore, several tests were
performed to uniformly coat the fabricated HCGs with BCB, without great success. The
characteristic small sizes of the target structures made it very hard to achieve a uniform
coating, and most often not enough BCB penetrated the trenches. Figure 5.11 illustrates
the best achieved result in this context, which was of unacceptable quality to proceed
with further processing even in case the dry etcher would have been available. Figures
5.11a to 5.11c were taken from the same chip while moving from the left to the right of
its cross-section. Evidently, while the right-hand edge was fully covered by BCB, a thick
hill was present on the sample’s centre and eventually the material was depleted towards
the left-hand edge. This process should be thoroughly optimised in order to realise good
quality half-buried HCGs. No time was left for the project to devise another process,
thus the reported one is the only meaningful result worth showing here.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.11: Scanning electron cross-sectional micrographs of an HCG sample coated with
cured BCB. The deposited layer is evidently not uniform at all as ﬁgures (a) to (c) were taken
while moving on the same sample from left to right.
5.1.5
Discussion
Overall, the nanofabrication activity can be considered to be a partial success, meaning
that samples of acceptable quality were produced and subsequently characterised by
means of reﬂection spectroscopy (as it will be shown below). Furthermore, a detailed
protocol to produce simple and pedestalled gratings was developed by focusing on the
reduction of the sidewalls roughness that eventually would introduce scattering, hence
increase the signal extinction. The production of buried HCGs could not be completed
in time due to diﬃculties in the uniform covering of samples with BCB. Unfortunately,
==PAGE:98==
88
5 Experimental
the power cuts which occurred in January and May 2021 aﬀected most of the cleanroom
machinery, including the silicon etcher and the dry etcher needed to process BCB after
the deposition, and this posed a strict limitation to what could have been achieved within
the given time frame.
An important remark due here is related to the nature of the processed silicon.
Towards the end of the project it was discovered that the wafers being processed were
actually not made of amorphous silicon, and this introduced most of the issues encountered
during the fabrication process such as the sidewalls roughness. The wafers were initially
prepared with 530 nm of amorphous silicon (conﬁrmed by ellipsometer measurements),
yet the aSi thickness was too large for the designed structures (the anti-crossing point
could not be reached that way), hence they had to be thinned down. The thinning-down
procedure foresees thermal oxidation of the wafer surface, and then a BHF bath that
would remove the grown oxide, hence decreasing the layer thickness. However, the
oxidation furnace operates at around 1050 oC, and as such it promotes annealing of
the deposited material during the process. When annealed, the atoms in the crystal
lattice rearrange themselves and the result is that the material becomes polycrystalline.
The amount of polycrystallinity depends on the annealing time, in the case of thermal
oxidation this is quite short, hence a mixture of amorphous and polycrystalline material
may be expected in the produced samples. The polycrystallinity of the processed wafers
does indeed explain most of the encountered issues, especially the surface and sidewalls
roughness. Unfortunately, this was discovered very late during the project and there was
no time to repeat the whole fabrication process, even considering the unavailability of
the needed machinery. The most important take-home message hence is: the structures
should be made of crystalline silicon starting from commercial SOI wafers; or, provided
that the LPCVD deposition is thoroughly optimised prior to the ﬁnal run, the aSi wafers
must be made with the exact required thickness in order not to face these issues again.
5.2
Optical characterisation
The original project plan included carrying out sensing experiments based on detec-
tion of biomarkers in actual biological samples. Unfortunately, it was soon realised
that the produced samples were aﬀected by inter and intrachip non-uniformities which
caused the resonance position to change from chip to chip and even between diﬀerent
positions on the same sample. Due to this, the planned experiments on detection of
resonance redshifts induced by thin alumina layers could not be carried out either.
This is a known issue in the sensing community, which is typically overcome by per-
forming parallel calibration and by detecting in real-time the dynamic redshift of the
resonance feature. This requires, however, a microﬂuidic network to controllably deliver
the analytes and an automatic data-recording mechanism. There was no time to im-
plement such a complicated measurement system, hence the fabricated samples were
only characterised in terms of spectral features and sensitivity to the bulk refractive index.
The produced gratings have been characterised by means of reﬂection spectroscopy
==PAGE:99==
5.2 Optical characterisation
89
measurements on speciﬁc optical setups. In order to do so, there are two possible solutions:
a free-space or ﬁbre-based setup, as depicted in ﬁgure 5.12. The former foresees splitting
a source beam with a 50/50 cube beam-splitter (BS), hence directing half of it towards the
sample and collecting half of the reﬂected beam that is transmitted by the BS with a lens
that focuses the received light onto a ﬁbre collimator. The signal is thus guided to the
optical spectrum analyser (OSA - ANDO® AQ-6315E) by means of a single mode ﬁbre.
The ﬁbre-based setup, instead, makes use of an optical circulator to accomplish the same
task. In both cases a polariser needs to be included in order to impart light the correct
state of polarisation needed to excite the resonance. As such, the employed circulator
needs to be based on a polarisation maintaining ﬁbre (PMF). The signal is guided to the
sample, which is probed by means of the ﬁbre tip at port 2, and the reﬂected light is
re-collected by the same aperture to be eventually guided to the OSA. Figure 5.12 shows
a diagram of the two implemented optical setups: in both cases, a supercontinuum light
source (SuperK Extreme, NKT Photonics A/S) was used to probe the samples with a
broadband signal; the SuperK spectrum presents a powerful laser peak at the Nd:YAG
wavelength (1064 nm, used for pumping) which needs to be ﬁltered out in order not to
destroy the samples with a too powerful light signal (hence the longpass ﬁlters). All the
used components (ﬁlters, lenses, ﬁbres, etc.) were part of the ThorLabs Inc. catalogue.
Figure 5.12: Schematic diagram of the two implemented optical setups for characterising the
produced samples.
The main advantage and drawbacks of the two implementations are:
□Free-space: besides the simplicity of the setup, it is easy to probe samples with a
collimated beam impinging with very good approximation truly at normal incidence.
Another advantage consists on having a beam with large waist, hence the probed
region on the sample is large and this allows to mitigate non-uniformity eﬀects,
However, the devices were meant to resonate with a very sharp spectral feature
when immersed in liquids, and given the high sensitivity characterisation in air
would not allow to observe the sharp resonance. Because of this, few drops of
suitable liquids needed to be poured on the devices, yet the droplet causes a large
amount of scattering and unwanted reﬂections which destroy the signal. In order
to compensate for this eﬀect, a microscope cover-glass can be placed on the sample
to ﬂatten the liquid out and allow maximum power collection from the reﬂected
==PAGE:100==
90
5 Experimental
signal. Unfortunately, a cover-glass on top of the sample creates a planar cavity
that introduces large Fabry-Perót oscillations which pollute the spectrum, hence
again destroying the signal. For this reasons, the free-space setup was only used
for characterising the samples in air;
□Fibre-based: the ﬁbre tip can be used to directly probe the samples in a liquid
environment as it can be easily dipped in the poured liquid droplet. In this way,
the light source is already in the liquid and scattering/reﬂections at the air-liquid
interface are avoided. Importantly, the ﬁbre must be connectorised with an angled
ﬁbre connector (APC), otherwise the ﬂat interface would once again create a planar
cavity. In terms of drawbacks, this implementation is problematic because of
two main reasons. First, normal incidence cannot be achieved due to the angled
connector and proximity of the ﬁbre tip to the sample; simple trigonometry can
show that having an 8o angled connector causes the light to be incident at ∼0.5o
if one assumes to have an SiO2-serum (n = 1.35) interface. Second, the beam spot
is quite small, around 10 µm in diameter, which means that the measurement
becomes more susceptible to imperfections and non-uniformity on the sample.
Before going through the results of optical characterisation, two important aspects
must be highlighted as they rendered experiments much more complicated and slowed
down the whole characterisation procedure. First of all, while simulating the structures
the crystalline silicon substrate was assumed to be inﬁnite in the direction of excitation.
This is obviously not the case in reality, as the wafers have a ﬁnite size (∼675 µm). The
ﬁniteness of the cSi layer does introduce some Fabry-Perót oscillations as a planar cavity
is formed, and these pollute the whole spectrum if not properly handled. In reality, the
used wafers were single-side polished, meaning that the wafer’s backside introduces a
large amount of scattering that mitigates somehow this eﬀect. However, especially with
the ﬁbre-based setup, these oscillations were always present and needed to be removed
in order to clean-up the signal. One eﬀective way to do so is to stick a carbon pad on the
backside of each chip, and before doing that it is a good idea to remove with the tip of a
tweezer the lucid most adhesive part which still maintains a relatively large amount of
reﬂected power. This simple solution made possible better resolving the spectral features.
Importantly, as previously shown the ﬁeld proﬁle at resonance does not penetrate the
cSi substrate, hence these oscillations do not aﬀect the resonance shape and position,
they just pollute the signal’s baseline with reﬂection dips and peaks.
Secondly, when performing ﬁbre-based measurements it was found that the reﬂection
peak was most of the time small in magnitude and relatively broad. There are many
factors contributing to this eﬀect, for instance scattering and non-uniformity of the
fabricated structures. However, another important contribution, that has a stronger
impact when probing the samples by means of a ﬁbre tip rather than in free-space, is the
actual angle of incidence and probed area. When using ﬁbre tip with angled connector
light is naturally refracted with a certain angle due to Snell’s law: the connector is
8o tilted, the incident medium has the refractive index of SiO2, the output medium
being serum (n = 1.35), hence the actual angle of incidence on the sample can easily
be calculated to be approximately α = 0.5o. Furthermore, being light conﬁned in the
==PAGE:101==
5.2 Optical characterisation
91
ﬁbre core, at the output it diverges spanning a set of angle that is given by the ﬁbre’s
numerical aperture (NA = 0.125 in this case). Similarly, the light collected by the ﬁbre is
only that impinging on the core with an angle (lower or equal) given by NA. This means
that, in air, the output light forms a cone that is around sin−1(NA) ≃7.5o wide, while
in a liquid with n = 1.35 this is slightly reduced to sin−1(NA/√n) ≃6.2o (reduced to
around ±5o if one considers the system’s geometry), hence the measurement is in reality
an average over the various angles of incidence captured by the ﬁbre. The average over
the angles of incidence introduces a further source of broadening on the resonance, hence
the reﬂection peak gets progressively less recognizable during the experiment. In this
regard, a trade-oﬀbetween signal level and distance of the ﬁbre tip from the surface has
to be found to minimise the eﬀect. Nonetheless, a very sharp reﬂection dip was observed
at each measurement: as the OSA displays traces in decibels, reﬂection dips are much
easier to see than peaks and can be thus used to monitor the redshift of interest for
sensing experiments. Figure 5.13 shows the results of RCWA simulations taking into
account the aforementioned eﬀects.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13:
RCWA simulations of HCGs in serum for real case scenarios: (a) Fabry-
Perót eﬀect originating from the ﬁnite size of the substrate and (b) evolution of the reﬂection
spectrum, in logarithmic scale, for diﬀerent values of the angle of incidence. HCG parameters:
w = 390 nm, h = 500 nm and Λ = 820 nm.
From ﬁgure 5.13a it can be seen how the ﬁnite size of the cSi substrate introduces
FP oscillations (further conﬁrmed by the oscillation period which depends on the layer
thickness) which aﬀect the whole reﬂection baseline, but not position of the resonance
peak. Instead, from ﬁgure 5.13b it is clear how the angle of incidence plays an important
role in the determination of the actual spectral shape, and if observed in logarithmic
scale a sharp reﬂection dip is actually predicted by the simulations. Considering all these
eﬀects, the results about to be discussed should be clearly explained.
Finally, a last aspect to consider is related to the used setup: the need of ﬁltering out
the laser peak from the supercontinuum source introduced further unexpected oscillations
in the experimental curves. This happens as the thin layers coating reﬂection ﬁlters may
form an additional resonance cavity for speciﬁc wavelengths, hence FP oscillations, which
unfortunately could not be avoided.
==PAGE:102==
92
5 Experimental
5.2.1
Free-space characterisation
In order to conﬁrm the validity of the simulations and attest quality of the fabricated sam-
ples, free space characterisation was performed on a batch of ten simple and pedestalled
HCGs. As previously mentioned, free-space optics provides an easy and fast way to
characterise the fabricated devices which is incidentally much less sensitive to ﬂuctuations
due to sample non-uniformities. Figure 5.14 displays the result of optical characterisa-
tion of two batches of simple and pedestalled gratings (with etch depth approximately
s ≃120 nm), along with an example trace of reference signal (i.e., the input signal,
collected by means of an aluminium mirror). Indeed, as anticipated the reference trace
did present clear signs of FP oscillations due to the presence of the longpass ﬁlter. Great
eﬀort was put in order to minimise such eﬀect, for instance by trying diﬀerent ﬁlters
and tilting them with a certain angle to both not send light back to the source and also
to reduce the oscillation amplitude. Unfortunately, the one displayed in ﬁgure 5.14a
is the best obtained trace, which is clearly aﬀected by both FP oscillations and water
absorption (the dips between 1350 and 1410 nm). Obviously, both these eﬀects have an
impact on the normalised reﬂectances as can be seen from the ﬁgure. However, from
ﬁgures 5.14b and 5.14c, which illustrate the result of optical characterisation of the
aforementioned batches of samples, excellent correspondence was found between data and
simulations (the green lines represent RCWA analysis), with both spectral features and
position matching really well the predictions. From the ﬁgures it can be as well seen that
the experimental curves do not perfectly coincide with each other, meaning that some
clear inter-chip deviations were present on the produced samples, and this aspect was
dramatically more evident in ﬁbre-based measurements as the probed area was smaller.
Incidentally, the RCWA simulations in ﬁgure 5.14 were carried out by employing the
polySi permittivity and geometrical parameters taken from SEM images, hence further
proving the polycrystalline nature of the fabricated HCGs.
==PAGE:103==
5.2 Optical characterisation
93
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.14: Free space characterisation of the fabricated samples. (a) Reference signal in
linear scale, (b) normalised reﬂectance for nine simple HCGs samples and (c) normalised
reﬂectance for ten 120 nm-pedestalled HCGs samples. The green line represent the theoretical
prediction based on RCWA simulations. Note that the reﬂection dips from 1350 to 1410 nm
shall be attributed to water absorption.
5.2.2
BRIS experiments with ﬁbre-based setup
The ﬁbre-based setup was used mainly to perform experiments of bulk refractive index
sensitivity on the produced samples. Due to the aforementioned complications, and
especially due to large ﬂuctuations of the resonance spectral position, it was impossible
to implement the planned biosensing experiments. Nevertheless, BRIS experiments were
possible to conduct and the results are about to be discussed here. Three diﬀerent liquids
were used to modify the sensor’s surrounding environment, namely deionised (DI) water,
ethanol (EtOH) and isopropanol (IPA), whose refractive indices were assumed to equal
n = 1.33, 1.35 and 1.37 respectively, according to available tabulated results.
First of all, ﬁgure 5.15 shows an example of typical spectral traces acquired with the
OSA for diﬀerent vertical positions of the ﬁbre tip with respect to the sample surface,
yet always probing the same spot on the grating plane. From such ﬁgure the eﬀect of
average over the whole set of collected ray angles is clearly evident: when the ﬁbre-tip
is very close to the sample surface (i.e., it touches the sample) no reﬂection peak can
be observed, and this shall be attributed to the various angles of incidence, yet also
there most likely is a contribution from the fact that touching the sample causes it to
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Experimental
be further tilted from the rest position, hence destroying the resonance features. As
the ﬁbre gets far from the sample, a resonance peak appears (small in size due to the
logarithmic scale) and gets progressively sharper. A trade oﬀbetween resonance feature
and signal quality had to be found in order to observe some similarities between the
experimental data and simulated curves.
Figure 5.15: Example of signal trace acquired by the OSA for increasing distance of the ﬁbre
tip from the sample surface: the resonance peak becomes sharper as the ﬁbre moves away from
the sample.
Figures 5.16a and 5.16b instead show examples of normalised reﬂectance curves
obtained upon normalisation of the experimental data by the reference signal (i.e., the
source spectrum reﬂected by a gold mirror). It can be seen how the signal’s baseline
is indeed polluted by FP oscillations (fast from the sample, slow from the ﬁlter), and
they were even greatly reduced by sticking a carbon pad on the samples’ backside as
previously discussed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.16: Examples of BRIS measurements, normalised reﬂectance: (a) simple HCG in
diﬀerent liquids and (b) 120 nm-pedestalled HCG in diﬀerent liquids.
==PAGE:105==
5.2 Optical characterisation
95
In regards to data normalisation, having mirror and samples diﬀerent thicknesses it
was not possible to maintain exactly the same distance between surface and ﬁbre tip at
each measurement, hence signals were collected by monitoring the power level, thus by
setting the ﬁbre tip at an height that gave (roughly) the same amount of power. This is
not a good practice and should be avoided, yet no other way of acquiring meaningful
data was found. As such, the reﬂectance value should be taken with a grain of salt,
meaning that the reﬂection peak could be actually higher or lower than what is reported.
For the sake of this analysis, however, only the qualitative shape of the resonance and its
position were of interest. A further complication was introduced by intra-chip deviations
of the resonance position (i.e., the resonance moved even by 3 −4 nm on the same chip),
which made impossible unloading and re-loading the samples after having deposited a
new liquid. Given the large ﬂuctuations in resonance position from chip to chip and
even within the same sample, the only feasible measurement protocol that was found
consisted in:
1) Loading the sample and ﬁxing its position;
2) Pouring IPA with a pipette and waiting few minutes for the liquid to settle down;
3) Performing the measurement, lifting the ﬁbre and waiting for IPA to evaporate;
4) Pouring EtOH, waiting few minutes for it to settle down, lowering the ﬁbre to
return to the same power level;
5) Performing the measurement, lifting the ﬁbre and waiting for EtOH to evaporate;
6) Concluding with water (slower evaporation) following the same protocol.
Such protocol allowed eventually to obtain meaningful BRIS curves. Regarding the
spectral shape, relatively narrow resonance peaks were indeed observed, yet the measured
FWHMs (1.2 to 2.5 nm) largely deviate from the predicted values which in any case
should be smaller than 0.5 nm. Several contributions to the resonance broadening
can be found, the most relevant being: the nature of the processed material (more
polycrystalline than amorphous), the averaged measurement over diﬀerent angles of
incidence, the convolution of spectral feature and slow FP oscillations originated from the
longpass ﬁlter, scattering due to sidewalls and surface roughness, and non-uniformities
on the grating geometry. Furthermore, given the poor signal quality, it is very hard to
determine whether pedestalling the gratings actually narrowed down the resonance as it
should. For this reason, quantitative analysis of the measured Q-factor is avoided here
in order not to claim facts which are not evident from the data. Nonetheless, seen the
diﬀerent behaviour of the simple and pedestalled samples in air, it is very likely that such
an improvement could be clearly observed in a liquid environment, once the measurement
setup will be perfectly functional.
The measured curves deviate in this case from the simulations of HCGs made of
either amorphous of polycrystalline silicon, hence suggesting that the actual material
may be a mixture of the two. Indeed, the resonance peak should be, with the measured
grating size, slightly above 1550 nm for an aSi structure, and somewhere around 1480 nm
(broader resonance) for a poly-Si HCG. Being the resonance on average located around
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Experimental
1530-1540 nm (in EtOH) further proves the statement.
Figure 5.17 shows the ﬁnal result of BRIS experiments on the produced samples
for two cases: ﬁgure 5.17a illustrates the BRIS curve when the normalised reﬂection
peak was monitored, while 5.17b shows the same curve obtained by monitoring the
reﬂection dip in logarithmic scale. The error bars were obtained by calculating mean
value and standard deviations of measurements performed on six diﬀerent chips for each
kind of sample. Three main conclusions can be drawn from such ﬁgures: huge inter-chip
deviations indeed aﬀected the samples (observable by simply looking at the error bars),
the pedestalled gratings appear to provide an improvement in sensitivity as predicted by
simulations, and both reﬂection peaks and dips can be eﬀectively used to measure the
sensitivity of the devices with consistent results.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.17: Bulk refractive index sensitivity curves obtained by monitoring (a) the normalised
reﬂection peak and (b) the reﬂection dip in decibels.
As it can be clearly seen the sensitivity values considerably diﬀer depending on
whether one observes the reﬂection peak or dip. The reason behind this is that often
the reﬂection peak is corrupted by strong oscillations, which may confuse the absolute
maximum with a local peak due to the overlap between spectral response and oscillations.
Moreover, being forced to pour liquids on the sample stage while keeping it ﬁxed may
introduce some deformation on the spectral shape due to the droplet shape and its
surface tension, which could aﬀect the incident beam to some extent. Furthermore, it
was unexpected to see that while tracking the reﬂection dip provided higher sensitivity
for the pedestalled gratings, the opposite happened for the simple versions. This should
be attributed to measurement inaccuracy and diﬃculty on implementing the protocol, as
it was shown in the theoretical analysis, and conﬁrmed by running BRIS simulations by
RCWA, that peak and dip of the resonance should retain the same sensitivity.
To conclude the section, it is important to comment on the fact that the measured
BRIS values were evidently lower than the simulated values. This was expected as no
experiment can outperform a numerical simulation, yet the diﬀerence is quite substantial
and an explanation should be found. The most realistic reason behind this lowering
of the sensor’s performance has to be sought in the combination of extremely small
characteristic samples’ sizes and the employed measurement protocol. Having a geometry
in the nanometre range, it is reasonable to assume that the gratings’ trenches were not
==PAGE:107==
5.2 Optical characterisation
97
completely ﬁlled with liquids at the moment of measuring. Indeed, due to the surface
tension of liquid droplets, the samples’ surface may be perceived as liquid-phobic when a
small amount of solution is poured on top of the chips with air trapped in the cavities
(Lotus eﬀect). This issue may be overcome by waiting long time from when the liquid
is poured and when the measurement is carried out. However, obviously, this is not
compatible with the employed liquids as they evaporate quite fast (EtOH and IPA), thus
they would be gone before they completely penetrated the trenches. As a result, the BRIS
curves should be attributed mainly to the intensity hot-spot at the grating surface, hence
the sensors were weakened by the impossibility of exploiting the ﬁeld proﬁle components
in the grating plane. The absence of liquid in the trenches may deﬁnitely be another
contribution to the observed resonance broadening, as the samples were supposed to
sharply resonate only when completely immersed in suitable liquids. The presence of air
in the trenches may even cause a further Fabry-Perót resonance which may contribute to
rendering the signal more noisy.
5.2.3
Discussion
Quantitative characterisation of the fabricated samples was possible and accurate when
performed with a free-space setup in air, while a larger degree of inaccuracy aﬀected
the measurements in a liquid environment due to complications with the employed
measurement setup and protocol. Nonetheless, the obtained results were to a good extent
in line with the expectations, hence proving that the fabricated sensors were of decent
quality regardless the issues encountered during their fabrication. Sensing experiments
were found to be much harder to conduct than expected due to the aforementioned
reasons, and as such a more advanced and complicated measurement setup and protocol
is being implemented. BRIS measurements conﬁrmed the performance improvement
provided by pedestalling the gratings, yet the measured sensitivities were far from the
predicted results due to the discussed reasons. To compensate for this eﬀect, and to
render actual biosensing experiments possible, the chips should be combined with a
microﬂuidic channel network which would allow to controllably and precisely deliver
liquids and reagents to the samples, hence completely immersing the sensors in the liquid
environment they are supposed to resonate in and ensuring a stable ﬂow of antibodies
and biomarkers as thoroughly discussed in the literature, e.g., [22–24].
To conclude, another unpleasant discovery was related to the used photolithography
mask: due to a mistake made when purchasing the reticle, it came with a tolerance
over the geometrical parameters of around 10%. This means that the chromium pattern
imprinted on the mask may deviate from the target size by as much as 40 nm for the
one-dimensional structure of interest, which is a huge deviation for the purpose of this
project. This was discovered as another device being fabricated in parallel to HCGs,
namely a nanohole array - imprinted on a diﬀerent portion of the same mask - presented
clear ﬂuctuations in the holes diameter clearly visible at the SEM. Indeed, the nanohole
array showed very large shifts of the resonance position during characterisation, which
is reasonable as such two-dimensional structure is harder to print during a lithography
than a simpler one-dimensional grating. This conﬁrmed that the inter and intra-chip
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Experimental
deviations were to a good extent due to the photolithography process, and in particular
to quality of the purchased reticle.
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Two advanced conﬁgurations of silicon high-contrast grating resonator were numerically
studied and optimised to provide an improvement in terms of sensing performance and
ﬁgure of merit. The two novel designs are based on two diﬀerent mechanisms: on the
one hand, pedestalled HCGs relies on increased index contrast which result in extended
sensing area and improvement in resonance Q-factor; on the other hand, buried HCGs
are based on the maximisation of resonant ﬁeld-biomarker interaction. The numerical
study led to the submission of an abstract to the OSA Sensors and Sensing Congress that
will be held (online) in Vancouver, Canada, in July 2021. Moreover, a journal publication
resuming the project ﬁndings is currently being written.
The project proceeded with the fabrication of the designed structures, starting from
the standard HCG version in order to identify a suitable and reproducible fabrication
protocol allowing to manufacture the designed geometry with the highest possible
accuracy. Achieving almost perfectly the target sizes was possible, but several issues
arose while trying to minimising the surface and sidewalls roughness of the produced
structures, which eventually would lead to scattering, and increased signal extinction in
the characterisation process, that unavoidably results in a resonance broadening and loss
of ﬁgure of merit. Another encountered diﬃculty was the production of SOI wafers with
the exact required thickness, the attempted control of which led to an unwanted transition
of the deposited silicon crystalline structure from amorphous to polycrystalline, which
again introduced many complications during optical characterisation. Furthermore, the
fabrication process had to prematurely stop due to faulty cleanroom equipment resulting
from two major power cuts of the surrounding area. As such, the characterised samples
were aﬀected by roughness on the sidewalls and the substrate was polluted by pillars of
re-deposited materials. A solution to minimise such eﬀects was identiﬁed: increasing the
chamber temperature to 0 oC and extending the BARC etch duration does provide the
desired result.
A robust protocol based on vapoured HF etching of SiO2 for the manufacturing of
pedestalled HCGs was developed as well, and indeed structures of good quality, precise
etch proﬁle and desired etch depth were successfully produced. Pedestalled HCGs oﬀer
many practical advantages also in applications going beyond sensing, where a narrow
spectral response is required, as they are expected to provide a remarkable improvement
in resonance Q-factor depending on the achieved etch depth.
Producing buried HCGs could not be produced in time due to diﬃculties on uniformly
coating gratings with BCB and faulty cleanroom equipment. There is strong conﬁdence
that BCB planarisation and its dry etch supported by laser interferometry is the correct
protocol to pursue in order to manufacture such structures.
The process is highly
exploited to produce MEMS and VCSELs, which have however much larger characteristic
==PAGE:110==
100
6 Conclusion
sizes. As a matter of facts, such narrow though shallow trenches resulted very hard to
interface with liquids, both in the fabrication process yet especially during the optical
characterisation in liquid environment. The production of buried HCGs should deﬁnitely
be further developed and eventually accomplished as they constitute the most promising
advanced sensor conﬁguration, providing a 58% improvement in sensitivity to the presence
of thin dielectric coating layers.
Optical characterisation of the produced samples has been subject of thorough
investigation and optimisation as well. Two diﬀerent laboratory setups were prepared:
free-space and ﬁbre based. The former was used to successfully and with good results
characterise the produced simple and pedestalled gratings; excellent correspondence
between experimental results and numerical simulations was found. However, the designed
structures were not meant to sharply resonate in air, but rather in a liquid environment.
For this reason, there was the need of implementing a ﬁbre-based setup enabling to
probe the samples with a light source already immersed into the sensing medium, yet it
turned out to be much more complicated than expected. Due to non-uniformities of the
produced samples and unexpected Fabry-Perót oscillations originated from both setup
and sample structure, accurate measurements were not possible in liquid environment
with the available setup. Resonance features were observed and measured, yet the poor
signal quality and its corruption by the aforementioned aspects did not allow to carry out
Q-factor measurements, hence the advantage provided by pedestalled HCGs could not
be experimentally demonstrated. Nevertheless, free-space measurements did highlight a
diﬀerence in the spectral responses of simple and pedestalled gratings, which surely is
encouraging.
Bulk refractive index sensitivity experiments were attempted and led to further
conﬁrming the advantage provided by pedestalled HCGs over the standard implementa-
tion. However, the estimated BRIS values were substantially lower than what numerical
simulations predict, and this shall once again attributed to diﬃculty on having liquids
penetrating the narrow trenches by simply pouring few droplets on the sensor surface
(Lotus eﬀect). This issue will be overcome by combining the developed sensing platforms
with microﬂuidic networks allowing to controllably deliver liquids and biological samples
to the sensing sites.
Overall, the project can be considered a success as it allowed not only to identify
unreported, advanced HCG designs with improved sensing performances, but also to gain
a clear insight in the most challenging aspects related to fabrication and characterisation
of the produced samples. Moreover, in light of the many tests and thorough optimisation,
it will result extremely easier in the future to produce the developed structures with the
desired quality. Eventually, when actual biosensing experiments will be implemented,
there is great conﬁdence that such novel conﬁgurations will prove their validity by
expressing sensitivity towards biomarkers beyond the reported values.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
T. Sun. “High Contrast Grating for Optical Sensing”. PhD thesis. University of
California at Berkeley, 2017. url: http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/
TechRpts/2017/EECS-2017-170.html.
[2]
T. Sun et al. “High-contrast grating resonators for label-free detection of disease
biomarkers”. Scientiﬁc Reports vol. 6 (2016), pages 1–7. doi: 10.1038/srep27482.
[3]
R. Magnusson and S. S. Wang. “New principle for optical ﬁlters”. Applied Physics
Letters vol. 61.9 (1992), pages 1022–1024. doi: 10.1063/1.107703.
[4]
S. S. Wang and R. Magnusson. “Theory and applications of guided-mode resonance
ﬁlters”. Applied Optics vol. 32.14 (1993), page 2606. doi: 10.1364/ao.32.002606.
[5]
S. Tibuleac and R. Magnusson. “Reﬂection and transmission guided-mode resonance
ﬁlters”. Journal of the Optical Society of America A vol. 14.7 (1997), page 1617.
doi: 10.1364/josaa.14.001617.
[6]
P. S. Priambodo, T. A. Maldonado, and R. Magnusson. “Fabrication and charac-
terization of high-quality waveguide-mode resonant optical ﬁlters”. Applied Physics
Letters vol. 83.16 (2003), pages 3248–3250. doi: 10.1063/1.1618930.
[7]
Y. Kanamori, T. Kitani, and K. Hane. “Guided-mode resonant grating ﬁlter
fabricated on silicon-on-insulator substrate”. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics
vol. 45.3 A (2006), pages 1883–1885. doi: 10.1143/JJAP.45.1883.
[8]
K.J. Lee et al. “Silicon-layer guided-mode resonance polarizer with 40-nm band-
width”. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters vol. 20.22 (2008), pages 1857–1859.
doi: 10.1109/LPT.2008.2004777.
[9]
C.F.R. Mateus et al. “Broad-Band Mirror (1.12-1.62um) Using a Subwavelength
Grating”. IEE Photonics Technology Letters vol. 16.7 (2004), pages 1676–1678.
[10]
J.J. Wang et al. “Resonant grating ﬁlters as refractive index sensors for chemical and
biological detections”. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics
and Nanometer Structures vol. 23.6 (2005), page 3006. doi: 10.1116/1.2101774.
[11]
D.D. Wawro, P. Priambodo, and R. Magnusson. “Resonating periodic waveguides as
ultraresolution sensors in biomedicine”. Nanoengineering: Fabrication, Properties,
Optics, and Devices vol. 5515.October 2004 (2004), page 52. doi: 10.1117/12.
560192.
[12]
R. Magnusson et al. “Characteristics of resonant leaky-mode biosensors”. Nanosens-
ing: Materials and Devices II vol. 6008 (2005), 60080U. doi: 10.1117/12.634094.
==PAGE:112==
102
Bibliography
[13]
H. N. Daghestani and B.W. Day. “Theory and applications of surface plasmon
resonance, resonant mirror, resonant waveguide grating, and dual polarization
interferometry biosensors”. Sensors vol. 10.11 (2010), pages 9630–9646. doi: 10.
3390/s101109630.
[14]
R. Magnusson et al. “Leaky-mode resonance photonics: an applications platform”.
Nanoengineering: Fabrication, Properties, Optics, and Devices VIII vol. 8102 (2011),
page 810202. doi: 10.1117/12.896431.
[15]
J.E. Baker, R. Sriram, and B.L. Miller. “Two-dimensional photonic crystals for
sensitive microscale chemical and biochemical sensing”. Lab on a Chip vol. 15.4
(2015), pages 971–990. doi: 10.1039/c4lc01208a.
[16]
J. Langer et al. “Present and future of surface-enhanced Raman scattering”. ACS
Nano vol. 14.1 (2020), pages 28–117. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224.
[17]
H. Shaﬁee et al. “Nanostructured optical photonic crystal biosensor for HIV viral
load measurement”. Scientiﬁc Reports vol. 4 (2014), pages 1–7. doi: 10.1038/
srep04116.
[18]
D.N. Maksimov et al. “Refractive index sensing with optical bound states in the
continuum”. Optics Express vol. 28.26 (2020), page 38907. doi: 10.1364/oe.411749.
eprint: 2010.11499.
[19]
D. Threm, Y. Nazirizadeh, and M. Gerken. “Photonic crystal biosensors towards
on-chip integration”. Journal of Biophotonics vol. 5.8-9 (2012), pages 601–616. doi:
10.1002/jbio.201200039.
[20]
C. J. Chang-Hasnain and W. Yang. “High-contrast gratings for integrated opto-
electronics”. Advances in Optics and Photonics vol. 4.3 (2012), page 379. doi:
10.1364/aop.4.000379.
[21]
G. Quaranta et al. “Recent Advances in Resonant Waveguide Gratings”. Laser and
Photonics Reviews vol. 12.9 (2018), pages 1–31. doi: 10.1002/lpor.201800017.
[22]
O. Yavas et al. “On-a-chip Biosensing Based on All-Dielectric Nanoresonators”.
Nano Letters vol. 17.7 (2017), pages 4421–4426. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.
7b01518.
[23]
O. Yavas et al. “Self-Calibrating On-Chip Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance
Sensing for Quantitative and Multiplexed Detection of Cancer Markers in Human
Serum”. ACS Sensors vol. 3.7 (2018), pages 1376–1384. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.
8b00305.
[24]
O. Yavas, M. Svedendahl, and R. Quidant. “Unravelling the Role of Electric and
Magnetic Dipoles in Biosensing with Si Nanoresonators”. ACS Nano vol. 13.4
(2019), pages 4582–4588. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.9b00572.
[25]
P.T. Lin et al. “Chip-scale Mid-Infrared chemical sensors using air-clad pedestal
silicon waveguides”. Lab on a Chip vol. 13.11 (2013), pages 2161–2166. doi: 10.
1039/c3lc50177a.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
103
[26]
K. Akama et al. “Wash- And Ampliﬁcation-Free Digital Immunoassay Based on
Single-Particle Motion Analysis”. ACS Nano (2019). doi: 10.1021/acsnano.
9b05917.
[27]
K.S. McKeating, A. Aubé, and J.F. Masson. “Biosensors and nanobiosensors for
therapeutic drug and response monitoring”. Analyst vol. 141.2 (2016), pages 429–
449. doi: 10.1039/c5an01861g.
[28]
J.N. Anker et al. “Biosensing with plasmonic nanosensors”. Nanoscience and
Technology: A Collection of Reviews from Nature Journals vol. 7 (2009), pages 308–
319. doi: 10.1142/9789814287005_0032.
[29]
I.A. Darwish. “Immunoassay Methods and their Applications in Pharmaceutical
Analysis: Basic Methodology and Recent Advances.” International journal of
biomedical science : IJBS vol. 2.3 (2006), pages 217–35. url: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23674985%0A.
[30]
M. Svedendahl et al. “Refractometric sensing using propagating versus localized
surface plasmons: A direct comparison”. Nano Letters vol. 9.12 (2009), pages 4428–
4433. doi: 10.1021/nl902721z.
[31]
S.D. Gan and K.R. Patel. “Enzyme immunoassay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay”. Journal of Investigative Dermatology vol. 133.9 (2013), pages 1–3. doi:
10.1038/jid.2013.287.
[32]
X. Chong et al. “Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption: Pushing the Frontier
for On-Chip Gas Sensing”. ACS Sensors vol. 3.1 (2018), pages 230–238. doi:
10.1021/acssensors.7b00891.
[33]
B.T. Cunningham et al. “Recent Advances in Biosensing with Photonic Crystal
Surfaces: A Review”. IEEE Sensors Journal vol. 16.10 (2016), pages 3349–3366.
doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2015.2429738.
[34]
B. Špačková et al. “Optical Biosensors Based on Plasmonic Nanostructures: A
Review”. Proceedings of the IEEE vol. 104.12 (2016), pages 2380–2408. doi: 10.
1109/JPROC.2016.2624340.
[35]
G. Pitruzzello and T.F. Krauss. “Photonic crystal resonances for sensing and
imaging”. Journal of Optics vol. 20.7 (2018).
[36]
W. Lukosz. “Integrated optical chemical and direct biochemical sensors”. Sensors
and Actuators B vol. 29 (1995), pages 37–50.
[37]
T. Baba et al. “Light propagation characteristics of straight single-line-defect
waveguides in photonic crystal slabs fabricated into a silicon-on-insulator substrate”.
IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics vol. 38.7 (2002), pages 743–752. doi: 10.
1109/JQE.2002.1017584.
[38]
S.S. Aćimović et al. “LSPR Chip for Parallel, Rapid, and Sensitive Detection of
Cancer Markers in Serum”. Nano letters (2014), pages 6–11.
[39]
T. Chung et al. “Plasmonic nanostructures for nano-scale bio-sensing”. Sensors
vol. 11.11 (2011), pages 10907–10929. doi: 10.3390/s111110907.
==PAGE:114==
104
Bibliography
[40]
P.G. Gottschalk and J.R. Dunn. “The ﬁve-parameter logistic: A characterization
and comparison with the four-parameter logistic”. Analytical Biochemistry vol.
343.1 (2005), pages 54–65. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2005.04.035.
[41]
B.M. Edwin A.H. Kenneth. Pulse oximeter. 1988.
[42]
W.T. Heller et al. “The Solution Structure of a Cardiac Troponin C-Troponin
I-Troponin T Complex Shows a Somewhat Compact Troponin C Interacting with
an Extended Troponin I-Troponin T Component”. Biochemistry vol. 41.52 (2002),
pages 15654–15663.
[43]
S. Sharma, P.G. Jackson, and J. Makan. “Cardiac troponins”. Journal of Clinical
Pathology vol. 57.10 (2004), pages 1025–1026. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2003.015420.
[44]
S. Upasham, A. Tanak, and S. Prasad. “Cardiac troponin biosensors: where are
we now?” Advanced Health Care Technologies vol. 4 (2018), pages 1–13. doi:
10.2147/ahct.s138543.
[45]
S. Spindel and K.E. Sapsford. “Evaluation of optical detection platforms for
multiplexed detection of proteins and the need for point-of-care biosensors for
clinical use”. Sensors (Switzerland) vol. 14.12 (2014), pages 22313–22341. doi:
10.3390/s141222313.
[46]
C.W. Hsu et al. “Bound states in the continuum”. Nature Reviews Materials vol.
1.9 (2016). doi: 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.48.
[47]
M.C. Teich B.E.A. Saleh. Fundamentals of Photonics. Second edition. John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., Publications, 2007.
[48]
V. Karagodsky, C. Chase, and C.J. Chang-Hasnain. “Matrix Fabry–Perot resonance
mechanism in high-contrast gratings”. Optics Letters vol. 36.9 (2011), page 1704.
doi: 10.1364/ol.36.001704.
[49]
M.F. Limonov et al. “Fano resonances in photonics”. Nature Photonics vol. 11.9
(2017), pages 543–554. doi: 10.1038/NPHOTON.2017.142.
[50]
E.D. Palik. Handbook of optical constants of solids. vol. 1. 2012. doi: 10.1016/
C2009-0-20920-2.
[51]
A.V. Lavrinenko et al. Numerical Methods in Photonics. Edited by Taylor and
Francis Group. CRC Press, 2015. doi: 10.1201/b17408.
[52]
M.G. Moharam and T.K. Gaylord. “Rigorous coupled-wave analysis of planar-
grating diﬀraction”. Journal of the Optical Society of America B vol. 71.7 (1981).
[53]
A. Khavasi, A. Kazemi Jahromi, and K. Mehrany. “Longitudinal Legendre polyno-
mial expansion of electromagnetic ﬁelds for analysis of arbitrary-shaped gratings”.
Journal of the Optical Society of America A vol. 25.7 (2008), page 1564. doi:
10.1364/josaa.25.001564.
[54]
S. Hamdi, W. Schiesser, and G. Griﬃths. “Method of lines”. Scholarpedia vol. 2.7
(2007), page 2859. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.2859.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
105
[55]
J.R. de Lasson et al. “Benchmarking ﬁve numerical simulation techniques for
computing resonance wavelengths and quality factors in photonic crystal membrane
line defect cavities”. Optics Express vol. 26.9 (2017), pages 11366–11392. doi:
10.1364/oe.26.011366. eprint: 1710.02215.
[56]
H. Vyas and R.S. Hegde. “Improved refractive-index sensing performance in medium
contrast gratings by asymmetry engineering”. Optical Materials Express vol. 10.7
(2020), page 1616. doi: 10.1364/ome.395833.
[57]
S. Surdo and G. Barillaro. “Impact of Fabrication and Bioassay Surface Roughness
on the Performance of Label-Free Resonant Biosensors Based on One-Dimensional
Photonic Crystal Microcavities”. ACS Sensors vol. 5.9 (2020), pages 2894–2902.
doi: 10.1021/acssensors.0c01183.
[58]
J. Vörös. “The density and refractive index of adsorbing protein layers”. Biophysical
Journal vol. 87.1 (2004), pages 553–561. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.103.030072.
[59]
S. Tadepalli et al. “Peptide Functionalized Gold Nanorods for the Sensitive Detec-
tion of a Cardiac Biomarker Using Plasmonic Paper Devices”. Scientiﬁc Reports
vol. 5 (2015), pages 1–11. doi: 10.1038/srep16206.
[60]
G. Pitruzzello, D. Conteduca, and T.F. Krauss. “Nanophotonics for bacterial
detection and antimicrobial susceptibility testing”. Nanophotonics vol. 9.15 (2020),
pages 4447–4472. doi: 10.1515/nanoph-2020-0388.
[61]
N. Bhalla et al. “Plasma-Assisted Large-Scale Nanoassembly of Metal-Insulator
Bioplasmonic Mushrooms”. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces vol. 10.1 (2018),
pages 219–226. doi: 10.1021/acsami.7b15396.
[62]
M.A. Otte et al. “Improved biosensing capability with novel suspended nanodisks”.
Journal of Physical Chemistry C vol. 115.13 (2011), pages 5344–5351. doi: 10.
1021/jp110363a.
[63]
S. Franssila. Introduction to Microfabrication. Edited by Wiley Online Library.
Second edition. 2010.
[64]
D. Biswas S. Tiku. III-V Integrated Circuits Fabrication Technology. Edited by
CRC Press. 2016.
[65]
E. Shkondin et al. “High Aspect Ratio Plasmonic Nanotrench Structures with
Large Active Surface Area for Label-Free Mid-Infrared Molecular Absorption
Sensing”. ACS Applied Nano Materials vol. 1.3 (2018), pages 1212–1218. doi:
10.1021/acsanm.7b00381.
[66]
S. M. George. “Atomic layer deposition: An overview”. Chemical Reviews vol. 110.1
(2010), pages 111–131. doi: 10.1021/cr900056b.
[67]
E. Shkondin. “Fabrication of Hyperbolic Metamaterials using Atomic Layer Depo-
sition”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
==PAGE:116==
106
Bibliography
[68]
B. Chang et al. “DREM: Inﬁnite etch selectivity and optimized scallop size dis-
tribution with conventional photoresists in an adapted multiplexed Bosch DRIE
process”. Microelectronic Engineering vol. 191 (2018), pages 77–83. doi: 10.1016/
j.mee.2018.01.034.
[69]
F. Laermer (Stuttgart DE) and A. Schilp (Schwa/bisch Gmu/ nd DE). Method
of anisotropically etching silicon. url: https://www.freepatentsonline.com/
5501893.html.
[70]
V.T.H Nguyen et al. “Ultrahigh aspect ratio etching of silicon in SF6 -O2 plasma:
The clear-oxidize-remove-etch (CORE) sequence and chromium mask”. Journal of
Vacuum Science & Technology A vol. 38.5 (2020), pages 053002-1–053002-12. doi:
10.1116/6.0000357.
