==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Bjørn Kurt Hansen
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) is one of the most common heart arrhythmia, and its
prevalence is expected to grow as the population ages. It is associated with
serious life threatening events such as stroke and heart failure. Electrocardio-
gram (ECG) recordings are one of the most economical and non-invasive tools
for detection of AF and other heart arrythmias. AF episodes are often sporadic
and asymptomatic (in the initial stage); therefore require long-term monitoring
in a patient’s natural setting.
Long-term monitoring produces a large amount of ECG data that needs to be
examined to detect AF. The manual examination of days or week-long ECG is,
however, a resource and time-consuming task. In the past, several algorithms
have been introduced to assist in the automated detection of AF. However,
accurate AF detection in the presence of ambulatory noise under free-living
conditions still remains an open challenge as ambulatory noises often can mimic
AF and other arrythmias.
To help in the automatic AF detection from raw ECG inputs and in the presence
of ambulatory noise, in this study, we designed and developed a deep learning-
based AF and noise detection system. The proposed system is robust enough to
be used reliably in the presence of natural ambulatory noise. It comprises of two
deep learning (DL) algorithms, a noise detection algorithm, and a AF detection
algorithm. The noise detection algorithm was trained using noise data from
the MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database, and the Physionet 2017 Cardiology
Challenge data set. The AF detection algorithm was trained using data from
the MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database.
The two algorithms in sequence
were tested on noise contaminated data from the Physionet 2017 Cardiology
==PAGE:4==
ii
Challenge data set as well as the Contextual Arrhythmia Database. The AF
detection algorithm used together with the noise detection algorithm achieved
a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of around 85% and over 90%, respectively when
tested on the noise contaminated data. When the AF detection algorithm alone
was tested on the noise contaminated data, a drop in speciﬁcity to below 80%
was seen, as many noise signals were being classiﬁed as AF. The results in this
study also showcase the importance of reliable noise screening when attempting
to perform AF detection on ECG recordings taken in a free-living ambulatory
setting.
The proposed system can be used in mHealth devices to either act as a warning
system for patients unknowingly suﬀering from AF or as a tool for physicians
to accelerate the assessment of ECG recordings taken in a free-living ambula-
tory setting (i.e., recordings taken by a Holter monitor). This will save their
examination time and resources in the clinical setting.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Atrieﬂimren (AF) er den mest almindelige hjerterytmeforstyrrelse i vores be-
folkning, og dens prævalens forventes at vokse mens befolkningen bliver ældre.
AF er forbundet med alvorlige livstruende begivenheder såsom slagtilfælde og
hjertesvigt. Langsigtet overvågning af patienter, der mistænkes for AF er of-
te påkrævet til diagnoser, da AF ofte er sporadisk; elektrokardiogram (EKG)
-optagelser af AF-episoderne er et standardværktøj til at identiﬁcere dets til-
stedeværelse. En AF-episode optages sandsynligvis i et langvarigt EKG (> 24
timer), men dette introducerer også en stor mængde data, der skal inspiceres. Et
andet problem med standard AF-diagnoser er, at det lægger ethvert ansvar på
patienten til i første omgang at søge lægehjælp om enhver mulig arytmi og der-
efter overfører alt ansvar til lægen til at inspicere, identiﬁcere og diagnosticere
en patient. Med stigningen i mHealth-popularitet og tilgængelige data analyse-
værktøjer kunne denne skæve ansvarsfordeling udjævnes. Formålet med denne
undersøgelse var at designe et system til automatisk AF-detektion ved hjælp af
rå EKG-input. Systemet blev udviklet til at være robust nok til at blive anvendt
pålideligt i nærvær af naturlig ambulant støj. Det antages, at systemet kunne
tilpasses til brug i mHealth-enheder, til enten at fungere som et advarselssystem
for patienter, der ubevidst lider af AF, eller som et værktøj til læger for at frem-
skynde vurderingen af EKG-optagelser taget i en fritlevende ambulant indstil-
ling (f.eks. optagelser taget af en Holter-skærm). Det foreslåede system består af
to “deep learning (DL)” indlæringsalgoritmer, en støjdetekteringsalgoritme og
en AF-detektionsalgoritme. Støjdetekteringsalgoritmen blev trænet ved hjælp
af støjdata fra MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database og datasættet Physionet
2017 Cardiology Challenge. AF-detektionsalgoritmen blev trænet ved hjælp af
data fra MIT-BIH atrieﬁbrilleringsdatabase. De to algoritmer i rækkefølge blev
testet på støjforurenede data fra datasættet Physionet 2017 Cardiology Chal-
==PAGE:6==
iv
lenge samt den kontekstuelle arytmi-database. AF-detekteringsalgoritmen, der
blev brugt sammen med støjdetekteringsalgoritmen, opnåede en følsomhed og
speciﬁcitet på henholdsvis 85
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared as part of the requirements of obtaining a Master of
Science in Engineering degree within Mathematical Modelling and Computation
at the Technical University of Denmark. This thesis represents a work load of
30 ECTS credits and was written at the department of DTU Health Tech.
Lyngby, 01-January-2021
Bjørn Kurt Hansen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to show my gratitude to my main supervisor, Associate Profes-
sor Sadasivan Puthusserypady for his regular and consistant guidance through-
out the entire thesis project. I would also like to extend this gratitude to De-
vender Kumar who although was not technically an advisor, provided me with
considerable advice and guidance.
I want to thank my parents and sister for always supporting me throughout my
educational endeavours, my girlfriend for her enthusiasm and positivity, and my
Siberian Husky for being extremely cute.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations and symbols
==PAGE:12==
x
AF
Atrial Fibrillation
NSR
Normal Sinus Rhythm
ECG
Electrocardiogram
SOTA
State of the art
NSR
Normal Sinus Rhythm
RRI
RR-intervals
HRV
Heart rate variability
DL
Deep Learning
MLP
Multilayer perceptron
FFN
Feed forward network
FCN
Fully connected network
CNN
Convolutional neural network
RNN
Recurrent neural network
LSTM
Long short term memory
GRU
Gated recurrent unit
FCDAE
Fully convolutional denoising autoencoder
NLP
Natural language processing
FIR
Frequency impulse response
Hz
Hertz, samples per time unit
V
Volt, energy per charge unit
AP
Action potential
SA
Sinoatrial
AV
Atrioventricular
ReLU
Rectiﬁed linear unit
SNR
Signal to noise ratio
PE
Positional encoding
AFDB
MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database
NSTDB
MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database
CinC2017
Physionet 2017 Cardiology Challenge
CACHET-ACDB
Contextual Arrhythmia Database
CACHET-ACDB
Contextual Arrhythmia Database
AFDB
MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database
==PAGE:13==
xi
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations and symbols
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Contribution of this Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review (SOTA)
5
2.1
Traditional arrhythmia detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Modern ML/DL based arrhythmia detection . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Heart Physiology and ECG
11
3.1
Heart Physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
ECG data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
AF and the heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Technical Background
17
4.1
Main concepts of deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Transformer model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
5
Materials and Methods
23
5.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.1
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database (AFDB)
. . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2
MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database (NSTDB) . . . . . .
24
5.1.3
Physionet Cardiology Challenge data set (CinC2017) . . .
25
5.1.4
Contextual Arrhythmia Database (CACHET-ACDB)
. .
25
5.2
Model training and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Data processing and AF detection model description . . . . . . .
26
5.3.1
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3.2
Heartbeat detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3.3
Noise detection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.4
AF detection model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.5
Performance Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Results
37
6.1
Performance of AF detection models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Performance of Noise detection Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.1
Autoencoder based noise detection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.2
CNN based noise detection model
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Evaluation of AF detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3.1
Evaluation on CinC2017 database
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Future of AF detection, a model or data problem?
. . . . . . . .
50
7.2
Impact of noise on AF detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
It has been found that heart disease is amongst the leading causes of death
[BVC+18] globally. Heart diseases often cause an irregularity in heart behaviour,
called an arrhythmia. Among all types of arrhythmia, atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) is
the most common cardiac arrhythmia and it is estimated to be prevalent in the
range of 2% to 4% of the population; with the prevalence expected to increase
linearly in the future as the average age of the population increases.
Given
the current statistics, there is an approximate probability of 37% for any given
individual of European decent to suﬀer from AF over the span of their lifetime
[HPD+20]. According to [HPD+20], AF is strongly associated with an increase
in several serious health outcomes such as a 1.5 to 3.5-fold increase in mortality
prevalent in 20-30% of patients who suﬀer a stroke and in 20-30% of patients
who suﬀer heart failure. It is also associated with cognitive decline (ranging from
mild dysfunction to dementia) as well as impaired exercise tolerance leading to
reduced quality of life. Because of the serious implications AF has, it will be
the main focus of this study. Figure 1.1 showcases an example of an ECG signal
from a patient suﬀering from atrial ﬁbrillation.
Because of the risk to health which heart disease causes, frequent monitoring
of physiological signals is important for any person who might potentially be
suﬀering from heart disease. A standard heart monitoring technology is the elec-
trocardiogram (ECG), which is a non-invasive tool that records heart activity
over a period of time. ECG is the most economical and non-invasive means for
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
(a) Normal sinus rhythm
(b) AF
Figure 1.1: Example ECG signal showing normal sinus rhythm and AF
rhythm.
diagnosing AF [HPD+20]. However, AF episodes are often sporadic and asymp-
tomatic and thus those suﬀering from AF often require more thorough diagnostic
assessments [HPD+20]. In attempts to reduce the time needed for diagnostic
assessment, many computer aided algorithms have been developed [ELDG20] in
recent years.
There are, however, diﬃculties when analyzing ECG signals via computer-aided
models, which will be discussed later and more thoroughly. A common diﬃculty
is model transferability between patients and databases. In this context, trans-
ferability means that the model performance should not change when tested on
data from new, unseen patients (all else being equal). Another diﬃculty which
must be overcome, for a model to be reliable enough for practical use, is to not
be negatively aﬀected by the occurrence of natural noise in the ECG signal. The
development and analysis of a computer aided AF detection model will be the
aim of this project as discussed in the next section.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Aims and Objectives
3
1.1
Aims and Objectives
The aim of this project is to implement a computer-aided system which can
detect AF from raw ECG signals. This system will rely on deep learning (DL)
and will be a combination of two trained models: the ﬁrst being a noise screening
model which will take as input a raw ECG signal and output a prediction of the
ECG being of acceptable quality, the second model will perform AF classiﬁcation
and take as input the ECG signal segments which were not classiﬁed as noise
in the previous model. The AF classiﬁcation model will utilize a transformer
architecture and rely purely on self-attention. The goal by the end of the project
is that this system will be relatively robust when using real ECG data from
multiple patients (with and without disease) where the type and amount of
noise ﬂuctuates over the entire ECG signal.
The vision of this thesis project is to contribute to the ﬁeld of mHealth. In
today’s society and for most of modern history, health and chronic disease have
been things that exist in a diﬀerent dimension, outside the control of the in-
dividual, where healthcare professionals are the almighty deciders in whether
or not the individual suﬀers from a particular disease and to what extent one
is deemed healthy. This is not a problem if healthcare is readily available to
all, however there are gaps in healthcare access throughout the world, in both
low- and high- income societies. The inﬂux of mHealth and its availability to
the general public has the ability to bridge the aforementioned gap in health-
care, the use of mHealth also allows for the ﬁrst time in history, the ability
for the general public to assess their own health in an unbiased way. The ﬁeld
of heart disease is such a ﬁeld in which mHealth can make breakthroughs, as
many heart arrhythmias are diagnosed in a standard systematic fashion, where
the patient’s family history is accessed, as well as inspecting any irregular be-
haviour in the patient’s ECG signal. Since computer algorithms are relatively
systematic in their processes, detecting heart disease in live patient data is a
possible objective.
1.2
Contribution of this Thesis
Below are the main contributions made from the work of this thesis:
• A DL model utilizing self-attention to detect AF using RR Interval (RRI)
and pre-processed ECG sequences.
• A DL model which can distinguish noise signals from signals which are
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
not noise.
• The combination of the two models is shown to perform exceptionally
well when natural noise is present in the ECG data, compared to when
the noise detecting model is not used.
The code used in this project can be found at: https://github.com/bh1995/
attention_based_AF_detection.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Literature Review (SOTA)
As mentioned, frequent monitoring of patient health is of high importance when
detecting and diagnosing cardiatric disease, however, it is time- consuming for
a cardiatric professional to manually analyze ECG signals with high accuracy.
There is, therefore, much value in the development of automating the ECG
analyzing process, which has lead to several computer-aided methods for detec-
tion of various arrhythmia’s, which will further be discussed in the subsequent
sections.
Initial computer-aided methods for arrhythmia detection relied on
a preprocessing stage and then a handcrafted feature extraction stage for the
ECG signal. Today, methods are more robust where a focus is put on auto-
matic feature extraction as well as being capable of generalizing between data
populations [HZS+20] [ELDG20].
When performing the literature review, the two main features considered were:
1) relevance of the given literature to computer aided arrhythmia detection, and
2) year the given literature was published- The goal of this project is to detect
AF and as such, literature which had a similar goal was given prevalence, how-
ever since many arrhythmia diseases have close similarities, literature regarding
the detection of other types of arrhythmia was also considered. As state-of-
the-art computer-aided arrhythmia detection models change rapidly over time,
literature that was less than ﬁve years old was given prevalence.
==PAGE:22==
6
Literature Review (SOTA)
2.1
Traditional arrhythmia detection
When performing analysis of ECG for any type of arrhythmia detection, there
must be an extracting of features such that those features which are descriptive
are separated from those which are not. Traditional methods for arrhythmia
detection typically relied on some sort of statistical model which utilized features
describing heart rate variability (HRV). An example of such an approach is
the work by [AHA09], which proposed the use of RRIs to ﬁnd thresholds for
shannon entropy, successive diﬀerences between RRIs and turning point ratio.
This approach achieved high sensitivity and speciﬁcity results of 94.4% and
95.1% respectively, when tested on the MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database.
The P-wave which follows the QRS complex in a classic ECG signal is another
feature which has shown to be useful in the detection of AF. A missing P-
wave indicates atrial spasm, which is a symptom of AF, thus the detection
of a missing P-wave implies AF. An algorithm proposed in work by [PPS+14]
detected 97.8% of total AF duration in over 70 subjects, showing that by using
information about P-wave absence, false positives can be reduced. A downside
to statistical based (HRV) arrhythmia detection algorithms is that they require
longer ECG signal inputs of around 50-60 seconds for optimal results, which is
longer than other non feature based detection methods. The longer input also
makes feature-based methods less robust in dealing with shorter arrhythmia
episodes, which can for example be the case with paroxysmal AF. A positive
characteristic for statistical based (HRV) arrhythmia detection algorithms is
that they are often less computationally expensive compared to other methods,
however in recent years, it is deep learning (DL) based algorithms which have
shown the most promise in terms of automatic arrhythmia detection.
2.2
Modern ML/DL based arrhythmia detection
Deep learning methods are beneﬁcial in that they are relatively robust, as they
generally require little to no feature engineering from the raw data by the practi-
tioner. There are three deep learning architectures which are predominant in the
recent heart disease detection literature, namely variants of multiplayer percep-
tron neural networks (MLP),variants of convolutional neural networks (CNN),
and variants of recurrent neural networks (RNN). Many times these three deep
learning architecture variants are combined with one another to create a more
robust deep learning model which leverages beneﬁts from the individual archi-
tectures. [ELDG20]
MLP: An MLP network was used for the classiﬁcation of normal and various
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Modern ML/DL based arrhythmia detection
7
types of arrhythmia heartbeats by [SP18]. The MLP network used consisted of
seven layers and was able to identify heartbeat types with over 99% accuracy.
A four layer MLP network was used by [SE18] to classify normal and abnor-
mal ECG signals, where the input to the network was raw ECG signals. The
suggested MLP network achieved nearly 90% accuracy in the task of classifying
normal and abnormal ECG signals.
CNN: The CNN deep learning based architecture is a popular architecture in
the heart disease detection literature. CNNs can be used for almost any task
using ECG data as CNNs are good at capturing features which describe infor-
mation about how neighbors (groups) of data points relate to other neighbors
of data points. A deep CNN-based neural network was used by [SE18] with
raw ECG signals as input for the classiﬁcation of ten types of arrhythmia, such
as, atrial ﬁbrillation, atrial ﬂutter, etc. All types of arrhythmia’s were able to
be classiﬁed with over 80% accuracy. A CNN-based neural network was also
used by [RPR+18] for the classiﬁcation of ECG rhythms (normal, atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion or other type of rhythm), which used as input, 15-second-long ECG signal
segments. The network achieved over 80% accuracy on the atrial ﬁbrillation
classiﬁcation task. [XWWZ18] utilized a four-layer-deep CNN for classiﬁcation
of AF, where instead of using a single dimension ECG signal as input, a Fourier
transform combined with a stationary wavelet transform was used to create a
2 dimensional, ﬁve-second-long input to the CNN. The CNN model using the
2 dimensional input achieved over 90% accuracy in the AF classiﬁcation task.
A two-layer CNN combined with an single-layer LSTM network was used by
[APP19], and achieved an accuracy of 97.8 % on the task of AF classiﬁcation
where RR intervals were used as input.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs): RNNs initially became of interest to
researchers within natural language processing (NLP) as it allows the model
to utilize the current data points when computing weights and also allows the
previous data points to aﬀect the current weight computations. RNNs are use-
ful for NLP but have also proven useful in practically all other domains where
sequential data is used. An RNN-based neural network was used by [WZL+19]
to learn the underlying features of heartbeats from ECG signals. The proposed
network was able to achieve 99% accuracy in the task of classifying various types
of heart beats. An LSTM- and GRU-based RNN network was used by [SSV18]
for AF detection and was able to achieve perfect 100% accuracy. [SSZ+17] uti-
lized an RNN- based network architecture and tested it on the private PhysioNet
CinC Challenge 2017 data set containing, normal, AF, and other arrhythmia
rhythms. The network received class-wise F1 scores of 0.90, 0.79 and 0.68 for
normal rhythms, AF, and other arrhythmias, respectively. A bidirectional re-
current neural network (Bi-RNN) was used by [MAA20] for AF detection, a
Bi-RNN is essentially the same as a standard RNN, however a Bi-RNN uses
both past, present and future data points when computing model weights, in-
==PAGE:24==
8
Literature Review (SOTA)
stead of only past and present data points in a standard RNN. The proposed
Bi-RNN based model also utilized an attention mechanism between the Bi-RNN
layers and took as input, a heartbeat broken down into its P, QRS, and T-wave
complexes as well as a sliding window of R-peak sequences. The model was able
to achieve near 99% accuracy in the task of AF classiﬁcation.
Autoencoder: The Autoencoder network architecture are popular in many
domains for they have the capability to learn important features which repre-
sent data whilst ignoring noise. There have been attempts from several authors
to deal with the occurrence of noise in ECG signal data, as it is well known
that noise in cardiac signals is a common occurrence in practice and poses large
problems when performing heart disease detection tasks [OC15]. A fully con-
volutional denoising autoencoder (FCDAE) was used by [CHF+19] for reducing
noise in one second long ECG signal segments. It was shown that the use of
a FCDAE is able to smooth out the noise throughout the signal, producing a
clearer representation of the important signal features, such as the QRS com-
plex. A FCDAE was also used by [TSA20] for the task of AF detection using
PPG signals from wearable devices. The FCDAE had two purposes, 1) it was
used for quality assessment of the input signal before performing the actual AF
detection task; 2) the weights which were learned in the encoder of the FCDAE
were utilized (through transfer learning) in the CNN model which performed the
AF detection. It was shown that by utilizing a FCDAE, higher sensitivity and
speciﬁcity on the task of AF detection was achieved (98%, 99% respectively),
compared to when a FCDAE was not utilized (49%, 90% respectively).
In Table 2.1 below, information about the state-of-the-art methods in AF detec-
tion are presented. It should be noted however, that many authors use diﬀerent
databases and divide their data sets diﬀerently. For example, if a data set con-
taining ECG recordings from multiple people is divided randomly into a training
and testing set, it is possible that recordings from the same person (i.e. very
similar data) will be present in both the train and test set, causing unintentional
bias of the results. An example of this can be seen in work by [MAA20] where
a standard data set from the MIT-BIH AFDB database was used to train and
test an AF detection model. When the data set was merely divided randomly
and consideration for same patient data in the test and train set was not taken,
the model produced an accuracy of 98.8%. However, when consideration was
taken to keep same patient data from the training set out of the test set, the
model produced an accuracy of 82%. Thus, direct comparison of results between
authors should be done with caution.
As most raw ECG signals are contaminated with some degree of noise artifacts,
a preprocessing step is necessary for all arrhythmia detection algorithms. A
typical preprocessing approach is applying a ﬁlter to the ECG signal which
constrains the ECG signal. A widely used ﬁlter technique is the so-called ﬁnite
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Modern ML/DL based arrhythmia detection
9
impulse response (FIR) [Lyn79]. FIR ﬁlters work well for excluding signals of
a particular frequency band. This can be useful for cases such as noise coming
from the electrical network (50 Hz or 60 Hz), since the ﬁltering method acts
as a quick band rejection ﬁlter. The problem with this approach is that the
frequency of the noise in a given signal is not always prior knowledge. Another
dowside is that the exclusion of certain frequency bands can distort the original
signal without the user being aware. Adaptive ﬁltering techniques, or techniques
which change according to variation in the signal, have been proposed for the
removal of noise [FW82]. However, according to [TZ91], these adaptive ﬁltering
techniques are not advantageous compared to FIR ﬁlters.
The frequency band ﬁlter technique mentioned above is the most common pre-
processing method used in SOTA arrhythmia detection. The order of the ﬁlter
and exact bandwidths used by various authors can diﬀer slightly however typi-
cally an order around 10 and a pass-band range around 0.5-50 Hz is used. Some
sort of frequency band ﬁlter is used in all of the following SOTA arrhythmia
detection work: [MAA20], [XWWZ18], [APP19], [TSA20], [NCM+20].
Much of the work previously mentioned on arrhythmia detection using ECG
data does not take into account naturally occurring noise when performing their
experiments, and it is therefor debatable how useful such results are for real
world applications. This is because various types of noise artifacts are typical
in ECG data and can be caused by many things such as patient movement or
by random occurrence. It has been shown for example in work by [OC15] and
[PPH+18], that noise interference negatively impacts arrhythmia detection algo-
rithms. As was previously mentioned, an important feature for detection of AF
is the spacing between R-peaks and the absence of the P wave. If noise artifacts
contaminate the original ECG signal, both of these important features will be
obscured. The R-peak estimation is especially susceptible, as will be discussed
in detail further on in the report, the R-peak detection algorithms use the ECG
signal in a sliding window fashion. This leads to heavy degrees of noise creating
a smearing aﬀect around where the noise is located in the ECG signal, which
can inﬂuence the R-peak detection in a negative way, leading to decreased per-
formance for feature based arrhythmia detection algorithms. Therefore, signal
quality assessment of ECG is useful [LMC08] [OC15], and can help to reject the
signal episodes with low signals quality thus theoretically improving arrhythmia
detection algorithm performance for real world applications [ZLW+14].
There is a great deal of work done on arrhythmia detection using deep learning,
which has proven that deep learning-based algorithms show good capabilities
in detecting arrhythmia such as AF when the ECG data assessed is of high
quality. However, there is not an abundance of work testing the performance of
such deep learning algorithms when data is contaminated with noise. Therefore,
it is proposed in this work to test deep learning based AF detection on real ECG
==PAGE:26==
10
Literature Review (SOTA)
data which contains naturally occurring noise.
Table 2.1: Overview of the SOTA methods for AF detection.
Author
Database
Method
Accuracy
[%]
Sensitivity
[%]
Speciﬁcity
[%]
F1 score
Schwab et al.
[SSZ+17]
CinC2017
RNN
-
-
-
0.79
Sujadevi et al.
[SSV18]
AFDB
RNN
100
100
100
-
Mousavi et al.
[MAA20]
AFDB
Bi-RNN
98.83
99.08
98.78
-
Xia et al.
[XWWZ18]
AFDB
SWT + CNN
98.79
97.87
98.63
-
Torres-Soto et al.
[TSA20]
Simulated,
SP Cup
2015
FCDAE + CNN
-
98
99
-
Andersen et al.
[APP19]
MIT-ADB,
MIT-
NSR, AFDB
CNN + LSTM
97.1
98
99
-
In this chapter the current state of the literature was presented.
To get a
fundamental overview of what arrhythmia is and how exactly it aﬀects the
heart, the next chapter will describe the physiology of the heart, how the heart
physiology presents itself in an ECG signal, as well as how AF presents itself in
an ECG signal.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Heart Physiology and ECG
This chapter describes the heart Physiology and characteristics of ECG signals.
3.1
Heart Physiology
The heart is the core of the body and is the primary muscle responsible for
distributing oxygen and nutrients via the blood. The combined system of the
heart, blood vessels and blood is often referred to as the cardiovascular system.
This system as a whole can be thought of as a combination of two smaller
circuits which transport blood to diﬀerent regions of the body.
The circuit
which supplies the air-exchanging organs with blood, such as the lungs, is called
the pulmonary circuit. The other circuit, which supplies the rest of the body
tissue with blood, is called the systemic circuit.
The heart consists of four
chambers, each playing a speciﬁc role in regards to blood distribution. The two
chambers on the right side of the heart take in blood from the pulmonary circuit
and pump it out to the systemic circuit. The two chambers on the left take in
de-oxygenated blood from the systemic circuit and pump it to the pulmonary
circuit. [Por11]
The heart itself is located in the so-called mediastinum, which is a mid-line par-
==PAGE:28==
12
Heart Physiology and ECG
tition of the thoracic cavity. The heart is protected by a tissue sac called the
pericardium, which encases the heart. The pericardium acts as an anchor, hold-
ing the heart in a ﬁxed position in the thorax, provides physical protection, and
helps lubricate the hearts movements. Electrical impulses in the heart wall cause
the heart to contract. The wall of the heart consists of three layers, the outer
layer is known as the epicardium, the middle layer is known as the myocardium,
and the innermost layer is known as the endocardium. The epicardium (also
known and the visceral serous pericardium) is smooth and thin and it covers
the heart acting as a serosa. The myocardium is thick and makes up a majority
of the volume in the heart wall. It consists of cardiac muscle cells and is mainly
responsible for the contraction of the heat. The endocardium is a thin layer
made up of cells similar to those inside blood vessels. It provides protection to
the valves and heart chambers which lie within the heart wall [Por11].
The myocardium, as previously mentioned, is the thickest layer in the heart
wall and is the main portion of the wall which performs contractions.
The
properties that cardiac muscle cells (which the myocardium consists of) have,
diﬀer from skeletal muscle cells in that the cardiac muscle cells are able to hold
the contraction for a much longer period of time. The cardiac muscle cells are
structured such that, the ends of each cardiac muscle cell form structures known
as intercalated discs where they meet neighboring cardiac muscle cells. These
intercalated discs contain many ﬁnger-like extensions of the plasma membrane
that interlock with identical structures on the neighboring cardiac muscle cell.
Intercalated discs are not only important for physically holding cardiac muscle
cells together, they are also vital for passing signals (ions) between the cardiac
muscle cells allowing the cardiac muscle cells to act together as a single unit
instead of individual cells [Por11].
The heart muscle relies on electrical impulses to create contractions, it is able
to create these electrical impulses called action potentials (AP). Within the my-
ocardium, APs occur and causes the cardiac muscle ﬁbers to excite, resulting
in contraction of the heart. The system in the heart, which initiates and co-
ordinates APs is called the cardiac conduction system. The cardiac conduction
system regulates the hearts rhythm and ensures the sequence of electrical events
throughout a full heart contraction are normal, thus ensuring that all parts of
the heart contract in a systematic, controlled and even manor. There are four
main locations where electrical events occur which the cardiac conduction sys-
tem regulates, namely the, sinoatrial (SA) node, atrioventricular (AV) node,
Atrioventricular bundle (bundle of His), and the Purkinje ﬁbres. It is when APs
move through the aforementioned locations that these main electrical events
occur and create the classic ECG heartbeat signal [Por11] [Whi21]. The sinoa-
trial node is made of pacemaker cells and is located in the upper wall of the
right atrium (at the top of the heart). The sinoatrial’s function is to generate
electrical impulses, creating a wave of excitement resulting in contraction of the
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Heart Physiology
13
(a) Anatomy of heart
(b) Cardiac conduction system
Figure 3.1: Figure showcasing the main anatomy of the heart and main com-
ponents of the cardiac conduction system. [hea21b]
atrium (both left and right), this moves blood from the atrium into the ven-
tricles. The atrioventricular node is located in the top of the atrioventricular
septum (located in between the left and right ventricles), and is the point where
the impulse from the sinoatrial converges. The atrioventricular’s function is to
==PAGE:30==
14
Heart Physiology and ECG
delay the incoming impulses, thus ensuring the atrium has enough time to fully
contract and move all of its blood into the ventricles. After the signal delay, the
impulses move to the atrioventricular bundle. The atrioventriclar bundle is a
sort of pathway which transmits impulses from the atrioventricular node to the
purkinje ﬁbres. The atrioventriclar bundle starts from the atrioventricular node,
continues down through the atrioventricular septum where it divides into two
bundles, one which continues to the purkinje ﬁbres of the left ventricle, and one
which continues to the purkinje ﬁbres of the right ventricle. The purkinje ﬁbres
are a network of special cells with extensive gap junctions, giving the ability for
rapid transmission of APs. This rapid transmission allows for a large area of
contraction to occur over both the left and right ventricles, which moves blood
from the ventricles to the aorta (from left ventricle) and pulmonary artery (from
right ventricle) [Por11] [Whi21].
3.2
ECG data description
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is the process of recording the electrical changes
of the heart which occur when the various sections of the heart contract. An
ECG is a non-invasive and relatively low-cost way of analyzing the activity of
the heart. ECGs are therefore commonly used for assessing heart health and
detecting heart disturbances such as arrhythmias. A standard ECG is done by
placing ten electrodes in a standard pattern across the body, this produces what
is known as a 12-lead ECG and gives 12 diﬀerent views of the activity of the
heart. The activity of the heart which is captured in the ECG is a distinct signal
and can be interpreted by following the main steps of the cardiac conduction
system previously discussed [Yan21].
The four most common wave forms analyzed in an ECG signal are the P, QRS
complex, T, and U; the P and QRS complex are typically the most important
waves when diagnosing heart arrhythmia. The ﬁrst signal which occurs in the
ECG is the P wave, this wave reﬂects the activation of the atria. After the
P wave comes the QRS complex, the time interval between the end of the P
wave and the start of the QRS complex is called the PR interval, and reﬂects
information on whether the impulse from the atria to the ventricles is in order
[Yan21] [WJ14].
The QRS complex is the classic spike in an ECG signal and is a combination
of three smaller waves which occur a consecutive manor (however in practice,
all three waves are not always clearly displayed in the ECG). The QRS com-
plex reﬂects the contraction of the ventricles; a short QRS duration (duration
meaning from start of the QRS complex to the end of the QRS complex) implies
==PAGE:31==
3.3 AF and the heart
15
that the ventricles are contracting rapidly and thus that the cardiac conduction
system is functioning properly, whereas a long QRS complex implies that the
ventricles are contracting slowly and could mean a ﬂaw in the cardiac conduc-
tion system. The interval between the peaks of consecutive QRS complexes,
known as the RR-interval is of particular interest, as many heart arrhythmia’s
cause an erratic heart contraction behaviour, which often presents itself in an
irregular RR-interval [WJ14].
The T wave occurs after the ventricles re-contract, and is typically positive on
the ECG signal, however negative T waves can occur [LTP13].
3.3
AF and the heart
AF causes an irregular heart rate and increases risk of various life-threatening
heart diseases such as, stroke, heart failure, etc. A lethal danger AF brings
is its potential to develop blood clots within the atria which could move to
other organs in the body, resulting in blocked blood ﬂow.
AF is caused by
the atria (two upper chambers of the heart) beating out of rhythm relative to
the ventricles (two bottom chambers of the heart). As mentioned previously,
the atrioventricular (AV) node acts as a delaying mechanism for the incoming
action potentials (APs) from the sinoatrial (SA) node, during an AF episode
either the SA node or the AV node malfunction, causing the atria to receive a
large quantity of APs which makes the atria contract rapidly; the ventricles will
also contract rapidly, however not as rapidly as the atria. In the case of the
SA node malfunctioning, a large and irregular amount of APs is sent through
to the AV and further to the atria, causing a spike and irregular number of
contractions of the atria. If the AV node malfunctions, it will lead to irregular
delays of each incoming AP from the SA node, thus causing the atria to beat
irregularly [may19] [fDCP].
As previously mentioned, AF typically causes an irregular heart rate, this will
usually cause distinct changes in an ECG recording, which will look like irregu-
lar spacing between the R-peaks, this is one of the hallmarks in diagnosing AF.
Another hallmark of AF is the absence of the P wave (the small wave occur-
ring before the QRS complex). The P wave can become unrecognizable in the
ECG signal when chaotic and unorganised depolarization of the atria causes low
amplitude ﬁbrillatory waves to replace the P waves [hea21a].
In this chapter an overview of the heart physiology, ECG signal and AF was
presented to give the reader a fundamental understanding of what arrhythmia is,
how it impacts humans, and how it can be identiﬁed through ECG monitoring.
==PAGE:32==
16
Heart Physiology and ECG
In the next chapter, the technical concepts in regards to deep learning and the
algorithms used in this work will be presented.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Technical Background
In this chapter the fundamentals of all technical concepts used in this work
are presented. The concepts presented in this chapter pertain mostly to deep
learning, ﬁrstly presenting the main concepts of deep learning, followed by a
short summary of autoencoders, and lastly with the a technical explanation of
transformers and how they are used in the work.
4.1
Main concepts of deep learning
Deep learning is branch of machine learning which has had tremendous break-
through over recent years, ever since it became popularized with the introduction
of AlexNet. Deep learning is based on neural network architectures which are
capable of learning abstract representations of almost any type of data. The
most simple type of neural network architecture used is called a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) and is often referred to as a feedforward network (FFN) or a
fully connected network (FCN). An MLP is a network consisting of three or
more fully connected layers of (one input layer, one or more hidden layers and
an output layer) as seen in Figure 4.1. Each layer consists of a given number of
so called neurons, each neuron can be thought of as a weight term, thus a layer
is simply a linear function containing a given number of weights and a single
==PAGE:34==
18
Technical Background
bias term. All neurons (except for those in the input layer) are wrapped in a
non linear activation function, the most popular activation function in recent
years being the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU). Since each layer is fully connected,
each neuron gives it’s output to each neuron in the in following layer and thus
one layer’s output is the sum of the product of each of the previous weights and
inputs as well as a bias term for the layer; the output aL of a single nueron
L, with a weight matrix W, a bias term b, and activation function σ, can be
mathematically deﬁned as:
aL = σ(W LaL−1 + bL)
(4.1)
Each blue circle in Figure 4.1 represents a neuron and thus outputs activation
aL which is dependent on the input received from the previous layer L −1 and
the bias term for the given layer bL.
Deep learning is considered deep, because each hidden layer computes a slightly
more abstract representation of the initial input than the previous layer. This
in theory makes a neural network capable of learning an approximate repre-
sentation of any function, given an adequate amount of data generated by said
function.
Figure 4.1: Basic MLP network architecture consisting of an input layer, two
hidden layers, and an output layer followed by a softmax function.
What makes deep learning powerful compared to other machine learning meth-
ods is the utilization of back propagation, to quickly and eﬃciently approximate
gradients of the loss function which is further used to solve non convex opti-
mization problems [Nie19]. The optimization problems which neural networks
are typically used for, are of thousands or more dimensions; this means that
the gradient of the loss vector is a direction of decent in many more dimensions
than any standard optimization method can solve eﬃciently. As mentioned pre-
viously, each layer of the neural network is made up of weights and a bias term,
thus a layer is in essence a matrix of weights W L. The overall network g(x)
given initial input x can therefor be mathematically denoted as:
g(x) = σL(W LσL−1(W L−1...σ1(W 1x)...))
(4.2)
The output of g(xi) given input xi is used to calculate the diﬀerence (sometimes
referred to as cost) between the true label yi and the networks prediction via
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Transformer model
19
the loss function (also known as cost function) C(yi, g(xi)). Backpropagation
approximates the derivative of the loss function as a product of derivatives
between each layer from left to right. The gradient of the loss function over one
single training example ∂C0
∂wL can be mathematically deﬁned as:
∂Ci
∂wL = aL−1σ′(W LaL−1 + bL)C′(yi, g(xi))
(4.3)
The deﬁnition Equation 4.3 describes how sensitive the loss for a given train-
ing sample i is to the weight matrix of that given layer. The gradient of the
loss function with respect to the bias has a similar expression as shown in Equa-
tion 4.4, however because the bias term is not inﬂuenced by the previous layer it
is not dependent on the output activation of the previous layer and can therefor
be described as:
∂Ci
∂bL = σ′(W LaL−1 + bL)C′(yi, g(xi))
(4.4)
The gradients of the loss described by Equation 4.3 and Equation 4.4, deﬁne
the computations needed to compute the gradient for a single layer L, therefor
the entire loss gradient over all layers is: ∇C = [ ∂C
∂w0
∂C
∂b0 , ...,
∂C
∂wL
∂C
∂bL ]
Computing the entire gradient vector of the loss function ∇C over all training
examples, will give an approximation of the multidimensional direction of de-
cent which should be taken to tend towards a local minimum of the given non
convex optimization problem. Every time the loss gradient is computed, the
weight matrix of the layers is updated such that the loss function is continu-
ously minimized. Passing through all of the data once, is called an epoch, and
repeating this same procedure over many epochs will continuously update the
weight matrix of each layer and the model will learn better representations of
the data, this procedure is known as training the neural network.
4.2
Transformer model
The transformer was proposed as a deep learning model by [VBS+] in 2017,
it was developed for use within the ﬁeld of natural language processing. The
standard neural network architecture used for sequential data such as, natural
language or time series data, prior to the transformer was the recurrent neural
network (RNN). One main diﬀerence between classic RNNs and transformers
is that an RNN relies on the data to processed in order from start to ﬁnish,
however a transformer takes in all data at once and relies purely on so called at-
tention to learn features. This allows transformers to consider all data sequences
equally since the model sees all the data at the same time, it also allows the
==PAGE:36==
20
Technical Background
transformer more parallelization during training which allows for faster training
times compared to RNNs. The transformer because of the self-attention, is able
to deal with longer range dependencies in many cases better than other deep
learning architecture models such as CNNs or RNNs.
The original transformer model is comprised of a encoder- decoder structure,
the encoder maps the input sequences of symbol representations (x1, ..., xn) to
a sequence of continuous representations (z1, ..., zn). With the sequence of z,
the decoder generates an output sequence (y1, ..., yn of symbols one element at
a time.
Encoder: The encoder is essentially a stacking of encoder layers, where each
encoder layer is comprised of two sub-layers. The ﬁrst sub-layer is a so called
multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second being a position-wise fully
connected feed forward network. There is also a residual connection between
each stacked encoding layer along with a layer normalization.
Decoder: The decoder similar to the encoder is a stacking of decoding layers,
where each layer is comprised of sub-layers comprised of multi-head attention
and position-wise fully connected feed forward network. The decoder layers also
incorporate a third multi-head attention over the output of the encoder stack,
which is modiﬁed to prevent positions from attending subsequent positions, in
other words, ensuring that predictions of the current sequence position can only
rely on previously known sequence positions. There is also a residual connection
between all stacked decoding layers along with layer normalization.
Attention: What makes the transformer as a whole special, is that it relies
purely on self-attention, this means that there exists no model recurrence over
sequences. The self-attention which the transformer relies can be thought of as
a function which maps a query and a set of key, value pairs to an output, where
everything (query, key, value, output) is a vector. The output is a weighted
sum of the values, where the weight assigned to each value is computed by a
compatibility function of the query with the corresponding key. The attention is
computed through averaging attention over multiple so called heads, where each
head computes its own scaled dot-product attention as shown in Equation 4.5.
The scaled dot-product attention can be mathematically deﬁned as (where dk
is an arbitrary dimension size):
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QK′
√dk

V
(4.5)
When using multi-head attention, the dot product from the Q, K, V inputs for
each head is linearly projected and concatenated. Using multiple heads (multiple
dot product projections) allows for the overall model a richer representation of
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Autoencoder
21
the information. The outline of the multi-head attention structure can be seen
in Figure 5.3, this ﬁgure shows that the multi-head attention block is essentially
a stacking of scaled dot-product attention over N heads.
Since the transformer includes no convolutions or recurrence and the full se-
quence is fed to the model at the same time, there is a need to provide some
sort of information on the positioning of each token in the sequence. There are
various methods of encoding position, a common method and also the method
implemented in this work uses a sinusoidal function for the positional encoding.
The sinusoidal function as seen below takes each position and transforms it to
a sinusiod with wavelengths progressing from 2π to 1000 · 2π. This allows the
sequence to be represented as a vector containing pairs of frequencies.
PEpos,2i = sin(pos/100002i)
PEpos,2i+1 = cos(pos/100002i)
(4.6)
Using the above expression over the whole input sequence will produce a position
vector of the same length as the input sequence of the form below, where i stands
for the dimension in the embedding, and x is the token at position n:
⃗P =


sin(x1/100002i), cos(x1/100002i)
sin(x2/100002i), cos(x2/100002i)
...
sin(xn/100002i), cos(xn/100002i)


4.3
Autoencoder
An autoencoder is a neural network which learns to a representation of input
to output. The basic architecture of an autoencoder is comprised of an encoder
and a decoder as shown in Figure 4.2.
The encoder maps the input to the
hidden layers, the decoder maps the hidden representation to a learned recon-
struction. Autoencoders can be used for various tasks such as reconstruction or
generation from input data. In both cases, autoencoders have been shown to be
useful and can be trained using unsupervised learning. A popular way to use
autoencoders is for anomaly detection; for this task, the autoencoder is trained
to learn a generalized representation of a given input, such that the autoencoder
is able to approximately reconstruct the input data, preserving only the most
relevant features in the output reconstruction. This would theoretically make
any input anomaly evident, as the anomaly feature would not be present in the
reconstruction.
==PAGE:38==
22
Technical Background
Figure 4.2: Basic autoencoder architecture.
An autoencoder can be deﬁned in a similar fashion as described by Equation 4.1,
where a represents the output activation, i.e. the learned latent representation.
The decoder is fundamentally similar to the encoder, but works in an oppo-
site direction, with the main diﬀerence being that the input comes from the
encoder, because of this, the weights and biases in the encoder and decoder are
likely unrelated. The decoder can be deﬁned as such, x′ = σ′(W ′h + b′). The
autoencoder is trained to minimise a loss function which in some way describes
the diﬀerence between the input and reconstruction. Given the input x and re-
construction x′ are one dimensional, the diﬀerence can be deﬁned using a least
squares formulation as seen in Equation 4.7.
L(x, x′) = ||x −x′||2 = ||x −σ′(W ′(σ(Wx + b)) + b′)||2
(4.7)
In this chapter the main technical details about deep learning, transformers
and, autoencoder architectures were presented. In the following materials and
methods chapter, it will shown how these topics are used for the detection of
AF. Further, the data used, the pre-processing steps, as well as the deep learning
architectures will also be described in detail.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5
Materials and Methods
In this work, multiple data sources are utilized and multiple algorithms are im-
plemented to use the data. In this chapter the data and algorithm architectures
will be presented in detail. First in section 5.1, details on the data used in this
work will be discussed. In section 5.2, details on how the models are trained
in this work are discussed. Further on in section 5.3, the pre-processing of the
data, and descriptions of the models implemented in this work are presented.
5.1
Data
There are various publicly available databases which host ECG data from healthy
and non healthy patients. The data used in this project come from the, MIT-
BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database (AFDB) [MM83], MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test
Database (NSTDB) [MMM84], Physionet 2017 Cardiology Challenge data set
(CinC2017) [CLM+17], and the Contextual Arrhythmia Database (CACHET-
ACDB) [KPB21].
==PAGE:40==
24
Materials and Methods
5.1.1
MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database (AFDB)
The AFDB is the largest single database holding annotated ECG recordings
from patients with AF. The database includes 25 long term ECG recordings
which have been clinically diagnosed with AF. Each recording contains an ac-
companying beat annotation ﬁle and an arrhythmia annotation ﬁle. The beat
annotation ﬁles were prepared using an automatic beat detection algorithm,
only some of the recordings beat annotations have been manually inspected and
corrected. The arrhythmia annotation ﬁles have been prepared manually by a
healthcare professional.
All recordings are sampled at a sample rate of 250 per second with a 12-bit reso-
lution over a range of ±10 mV. The recordings were obtained using ambulatory
ECG recorders with a band-with of approximately 0.1 - 40 Hz. It should be
noted that there are two recordings (00735, 03665) which do not have signals
available and thus have been excluded. An overview of the data from the AFDB
database used in this project can be seen in Table 5.1 below.
Table 5.1: Overview of the AFDB data used.
Data set
Nr.
individual
recordings
Total
data
set
length [hours]
AF
duration
length [hours]
AFDB
22
231.7
93
5.1.2
MIT-BIH Noise Stress Test Database (NSTDB)
This database includes 12 half-hour ECG recordings and 3 half-hour recordings
of noise typical in ambulatory ECG recordings. The 12 half-hour recordings are
made by injecting two minutes of noise into the recording every two minutes.
The type of noise injected are deemed common in ECG signals and originally
come from motion artifacts, baseline wander, and electrode motion artifact. Half
of the noise records were made using a clean ECG recording and the other half
using a diﬀerent clean ECG recording from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database.
Each of the noise recordings vary in signal to noise ratio (SNR); in this project
only the three most noisy recordings with a SNR of 6, 0, and -6, were used, and
only the injected noise was used. The total length of noise in each recording
is 750 seconds, and six total SNR samples were used (three for each of the
two available recordings), thus 4500 seconds of noise signal was used from the
NSTDB.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Data
25
Table 5.2: Overview of the NSTDB data used.
Data set
Nr.
individual
recordings
Total
data
set
length per record-
ing [minutes]
Noise
duration
length [minutes]
NSTDB
2
60
75
5.1.3
Physionet Cardiology Challenge data set (CinC2017)
The CinC2017 data set was released to encourage the development of arrhythmia
classiﬁcation algorithms.
The data set contains short single lead recordings
which range from 30 - 60 seconds in length and were obtained using AliveCor
devices. Each recording is sampled at a sample rate of 300 per second. The
recordings are labeled either as normal sinus rhythm, AF, alternative rhythm
or too noisy to be classiﬁed. For this project only the normal sinus rhythm, AF
and noise recordings were used.
Table 5.3: Overview of the CinC data used.
Data set
Nr.
individual
recordings
Total normal data
length [minutes]
Total
AF
data
length [minutes]
Total
noise
data
length [minutes]
CinC
5917
2701
395
115
5.1.4
Contextual Arrhythmia Database (CACHET-ACDB)
The CACHET-ACDB [KPB21] includes ECG data captured using a Holter mon-
itor device over the span of 259 days from a total of 24 patients. The patients
had either previously been diagnosed with AF or suspected as being at high risk
of AF. The recordings were taken under so called free living conditions, i.e. the
patient was was not in an ambulatory setting. The recordings are taken with
a sample rate of 1024 samples per second. At the time of writing this project,
the database had recently become public and as such only a portion of the total
available ECG data had been annotated by healthcare professionals. The anno-
tated labels in the database are, normal sinus rhythm, AF, other rhythm, and
noise. For this project, all current annotated data is used.
Table 5.4: Overview of the CACHET-ACDB data used.
Data set
Nr. Subjects
Total Normal data
length [minutes]
Total
AF
data
length [minutes]
Total
Noise
data
length [minutes]
CACHET-ACDB
24
103
125
37
==PAGE:42==
26
Materials and Methods
5.2
Model training and validation
The most widely used database by the research community in regards to AF
detection is the AFDB. In this project, the AFDB will be used for training the
AF detection model.
To evaluate the AF detection model, 10% of the data
will be used as a holdout set, additionally the model will be evaluated on the
CinC2017 data set. To simulate a real world AF detection pipeline with ECG
data which at times is noisy, the AF detection model will be used in sequence
with a noise detection model. The noise detection model is trained on the data
from the NSTDB and noise data from the CinC2017. The full AF detection
pipeline is tested on the normal and AF data signals from the CinC2017 data,
where 15% of the time a random noise sample is injected to simulate a corrupted
input signal.
To further evaluate the full AF detection pipeline for real world use, the pipeline
was tested on the labeled data samples from the CACHET-ACDB. The pipeline
is tested on all of the normal and AF signals in the data set, where 15% of the
time a random noise signal from the data set is given as input to the pipeline.
The evaluation of the AF detection pipeline on the CACHET-ACDB data set
gives an idea of what performance can be expected if models which have been
trained on popular benchmark data sets (such as AFDB) are used for AF detec-
tion on real world ECG data recorded in an ambulatory setting. After testing
the pipeline on the unseen CACHET-ACDB data, the noise detection model will
be trained via transfer learning on a small amount of the CACHET-ACDB data
set. The pipeline will again be tested on the unseen CACHET-ACDB data, this
will showcase potential for transfer learning to improve model transferability
between small data sets.
5.3
Data processing and AF detection model de-
scription
Classiﬁcation of AF by a human requires in depth domain knowledge of ECG
data as well as knowledge of the heart physiology associated AF. The main goal
in the project is through deep learning, learn the features which are associated
with AF episodes and ﬁnd an approximation of the probability distribution of
AF based on those features. As discussed in section 1.4, noise interference causes
problems when detecting AF, therefor this study oﬀers two novel deep learning
based algorithms for ensuring correct classiﬁcation of AF. One algorithm for
the detection of AF signals and one algorithm for the detection of noise signals
in ECG data. Figure 5.1 gives an overview of how that entire AF detection
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Data processing and AF detection model description
27
pipeline is thought to work. First the data is pre-processed, then given as input
to the noise detection model, if classiﬁed as not noise, the data is given as input
to the AF detection algorithm which produces a probability of being AF.
Figure 5.1: Overview of how the AF detection pipeline is set up.
5.3.1
Data processing
To increase the deep learning models feature learning capabilities, the ECG data
must be presented in a clever way that makes learning possible. The raw ECG
signals often contains various types of artifacts such as the so called, power
line interference signal. Many of these artifacts have a frequency outside the
standard frequency range of the valuable heart signals within the ECG, therefor
all ECG signals are passed through a band pass ﬁlter such that only frequencies
within the range of [0.1, 40] are kept. The ECG signals are then normalized
between [0, 1]. The ﬁltered and normalized ECG signal are used directly as input
to the noise detection model. The AF detection models use RRI sequences as
input, as these sequences greatly reduce the dimensionality of the original data
input, as well as capture a previously mentioned hallmark of AF, namely the
irregularity in heart contractions. The RRI sequences are calculated by ﬁnding
the amount of time in seconds between two adjacent R peaks (middle of the
QRS complex) and the next as seen in Equation 5.1.
RRIn = Rn+1 −Rn
fs
,
(5.1)
where RRIn is the the diﬀerence in seconds between R peak at position n and
R peak at position n + 1, fs is the frequency at which the signal is sampled per
second.
5.3.2
Heartbeat detection
In this project the Pan-Tompkins algorithm is used to approximate the posi-
tioning of individual heartbeats within the ECG signal.
The Pan-Tompkins
algorithm is a widely used algorithm for the detection of QRS complexes and
was originally introduced in 1985 by [PT85]. The algorithm has four main steps,
the ﬁrst being a band pass ﬁlter which ﬁlters any frequency not deemed to be
==PAGE:44==
28
Materials and Methods
within the useful frequency range. The second step being a derivative ﬁlter,
which applies a transfer function to provide information about the slope of the
QRS complex. The ﬁnal two steps are, squaring the ﬁltered signal to amplify
the peaks and then taking the moving average of the these peaks to ﬁnally
determine the middle of the detected QRS complex.
When the raw input ECG signal is relatively noise free, the Pan-Tompkins al-
gorithm typically detects all QRS complexes very well. However the algorithm
performance becomes easily disrupted if noise is allowed past the initial band
pass ﬁlter. The ﬁnal peak detecting is determined with a moving average esti-
mation of the noise level which is used for estimating a peak threshold. If a noise
peak is wrongly classiﬁed as a QRS peak then the algorithm’s noise level and
peak threshold estimations will be obscured and negatively impact future QRS
complex classiﬁcations. Thus if sudden spikes in noise occur throughout the
signal, the negative impact of detection will be smeared out into future portions
of the signal. Figure 5.2 showcases examples of the Pan-Tompkins algorithm
used on non noisy ECG signals as well as noisy ECG signals. Comparing the
two ﬁgures, the top has all R-peaks correctly detected with no miss detections,
whereas in the bottom ﬁgure, looking closely it can be seen that some R-peaks
are not detected and some are falsely detected due to the inﬂuence of noise.
5.3.3
Noise detection model
The noise detection model has the purpose of classifying a ECG sequence as
noise or not. In this project, two noise detection approaches have been tried,
the ﬁrst being an auto-encoder, the second being a one-dimensional CNN. The
auto-encoder model is unsupervised and as such can be trained with a large
amount of AF and normal ECG data. The ECG data used for training was
divided into individual heartbeats which were used as input, this was done by
approximating an R peak with the Pan-Tompkins algorithm and then taking a
number of sample points before and after the R peak such that the entire QRS
complex of the heart beat is captured. In this project 70 sample points before
and after each R peak was chosen, thus each input heart beat sequence has a
length of 140 samples.
The idea behind the auto-encoder is that if the auto-encoder can reconstruct
a typical heartbeat well, then anything that is given as input which does not
resemble a typical heartbeat will be reconstructed poorly by the auto-encoder.
This poor reconstruction can be identiﬁed either by a high loss score or by a low
cross correlation score between the original input and the reconstruction. The
model architecture used for the auto-encoder can be seen below in Table 5.5,
it is a combination of convolutional layers and bi-directional LSTM layers with
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Data processing and AF detection model description
29
(a) ECG signal with lower amount of noise
(b) ECG signal with higher amount of noise
Figure 5.2: Example of Pan-Tompkins algorithm used on an ECG signal con-
taining low and high amount of noise.
==PAGE:46==
30
Materials and Methods
a single ﬂattening and linear layer for the output sequence.
The activation
function ReLU and dropout with a probability of 25% was used after each layer,
except for the ﬁnal linear layer.
Table 5.5: Auto-encoder architecture.
Layer type
Size
Kernel size
Convolution
20
3
Maxpool
-
2
LSTM
40
-
Convolution
16
3
Maxpool
-
2
Convolution
16
3
Maxpool
-
2
Convolution
40
3
Maxpool
-
2
LSTM
20
-
Convolution
20
3
Maxpool
-
2
Linear
140
-
The second noise detection model used in this project is a neural network in-
cluding convolutional and linear layers. The network is trained on 10 second
long ECG signals which have been labeled as either noise, AF or normal sinus
rhythm and outputs logits for each of the three classes. To decrease dimen-
sionality, each input signal is re-sampled to a sample rate of 100 samples per
second, thus each input signal has a total length of 1000 samples. The model’s
architecture can be seen in Table 5.6 below, it consists of four one-dimensional
convolutional layers followed by three linear layers with two dropout layers after
the ﬁrst two linear layers, the ReLU activation function was used after every
layer except for the ﬁnal linear layer. The idea behind this model is that given
suﬃcient labeled data, the model will be able to learn features which are pre-
dominant to normal sinus rhythm and AF signals such that the model will be
able to distinguish useful clean signals from chaotic noise signals.
5.3.4
AF detection model
The AF detection model has the purpose of taking in an input sequence and
outputting a probability of the input sequence being AF. Two variations of self-
attention transformer models were used in this project, a third AF detection
model, which is a convolutional and LSTM based deep learning model intro-
duced by [APP19] was also used for sake of comparing the transformer models
performance with a proven state of the art AF detection model. The ﬁrst trans-
former model which will be denoted as transformer 1 has a similar architecture
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Data processing and AF detection model description
31
Table 5.6: Architecture for noise detection using convolution and linear layers.
Layer type
Size
Kernel size
Convolution
8
20
Maxpool
-
4
Convolution
16
10
Maxpool
-
4
Convolution
32
5
Maxpool
-
2
Convolution
16
5
Maxpool
-
2
Linear
416
-
Linear
128
-
Linear
64
-
as that of the original transformer architecture introduced by [VBS+] and de-
scribed in section 2.2. The input to the AF detection models is an RRI sequence
with a length of 10 (the time interval between 10 R-peaks). The idea is to create
a vector encoding of the input sequence and then through the attention mecha-
nism in Equation 4.5, create context vectors which can be used to describe the
correlation of sequence encodings with other sequence encodings. In the AF
detection model the, queries, keys and values are all linear transformations of
the RRI sequence after it has been position encoded as in Equation 4.6. When
the RRI sequence is initially position encoded, each encoding in the sequence
lacks context of the other encodings around it and is why the context vectors
are of importance. The context vectors are in essence a transformation of the
initial sequence encodings, created via scaled concatenating dot-product atten-
tion shown in Equation 4.5. An overview of the transformer 1 architecture can
be seen in Figure 5.5.
The second AF detection transformer model implemented is denoted as trans-
former 2 and utilizes a series of convolutional operations along with a stacked
transformer encoder module. The idea behind the transformer 2 model is that
because the task is to perform classiﬁcation and not sequence prediction as in
[VBS+], the model may beneﬁt enough from the scaled dot-product attention
in the encoder alone to perform classiﬁcation, thus not needing a decoder. It
is also thought that both the raw ECG signal and RRI sequence hold valuable
features of their own and as such both were used as input. The transformer 2
model takes in two inputs, a 10 second long ECG signal and the RRI sequence
of that 10 second ECG signal (the RRI sequence was ﬁxed to length of 10, and
was zero padded if needed). Both inputs are put through a series of convo-
lutional operations to capture a latent space representation. The latent space
representations for both the ECG signal and RRI sequence are then position
encoded and fed into the stacked transformer encoder. Each of the encoders is
of the same architecture to that seen in Figure 5.4 and consist of a multi-head
==PAGE:48==
32
Materials and Methods
self-attention mechanism sub-layer, followed by a fully connected feed-forward
network. The outputs from the stacked encoders are concatenated and fed to
a ﬁnal fully connected feed-forward layer which produces the logits prediction.
An overview of the transformer 2 model can in be seen in Figure 5.6.
An overview of the multi-head attention and the scaled dot-product attention
is seen Figure 5.3, the scaled dot-product attention is applied using the queries,
keys and, values vectors multiple times, the result from each stacking is concate-
nated and linearly transformed. The queries, keys and, values here are linear
transformations of the inputs. The process of staking the results from multi-
ple scaled dot-product attention heads is called multi-head attention, both the
encoder and decoder contain these multi-head attention blocks. Skip connec-
tions are also used between the multi-headed attention blocks in an attempt
to preserve some original position encoding information accounting for original
context. Figure 5.4 showcase the encoder and decoder architecture respectively.
The ﬁnal linear layer of the model takes in the output of the decoder (encoder
for transformer 2) and outputs a single logits prediction which then is passed
through a sigmoid function to produce the probability of the given input being
AF.
Figure 5.3: Scaled dot-product and Multi-head attention.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Data processing and AF detection model description
33
(a) Architecture of encoder
(b) Architecture of decoder
Figure 5.4: Architecture of both encoder (left) and decoder (right) as origi-
nally introduced by [VBS+]
==PAGE:50==
34
Materials and Methods
Figure 5.5: Schematic which depicts the transformer 1 model structure.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Data processing and AF detection model description
35
Figure 5.6: Schematic which depicts the transformer 2 model structure.
5.3.5
Performance Measures
To analyze and compare the performance of the models in this work, the perfor-
mance metrics, sensitivity, speciﬁcity and, accuracy were chosen. These metrics
are chosen as they are common in the literature for describing performance of
testing in the ﬁeld of medicine/ disease. Since this work is based on the fact
that AF is a harmful disease and that detecting it is of higher importance than
not, it is of most interest to describe how accurate the AF detection model is
in classifying AF when a signal is actually AF. But we also would not like the
model to classify everything as AF, as that would not be useful in practice.
This means that the metrics, sensitivity and speciﬁcity will give the most useful
information for this project’s use-case.
==PAGE:52==
36
Materials and Methods
Sensitivity: is one of the most common metrics for determining how well a
given test can classify a positive class given the class is actually positive. In this
work that translates to, how accurate an AF classiﬁcation model is at correctly
classifying AF signals which are truly AF. The sensitivity is calculated as,
Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN ,
(5.2)
where TP denotes true positives (i.e. signals correctly classiﬁed as AF) and,
FN denotes false negatives (i.e. signals incorrectly classiﬁed as normal).
Speciﬁcity: is another common metric which describes how accurate a test
is at classifying a class as negative which truly is negative. In this work that
translates to, how accurate an AF classiﬁcation model is at correctly classifying
a normal sinus rhythm signal given the signal truly is normal sinus rhythm. The
speciﬁcity is calculated as,
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP ,
(5.3)
where TN denotes true negatives (i.e. signals correctly classiﬁed as normal)
and, FP denotes false positives (i.e. signals incorrectly classiﬁed as AF).
Accuracy: is probably the most common metric for describing any general
classiﬁcation test. It describes how well a test can generally classify all classes
correctly. By general it is meant that, the accuracy metric does not give ad-
ditional information on how accurate the test is for any given class, only the
overall combination of classes. The accuracy of a test is calculated as,
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.4)
In this chapter the materials and methods, such as data used, model structure,
performance measures used in the work were discussed. In the next chapter, the
results of the implemented models will be presented.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Results
This chapter presents the results and performance of the various deep learning-
based AF and Noise detection models presented in the chapter 5. First, sec-
tion 6.1 shows the AF detection model’s results on the AFDB. After that, the
results of the Noise detection models are presented in 6.2. Lastly, the over-
all AF detection performance on unseen data coming from the CinC2017 and
CACHET-ACDB database is presented in section 6.3.
6.1
Performance of AF detection models
The AF detection models described in the previous chapter were trained on
the AFDB dataset (see Table 5.1). The training details and hyper parameters
used for each model are shown in Tables 6.1 and 6.2. The hyper parameter
ranges for each model were initially chosen by considering the parameters used
in the work by [NCM+20], where a similar architecture was implemented for
arrhythmia detection. However the ﬁnal hyper parameters used were chosen
through thorough trial and error. All models used the Adam optimizer and
binary cross entropy as a loss function during training. During training of each
model, the initial learning rate was decreased by 15% every tenth epoch starting
after approximately one fourth of the total epochs. The training loss curves for
==PAGE:54==
38
Results
both transformer models are shown in Figure 6.1. It can be observed that both
models show consistent training with no considerable over ﬁtting.
Table 6.1: Hyper parameters used for transformer 1.
Parameter
Value
Learning rate
10−4
Dimension value
20
Dimension attention
10
Number encoder lay-
ers
5
Number decoder lay-
ers
5
Number heads
8
Table 6.2: Hyper parameters used for transformer 2.
Parameter
Value
Learning rate
10−4
Dimension value
64
Dimension attention
64
Number encoder lay-
ers
4
Number heads
4
Number
convolu-
tional layers for ECG
input
4
Number
convolu-
tional layers for RRI
input
2
Number
fully
con-
nected layers before
output
2
The confusion matrix on the holdout data for the transformer 1 model is shown
in Figure 6.2.
The confusion matrix shows that the model achieved a total
accuracy of 87%, sensitivity of 86% and speciﬁcity of 87%.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Performance of AF detection models
39
(a) Loss of Transformer 1 model
(b) Loss of Transformer 2 model.
Figure 6.1: Training loss curves over epochs of both transformer models.
Figure 6.2: Confusion matrix depicting results of validation data using trans-
former 1 model on AFDB data set.
The confusion matrix on the holdout data for the transformer 2 model is shown
in Figure 6.3.
It shows that the model achieved a total accuracy of 95.8%,
sensitivity of 96.3% and speciﬁcity of 95.3%.
==PAGE:56==
40
Results
Figure 6.3: Confusion matrix depicting results of validation data using trans-
former 2 model on AFDB data set.
The confusion matrix on the holdout data for the state of the art CNN/ LSTM
model is shown in Figure 6.4.
The confusion matrix shows that the model
achieved a total accuracy of 92.9%, sensitivity of 92.9% and speciﬁcity of 92.9%.
Figure 6.4: Confusion matrix depicting results of validation data using CNN/
LSTM model on AFDB data set.
Table 6.3: Performance comparison between AF detection model trained and
evaluated on 15% holdout data from AFDB data set.
Model
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
87%
86%
87%
Transformer 2
95.8%
96.3%
95.3%
CNN/ LSTM
92.9%
92.9%
92.0%
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Performance of Noise detection Models
41
6.2
Performance of Noise detection Models
As described in the previous section, two noise detection approaches were used.
The ﬁrst approach was based on an autoencoder and required the reconstruction
of the input signal, whereas the second approach was a CNN based classiﬁcation
model. Among these two approaches, the CNN-based noise detection showed
the most reliable results, thus was also used in the ﬁnal AF detection pipeline.
6.2.1
Autoencoder based noise detection
An autoencoder was trained was trained for 100 epochs and reached convergence
after about 10.
The Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3, and the
summed mean squared squared error as a loss function was used for training.
Below in Figure 6.5 the loss curves over epochs can be seen for the training and
holdout data.
Figure 6.5: Loss curves over epochs of autoencoder model.
To distinguish a good input signal from a noise signal the cross correlation
coeﬃcient between the input and reconstruction was used.
The model was
tested on good signals and noise signals; the average cross correlation score of
the noise signal reconstructions was 0.811, and the average cross correlation of
the normal signal reconstructions was 0.869. Example reconstructions for good
signals can be seen in Figure 6.6 and noise signals in Figure 6.7.
From viewing the reconstructions of the good inputs signals in Figure 6.6, most
of the reconstructions are relatively similar to the input and have relatively high
cross correlation coeﬃcient scores. However some signals where the R peak is
==PAGE:58==
42
Results
Figure 6.6: Example reconstructions of good signals.
detected later than usual in the QRS complex (this can happen if the length of
the QRS complex is exceptional), results in a heartbeat signal which is shifted
a bit to the right. This shift does not appear often and the autoencoder shows
diﬃculty coping with the shift and reconstructs a poor signal even though the
input was of good quality.
The average cross correlation over all noise and
normal signal reconstructions showed that the discrepancy between normal and
noise reconstructions is small as mentioned previously, with the average cross
correlation score of the noise signal reconstructions being 0.811, and the average
cross correlation of the normal signal reconstructions being 0.869.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Performance of Noise detection Models
43
Figure 6.7: Example reconstructions of noise signals.
Examples of reconstructions of noise signals can be seen in Figure 6.7. It can
be seen that some noise signals are clearly not heartbeats and have been re-
constructed poorly, where as some of the noise signals look similar to natural
heartbeats; in these cases the reconstruction resembles a natural heartbeat. The
reason for some noise signals looking like natural heartbeats is that the Pan-
Tomkins algorithm has identiﬁed R-peaks around sections of the noise signal
which imitate QRS complexes.
6.2.2
CNN based noise detection model
A CNN based noise detection model was employed for noise classiﬁcation. It
was trained for 200 epochs using the Adam optimizer with an initial learning
rate of 10−4. A step scheduler was used which reduced the learning rate by
50% every 10 epochs starting after 50 epochs. Below the learning curves of the
training and holdout data can be seen as well as the ﬁnal confusion matrix.
==PAGE:60==
44
Results
(a) Loss of noise detection model.
(b) Accuracy of noise detection model.
Figure 6.8: Loss and accuracy curves over epochs of noise detection model.
Figure 6.9: Confusion matrix of noise model on validation data.
As can be seen in Figure 6.8, the model shows signs of over ﬁtting over epochs,
however the over ﬁtting does not tend towards any single class as can be seen in
the confusion matrix. In Table 6.4, the noise model is tested on unseen normal
and AF rhythm signals from the AFDB data set. The noise detection model
wrongly classify, i.e. has a false positive rate of 2.6% on normal signals and
1.5% on AF signals.
Table 6.4: Misclassiﬁcation percentage on unseen AFDB data.
Normal
AF
Amount classiﬁed as noise
2.6%
1.5%
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Evaluation of AF detection
45
6.3
Evaluation of AF detection
In this section, the AF detection models and noise detection model, will be
tested on unseen data coming from the CinC2017 and CACHET-ACDB. The
models will be tested on this data with and without noise contamination.
6.3.1
Evaluation on CinC2017 database
The AF detection models were tested on normal sinus rhythms and AF rhythms
from the CinC2017 data set. As seen in Table 6.5, the transformer 1 model had
89.17% sensitivity and 77.89% speciﬁcity, and the transformer 2 model had
81.14% sensitivity and 80.38% speciﬁcity on the CinC2017 data set. Compara-
tively the CNN and LSTM AF detection model introduced by [APP19], received
86.9% sensitivity and 85.21% speciﬁcity on the same data.
Table 6.5: Performance
comparison
between
AF
detection
models
on
CinC2017 data set.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
89.17%
77.89%
Transformer 2
81.14%
80.38%
CNN/ LSTM
86.9%
85.21%
The models were also tested in sequence with the second noise detection model
described in the previous section. The same data from the CinC2017 data set
was used, however 15% of the time a random sinus wave was added to the input
signal which corrupted the original signal. The resulting performance of the
models is shown in Table 6.6. The transformer model had 83.53% sensitivity
and 87.77% speciﬁcity and the CNN and LSTM model had 85.74% sensitivity
and 88.32% speciﬁcity
Table 6.6: Performance comparison between AF detection models in sequence
with a noise detection model on CinC2017 with 15% signal corrup-
tion.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
83.53%
87.77%
Transformer 2
81.35%
82.82%
CNN/ LSTM
85.74%
88.32%
The same experiment was performed without the noise detection model; the
results seen in Table 6.7 show a considerable decrease in speciﬁcity for both
models, with the speciﬁcity of the transformer 1 model decreasing by about 15%
==PAGE:62==
46
Results
and the speciﬁcity of the CNN and LSTM model decreasing by 30%. Without
noise detection, the transformer 2 model’s sensitivity decreased by about 5%.
Table 6.7: Performance comparison between AF detection models in sequence
without a noise detection model on CinC2017 with 15% signal cor-
ruption.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
88.29%
73.15%
Transformer 2
75.81%
81%
CNN/ LSTM
88.14%
73.40%
6.3.1.1
Evaluating noise detection combined with AF detection on
CACHET-ACDB
The noise and AF detection pipeline was tested on the CACHET-ACDB data
set, where all normal sinus and AF rhythm signals in the data set were used
for testing. To evaluate the performance in the presence of natural occurring
noise, a random noise signal from the data set was given as input 15% of the
time. The results of AF detection was tested with and without noise detection
as seen in Table 6.9 and Table 6.8 respectively. It can be seen that with the
noise detection model, more labels are predicted as normal sinus rhythms thus
increasing the speciﬁcity and decreasing the sensitivity. However when the noise
model is not used, the opposite happens, where more labels are predicted as AF
so the sensitivity increases and the speciﬁcity decreases.
Table 6.8: Performance comparison between AF detection models in sequence
with a noise detection model on CACHET-ACDB with 15% signal
corruption.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
71.63%
92.48%
Transformer 2
65.41%
82.99%
CNN/ LSTM
78.71%
85.28%
Table 6.9: Performance comparison between two models in sequence without
a noise detection model on CACHET-ACDB with 15% signal cor-
ruption.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
84.36%
75.12%
Transformer 2
72.94%
74.06%
CNN/ LSTM
84.23%
72.18%
To test how much the performance of the noise detection model aﬀects the end
AF detection model, the noise detection model was transfer learned using 150
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Evaluation of AF detection
47
samples of each label (normal, AF, noise) from the CACHET-ACDB data set.
The noise with AF detection pipeline was then tested on the remaining unseen
CACHET-ACDB data.
The transfer learning on the noise detection model
resulted in an increase in sensitivity, whilst not compromising the speciﬁcity.
As can be seen in Table 6.10, this trend is true for all models.
Table 6.10: Performance comparison between two models in sequence with a
transfer learned noise detection model on CACHET-ACDB with
15% signal corruption.
Model
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Transformer 1
83.59%
92.82%
Transformer 2
74.3%
82.68%
CNN/ LSTM
85.89%
87.60%
In this chapter, all results of the models on all data used in the work were pre-
sented. In the next chapter, these results, their meaning and their implications
will be discussed in further detail.
==PAGE:64==
48
Results
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Discussion
Out of all architectures tested for AF detection, the transformer 2 architecture
showcased the highest performance when trained and tested on the AFDB data
set, as can be seen in Figure 6.2, Figure 6.3, and Figure 6.4. However, the same
level of performance was not seen when the same model was tested on other
data sets such as the CinC2017 and the CACHET-ACDB. All of the tested
architecture suﬀered decreased performance when tested on the CinC2017 and
CACHET-ACDB. Each architecture suﬀered diﬀering drops in sensitivity and
speciﬁcity, but on average the CNN and LSTM architecture held the most stable
sensitivity and speciﬁcity over all data sets. When the models were tested in the
presence of natural ECG noise, performance worsened via an increase in false
positives. However, when a noise classifying model which rejected signals classi-
ﬁed as noise was placed sequentially before the AF detection model, a decrease
in false negatives was observed. This can be seen by the higher speciﬁcity in Ta-
ble 6.6 which shows the performance on the CinC2017 data set with 15% added
noise contamination, compared with Table 6.7 which shows the performance on
the same data but without using a noise classiﬁer. This same trend of decreased
speciﬁcity can be seen when comparing Table 6.8 and Table 6.9, which is AF
classiﬁcation performance with and without a noise classiﬁer on the noise con-
taminated CACHET-ACDB data set. The performance discrepancy observed
when natural noise was added is further discussed later in this chapter.
==PAGE:66==
50
Discussion
For noise classiﬁcation, the two approaches tested (autoencoder and CNN) both
showed potential, however it was the CNN based noise classiﬁer which was the
most eﬀective. The autoencoder model which was trained to reconstruct on a
beat by beat basis was able to reconstruct a generalized heartbeat well as shown
in Figure 6.6, however as seen in Figure 6.7,the reconstructions of pure noise
signals is similar to that of a natural heartbeat. This showcases a drawback
of the autoencoder approach, namely that a single heartbeat is too small of a
window for the autoencoder to be reliable. This is likely attributed to the use
of the Pan-Tompkins algorithm to initially ﬁnd possible R-peaks, this results
in the Pan-Tompkins algorithm tending to ﬁnd R-peaks resembling natural R-
peaks even if the input signal is pure noise. An attempt to use longer windows
of ECG signal with lengths between 10 and 30 seconds was tested in this work,
similarly to what was done in work by [CHF+19]. However the attempt to re-
construct longer ECG sequences was not successful as the model failed to learn
consistently when given input signals longer than a single heartbeat.
The CNN based noise classiﬁer as able to reject noise signals with higher ac-
curacy. However, it should be noted that the performance of the CNN based
noise classiﬁer on real world ECG data could be misleading. This is because real
ECG noise is not always random, and there are many types of noise, thus, real
world noise artifacts found in ECGs can vary in nature, however, there is not
an abundant amount of professionally labeled noise data available, and as such
the model could only be trained on about 3 200, 10 second long data samples.
In comparison with the 113 000, 10 second long samples the AF classiﬁcation
model was trained on, the noise classiﬁcation model was not trained on great
deal of data.
7.1
Future of AF detection, a model or data prob-
lem?
As shown in Table 2.1, most SOTA AF detection models in the literature are
based on data from the AFDB. This is likely because it is the largest public
database containing professionally annotated ECG signals from subjects suf-
fering from AF. The data from the AFDB could be a good starting point for
modern deep learning models to showcase initial proof of concept, but this is in
essence the only use the AFDB data has. It is worth evaluating what overar-
ching goal any research which uses the AFDB as it’s predominant data source
has. If the overarching goal of the research is to better the life quality of human
beings via automated classiﬁcation of AF, then the data in the AFDB is not
suﬃcient as a primary data source.
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Impact of noise on AF detection
51
There are two key problems with the AFDB when used for research purposes,
the ﬁrst being that it only contains clean, rhythmic ECG signals which do not
contain common noise found in many real world ECG recordings. The other
being that the database contains data from merely 22 subjects recorded at
one hospital.
The AFDB therefor does not give a true comparison to ECG
data which could be expected in real circumstances. The AFDB is also not
comparable for mHealth applications, as an everyday AF detection model would
need to be able to deal with noisy and irregular ECG signals recorded within an
ambulatory setting. Any model trained on the AFDB alone would show poor
transferability on new data of such ambulatory nature. This is what is seen in
this work when all models trained on the AFDB are tested on the CinC2017
and CACHET-ACDB data sets.
As mentioned previously, the AFDB contains recordings from only 22 subjects,
of which 20 are accessible. Even if the recordings are long, the pool of subjects is
remarkably small and therefor it is not surprising that models trained exclusively
on AFDB data have poor transferability.
The nature of ECG recordings is
the same for all humans, however, the heart is a complex organ and many
small variations in any given human heart’s conductivity occur. This leads to
diﬀerences in pace, noise artifacts and types of possible arrhythmia shown in
any given person’s ECG recording. The type of recording device also has a great
aﬀect on the ECG recording. For example, the Holter monitoring device used in
collecting the CACHET-ACDB data diﬀers in recording nature than that of the
AliveCor device used for collecting the CinC2017 data. The Holter monitoring
device will for example record all movements the subject makes during their
everyday life, whereas the AliveCor device is handheld and will only record
continues, stable signals without any considerable movement.
I feel that, based on the points mentioned above, the predominant need for the
research community in regards to AF detection algorithms, is access to a larger
and more diverse database. It is diﬃcult to say how much data will be needed
to produce a robust enough algorithm which is reliable enough for practical use;
however, a subject pool of a couple hundred, with each recording being a few
hours in length, preferably being recorded on diﬀerent days would be a good
start for such a database.
7.2
Impact of noise on AF detection
As seen in the results section, when naturally occurring noise is added to the test
data, the AF classiﬁcation model in most cases classiﬁes the noise as AF. This
is likely because AF episodes exhibit a somewhat erratic and random nature,
==PAGE:68==
52
Discussion
similar to some forms of noise. This leads to a false positives increase no matter
which data the model is tested on, thus making clear that any AF detection
system which plans to be used for practical use must take consideration to
dealing with possible noise. In this work a CNN based noise detection model
was used in sequence before the AF detection model to ﬁlter out any possible
noise signals. This approach showed to decrease the number of false positives
which was experienced compared to without the noise detection; however, the
noise detection model approach also has possible downsides. The main downside
which can be noticed from comparing Table 6.8 and Table 6.9, is that by using
the noise detection model on a type of data (in this case data from CACHET-
ACDB) which it has not seen before, resulted in a decrease of sensitivity and
an increase in speciﬁcity; this means that the noise detection model is likely
incorrectly classifying some noise signals and thus not rejecting them as well as
incorrectly rejecting non-noise signals, which then become wrongly classiﬁed by
the AF detection algorithm. This is problematic, however as seen in Table 6.10,
using a small portion of the non-seen CACHET-ACDB data, the noise detection
model performance could be improved via transfer learning. This increase in
noise detection performance resulted in a greater performance for the end AF
classiﬁcation.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to implement a reliable computer aided atrial
ﬁbrillation detection algorithm in the presence of ambulatory noise. To achieve
this, a pipeline comprised of two deep learning based algorithms, a CNN based
noise detection algorithm, and a transformer based AF detection algorithm was
developed. The noise detection algorithm was capable of classifying noise sig-
nals from the NSTDB with high accuracy (over 90%), and the AF detection
algorithm showed high accuracy of over 80% in classifying AF and normal ECG
signals from the AFDB, CinC2017 and, CACHET-ACDB.
On evaluating the performance of the AF detection algorithm on ECG data from
CinC2017 and CACHET-ACDB which was contaminated with artifacts and
ambulatory noise, a signiﬁcant decrease in performance (decreased speciﬁcity)
was observed as many confounding noise signals were wrongly being classiﬁed
as AF.
This decrease in performance highlights the need for eﬀective noise detection
to avoid FPs from confounding ambulatory noises in an AF classiﬁcation al-
gorithm. When the noise detection algorithm was used to reject noise signals,
the overall sensitivity and speciﬁcity of AF detection improved signiﬁcantly. It
was also observed that the end performance on AF classiﬁcation in the pres-
ence of ambulatory noise was highly dependent on the performance of the noise
detection algorithm.
==PAGE:70==
54
Conclusion
The noise detection algorithm showed depreciated performance when tested on
unseen data from the CACHET-ACDB, which resulted in an increase in FPs and
decreasing the speciﬁcity of the end AF classiﬁcation. This increase in FPs is
likely attributed to the noise detection algorithm miss-classifying noise as clean
signals, thus resulting in noise being miss-classiﬁed as AF. It was seen that the
performance of the noise detection algorithm was improved via transfer learning
on a small portion of the unseen data. The better noise detection resulted in
a considerable increase in performance for the ﬁnal AF detection algorithm. It
showcases the importance of using a reliable noise detection algorithm when
attempting to detect AF in noise-contaminated ambulatory ECG from free-
living conditions.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[AHA09]
S D Ash, K H C Hon, and E A R Aeder. Automatic Real Time
Detection of Atrial Fibrillation. Annals of Biomedical Engineering,
37(9):1701–1709, 2009.
[APP19]
Rasmus S. Andersen, Abdolrahman Peimankar, and Sadasivan
Puthusserypady. A deep learning approach for real-time detection
of atrial ﬁbrillation. Expert Systems with Applications, 115:465–473,
2019.
[BVC+18]
Emelia Benjamin, Salim Virani, Clifton Callaway, Alanna Cham-
berlain, Alexander Chang, Susan Cheng, Stephanie Chiuve, Mary
Cushman, Francesca Delling, Rajat Deo, and et al. Heart disease
and stroke statistics 2018 update: A report from the american heart
association. American Heart Association, 1, 2018.
[CHF+19]
Hsin Tien Chiang, Yi Yen Hsieh, Szu Wei Fu, Kuo Hsuan Hung,
Yu Tsao, and Shao Yi Chien.
Noise Reduction in ECG Signals
Using Fully Convolutional Denoising Autoencoders. IEEE Access,
7:60806–60813, 2019.
[CLM+17]
Gari Cliﬀord, Chengyu Liu, Benjamin Moody, Li-wei Lehman,
Ikaro Silva, Alistair Johnson, and Roger Mark. Af classiﬁcation
from a short single lead ecg recording - the physionet computing
in cardiology challenge 2017. AF Classiﬁcation from a Short Sin-
gle Lead ECG Recording - The PhysioNet Computing in Cardiol-
ogy Challenge 2017 v1.0.0, Feb 2017. https://physionet.org/
content/challenge-2017/1.0.0/.
==PAGE:72==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[ELDG20]
Zahra Ebrahimi, Mohammad Loni, Masoud Daneshtalab, and
Arash Gharehbaghi. A review on deep learning methods for ECG
arrhythmia classiﬁcation.
Expert Systems with Applications: X,
7:100033, 2020.
[fDCP]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Other conditions
related to heart disease.
https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/
other_conditions.htm.
[FW82]
E.R. Ferrara and B. Widraw. Fetal electrocardiogram enhancement
by time-sequenced adaptive ﬁltering. Ieee Transactions on Biomed-
ical Engineering, 29, 1982.
[hea21a]
Atrial ﬁbrillation topic review, May 2021. https://www.healio.
com/cardiology/learn-the-heart/cardiology-review/
topic-reviews/atrial-fibrillation.
[hea21b]
Heart structure, June 2021.
https://www.pinterest.com/pin/
13721973855849518/.
[HPD+20]
Gerhard Hindricks, Tatjana Potpara, Nikolaos Dagres, Elena Ar-
belo, Jeroen J Bax, Carina Blomström-Lundqvist, Giuseppe Bo-
riani, Manuel Castella, Gheorghe-Andrei Dan, Polychronis E
Dilaveris, Laurent Fauchier, Gerasimos Filippatos, Jonathan M
Kalman, Mark La Meir, Deirdre A Lane, Jean-Pierre Lebeau, Mad-
dalena Lettino, Gregory Y H Lip, Fausto J Pinto, G Neil Thomas,
Marco Valgimigli, Isabelle C Van Gelder, Bart P Van Putte, Car-
oline L Watkins, and ESC Scientiﬁc Document Group. 2020 ESC
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion developed in collaboration with the European Association for
Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS): The Task Force for the diag-
nosis and management of atrial ﬁbrillation of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with the special contribution of the
European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Euro-
pean Heart Journal, 08 2020. ehaa612.
[HZS+20]
Shenda Hong, Yuxi Zhou, Junyuan Shang, Cao Xiao, and Jimeng
Sun. Opportunities and challenges in deep learning methods on
Electrocardiogram data: A systematic review. Computers in Biol-
ogy and Medicine, 22, 2020.
[KPB21]
Devender Kumar, Sadasivan Puthusserypady, and Jakob Eyvind
Bardram. CACHET-CADB. 5 May 2021. https://doi.org/10.
11583/DTU.14547264.v1.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[LMC08]
Q Li, R.G. Mark, and G.D. Cliﬀord. Robust heart rate estimation
from multiple asynchronous noisy sources using signal quality in-
dices and a Kalman ﬁlter. Physiological Measurement, 29(1):15–32,
2008.
[LTP13]
Weiqin Lin, Swee Teo, and Kian Poh. Electrocardiographic t wave
abnormalities. Singapore Medical Journal, 11(54):606–610, 2013.
[Lyn79]
P. Lynn. Recursive digital ﬁlters for biological signals. Medical and
Biological Engineering, 9, 1979.
[MAA20]
Sajad Mousavi, Fatemeh Afghah, and U. Rajendra Acharya. HAN-
ECG: An interpretable atrial ﬁbrillation detection model using hi-
erarchical attention networks. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
127, 2020.
[may19]
Atrial
ﬁbrillation,
Jun
2019.
https://www.mayoclinic.
org/diseases-conditions/atrial-fibrillation/
symptoms-causes/syc-20350624.
[MM83]
George Moody and Roger Mark. A new method for detecting atrial
ﬁbrillation using r-r intervals. Computers in Cardiology, 10:227–
230, Nov 1983. https://physionet.org/content/afdb/1.0.0/.
[MMM84]
George Moody, W Muldrow, and Roger Mark. A noise stress test
for arrhythmia detectors.
Computers in Cardiology, 11:381–384,
1984. https://physionet.org/content/nstdb/1.0.0/.
[NCM+20]
Annamalai Natarajan, Yale Chang, Sara Mariani, Asif Rahman,
Gregory Boverman, Shruti Vij, and Jonathan Rubin. A wide and
deep transformer neural network for 12-lead ecg classiﬁcation. Com-
puting in Cardiology, 47, 2020.
[Nie19]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. 2019.
[OC15]
Julien Oster and Gari D. Cliﬀord. Impact of the presence of noise
on RR interval-based atrial ﬁbrillation detection. Journal of Elec-
trocardiology, 48(6):947–951, 2015.
[Por11]
Carol Porth. Essentials of Pathophysiology: Concepts of Altered
Health States.
Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams
Wilkins,
2011. https://books.google.se/books/about/Essentials_of_
Pathophysiology.html?id=Lj95RQAACAAJ&redir_esc=y.
[PPH+18]
Birut˙e Paliakait˙e, Andrius Petr˙enas, Mikael Henriksson, Jurgita
Skibarkien˙e, Raimondas Kubilius, Leif Sörnmo, and Vaidotas
Marozas. Atrial ﬁbrillation frequency tracking in ambulatory ecg
signals: The signiﬁcance of signal quality assessment. Computers
in Biology and Medicine, 102:227–233, 2018.
==PAGE:74==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PPS+14]
Helmut Pürerfellner, Evgeny Pokushalov, Shantanu Sarkar, Jodi
Koehler, Ren Zhou, Lubos Urban, and Gerhard Hindricks. P-wave
evidence as a method for improving algorithm to detect atrial ﬁb-
rillation in insertable cardiac monitors. Heart Rhythm, 11(9):1575–
1583, 2014.
[PT85]
Jiapu Pan and Willis J. Tompkins. A Real-Time QRS Detection
Algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, BME-
32(3):230–236, 1985.
[RPR+18]
Jonathan Rubin, Saman Parvaneh, Asif Rahman, Bryan Conroy,
and Saeed Babaeizadeh. Densely connected convolutional networks
for detection of atrial ﬁbrillation from short single-lead ECG record-
ings. Journal of Electrocardiology, 51:18–21, 2018.
[SE18]
Shalin Savalia and Vahid Emamian. Cardiac arrhythmia classiﬁ-
cation by multi-layer perceptron and convolution neural networks.
Bioengineering, 5(2), 2018.
[SP18]
G. Sannino and G. De Pietro. A deep learning approach for ecg-
based heartbeat classiﬁcation for arrhythmia detection.
Future
Generation Computer Systems, 86:446–455, 9 2018.
[SSV18]
V. G. Sujadevi, K. P Soman, and R Vinayakumar. Real-time de-
tection of atrial ﬁbrillation from short time single lead ECG traces
using recurrent neural networks. Intelligent Systems Technologies
and Applications, 683:212–221, 2018.
[SSZ+17]
Patrick Schwab, Gaetano C. Scebba, Jia Zhang, Marco Delai, and
Walter Karlen. Beat by beat: Classifying cardiac arrhythmias with
recurrent neural networks. Computing in Cardiology, 44:1–4, 2017.
[TSA20]
Jessica Torres-Soto and Euan A. Ashley. Multi-task deep learn-
ing for cardiac rhythm detection in wearable devices. npj Digital
Medicine, 3(1), 2020.
[TZ91]
Nv Thakor and Ys Zhu. Applications of adaptive ﬁltering to ecg
analysis - noise cancellation and arrhythmia detection. Ieee Trans-
actions on Biomedical Engineering, 38, 1991.
[VBS+]
Ashish Vaswani, Google Brain, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need.
[Whi21]
Sophie White.
The conducting system of the heart,
June
2021.
https://teachmeanatomy.info/thorax/organs/heart/
conducting-system/.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[WJ14]
Jonathan Waks and Mark Josephson. Mechanisms of atrial ﬁbril-
lation – reentry, rotors and reality. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev.,
3(2):947–951, 2014.
[WZL+19]
Guijin Wang, Chenshuang Zhang, Yongpan Liu, Huazhong Yang,
Dapeng Fu, Haiqing Wang, and Ping Zhang.
A global and up-
datable ECG beat classiﬁcation system based on recurrent neural
networks and active learning. Information Sciences, 501:523–542,
2019.
[XWWZ18] Yong Xia, Naren Wulan, Kuanquan Wang, and Henggui Zhang.
Detecting atrial ﬁbrillation by deep convolutional neural networks.
Computers in Biology and Medicine, 93(July 2017):84–92, 2018.
[Yan21]
Frank G. Yanowitz. Ecg learning center - an introduction to clinical
electrocardiography, May 2021. https://ecg.utah.edu/.
[ZLW+14]
T Zhang, Y Liu, S Wei, S Wei, and F Liu.
Robust heart rate
estimation from multiple asynchronous noisy sources using signal
quality indices and a Kalman ﬁlter. Computers and Electronics,
15:564–573, 2014.
