==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Point Cloud Processing based on Graph
Neural Network
Manxi Lin (s192230)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Point Cloud Processing based on Graph Neural Network
Author:
Manxi Lin (s192230)
Main supervisor:
Aasa Feragen, Professor, Ph.D.
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor:
Guan Wang, Ph.D.
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Project period: January 2021 - June 2021
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science in Engineering
Field: Autonomous Systems Engineering
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Point cloud, a set of points defined by a given 3D coordinates system, has become
popular with the development of 3D sensors. With the introduction of effective deep
learning frameworks, point cloud processing is playing a more and more important
role in autonomous driving.
However, most previous works cannot address point
clouds eﬀiciently and effectively, as point clouds are unstructured and usually mas-
sive.
In this thesis, we represent point clouds by multi-scale undirected graphs. Based on
the investigation of former works, we propose a novel pipeline for graph-based point
cloud processing, including Iterative Farthest Point Sampling (IFPS) strategy
and a multi-scale robust graph convolutional neural network for point cloud feature
learning, named FlexNet. IFPS works for data reduction and FlexNet is used in
point feature learning. Specifically, the point features are learned by FlexNet. Graph
Inception modules in FlexNet. In each Graph Inception module, spectral graph con-
volution is carried out on multi-scale reception fields to aggregate point features at
both local and global levels. We also consider the robustness of the network, involv-
ing rotation, translation, scaling, order, and resolution invariance. Furthermore, we
look into the over-smoothing and over-squashing problems that restrict graph con-
volutional neural networks’ performance.
We deem the proposed feature learning
framework can alleviate these problems.
Through extensive experiments on diverse public data sets, we demonstrate the ad-
vantage of our models for both point cloud classification and segmentation tasks. In
the end, we analyze the limitations in our work and clarify potential directions to
improve.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a master of science degree in autonomous systems engineering.
The thesis was assigned to a workload of 30 ECTS, from the 25th of January 2021
to the 25th of June 2021. The work presented herein was supervised by Prof. Aasa
Feragen and her Postdoc Guan Wang.
This project has been approved by Assoc.
Prof.
Lazaros Nalpantidis, the head
of study in the autonomous systems engineering program.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Manxi Lin (s192230)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Upon the completion of the thesis, I am grateful to those who have offered me en-
couragement and support during my study.
The profound gratitude should go to my supervisors Aasa and Guan. Without their
patient instruction and insightful feedback, I could hardly finish the project. I would
especially like to thank Aasa again for the weekly online meeting and generous help
on my job-hunting.
In addition, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my twin brother Man-
hui as well as my good friend Ruchir and Channing, for their constructive suggestions
on coding and life. A special appreciation belongs to my close friend Mengge, who
supervised and ”pushed” me to finish the thesis all the way - I am a procrastinator in
writing. I would also like to thank her accompany from early morning to mid-night
(especially days before the deadline), which traverses 7.000 kilometers from the other
side of Eurasia to my sweet dream. I would also mention my parents, who always
give me full love and support in my postgraduate study.
Furthermore, my thanks also go to the scholars whose academic papers and mono-
graphs have enlightened me in this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Point Cloud: represent the world in 3D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Point Cloud Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.6
Main Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.7
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Preliminaries
17
2.1
Point Cloud Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
PointNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Point Feature Learning
. .
24
2.4
Multi-scale Feature Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Methods
35
3.1
Iterative Farthest Point Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Multi-scale Graph Feature Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Differentiable Graph Pooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
FlexNet: Flexible multi-scale graph feature learning on point sets . . .
45
3.5
Robust Point Feature Learning: A discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Experiment
49
4.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Data Preparation: Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Data Preparation: Flexible graph representation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Point Cloud Classification on ModelNet40 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.5
Point Cloud Segmentation on S3DIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Resistance of Over-smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.7
Resistance of Over-squashing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.8
Robustness Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Conclusion
61
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Limitations and Future Directions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A
Alternative Solutions
63
A.1 One-time Farthest Point Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 FPS-based Pooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Skip Connection in Graph Convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.4 Non-centered Covariance and Rotation Invariance . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B
Contributions in a Nutshell
69
B.1
Original Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.2
Process of the Proposed Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Point cloud processing is an old topic raised along with the birth of 3D acquisition
technologies, and reborns with the rise of deep learning in recent years. This chap-
ter is devoted to a very general and overall introduction to this field.
Note that
as point cloud processing involves many different methods, the topic could be very
large. We would like to cover the basic concepts of point cloud processing and com-
pare various feature learning schemes, to answer the questions that ”What is point
cloud processing?”, ”What problems are we aiming to solve?”, and ”Why do we pro-
pose a multi-scale spectral graph convolutional neural network framework to solve the
problem?”
1.1
Point Cloud: represent the world in 3D
The rapid development of acquisition technologies these years brings us more afford-
able and available 3D sensors [Guo+20]. Compared with 2D images, 3D data collected
by these sensors have rich geometric, shape, and scale information [Guo+13], which
provide a better understanding of our world.
Figure 1.1: 3D representations of a rabbit [Hoa+19]. (Left) Point Cloud represen-
tation. (Middle) Volumetric Grid representation. (Right) Mesh repre-
sentation.
3D data can be represented in many different formats, including point clouds, RGB-
D images, meshes, and volumetric grids. Some commonly used representations are
illustrated in Figure 1.1.
A point cloud is a set of data points defined by a given 3D coordinates system [Cona].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
It can provide the original geometric information without discretization [Guo+20],
which is preferred in many scene understanding applications. Therefore, the point
cloud representation is widely employed in 3D scene understanding tasks, which are
our interests in this project.
Point cloud representation has four main properties, which are outlined here.
(1) Point cloud has an immense data volume.
In some scenarios such as
autonomous driving, there could be millions of points in a cloud, distributed in vari-
ous densities in a large space. It means a significant computation amount as well as
rich information. Similar to that in image representation, resolution (the number of
points in a point cloud) governs the level of identifiable details within the point cloud
[LYR08]. The acquisition devices determine the resolution of raw points, while some
operations on points, i.g., sampling, also lead to resolution variation.
(2) Point cloud is irregular and unordered.
Unlike pixel arrays in images
or voxel arrays in volumetric grids, a point cloud is a set of points without specific
order [Qi+17a]. In other words, a point cloud with N points can have N! different
permutations in the storage, which all represent the same point set.
(3) Point cloud is invariant under certain geometric transformations. Com-
mon geometric transformations include rotation, translation, and scaling. The geo-
metric information of a point set is invariant to these transformations. That is, the
properties of an object do not vary by the observer’s position.
(4) Point cloud has latent topological structures. Point cloud does not provide
topological structures directly. However, since the points are from Euclidean space,
they are naturally not isolated. Interaction between points and their neighboring
points [Qi+17a] indicates the possibility of building topological structures that pro-
vides geometric information. That is, point clouds can be handled in a non-Euclidean
way.
1.2
Point Cloud Processing
Acquisition equipment is formatting our world to point clouds, while point cloud
processing is to recover the points back to our knowledge of the world. Point cloud
processing aims at endowing machines with the ability to understand scenes and ad-
dress some practical problems, such as object shape classification. A general pipeline
of point cloud processing is presented in Figure 1.2. It includes three steps, prepro-
cessing, feature engineering, and applications.
Preprocessing The raw point cloud from acquisition devices is often noisy and con-
tains outliers [Han+17]. Thereby it is crucial to filter the points while preserving their
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Point Cloud Processing
3
features before further processing. In large-scale scenarios, i.g., 3D reconstruction of
a city, data is often collected by many unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Registration
is to associate these point clouds into a common coordinate system [PCS15]. Apart
from the noises, the point clouds from sensors are usually incomplete. Occlusion,
light reflection, transparency of surface material, and limitations of sensor resolution
and viewing angle lead to a loss of geometric and semantic information [Hua+20].
To repair incomplete point clouds for further applications, point cloud completion is
called out by many works.
Figure 1.2: The pipeline of point cloud processing.
Point feature engineering Raw attributes of a single point, such as coordinates
and colors, are usually not enough for scene understanding tasks. Feature engineering
is to aggregate single point attributes into high-dimension feature vectors to represent
local and global scene information better. Point features can be either hand-crafted
[Rus+08] [RBB09] [Bos+16] or autonomously learned by machine learning models
[Qi+17a] [Qi+17b] [Wan+19b]. The latter process is also called feature learning.
Notably, a massive point cloud may contain millions of points. Hence, to reduce com-
putation amount, sampling is often adapted before feature learning. Unlike noise
filtering in data cleaning, sampling in this step aims to pick up key points that pre-
serve the data structure. Sampling is also incorporated as part of some hierarchical
feature learning methods [Qi+17b] [Pan+18] to generalize models and provide multi-
scale point geometric information.
Applications Point cloud processing works towards addressing specific problems
related to point clouds, i.g., detecting and classifying cars and pedestrians on a road.
Among them, classification, detection, tracking, and segmentation problems have at-
tracted much attention in recent years. Although 2D computer vision has developed
a lot of mature solutions to these problems, due to the difference between point clouds
and images, there is still significant work to be done in the 3D field. We show some
common tasks associated with point cloud processing in Figure 1.3.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Our project works on public data sets described in chapter 4. In most cases, these
data sets are already cleaned and registered. In the literature investigation, we notice
that point cloud completion is usually studied separately. This means it is not a
necessary option in point cloud processing - its role can be played by a robust feature
learning model. For these reasons, in our project, we put point feature engineering
under the spotlight. The term ”point cloud processing” is thereby having a similar
definition with point cloud feature engineering/learning in the rest part of this report.
Specifically, we focus on point feature learning via graph convolutional neural net-
works. The learned features are employed in 3D shape classification and semantic
segmentation problems. Shape classification is identifying which of a set of shapes
a point cloud belongs to. The segmentation problem is similar to classification, but
it allocates each point with a category.
Figure 1.3: Some common tasks related to point cloud processing (modified from
[Mil]).
1.3
Problem Statement
In this project, we address two problems, 3D object shape classification, and point
cloud semantic segmentation under the indoor scenario. We design a deep learning
framework that directly takes preprocessed point clouds as input. The preprocessing
includes data cleaning and registration, which have been done in public data sets.
We represent a point cloud as a set P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} of n points, where point pi
is represented by its 3D spatial coordinates and possibly auxiliary features such as
color and surface normal.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Related Work
5
For the shape classification task, the output of the proposed framework includes
k scores for all the k candidate classes. Each score is between 0 and 1, indicating
the predicted probability of the object in the class. For semantic segmentation, our
framework outputs n × m scores for each of the n points, if given m categories.
1.4
Related Work
In our project, point cloud processing aims to solve scene understanding problems,
including object shape classification and 3D semantic segmentation. As stated be-
fore, among the three stages of point cloud processing posed in section 1.2, feature
engineering plays the most important role in such semantic tasks.
This section is devoted to a brief overview of the progress of point feature learning.
We consider the related work in three categories separately. Firstly, we start with an
introduction to point sampling, which is widely employed in hierarchical feature learn-
ing and data reduction. Secondly, we give a general introduction to existing feature
engineering approaches and their merits as well as drawbacks in section 1.4.2. We
notice that point-based methods (e.g., PointNet) popular at present are not able to
capture the local topological information in point clouds, while graph-based methods,
which are designed to utilize the topological structure, suffer from many other prob-
lems. These problems limit graph-based approaches to be the mainstream. Section
1.4.3 reviews the three major problems of existing graph-based methods and some
present solutions. In this project, we propose a graph-based point feature learning
scheme. Different from point-based methods, it leverages local structural informa-
tion in point clouds hierarchically.
Moreover, it overcomes the main problems in
existing graph-based approaches, including expensive computation, over-smoothing,
over-squashing, and lack of robustness.
1.4.1
Point cloud sampling
A large-scale point cloud makes storage and subsequent processing ineﬀicient [Che+17].
To this end, sampling is an important part of point feature learning. In most cases,
sampling is used to reduce redundant points to avoid extra computation cost and
over-fitting. Some hierarchical learning works also employ sampling to locate inter-
esting local regions for further aggregation. That is, in these works, sampling plays
the same role as the pooling layer in convolutional neural networks (check chapter 3
for details). Moreover, sampling is also significant in robust point feature learning -
fused features learned from point clouds with different sampling rates are more robust
to the varying resolution.
Hu et al.
[Hu+20] classified existing point sampling methods into heuristic and
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
learning-based approaches. They further suggested evaluating the sampling perfor-
mance in two aspects: the time complexity and the space coverage. The complexity
decides the speed of sampling and the coverage is correlated with the remaining use-
ful information. In chapter 4, we look further into the quantification of sampling
eﬀiciency and coverage.
Figure 1.4: The performance of different sampling approaches (the coordinates only
present relative levels).
Heuristic sampling Heuristic methods usually incorporate practical and human-
interpretable rules. Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) starts from a point in the set,
and iteratively selects the point with the furthest distance to the points already
taken [MD03]. Regardless of its high time complexity, FPS has good coverage of the
entire point set. To improve the eﬀiciency, Fabian et al. [GWL18] suggested Inverse
Density Importance Sampling (IDIS). It sorts all the points by their density and takes
those with high value. IDIS is faster than FPS, whereas sensitive to noise. In order
to maximize the eﬀiciency, Hu et al. [Hu+20] simply applied Random Sampling (RS)
in massive point sets, which follows a naive and eﬀicient way while resulting in a sig-
nificant loss of information. Voxel Sampling (VS) [He+95] voxelizes the 3D space and
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Related Work
7
selects the points near grid centers. It only has good performance on even-distributed
points. Compared with learning-based methods, heuristic approaches are more eﬀi-
cient and interpretable. Nevertheless, these methods are task-agnostic, i.e., they do
not consider the subsequent processing of the sampled point cloud. Moreover, it is
also diﬀicult to design heuristic rules satisfying both the eﬀiciency and coverage rate.
Learning-based sampling Learning-based approaches yield a subset representing
the whole point set by data-driven models. Specifically, these approaches are subject
to a subsequent task objective [DLA19], e.g., point segmentation. S-NET [DLA19]
learns to generate a small set of points and match these points with their nearest neigh-
bors in the original set, which leads to high complexity. Yang et al. [Yan+19] applied
a strategy called PATs via a learned weighted sum over the full point clouds to avoid
the expensive matching. The large weight matrix and matrix multiplication result in
an unaffordable memory cost. SampleNet [LMA20] replaces the global weighted sum
with eﬀicient interpolation among nearest neighbors called soft projection operation.
The learning-based approaches are task-specific, i.e., the sampled subset is optimized
to fit the subsequent task. Nonetheless, this end-to-end learning strategy makes the
neural network more diﬀicult to train, which limits these approaches to further appli-
cation.
We illustrate the performance of different sampling approaches in Figure 1.4, ac-
cording to the theoretical analysis and experimental results in these works.
Note
that the coordinates are eyeballed and only represent relative levels. The direction of
the horizontal arrow indicates the increase of eﬀiciency while that of the vertical one
means better coverage. Thus it is clear that an ideal sampling approach should lie in
the right-up corner in the figure.
The learning-based approaches are task-specific, but increase the diﬀiculty of train-
ing a model. Moreover, they take the massive raw point cloud as input, resulting
in prodigious computational complexity. Therefore, although simple, the heuristic
methods are applied more frequently at present. We also employ heuristic sampling
in this thesis. Among the listed approaches, FPS and RS are the dominant ones in
point cloud processing (details in chapter 2). FPS has a high coverage rate with low
eﬀiciency, while RS is at the opposite extreme. Currently, either heuristic or learning-
based, rare work is able to achieve a trade-off between eﬀiciency and the coverage
of the whole point set. In practice, the point clouds acquired are usually immense
and large-scale [Guo+20]. As a consequence, it is desirable to further investigate
the problem of eﬀicient sampling of massive point clouds with enough reservation of
information.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
1.4.2
Point feature learning
As indicated in section 1.1, for an object represented by a set of points, its geometric
information lies in the neighborhood of points. Therefore, point feature engineering
is indeed a process of dividing a point cloud into serval local regions and aggregating
information in each region. In the process, the neighborhood decides the description
scope of features. After multiple aggregations, features with the largest neighbor-
hood, global features, represent overall geometric information of the whole object.
With the progress of computer vision and computer graphics technologies, point fea-
tures have experienced development from hand-crafted features to learned features.
The hand-crafted features refer to properties derived using the information present
in the point cloud itself, while the learned features are obtained by training neural
networks. When implemented by artificial neural networks, point feature engineering
is usually called feature learning.
Traditional point cloud processing depends on hand-crafted geometric features [Rus+08]
[RBB09] [Bos+16]. These features are robust to transformations, whereas having poor
performance in handling noisy and low-resolution data. Furthermore, in the process
of traditional feature engineering, prior knowledge is highly involved, inevitably intro-
ducing bias and uncertainty. In addition, like heuristic sampling, these features are
also task-agnostic. As a result, hand-crafted features are rarely involved in seman-
tic tasks at present. They are gradually replaced by the unparalleled representation
capacity of deep neural networks. Point normal may be an exception - it was pre-
computed in some public data sets and employed as raw point geometric features
together with point coordinates.
Recently, deep learning techniques, especially the convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
have dominated many research areas in computer vision. Compared with the hand-
engineered features, neural networks provide a solution independent from prior knowl-
edge and human intervention. However, the unstructured nature of 3D point clouds
poses a great challenge - CNNs can only work on regular representations, such as
images and 3D voxels. In other words, the well-established 2D computer vision tech-
nologies can not be transplanted directly to 3D points. Point feature learning heads
at seeking ways for feature engineering to benefit from the improvement of deep learn-
ing. We roughly split feature learning into three categories, grid-based, point-based
and graph-based approaches based on the network type.
Grid-based networks Many studies [Su+15] [Yua+18] [MS15] [ROG17] convert
a point cloud to a regular representation to utilize 2D or 3D Convolutional Neural
Networks.
The representation can be multi-view [Su+15] [Yua+18] or volumetric
[MS15] [ROG17]. Nevertheless, since discretization inevitably introduces information
loss in the learning process, most grid-based methods drift apart from the original
intention of using point cloud representation. Besides, CNNs are sensitive to some
transformations on point clouds, e.g., rotation.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Related Work
9
Point-based networks The irregularity of point clouds isolated point features from
deep learning like a wall until PointNet [Qi+17a] broke it in 2017. By running a Mul-
tilayer Perceptron (MLP) on each point, PointNet directly works on raw point clouds
without any voxelization or projection [Guo+20]. Since point-wise MLPs can not
capture local information of the set, Qi et al. suggested PointNet++ [Qi+17b] which
learns point features in small neighborhoods. At present, point-based methods have
dominated the research on point cloud processing. Many works [WQF19] [Xu+21]
follow the idea of PointNet and PointNet++ and have made significant achievements.
However, most point-based methods, even PointNet++, fail to really model the joint
relationship between points - in each neighborhood, point features are still learned
individually and aggregated by max poolings. Without the consideration of point
interactions, point-based networks are not able to capture the local topological infor-
mation among points. In addition, many point-based methods implement k-nearest
neighbor to define neighborhoods in each layer, which has a considerable time cost.
What if we provide points with the additional topological information in each con-
volution? Graph-based methods, which go beyond the Euclidean space, suggest a
solution to address the problems of point-based methods.
Figure 1.5: An illustration of graph-based point feature learning.
Graph-based networks Graphs are mathematical structures used to model pair-
wise relations between objects [Conb]. A graph is made up of vertices (also called
nodes) which are connected by edges (also called links) [Conb]. By leveraging the
latent topological structure of point sets, graph-based methods excavating point in-
formation from the view of geometric learning. More specifically, point clouds are
abstracted to graphs where vertices represent points and edges connect points with
their spatial neighbors.
A subsequent graph convolutional neural network (GCN)
is applied to learn features in spatial or spectral domains. A typical graph-based
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
learning scheme is shown in Figure 1.5. There are various strategies to construct the
graphs, such as k-nearest neighbors. We describe them in the next chapter. GCN’s
inherent strong capability to handle irregular data gives the graph-based approaches a
promising future. Compared with the non-graph-based alternatives, the graph-based
methods are standing on the shoulders of giants - GCNs are also applied in many
other areas, e.g., medical signal processing, and social network analysis. Graph-based
point feature learning can benefit from the theoretical progress of geometric learning
that unifies these areas.
Spatial-based GCNs [Wan+19b] [Wan+19a] [HH19] implement convolution directly
over spatial neighbors of each vertex. The key issue in spatial-based GCNs [WQF19]
[Liu+19] [Xu+21] can be summarized in the design of irregular convolutional ker-
nels and the operations in kernels. These kernels can be spherical, cylindrical, and
square. DGCNN [Wan+19b] uses MLP to aggregate node features as well as the
edge features associated with the neighbors of each point. Based on DGCNN, Wang
et al.
[Wan+19a] introduced the attention mechanism to selectively focus on the
most relevant part of the neighbors. At present, spatial convolutions have been very
attractive due to their low computational complexity, localized property, and trans-
ferability [Bal+20]. However, on one hand, Balcilar et al. [Bal+20] proved that the
spatial-based graph convolutions are essentially low-pass filters. To this end, they
are not able to capture high-frequency point features. On the other hand, the shared
convolution kernel requires nodes to have the same number of neighbors, which leads
to the variance of the region scale of the neighborhood when the points are unevenly
distributed. Points with higher density have a smaller neighborhood. This further
weakens the generalization of local features across space [Qi+17b].
Spectral-based GCNs define convolutions as spectral filtering, which is implemented
as the multiplication of signals on a graph with eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian
matrix [Guo+20] (check chapter 2 for details).
To address the challenges of high
computation and non-localization in naive GCNs, Defferrard et al. [DBV16] approx-
imated the spectral filtering with a shifted Chebyshev polynomials. The order of the
Chebyshev polynomials decides the receptive field of the learned features. We look
into the details in chapter 2.
RGCNN [Te+18] applies the Chebyshev approximation with improvements on pool-
ing. Specifically, it updates the graph Laplacian matrix with additional graph con-
volutions. As RGCNN only works in the global scope, PointGCN [ZR18] proposes a
multi-scale pooling to capture both global and local features of the point cloud. Fol-
lowing works have contributions in various aspects. Pan et al. [Pan+18] developed
3DTI-Net with consideration to the robustness of the network. Wang et al.[Wan+19a]
increased the processing speed through adopting an effective graph pooling strategy
by recursively clustering the spectral coordinates. Another notable work is HGNN
[Fen+19], which operates hyperedge convolution on a hypergraph.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Related Work
11
The aforementioned methods all employ the Chebyshev polynomials to approximate
spectral filtering. Kipf et al. [KW16] further simplified the filtering in 2016. Their
simplification is applying the first-order Chebyshev polynomials - each node only
considers neighbors directly connected with it (further descriptions in chapter 2). Re-
cently, Tang et al. [TGH21] used the simplified convolutions and suggested a residual
graph learning paradigm called RGLN to generate and update graphs automatically.
Spectral-based GCNs can theoretically utilize information on any frequency. Com-
pared with spatial-based GCNs, these filters have a more solid theoretical basis, as
well as a global view of the point set. Thereby, we deploy spectral GCNs in our
work. To avoid ambiguity and for stating convenience, unless specifically noted, the
term ”GCN” used in the rest of this report all refers to GCNs work in the spectral
domain.
1.4.3
Problems in GCNs
Compared with point-based approaches, graph-based methods leverage the topologi-
cal information in point clouds and can model local geometric structures. However,
based on the literature investigation, we are also conscious that graph-based methods
suffer from three major problems that limit them to be the mainstream. The prob-
lems are concluded as follows:
(1) The resolution of a point cloud (number of points) decides the size of the graph
Laplacian matrix, and further determines the computational complexity of spectral
filtering.
Therefore, it is challenging to employ GCNs in large-scale point clouds,
due to the expensive computational cost. Existing approaches have developed
some solutions. On the one hand, to indicate local features, the constructed graph
is usually sparse and thus can be accelerated by sparse matrix-matrix multiplica-
tion algorithms [YML18]. On the other hand, adopting an eﬀicient sampling strategy
helps reduce data size. A massive point cloud are usually sampled into 1024 [Qi+17a],
2048[Qi+17b] , or 4096 [Shi+20] key points before feature learning. For segmentation
tasks, the learned features are then interpolated to other raw points subsequently.
In this project, we follow the second way - we implement a novel sampling trick.
Compared with former sampling methods, our approach achieves a trade-off between
coverage and time complexity.
(2) Not only graph-based methods, robustness, i.e., the invariance of features of
points under transformations, is a common topic in point feature learning. Currently,
many present approaches only tackle the problem with data argumentation, which
increased computation sharply and does not promise ”real” invariance. According
to the properties of point clouds in section 1.2, a robust network ought to have the
following five kinds of invariance:
• Rotation invariance
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
• Translation invariance
• Scale invariance
• Order invariance
• Resolution invariance
Figure 1.6: Common operations associated with robustness.
In Figure 1.6, we list the six corresponding operations that may have an impact on
the learned features. The numbers in the figure stand for the input order of points
to a network.
Invariance under aﬀine transformations The rotation, translation, and scale
invariance guarantee the network recognizes objects in an arbitrary pose. Transla-
tion and scale invariance can be easily achieved by coordinate normalization, while
the rotation invariance remains a challenge in 3D deep learning [Pan+18]. One direct
way to solve the problem is to design theoretically rotation-invariant point features.
For example, Yi et al. [Yi+17] projected the 3D points into a unit sphere and perform
spherical convolutions. These methods need preprocessing but have a solid theoretical
basis. Moreover, PointNet [Qi+17a] provides a data-driven solution. A mini network
called T-Net is added in the main network to predict aﬀine transformation rotation
matrices that align points in both Euclidean space and feature space. T-Net is task-
specific and easy to implement. Within this thesis, we adopt T-Net and prove by
experiments that T-Net outperforms the hand-designed rotation-invariant features.
The strategy adopting T-Net is also called input transformation.
Order invariance The order invariance means the network that consumes N points
needs to be invariant to N! permutations of the input set in the data feeding order
[Qi+17a]. Note that the permutation here refers to the change of points’ sequence
in storage. It does not physically move the points. GCNs are naturally invariant to
these permutations since nodes in a graph are also unordered. We provide detailed
proof in chapter 4.
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Related Work
13
Resolution invariance The resolution invariance requires the network to perceive
the same object represented in different numbers of points. It is usually solved by
data argumentation [Qi+17a] or hierarchical learning [Qi+17b].
In our work, we
adopt graph pooling to build a hierarchical learning scheme. Data argumentation is
also employed to enhance the robustness.
(3) Due to the intrinsic characteristics of the information propagation in GCNs (see
section 2.3.2 for details), a deep framework often suffers from over-smoothing and
over-squashing problems. over-smoothing refers to the phenomenon of the node fea-
tures tending to converge to the same value and become nearly indistinguishable as the
result of applying multiple graph convolutional layers [OS19]. Over-squashing, also
known as the information bottleneck problem, describes the occurrence of “squashing”
of information from exponentially growing neighbors into fixed-size vectors [AY20],
which is shown in Figure 1.7.
Over-smoothing and multi-scale feature learning Over-smoothing was first
observed by Kips et al. [KW16] in deep GCNs (networks stacking a significant num-
ber of graph convolutions), and thus they suggested GCN architectures be no deeper
than 3 or 4 layers. Nevertheless, shallow GCNs do not have enough complexity and
fitting capabilities to handle large point clouds.
The conflict of network size and
information over-smoothing can be summarized to the choice of the receptive field
of features, which is defined as the size of the region in the input that produces the
feature [AWJ]. In other words, the receptive field of a node in a GCN is the ”viewing
scope” of the node. It plays an important role in the formulation of over-smoothing,
and thus provides a key to address the problem. The size of the receptive field grows
with the number of layers in the neural network. The process of feature aggregation
in GCN is indeed the expansion of receptive fields. An over-expansion is not expected
in most cases - one abstract explanation for over-smoothing is that with the enlarge-
ment of the receptive field, all the nodes on the graph share a common global view,
leading to indiscriminate features.
Multi-scale learning that incorporates features
with different receptive fields is an antidote for over-smoothing. Li et al. [Li+19] al-
leviated the over-smoothing and built a 54-layer deep GCN by employing multi-scale
feature fusion, including residual/dense connections [He+16] and dilated convolutions
[YK15]. Inspired by Inception [Sze+15], Hassa et al. [HH19] proposed a shared multi-
scale graph-based encoder, successfully broadening the graph convolution. MixHop
[Abu+19] and N-GCN[Abu+20] further flatten the network architecture and learn
multi-scale point features through precomputing the powers of the graph Laplacian
matrix.
However, in most present multi-scale learning schemes, the expansion of
receptive fields is still done by multiple convolutions, which brings much computa-
tional expense. Existing multi-scale feature fusion is performed either in depth (skip
connection) or in width (multi-parallel branches). By representing point clouds in
multi-scale undirected graphs, this project presents a novel way to learn point fea-
tures at different scales by GCNs. The proposed learning scheme considers both the
in-depth and in-width feature fusion and can reach any receptive field with only one
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Introduction
convolution.
Over-squashing The information bottleneck problem is raised by the long distance
of information propagation. Graph convolution can be considered as an information
compression (spectral filtering) of neighboring node features.
As the compression
inevitably causes information loss, nodes can hardly get the information from distant
nodes on the graph. As a result, the expansion of receptive fields does not bring
more information to each node. Varying the original locally-connected topological
structure [Sen+08] [Gil+17] can be a solution. In our work, we apply a differentiable
graph pooling strategy to cluster and fuse similar nodes, to enhance the information
propagation. Besides, we apply the attention mechanism to the network, to reallo-
cate the edge weights on the graph, to make nodes focus on important neighbors in
filtering.
Figure 1.7: The bottleneck of graph neural networks [AY20].
In chapter 2, we look into the origin of over-smoothing and over-squashing from
the perspective of principles of GCNs.
1.5
Motivation
The world should not always be recorded in lines and planes - point clouds represent
our world more realistically. In recent years, point cloud processing is playing a more
and more important role in many areas, e.g., virtual reality, unmanned driving, and
3D city reconstruction. We have never been so close to these plots described only in
==PAGE:25==
1.6 Main Contributions
15
science fiction before.
However, although deep learning has earned enough fame and success in 2D com-
puter vision, it has not fulfilled its full potential in point cloud processing. Due to
the characteristics of point cloud representation, traditional convolution can not be
applied directly. It dismisses the possibility of transferring the mature 2D solutions
directly to 3D.
Point-based networks present a way to handle irregular point clouds, whereas neglect
the interaction between points. By representing point clouds in graphs, graph-based
methods learn point features with the consideration of these interactions. Nonethe-
less, most present graph-based works suffer from over-smoothing, over-squashing, and
expensive computation, and the learned features are usually not robust to transfor-
mations. These problems weaken the performance of graph-based approaches to even
worse than point-based networks. In this master’s project, we would like to propose a
graph-based scheme for point feature learning, which captures topological features of
points and addresses the challenging problems of existing graph-based methods. We
expect the proposed method to indeed leverage the advantage of graph representa-
tion and have a comparable or even better performance with mainstream point-based
methods in scene understanding tasks.
1.6
Main Contributions
Based on the investigation of former works, in this thesis, we propose a novel graph-
based point cloud processing pipeline. Our main methodological contributions are
the following:
• We perform farthest point sampling on only partial data and make a trade-off
between coverage and eﬀiciency.
• We represent point clouds by a flexible graph representation.
• We propose a multi-scale graph feature learning module, Graph Inception, to
alleviate the over-smoothing problem by fusing features from multi-scale graphs.
• We apply the attention mechanism to graph convolution to address the over-
squashing problem.
• We consider the robustness of the network and apply input transformation
and data argumentation in the framework to assure the invariance of learned
features.
• We demonstrate the proposed processing scheme outperforms the baseline model,
PointNet, in both shape classification and point segmentation tasks.
==PAGE:26==
16
1 Introduction
1.7
Thesis Overview
The thesis includes 5 chapters.
• Chapter 1 gives a general introduction to the project background and our
motivation.
• Chapter 2 presents the necessary theoretical basis to understand our work.
• Chapter 3 introduces the proposed graph-based framework for point cloud
processing.
• Chapter 4 illustrates experiments evaluating the models, and our analysis of
the result.
• Chapter 5 has a back glance at the whole project and figures out some direc-
tions for future improvement.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Preliminaries
This chapter aims to provide some preparatory knowledge on graph-based point cloud
processing. Notably, chapter 2 covers technical details of the existing approaches or
schemes which are indicated in related work and applied in our project, while chapter
3 is devoted to the proposed novel processing pipeline.
In this chapter, a variety of aspects are analyzed: point sampling algorithms, graph
neural networks, multi-scale feature learning, and PointNet, the baseline model in
this project.
2.1
Point Cloud Sampling
We have reviewed various existing sampling methods in section 1.4.1. Among them,
Random Sampling and Furthest Point Sampling are employed most frequently. Re-
garding their problems, the diﬀiculty in the trade-off between eﬀiciency and coverage
rate, we also introduce two additional rapid distance-based sampling approaches from
the outlier detection area: iterative sampling, and one-time sampling. We deem they
can suit point clouds with some minor modifications. Table 2.1 indicates an overview
of these sampling methods.
Specifically, the second column in the table presents
whether the algorithm takes point coordinates as input. We deem methods consider-
ing point distance have a better space coverage than others, as spatial information is
introduced. It is quantified in experiments in chapter 4. In this section, we denote
by m the number of samples (sample size) and by n the number of original points.
k is the adjustable parameter in iterative sampling and one-time sampling. In most
cases, k < m.
Methods
Distance-based
Time complexity
Random Sampling [Hu+20]
No
O(1)
Furthest Point Sampling [MD03]
Yes
O(m2n)
Iterative Sampling [WJ06]
Yes
O(kn)
One-time Sampling [SB13]
Yes
O(kn)
Table 2.1: Various sampling methods.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Preliminaries
2.1.1
Random Sampling
Random Sampling (RS) follows a very naive way. It uniformly selects a set of points
from the original point set. Its time complexity is O(1), which is agnostic to the
total number of input points, i.e., it is constant-time and hence inherently scalable
[Hu+20]. Hence, RS runs the fastest than any other method on massive point sets.
However, as it does not consider the point coordinates, its ability to preserve the
original object shape is also ”random” unless the points are uniformly distributed
in the space. In extreme cases, RS may lead to artificial truncation, which strongly
challenges the scene understanding problem.
2.1.2
Farthest Point Sampling
Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) [MD03], presented in Alg.
1, starts from a ran-
dom point in the set, and iteratively picks the point that maximizes the distance
to the selected points. Computation of the distance to selected points is denoted
as pointToSet here. Alg. 2 illustrates the process of the pointToSet operation in
FPS. The pointToSet operation takes a point and a point set as input. It computes
the point’s distance from each point in the set and returns the shortest one as the
distance from the point to the set, leading to linear time complexity. Note that as
point clouds are usually normalized before sampling, the variable t in pointToSet is
initialized by the known bound of the normalized point set.
Figure 2.1: The process of FPS on a point cloud [Anoc]. Gray points represent the
original point cloud and red points stand for the sampled point cloud.
Figure 2.1 visualizes the process of performing FPS on a point cloud. Due to the
time limit, we did not analyze the coverage of FPS theoretically, but we noticed that
many former works [Qi+17b] [Shi+20] argue that FPS has good coverage. FPS has a
very wide application in point cloud processing. Some works [Qi+17b] [DHN19] even
utilize FPS as the pooling module after convolutions (details of FPS-based pooling
can be found in appendix A).
Following the introduced process, to sample m points from a set of n points, FPS
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Point Cloud Sampling
19
takes
(n −1) + 2(n −2) + ... + m(n −m) = nm(m + 1)
2
−m(m + 1)(2m + 1)
6
computations. The time complexity of FPS is O(nm2). It is much higher than that
of RS. The complexity heavily limits FPS’s application on larger scenes.
Notably, even though with some tricks, e.g., dynamic programming (appendix A.1),
the time complexity of FPS can be reduced to O(nm) or even O(nlog(m)) [Eld92],
we are referring to the vanilla implementation of FPS (Alg. 1) in this thesis. Its
time complexity is O(nm2).
Algorithm 1 Farthest Point Sampling
1: Input: Sampling size m; Full point set X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} of n points
2: Output: Subset S ∈X
3: Initialize a subset S = {s1} with a random point picked from X.
4: for i = 2 to m do
5:
t ←0
6:
Initialize an empty point s
7:
for x ∈X and x /∈S do
8:
d ←pointToSet(x, S)
▷The distance from x to S
9:
if d > t then
10:
t ←dj
11:
s ←x
▷Pick the point farthest from S
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
Add s as a new sample into S.
15: end for
16: return S
Algorithm 2 pointToSet
1: Input: Point x; Point set S = {s1, s2, ..., sk} of k points
2: Output: t, i.e., the distance from x to S
3: Initialize a variable t with a value larger than ∥si −sj∥2, ∀si, sj ∈S.
4: for i = 1 to k do
5:
di ←∥x −si∥2
6:
if di < t then
7:
t ←di
▷Pick the shortest distance
8:
end if
9: end for
10: return t
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Preliminaries
2.1.3
Iterative Sampling
Iterative Sampling (IS) [WJ06] was first proposed in 2006 for distance-based outlier
detection.
It eﬀiciently approximates the kth-nearest neighbor (kth-NN) distance
score for each point. Points with higher scores are selected in the end. In our project,
we simply employ the 1st-NN score, and the algorithm is described in Alg. 3.
Algorithm 3 Iterative Sampling
1: Input: Sampling size m; Full point set X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} of n points; Subset
size k
2: Output: Subset M ∈X
3: score ←0
4: for i = 1 to n do
5:
Initialize a subset S with k points randomly picked from X
6:
score[i] ←pointToSet(xi, S)
7: end for
8: score = sorted(score)
9: Initialize M with m points from S with the highest score
10: return M
For each point, IS gives a score measuring its distance to a random-sampled subset.
Since the real noises and outliers have been removed in preprocessing, the ”abnormal”
points detected by IS here have a somehow similar definition as the farthest points
in FPS. As a consequence, we suggest IS can preserve geometric information of the
3D object during sampling, like FPS. It should have a better coverage rate than RS.
The time complexity of IS is O(kn), when selecting m samples from n points, with
a subset size of k. k is usually a much smaller number than m, which means that
compared with FPS, IS has higher eﬀiciency. In each iteration, IS only focuses on a
small part of the whole point set. We deem it the key innovation of IS - it avoids
tons of computations.
2.1.4
One-time Sampling
One-time Sampling (OtS) [SB13] is closely related to IS. As indicated in Alg. 3 and
Alg. 4, random subsets are generated iteratively for each point in IS while OtS only
performs it once.
OtS avoids iterative random sampling in IS. However, the improvement is at the
cost of stability - its performance highly depends on the result of the initial random
sampling. Its time complexity is O(kn).
==PAGE:31==
2.2 PointNet
21
Algorithm 4 One-time Sampling
1: Input: Sampling size m; Full point set X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} of n points; Subset
size k
2: Output: Subset M ∈X
3: Initialize a subset S with K points randomly picked from X
4: score ←0
5: for i = 1 to n do
6:
score[i] ←pointToSet(xi, S)
7: end for
8: score = sorted(score)
9: Initialize M with m points from S with the highest score
10: return M
2.2
PointNet
As a milestone in point feature learning, PointNet [Qi+17a] has drawn extensive con-
cerns since presented in 2017. Both empirically and theoretically, PointNet shows
impressive performance and robustness in applications ranging from object classifica-
tion, part segmentation, to scene semantic parsing [Qi+17a]. It is one of the most
widely leveraged baseline models in the research of point feature learning. In this
project, PointNet is used as
PointNet directly takes point clouds as input and performs a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) identically and independently on each point. The PointNet architecture is
demonstrated in Figure 2.2. There are two networks in the figure. The classification
network takes n points as input and outputs k scores for each category while the seg-
mentation network, which is extended from the classification net, outputs per point
scores.
MLP is a traditional artificial neural network with a long history.
It is inspired
by the working scheme of human brains, whereby neurons are stimulated by con-
nected nodes and are only activated when a certain threshold value is reached [Ste].
As shown in Figure 2.3, an MLP consists of two or more fully-connected (FC) layers.
Given the input E ∈Rn, a FC layer with the output size of m can be described
in matrix form as
h(E) = σ(EW)
(2.1)
where σ is a nonlinear activation function, and W ∈Rn×m is a weight matrix. In
PointNet, σ is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [Brob]. Note that we do not include
bias here for the convenience of subsequent analysis. In the implementation, we add
the bias matrix B ∈Rm. Hence, the actual mapping we employ is h(E) = σ(EW +B).
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Preliminaries
Figure 2.2: PointNet architecture [Qi+17a].
Figure 2.3: A 3-layer multilayer perceptron [Moh+15].
Then, an l-layer MLP that consumes E (e.g., coordinates of a point) can be pre-
sented by stacking FC layers as
MLP(E) = (hl ◦hl−1 ◦... ◦h1)(E)
(2.2)
==PAGE:33==
2.2 PointNet
23
where hi is the ith fully-connected layer, and operation ◦is function composition.
With these aforementioned definitions, given the input point set{p1, p2, ..., pn}, Point-
Net can be summarized as a function f that maps a set of points to a vector [Qi+17b]:
f(p1, p2, ..., pn) = γ( MAX
i=1,2,...,n{g(pi)})
(2.3)
where γ and g are MLPs, and MAX{·} is the global max pooling operation.
Invariance PointNet considers the five kinds of invariance listed in section 1.4.2.
It performs corresponding data argumentation to address the translation, scaling,
and resolution invariant problem.
To achieve rotation robustness, as indicated in
Figure 2.2, PointNet predicts two aﬀine transformation matrices through mini-MLPs
called T-Net. The transformation process is called input transformation. The trans-
formations are applied to the coordinates of input points and the learned features in
the first layer respectively. PointNet also takes the order invariance into account. On
the one hand, the MLP is performed on each point independently, regardless of the
input point order. On the other hand, PointNet applies a simple symmetric function,
global max pooling, on the whole point set to aggregate global point features, natu-
rally guaranteeing the learned information invariant to the unordered input [Qi+17a].
Multi-scale learning in PointNet In the perspective of the receptive field, Point-
Net learns features in two different scales. Local features that are learned by the
MLP have a fixed and point-size receptive field throughout the whole network, and
the global features that are obtained by max pooling have an overall receptive field
covering the whole point set.
In the segmentation task, global features give the
network a basic understanding of the whole scene, while local features supplement de-
tailed geometric information. For this reason, PointNet aggregates features from both
local and global scales to address the segmentation problem, as indicated in Figure
2.2. However, PointNet lacks the ability to learn multi-scale local contexts. The local
features in PointNet are learned on each point independently. PointNet fails to em-
ploy the interaction between points and their neighbors to capture geometric features.
Train the PointNet PointNet is designed to address two scene understanding prob-
lems, object shape classification and 3D semantic segmentation. In both problems,
the output of the last MLP layer X = {x1, x2, ..., xk} is further normalized to a
probability distribution over predicted k classes by the Softmax function [cong], i.e.,
softmax(xi) =
exi
Pk
j=1 exj
(2.4)
for each xi ∈X. The training of a PointNet can be seen as an optimization problem
arg min
w
∥L(w)∥
(2.5)
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Preliminaries
where w represents all the trainable parameters in the network, and the loss L is
L = Ltask + Lreg.
(2.6)
Ltask depends on the problem to be addressed. For classification, Ltask is the cross-
entropy loss [Broc] and for segmentation it is the absolute value of cosine distance
[cone]. The regularization loss Lreg is used to constrain each feature transformation
matrix to be close to orthogonal matrix (rotation matrices are orthogonal) [Qi+17a]:
Lreg = ∥I −AAT ∥
2
(2.7)
where A is the alignment matrix learned by the T-Nets, and I is an identity matrix.
2.3
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Point
Feature Learning
According to our analysis in section 1.4.2, Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
(GCNs) are playing an effective role in point cloud feature learning and have unique
advantages compared with grid-based and point-based methods. The process of graph-
based feature learning is illustrated in Figure 1.5.
Pending point clouds are first
mapped into the non-Euclidean domain by graph representation, then processed by
a series of graph convolution and pooling operations. Subsequently, depending on
the desired application, the learned features are further aligned to each node or the
whole graph. For this reason, the two scene understanding problems referred to in
this thesis, 3D shape classification and point semantic segmentation, are also called
graph classification and node classification respectively in the perspective of GCN.
Formally, in this section, we consider a point cloud of n points as a set P = {p1, p2, ..., pn}.
We assume each point has d features, including 3D coordinates, color, etc. Besides,
we denote by xi ∈R3 the 3D coordinates of pi ∈P. Note that as the point cloud is
unordered, the subscripts here only represent the order of storage points.
2.3.1
Graph construction from points
As indicated in section 1.2, point cloud has latent topological structures, which are
indicated by the interaction between points. A graph that consists of vertices (nodes)
and edges (links) can represent these structures. Figure 2.4 shows the difference be-
tween the point cloud and its graph representation. As illustrated in the figure, each
point (red points in the figure) is considered as a node (green points in the figure) in
the graph. Point features, e.g., 3D coordinates are thereby treated as node features.
To present the local geometric information which is latent in the Euclidean space,
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Point Feature Learning
25
edges (black lines in the figure) on the graph are defined as the connections between
nodes and their spatial neighbors.
Graph construction is to represent the point set P with a graph G = (A, E), where A
is the n×n adjacency matrix with Ai,j the weight assigned to the edge (i, j) connect-
ing vertices i and j, and E ∈Rn×d is the node feature matrix. Graph G presents a
topological structure through connecting points with their spatial neighbors. There-
fore, varying on the definition of neighborhood, there are two approaches to construct
graphs from points.
Figure 2.4: An airplane represented by a point cloud (left) and a graph (right)
respectively.
In most methods implementing spatial GCN [Wan+19b] [Liu+19] [Xu+20], nodes
are pointing to their k-nearest neighbors (KNN) in the Euclidean space. In a KNN
graph, each node has the same number of neighbors, which just ensures the parameter
sharing mentioned in section 1.4.2. However, the KNN algorithm does not guarantee
symmetrical results, and thus the constructed graph is usually directed.
As the
Laplacian transform does not apply to directed graphs directly [KW16], the KNN
graph representation can be hardly adopted in spectral GCNs.
Chen et al.
constructed a general graph of a point cloud by encoding the local
geometry information through an adjacency matrix A ∈Rn×n [Che+17]. The edge
weight between two points pi and pj is
Ai,j =
(
e−∥xi−xj∥2
2
σ2
,
∥xi −xj∥2 ≤τ;
0,
otherwise,
(2.8)
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Preliminaries
where variance σ and cut-off distance τ are parameters. As illustrated in Figure 2.5,
the construction of such a graph is indeed searching the near-neighbors in a fixed
radius. To this end, the graph is called radius graph in this thesis. In Equation
2.8, cut-off distance τ determines the searching radius, i.e., the neighborhood size of
points. Since the edge connecting a pair of points close to each other is more geo-
metrical significant, through performing a squared exponential kernel, edge weight is
negatively correlated with the distance between point pi and pj, ∥xi −xj∥2. Variance
σ controls the length of the squared exponential kernel.
Figure 2.5: Construction of KNN graph and Radius graph on a point set under
different resolutions.
There are three notable details in Figure 2.5. Firstly, since the Euclidean distance is
symmetric, the radius graph is undirected (without arrows), where the Laplacian
transform is applicable. Secondly, in Figure 2.5 (b), when a blue point is removed,
the KNN graph takes the far green point to connection, while the radius graph stays
the same, indicating that the radius graph is more robust to the resolution change.
Thirdly, according to Equation 2.8, nodes in a radius graph are self-connected (diago-
nal elements Ai,i = 1), which reduces the loss of nodes’ self-information in information
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Point Feature Learning
27
propagation, and helps keeping node features discriminative. For these reasons, we
adopt the radius graph representation in this project.
2.3.2
Graph convolution
We consider the undirected radius graph G = (A, E), where A ∈Rn×n is the adja-
cency matrix and E ∈Rn×d is the node feature matrix. GCNs define convolutions
as spectral filtering, which is implemented as the multiplication of signals on a graph
with eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix [Guo+20]. In spectral graph theory,
the combinatorial graph Laplacian matrix Lc ∈Rn×n is given by
Lc = D −A
(2.9)
where D ∈Rn×n is the weighted degree matrix. D is defined as a diagonal matrix
with diagonal element Di,i = Pn
j=1 Ai,j reflecting the density around the ith point
[Che+17]. Note that the spectral graph convolution is based on the assumption that
the Laplacian matrix is symmetric [Pha]. Therefore, it only works on undirected
graphs. We denote by I an n × n identity matrix, and the normalized Laplacian
matrix L is defined as
L = I −D−1
2 AD−1
2 .
(2.10)
Then, the matrix of eigenvectors U of the normalized graph Laplacian can be obtained
by the decomposition
L = UΛU T ,
(2.11)
with Λ being eigenvalues. We denote by x ∈Rd the features of a node in G (i.e., a
row in E). The graph convolution h on x is further defined as the multiplication of x
with a filter gw = diag(w) parameterized by w ∈Rd in the Fourier domain (spectral
domain), i.e.,
h(x, A) = UgwU T x
(2.12)
where U T x is the graph Fourier transform of x.
As Equation 2.11 and 2.12 are
computationally expensive, Defferrard et al.
[DBV16] leveraged an approximated
convolution h by a truncated expansion in terms of Chebyshev polynomials Tk(x) up
to Kth order,
h(x, A) ≈
K
X
k=0
wkTk(˜L)x
(2.13)
where ˜L =
2
λmax L−I, and w ∈RK is now a vector of Chebyshev coeﬀicients. λmax is
the largest eigenvalue of L. The Chebyshev polynomials [conc] are recursively defined
as Tk(x) = 2xTk−1(x) −Tk−2(x), with T0(x) = 1 and T1(x) = x.
In a graph, we define the k-hop neighborhood (kth order proximity) of a node as
a set of vertices that are at maximum k steps away from the node. In Equation 2.13,
the convolution is aggregating node features in the K-hop neighborhood. This also
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Preliminaries
means that by playing with K, we can change the filter size to vary the reception
field of learned features.
Kipf et al. [KW16] further simplified the convolution by setting the K = 1. The
convolution h is thus approximated by first-order Chebyshev polynomials, i.e.,
h(x, A) ≈w(I + D−1
2 AD−1
2 )x = w( ˜D−1
2 ˜A ˜D−1
2 )x
(2.14)
where ˜A = I + A is the renormalized adjacency matrix, and ˜D is the degree matrix
with diagonal element ˜Di,i = Pn
j ˜Ai,j.
The convolution h can be further generalized to the whole graph (we consider one
node before). Given the input graph G = (A, E), a graph convolutional layer with f
filters is presented by
H(E, A) = σ( ˆAEW)
(2.15)
where σ is an element-wise nonlinear activation function, ˆA = ˜D−1
2 ˜A ˜D−1
2 is a sym-
metrically normalized adjacency matrix with self-connections, and W ∈Rd×f is a
trainable weight matrix. Since the adjacency matrix ˜A indicates the node connec-
tions on the graph, the learned features for each node can be deemed as the averaged
representation of the neighbors’ features [Abu+19]. In the rest content of this report,
unless specially stated, all the mentioned graph convolutions follow the updating rules
described in Equation 2.15.
Figure 2.6: Message passing of the GCN on a graph [Les].
Message passing Although mentioned a lot before, we would like to refer to the
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Point Feature Learning
29
concepts of the receptive field in GCNs again.
The receptive field of a feature is
defined as the size of the region in the input that produces the feature [AWJ]. Since
in GCN, the features of a particular node (node embeddings) are updated together,
in this thesis, we define the receptive field of a node as the number of nodes that
have contributions to its embeddings. As the graph convolution described in Equa-
tion 2.15 is deduced from first-order Chebyshev polynomials, it only aggregates node
features in the one-hop neighborhood locally (first-order proximity). The process is
called message passing [Gil+17], described in Figure 2.6. Each node only passes
the information to its one-hop neighbors in a single convolution. Hence, the receptive
field of a node is dilated one step after a convolution. For example, in Figure 2.6, the
features of node F is propagated to the target node A after two convolutions (layer0
-> layer1, layer1 -> layer2), since it is two steps away from node A, while features
from node B, C, and D only need to take one convolution to pass the information.
Over-smoothing There are two reasons to build deep architecture in deep learning:
model size and receptive field. On the one hand, the number of learnable parameters
(weights and biases) decides the capacity and complexity of the model1. On the other
hand, considering the immense volume of point clouds, simple networks usually suf-
fer from the under-reaching problem (a kind of under-fitting) - distant nodes are not
aware of each other [AY20] and thus they can not get enough information from other
vertices to represent the geometric structure. The end-tasks of point cloud processing,
e.g., 3D object shape classification, heavily rely on the learned features. Therefore,
GCNs handling massive point clouds need to include multiple graph convolutions.
One common architecture is the deep GCNs constructed by stacking graph convo-
lutions. Let us consider the graph convolution presented in Equation 2.15. Each
convolution expands the receptive field by one step of each node on the graph. With
the deepening of the network, the receptive field of each node is gradually dilated,
and the network can aggregate raw point features into expressive geometric features
at different scales. A l-layer deep GCN that consumes graph G can be described by
GCN(E, A) = (Hl ◦Hl−1 ◦... ◦H1)(E, A)
(2.16)
where Hi is the ith graph convolution layer presented in Equation 2.15. For stating
convenience, we ignore the activation function σ in H for a moment. Bringing in
Equation 2.15, we can present the deep GCN as
GCN(E, A) = ˆAlE
lY
i=1
Wi
(2.17)
where Wi is the weight matrix of the ith layer. The power matrix ˆAl here is playing
the role of message passing on the graph. By decomposing ˆAl, Li et al. [LHW18]
1In fact, the number of learnable parameters is not very important in GCNs after reaching a cer-
tain scale [Abu+19]. But too simple models usually do not have good data fitting and generalization
capability
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Preliminaries
demonstrated that in a very deep GCN, i.e., when l has a high value, each element in
ˆAl will converge to the same value, which causes the learned node features indiscrim-
inate. This phenomenon is called over-smoothing. More precisely, over-smoothing
refers to the phenomenon that all the learned node embeddings in a connected com-
ponent (an induced subgraph in which any two vertices are connected to each other
by paths, and which is connected to no additional vertices in the rest of the graph
[cond]) become indiscriminate [LHW18]. As there are only a few connected compo-
nents in the graphs constructed from point clouds, e.g., points representing adjacent
but different objects are often in the same component, over-smoothing severely harms
graph-based point feature learning in most cases.
Over-squashing Over-squashing is also known as the information bottleneck prob-
lem in GCN. Alon et al. [AY20] argued that, in a deep GCN, as the number of layers
increases, the size of each node’s receptive field grows exponentially (even though
only dilated one step in each layer). For instance, as shown in the right subfigure of
Figure 2.6, there is just too much information from too many nodes in the receptive
field that has to be squashed into a single fixed-length node vector. Consequently, the
deep GCNs usually fail to propagate messages flowing from distant nodes and learns
only short-range signals from the training data [AY20]. Note that over-squashing
does not only happen in deep GCNs. When the neighborhood of a node is too large,
e.g., each node is connected with all the other nodes on a huge graph, even a single
GCN suffers from the over-squashing problem.
Over-smoothing and over-squashing are two independent problems.
For example,
there is a big chance of over-smoothing when performing multiple convolutions on a
very simple graph, whereas over-squashing may not happen.
2.4
Multi-scale Feature Learning
Graph convolutional neural networks learn features through layer-by-layer abstrac-
tion. In the perspective of the receptive field, as stated before, this abstraction is a
process of receptive field expansion. Generally, a small receptive field provides more
local geometric details of the input data while a large receptive field presents a bet-
ter representation of semantic information. Since both the geometric and semantic
information plays important roles in scene understanding tasks, especially in segmen-
tation, multi-scale feature learning aims to fuse features with different receptive fields
to improve the model characterization of input data. In GCNs, as discussed in section
1.4.3, multi-scale feature learning also helps to alleviate the over-smoothing problem
by fusing local discriminative features (with small receptive fields) with the global
smoothed features (with larger receptive fields).
Common multi-scale GCN archi-
tectures can be split into two categories, skip-connection in depth and multi-branch
structure in width.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Multi-scale Feature Learning
31
Skip connection Skip connections in deep architectures, as the name suggests, skip
some layer in the neural network and feeds the output of one layer as the input to
the next layers (instead of only the next one) [Ada]. Generally, there are two kinds of
skip connections: addition as in residual architectures [He+16] and concatenation as
in densely connected architectures [Hua+17]. Li et al. [Li+19] applied these skip con-
nections to GCNs and succeeded in building a very deep GCN architecture. Together
with a plain deep GCN, the residual and densely connected GCN architectures are
shown in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Skip connections in GCNs [Li+19].
PlainGCN is a deep GCN with-
out any skip connections.
ResGCN follows the residual architecture.
DenseGCN is a deep GCN with dense connections.
For stating convenience, we consider a single graph convolution with skip connections
between its input and output. Given a graph convolution described in Equation 2.15,
i.e., GCN(E, A) = σ( ˆAEW), the output of residual architecture, Eres, is computed
by vertex-wise addition as
Eres = σ( ˆAEW + ˆAE).
(2.18)
Note that we follow the residual architecture in GresNet [ZM19], i.e., the input node
feature vector E is smoothed by the adjacency matrix ˆA before the addition. An
MLP is usually adopted on the input node embeddings to keep the input and output
node embeddings have the same number of features. The result of dense connection,
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Preliminaries
Edes, is calculated by vertex-concatenation as
Edes = σ(E|( ˆAEW))
(2.19)
where | means concatenation.
Multi-branch structure The first multi-branch structure, Inception, was intro-
duced by Szegedy et al. [Sze+15] to process 2D images. As illustrated in Figure
2.8 (a), rather than stacking convolutions, Inception concatenates the result of con-
volutions with different filter sizes to fuse features with various receptive fields. By
controlling the convolutional filter size, Inception can incorporate features with any
receptive field. Unlike convolutional neural networks, graph convolutions do not have
a specific filter size. The receptive field is dilated by one hop in each graph convolu-
tion. Inspired by Inception, Abu-El-Haija et al. [Abu+19] proposed MixHop, which
aggregates multi-scale graph features. The architecture of MixHop is shown in Figure
2.8 (b).
(a) Inception [Sze+15]
(b) MixHop [Abu+19]
Figure 2.8: Multi-scale branch structures.
In Equation 2.17, we have presented that the expansion of receptive fields in deep
GCNs is achieved by multiplying the adjacency matrix ˆA with itself. MixHop follows
a similar way. We denote by E and E′ the input and output node embeddings re-
spectively. A MixHop architecture aggregating graph features in one-hop, two-hop
and three-hop neighborhoods is presented as
MixHop(E, A) = σ( ˆA1EW1| ˆA2EW2| ˆA3EW3)
(2.20)
where W1, W2, and W3 are three weight matrices, and | means concatenation. In the
implementation, computing the power of ˆA inevitably brings a computational burden,
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Multi-scale Feature Learning
33
especially when the order of power is high (i.e., we expect to fuse features with a large
receptive field). When there are n points in the point cloud, calculating ˆAl needs ln2
computations.
Do we really need deep GCNs?
In most present multi-scale graph learning
schemes, the expansion of receptive fields is still done by multiple convolutions. To
fuse features with discriminative receptive fields (receptive fields are only dilated
by one hop in each convolution), GCNs with skip connections are usually built very
deep. However, according to Michael Bronstein’s study [Broa], compared with shallow
models, the skip connections in deep GCNs only resist the effect of over-smoothing,
whereas do not really bring improvement to the model performance. Therefore, sim-
ply stacking one hundred convolutions does not demonstrate more significant gains
than a two-layer GCN. Bronstein’s further argued that we do not really need deep
GCNs [Broa]. Heading toward a wide GCN, the multi-branch structure can be a
solution. Nonetheless, present wide GCNs, most of which are inspired by Inception,
do not employ the working scheme of Inception. In Inception, all the multi-scale
features are learned by single convolutions respectively, and only the filter size varies.
While in graph-based methods, a k-hop receptive field is still achieved by k-times
spectral filtering, which brings extra computational expense.
In other words,
existing multi-scale graph learning schemes lack a way to control the receptive field
conveniently. In this project, we address this problem by representing point clouds
in multi-scale undirected graphs.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
Section 1.4.2 have clarified the problems in the present graph-based point feature
learning methods, i.e.,
• Compared with MLPs, GCNs bring extra computational cost, because of the
expensive matrix multiplication in the Laplacian transform.
• Deep GCNs suffer from over-smoothing and the information bottleneck problem
(over-squashing).
• Most present graph-based methods are not very robust to the transformation
on points.
Considering five cases of robustness, we can further detach the problems listed above
into seven sub-problems. Table. 3.1 wraps up our proposed scheme to address these
sub-problems. Note that for each problem, we may propose many different alternative
solutions (only the final choices are indicated in Table 3.1). As there ain’t no such
thing as a free lunch, theoretically, these solutions have their merits and drawbacks
which are sometimes hard to be compared. To this end, we adopt a practical way -
the processing pipeline is finalized by the experiments described in appendix A. For
stating convenience, we only present details of the finalized pipeline in this
chapter. Other alternative solutions can be found in appendix A. To distinguish our
contributions from the deployed approaches developed by others, we list our original
contributions in appendix B.
Section 3.1 is devoted to a novel partial farthest point sampling trick. It is innovated
by the idea of iterative sampling [WJ06]. We expect the trick to reduce the data
size in an eﬀicient way and without much information loss. Section 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4
provide a detailed description of the graph convolutional neural network architecture,
FlexNet, employed in this project. Specifically, FlexNet follows the modular design
style and learns features hierarchically. It is implemented by stacking multiple feature
learning modules and pooling layers. First, section 3.2 poses our biggest contribu-
tion, Graph Inception, a neural module for graph feature learning. It encodes local
geometric information of point clouds at different scales in an attentive way. Then,
section 3.3 introduces a differentiable graph pooling strategy [Yin+18] applied in the
network, which changes the resolution of point clouds. After that, we look into the
network architecture in section 3.4. At the end of this chapter, in section 1.6, we also
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methods
discuss the robustness of the network and describe some corresponding methods we
employ to make the learned features robust to points with different transformations.
Problem
Strategy (final choice)
Large computational cost
iterative farthest point sampling
Over-smoothing
multi-scale point feature learning
Over-squashing
pooling [Yin+18], neighbor-aware graph
convolution
Rotation invariance
input transformation [Qi+17a]
Resolution invariance
pooling [Yin+18]
Order invariance
no need to consider
Scale and translation invariance
data normalization
Table 3.1: The final technical solution to address the problems listed in section 1.4.2.
3.1
Iterative Farthest Point Sampling
We have talked much about sampling in chapter 1 and 2. When handling massive
point clouds, sampling is an instant way to reduce the computation amount. Four
sampling strategies, Random Sampling (RS), Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) [MD03],
Iterative Sampling (IS) [WJ06], and One-time Sampling (OtS) [SB13] have been pre-
sented in detail in section 2.1. Among them, FPS can guarantee a good coverage of
the point set [Qi+17b], although time-consuming. RS is in the opposite extreme. In-
novated by IS and OtS, we propose two improvement plans of FPS that only address
partial data at one time, Iterative Farthest Point Sampling (IFPS) and One-
time Farthest Point Sampling (OtFPS). As IFPS and OtFPS are FPS working
on partial data, we argue that, with proper parameter setting (there is an adjustable
parameter in IFPS and OtFPS respectively), they keep the coverage of FPS while
consuming less computational resources. We further demonstrate the conclusion nu-
merically in an experimental study in chapter 4. The experiment shows that IFPS
makes a trade-off between coverage and eﬀiciency and has a better performance than
any other methods including OtFPS in the implementation. We only present IFPS
in this section. Appendix A.1 provides details of OtFPS.
As introduced in Alg. 1, a standard FPS can be concluded into two steps [Kam+16]:
1. Start with a random point as the first sample.
2. Iteratively select the point from the unsampled points with the farthest distance
to the already picked points.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Iterative Farthest Point Sampling
37
The second step has a high time complexity and makes FPS very ineﬀicient. For each
sampled set, FPS needs to iterate all the remaining points in the original set and pick
one farthest. The computational amount increases with the input data volume and
could become a staggering number when processing an immense point set.
Iterative sampling does not suffer from this problem.
It randomly picks a subset
in each iteration, and all the following computations only take place in the subset. In
other words, it is only working on partial data in each loop. Inspired by IS, we pro-
pose a novel sampling strategy called Iterative Farthest Point Sampling, which
is illustrated in Alg. 5.
Compared with FPS shown in Alg. 1, IFPS only has a difference in line 6 and 7
by adding a subset K. It only handles a small part of the whole point set in each
iteration. The algorithm can be summarized into these two steps:
1. Start with a random point as the first sample.
2. Iteratively pick a subset from the unsampled points with random
sampling, and select the point from the subset with the farthest distance to
the already picked points.
Algorithm 5 Iterative Farthest Point Sampling
1: Input: Sampling size m; Full point set X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} of n points; Iterative
sampling size k
2: Output Subset S ∈X
3: Initialize a subset S = {s1} with a random point picked from X.
4: for i = 2 to m do
5:
t ←0
6:
Initialize an empty point s
7:
Initialize a subset K with k points randomly picked from X\S
8:
for x ∈K and x /∈S do
9:
d ←pointToSet(x, S)
▷The distance from x to S
10:
if d > t then
11:
t ←dj
12:
s ←x
▷Pick the point farthest from S
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Add s as a new sample into S.
16: end for
17: return S
We denote by k the size of the iterative sampled subset (different from the output
subset). To sample m points from n points, FPS has the time complexity of O(nm2).
For IFPS, as it samples k points from the original point set (of size n) in each iteration,
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Methods
it has the time complexity of O(km2). Note that k is different from n here. k is an
adjustable parameter that decides the size of partial data the algorithm is working
on, while n is the size of the whole input point set. Since k < n, IFPS gets the result
more quickly than FPS. Our experimental results in chapter 4 further demonstrate
this conclusion. As modified from FPS, IFPS can guarantee a better coverage than
random sampling, since RS does not consider the point coordinates (IFPS employs
spatial information while RS does not).
3.2
Multi-scale Graph Feature Learning
We employ a multi-scale feature learning scheme in the proposed network. Specifically,
we present the input point cloud in multi-scale graphs (flexible graph representation)
and perform neighbor-aware graph convolution on each graph. After that, we lever-
age a multi-branch structure to fuse node features in different scales, named Graph
Inception.
Let us have a back glance at the process of graph-based point feature learning in
Figure 1.5: input points are first represented by graphs and then fed into a GCN to
learn features. We have discussed two different graph construction methods in section
2.3.1, including the directed KNN graph and the undirected radius graph. On the
one hand, since the graph convolution works on the spectral domain, we can only
feed the undirected graphs directly. On the other hand, as presented in section 2.3.1,
compared with the KNN graph, the radius graph is more robust to the change of
resolution and can reduce the loss of self-information in message passing. For these
reasons, we leverage radius graphs to represent the point clouds.
3.2.1
Flexible graph representation
As shown in Figure 3.1 (a), traditional convolutions can easily change the receptive
field of features by altering the filter size. In contrast, the adopted graph convolution
(Equation 2.15) only aggregates features in the first-order neighborhood and dilates
the receptive field by one hop at a time. That is, it takes at least two convolutions
for the green node in Figure 3.1 (b) to receive information from the yellow nodes,
which are in its second-order neighborhood. As indicated in section 2.4, this fixed-
size expansion style of receptive fields leads to much extra computational expense in
multi-scale feature learning. To fetch high-level semantic information, one may have
to stack multiple graph convolutions, which usually leads to over-smoothed features.
We represent point clouds with radius graphs. Recalling Equation 2.8, radius graph
representation has an important characteristic: each node has the same size of
the first-order neighborhood, and the size (searching radius) is determined
by the cut-off distance τ. Since graph convolution is aggregating features among
the first-order neighbors, by altering the size of the first-order neighborhood, more
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Multi-scale Graph Feature Learning
39
specifically, by tuning the cut-off distance τ, we can easily obtain node features with
any receptive field by one convolution. For instance, in Figure 3.1 (c), we set the size
of the first-order neighborhood twice that in (b), and the green node is connected
with the yellow nodes, i.e., its second-order neighbors in (b). Now it only takes one
convolution to propagate information from yellow nodes to the green node.
Figure 3.1: The reception field of green pixel/nodes.
In this project, through controlling τ, we represent the input point cloud with a
set of multi-scale undirected graphs. The ”multi-scale” here is referring to the size of
the first-order neighborhood of each node. When performing graph convolutions, it
decides the expansion speed of the receptive field of node features. We call these multi-
scale graphs the flexible graph representation of point clouds. These graphs are
the input of our GCN and the basis of our multi-scale graph feature learning scheme.
Compared with MixHop [Abu+19], we only need to perform graph convolution once
to learn features with a large receptive field, and thus avoid the expensive matrix mul-
tiplication. As indicated in section 2.4, when there are n points in the point cloud,
MixHop needs to perform ln2 computations to aggregate node features in the lth-
order neighborhood. The flexible graph representation only needs n2 computations
to reach the same receptive field and even faster when deployed parallelly on GPU.
3.2.2
Neighbor-aware graph convolution
Kipf et al. [KW16] have demonstrated that shallow GCNs with less than 4 layers
poses improvement on single-layer GCNs. Our experiment in appendix A.3 further
shows that a double-layer GCN with dense connections (Equation 2.19) can learn
more effective features than the single-layer GCN and the double-layer GCN without
skip connection. To this end, as shown in Figure 3.2, we leverage a dense architecture
with two graph convolutions as the basic feature encoder in the proposed feature
learning scheme. After incorporating our designed attentional branch, we call the
encoder neighbor-aware graph convolution (NAConv).
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Methods
We also consider the information bottleneck problem (over-squashing). In line with
our analysis before, over-squashing results from the squeezing of too much informa-
tion from too many nodes into a single fixed-length node vector. In our view, one
reason for over-squashing is the lack of attention in graph convolution. That is, vanilla
graph convolution fails to focus on important nodes in the receptive field. It aggre-
gates information from all the nodes according to their spatial position (edge weights
in Equation 2.8) - spatial information is not always a good measure, as it weakens the
impact of distant nodes. We introduce the idea of attention mechanism [Vas+17]
to address the problem. Similar to the meaning of the English word ”Attention”, the
attention mechanism in deep learning refers to the concept that the network pays
greater attention to certain factors when processing the data [Conc]. In our work, we
introduce attention to update the adjacency matrix by adding an attentional branch
in the double-layer graph convolution (the top branch in Figure 3.2). We expect the
graph convolution to be aware of important neighbors with the attentional adjacency
matrix.
Figure 3.2: The proposed neighbor-aware graph convolution.
The Graph Conv
block refers to the graph convolution described in Equation 2.15.
The NAConv has two branches. In the feature-learning branch (the bottom branch
in Figure 3.2), input node embeddings E are encoded by two graph convolutions H1
and H2 as
E′ = NAConv(E, A) = H2(H1(E, eA)|E, eA)
(3.1)
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Multi-scale Graph Feature Learning
41
where E′ is the encoded node features, | means channel-wise concatenation, A is
the original adjacency matrix of the input graph, and eA is the attentional adjacency
matrix. eA is calculated in the attentional branch. In the branch, a graph convolution
Hatt is firstly employed to learn attention features Eatt ∈Rn×f, where n is the
number of nodes and f is the number of feature channels. The attentional features
are then normalized by a softmax function. The process is presented as
Eatt = softmax(Hatt(E, A)).
(3.2)
To keep the adjacency matrix symmetric, we define the attention scores S ∈Rn×n as
S = EattEatt
T
(3.3)
where the symmetry can be easily proved by ST = (EattEatt
T )T = S. The attentional
adjacency matrix eA ∈Rn×n is then calculated by
eA = A ⊙S
(3.4)
where ⊙is the Hadamard product. We expect the neighbor-aware graph convolution
the alleviate the over-squashing problem.
3.2.3
Graph Inception
Based on the proposed flexible graph representation and neighbor-aware graph con-
volution, we build a multi-branch graph feature learning structure, named Graph
Inception. Graph Inception, which is shown in Figure 3.3, is employed to aggregate
features with different receptive fields in the network.
We represent the working mechanism of an m-scale Graph Inception by
E′ = GraphInception(E, A) = MAX{


m
i=1NAConv(E, Ai)}
(3.5)
where

 is the point-wise concatenation, MAX{·} is the max pooling operation,
A = A1, A2, ..., Am is the flexible graph representation of the input point cloud. Note
that instead of the simple concatenation in Inception [Sze+15] presented in Figure
2.8, we implement max pooling to aggregate the learned multi-scale features and re-
duce the number of feature channels. In this design, we expect Graph Inception to
activate effective features from various scales.
We consider an extreme case in flexible graph representation, where the cut-off dis-
tance τ is set 0.
When τ = 0, all the nodes on the graph are isolated, and the
adjacency matrix A is an identity matrix. The graph convolution in Equation 2.15
can be then written as
H(E, A) = σ( ˆAEW) = σ(EW).
(3.6)
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Methods
Recalling Equation 2.1, we notice an interesting fact that the graph convolution de-
grades to an MLP. We include the zero cut-off distance in our implementation. In
other words, for an m-scale Graph Inception presented in Equation 3.5, we redefine
A as A = {I, A1, ..., Am−1} where I is an identity matrix. To this end, we argue
that the baseline model in this project, PointNet, is just a special case of
Graph Inception. And thereby Graph Inception should have a better per-
formance than PointNet (in the worst case it degenerates to PointNet).
Figure 3.3: A three-scale Graph Inception module. E represents the input point
embeddings.
E′ stands for the learned point embeddings.
Max is
the channel-wise max pooling operation. A1, A2, and A3 present con-
structed graphs at the three scales respectively.
In sum, we deem the Graph Inception module has at least three advantages. First,
it weakens the inductive bias of graph convolution, i.e., first-order proximity. The
first-order proximity goes that a node’s most relevant context is its local neighbor-
hood. By employing flexible graph representation, Graph Inception can learn features
with the arbitrary receptive field in one convolution (any size of neighborhood) and
thus the ”local” neighborhood is no longer existing. Second, by aggregating various
scale features, Graph Inception enhances the model’s generalization capability of data
characteristics. Third, the flexible graph representation means we no longer need to
stack convolutions to build deep GCNs and the multi-scale feature fusion makes node
embeddings more discriminative. For this reason, Graph Inception can address the
over-smooth problem in deep GCNs.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Differentiable Graph Pooling
43
3.3
Differentiable Graph Pooling
Pooling is nothing other than downsampling [San]. Specifically, pooling layers can
reduce computation in the network and summarize the features present in a region of
the feature map to improve the model robustness[Anob]. In the point cloud process-
ing, pooling also helps the network aggregate point features hierarchically at different
resolutions (number of points in a point cloud). Thereby, the learned features are
robust to the input point number. In this project, we leverage a differentiable graph
pooling approach developed by Ying et al.
[Yin+18].
We also introduce another
common pooling strategy in point cloud processing, FPS-based pooling, in appendix
A.2. Besides enhancing the resolution robustness, we deem the differentiable graph
pooling alleviates the over-squashing problem in GCNs. We demonstrate our suppose
in an experiment in chapter 4, via the comparison with FPS-based pooling.
Common graph pooling approaches [DDS16] [Duv+15] are usually performed only
once in the network. They generate node embeddings for all the nodes in the graph
and globally pool all the nodes together by employing a simple summation or neural
network over the graph [Yin+18]. The graph remains static in these approaches and
these poolings make the GCN architectures flat.
Ying et al. [Yin+18] proposed DiffPool, a differentiable graph pooling module that
generates hierarchical representations of graphs. DiffPool learns an assignment ma-
trix to cluster nodes in a graph in a ”soft” way. Then, node embeddings in each
cluster are aggregated by a graph convolution. DiffPool is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: High-level illustration of DiffPool in graph classification [Yin+18].
We consider a DiffPool module pooling the number of nodes from n to m. In our
hierarchical learning scheme, DiffPool is always deployed behind a Graph Inception
module (Equation 3.5). We use Z to represent the learned node embeddings, i.e.,
Z = GraphInception(E, A)
(3.7)
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Methods
where E is the input node embeddings of the feature learning module and A is a set
of adjacency matrices. After that, DiffPool learns an assignment matrix S ∈Rn×m
with a single neighbor-aware graph convolution (Equation 3.1) as
S = softmax(NAConv(E, A)).
(3.8)
where A ∈Rn×n is one of the adjacency matrices in A. softmax is used the nor-
malize the assignment matrix. DiffPool then clusters the node embeddings with the
assignment matrix by
E′ = ST Z
(3.9)
where E′ ∈Rm×f is the pooled node embeddings.
Each adjacency matrix Ai ∈A is also updated by
A′
i = ST AiS
(3.10)
where A′
i ∈Rm×m is the pooled adjacency matrix. The pooled node embeddings and
adjacency matrices are the input of the next feature-learning module. By stacking
Graph Inception and DiffPool modules, the GCN can learn node features hierarchi-
cally.
Symmetry As indicated in section 2.3.2, the adopted graph convolution only works
on undirected graphs. That is, the adjacency matrix needs to be symmetric through-
out the network. We hereby consider the symmetry of the pooled adjacency matrix
A by DiffPool. It’s not discussed in the original paper. We denote by S the assign-
ment matrix. Considering the transposition of the updated adjacency matrix A′ in
Equation 3.10, we have
A′T = (ST AS)
T = (ST AT S)
(3.11)
. For any input symmetric adjacency matrix A = AT , the updated adjacency matrix
A′ is also symmetric.
Role of DiffPool The core idea of DiffPool is to learn comprehensive node assign-
ments that consider both topological and feature information of a graph [Wu+20].
We deem DiffPool has at least two advantages in our network:
1. DiffPool coarsens the graph and reduces the number of learnable parameters.
It keeps the network lightweight and helps to learn resolution-variant features.
DiffPool thereby enhances the resolution robustness of the network.
2. DiffPool makes the graph dynamic by updating the adjacency matrix instead of
simply indexing elements in the matrix. It groups and aggregates points with
similar geometric features and helps optimize the graph structure (e.g., remov-
ing some wrong edges and connecting distant but relevant nodes). The dynamic
graph strengthens the message passing among distant nodes and alleviates the
over-squashing problem.
For these reasons, we adopt DiffPool in our network.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 FlexNet: Flexible multi-scale graph feature learning on point sets
45
3.4
FlexNet: Flexible multi-scale graph feature learning
on point sets
We propose a novel flexible multi-scale graph feature learning architecture for 3D clas-
sification and segmentation. Through stacking multiple Graph Inception and DiffPool
modules, we expect FlexNet to learn point features hierarchically at different scales
and various resolutions. Specifically, the FlexNet architecture for 3D shape classifi-
cation is described in detail in Table 3.2.
Layer number
layer type
output point number
output feature channels
1
Input
n
f
2
Graph Inception
n
64
3
DiffPool
512
64
4
Graph Inception
512
128
5
DiffPool
256
128
6
Graph Inception
256
256
7
DiffPool
128
256
8
Graph Inception
128
512
9
DiffPool
1
512
10
NAConv
1
k
11
softmax
1
k
Table 3.2: FlexNet for 3D classification. The input is n points with f feature chan-
nels. The output is k scores for k categories.
Since each NAConv encoder includes two graph convolutions (in the feature-learning
branch), there are 10 convolutions stacked in the FlexNet for classification. The deep
architecture also brings the vanishing gradient problem to training.
As indicated
in section 2.2, training a neural network is indeed an optimization problem. The
learnable parameters (weights and biases) in the network are updated by a value pro-
portional to the partial derivative of the error function [conh]. The process is called
backpropagation, which is based on the chain rule [conb]. The successive multiplica-
tion in the chain rule leads to vanishingly small gradients of early layers in the deep
architecture, further preventing the weights from changing their value [conh].
Following the work of GoogLeNet [Sze+15], auxiliary classifiers have been adopted to
address the vanishing gradient problem. Specifically, for each intermediate feature-
encoding layer (layer 2, 4, 6, 8 in Table 3.2), we add an auxiliary classifier as shown
in Table 3.3. To train the FlexNet for 3D classification, the cross-entropy loss has
been used [Broc]. The overall classification loss Lcls in training is
Lcls = Lpred + Laux
(3.12)
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Methods
where Lpred is the cross-entropy loss of the output of the network and Laux is the sum
of the cross-entropy loss of auxiliary classifiers. As the intermediate node embeddings
are learned directly for classification in auxiliary classifiers, they are more meaningful.
Layer number
layer type
output point number
output feature channels
1
Input
n
f
2
DiffPool
1
f
3
NAConv
1
k
4
softmax
1
k
Table 3.3: Auxiliary classifier in FlexNet for classification. The input is the interme-
diate node embeddings with n nodes and f feature channels. The output
is k scores for k categories.
We further explore a wide but shallow architecture for 3D semantic segmentation.
The structure is presented in Tabel 3.4.
Layer number
layer type
output point number
output feature channels
1
Input
n
f
2
Graph Inception
n
512
3
DiffPool
n
512
4
NAConv
n
k
5
softmax
n
k
Table 3.4: FlexNet for 3D segmentation.
The input is n points with f feature
channels. The output is n × k scores for k categories and n points.
Different from the popular segmentation networks with many layers, e.g., U-Net
[RFB15], there are only five layers in our segmentation architecture, and there is only
one Graph Inception module. That is, a wide and parallel architecture is leveraged to
replace the deep network. DiffPool in the structure is not employed for data reduction,
but for updating the node relationship on the graph to alleviate the over-squashing
problem. The following NAConv consumes a graph with a small first-order neighbor-
hood (related to the filter/kernel size in CNNs). We expect the NAConv with the
small ”filter size” to make the segmentation result finer and more detailed.
Compared with deep GCNs, the proposed wide architecture can be trained distribu-
tively.
Due to the time and hardware limit, we do not really build a distributed
network. We suggest that each branch in the wide architecture can be trained on a
set of GPUs respectively and simultaneously, which can greatly improve the eﬀiciency
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Robust Point Feature Learning: A discussion
47
of training. A further discussion is posed in the future work part.
To train the network, the cross-entropy loss is still adopted to measure the over-
all classification result of nodes in each graph. Auxiliary classifiers is not needed in
the segmentation network for its shallow and thus would not suffer from the vanishing
gradients.
3.5
Robust Point Feature Learning: A discussion
We have mentioned five kinds of invariance in section 1.4.2, including rotation, transla-
tion, scale, order, and resolution invariance. This section is devoted to the robustness
of the proposed MS-GCN and the employed tricks. In chapter 4, we evaluate the
robustness of the proposed network.
Rotation invariance Rotation invariance is the most popular topic in robust point
feature learning. In this project, we adopt two strategies respectively to achieve rota-
tion invariance, including non-centered covariance and input transformation. The Ex-
periment described in appendix A.4 demonstrates that even though the non-centered
covariance can guarantee a theoretical rotation invariance, it is not very informative.
To this end, we apply input transformation [Qi+17a] in our network. The details of
input transformation have been introduced in section 2.2. To constrain the predicted
transformation matrix orthogonal, the regularization loss Lreg described in Equation
2.7 is also added to the training loss in our task. Note that different from the imple-
mentation of PointNet, in our network, we only transform the input point coordinates.
Order invariance We represent point clouds with graphs and implement GCNs
to learn point features in this project. As nodes in a graph do not have any specific
order, they are naturally invariant under permutations. We would like to prove that
GCNs are also invariant to the input nodes. We denote by P ∈{0, 1}n×n an arbi-
trary permutation matrix. When bringing the re-ordered adjacency matrix PAP T
into Equation 2.17, we have
GCN(PE, PAP T ) = (P ˆAP T )
lPE
lY
i=1
Wi = P ˆAlE
lY
i=1
Wi,
(3.13)
since the permutation matrix P is always orthogonal, i.e., P T P = I. The learned
point features stay the same under the permutation. As a consequence, we do not
need to consider the point order invariance when performing graph convolutions on
point clouds. In the proposed MS-GCN, the operations on points are either graph
convolutions or global sampling. Hence, MS-GCN is theoretically robust to point
permutation. In chapter 4, we demonstrate this conclusion by experiments.
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Methods
Resolution invariance As stated when introducing DiffPool, in the proposed net-
work, we employ graph pooling to learn point features at different resolutions and
thus endows the model with resolution robustness. We check this robustness in an
experiment in chapter 4.
Data normalization The scale and translation invariance can be assured by nor-
malizing the input points. In this project, the centroid of each point cloud is first
aligned to (0, 0, 0), which is achieved by subtracting the coordinates of the original
center from the coordinates of all points. Then, we normalize the point coordinates
by dividing their standard deviation in each dimension respectively (x, y, and z di-
mension). After the normalization, all the points are inside a unit ball whose centroid
is the origin. Thereby, for a point cloud at any scale and under any translation, the
normalized data stays the same.
Data argumentation Deep learning has to deal with the problem of limited-size
datasets. To achieve better generalization in the model, there should be more varia-
tion in the data set. In other words, as deep neural networks are data-driven, training
the model with transformed data can improve the model’s robustness. We perform
four data argumentation techniques in this project:
• Random rotations (−180◦to 180◦) by x, y, and z-axis respectively.
• Random translations (−0.1 to 0.1) along x, y, z-axis.
• Random scaling from 0.8 to 1.25.
• Random jittering.
We perform the data argumentation dynamically. That is, the training data in each
batch is augmented every time before being fed into the network. We further enhance
the translation robustness of the network by jittering the point clouds: each point is
jittered by random local translations following a Gaussian distribution ~N(0, 1). The
bound of jittering is from −0.1 to 0.1.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Experiment
This chapter is devoted to the illustration and discussion of experiments. First, we
introduce the setup of experiments, including the description of two public data sets.
Before feature learning, the data sets are sampled and transformed to flexible graph
representation (a set of radius graphs). In section 4.2, we compare different sampling
methods and prove that the proposed IFPS can make a trade-off between eﬀiciency
and coverage than other commonly used sampling methods. In section 4.3, we deter-
mine some proper values of the cut-off distance τ for radius graph construction. After
that, in sections 4.4 and 4.5, we conduct experiments on two tasks: object shape clas-
sification on Computer-aided Design (CAD) models and 3D semantic segmentation
in indoor scenarios. According to the result, the proposed FlexNet outperforms the
baseline model, PointNet, in both two tasks. In the rest sections, we further discuss
the three key problems to address in this project indicated at the beginning of chapter
3. These sections are dedicated to the ablation studies verifying the effectiveness of
methods leveraged in this project.
The proposed point cloud processing scheme consists of IFPS and FlexNet. IFPS
samples the raw point cloud into a fixed number of points, from which FlexNet learns
multi-scale features and gives predictions to classification or segmentation problems.
4.1
Experimental Setup
The experiments were carried on a Tesla V100 GPU and an Intel Core i7 CPU. We
built neural networks through the open-source machine learning framework, Pytorch1.
It is based on Torch2 and has been widely leveraged in the computer vision area. The
baseline model in this project is PointNet, which has been described in chapter 2. Our
implementation of PointNet was modified from the open-source work3. Besides, we
employed some CUDA functions in the open-source PointNet++ implementation4 to
accelerate the sampling and grouping process. We consider two tasks in this project,
object shape classification, and 3D semantic segmentation. Therefore, we evaluate
1https://pytorch.org/
2http://torch.ch/
3https://github.com/fxia22/pointnet.pytorch
4https://github.com/charlesq34/pointnet2
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Experiment
model performance on two data sets respectively, including ModelNet40 [Wu+15a]
and S3DIS [Arm+16].
ModelNet40 The ModelNet40 data set [Wu+15a] consists of 12,311 CAD models
of 40 categories, most of which are man-made. We use the ModelNet40 data set5
preprocessed by Qi et al., which is open-source. In the set, each point cloud includes
10,000 points. Each point has 6 features, involving 3d coordinates and normals. Some
examples of point clouds in the data set are shown in Figure 4.1. The oﬀicial split
of ModelNet40 contains 9,843 shapes for training and 2,468 for testing. We notice
that in the oﬀicial implementation of PointNet6, the oﬀicial training set is fed to
the network, while the testing set is used in both validating (during training) and
final evaluating (during testing). It means that the information of the testing set has
been introduced during training, which may affect our evaluation of the generaliza-
tion capability of the network. To this end, in our project, we perform the 10-cross
validation.
The oﬀicial testing set is not involved in training or validation.
The
validation set accounts for 10% of the oﬀicial training set during each training. In
our experimental studies, ModelNet40 is first employed to evaluate the performance
of FlexNet, PointNet, and some other point feature learning methods. Then, in the
ablation studies, it is used again to verify the effectiveness of our contributions.
(a) Bookshelf
(b) Plant
(c) Vase
Figure 4.1: Point clouds in ModelNet40 [cond].
S3DIS For segmentation, we experiment on the Stanford 3D semantic parsing data
set (S3DIS) [Arm+16]. The data set includes 3D scans from Matterport scanners in
6 areas. There are 271 rooms in these areas. Each point in the scan is annotated with
a semantic label from 13 categories. We adopt the preprocessed S3DIS7 in PointNet.
In the processed data, points are split by room, and rooms are sampled in blocks
with an area of 1m by 1m. With random sampling, there are 4096 points in each
block (a point cloud). Each point is represented by a 9-dim vector of XYZ, RGB and
normalized location as to the room (from 0 to 1) [Qi+17a]. Our training set includes
5https://shapenet.cs.stanford.edu/media/modelnet40_normal_resampled.zip
6https://github.com/charlesq34/pointnet
7https://shapenet.cs.stanford.edu/media/indoor3d_sem_seg_hdf5_data.zip
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Data Preparation: Sampling
51
16,733 point clouds and the testing set has 6,852 blocks. The 10-fold cross-validation
is also performed. An area, a room, and a block from S3DIS are shown in Figure 4.2.
(a) Area
(b) Room
(c) Block (point cloud)
Figure 4.2: An area, a room, and a block from S3DIS[Arm+16].
Training details We deploy an Adam [KB14] optimizer to train the networks. Be-
sides, we apply a scheduler [cona] to update the learning rate automatically. The
strategy is, reducing the learning rate when the training loss stopped descending.
The initial learning rate is set at 0.01. Moreover, to resist over-fitting and enhance
models’ generalization ability, we add a dropout layer after layer 8 in Table 3.2, and
layer 3 in Table 3.4, and L2 regularization with the parameter of 0.0001. The dropout
rate is 0.5 for classification and 0.8 for segmentation. For both the two tasks, the num-
ber of epochs is set at 1,000, with early stopping [conf] employed to avoid over-fitting.
The activation function in graph convolution is ELU [CUH15], which is proved to
have a better converge than ReLU applied in PointNet [CUH15]. In addition, we
perform batch normalization [IS15] in each graph convolution to make the training
faster and more stable. For the ModelNet40 data set, the batch size is set 64, and
that of S3DIS is 16.
4.2
Data Preparation: Sampling
We have described four popular sampling methods, random sampling, farthest point
sampling, iterative sampling, and one-time sampling in section 2.1, and have pro-
posed two novel revisions of FPS, iterative farthest sampling and one-time farthest
sampling, in section 3.1. This section is devoted to a comparison of these six ap-
proaches in coverage and eﬀiciency.
Hu et al. [Hu+20] suggested two metrics to evaluate the performance of different
sampling algorithms: the time complexity in the perspective of eﬀiciency and the
space coverage measuring the remaining information. In experiments, the time com-
plexity can be evaluated by the running time of the algorithm. Xu et al. [Xu+20]
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Experiment
quantified the space coverage by voxelization. The coverage rate is defined as the
ratio of voxels occupied by the sampled and the raw point set.
We pick 100 point clouds randomly from S3DIS as a simple data set. We perform
each sampling method on the set 10 times and record the average coverage rate and
running time in Table 4.1. When calculating the coverage rate, we split each point
cloud into 0.01 × 0.01 × 0.01 voxels (the points are already normalized). For IFPS
and OtFPS, the adjustable parameter k is set 400, roughly 10% of the 4096 points in
a point cloud. k is the parameter that controls the size of the partial data IFPS and
OtFPS are working on.
Sampling method
coverage rate (%)
running time (s)
Random sampling
23.65
0.001
Farthest point sampling
38.46
3.56
Iterative sampling
32.21
1.53
One-time sampling
24.52
0.05
Iterative farthest point sampling
37.02
0.45
One-time farthest point sampling
30.76
0.31
Table 4.1: Performance of different sampling methods on S3DIS data set.
Among the methods, FPS achieves the highest coverage rate and RS has the fastest
(a) Running time
(b) Coverage rate
Figure 4.3: Performance of IFPS with different k.
running speed. However, they all fail to hold a balanced performance between the
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Data Preparation: Flexible graph representation
53
two metrics. We notice that the proposed IFPS has a very close coverage rate to FPS,
and it only took 12% of the time FPS consumed. That is, IFPS in a sense realizes
the trade-off between coverage and eﬀiciency.
We further explore the properties of IFPS in Figure 4.3.
Specifically, we expect
to find the optimal value of k. We evaluate the performance of IFPS with k being
10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% and 100% of the point cloud res-
olution, i.e., 4096. When k = 4096, IFPS is in fact FPS. We notice that with the
increase of k, the running time of IFPS increases linearly, whereas the coverage rate
stays stable. Therefore, a small k does not lead to much loss of coverage but saves
time to a significant degree. In this project, we set k to be 10% of the point number.
According to the time complexity given in former chapters, IFPS should run 10 times
faster than FPS.
For both the ModelNet40 and S3DIS data sets, we sample each point cloud to 1024
points to avoid expensive computation. One example is shown in Figure 4.4.
(a) Raw points
(b) Sampled points
Figure 4.4: Raw and sampled points of an airplane model in ModelNet40.
4.3
Data Preparation: Flexible graph representation
Point clouds are normalized and argued (section 3.5) before further processing.
To perform graph convolutions, we convert the sampled and normalized point cloud
into flexible graph representation described in section 3.2.1. Flexible graph represen-
tation consists of a set of multi-scale radius graphs and the scale is determined by
the adjustable cut-off distance τ. We experiment to decide proper values of τ. Two
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Experiment
experiments are conducted on the training set of ModelNet40 and S3DIS respectively.
The two experiments only vary on the data set. To avoid repeating illustration, we
only present the result of the experiment on ModelNet40 in this section.
We compute the average number of first-order neighbors (the average degree of each
graph) in the constructed graphs with different τ values. The result is shown in Table
4.2.
τ
average degree
0
0
0.01
11.79
0.03
36.89
0.06
61.80
0.09
121.57
0.3
325.99
0.5
484.01
1
740.37
1.5
946.93
2
1024
Table 4.2: The average degree of different-scale radius graph representations of Mod-
elNet40 data.
(a) Sampled points
(b) τ = 0.03
(c) τ = 0.09
Figure 4.5: Flexible graph representation of sampled points of an airplane model in
ModelNet40.
When τ = 0, all the nodes on the graph are isolated, and thus the graph convolution
degrade to an MLP. As the points are normalized into a unit ball, the theoretically
farthest distance between any two points is 2. When τ = 2, all the nodes are con-
nected. We expect to incorporate MLP as a special case in our FlexNet. For shape
classification, we represent point clouds in three radius graphs, with τ = 0, 0.03, and
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Point Cloud Classification on ModelNet40
55
0.09. The presentation of the constructed graphs can be found in Figure 4.5. Accord-
ing to the result of another experiment, we represent point clouds in S3DIS in five
radius graphs, with τ = 0, 0.03, 0.06, 0.09, and 0.15, since we are building a wide
architecture. For both tasks, the last NAConv layer (layer 10 in Table 3.2, layer 3 in
Table 3.3, and layer 4 in Table 3.4) consumes radius graphs with τ = 0.03.
4.4
Point Cloud Classification on ModelNet40
Our network learns point features that can be used for object shape classification.
We evaluate our model on the ModelNet40 benchmark. In Table 4.3, we compare
our FlexNet with the baseline model PointNet as well as some other previous works,
where VoxelNet [MS15] and 3DShapeNets [Wu+15b] are grid-based methods. Note
that Qi et al. [Qi+17a] reported the overall accuracy of PointNet on ModelNet40 is
89.2%. However, as indicated before, they reused the validation set as the testing set
in implementation and thus the result is not reliable. We re-implement PointNet and
the overall accuracy is 85.2%.
(a) PointNet
(b) FlexNet
Figure 4.6: The first 300 epochs of the training process of PointNet and FlexNet
on ModelNet40.
Our model outperforms both the point-based and grid-based methods. We would
attribute the performance to the use of graph convolution. GCNs go beyond the
Euclidean space and learn the topological information from points, which can not be
obtained by other methods. Moreover, we find that our FlexNet converges at a faster
speed than PointNet. The observation is in accordance with the conclusion given by
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Experiment
Kipf et al. [KW16], that GCNs have good performance even at the beginning of train-
ing. We present the training process of FlexNet and PointNet in Figure 4.6. In the
figure, FlexNet reaches a training accuracy of 66% in the first epoch. For PointNet,
the accuracy is 18%. In our implementation, PointNet takes 11 hours to train while
FlexNet only takes 5 hours.
Model
accuracy (%)
PointNet [Qi+17a]
85.20
VoxelNet [MS15]
85.90
3DShapeNets [Wu+15b]
84.70
FlexNet
88.13
Table 4.3: Classification results on ModelNet40.
Our FlexNet for classification is built by stacking Graph Inception and DiffPool lay-
ers. And we expect the multi-scale graph features to enhance the model performance
than single-scale features. As a consequence, we experiment on the effectiveness of
the width (scale number) and the depth (layer number) of FlexNet. The result is
shown in Table 4.4. We consider a 10-layer single-scale GCN (τ = 0.03), which has
the same depth with FlexNet, and a shallow FlexNet, i.e., a simple combination of a
three-scale Graph Inception module and a DiffPool module.
Model
accuracy (%)
10-layer GCN
84.04
Shallow FlexNet
87.38
FlexNet
88.13
Table 4.4: Classification results on ModelNet40 of different architectures of FlexNet.
We notice that both the depth and the width have a positive impact on the model
performance. However, the improvement of depth is very limited. For this reason,
we consider a shallow FlexNet in the semantic segmentation task.
4.5
Point Cloud Segmentation on S3DIS
We extend FlexNet to the semantic scene understanding task on the S3DIS data set.
We evaluate the model performance by the overall accuracy and the result is shown
in Table 4.5. Our FlexNet also has a better performance than PointNet in segmenta-
tion, even with a very shallow architecture. We further illustrate two representative
segmentation results in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Point Cloud Segmentation on S3DIS
57
Model
accuracy (%)
PointNet [Qi+17a]
81.14
FlexNet
83.06
Table 4.5: Segmentation results on S3DIS.
(a) Raw points
(b) Ground truth
(c) PointNet output
(d) FlexNet output
(e) Raw points
(f) Ground truth
(g) PointNet output
(h) FlexNet output
Figure 4.7: Segmentation results on two point clouds from S3DIS.
We illustrate the segmentation on two point clouds from S3DIS in Figure 4.7. FlexNet
works well on the first point cloud (the top row in Figure 4.7). We observe that
FlexNet can roughly predict all points inside an object (e.g., the wall, i.e., the yel-
low region) in the same class, while PointNet makes some mistakes on the border of
objects (the region bounded by the red box). We deem this is because FlexNet can
aggregate the neighbor features whereas PointNet can not.
It can be also noticed that FlexNet makes some mistakes when addressing the second
point cloud (the bottom row in Figure 4.7), which describes a desk with a book on
onside. One potential explanation for the mistakes is that the wall (the yellow region
in (f), (g), and (h)) is truncated and has very similar textures to the desk (the blue
region) nearby. However, we may still notice that FlexNet recognizes the book on
the desk (the region bounded by the orange box) that PointNet ignores.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Experiment
4.6
Resistance of Over-smoothing
In Table 4.4, the performance of the 10-layer single-scale GCN can not compete with
that of FlexNet with the same depth. One explanation is that the single-scale GCN
suffers from the over-smoothing problem. Since the over-smooth problem tends to
be more severe in a deeper network, we build a very deep single-layer GCN with 30
layers to verify the explanation. The classification results on ModelNet40 are shown
in Table 4.6.
Model
accuracy (%)
10-layer GCN
84.04
30-layer GCN
51.65
FlexNet
88.13
Table 4.6: Classification results on ModelNet40.
The results demonstrate the guess that the over-smoothing problems lead to the per-
formance degradation in deep GCNs. In addition, the proposed multi-scale learning
scheme, FlexNet, at a degree alleviates over-smoothing and poses a better perfor-
mance. We further illustrated the input node embeddings and the learned features
from these three networks in Figure 4.6. For a clear visualization, we only show the
first 16 features of 16 points from a point cloud.
(a) Input features
(b) 10-layer GCN
(c) 30-layer GCN
(d) FlexNet
Figure 4.8: Heat maps of input features and learned features from different networks.
The x-axis is the index of the feature channel, and the y-axis is the index
of points. The color represents the value of features.
It can be clearly seen from Figure 4.6 that, the learned features from the 30-layer
GCN are over-smoothed, and FlexNet does not suffer from the problem to a signifi-
cant degree.
==PAGE:69==
4.7 Resistance of Over-squashing
59
4.7
Resistance of Over-squashing
The over-squashing problem is an vital topic in graph-based point feature learning. In
the proposed FlexNet, we adopt neighbor-aware graph convolution and differentiable
graph pooling to handle this problem. We experiment on ModelNet40 to show the
effectiveness of NAConv and DiffPool. Three models are considered:
• Model A: FlexNet with DiffPool and NAConv.
• Model B: FlexNet with FPS-based pooling (see appendix A.2) and NAConv.
• Model C: FlexNet with DiffPool and vanilla graph convolution.
The results are shown in Table 4.7.
Model
accuracy (%)
Model A
88.13
Model B
81.53
Model C
87.19
Table 4.7: Ablation study on DiffPool and NAConv.
The experiment shows that DiffPool plays a very important role in resisting over-
squashing, while NAConv only seems to bring limited improvement. This is not sur-
prising. DiffPool can aggregate distant nodes with similar characteristics, for example,
two wings of a plane. The distant nodes do not need to be connected. In contrast,
NAConv is still working on the neighborhood by reweighting the edge weights. It
does not change the connections in the graph.
Compared with FPS-based pooling, DiffPool has two advantages. On the one hand,
DiffPool avoids repeating KNN searching, which is time-consuming. On the other
hand, DiffPool leverages point geometric features while FPS-based pooling only con-
siders point coordinates.
4.8
Robustness Test
As mentioned in section 3.5, there are five kinds of robustness worth considering.
We show the proposed FlexNet is robust to various kinds of point transformations
by feeding transformed testing data. As we have demonstrated theoretically that
FlexNet is invariant to point translation, scaling, and permutation (see section 3.5),
the following three transforms on each point cloud are considered in this section.
• Random rotation.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Experiment
• Random jittering.
• Sampling.
The random rotation and jittering follow the same way in data argumentation. In
sampling, we select 512 points from the 1024 points in each point cloud via FPS.
Note that as DiffPool only accepts a fixed number of nodes, 512 isolated nodes with
all-zero feature vectors are added into each sampled point cloud before it is fed into
the network. The testing model is FlexNet trained for classification on ModelNet40.
Results are in Table 4.8.
Transform
accuracy (%)
None
88.13
Rotation
87.19
Jittering
87.97
Sampling
87.54
Table 4.8: Robustness test on ModelNet40.
Results show that FlexNet has strong robustness. With the transformed points, the
accuracy only declines to a small degree.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Conclusion
In this thesis, we propose a novel graph-based feature learning scheme for point clouds.
Through abundant experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed graph neural net-
work, FlexNet, outperforms the baseline model PointNet in both shape classification
and 3D semantic segmentation tasks. In addition, our FlexNet can address the com-
mon problems faced by former graph-based works.
We first give a brief introduction to 3D representations of objects and point cloud
processing. Then, based on the literature investigation, we analyze different point
feature engineering methods. Graph-based methods are one of the most promising
approaches, whereas suffering from three main problems, i.e., expensive computation,
over-smoothing and over-squashing, and lack of robustness.
In the second chapter, we provide a detailed description of the popular methods
as well as their limitations. Previous sampling approaches, e.g., FPS and RS, fail
to make a trade-off between coverage and eﬀiciency. Former graph-based learning
schemes require a deep architecture to obtain a large receptive field. The deep GCN
structure leads to the three main problems stated above.
Through running FPS on partial data, we propose IFPS which reduces the high
time complexity of FPS. We leverage flexible graph representation to represent point
clouds, based on which the network can learn features with any size of receptive
field within one convolution.
A multi-branch structure is then adopted to build
the multi-scale graph feature learning module called Graph Inception. Via stacking
Graph Inception and DiffPool, we design two network frameworks for classification
and segmentation respectively. We name the network FlexNet. To address the over-
squashing problem, the attention mechanism is introduced in graph convolution to
make it neighbor-aware. We also enhance the robustness of FlexNet by data normal-
ization, data argumentation, and input transformation.
IFPS is proved to have a most balanced performance than other introduced sam-
pling methods by experiments.
Through extensive experiments on diverse public
data sets, we demonstrate the leading of our models in both point cloud classification
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Conclusion
and segmentation tasks. The ablation studies further verify the effectiveness of the
proposed scheme and adopted tricks. Proofs show that our FlexNet is robust to point
transforms.
5.2
Limitations and Future Directions
There are still many limitations in our work. For each limitation, we suggest solutions
as follows:
• The proposed FlexNet architecture has shown competitive performance in both
classification and segmentation tasks. However, loading the constructed graphs
consume a lot of memory. Even in the Tesla V100 GPU with 16 GB memory,
FlexNet can only learn features from a maximum of five scales. Point sampling
is a solution but inevitably causes information loss. Another potential solution
is parallel training, which has been presented in section 3.4. By training a wide
multi-scale GCN in multiple GPUs, we have more computational resources. And
the parallel training could save time.
• In this project, the cut-off distance τ in flexible graph representation is deter-
mined by time-consuming experiments. Moreover, τ is given before training
and remains fixed throughout the whole processing pipeline. A potential im-
provement is to adopt a popular end-to-end way, i.e., updating τ in the network.
The adaptive τ is also associated with dynamic graphs, which would enhance
the network’s ability to resist over-squashing.
• We lack a metric to quantify or visualize the over-squashing problem in this
project. The graph radius [Anoa] may be a good choice.
We acknowledge the limitations in our work and expect to address them in the future.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Alternative Solutions
A.1
One-time Farthest Point Sampling
Inspired by one-time sampling shown in Alg. 4, in this thesis, besides IFPS, we also
pose One-time Farthest Point Sampling (OtFPS) to further reduce the compu-
tational amount. In OtFPS, random sampling is only implemented once to get the
subset K, as indicated in Alg. 6.
Algorithm 6 One-time Farthest Point Sampling
1: Input: Sampling size m; Full point set X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} of n points
2: Output: Subset S ∈X
3: Initialize a subset K with k points picked from X
4: Initialize a subset S = {s1} with a random point picked from K.
5: for i = 2 to m do
6:
t ←0
7:
Initialize an empty point s
8:
for x ∈K and x /∈S do
9:
d ←pointToSet(x, S)
▷The distance from x to S
10:
if d > t then
11:
t ←dj
12:
s ←x
▷Pick the point farthest from S
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Add s as a new sample into S.
16: end for
17: return S
Compared with IFPS, OtFPS only picks the subset K once, i.e., the sampling result
of OtFPS heavily relies on the pre-sampled subset. K can be obtained by various sam-
pling methods that are faster than FPS (otherwise the eﬀiciency is not improved). In
this sense, we deem OtFPS to be a combination of an eﬀicient sampling strategy and
FPS. That is, FPS is working on the pre-sampling result of a fast sampling method,
and the fast sampling does not need to promise high coverage. In our implementation,
we simply employ random sampling to initialize the subset K. To sample m points
==PAGE:74==
64
A Alternative Solutions
from n points, in our case, OtFPS has the time complexity of O(km2), where k is the
size of K.
Dynamic programming Some works [SR20] notice that there are many redun-
dant computations in the presented pointToSet (Alg. 2) operation. Thereby in their
implementation, the time cost is reduced by caching the former calculated distance
(dynamic programming). Adopting dynamic programming, FPS takes
(n −1) + (n −2) + ... + (n −m) = nm −m(m + 1)
2
computations to sample m points from n points. The time complexity is reduced to
O(nm) with a cost of the space complexity.
Since the proposed OtFPS is simply replacing the whole point set of n points with
a pre-sampled subset with k points, its time complexity will be O(km) if performing
dynamic programming.
A.2
FPS-based Pooling
Lin et al. [LCY13] noted a MLP is in fact a 1×1 convolutional neural network in 1D.
As indicated in Figure A.1, stacking 1×1 convolutions in the network can not expand
the receptive field. That is, the receptive field of MLP-learned features stays the same
throughout the whole network. Thereby, PointNet lacks the ability to capture local
context at different scales [Qi+17a].
Figure A.1: The receptive field (yellow grids) of a particular 2D CNN’s feature
(peach-orange grids) under a 3 × 3 and a 1 × 1 convolution.
==PAGE:75==
A.3 Skip Connection in Graph Convolutions
65
PointNet++ introduces a hierarchical feature learning framework to resolve the lim-
itation [Qi+17b]. PointNet++ employs FPS to reduce the point resolution so as to
expand the receptive field of point features. The process is shown in Figure A.2. In
our implementation, the symmetric operation at step 3 is channel-wise max pooling.
The max pooling keeps pooled features invariant to the order of input points.
Figure A.2: The process of FPS-based pooling. Step 1: Downsample points by FPS
(the sampled points are those red in (b)). Step 2: Find neighbors of the
sampled points. Step 3: Aggregate point features in the neighborhood
(green circles in (c)) with a symmetric operation.
In this project, FPS-based pooling is implemented in the ablation study on DiffPool.
The experiment demonstrates that DiffPool is effective in resisting over-squashing.
A.3
Skip Connection in Graph Convolutions
According to Michael Bronstein [Broa], a too deep GCN architecture does not really
bring improvement on the model performance. In this section, we would like to com-
pare the performance of a single-layer GCN and a set of double-layer GCNs. We aim
to demonstrate that stacking graph convolutions on a small scale and applying skip
connections are effective. In addition, we would like to figure out the better of two
kinds of skip connections: residual architectures and densely connected architectures.
This experiment is conducted on the data set ModelNet40 [Wu+15a] (details in chap-
ter 4). We consider four models:
• A single-layer GCN. We call it S-GCN.
• A double-layer GCN without any skip connections. We call it D-GCN.
• A double-layer GCN performing the residual connection in Equation 2.18. We
call it ResGCN.
• A double-layer GCN performing the dense connection in Equation 2.19. We
call it DenseGCN.
==PAGE:76==
66
A Alternative Solutions
The classification result is shown in Table A.1. According to the result, double-layer
GCNs are able to learn more effective features than the single-layer GCN,
and dense architecture is better than the residual one in our case. To this
end, our feature learning module, neighbor-aware graph convolution, includes two
densely connected GCNs.
Model
accuracy (%)
S-GCN
78.21
D-GCN
78.61
ResGCN
81.04
DenseGCN
82.36
Table A.1: Effects of stacking convolutions and skip connections. Metric is overall
classification accuracy on ModelNet40 data set.
A.4
Non-centered Covariance and Rotation
Invariance
To make the network robust to point rotation, we use the non-centered covariance
of point coordinates as the input of the network.
Given a set of n points P =
[x1, x2, ..., xn]T , where xi ∈R3 is the 3D coordinates of the ith point, the non-centered
covariance matrix Σ ∈Rn×n is defined as,
Σ = PP T .
(A.1)
We denote by an arbitrary rotation matrix R ∈R3×3. The non-centered covariance
Σ′ of rotated points PR should be:
Σ′ = PR(PR)T = PRRT P T = Σ.
(A.2)
To this end, networks consuming the non-centered covariance are theoretically invari-
ant to point rotations.
Model
accuracy (%)
(Raw ModelNet40)
accuracy (%)
(Rotated ModelNet40)
Input transformation
88.13
87.19
Non-centered covariance
19.55
19.55
Table A.2: Comparison of different strategies for rotation invariance.
==PAGE:77==
A.4 Non-centered Covariance and Rotation Invariance
67
We experimented on ModelNet40 to compare the effectiveness of two strategies, the
input transformation described in section 1.6, and the non-centered covariance. The
evaluation is based on models’ overall classification accuracy on raw and arbitrary
rotated ModelNet40 data set. The result is shown in Table A.2.
The result is interesting. The non-centered covariance, although invariant to point ro-
tations, has a very poor performance in classification. We deem the reason is that the
non-centered covariance maybe not very informative. In the covariance matrix, point
coordinates are only playing the roles of observations. There is a good chance that the
non-centered covariance is both losing information and sensitive to not-so-interesting
features - it is essentially squaring all norms, which means the overemphasizing of
distant points. Based on the experiment result, we adopt the input transformation
in the final implementation.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Contributions in a
Nutshell
B.1
Original Contributions
In this thesis, we have the following original contributions:
• Iterative farthest point sampling.
• One-time farthest point sampling.
• Flexible graph representation.
• Neighbor-aware graph convolution.
• Graph Inception module.
• FlexNet architecture.
B.2
Process of the Proposed Pipeline
1. Iterative farthest point sampling.
2. Data normalization.
3. Flexible graph representation.
4. FlexNet.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[Abu+19]
Sami Abu-El-Haija et al. “Mixhop: Higher-order graph convolutional
architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing.” In: international con-
ference on machine learning. PMLR. 2019, pages 21–29.
[Abu+20]
Sami Abu-El-Haija et al. “N-gcn: Multi-scale graph convolution for semi-
supervised node classification.” In: uncertainty in artificial intelligence.
PMLR. 2020, pages 841–851.
[Ada]
Nikolas Adaloglou. Intuitive Explanation of Skip Connections in Deep
Learning. https://theaisummer.com/skip-connections/ Accessed
June 22, 2021.
[Anoa]
Anonymous. Graph Radius. https://mathworld.wolfram.com/GraphRadius.
html) Accessed June 25, 2021.
[Anob]
Anonymous. Introduction to Pooling Layer. https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/cnn-introduction-to-pooling-layer/ Accessed June 10, 2021.
[Anoc]
Anonymous. Point Cloud Sampling. http://geometryhub.net/notes/
pointcloudsample Accessed June 5, 2021.
[Arm+16]
Iro Armeni et al. “3D Semantic Parsing of Large-Scale Indoor Spaces.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition. 2016.
[AWJ]
Araujo Andrém, Norris Wade, and Sim Jack. Computing Receptive Fields
of Convolutional Neural Networks. https : / / distill . pub / 2019 /
computing-receptive-fields/ Accessed June 4, 2021.
[AY20]
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. “On the bottleneck of graph neural networks
and its practical implications.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05205 (2020).
[Bal+20]
Muhammet Balcilar et al. “Bridging the gap between spectral and spa-
tial domains in graph neural networks.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11702
(2020).
[Bos+16]
Davide Boscaini et al. “Anisotropic diffusion descriptors.” In: Computer
Graphics Forum. Volume 35. 2. Wiley Online Library. 2016, pages 431–
441.
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
[Broa]
Michael Bronstein. Do we need deep graph neural networks? https:
/ / towardsdatascience . com / do - we - need - deep - graph - neural -
networks-be62d3ec5c59 Accessed June 22, 2021.
[Brob]
Jason Brownlee. A Gentle Introduction to the Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU). https://machinelearningmastery.com/rectified-linear-
activation-function-for-deep-learning-neural-networks/ Ac-
cessed June 7, 2021.
[Broc]
Jason Brownlee. Croff Entropy. https://machinelearningmastery.
com / cross - entropy - for - machine - learning/ Accessed June 13,
2021.
[Che+17]
Siheng Chen et al. “Fast resampling of three-dimensional point clouds
via graphs.” In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 66.3 (2017),
pages 666–681.
[Cona]
TechTarget Contributor. What is point cloud. https://whatis.techtarget.
com/definition/point-cloud Accessed Feb 10, 2021.
[Conb]
WikiPedia Contributor. Graph theory. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Graph_theory Accessed June 2, 2021.
[Conc]
Anonymous Contributors. Attention Mechanism. https://blog.floydhub.
com/attention-mechanism/ Accessed June 24, 2021.
[cona]
Pytorch contributors. REDUCELRONPLATEAU. https://pytorch.
org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateau.
html # torch . optim . lr _ scheduler . ReduceLROnPlateau Accessed
June 24, 2021.
[conb]
Wikipedia contributors. Chain rule. https : / / en . wikipedia . org /
wiki/Chain_rule) Accessed June 24, 2021.
[conc]
Wikipedia contributors. Chebyshev polynomials. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Chebyshev_polynomials Accessed June 11, 2021.
[cond]
Wikipedia contributors. Component (graph theory). https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Component_(graph_theory) Accessed June 18, 2021.
[cone]
Wikipedia contributors. Cosine Simlarity. https : / / en . wikipedia .
org/wiki/Cosine_similarity Accessed June 13, 2021.
[conf]
Wikipedia contributors. Early stopping. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Early_stopping) Accessed June 25, 2021.
[cong]
Wikipedia contributors. Softmax function. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Softmax_function Accessed June 13, 2021.
[conh]
Wikipedia contributors. Vanishing gradient problem. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Vanishing_gradient_problem) Accessed June 24, 2021.
[CUH15]
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. “Fast
and accurate deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus).”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07289 (2015).
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
73
[DBV16]
Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. “Convo-
lutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.09375 (2016).
[DDS16]
Hanjun Dai, Bo Dai, and Le Song. “Discriminative embeddings of latent
variable models for structured data.” In: International conference on
machine learning. PMLR. 2016, pages 2702–2711.
[DHN19]
Zhipeng Ding, Xu Han, and Marc Niethammer. “VoteNet: A deep learn-
ing label fusion method for multi-atlas segmentation.” In: International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-
vention. Springer. 2019, pages 202–210.
[DLA19]
Oren Dovrat, Itai Lang, and Shai Avidan. “Learning to sample.” In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 2760–2769.
[Duv+15]
David Duvenaud et al. “Convolutional networks on graphs for learning
molecular fingerprints.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.09292 (2015).
[Eld92]
Y Eldar. “Irregular image sampling using the voronoi diagram.” PhD
thesis. M. Sc. thesis, Technion-IIT, Israel, 1992.
[Fen+19]
Yifan Feng et al. “Hypergraph neural networks.” In: Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Volume 33. 01. 2019,
pages 3558–3565.
[Gil+17]
Justin Gilmer et al. “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry.” In:
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2017, pages 1263–
1272.
[Guo+13]
Yulan Guo et al. “Rotational projection statistics for 3D local surface de-
scription and object recognition.” In: International journal of computer
vision 105.1 (2013), pages 63–86.
[Guo+20]
Yulan Guo et al. “Deep learning for 3d point clouds: A survey.” In: IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence (2020).
[GWL18]
Fabian Groh, Patrick Wieschollek, and Hendrik Lensch. “Flex-convolution
(million-scale point-cloud learning beyond grid-worlds).” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.07289 (2018).
[Han+17]
Xian-Feng Han et al. “A review of algorithms for filtering the 3D point
cloud.” In: Signal Processing: Image Communication 57 (2017), pages 103–
112.
[He+16]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition.” In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2016, pages 770–778.
[He+95]
Taosong He et al. “Voxel based object simplification.” In: Proceedings
Visualization’95. IEEE. 1995, pages 296–303.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[HH19]
Kaveh Hassani and Mike Haley. “Unsupervised multi-task feature learn-
ing on point clouds.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision. 2019, pages 8160–8171.
[Hoa+19]
Long Hoang et al. “A Deep Learning Method for 3D Object Classifi-
cation Using the Wave Kernel Signature and A Center Point of the
3D-Triangle Mesh.” In: Electronics 8.10 (2019), page 1196.
[Hu+20]
Qingyong Hu et al. “Randla-net: Eﬀicient semantic segmentation of
large-scale point clouds.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 11108–11117.
[Hua+17]
Gao Huang et al. “Densely connected convolutional networks.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition. 2017, pages 4700–4708.
[Hua+20]
Zitian Huang et al. “PF-Net: Point fractal network for 3D point cloud
completion.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 7662–7670.
[IS15]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.” In: Interna-
tional conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2015, pages 448–456.
[Kam+16]
Pegah Kamousi et al. “Analysis of farthest point sampling for approx-
imating geodesics in a graph.” In: Computational Geometry 57 (2016),
pages 1–7.
[KB14]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[KW16]
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. “Semi-supervised classification with
graph convolutional networks.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016).
[LCY13]
Min Lin, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan. “Network in network.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.4400 (2013).
[Les]
Jure Leskovec. Stanford CS224W: Machine Learning with Graphs. http:
//web.stanford.edu/class/cs224w/ Accessed June 11, 2021.
[LHW18]
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. “Deeper insights into graph
convolutional networks for semi-supervised learning.” In: Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Volume 32. 1. 2018.
[Li+19]
Guohao Li et al. “Deepgcns: Can gcns go as deep as cnns?” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision.
2019, pages 9267–9276.
[Liu+19]
Yongcheng Liu et al. “Relation-shape convolutional neural network for
point cloud analysis.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 8895–8904.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[LMA20]
Itai Lang, Asaf Manor, and Shai Avidan. “SampleNet: differentiable
point cloud sampling.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 7578–7588.
[LYR08]
Zhu Ling, Mu Yuqing, and Shi Ruoming. “Study on the resolution of
laser scanning point cloud.” In: IGARSS 2008-2008 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. Volume 2. IEEE. 2008,
pages II–1136.
[MD03]
Carsten Moenning and Neil A Dodgson. Fast marching farthest point
sampling. Technical report. University of Cambridge, Computer Labo-
ratory, 2003.
[Mil]
Data Science Milan. 3D Point Cloud Analysis using Deep Learning.
https://datasciencemilan.medium.com/3d-point-cloud-analysis-
using-deep-learning-1b2656effa8e Accessed May 17, 2021.
[Moh+15]
H Mohamed et al. “Assessment of artificial neural network for bathymetry
estimation using High Resolution Satellite imagery in Shallow Lakes:
case study El Burullus Lake.” In: International water technology confer-
ence. 2015, pages 12–14.
[MS15]
Daniel Maturana and Sebastian Scherer. “Voxnet: A 3d convolutional
neural network for real-time object recognition.” In: 2015 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE. 2015, pages 922–928.
[OS19]
Kenta Oono and Taiji Suzuki. “Graph neural networks exponentially
lose expressive power for node classification.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10947
(2019).
[Pan+18]
Guanghua Pan et al. “3DTI-Net: Learn inner transform invariant 3D ge-
ometry features using dynamic GCN.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06254
(2018).
[PCS15]
François Pomerleau, Francis Colas, and Roland Siegwart. “A review of
point cloud registration algorithms for mobile robotics.” In: Foundations
and Trends in Robotics 4.1 (2015), pages 1–104.
[Pha]
Chau Pham. Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN). https : / / www .
topbots.com/graph- convolutional- networks/ Accessed June 14,
2021.
[Qi+17a]
Charles R Qi et al. “Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classi-
fication and segmentation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pages 652–660.
[Qi+17b]
Charles R Qi et al. “Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning
on point sets in a metric space.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02413
(2017).
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[RBB09]
Radu Bogdan Rusu, Nico Blodow, and Michael Beetz. “Fast point fea-
ture histograms (FPFH) for 3D registration.” In: 2009 IEEE interna-
tional conference on robotics and automation. IEEE. 2009, pages 3212–
3217.
[RFB15]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Convo-
lutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.” In: International
Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted inter-
vention. Springer. 2015, pages 234–241.
[ROG17]
Gernot Riegler, Ali Osman Ulusoy, and Andreas Geiger. “Octnet: Learn-
ing deep 3d representations at high resolutions.” In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017,
pages 3577–3586.
[Rus+08]
Radu Bogdan Rusu et al. “Persistent point feature histograms for 3D
point clouds.” In: Proc 10th Int Conf Intel Autonomous Syst (IAS-10),
Baden-Baden, Germany. 2008, pages 119–128.
[San]
Pavan Sanagapati. What is Pooling in Deep Learning? https://www.
kaggle.com/questions-and-answers/59502 Accessed June 10, 2021.
[SB13]
Mahito Sugiyama and Karsten Borgwardt. “Rapid distance-based out-
lier detection via sampling.” In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 26 (2013), pages 467–475.
[Sen+08]
Prithviraj Sen et al. “Collective classification in network data.” In: AI
magazine 29.3 (2008), pages 93–93.
[Shi+20]
Shaoshuai Shi et al. “Pv-rcnn: Point-voxel feature set abstraction for
3d object detection.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 10529–10538.
[SR20]
Weijing Shi and Raj Rajkumar. “Point-gnn: Graph neural network for
3d object detection in a point cloud.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2020, pages 1711–
1719.
[Ste]
Matthew Stewart. Simple Introduction to Convolutional Neural Net-
works. https://towardsdatascience.com/simple- introduction-
to-convolutional-neural-networks-cdf8d3077bac Accessed June
7, 2021.
[Su+15]
Hang Su et al. “Multi-view convolutional neural networks for 3d shape
recognition.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision. 2015, pages 945–953.
[Sze+15]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Going deeper with convolutions.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2015, pages 1–9.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
77
[Te+18]
Gusi Te et al. “Rgcnn: Regularized graph cnn for point cloud segmen-
tation.” In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM international conference on
Multimedia. 2018, pages 746–754.
[TGH21]
Jiaxiang Tang, Xiang Gao, and Wei Hu. “RGLN: Robust Residual
Graph Learning Networks via Similarity-Preserving Mapping on Graphs.”
In: ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2021, pages 2940–2944.
[Vas+17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03762 (2017).
[Wan+19a]
Lei Wang et al. “Graph attention convolution for point cloud semantic
segmentation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 10296–10305.
[Wan+19b]
Yue Wang et al. “Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds.” In:
Acm Transactions On Graphics (tog) 38.5 (2019), pages 1–12.
[WJ06]
Mingxi Wu and Christopher Jermaine. “Outlier detection by sampling
with accuracy guarantees.” In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 2006,
pages 767–772.
[WQF19]
Wenxuan Wu, Zhongang Qi, and Li Fuxin. “Pointconv: Deep convolu-
tional networks on 3d point clouds.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 9621–
9630.
[Wu+15a]
Zhirong Wu et al. “3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric
shapes.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2015, pages 1912–1920.
[Wu+15b]
Zhirong Wu et al. “3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric
shapes.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2015, pages 1912–1920.
[Wu+20]
Zonghan Wu et al. “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks.”
In: IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems (2020).
[Xu+20]
Qiangeng Xu et al. “Grid-gcn for fast and scalable point cloud learning.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 5661–5670.
[Xu+21]
Mutian Xu et al. “PAConv: Position Adaptive Convolution with Dy-
namic Kernel Assembling on Point Clouds.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14635
(2021).
[Yan+19]
Jiancheng Yang et al. “Modeling point clouds with self-attention and
gumbel subset sampling.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 3323–3332.
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[Yi+17]
Li Yi et al. “Syncspeccnn: Synchronized spectral cnn for 3d shape seg-
mentation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 2017, pages 2282–2290.
[Yin+18]
Rex Ying et al. “Hierarchical graph representation learning with differ-
entiable pooling.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08804 (2018).
[YK15]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. “Multi-scale context aggregation by di-
lated convolutions.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122 (2015).
[YML18]
Yan Yan, Yuxing Mao, and Bo Li. “Second: Sparsely embedded convo-
lutional detection.” In: Sensors 18.10 (2018), page 3337.
[Yua+18]
Wentao Yuan et al. “Pcn: Point completion network.” In: 2018 Interna-
tional Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). IEEE. 2018, pages 728–737.
[ZM19]
Jiawei Zhang and Lin Meng. “Gresnet: Graph residual network for reviv-
ing deep gnns from suspended animation.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05729
(2019).
[ZR18]
Yingxue Zhang and Michael Rabbat. “A graph-cnn for 3d point cloud
classification.” In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE. 2018, pages 6279–6283.
