==PAGE:1==
Automated discovery and phylogenetic anal­
yses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
Master Thesis
Alex Vincent Thorn
DTU FOOD
Department of Global Surveillance
==PAGE:2==
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in
sewage
Alex Vincent Thorn
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Alex Vincent Thorn
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Global Surveillance, Kemitorvet, Building 204, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.food.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing public health threat, which threatens to under­
mine a century of advancement in the treatment of infectious diseases. Reliable surveil­
lance of the global occurrence and distribution of AMR is crucial in order to take action
against antimicrobial resistance. The Global Sewage Surveillance Project was launched
to explore the potential of monitoring antimicrobial resistance via sewage samples. Global
Sewage data has already been analysed on a AMR class level and on an individual gene
level. This Masters thesis project goes one level deeper and looks at SNPs and spe­
cific variants of the AMR genes in the global sewage metagenomes. A bioinformatics
pipeline named VariantHunter was developed for the automatic discovery of gene vari­
ants in metagenomic samples. Global Sewage data was analysed with VariantHunter,
to find novel variants of known antimicrobial resistance genes. 648 different AMR gene
consensus sequences were found; 280 of them were novel variants where one or more
bases differed from the reference. VariantHunter has the potential to become a useful
tool for screening metagenomic samples for variants of known genes.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antimicrobial resistance ­ a threat to global health
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of Master’s Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature Review
2
2.1
Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Reconstruction of gene sequences from NGS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Results
4
3.1
The VariantHunter pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1.1
Overview of the pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1.2
Part 1 ­ From NGS data to consensus sequences
. . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.3
Part 2 ­ Clustering and Phylogeny
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Automated discovery of novel AMR genes in Global Sewage samples . . . 12
3.2.1
Running the pipeline with the Global Sewage data . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.2
AMR gene variants discovered by VariantHunter . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.3
Exploring the clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Methods
25
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.1
The Global Sewage Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.2
The ResFinder Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Analysis with the VariantHunter pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2.1
The VariantHunter Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2.2
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2.3
Variant calling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2.4
Clustering and Phylogeni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.5
Post processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Discussion
30
Bibliography
31
A Snakefile
34
B Config
43
C Essential metadata
45
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Antimicrobial resistance ­ a threat to global health
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing public health threat (WHO 2014), which
threatens to undermine a century of advancement in the treatment of infectious diseases
(Hendriksen et al. 2019). In 2019 the World Health Organization published a list of 10
threats to global health (Ten threats to global health in 2019 2021). Antimicrobial resis­
tance is listed along with climate change, Ebola virus, and a global influenza pandemic.
The Covid­19 pandemic has shown that global authorities are able to react fast and some­
what effectively when confronted with an acute threat. The same level of action must be
taken against antimicrobial resistance, and reliable surveillance of the global occurrence
and distribution of AMR is crucial(Aarestrup and Woolhouse 2020).
Urban sewage contains faecal material from a large part of the human population in an
area (Hendriksen et al. 2019) and sewage has earlier been used for surveillance of Po­
liovirus (Ivanova et al. 2019). The Global Sewage Surveillance Project was launched in
2016 to explore the potential of monitoring antimicrobial resistance via sewage samples
(Brinch, Christian & Aarestrup 2021). Since then, untreated urban sewage samples from
around the world has been sent for Next­Generation Sequencing at the Research Group
for Genomic Epidemiology located at the Technical University of Denmark.
The samples collected in 2016 have been analysed in a study by Hendriksen et.
al
(Hendriksen et al. 2019). They found systematic differences in abundance and diversity
of AMR genes between Europe/North­America/Oceania and Africa/Asia/South­America,
with a higher abundance in the latter region.
1.2
Scope of Master’s Thesis
The Global Sewage data has already been analysed on a AMR class level and on an
individual gene level (Hendriksen et al. 2019). This Masters thesis project goes one level
deeper and looks at SNPs and specific variants of the AMR genes in the global sewage
metagenomes. By variants is meant the single nucleotide polymorphisms, and insertions
and deletions the sequences have compared to the reference genes. Quantitative analy­
sis of AMR gene abundance is not within the scope of this project, which focuses only on
whether or not a specific AMR gene is present in a specific sample.
The main objective of the Master Thesis project is to develop a general pipeline for the
automatic discovery of gene variants in metagenomes. The final pipeline is applied to the
Global Sewage data to show its usability and to do a small study of the global AMR gene
variants.
Pipeline vision The vision is to build a pipeline that can scan numerous metagenomes
for novel variants of known reference genes. The pipeline should be relatively fast to ac­
commodate big datasets and make it reasonable to rerun it each time new samples are
sequenced. The output should give the user a quick overview of the variants and refer­
ence genes found in the data and the opportunity to explore the results further. The output
should include phylogenetic trees to visualize the relationship between the variants and
their known reference sequences. For each new variant in the output, it should be possible
to backtrack the analysis and look at the intermediate files yourself if needed. Users with
limited bioinformatics experience and compute time should be able to run the pipeline. It
should be possible to parameterize the pipeline to fit many datasets and purposes.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
1
==PAGE:6==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Phylogeny
Different kinds of phylogenetic analyses exist. The maximum likelihood methodology is
one of the most widely used techniques to infer phylogenies from molecular sequences.
To use maximum likelihood, one has to select a statistical model of evolution for the analy­
sis (Roch 2019), and maximum likelihood analysis of DNA sequences typically consists of
3 computational steps for each dataset: Multiple sequence alignment followed by model
selection and tree searching (Machado, Castroviejo­Fisher, and Grant 2019). Model se­
lection is a time­consuming step, and a study by S. Abadi et. al suggests that model selec­
tion may not always be necessary. They found that blindly using the most parameter­rich
model, ”GTR+I+G”, for all datasets in their study instead of conducting a model selection
step for each of them gave phylogenies that were just as accurate (Abadi et al. 2019).
Finding the absolute best tree under the maximum likelihood criterium is a computationally
heavy task. The number of candidate trees to evaluate grows rapidly with the number of
sequences in the alignment. Clever heuristic search algorithms can be used to speed
up the process significantly since every single possible tree is not evaluated. Finding the
absolute best tree is not guaranteed with these methods, but it has made fast phylogenetic
analysis of big datasets possible. Several fast maximum likelihood programs such as
RAxML, PhyML and FastTree 2 have been developed to handle large datasets ??.
PhyML has a comfort zone of 100­200 sequences of maximum 2000 characters. Theo­
retically, it can handle alignments of up to 4,000 sequences, but the program’s manual
recommends using another software for datasets bigger than the comfort zone (PhyML­
Manual 2008). RAxML can handle larger datasets, but it can run for days or weeks when
used on datasets with thousands of molecular sequences. (Liu, Linder, and Warnow
2011) (Price, Dehal, and Arkin 2010).
FastTree 2 uses an approximately­maximum­ likelihood method and saves time by using
heuristics at all stages of the analysis. (Zhou et al. 2018). As a result, FastTree 2 is a little
less accurate than the more elaborate maximum likelihood programs(Zhou et al. 2018),
but it is 100–1,000 times faster at analysing large alignments (Price, Dehal, and Arkin
2010).
2.2
Reconstruction of gene sequences from NGS data
It is entirely possible for different variants of the same gene to be present within the same
sample. If the NGS data consists of reads that are shorter than the genes of interest,
this poses a problem. Lancia et. al. (Lancia et al. n.d.) has described the problem in the
context of human genetics: “Given a set of fragments obtained by DNA sequencing from
the two copies of a chromosome, reconstruct the two haplotypes from the SNPs values
observed in the fragments.” The problem is even more daunting for metagenomic samples
where numerous closely related variants of a gene may be present. One approach is to
construct a consensus sequence, for example, with the widely used programs Samtools
and BCFtools (Danecek et al. 2021). With this approach, only one gene variants can be
extracted per sample. With the consensus sequence method, there is a potential risk of
constructing chimeric sequences. This is especially the case when working with short
reads from metagenomic samples. Naive consensus sequence construction where the
most frequent allele is blindly chosen for the consensus sequence is not wise. This can
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
2
==PAGE:7==
results in chimeric sequences e.g. if two or more gene variants are equally abundant in
the sample.
Gretel is the state­of­the­art haplotype­reconstruction tool for metagenomic data (Cao et
al. 2021). The Gretel algorithm uses read information and the co­occurrence of SNPs on
the same read to reconstruct multiple gene variants from the same metagenomic sample.
Gretel cannot handle insertions (Nicholls et al. 2020) which is not ideal, but the algorithm’s
potential for recovery of multiple co­existing gene variants from a metagenomic sample
is promising.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
3
==PAGE:8==
3
Results
A bioinformatics pipeline named VariantHunter was developed as part of this Master’s
thesis project. VariantHunter was built for the purpose of analysing the Global Sewage
dataset. It was however developed as a general purpose pipeline for the automated dis­
covery of novel gene variants in metagenomic samples. The VariantHunter pipeline and
its development are described in the first part of the results section, and the results from
analysing the Global Sewage Data will be presented in the second section.
A GitHub reposetory for this Masters thesis project can be found here: github.com/avthorn/global_sew
3.1
The VariantHunter pipeline
3.1.1
Overview of the pipeline
Snakemake
VariantHunter was developed with the workflow management system Snakemake (Köster
and Rahmann 2012). The main pipeline script is a Snakefile written in an enhanced
version of Python. Each pipeline step is defined as a rule consisting of input, output and
commands. Snakemake was chosen because it supports scalable and reproducible data
analyses (Köster, Mölder, et al. 2021) and an intuitive development process. Furthermore,
the pipeline code is easy to read, making it possible for end­users to understand what goes
on and to modify the pipeline to their specific needs.
The Snakemake program keeps track of all files and which operations that are to be per­
formed, and if more samples are added, Snakemake will only rerun the relevant part of
the pipeline. The last part of the pipeline can be rerun on its own repeatedly. This saves
the user a lot of time when trying to find the best parameters.
The Snakefile containing the main code can be found in Appendix A.1 and the configura­
tion file used to parameterize the pipeline can be found in Appendix B.1.
Pipeline Diagram
Figure 3.1 shows a diagram of steps in the VariantHunter pipeline, although some minor
steps are left out of the diagram for clarity. The pipeline is divided into two main parts:
Part 1 (blue arrows) and Part 2 (yellow).
Part 1 deals with each sample separately. Trimmed reads for each sample are aligned to
reference genes and analysed to obtain the specific gene sequences found in the sample.
This part of the pipeline can run alone if the user is only interested in the consensus
sequences for each sample.
In Part 2, all the consensus sequences from the individual samples are pooled together
and processed them into a dataset of unique sequences and associated metadata . The
sequences are then divided into clusters based on sequence identity and aligned to per­
form a simple phylogenetic analysis.
Output
VariantHunter outputs multible data and metadata files intended to cater to various differ­
ent needs the user might have. They can be read as they are or used as input for other
downstream analysis.
The primary output is the actual consensus sequences in FASTA format. Each sequence
has been given a unique ID that contains the name of the template gene and whether it
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
4
==PAGE:9==
Figure 3.1: Diagram of the VariantHunter Pipeline.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
5
==PAGE:10==
is identical to the reference or a variant. The sequence_sample_metadata file contains
the sample IDs for the samples each sequence were found in along with the number of
samples each sequence where found in, so that user has the opportunity to focus on the
most sampled new variants.
The template­metadata file contains information on whether the exact reference sequence
or new variants were found for all genes from the reference database.
The phylogenetic trees give the user a quick overview of new gene variants found and how
different they are from similar genes already in the reference database. To get a closer
look at the new variants, the user can use the multiple sequences alignments, metadata
and SNP­distance matrixes are outputted for each cluster.
Intermediate files such as VCF files and BAM files for each sample are included in the
output, so the user can backtrack the analysis and check the data behind strange or
interesting results by hand.
How to use VariantHunter
To use VariantHunter download, the VariantHunter repository on GitHub
github.com/avthorn/global_sewage_AMR_gene_variants_project/tree/main/VariantHunter
Make sure that Snakemake and the programs listed in module_load.txt are installed.
Then fill out the configuration file with names of input files and the desired parameter
settings and start the pipeline using Snakemake commands, which can be found here:
snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/executing/cli.html
3.1.2
Part 1 ­ From NGS data to consensus sequences
A flowchart depicting the filtering steps in Part 1 of the pipeline can be seen in figure 3.2.
The yellow gears marks parameters set by the user.
Mapping
The global sewage dataset consists of 962 samples, so the VariantHunter pipeline should
be able to handle this as well as bigger datasets. Mapping and alignment of reads is the
essential first step in a reference­based NGS analysis. It is often a time­consuming step,
so the speed of the entire pipeline depends on the choice of algorithm.
The ResFinder database (Bortolaia et al. 2020) contains 3085 reference sequences of
antimicrobial resistance genes. The database is redundant as there is down to one SNP
difference between closely related genes. This poses a problem since commonly used
alignment tools (such as Minimap2, Bowtie2 and BWA­MEM) are not designed to map
against redundant databases (P. T. Clausen, Aarestrup, and Lund 2018). The alignment
tool KMA was chosen for the pipeline. KMA uses k­mer seeding to speed up mapping be­
fore alignment with the Needleman­Wunsch algorithm. The algorithm is designed specif­
ically for fast and accurate alignment against large and redundant databases such as
ResFinder (P. T. Clausen, Aarestrup, and Lund 2018).
The Global Sewage dataset consists of trimmed Illumina Paired­end DNA sequencing
reads. Due to time constraints, the pipeline was only developed to accept this particular
type of input data. However, acceptance of more input types e.g. Nanopore, can easily
be implemented in the future since KMA accepts multiple input formats.
The reads are short, up tp 150 bp, and KMA was therefore implemented with the ”1t1”
option which forces each query sequence to match to only one template (P. T. Clausen,
Aarestrup, and Lund 2018).
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
6
==PAGE:11==
To save memory, KMA was parameterized to output a SAM file containing only the reads
that had mapped and aligned to a reference template.
The user can choose which alignment scores and penalties to use with KMA and it is pos­
sible to choose between two template scoring schemes, see figure 3.2. The two scoring
schemes are ConClave 1 which favours as few templates as possible and ConClave 2
which allows for numerous closely related templates to present (P. T. L. C. Clausen n.d.).
Variant Calling
The most critical choice during the development was which algorithm to use to obtain vari­
ant gene sequences from the aligned reads. The initial ambition was to use an algorithm
that could recover multiple variants of the same gene within a single sample. This was
preferred over the consensus sequence method, where a maximum one variant can be
recorded per sample.
A pilot pipeline was built to test Gretel, the state­of­the­art haplotype­reconstruction tool for
metagenomic data (Cao et al. 2021). Gretel was tested with the Global Sewage data and
individual reference genes from the ResFinder database. The tools seemed promising,
but the algorithm was not able to run to completion for any of the data tested. In addition,
it gave error messages concerning SNP number 0 at position 0 even though position 0
did not exist. Apparently, Gretel cannot handle paired­end data yet (Failing at SNP #0 at
position 0, questions for understanding output ∙Issue #29 ∙SamStudio8/gretel 2021), so
another method had to be used.
PoolHapX (Cao et al. 2021), another haplotype­reconstruction tool, was considered for the
pipeline and tested with the included example data. The results format (theLongLab/Pool­
HapX: PoolHapX 2021) was found to be unsuitable for the pipeline since it could not be
used to construct the variant sequences. The results file used ”0” for the reference allele
and ”1” for the alternative allele, but information on the actual nucleotides of the alternative
allele was not included.
Plan B was to use a more traditional approach ­ the construction of consensus sequences.
Different version of the same gene can be present in metagenomic samples. This poses
a challenge since blindly choosing the most frequent allele at each position can result in
chimeric sequences that do not exist in nature. One example could be a sample containing
two different versions of the same gene. If the genes have been sequenced in roughly
the same amount and consensus is ruled by simple majority then the resulting consensus
sequence might consist of SNPs from a mix of genes. One way was to handle this issue
is to require a high proportion of reads at a position to have an allele before it is accepted
as consensus.
KMA has a built­in option to output consensus sequences, but it is not possible to set
different thresholds for acceptance of reference and alternative alleles. Less evidence
should be required to accept that a position in a sequence if it is the same as the refer­
ence allele found in the best matching template. Setting a specific threshold for just the
alternative alleles means that the threshold can be set quite high without getting a lot of
”N”s even in regions of the sequence that are identical to the reference just because there
was low depth in the region.
BCFtools was chosen for variant calling and construction of consensus sequences. The
program can handle both SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) and indels (insertions
and deletions) . BCFtools is very flexible, and it contains many different commands that
can be piped together and parameterized in many ways. VCF filtering is entirely cus­
tomizable, which allows for different thresholds for reference and alternative alleles.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
7
==PAGE:12==
Different combinations of BCFtools commands were explored to find the best combination
for the pipeline. In the BCFtools How­To guide (Consensus sequence 2021), there is a
suggestion on how to make consensus sequences. They recommend including only vari­
ant positions in the VCF file, then filter the VCF file to only include the positions with high
support for the alternative allele. The last step is to construct the consensus sequence
by taking the reference sequence and altering the positions that are left in the consensus
sequence. The issue with this approach is that it is binary in the sense that if there is not
enough support for the alternative allele, then the consensus must be the reference allele.
This approach may be useful in certain situations, but it may lead to errors. Imagine, for
example, that for a specific position both the reference nucleotide as well as two different
alleles are observed at an equal frequency of 0.33 each. There will then not be enough
support for any of the alternative alleles to be accepted into the consensus sequence, but
choosing to put the reference allele in the consensus sequence would be wrong as well.
A solution is to define a third category for calls that are uncertain. Lower case letters are
sometimes used to symbolize uncertainty in a consensus sequence, but the letter must
still represent one of four nucleotides. An ”N” for missing data is better to represent un­
certainty, and it has the advantage that it will not disappear even when the sequence is
changed to all lower or upper case by some software.
BCFtools was used in the pipeline in the following way: The BCFtools commands mpileup
was used to make a raw BCF file (binary version of a VCF file). The user is able to control
the quality of the data that is included in the BCF file by adjusting the minimum mapping
quality and base quality required. The user can also decide whether to include or exclude
”orphan” reads, where the mate is not paired, see figure 3.2. The BCF file is piped to
BCFtools call which makes a consensus VCF file that include all positions in the reference
gene. If the reference allele is found at a position above a certain user­defined threshold
then the reference allele is accepted as consensus at the position. The VCF file is then
piped to BCFtools norm which left aligns and normalizes indels and remove duplicate
entries of the same indels.
The next step is to filter the VCF file. Positions where the reference has been accepted
as consensus all pass the filter. At the other positions, the potential SNPs or indels will be
judged based on the raw number and relative proportion of reads that support the alter­
native allele at that particular position. The proportion of strand bias is also considered.
These thresholds are user defined and if a single threshold is not met then the SNP or
indel entry at the position is deleted from the output VCF file. See figure 3.2
The filtered VCF file is piped to BCFtools consensus, which constructs a consensus se­
quence. SNPs and indels that meet the criteria to be included in the VCF file are integrated
into the consensus sequence. Positions that are missing from the VCF file are replaced
with an ”N” in the consensus sequence.
Filtering consensus sequences
Two additional filtering steps were added to accommodate users who are only interested
in high­quality consensus sequences. First the sequences are filtered by coverage, then
by percentage of ”N”s.
The program Samtools was used to calculate the overage statistics of each gene based on
the BAM file. For each consensus sequence, the template coverage and mean read depth
from the BAM file are compared to the chosen thresholds. If the minimum requirements
are not met, then the consensus sequence is deleted from the FASTA file. See figure 3.2.
Some sequences may contain ”N”s if neither the reference nor an alternative allele is
accepted as consensus at a position due to insufficient evidence. The final filtering step
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
8
==PAGE:13==
allows the user to control the percentage of ”N”s acceptable in the consensus sequences.
Suppose the goal of the analysis is to find as many new interesting new SNPs as possible.
In that case, one can choose a low percentage and accept that some sequences will have
a large percentage of ”N”. If only complete sequences with no ”N”s are desired, then the
percentage allowed can be set to 0. This makes it easy to work with the sequences
afterward, but many new sequences will be discarded just for having low coverage on a
few SNP positions.
3.1.3
Part 2 ­ Clustering and Phylogeny
Processing the sample consensus sequences
Now that the consensus sequences from each sample have been generated from part 1
of the pipeline, the name of the sample is added to the FASTA header of each sequence
to retain information of the sequence origin. The sequences from all the samples are col­
lected into one big FASTA file, see figure 3.1. The reference sequences are also added
to the big FASTA file to ensure that the new gene variants could be compared to their
closest reference gene. Identical sequences might be present in many samples. To sim­
plify the data and to reduce the sizes of the phylogenetic trees it was decided to include
a script that merges all identical sequences in the FASTA so that each sequence in the
FASTA is unique. Each unique sequences is given a unique ID which is used to refer to
the sequence in the metadata files.
Clustering
As the reference genes from the ResFinder database come from different gene families,
it is not possible to make a meaningful phylogenetic tree of all the sequences at once.
By clustering the sequences by percentage identity, they can be divided into groups of
homologous genes.
The clustering step is a bottleneck in the pipeline, especially for datasets larger than the
Global Sewage samples, so the clustering step’s speed will have a significant impact on
the overall compute time. The program CD­HIT­EST was chosen since it can efficiently
cluster millions of DNA sequences. The program does not compare the sequences by
alignment but uses an algorithm for short word filtering, and this makes the program ultra­
fast (W. Li and Godzik 2006).
Since the reference sequence are present in the file to be clustered clustering, a variant
may end up in a different cluster than its reference. This poses a problem since it should
be possible for the user to compare the new variants sequences with their closest ref­
erence sequences. Therefore, it was decided to include a step in the pipeline that adds
the appropriate reference sequences to clusters where a variant is clustered without its
reference.
Phylogeny
The cluster FASTA files are aligned with the multiple alignment tool MAFFT. It was im­
plemented with the auto option, which selects the most appropriate alignment strategy
according to the data size (Katoh and Standley 2013). This way, the pipeline can scale
well and not spend an unreasonable long time on alignment of large clusters.
VariantHunter outputs phylogenetic trees for each cluster. The purpose of the trees is to
provide a visual overview of the gene variants that have been found and their approximate
evolutionary relationship to each other and the reference genes. VariantHunter shall be
able to run relatively fast even with big datasets, so it was decided to prioritize fast com­
pute time and scalability over a more accurate phylogenetic analysis. If the user wants a
more accurate phylogenetic analysis of a cluster, they can easily do so since the cluster
alignment is also part of the output.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
9
==PAGE:14==
Phylogenetic trees are constructed with approximately­maximum­ likelihood FastTree 2
using a general time reversible model (GTR). FastTree 2 was chosen because it scales
well, and it can be inferred for even very large alignments within a reasonable amount
of time (Price, Dehal, and Arkin 2010). This is critical since depending on the data and
the parameters used when running VariantHunter, there may be hundreds or thousands of
clusters to be analysed, and if some of them are very large, it would take an unreasonable
long time to run with a full maximum­likelihood method.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
10
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.2: FASTQ to consensus sequences
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
11
==PAGE:16==
3.2
Automated discovery of novel AMR genes in Global
Sewage samples
3.2.1
Running the pipeline with the Global Sewage data
The Global Sewage dataset consists of 52 negative controls samples and 910 metage­
nomic sewage samples from around the globe.
It was analysed with VariantHunter to find novel variants of known antimicrobial resistance
genes from the ResFinder database. The pipeline parameters related to variant calling
and consensus sequences are written in the yellow boxes in figure 3.2. Strict and conser­
vative thresholds were chosen to ensure that novel gene variants found by the pipeline
were all backed by convincing data and to limit the risk of constructing chimeric consensus
sequences. High allele depth and high allele frequency was required before indels and
SNPs were accepted. Consensus sequences with ”N”s representing missing data were
filtered out to make downstream analysis easy. Consensus sequences were required to
have at least 98 % coverage to be accepted. A coverage of 100 % would be ideal but
98% was chosen to allow for sequences with minor deletions.
The pipeline took 7 hours and 55 minutes to run on a run on a dual 20 Xeon Gold 6230
CPUs clocked at 2.1Ghz. The majority of the time was spend on mapping and alignment
with KMA.
3.2.2
AMR gene variants discovered by VariantHunter
The raw result files from the pipeline analysis can be found here:
github.com/avthorn/global_sewage_AMR_gene_variants_project/tree/main/data/vh_results.
280 gene AMR gene variants were found
VariantHunter found 648 different AMR gene consensus sequences in the Global Sewage
data set. 368 sequences were identical to reference genes from the ResFinder database,
while 280 were potentially novel variants where one or more bases differed from the ref­
erence. It was checked that none of the variant consensus sequences were identical to
any of the ResFinder genes, not just the ones used for templates.
The highest numbers of potential new variants found were found for the genes mef(A)_4_HG423652
and oqxA_1_EU370913 with 11 variants each. The reference sequences for these two
were, however, not found in any of the samples (see Essential metadata table ­ Appendix
C).
Templates
433 out of 3085 ResFinder genes were used as templates for the 648 consensus se­
quences. Among the variant consensus sequences, just 157 were used in total. The
exact identical sequence was found in samples for 368 of the reference sequences used
as templates.
Sampling count
VariantHunter outputs a metadata file that states the number of samples each consensus
sequence was found in. The number of samples taken on each location is not the same,
so the sample count for each sequence cannot be compared one to one. The most fre­
quent reference genes found in the samples were msr(E)_1_FR751518 (877 samples) and
mph(E)_1_DQ839391 (872 samples). Each of them clustered alone at 95% identity, as no
variants were found for any of them. This could indicate that these two ubiquitous genes
are highly conserved. Among the top 40 most sampled consensus sequences, there are
39 reference sequences and a single variant, mef_C_1_AB571865.v1, which is found in
323 samples (Appendix C).
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
12
==PAGE:17==
More than 80% of reference sequences and more than 50% of variants sequences were
found in multiple samples. 17.54% of variant sequences were found in more than 10
samples (Table 3.1).
Number of sample
Reference sequences
Variant sequences
1
19.6 %
48.9 %
(1,10]
32.9 %
33.6 %
(10,100]
31.8 %
15.4 %
(100,450]
12.2 %
2.14 %
(450,900]
3.53 %
0 %
Table 3.1: Number of samples the consensus sequences were found in.
Distribution of AMR genes among the major antibiotics classes
The bar plots in figure 3.3 shows barplots of the AMR class distribution for 3 collections
of AMR genes: The ResFinder genes, all the Global Sewage consensus sequences and
the variant Global Sewage consensus sequences
One gene can confer resistance to more than one class of antibiotics but most genes
belong to only one AMR class.
The upper plot shows the class distribution of genes in ResFinder database. The largest
group is the β­lactamase genes that count almost 2000 sequences, while the other AMR
classes consists of less than 300 sequences each.
The middle plot shows the class distribution among the consensus sequences found by
VariantHunter. They are more evenly distributed than the ResFinder database genes,
even though β­lactam is still the most common class.
The bottom plot shows the distribution of the variant consensus sequences only. The dis­
tribution is relatively even, though some classes have had very few new variants found.
Macrolide is the largest class among the variants consensus sequences. 59 new variants
of known genes confering resistance to Macrolides were found, which almost doubles the
number of known resistance genes belonging to this class. The major class in the Res­
Finder genes, the β­lactamases are not overrepresented among the consensus sequence
found in the analysis.
AMR genes found in negative controls
AMR genes were found in 3 out of 52 negative control samples. Their ID numbers come
just after each other, and there are overlaps between AMR sequences found in the sam­
ples. This could indicate contamination from a common source. Since contamination
is found in the negative controls, there is likely to be some level of cross­contamination
between the sewage samples.
Geographical spread of AMR genes
Figure 3.4 shows a tile plot, where the y­axis shows all the variant consensus sequences
found by VariantHunter, and the x­axis shows the countries. If a sequence is found in a
particular country, the square is coloured. Each world region has its own colour. Some of
the variant sequences were found in samples from many or all world regions, an indication
that these are widely spread. Some sequences are only found in samples from single or
a few world regions. This does not necessarily mean that the gene is restricted to specific
regions; it could also mean that the presence of the gene is only confirmed for some
regions.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
13
==PAGE:18==
Clustering
For 65 of the ResFinder genes, new variants were found while the reference sequences
were absent.
VariantHunter added these reference sequences to the consensus se­
quences before the clustering step to create a dataset of a total 713 sequences.
The sequences were clustered at 95% identity. The clustering resulted in in 256 numbered
clusters, where the biggest clusters had the lowest number, see table C. Clusters 155 ­
255 contained only a single sequence. Out of these 101 sequences, only one was a
potential new variant. Clusters 87 to 154 all contained two sequences and were a mix
of reference sequences and new variants. Cluster 0 to 86 contained between 16 and 3
sequences each. With 3 sequences, it is possible to draw a proper phylogenetic tree.
3.2.3
Exploring the clusters
Due to time constrains only a few clusters have been chosen for exploratory data analysis.
Clusters of genes that confer resistance to β­lactamases or Macrolides were chosen since
these were the largest group among the variant sequences. Cluster with 12 or more
sequences were chosen since it is more interesting to look at the bigger trees.
All the data related to a cluster is visualised in a single plot with the following composition:
In the upper left corner, there is a rectangular phylogenetic tree. Each tip is a consensus
sequence, and the colour of the tip node represents the specific gene. A black dot in the
tip node signifies that it is a reference sequence and the absence of a black dot signifies
that it is a variant sequence. In the upper right corner, there is a tile plot that shows
which country and world region each sequence was found in. Since no outgroup was
used for the phylogenetic analysis, the root of the tree is arbitrarily placed. An unrooted
view of the tree is found in the lower­left corner. In the middle of the lower pane is a
heatmap that depicts the SNP distance between each of all the sequences in the tree.
The y­axis corresponds to the tips on the tree. The x­axis is a mirror of the y­axis so that
the sequences are in the same order. The darker the colour is, the more different the
sequences are. Gaps (”­”) are also included in the SNP distance count even though they
indicate insertions or deletions and are thus not officially SNPs. In the lower right corner,
there is a bar plot that depict the number of samples each sequence has been found in.
Reference sequences are black, and variant sequences are blue.
erm(b) ­ Macrolide resistance
Erm(B) genes confer resistance to Macrolide antibiotics. 8 out of 15 erm(B) genes from
the ResFinder database were found in the Global Sewage Data.
Cluster 0 contains all erm(b) consensus sequences found in the Global Sewage Data.
Figure 3.6 gives a visual representation of the cluster.
Genes from the cluster were found in 97 out of 101 Global Sewage Project countries. The
most sampled sequence in the cluster was the reference sequence for erm(B)_10_U86375,
which was found in 548 samples and 90 countries all over the globe.
Two variants
of the gene were found.
They were both only samples once and almost identical to
the reference gene. The reference sequence for erm_B_12_U18931.R was sampled 317
times but no variants were found here. One of the 8 reference sequences in the cluster,
erm(B)_18_X66468, was not samples in any samples, but 2 variants of the gene were
found.
The most sampled variant in the cluster is erm_B_20_AF109075.v1, found in 121 global
sewage samples in all regions of the world. Its reference gene erm_B_20_AF109075.R was
sampled just 3 times ­ in Morocco, Canada, and Guatemala. There is 1 SNP difference
between the reference and the variant found at position 489, resulting in a different amino
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
14
==PAGE:19==
acid occurring at position 163 (H163Q). These results suggest that the closely variant of
erm_B_20_AF109075 is more common than version of the gene than the one in ResFinder.
mef(A)_4­ Macrolide resistance
The mef(A) genes confer confer resistance to Macrolide Antibiotics (Marchandin et al.
2001). Three out of four mef(A) genes in the ResFinder database were found among the
consensus sequences, and each gene formed its own cluster, see the metadata in table
C.
The major mef(A) cluster consist of 11 variants of the gene mef(A)_4_HG423652, see figure
3.7. The reference gene itself was not found in any samples, but the sequence was
added to the cluster for reference. Each of the variants are between 1 and 18 SNPs
different from the reference sequence. There were no insertion or deletions in any of
them. The reference sequence has an A on position 835 while all 11 variants have a T. See
screenshot of the alignment in figure 3.5. Variant 1, mef(A)_4_HG423652.v1, was the most
sampled gene in the cluster and it was found in 29 samples and all world regions. The
phylogenetic tree shows that Variant 1 is the variant most closely related to the reference
gene. There is only 1 SNP between the two sequences ­ namely the one on position
835. These results indicate that variant 1, mef(A)_4_HG423652.v1, would be a more
representative reference sequence for the genes than the official reference sequence.
blaTEM ­ β­lactam resistance
The blaTEM genes are one of the most clinically significant families of β­lactamases, and
they are widespread in the environment. (Lachmayr et al. 2009) VariantHunter found a
total of 12 blaTEM consensus sequences. They formed a single cluster, cluster 6 which
is visualised in figure, 3.8. All the consensus sequences were identical to reference se­
quences, so no new variants were found. The 12 reference genes were all highly similar,
with no more than 7 SNPs between any two sequences. It could be that the 12 reference
sequence covers a large proportion of the natural variation within blaTEM genes so that
there are few ”novel variants” left to be discovered by VariantHunter.
blaTEM-1B_1_AY458016 was by far the most sampled gene, found 319 times. It was de­
tected in 81 out of 101 Global Sewage countries, covering all world regions. The 11 other
cluster genes had a sample count between 1 and 12. These results could suggest that
blaTEM-1B_1_AY458016 is far more abundant and widespread than the other genes. 12
out of 183 ResFinder blaTEM genes were found by VariantHunter but 11 of them had a
very low sample count.
blaOXA ­ β­lactam resistance
The blaOXA genes confer resistance to β­lactam (genomicepidemiology / resfinder_db
— Bitbucket 2021). There are many clusters with blaOXA genes since they are a diverse
family of genes. There are two blaOXA clusters with more than 12 sequences, but only
the largest, cluster 1, is presented here.
A visualisation of the cluster can be seen in figure 3.9. The cluster consists of 13 consen­
sus sequences. 7 are the exact references and 6 are variants of those. The reference
genes in the cluster are quite different from each other, with up to 50 SNPs different be­
tween the sequences. In the unrooted view of the tree, it can be seen that each reference
sequence forms its own little cluster, and none of the variant sequences lie between clus­
ters. All the variant sequences and some of the reference sequences has been found
in a low number of samples, but two reference sequences
blaOXA-333_1_KF203107
blaOXA-211_1_JN861779 are found in a very high number of samples. No variants were
found for any of these two genes, which could indicate that the genes are highly con­
served.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
15
==PAGE:20==
blaGES ­ β­lactam resistance
The blaGES genes confer resistance to β­lactams. The ResFinder database contains 23
blaGES reference genes, although only 12 consensus sequences were found by Vari­
antHunter. They all formed a single cluster containing 11 reference sequences and one
variant of the gene blaGES-2_1_AF326355, see figure 3.10. The variant is only found
in a single sample from Iceland. It has a single synonymous SNP relative to its refer­
ence gene. The blaGES-5_1_DQ236171 reference gene is by far the most sampled of the
blaGES genes with a sampling count of 451, and it is found in all world regions. There
are no more than 6 SNPs between any two sequences in the cluster, so the genes are all
very similar.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
16
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.3: AMR class distribution for ResFinder genes, Global Sewage genes and Global
Sewage variant genes
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Variant Consensus sequences vs world regions
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: Alignment of sequences from cluster 4 ­ variants of gene mef(A)_4_HG423652.
The bottom sequence is the reference gene.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: All erm(B) genes found
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7: All mef(A)_4 genes found
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.8: All blaTEM genes found
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
22
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.9: Largest blaOXA cluster
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.10: All blaGES genes found
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
24
==PAGE:29==
4
Methods
4.1
Data
4.1.1
The Global Sewage Data set
A large number of sewage samples from around the world has been collected for the
Global Sewage Surveillance Project (Hendriksen et al. 2019). The specific dataset used
for this study were the samples officially included in the GS2 project per November 3 2020.
The samples were collected between 2016 and 2018 in 101 countries from all continents
except Antarctica. They were Paired­end sequenced with Illumina HiSeq 3000 or Illumina
NovaSeq 6000. There are 963 samples in total. 52 of these are negative controls, sterile
water or empty test tubes that had been run through the DNA extraction kits like the rest
of the samples. Sometimes of the samples were duplicate samples taken in the same
time period at the exact same location. In total, the samples originated from 625 unique
sampling events (not including negative controls).
The FASTQ sequences had already been trimmed prior to this study, so this step was
omitted in the analysis. One sample (DTU_2016_62_2_MG_DEU-27_1) had to be excluded
from the dataset since one of the FASTQ files contained a minor anomaly that broke the
pipeline. The final dataset thereby consisted of FASTQ files from 910 sewage samples
and 52 negative controls, 962 samples in total.
4.1.2
The ResFinder Database
AMR gene sequences from the ResFinder Database were used as reference genes in
the analysis. The exact version of the database was ResFinder_20200125. It is a multi
FASTA file containing 3085 sequences. After the analysis was finished, it was discovered
that there are 6 pairs of duplicates in the database. The reference FASTA file can be found
here: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/avthorn/global_sewage_AMR_gene_variants_project/
main/data/raw/ResFinder_20200125
4.2
Analysis with the VariantHunter pipeline
This section will go through the commands used for the analysis of Global Sewage data
with the VariantHunter pipeline. Only a subset of the pipeline commands are presented.
The full pipeline script is found in Appendix A.1.
4.2.1
The VariantHunter Pipeline
The pipeline VariantHunter v.0.4.6 was built with Snakemake version 6.0.4. It was devel­
oped as part of this Master’s thesis project and used to analyse the Global Sewage Data.
The pipeline can be found on Github: github.com/avthorn/global_sewage_AMR_gene_variants_proje
The pipeline folder
The VariantHunter pipeline consitst of a number of files packaged in a folder. The contents
can be seen below:
VariantHunter folder structure
• Snakefile ­ the main pipeline script
• Config.yaml ­ the configuration file
• module_load.txt ­ list of software versions
• output ­ output which is created by Snakemake
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
25
==PAGE:30==
• scripts ­ External scripts needed for the analysis
– DupRemover.py
– make_multi_seq.pl
– sequence_cleaner.py
The Snakefile can be found in Appendix A.1. The exact configuration file used in this
study can be found in Appendix B.1.
The script folder contains external scripts used in the pipeline. They are DubRemover.py
written by Abhijeet Singh (Singh 2021), make_multi_seq.pl (cdhit/make_multi_seq.pl at
master ∙weizhongli/cdhit 2021) and textttsequence_cleaner.py from (Sequence Cleaner
∙Biopython 2021).
See 3.1 for a flowchart of the pipeline.
Software used by the pipeline
Software
Version
anaconda3
4.4.0
Snakemake
6.0.4
samtools
1.11
BCFtools
1.11
KMA
1.3.15
perl
5.20.1
ncbi­blast
2.11.0+
CD­HIT
4.8.1
pigz
2.3.4
seqkit
0.13.2
FastTree
2.1.11
MAFFT
7.453
snp­dists
0.7.0
Table 4.1: Software used by the pipeline
High Performance Computing
The pipeline was developed and later ran on Computerome 2, the Danish National Super­
computer for Life Sciences (Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Comput­
erome 2021). The analysis of the Global Sewage data was run on an interactive node with
40 cores, more specifically a dual 20 Xeon Gold 6230 CPUs clocked at 2.1Ghz (System
Hardware ­ Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Computerome 2021).
It finished in 7 hours and 55 minutes.
1
2
qsub -W group_list=cge -A cge -l nodes=1:ppn=40,mem=180gb,walltime=43200 -I
Listing 4.1: Command for booking an interactive node on Computerome
The Snakemake pipeline was ran from the VariantHunter folder with the following com­
mand:
1
snakemake --cores 39
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
26
==PAGE:31==
4.2.2
Mapping
KMA version 1.3.15 (P. T. Clausen, Aarestrup, and Lund 2018) was used to index the
reference file and align FASTQ reads to the reference genes.
1
2
kma index -i {reference fasta} -o output/1_reference/ref;
Listing 4.2: KMA ­ Index reference database
1
2
kma -i {singletong reads} -ipe {Forward and reverse reads} -o output/2_mapping
/{sample_name} -t_db {reference fasta} -1t1 -sam 2096 -ConClave 2 -cge -nc
-nf | samtools view -bS > {bam file};"
Listing 4.3: KMA ­ alignment of FASTQ reads
Conclave Scoring Scheme 2 is used for the alignment since it allows for several closely
related templates to present in the same sample which is what would be expected in
complex metagenomic samples. KMA was run with the ”cge” alignment option which has
been tested ideal for the ResFinder database. The ”cge” options corresponds to “­reward
1 ­penalty ­3 ­gapopen ­5 ­gapextend ­1 ­per 17 ­mrs 0.75” (P. T. L. C. Clausen n.d.).
The flag ”­1t1” is set which forces each read to match with only one template (P. T. L. C.
Clausen n.d.). The flag ”­sam 2096” makes KMA create a SAM file containing only the
aligned reads and send it to standart out. In order to save memory it is piped directly to
Samtools (Danecek et al. 2021) for compression.
Samtools (Danecek et al. 2021)
Samtools (Danecek et al. 2021) was used to sort and index the BAM file and then calculate
the template coverage and mean depth of coverage for the BAM file. A minimum base
quality of 20 was used in the coverage calculations as a threashold for which bases should
be counted in the coverage statistic.
1
samtools sort -o {sorted bam file} {raw bam file};
2
samtools index {output.bam_sort};
3
samtools coverage --no-header --min-BQ 20
{sorted bam file} > {coverage file}
Listing 4.4: Samtool coversge
4.2.3
Variant calling
The parameters used for variant calling can be found in the yellow boxes in 3.2.
BCFtools mpileup and call
BCFtools mpileup and call (H. Li 2011) was used to create a consensus VCF file from the
BAM file. The format of the VCFfile was VCFv4.2.
In WHO’s guide on Genomic sequencing of SARS­CoV­2 samples (Genomic sequencing
of SARS­CoV­2: a guide to implementation for maximum impact on public health 2021)
they recommend a minimum average base quality of 15 for consensus sequence building
with BCFtools. The data used in this research projects is different as it is environmental
samples containing many different strains. In order to find only highly supported new
variants the minimum base quality and minumum mapping qualities were set to a Phred
score of 20, corresponding to 99 % accuracy.
1
bcftools mpileup -Ou -f {reference fasta} --max-depth 1000000 --min-MQ 20 --
min-BQ 20
-a INFO/AD
{bam file} |
2
bcftools call -c -p 0.75 --ploidy 1 -Oz -o {output vcf}
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
27
==PAGE:32==
Normalizing indels
Before filtering the VCF file BCFtools norm (Danecek et al. 2021) was used to normalize
and leftalign indels and remove dublicate indel entries.
1
bcftools norm --rm-dup indels -f {reference fasta} {raw vcf} -Oz -o {
normalized vcf}
Filtering VCF
The VCF was filtered with BCFtools filter using the ”include” option where only sites for
which a defined EXPRESSION is true are included in the output VCF (bcftools filter ­
manual 2021). The filtering expression is difficult to read, but a graphical represention
can be seen in figure 3.2.
1
bcftools filter -i '(ALT="." || (DP4[2] >= AD[1]* 0.1 && \
2
DP4[3]
>= AD[1]* 0.1 && AD[1] = max(AD) && AD[1] >= 10 && \
3
AD[1] >= (INFO/DP* 0.9 )))' {input vcf} -Oz -o {filtered vcf};
4
bcftools index -o {indexed filtered vcf} {filtered vcf}
4.2.4
Clustering and Phylogeni
Identical sequences were merged with DubRemover.py (Singh 2021) to create a dataset
of unique sequences before clustering.
1
python3 DupRemover.py -i {input fasta} -o {output fasta}
Clustering
Clustering was performed with CD­HIT­EST (W. Li and Godzik 2006). A 95% identity
threshold was used since since test runs showed that this separated the majority of the
genes nicely into cluster with a single gene or closely related genes. The wordsize used
was 9 as recommended by the manual (CD­HIT­EST User’s Guide ∙weizhongli/cdhit Wiki
2021).
1
cd-hit-est -i {input} -o {output.genes} -M 0 -d 0 -c 0.95 -n 9 -d 0 -T 8 -s
0.5 -sc 1 -g 1 -mask N
CD­HIT­EST is implemented in VariantHunter with a few predefined parameters: Length
difference cutoff of 50 %, The slower more precise clustering mode and the masking of
”N”s.
make_multi_seq.pl (cdhit/make_multi_seq.pl at master ∙weizhongli/cdhit 2021) was used
to make fasta files of the clusters. The minimum cluster size was set to two.
1
perl scripts/make_multi_seq.pl {input sequences} {cluster file} output/5
_results/cd-hit_fastas 2
Phylogeny
Multiple alignment of the cluster FASTAs were performed with MAFFT (Katoh and Stan­
dley 2013) using the auto option.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
28
==PAGE:33==
1
2
mafft --auto {input fasta} > {aligned fasta}
Listing 4.5: Multible alignment with MAFFT
FastTree 2 was used to make approximately maximum­likelihood trees. The model used
was GTR+CAT.
1
"FastTree -gtr -nt
{input aligment} > {Newick Tree}"
Listing 4.6: FastTree
SNP distances
Pairwise SNP distance matrixes for each cluster were made with snp­dists version 0.7.0
(tseemann/snp­dists: Pairwise SNP distance matrix from a FASTA sequence alignment
2021).
Flag ­a means that all pairwise differences will be counted as SNPs, including gaps that
represents indels. This option was chosen to include the evolutionary information from
indels in the distance heat maps.
1
snp-dists -a {fasta alignment} > {snp-dist file}
4.2.5
Post processing
A custom python script was used to integrate country information into the sample meta­
data files.
Cluster plots and the essential metadata in table C were made in RStudio version 4.0.0
with the tidyverse package. The cluster trees and associated metadata were visualised
with the ggtree package (Yu et al. 2017).
Jalview version 2.11.1.4 (Waterhouse et al. 2009) was used to examine alignments of
cluster sequences.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
29
==PAGE:34==
5
Discussion
A novel bioinformatics pipeline called VariantHunter was developed during this Master
thesis project. It was built as a general­purpose metagenomic screening tool for variants
of known genes.
The Global Sewage dataset was analysed with VariantHunter to find novel variants of
known antimicrobial resistance genes. Due to time constraints, it was not possible to
find the optimal parameters before the analysis. Strict and conservative thresholds were
chosen for variant calling and consensus sequence parameters. This was done to be on
the safe side and minimise the risk of finding chimeric consensus sequences, but it also
means that many consensus sequences were excluded from the final results. An alter­
native solution may have been to use less strict variant calling and consensus sequence
parameters and exclude variant sequences that had only been found in one sample. This
might work since it is unlikely that the same chimeric sequence would be constructed
more than once.
VariantHunter found just 648 different AMR gene sequences in the Global Sewage data
set. This is quite few considering the size of the Global Sewage dataset and the number
of reference genes in the ResFinder database. 280 potential new AMR gene variants
were found. 17.54% of those had been found in more than 10 samples and one variant
gene was found in 323 samples. The fact that the same variant sequences have been
found independently in many samples suggest that VariantHunters method of consensus
sequences construction is working as it should.
VariantHunter has the potential to become a useful tool for screening metagenomic sam­
ples for variants of known genes. More time is needed to develop VariantHunter before
it is ready for publication. The pipeline should be tested with simulated data where the
expected outcome is known in order to verify that everything works as expected. It should
also be tested with much bigger datasets to see how that effect the compute time. A fu­
ture version of VariantHunter could be used for ongoing surveillance of global AMR gene
variants.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
30
==PAGE:35==
Bibliography
WHO (2014). “Antimicrobial resistance. Global report on surveillance”. In: World Heal.
Organ. 61.3, pp. 12–28. ISSN: 0042­9686. DOI: 10.1007/s13312-014-0374-3. arXiv:
9789241564748. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22247201%7B%5C%
%7D5Cnhttp://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2536104%7B%5C&
%7Dtool=pmcentrez%7B%5C&%7Drendertype=abstract.
Hendriksen, Rene S. et al. (Dec. 2019). “Global monitoring of antimicrobial resistance
based on metagenomics analyses of urban sewage”. In: Nat. Commun. 10.1. ISSN:
20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-08853-3. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6408512/%20/
pmc/articles/PMC6408512/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC6408512/.
Ten threats to global health in 2019 (2021). URL: https://www.who.int/news- room/
spotlight/ten-threats-to-global-health-in-2019 (visited on 06/14/2021).
Aarestrup, Frank M. and Mark E.J. Woolhouse (Feb. 2020). Using sewage for surveillance
of antimicrobial resistance. DOI: 10.1126/science.aba3432. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1101/498329.
Ivanova, Olga E. et al. (May 2019). “Environmental surveillance for poliovirus and other
enteroviruses: Long­term experience in moscow, russian federation, 2004­2017”. In:
Viruses 11.5. ISSN: 19994915. DOI: 10.3390/v11050424. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6563241/
%20/pmc/articles/PMC6563241/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC6563241/.
Brinch, Christian & Aarestrup, Frank M. (2021). Update May 2020 ­ Global Surveillance ­
Global sewage situation report. URL: https://www.globalsurveillance.eu/Projects/Global-
Surveillance-of-Antimicrobial-Resistance/Update-May-2020 (visited on 06/25/2021).
Roch, Sébastien (2019). A Short Proof that Phylogenetic Tree Reconstruction by Maxi­
mum Likelihood is Hard. Tech. rep.
Machado, Denis Jacob, Santiago Castroviejo­Fisher, and Taran Grant (Sept. 2019). Evi­
dence of absence treated as absence of evidence: The effects of variation in the number
and distribution of gaps treated as missing data on the results of standard maximum
likelihood analysis. DOI: 10.1101/755009. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/755009.
Abadi, Shiran et al. (Dec. 2019). “Model selection may not be a mandatory step for phy­
logeny reconstruction”. In: Nat. Commun. 10.1, pp. 1–11. ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.
1038/s41467-019-08822-w. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08822-w.
PhyML­Manual (2008). Tech. rep. URL: http://www.atgc-montpellier.fr/phyml.
Liu, Kevin, C. Randal Linder, and Tandy Warnow (Nov. 2011). “RAxML and FastTree:
Comparing Two Methods for Large­Scale Maximum Likelihood Phylogeny Estimation”.
In: PLoS One 6.11. Ed. by Rongling Wu, e27731. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0027731. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3221724/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3221724/
?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / PMC3221724 /
%20https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027731.
Price, Morgan N., Paramvir S. Dehal, and Adam P. Arkin (Mar. 2010). “FastTree 2 ­ Ap­
proximately maximum­likelihood trees for large alignments”. In: PLoS One 5.3. ISSN:
19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC2835736/%20/
pmc/articles/PMC2835736/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2835736/.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
31
==PAGE:36==
Zhou, Xiaofan et al. (Feb. 2018). “Evaluating fast maximum likelihood­based phylogenetic
programs using empirical phylogenomic data sets”. In: Mol. Biol. Evol. 35.2, pp. 486–
503. ISSN: 15371719. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msx302. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/29177474/.
Lancia, Giuseppe et al. (n.d.). SNPs Problems, Complexity, and Algorithms. Tech. rep.
Danecek, Petr et al. (Feb. 2021). Twelve years of SAMtools and BCFtools. DOI: 10.1093/
gigascience/giab008. arXiv: 2012.10295. URL: https://www.htslib.org.%20/pmc/articles/
PMC7931819/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7931819/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7931819/.
Cao, Chen et al. (May 2021). “Reconstruction of Microbial Haplotypes by Integration of
Statistical and Physical Linkage in Scaffolding”. In: Mol. Biol. Evol. 38.6, pp. 2660–2672.
ISSN: 15371719. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab037. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC8136496/
%20/pmc/articles/PMC8136496/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC8136496/.
Nicholls, Samuel M et al. (Nov. 2020). “On the complexity of haplotyping a microbial com­
munity”. In: Bioinformatics. Ed. by Pier Luigi Martelli. ISSN: 1367­4803. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btaa977. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/advance-article/
doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa977/5988481.
Köster, Johannes and Sven Rahmann (Oct. 2012). “Snakemake­a scalable bioinformatics
workflow engine”. In: Bioinformatics 28.19, pp. 2520–2522. ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/bts480. URL: http://snakemake.googlecode.com..
Köster, Johannes, Felix Mölder, et al. (2021). “Sustainable data analysis with Snake­
make”. In: F1000Research 10. ISSN: 1759796X. DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.29032.2.
URL: /pmc/articles/PMC8114187/%20/pmc/articles/PMC8114187/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8114187/.
Bortolaia, Valeria et al. (Dec. 2020). “ResFinder 4.0 for predictions of phenotypes from
genotypes”. In: J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 75.12, pp. 3491–3500. ISSN: 14602091.
DOI: 10 . 1093 / jac / dkaa345. URL: /pmc / articles / PMC7662176 / %20 / pmc / articles /
PMC7662176 / ?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC7662176/.
Clausen, Philip T.L.C., Frank M. Aarestrup, and Ole Lund (Aug. 2018). “Rapid and pre­
cise alignment of raw reads against redundant databases with KMA”. In: BMC Bioin­
formatics 19.1, p. 307. ISSN: 14712105. DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6. URL: https:
//bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6.
Clausen, Philip T L C (n.d.). “The k­ mer alignment ( KMA ) specification v1.3.19”. In:
(), pp. 1–19. URL: https : / / bitbucket . org / genomicepidemiology / kma / src / master /
KMAspecification.pdf.
Failing at SNP #0 at position 0, questions for understanding output ∙Issue #29 ∙SamStu­
dio8/gretel (2021). URL: https://github.com/SamStudio8/gretel/issues/29 (visited on
06/18/2021).
theLongLab/PoolHapX: PoolHapX (2021). URL: https://github.com/theLongLab/PoolHapX
(visited on 06/22/2021).
Consensus sequence (2021). URL: https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/howtos/consensus-
sequence.html (visited on 06/22/2021).
Li, Weizhong and Adam Godzik (July 2006). “Cd­hit: A fast program for clustering and
comparing large sets of protein or nucleotide sequences”. In: Bioinformatics 22.13,
pp. 1658–1659. ISSN: 13674803. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btl158. URL: https :
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16731699/.
Katoh, Kazutaka and Daron M. Standley (Apr. 2013). “MAFFT multiple sequence align­
ment software version 7: Improvements in performance and usability”. In: Mol. Biol.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
32
==PAGE:37==
Evol. 30.4, pp. 772–780. ISSN: 07374038. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst010. URL: /pmc/
articles/PMC3603318/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3603318/?report=abstract%20https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3603318/.
Marchandin, H. et al. (2001). Distribution of macrolide resistance genes erm(B) and mef(A)
among 160 penicillin­intermediate clinical isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae iso­
lated in Southern France. DOI: 10.1016/S0369-8114(01)00212-7. URL: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11642013/.
Lachmayr, Karen L. et al. (Jan. 2009). “Quantifying nonspecific tem β­lactamase (blatem)
genes in a wastewater stream”. In: Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75.1, pp. 203–211. ISSN:
00992240. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01254-08. URL: https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem.
genomicepidemiology / resfinder_db — Bitbucket (2021). URL: https://bitbucket.org/
genomicepidemiology/resfinder%7B%5C_%7Ddb/src/master/ (visited on 06/10/2021).
Singh, Abhijeet (2021). abhijeetsingh1704/DupRemover: Removes duplicate sequences
in multifasta file. URL: https://github.com/abhijeetsingh1704/DupRemover (visited on
06/20/2021).
cdhit/make_multi_seq.pl at master ∙weizhongli/cdhit (2021). URL: https://github.com/
weizhongli/cdhit/blob/master/make%7B%5C_%7Dmulti%7B%5C_%7Dseq.pl (visited on
06/20/2021).
Sequence Cleaner ∙Biopython (2021). URL: https://peterjc.github.io/wiki/Sequence%
7B%5C_%7DCleaner (visited on 06/20/2021).
Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Computerome (2021). URL: https://
computerome.dk/ (visited on 06/20/2021).
System Hardware ­ Computerome 2.0 Wiki ­ Computerome (2021). URL: https://www.
computerome.dk/display/C2W/System+Hardware (visited on 06/25/2021).
Li, Heng (Nov. 2011). “A statistical framework for SNP calling, mutation discovery, asso­
ciation mapping and population genetical parameter estimation from sequencing data”.
In: Bioinformatics 27.21, pp. 2987–2993. ISSN: 13674803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btr509. arXiv: 1203.6372. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3198575/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3198575/
?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3198575/.
Genomic sequencing of SARS­CoV­2: a guide to implementation for maximum impact on
public health (2021). URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240018440
(visited on 04/08/2021).
bcftools filter ­ manual (2021). URL: http://samtools.github.io/bcftools/bcftools.html%7B%
5C#%7Dfilter (visited on 06/24/2021).
CD­HIT­EST User’s Guide ∙weizhongli/cdhit Wiki (2021). URL: https : / / github . com /
weizhongli/cdhit/wiki/3.-User’s-Guide%7B%5C#%7DCDHITEST (visited on 06/25/2021).
tseemann/snp­dists: Pairwise SNP distance matrix from a FASTA sequence alignment
(2021). URL: https://github.com/tseemann/snp-dists (visited on 06/24/2021).
Yu, Guangchuang et al. (Jan. 2017). “ggtree: an r package for visualization and annotation
of phylogenetic trees with their covariates and other associated data”. In: Methods Ecol.
Evol. 8.1, pp. 28–36. ISSN: 2041210X. DOI: 10.1111/2041- 210X.12628. URL: http:
//www.bioconductor.org/packages/ggtree.
Waterhouse, Andrew M. et al. (May 2009). “Jalview Version 2­A multiple sequence align­
ment editor and analysis workbench”. In: Bioinformatics 25.9, pp. 1189–1191. ISSN:
13674803. DOI: 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btp033. URL: https : / / academic . oup . com /
bioinformatics/article/25/9/1189/203460.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
33
==PAGE:38==
A
Snakefile
1
# VariantHunter Version 0.4.6
2
3
configfile: "config.yaml"
4
5
import os
6
7
# open sample name file and read the content in a list
8
with open(config["sample_name_path"], 'r') as file:
9
SAMPLE_NAMES = [sample_name.rstrip() for sample_name in file.readlines()]
10
11
rule all:
12
input:
13
"output/5_results/cluster_lookup.txt"
14
15
## Reference
##################################################################
16
17
# Remove illegal characters from reference names and index the reference
18
rule prepare_index_reference:
19
input:
20
config["ref_path"]
21
output:
22
fasta="output/1_reference/ref.fasta",
23
c="output/1_reference/ref.comp.b",
24
fai="output/1_reference/ref.fasta.fai",
25
name="output/1_reference/ref.name",
26
old_names=temp("output/1_reference/ref.old_name.txt"),
27
converstion_file="output/1_reference/gene_name_conversion.tsv"
28
shell:
29
'''
30
cp {input} {output.fasta};
31
sed -i -e "s/[;|:|,| |(|)|'|+]/_/g" -e "s/-/_/g" -e "s/\//_/g" -e "s
/\./_/g"
-e "s/|/_/g"
{output.fasta};
32
sed -i 's/__/_/g'
{output.fasta};
33
sed -i 's/__/_/g'
{output.fasta};
34
35
kma index -i {output.fasta} -o output/1_reference/ref;
36
samtools faidx {output.fasta};
37
grep -e ">" {input} | sed 's/>//g'
> {output.old_names};
38
paste {output.old_names} {output.name} > {output.converstion_file}
39
40
'''
41
42
## Mapping
#########################################################################
43
44
# Map samples to resfinder database , to create consensus fasta and other files
45
rule mapping:
46
input:
47
ref="output/1_reference/ref.comp.b"
48
output:
49
bam_raw=temp("output/2_mapping/bam_raw/{sample_name}.bam"),
50
res_file="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.res",
51
bam_sort="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.bam",
52
bai="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.bam.bai",
53
cov="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.cov"
54
params:
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
34
==PAGE:39==
55
S=config["seq_path"] + "{sample_name}" + config["singleton_suf"],
56
out_dir="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}",
57
PE=config["seq_path"] + "{sample_name}" + config["for_rev_suf"],
58
ref="output/1_reference/ref",
59
min_BQ=config["minimum_base_Q"],
# Minimum base quality for a
base to be considered by samtools coverage
60
conclave=config["conclave_verson"],
61
ali_settings=config["alignment_setting_for_kma"]
62
63
shell:
64
"kma -i {params.S} -ipe {params.PE} -o {params.out_dir} -t_db {params.
ref} "
65
" -1t1 -sam 2096 -ConClave {params.conclave} {params.ali_settings} -nc
-nf | samtools view -bS > {output.bam_raw};"
66
"samtools sort -o {output.bam_sort} {output.bam_raw};"
67
"samtools index {output.bam_sort};"
68
"samtools coverage --no-header --min-BQ {params.min_BQ}
{output.
bam_sort} > {output.cov}"
69
70
## vcf
################################################################################
71
72
rule bcftools_mpileup_call:
73
input:
74
bam="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.bam",
75
ref="output/1_reference/ref.fasta"
76
output:
77
vcf="output/3_vcf/1_raw/{sample_name}.raw.vcf.gz"
78
params:
79
max_dp="--max-depth 1000000", # At a position , read maximally INT
reads per input file.
80
MQ=config["minimum_map_Q"],
# Minimum mapping quality for an
alignment to be used.
81
BQ=config["minimum_base_Q"],
# Minimum base quality for a base to be
considered.
82
p=config["p_value"],
# Ignore variant if the frequency of the
ref allele
>= p
83
ploidy=config["ploidy"],
# Choose ploidy eg. haploid
84
orphan=config["orphan_reads"] # Choose whether or not to include
orphan reads
85
86
shell:
87
"bcftools mpileup -Ou -f {input.ref} {params.max_dp} --min-MQ {params.
MQ} --min-BQ {params.BQ} {params.orphan} "
88
" -a INFO/AD
{input.bam} | "
89
"bcftools call -c -p {params.p} --ploidy {params.ploidy} -Oz -o {
output.vcf};"
90
91
92
# Normalize and left-align indels and remove dublicate entries of the same
indel.
93
rule bcftools_norm_vcf:
94
input:
95
vcf_raw="output/3_vcf/1_raw/{sample_name}.raw.vcf.gz",
96
ref="output/1_reference/ref.fasta"
97
output:
98
norm_vcf="output/3_vcf/2_norm/{sample_name}.norm.vcf.gz"
99
shell:
100
'''
101
bcftools norm --rm-dup indels -f {input.ref} {input.vcf_raw} -Oz -o {
output.norm_vcf}
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
35
==PAGE:40==
102
'''
103
104
rule bcftools_filter_vcf:
105
input:
106
vn="output/3_vcf/2_norm/{sample_name}.norm.vcf.gz"
107
output:
108
vf="output/3_vcf/3_filter_norm/{sample_name}.filter.norm.vcf.gz",
109
vf_index="output/3_vcf/3_filter_norm/{sample_name}.filter.norm.vcf.gz.
csi"
110
params:
111
min_AD=config["minimum_ALT_AD"],
# minimum ALT allele depth to be
accepted.
112
min_AF=config["minimum_ALT_AF"],
# minimum ALT allele freq to be
accepted.
113
min_strand=config["minimum_ALT_strand_prop_forward_and_reverse"]
114
shell:
115
'''
116
bcftools filter -i '(ALT="." || (DP4[2] >= AD[1]*{params.min_strand}
&& \
117
DP4[3]
>= AD[1]*{params.min_strand} && AD[1] = max(AD) && AD[1] >= {
params.min_AD} && \
118
AD[1] >= (INFO/DP*{params.min_AF} )))' {input.vn} -Oz -o {output.vf};
119
bcftools index -o {output.vf_index} {output.vf}
120
'''
121
122
## Sample consensus sequence wrangling
##########################################
123
124
rule bcftools_consensus_raw:
125
input:
126
vf="output/3_vcf/3_filter_norm/{sample_name}.filter.norm.vcf.gz",
127
vf_index="output/3_vcf/3_filter_norm/{sample_name}.filter.norm.vcf.gz.
csi",
128
ref="output/1_reference/ref.fasta"
129
output:
130
raw_consensus="output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/1_raw/{sample_name}.
fasta"
131
shell:
132
'''
133
bcftools consensus --absent N
-f {input.ref} {input.vf} > {output.
raw_consensus}
134
'''
135
136
137
# Filter
consensus sequences on coverage
138
rule filter_coverage:
139
input:
140
r_c="output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/1_raw/{sample_name}.fasta",
141
cov="output/2_mapping/{sample_name}.cov"
142
output:
143
hc_c="output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/2_high_cov/{sample_name}.fasta",
144
hc_list=temp("output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/2_high_cov/{sample_name
}.hc_list")
145
params:
146
min_cov=config["min_template_cov"],
# minimum template coverage in
percent to accept consensus
147
min_meandepth=config["min_meandepth"]
148
run:
149
shell("awk '$6 >= {params.min_cov} && $7 >= {params.min_meandepth}' {
input.cov} | awk '{{print $1}}'
> {output.hc_list}")
150
if os.path.getsize(output[1]) > 0:
# Test that high coverage list
file is not empty.
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
36
==PAGE:41==
151
shell("seqkit grep -n -f {output.hc_list} {input.r_c} > {output.
hc_c}")
152
else:
153
shell("touch {output.hc_c}")
# Create empty fasta file if high
coverage list is empty
154
155
156
157
# Filter on percentage of Ns in sequences
158
rule seq_cleaner_filter_Ns:
159
input:
160
"output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/2_high_cov/{sample_name}.fasta"
161
output:
162
"output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/3_high_cov_n/{sample_name}.fasta"
163
params:
164
l="0",
# minimum length of sequences. Set to 0 since coverage is
filtered upstreams in the pipeline.
165
p=config["percentage_unknown_nuc_allowed"]
# max percentage Ns
allowed in sequences
166
shell:
167
"cd output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/2_high_cov;"
168
"python3 ../../../scripts/sequence_cleaner.py
{wildcards.sample_name
}.fasta
{params.l} {params.p};"
169
"mv clear_{wildcards.sample_name}.fasta ../3_high_cov_n/{wildcards.
sample_name}.fasta"
170
171
rule make_list_of_templates_used:
172
input:
173
expand("output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/3_high_cov_n/{sample_name}.
fasta", sample_name=SAMPLE_NAMES)
174
output:
175
temp("output/5_results/template_names.txt")
176
shell:
177
"cat output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/3_high_cov_n/*.fasta | grep '>' |
sed 's/>//g' | sort -u > {output}"
178
179
180
rule perl_sample_id_to_header_sample_fasta:
181
input:
182
"output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/3_high_cov_n/{sample_name}.fasta"
183
output:
184
"output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/4_high_cov_n_ID/{sample_name}.fasta"
185
params:
186
sample_id= lambda wildcards: wildcards.sample_name
187
shell:
188
'''
189
perl -p -e 's/^>/>{params.sample_id}+/g' {input}
> {output}
190
'''
191
## Pool Samples
############################################################################
192
193
rule cat_variant_fastas:
194
input:
195
gene_fasta=expand("output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/4_high_cov_n_ID/{
sample_name}.fasta", sample_name=SAMPLE_NAMES)
196
output:
197
"output/5_results/all_consensus_sequences.fasta"
198
shell:
199
'''
200
cat output/4_induvidual_sample_seqs/4_high_cov_n_ID/*.fasta
>
{
output}
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
37
==PAGE:42==
201
'''
202
203
rule add_ref_sequences:
204
input:
205
ref_names="output/5_results/template_names.txt",
206
cons_fasta="output/5_results/all_consensus_sequences.fasta",
207
ref_fasta="output/1_reference/ref.fasta"
208
output:
209
both_fasta="output/5_results/all_consensus_and_ref_sequences.fasta",
210
ref_subset_fasta=temp("output/5_results/ref_sequences.fasta")
211
shell:
212
"seqkit grep -n -f {input.ref_names} {input.ref_fasta} | perl -p -e 's
/^>/>Ref+/g' > {output.ref_subset_fasta};"
213
"cat {input.cons_fasta} {output.ref_subset_fasta}
>
{output.
both_fasta}"
214
215
216
# Merge dublicate sequences so that all sequences are unique. Also merges the
headers
217
rule DupRemover:
218
input:
219
"output/5_results/all_consensus_and_ref_sequences.fasta"
220
output:
221
"output/5_results/all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged.
fasta"
222
shell:
223
"python3 scripts/DupRemover.py -i {input} -o {output};"
224
225
# Give the sequences proper names and create 2 metadata files
226
rule python3_create_variant_ID_and_metafiles:
227
input:
228
fasta="output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged.fasta",
229
gene_name_conversion_file="output/1_reference/gene_name_conversion.tsv
"
230
output:
231
fasta_id="output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged_ID.fasta",
232
gene_name="output/5_results/gene_name_conversion.tsv",
233
raw_tsv=temp("output/5_results/raw_sequence_sample_metadata.tsv"),
234
tsv="output/5_results/sequence_sample_metadata.tsv",
235
raw_template_metadata_file =temp("output/5_results/
raw_template_metadata.tsv"),
236
template_metadata_file ="output/5_results/template_metadata.tsv"
237
run:
238
## Create ID fasta and sequence sample metadata
239
variant_meta = open("output/5_results/raw_sequence_sample_metadata.tsv
", 'w')
240
fasta_id_file = open("output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged_ID.fasta",'w')
241
fasta_file = open("output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged.fasta","r")
242
variant_count = {}
243
refs_found=set()
244
for line in fasta_file:
245
if line.startswith(">"):
246
line = line.strip(">")
247
last_entry = line.split("|")[-1]
248
gene_name= last_entry.split("+")[1].strip()
249
if last_entry.startswith("Ref"):
250
varname = gene_name + ".R"
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
38
==PAGE:43==
251
if len(line.split("|")) > 1:
# if the reference was
found in any actual samples and not just added.
252
refs_found.add(gene_name)
253
else:
254
if gene_name not in variant_count:
255
variant_count[gene_name] = 1
256
else:
257
variant_count[gene_name] += 1
258
varname = gene_name + ".v" + str(variant_count[gene_name])
259
new_header= ">" + varname
260
print(new_header , file =fasta_id_file)
261
sample_and_gene_list = line.split("|") # split the string into
the different headers
262
sample_list = [i.split("+", 1)[0] for i in
sample_and_gene_list] # make list of sample IDs
263
if sample_list == ["Ref"]:
264
sample_list = ["*"]
265
if "Ref" in sample_list:
266
sample_list.remove("Ref")
267
if sample_list == ["*"]:
268
length = "0"
269
else:
270
length = str(len(sample_list))
271
metafile_line = varname + "\t" + length + "\t" + ','.join(
sample_list)
272
print(metafile_line , file =variant_meta)
273
else:
274
print(line.strip(), file =fasta_id_file)
275
variant_meta.close()
276
fasta_id_file.close()
277
fasta_file.close()
278
shell("sort -k 2 -n -r
{output.raw_tsv} > {output.tsv}")
# sort by
number of samples the sequence was found in
279
## Create Template metadata file
280
gene_name_conversion_file = open("output/1_reference/
gene_name_conversion.tsv","r")
281
raw_template_metadata_file = open("output/5_results/
raw_template_metadata.tsv","w")
282
print("#Official_gene_name
software_friendly_gene_name
template_sequence_found?
number_of_new_variants_found?")
283
for line in gene_name_conversion_file:
284
line = line.strip()
285
new_name = line.split("\t")[1]
286
if new_name in refs_found:
287
ref_found = "y"
288
else:
289
ref_found = "n"
290
if new_name in variant_count:
291
new_vars=str(variant_count[new_name])
292
else:
293
new_vars="0"
294
new_line= line + "\t" + ref_found + "\t" + new_vars
295
print(new_line , file = raw_template_metadata_file)
296
gene_name_conversion_file.close()
297
raw_template_metadata_file.close()
298
shell("sort -k 4 -n -r
{output.raw_template_metadata_file} > {output.
template_metadata_file}")
299
## Copy gene name conversion to results folder
300
shell("cp {input.gene_name_conversion_file} {output.gene_name}")
301
302
## Clusters
###############################################################################
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
39
==PAGE:44==
303
304
305
306
rule cd_hit:
307
input:
308
"output/5_results/all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged_ID
.fasta"
309
output:
310
clus="output/5_results/cd_hit.clstr",
311
genes=temp("output/5_results/cd_hit")
312
params:
313
i= config["cluster_identity_cd_hit"],
314
w= config["cluster_wordsize_cd_hit"]
315
shell:
316
'''
317
cd-hit-est -i {input} -o {output.genes} -M 0 -d 0 -c {params.i} -n {
params.w} -d 0 -T 8 -s 0.5 -sc 1 -g 1 -mask N
318
'''
319
320
rule make_cd_hit_fastas:
321
input:
322
clus="output/5_results/cd_hit.clstr",
323
seq="output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged_ID.fasta"
324
output:
325
temp(dynamic("output/5_results/cd-hit_fastas/{cluster_id}"))
326
params:
327
fasta_outdir="output/5_results/cd-hit_fastas",
328
min_cluster_size = config["minimum_cluster_size"]
329
shell:
330
"perl scripts/make_multi_seq.pl {input.seq} {input.clus} {params.
fasta_outdir} {params.min_cluster_size}"
331
332
333
334
# Some new variants may have ended up in an other cluster than their reference
sequence.
335
# Add the reference sequence to these clusters before alignments
336
337
rule python3_seqkit_add_refs_to_clusters_that_lost_refs:
338
input:
339
c_fasta_raw="output/5_results/cd-hit_fastas/{cluster_id}",
340
all_seq_fasta="output/5_results/
all_consensus_and_ref_sequences_dublicants_merged_ID.fasta"
341
output:
342
list=temp("output/5_results/ref_add_lists/{cluster_id}.ref_add.txt"),
343
complete_c_fasta="output/5_results/cluster_fastas/{cluster_id}.fasta"
344
run:
345
fasta_in = open(input[0],"r")
346
ref_set = set()
347
var_set = set()
348
for line in fasta_in:
349
if line.startswith(">"):
# if it is a fasta header
350
row = line[1:].strip()
# remove the >
351
gene_name = row.split(".")[0] # extract gene name
352
if row.split(".")[1] is "R":
# if it is a ref sequence
353
ref_set.add(gene_name)
# save the gene name in ref set
354
else:
# if it is not a ref sequence
355
var_set.add(gene_name)
# save the gene name in variant
set
356
fasta_in.close()
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
40
==PAGE:45==
357
missing_ref = var_set.difference(ref_set)
# find the var genes that
does not have their ref sequence in the cluster
358
list_out= open(output[0],"w")
359
for item in missing_ref:
360
print(item + ".R", file=list_out)
361
list_out.close()
362
shell("cp {input.c_fasta_raw}
{output.complete_c_fasta}")
363
if len(missing_ref) > 0:
# if there are missing ref fastas , then add
the missing ones to the input fasta
364
shell("seqkit grep --line-width 0 -n -f {output.list} {input.
all_seq_fasta} >> {output.complete_c_fasta}")
365
366
367
rule align:
368
input:
369
fasta="output/5_results/cluster_fastas/{cluster_id}.fasta"
370
output:
371
fasta="output/5_results/cluster_alignments/{cluster_id}.fasta"
372
373
shell:
374
"mafft --auto {input.fasta} > {output.fasta}"
375
376
377
rule fasttree:
378
input:
379
"output/5_results/cluster_alignments/{cluster_id}.fasta"
380
output:
381
"output/5_results/cluster_trees/{cluster_id}.tree"
382
shell:
383
"FastTree -gtr -nt
{input} > {output}"
384
385
rule snp_dists:
386
input:
387
"output/5_results/cluster_alignments/{cluster_id}.fasta"
388
output:
389
"output/5_results/cluster_snp_dist/{cluster_id}.tsv"
390
params:
391
options =config["snp_dists_options"]
392
shell:
393
"snp-dists {params.options} {input} > {output}"
394
395
396
397
398
rule make_cluster_sequence_sample_metadata:
399
input:
400
tree="output/5_results/cluster_trees/{cluster_id}.tree",
401
tsv="output/5_results/sequence_sample_metadata.tsv",
402
dist="output/5_results/cluster_snp_dist/{cluster_id}.tsv",
403
fasta="output/5_results/cluster_fastas/{cluster_id}.fasta"
404
output:
405
tsv="output/5_results/cluster_meta/{cluster_id}.tsv",
406
cc=temp("output/5_results/cluster_content/{cluster_id}.txt"),
407
list=temp("output/5_results/cluster_list/{cluster_id}.txt")
408
shell:
409
"grep '>' {input.fasta} | sed 's/>//g' > {output.list};"
410
"grep -wFf {output.list}
{input.tsv} > {output.tsv};"
411
"grep '\.R' {output.list} | sed 's/\.R//g' | sed 's/^/{wildcards.
cluster_id}
/' > {output.cc} "
412
413
414
rule make_cluster_lookup_file:
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
41
==PAGE:46==
415
input:
416
dynamic("output/5_results/cluster_content/{cluster_id}.txt")
417
output:
418
"output/5_results/cluster_lookup.txt"
419
shell:
420
"cat output/5_results/cluster_content/*.txt | sort -n > {output}"
Listing A.1: Snakefile
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
42
==PAGE:47==
B
Config
1
# VariantHunter Version 0.4.6
2
3
## Input files ##
4
5
# Path to reference fasta file.
6
ref_path: "../data/raw/ResFinder_20200125"
7
8
# Path to list of sample names. One line per name.
9
sample_name_path: "../data/raw/gs2_sample_names_exclude_62.txt"
10
11
# Path to folder with trimmed illumina paired end fastq sequences
12
seq_path: "/home/projects/cge/data/projects/5001/Sewage_data_symbolic_links/
Trimmed/"
13
14
# What comes after sample name for singletons
15
singleton_suf: "_R1.singletons.fq.gz"
16
17
# What comes after sample name for forwar og reverse reads. Use * to indicate
a 1 or a 2.
18
for_rev_suf: "_R*.trim.fq.gz"
19
20
21
## Mapping ##
22
23
# ConClave version , Choose "1" or "2"
24
conclave_verson: "2"
25
26
# Choose alignment parameters for kma mapping software.
27
# Suggestion: "-reward 1 -penalty -3 -gapopen -5 -gapextend -1 -per 17 -mrs
0.75"
28
# If defalt are wanted choose: ""
29
# If settings tested ideal for ResFinder database is wanted choose: "-cge"
30
alignment_setting_for_kma:
"-cge"
31
32
# minimum base quality.
33
minimum_base_Q: "20"
34
35
36
## Variant Calling ##
37
38
# Do not even consider ALT allele if proportion of ref allele is equal to or
more than given value. E.g. "0.5"
39
p_value: "0.75"
40
41
# Include "orphan" reads, where the mate is not paired? For yes choose "-A" ,
for no choose "".
42
orphan_reads: ""
43
44
# Choose ploidy for samples. Choose "1" for haploid.
45
# See http://samtools.github.io/bcftools/bcftools.html#call for more options.
46
ploidy: "1"
47
48
49
# minimum mapping quality
50
minimum_map_Q: "20"
51
52
# minimum proportion of
forward and reverse for ALT
alleles. Suggested value
0.2
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
43
==PAGE:48==
53
minimum_ALT_strand_prop_forward_and_reverse: "0.1"
54
55
# minimum allele depth for non-reference allele for the call to be accepted
56
minimum_ALT_AD: "10"
57
58
# minimum allele frequency for non-reference allele for the call to be
accepted
59
minimum_ALT_AF: "0.90"
60
61
62
## Consensus Sequence quality filtering ##
63
64
# minimum template coverage in percent , in order to accept the consensus
sequence as "high coverage" and keep it
65
min_template_cov: "98"
66
67
# Minimum mean depth of sequence.
68
min_meandepth: "10"
69
70
# Percentage unknown nucleotides "N" allowed.
71
# N can mean that the position did not get through the vcf filtering
72
# or the position was not found in the vcf file due to problems with coverage
or bcftools
73
percentage_unknown_nuc_allowed: "0"
74
75
76
## Clustering ##
77
# Read the documentation to choose correct wordsize for the cluster_identity!
78
# https://github.com/weizhongli/cdhit/wiki/3.-User's-Guide#CDHITEST
79
80
cluster_identity_cd_hit: "0.95"
81
cluster_wordsize_cd_hit: "9"
82
83
# Choose at least "2" for minimum cluster size. The pipe will not work with a
cluster size of one.
84
minimum_cluster_size: "2"
85
86
87
## SNP-dist matrix
88
# for all options see https://github.com/tseemann/snp-dists
89
# to count only ACTG as differences choose the
default ""
90
# to count also gaps and Ns as differences choose "-a"
91
92
snp_dists_options: "-a"
Listing B.1: Config
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
44
==PAGE:49==
C
Essential metadata
id
original_gene_name
cluster_name
type
sample_count
new_variants_found
erm_B_10_U86375.R
erm(B)_10_U86375
0
Reference
548
2
erm_B_23_X72021.R
erm(B)_23_X72021
0
Reference
401
3
erm_B_12_U18931.R
erm(B)_12_U18931
0
Reference
317
0
erm_B_1_JN899585.R
erm(B)_1_JN899585
0
Reference
176
0
erm_B_20_AF109075.v1
erm(B)_20_AF109075
0
Variant
121
NA
erm_B_18_X66468.v2
erm(B)_18_X66468
0
Variant
78
NA
erm_B_18_X66468.v1
erm(B)_18_X66468
0
Variant
41
NA
erm_B_9_AF299292.R
erm(B)_9_AF299292
0
Reference
39
0
erm_B_20_AF109075.R
erm(B)_20_AF109075
0
Reference
3
1
erm_B_6_AF242872.R
erm(B)_6_AF242872
0
Reference
2
0
erm_B_23_X72021.v3
erm(B)_23_X72021
0
Variant
1
NA
erm_B_23_X72021.v2
erm(B)_23_X72021
0
Variant
1
NA
erm_B_23_X72021.v1
erm(B)_23_X72021
0
Variant
1
NA
erm_B_10_U86375.v2
erm(B)_10_U86375
0
Variant
1
NA
erm_B_10_U86375.v1
erm(B)_10_U86375
0
Variant
1
NA
erm_B_18_X66468.R
erm(B)_18_X66468
0
Reference
0
2
blaOXA_333_1_KF203107.R
blaOXA­333_1_KF203107
1
Reference
286
0
blaOXA_211_1_JN861779.R
blaOXA­211_1_JN861779
1
Reference
161
0
blaOXA_280_1_APPZ01000001.R
blaOXA­280_1_APPZ01000001
1
Reference
44
2
blaOXA_334_1_KF203108.R
blaOXA­334_1_KF203108
1
Reference
33
1
blaOXA_281_1_APON01000041.R
blaOXA­281_1_APON01000041
1
Reference
13
0
blaOXA_334_1_KF203108.v1
blaOXA­334_1_KF203108
1
Variant
10
NA
blaOXA_373_1_HG931732.R
blaOXA­373_1_HG931732
1
Reference
4
0
blaOXA_280_1_APPZ01000001.v2
blaOXA­280_1_APPZ01000001
1
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_280_1_APPZ01000001.v1
blaOXA­280_1_APPZ01000001
1
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_212_1_JN861780.v3
blaOXA­212_1_JN861780
1
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_212_1_JN861780.v2
blaOXA­212_1_JN861780
1
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_212_1_JN861780.v1
blaOXA­212_1_JN861780
1
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_212_1_JN861780.R
blaOXA­212_1_JN861780
1
Reference
1
3
blaOXA_10_1_J03427.R
blaOXA­10_1_J03427
2
Reference
762
0
blaOXA_101_1_AM412777.R
blaOXA­101_1_AM412777
2
Reference
425
1
blaOXA_17_1_DQ902344.R
blaOXA­17_1_DQ902344
2
Reference
94
0
blaOXA_35_1_AF315786.R
blaOXA­35_1_AF315786
2
Reference
22
0
blaOXA_256_1_HE616889.R
blaOXA­256_1_HE616889
2
Reference
18
1
blaOXA_74_1_EU161636.R
blaOXA­74_1_EU161636
2
Reference
8
0
blaOXA_246_1_EU886980.R
blaOXA­246_1_EU886980
2
Reference
5
0
blaOXA_101_1_AM412777.v1
blaOXA­101_1_AM412777
2
Variant
4
NA
blaOXA_56_1_AY445080.R
blaOXA­56_1_AY445080
2
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_520_1_KX388630.R
blaOXA­520_1_KX388630
2
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_256_1_HE616889.v1
blaOXA­256_1_HE616889
2
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_14_1_KJ420612.R
blaOXA­14_1_KJ420612
2
Reference
1
0
blaGES_5_1_DQ236171.R
blaGES­5_1_DQ236171
3
Reference
451
0
blaGES_1_1_HQ170511.R
blaGES­1_1_HQ170511
3
Reference
126
0
blaGES_2_1_AF326355.R
blaGES­2_1_AF326355
3
Reference
100
1
blaGES_13_1_GU169702.R
blaGES­13_1_GU169702
3
Reference
30
0
blaGES_7_1_HM453325.R
blaGES­7_1_HM453325
3
Reference
15
0
blaGES_6_1_AY494718.R
blaGES­6_1_AY494718
3
Reference
9
0
blaGES_16_1_HM173356.R
blaGES­16_1_HM173356
3
Reference
6
0
blaGES_9_1_AY920928.R
blaGES­9_1_AY920928
3
Reference
2
0
blaGES_4_1_AB116723.R
blaGES­4_1_AB116723
3
Reference
2
0
blaGES_3_1_AB113580.R
blaGES­3_1_AB113580
3
Reference
1
0
blaGES_2_1_AF326355.v1
blaGES­2_1_AF326355
3
Variant
1
NA
blaGES_14_1_GU207844.R
blaGES­14_1_GU207844
3
Reference
1
0
mef_A_4_HG423652.v1
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
29
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v4
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
11
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v3
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
8
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v9
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
5
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v5
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
4
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v2
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
4
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v7
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
3
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v6
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
3
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v8
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v11
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.v10
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_4_HG423652.R
mef(A)_4_HG423652
4
Reference
0
11
oqxA_1_EU370913.v5
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
3
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v9
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
2
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v4
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
2
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v8
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v7
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v6
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v3
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v2
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v11
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v10
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.v1
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Variant
1
NA
oqxA_1_EU370913.R
oqxA_1_EU370913
5
Reference
0
11
blaTEM_1B_1_AY458016.R
blaTEM­1B_1_AY458016
6
Reference
319
0
blaTEM_1C_1_FJ560503.R
blaTEM­1C_1_FJ560503
6
Reference
12
0
blaTEM_1A_1_HM749966.R
blaTEM­1A_1_HM749966
6
Reference
11
0
blaTEM_176_1_GU550123.R
blaTEM­176_1_GU550123
6
Reference
6
0
blaTEM_215_1_KP050492.R
blaTEM­215_1_KP050492
6
Reference
3
0
blaTEM_15_1_AM849805.R
blaTEM­15_1_AM849805
6
Reference
2
0
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
45
==PAGE:50==
blaTEM_116_1_AY425988.R
blaTEM­116_1_AY425988
6
Reference
2
0
blaTEM_40_1_FR717535.R
blaTEM­40_1_FR717535
6
Reference
1
0
blaTEM_35_1_KP860986.R
blaTEM­35_1_KP860986
6
Reference
1
0
blaTEM_33_1_GU371926.R
blaTEM­33_1_GU371926
6
Reference
1
0
blaTEM_30_1_AJ437107.R
blaTEM­30_1_AJ437107
6
Reference
1
0
blaTEM_135_1_GQ896333.R
blaTEM­135_1_GQ896333
6
Reference
1
0
sul2_2_AY034138.R
sul2_2_AY034138
7
Reference
774
0
sul2_3_HQ840942.R
sul2_3_HQ840942
7
Reference
14
0
sul2_18_AJ830714.R
sul2_18_AJ830714
7
Reference
8
0
sul2_6_FN995456.R
sul2_6_FN995456
7
Reference
6
0
sul2_11_AY232670.R
sul2_11_AY232670
7
Reference
3
0
sul2_10_AM183225.R
sul2_10_AM183225
7
Reference
3
0
sul2_9_FJ197818.R
sul2_9_FJ197818
7
Reference
2
0
sul2_13_AJ289135.v1
sul2_13_AJ289135
7
Variant
2
NA
sul2_12_AF497970.R
sul2_12_AF497970
7
Reference
2
0
sul2_17_U57647.R
sul2_17_U57647
7
Reference
1
0
sul2_13_AJ289135.R
sul2_13_AJ289135
7
Reference
0
1
aadA2_2_JQ364967.R
aadA2_2_JQ364967
8
Reference
22
0
aadA2_1_NC_010870.R
aadA2_1_NC_010870
8
Reference
17
3
aadA2_1_NC_010870.v1
aadA2_1_NC_010870
8
Variant
12
NA
aadA3_1_AF047479.v1
aadA3_1_AF047479
8
Variant
3
NA
aadA8b_1_AY139603.R
aadA8b_1_AY139603
8
Reference
2
0
aadA8_1_AF326210.v1
aadA8_1_AF326210
8
Variant
2
NA
aadA3_1_AF047479.R
aadA3_1_AF047479
8
Reference
1
1
aadA2_1_NC_010870.v3
aadA2_1_NC_010870
8
Variant
1
NA
aadA2_1_NC_010870.v2
aadA2_1_NC_010870
8
Variant
1
NA
aadA8_1_AF326210.R
aadA8_1_AF326210
8
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_1_1_HQ170510.R
blaOXA­1_1_HQ170510
9
Reference
109
0
blaOXA_4_1_AY162283.R
blaOXA­4_1_AY162283
9
Reference
74
2
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.R
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Reference
57
5
blaOXA_4_1_AY162283.v1
blaOXA­4_1_AY162283
9
Variant
2
NA
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.v4
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Variant
2
NA
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.v1
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Variant
2
NA
blaOXA_4_1_AY162283.v2
blaOXA­4_1_AY162283
9
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.v5
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.v3
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_392_1_AB901044.v2
blaOXA­392_1_AB901044
9
Variant
1
NA
ant_2_Ia_1_X04555.R
ant(2”)­Ia_1_X04555
10
Reference
270
0
ant_2_Ia_6_AJ871915.R
ant(2”)­Ia_6_AJ871915
10
Reference
69
1
ant_2_Ia_20_AY139599.R
ant(2”)­Ia_20_AY139599
10
Reference
13
0
ant_2_Ia_13_DQ176450.R
ant(2”)­Ia_13_DQ176450
10
Reference
9
1
ant_2_Ia_9_HM367610.R
ant(2”)­Ia_9_HM367610
10
Reference
8
0
ant_2_Ia_6_AJ871915.v1
ant(2”)­Ia_6_AJ871915
10
Variant
1
NA
ant_2_Ia_19_GQ466184.v1
ant(2”)­Ia_19_GQ466184
10
Variant
1
NA
ant_2_Ia_13_DQ176450.v1
ant(2”)­Ia_13_DQ176450
10
Variant
1
NA
ant_2_Ia_19_GQ466184.R
ant(2”)­Ia_19_GQ466184
10
Reference
0
1
sul1_9_AY963803.R
sul1_9_AY963803
11
Reference
561
0
sul1_36_X15024.R
sul1_36_X15024
11
Reference
182
0
sul1_20_JF262165.R
sul1_20_JF262165
11
Reference
49
0
sul1_38_BX248359.R
sul1_38_BX248359
11
Reference
20
0
sul1_5_EU780013.R
sul1_5_EU780013
11
Reference
16
0
sul1_2_U12338.R
sul1_2_U12338
11
Reference
15
0
sul1_8_JN581942.R
sul1_8_JN581942
11
Reference
2
0
sul1_3_EU855787.R
sul1_3_EU855787
11
Reference
2
0
sul1_33_AJ564903.R
sul1_33_AJ564903
11
Reference
2
0
tet_Q_1_L33696.v1
tet(Q)_1_L33696
12
Variant
88
NA
tet_Q_4_Z21523.R
tet(Q)_4_Z21523
12
Reference
52
1
tet_Q_1_L33696.v3
tet(Q)_1_L33696
12
Variant
38
NA
tet_Q_2_X58717.R
tet(Q)_2_X58717
12
Reference
27
1
tet_Q_1_L33696.v2
tet(Q)_1_L33696
12
Variant
18
NA
tet_Q_1_L33696.v4
tet(Q)_1_L33696
12
Variant
9
NA
tet_Q_4_Z21523.v1
tet(Q)_4_Z21523
12
Variant
5
NA
tet_Q_2_X58717.v1
tet(Q)_2_X58717
12
Variant
4
NA
tet_Q_1_L33696.R
tet(Q)_1_L33696
12
Reference
4
4
cmlA1_2_AB212941.R
cmlA1_2_AB212941
13
Reference
64
2
cmlA1_1_M64556.v1
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Variant
45
NA
cmlA1_1_M64556.v2
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Variant
12
NA
cmlA1_1_M64556.v3
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Variant
6
NA
cmlA1_1_M64556.v4
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Variant
4
NA
cmlA1_2_AB212941.v2
cmlA1_2_AB212941
13
Variant
3
NA
cmlA1_2_AB212941.v1
cmlA1_2_AB212941
13
Variant
1
NA
cmlA1_1_M64556.v5
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Variant
1
NA
cmlA1_1_M64556.R
cmlA1_1_M64556
13
Reference
0
5
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v1
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
62
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v2
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
15
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.R
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Reference
11
7
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v3
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
4
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v4
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
2
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v7
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
1
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v6
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
1
NA
lsa_E_1_JX560992.v5
lsa(E)_1_JX560992
14
Variant
1
NA
ant_3_Ia_1_X02340.R
ant(3”)­Ia_1_X02340
15
Reference
136
1
aadA1_4_JQ480156.R
aadA1_4_JQ480156
15
Reference
33
0
aadA1_3_JQ414041.R
aadA1_3_JQ414041
15
Reference
28
0
aadA1b_1_M95287.R
aadA1b_1_M95287
15
Reference
19
0
aadA1_5_JX185132.R
aadA1_5_JX185132
15
Reference
9
0
aadA22_1_AM261837.R
aadA22_1_AM261837
15
Reference
3
0
ant_3_Ia_1_X02340.v1
ant(3”)­Ia_1_X02340
15
Variant
2
NA
aadA24_1_DQ677333.R
aadA24_1_DQ677333
15
Reference
1
0
msr_D_3_AF227520.v1
msr(D)_3_AF227520
16
Variant
24
NA
msr_D_2_AF274302.R
msr(D)_2_AF274302
16
Reference
4
2
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
46
==PAGE:51==
msr_D_3_AF227520.v3
msr(D)_3_AF227520
16
Variant
1
NA
msr_D_3_AF227520.v2
msr(D)_3_AF227520
16
Variant
1
NA
msr_D_2_AF274302.v2
msr(D)_2_AF274302
16
Variant
1
NA
msr_D_2_AF274302.v1
msr(D)_2_AF274302
16
Variant
1
NA
msr_D_3_AF227520.R
msr(D)_3_AF227520
16
Reference
0
3
tet_W_5_AJ427422.R
tet(W)_5_AJ427422
17
Reference
739
0
tet_W_3_AJ427421.v1
tet(W)_3_AJ427421
17
Variant
33
NA
tet_W_1_DQ060146.R
tet(W)_1_DQ060146
17
Reference
22
0
tet_O_W_2_1_AY485122.R
tet(O/W)­2_1_AY485122
17
Reference
5
0
tet_W_3_AJ427421.v2
tet(W)_3_AJ427421
17
Variant
3
NA
tet_W_4_FN396364.R
tet(W)_4_FN396364
17
Reference
2
0
tet_W_3_AJ427421.R
tet(W)_3_AJ427421
17
Reference
0
2
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.R
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Reference
233
6
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v1
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
9
NA
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v2
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
5
NA
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v3
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
3
NA
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v5
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
2
NA
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v6
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
1
NA
lnu_B_2_JQ861959.v4
lnu(B)_2_JQ861959
18
Variant
1
NA
blaCARB_8_1_AY178993.R
blaCARB­8_1_AY178993
19
Reference
68
1
blaCARB_10_1_EU850412.v1
blaCARB­10_1_EU850412
19
Variant
43
NA
blaCARB_16_1_HF953351.R
blaCARB­16_1_HF953351
19
Reference
27
0
blaCARB_10_1_EU850412.v2
blaCARB­10_1_EU850412
19
Variant
2
NA
blaCARB_8_1_AY178993.v1
blaCARB­8_1_AY178993
19
Variant
1
NA
blaCARB_5_1_AF135373.R
blaCARB­5_1_AF135373
19
Reference
1
0
blaCARB_10_1_EU850412.R
blaCARB­10_1_EU850412
19
Reference
0
2
aadA5_1_AF137361.R
aadA5_1_AF137361
20
Reference
446
3
aadA4_1_Z50802.v1
aadA4_1_Z50802
20
Variant
121
NA
aadA5_1_AF137361.v1
aadA5_1_AF137361
20
Variant
9
NA
aadA5_1_AF137361.v2
aadA5_1_AF137361
20
Variant
2
NA
aadA5_1_AF137361.v3
aadA5_1_AF137361
20
Variant
1
NA
aadA4_1_Z50802.R
aadA4_1_Z50802
20
Reference
0
1
erm_G_1_M15332.R
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Reference
45
5
erm_G_1_M15332.v5
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Variant
1
NA
erm_G_1_M15332.v4
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Variant
1
NA
erm_G_1_M15332.v3
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Variant
1
NA
erm_G_1_M15332.v2
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Variant
1
NA
erm_G_1_M15332.v1
erm(G)_1_M15332
21
Variant
1
NA
aadA7_1_AF224733.R
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Reference
67
5
aadA7_1_AF224733.v3
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Variant
6
NA
aadA7_1_AF224733.v1
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Variant
6
NA
aadA7_1_AF224733.v2
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Variant
2
NA
aadA7_1_AF224733.v5
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Variant
1
NA
aadA7_1_AF224733.v4
aadA7_1_AF224733
22
Variant
1
NA
erm_F_3_M17808.R
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Reference
350
5
erm_F_3_M17808.v2
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Variant
64
NA
erm_F_3_M17808.v4
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Variant
11
NA
erm_F_3_M17808.v3
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Variant
5
NA
erm_F_3_M17808.v1
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Variant
3
NA
erm_F_3_M17808.v5
erm(F)_3_M17808
23
Variant
1
NA
tet_C_2_AY046276.R
tet(C)_2_AY046276
24
Reference
29
1
tet_C_3_AF055345.v1
tet(C)_3_AF055345
24
Variant
11
NA
tet_C_2_AY046276.v1
tet(C)_2_AY046276
24
Variant
3
NA
tet_C_1_NC_003123.v1
tet(C)_1_NC_003123
24
Variant
1
NA
tet_C_1_NC_003123.R
tet(C)_1_NC_003123
24
Reference
1
1
tet_C_3_AF055345.R
tet(C)_3_AF055345
24
Reference
0
1
blaCMY_4_1_LNHZ01000079.R
blaCMY­4_1_LNHZ01000079
25
Reference
74
0
blaCMY_2_1_X91840.R
blaCMY­2_1_X91840
25
Reference
20
0
blaCMY_42_1_HM146927.R
blaCMY­42_1_HM146927
25
Reference
1
0
blaCMY_35_1_EF394371.R
blaCMY­35_1_EF394371
25
Reference
1
0
blaCMY_34_1_EF394370.R
blaCMY­34_1_EF394370
25
Reference
1
0
blaCMY_13_1_AY339625.R
blaCMY­13_1_AY339625
25
Reference
1
0
aph_3_Ia_7_X62115.R
aph(3’)­Ia_7_X62115
26
Reference
68
0
aph_3_Ia_1_V00359.R
aph(3’)­Ia_1_V00359
26
Reference
19
1
aph_3_Ia_5_AP004237.R
aph(3’)­Ia_5_AP004237
26
Reference
2
0
aph_3_Ia_3_EF015636.v1
aph(3’)­Ia_3_EF015636
26
Variant
1
NA
aph_3_Ia_1_V00359.v1
aph(3’)­Ia_1_V00359
26
Variant
1
NA
aph_3_Ia_3_EF015636.R
aph(3’)­Ia_3_EF015636
26
Reference
0
1
tet_A_6_AF534183.R
tet(A)_6_AF534183
27
Reference
215
1
tet_A_4_AJ517790.R
tet(A)_4_AJ517790
27
Reference
4
1
tet_A_3_AY196695.R
tet(A)_3_AY196695
27
Reference
3
1
tet_A_6_AF534183.v1
tet(A)_6_AF534183
27
Variant
1
NA
tet_A_4_AJ517790.v1
tet(A)_4_AJ517790
27
Variant
1
NA
tet_A_3_AY196695.v1
tet(A)_3_AY196695
27
Variant
1
NA
tet_O_3_Y07780.R
tet(O)_3_Y07780
28
Reference
117
3
tet_O_2_M20925.R
tet(O)_2_M20925
28
Reference
74
1
tet_O_2_M20925.v1
tet(O)_2_M20925
28
Variant
3
NA
tet_O_3_Y07780.v3
tet(O)_3_Y07780
28
Variant
2
NA
tet_O_3_Y07780.v1
tet(O)_3_Y07780
28
Variant
2
NA
tet_O_3_Y07780.v2
tet(O)_3_Y07780
28
Variant
1
NA
tet_O_32_O_5_FP929050.R
tet(O/32/O)_5_FP929050
29
Reference
39
2
tet_O_32_O_4_AIOQ01000025.R
tet(O/32/O)_4_AIOQ01000025
29
Reference
5
0
tet_O_32_O_3_NZ_AUJS01000017.R
tet(O/32/O)_3_NZ_AUJS01000017
29
Reference
2
0
tet_O_32_O_5_FP929050.v2
tet(O/32/O)_5_FP929050
29
Variant
1
NA
tet_O_32_O_5_FP929050.v1
tet(O/32/O)_5_FP929050
29
Variant
1
NA
aadA16_1_EU675686.v2
aadA16_1_EU675686
30
Variant
6
NA
aadA16_1_EU675686.v1
aadA16_1_EU675686
30
Variant
6
NA
aadA16_1_EU675686.v4
aadA16_1_EU675686
30
Variant
4
NA
aadA16_1_EU675686.v3
aadA16_1_EU675686
30
Variant
3
NA
aadA16_1_EU675686.R
aadA16_1_EU675686
30
Reference
0
4
aac_6_aph_2_1_M13771.R
aac(6’)­aph(2”)_1_M13771
31
Reference
87
1
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
47
==PAGE:52==
aph_2_Ia_2_AP009486.v2
aph(2”)­Ia_2_AP009486
31
Variant
1
NA
aph_2_Ia_2_AP009486.v1
aph(2”)­Ia_2_AP009486
31
Variant
1
NA
aph_2_Ia_2_AP009486.R
aph(2”)­Ia_2_AP009486
31
Reference
1
2
aac_6_aph_2_1_M13771.v1
aac(6’)­aph(2”)_1_M13771
31
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_Ib_cr_1_DQ303918.R
aac(6’)­Ib­cr_1_DQ303918
32
Reference
38
0
aac_6_Ib_cr_2_EF636461.R
aac(6’)­Ib­cr_2_EF636461
32
Reference
4
0
aac_6_Ib_1_M21682.R
aac(6’)­Ib_1_M21682
32
Reference
2
0
aac_6_Ib3_1_X60321.v1
aac(6’)­Ib3_1_X60321
32
Variant
2
NA
aac_6_Ib3_1_X60321.R
aac(6’)­Ib3_1_X60321
32
Reference
2
1
blaVEB_1_1_HM370393.R
blaVEB­1_1_HM370393
33
Reference
101
0
blaVEB_1_3_DQ393569.R
blaVEB­1_3_DQ393569
33
Reference
73
0
blaVEB_3_1_AY536519.R
blaVEB­3_1_AY536519
33
Reference
40
0
blaVEB_1_4_AF324834.R
blaVEB­1_4_AF324834
33
Reference
7
0
blaVEB_7_1_FJ825622.R
blaVEB­7_1_FJ825622
33
Reference
1
0
blaAER_1_1_U14748.v1
blaAER­1_1_U14748
34
Variant
11
NA
blaAER_1_1_U14748.v2
blaAER­1_1_U14748
34
Variant
2
NA
blaAER_1_1_U14748.v4
blaAER­1_1_U14748
34
Variant
1
NA
blaAER_1_1_U14748.v3
blaAER­1_1_U14748
34
Variant
1
NA
blaAER_1_1_U14748.R
blaAER­1_1_U14748
34
Reference
0
4
mph_A_1_D16251.R
mph(A)_1_D16251
35
Reference
222
2
mph_A_1_D16251.v2
mph(A)_1_D16251
35
Variant
2
NA
mph_A_2_U36578.v1
mph(A)_2_U36578
35
Variant
1
NA
mph_A_1_D16251.v1
mph(A)_1_D16251
35
Variant
1
NA
mph_A_2_U36578.R
mph(A)_2_U36578
35
Reference
0
1
qnrB6_2_EF523819.R
qnrB6_2_EF523819
36
Reference
5
0
qnrB1_1_DQ351241.R
qnrB1_1_DQ351241
36
Reference
4
0
qnrB7_1_EU043311.R
qnrB7_1_EU043311
36
Reference
3
0
qnrB9_1_EF526508.R
qnrB9_1_EF526508
36
Reference
2
0
qnrB2_1_DQ351242.R
qnrB2_1_DQ351242
36
Reference
2
0
aph_6_Id_1_M28829.R
aph(6)­Id_1_M28829
37
Reference
808
1
aph_6_Id_4_CP000971.R
aph(6)­Id_4_CP000971
37
Reference
32
0
aph_6_Id_3_AB109805.R
aph(6)­Id_3_AB109805
37
Reference
3
0
aph_6_Id_5_18676889.R
aph(6)­Id_5_18676889
37
Reference
1
0
aph_6_Id_1_M28829.v1
aph(6)­Id_1_M28829
37
Variant
1
NA
tet_40_2_AM419751.v1
tet(40)_2_AM419751
38
Variant
112
NA
tet_40_1_FJ158002.R
tet(40)_1_FJ158002
38
Reference
107
1
tet_40_2_AM419751.v2
tet(40)_2_AM419751
38
Variant
11
NA
tet_40_1_FJ158002.v1
tet(40)_1_FJ158002
38
Variant
3
NA
tet_40_2_AM419751.R
tet(40)_2_AM419751
38
Reference
0
2
ere_A_1_AY183453.v1
ere(A)_1_AY183453
39
Variant
43
NA
ere_A_6_DQ157752.v1
ere(A)_6_DQ157752
39
Variant
36
NA
ere_A_6_DQ157752.v2
ere(A)_6_DQ157752
39
Variant
16
NA
ere_A_1_AY183453.R
ere(A)_1_AY183453
39
Reference
6
1
ere_A_6_DQ157752.R
ere(A)_6_DQ157752
39
Reference
0
2
mdf_A_1_Y08743.v1
mdf(A)_1_Y08743
40
Variant
61
NA
mdf_A_1_Y08743.v2
mdf(A)_1_Y08743
40
Variant
5
NA
mdf_A_1_Y08743.v4
mdf(A)_1_Y08743
40
Variant
1
NA
mdf_A_1_Y08743.v3
mdf(A)_1_Y08743
40
Variant
1
NA
mdf_A_1_Y08743.R
mdf(A)_1_Y08743
40
Reference
0
4
cfxA6_1_GQ342996.v1
cfxA6_1_GQ342996
41
Variant
88
NA
cfxA6_1_GQ342996.v4
cfxA6_1_GQ342996
41
Variant
7
NA
cfxA6_1_GQ342996.R
cfxA6_1_GQ342996
41
Reference
6
4
cfxA6_1_GQ342996.v3
cfxA6_1_GQ342996
41
Variant
1
NA
cfxA6_1_GQ342996.v2
cfxA6_1_GQ342996
41
Variant
1
NA
cfxA3_1_AF472622.R
cfxA3_1_AF472622
42
Reference
156
1
cfxA5_1_AY769934.R
cfxA5_1_AY769934
42
Reference
52
0
cfxA4_1_AY769933.R
cfxA4_1_AY769933
42
Reference
28
0
cfxA3_1_AF472622.v1
cfxA3_1_AF472622
42
Variant
2
NA
blaNPS_1_AY027589.v1
blaNPS_1_AY027589
43
Variant
46
NA
blaLCR_1_1_X56809.R
blaLCR­1_1_X56809
43
Reference
38
0
blaNPS_1_AY027589.v2
blaNPS_1_AY027589
43
Variant
28
NA
blaNPS_1_AY027589.R
blaNPS_1_AY027589
43
Reference
17
2
dfrA22_4_AJ628423.R
dfrA22_4_AJ628423
44
Reference
10
0
dfrA22_3_FM957884.v1
dfrA22_3_FM957884
44
Variant
1
NA
dfrA22_2_KF525301.R
dfrA22_2_KF525301
44
Reference
1
0
dfrA22_3_FM957884.R
dfrA22_3_FM957884
44
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_129_1_FJWZ01000025.R
blaOXA­129_1_FJWZ01000025
45
Reference
57
3
blaOXA_129_1_FJWZ01000025.v1
blaOXA­129_1_FJWZ01000025
45
Variant
13
NA
blaOXA_129_1_FJWZ01000025.v3
blaOXA­129_1_FJWZ01000025
45
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_129_1_FJWZ01000025.v2
blaOXA­129_1_FJWZ01000025
45
Variant
1
NA
tet_M_7_FN433596.R
tet(M)_7_FN433596
46
Reference
77
1
tet_M_13_AM990992.R
tet(M)_13_AM990992
46
Reference
11
0
tet_M_1_X92947.R
tet(M)_1_X92947
46
Reference
2
0
tet_M_7_FN433596.v1
tet(M)_7_FN433596
46
Variant
1
NA
blaACT_2_1_AM076977.R
blaACT­2_1_AM076977
47
Reference
6
0
blaACT_4_2_AJ311172.v1
blaACT­4_2_AJ311172
47
Variant
3
NA
blaACT_3_1_EF125013.R
blaACT­3_1_EF125013
47
Reference
2
0
blaACT_4_2_AJ311172.R
blaACT­4_2_AJ311172
47
Reference
0
1
blaSHV_12_1_KF976405.R
blaSHV­12_1_KF976405
48
Reference
4
0
blaSHV_1_1_AF148850.R
blaSHV­1_1_AF148850
48
Reference
2
0
blaSHV_26_1_AF227204.R
blaSHV­26_1_AF227204
48
Reference
1
0
blaSHV_119_1_JX192924.R
blaSHV­119_1_JX192924
48
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_276_1_APPI01000013.R
blaOXA­276_1_APPI01000013
49
Reference
9
0
blaOXA_360_1_KF421163.R
blaOXA­360_1_KF421163
49
Reference
3
0
blaOXA_277_1_APPQ01000011.R
blaOXA­277_1_APPQ01000011
49
Reference
2
0
blaOXA_235_1_JQ820240.R
blaOXA­235_1_JQ820240
49
Reference
2
1
lnu_F_3_AJ561197.v1
lnu(F)_3_AJ561197
50
Variant
31
NA
lnu_F_3_AJ561197.v3
lnu(F)_3_AJ561197
50
Variant
1
NA
lnu_F_3_AJ561197.v2
lnu(F)_3_AJ561197
50
Variant
1
NA
lnu_F_3_AJ561197.R
lnu(F)_3_AJ561197
50
Reference
0
3
aph_3_VI_1_KC170992.R
aph(3’)­VI_1_KC170992
51
Reference
10
0
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
48
==PAGE:53==
aph_3_VIb_1_AJ627643.R
aph(3’)­VIb_1_AJ627643
51
Reference
4
0
aph_3_VIa_1_X07753.R
aph(3’)­VIa_1_X07753
51
Reference
4
1
aph_3_VIa_1_X07753.v1
aph(3’)­VIa_1_X07753
51
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_2_U83667.v3
mef(A)_2_U83667
52
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_2_U83667.v2
mef(A)_2_U83667
52
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_2_U83667.v1
mef(A)_2_U83667
52
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_2_U83667.R
mef(A)_2_U83667
52
Reference
1
3
fosA_3_ACWO01000079.R
fosA_3_ACWO01000079
53
Reference
9
1
fosA_3_ACWO01000079.v1
fosA_3_ACWO01000079
53
Variant
2
NA
fosA5_1_EU195449.v1
fosA5_1_EU195449
53
Variant
2
NA
fosA5_1_EU195449.R
fosA5_1_EU195449
53
Reference
0
1
tet_B_2_AF326777.R
tet(B)_2_AF326777
54
Reference
66
0
tet_B_1_AP000342.R
tet(B)_1_AP000342
54
Reference
13
2
tet_B_1_AP000342.v2
tet(B)_1_AP000342
54
Variant
1
NA
tet_B_1_AP000342.v1
tet(B)_1_AP000342
54
Variant
1
NA
aadA11_1_AY144590.R
aadA11_1_AY144590
55
Reference
471
0
aadA6_1_AF140629.R
aadA6_1_AF140629
55
Reference
360
1
aadA10_2_AM087405.R
aadA10_2_AM087405
55
Reference
2
0
aadA6_1_AF140629.v1
aadA6_1_AF140629
55
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_3_AF227520.v1
mef(A)_3_AF227520
56
Variant
44
NA
mef_A_3_AF227520.v3
mef(A)_3_AF227520
56
Variant
2
NA
mef_A_3_AF227520.v2
mef(A)_3_AF227520
56
Variant
1
NA
mef_A_3_AF227520.R
mef(A)_3_AF227520
56
Reference
0
3
erm_X_2_X51472.v1
erm(X)_2_X51472
57
Variant
23
NA
erm_X_3_U21300.v1
erm(X)_3_U21300
57
Variant
8
NA
erm_X_2_X51472.R
erm(X)_2_X51472
57
Reference
1
1
erm_X_3_U21300.R
erm(X)_3_U21300
57
Reference
0
1
aph_3_Ib_5_AF321551.R
aph(3”)­Ib_5_AF321551
58
Reference
705
1
aph_3_Ib_4_AF313472.R
aph(3”)­Ib_4_AF313472
58
Reference
165
0
aph_3_Ib_2_AF024602.R
aph(3”)­Ib_2_AF024602
58
Reference
12
0
aph_3_Ib_5_AF321551.v1
aph(3”)­Ib_5_AF321551
58
Variant
1
NA
lnu_A_1_M14039.v1
lnu(A)_1_M14039
59
Variant
4
NA
lnu_A_1_M14039.v2
lnu(A)_1_M14039
59
Variant
2
NA
lnu_A_1_M14039.v3
lnu(A)_1_M14039
59
Variant
1
NA
lnu_A_1_M14039.R
lnu(A)_1_M14039
59
Reference
0
3
dfrA14_1_KF921535.R
dfrA14_1_KF921535
60
Reference
213
0
dfrA14_4_AF393510.R
dfrA14_4_AF393510
60
Reference
11
0
dfrA14_5_DQ388123.v1
dfrA14_5_DQ388123
60
Variant
3
NA
dfrA14_5_DQ388123.R
dfrA14_5_DQ388123
60
Reference
0
1
blaCARB_4_1_FJ785525.v2
blaCARB­4_1_FJ785525
61
Variant
7
NA
blaCARB_4_1_FJ785525.R
blaCARB­4_1_FJ785525
61
Reference
7
3
blaCARB_4_1_FJ785525.v3
blaCARB­4_1_FJ785525
61
Variant
1
NA
blaCARB_4_1_FJ785525.v1
blaCARB­4_1_FJ785525
61
Variant
1
NA
mef_C_1_AB571865.v1
mef(C)_1_AB571865
62
Variant
323
NA
mef_C_1_AB571865.R
mef(C)_1_AB571865
62
Reference
13
3
mef_C_1_AB571865.v2
mef(C)_1_AB571865
62
Variant
3
NA
mef_C_1_AB571865.v3
mef(C)_1_AB571865
62
Variant
1
NA
mph_G_1_AB571865.v2
mph(G)_1_AB571865
63
Variant
185
NA
mph_G_1_AB571865.R
mph(G)_1_AB571865
63
Reference
102
3
mph_G_1_AB571865.v3
mph(G)_1_AB571865
63
Variant
8
NA
mph_G_1_AB571865.v1
mph(G)_1_AB571865
63
Variant
5
NA
blaCARB_2_1_M69058.R
blaCARB­2_1_M69058
64
Reference
125
1
blaCARB_12_1_D13210.R
blaCARB­12_1_D13210
64
Reference
2
0
blaCARB_2_1_M69058.v1
blaCARB­2_1_M69058
64
Variant
1
NA
blaCTX_M_14_1_AF252622.R
blaCTX­M­14_1_AF252622
65
Reference
33
0
blaCTX_M_27_1_AY156923.R
blaCTX­M­27_1_AY156923
65
Reference
2
0
blaCTX_M_14b_1_DQ359215.R
blaCTX­M­14b_1_DQ359215
65
Reference
2
0
blaOXA_427_1_KX827604.v1
blaOXA­427_1_KX827604
66
Variant
2
NA
blaOXA_427_1_KX827604.v2
blaOXA­427_1_KX827604
66
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_427_1_KX827604.R
blaOXA­427_1_KX827604
66
Reference
0
2
tet_M_12_FR671418.R
tet(M)_12_FR671418
67
Reference
71
0
tet_M_8_X04388.v1
tet(M)_8_X04388
67
Variant
70
NA
tet_M_8_X04388.R
tet(M)_8_X04388
67
Reference
10
1
aac_6_Ig_1_L09246.v1
aac(6’)­Ig_1_L09246
68
Variant
2
NA
aac_6_Ig_1_L09246.v2
aac(6’)­Ig_1_L09246
68
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_Ig_1_L09246.R
aac(6’)­Ig_1_L09246
68
Reference
0
2
catB8_1_AF227506.R
catB8_1_AF227506
69
Reference
49
2
catB8_1_AF227506.v2
catB8_1_AF227506
69
Variant
17
NA
catB8_1_AF227506.v1
catB8_1_AF227506
69
Variant
3
NA
cat_2_M35190.R
cat_2_M35190
70
Reference
18
2
cat_2_M35190.v2
cat_2_M35190
70
Variant
2
NA
cat_2_M35190.v1
cat_2_M35190
70
Variant
2
NA
blaADC_25_1_EF016355.v2
blaADC­25_1_EF016355
71
Variant
1
NA
blaADC_25_1_EF016355.v1
blaADC­25_1_EF016355
71
Variant
1
NA
blaADC_25_1_EF016355.R
blaADC­25_1_EF016355
71
Reference
0
2
cmx_1_U85507.v1
cmx_1_U85507
72
Variant
40
NA
cmx_1_U85507.v2
cmx_1_U85507
72
Variant
1
NA
cmx_1_U85507.R
cmx_1_U85507
72
Reference
0
2
floR_2_AF118107.R
floR_2_AF118107
73
Reference
79
2
floR_2_AF118107.v1
floR_2_AF118107
73
Variant
2
NA
floR_2_AF118107.v2
floR_2_AF118107
73
Variant
1
NA
ere_A_2_AF099140.R
ere(A)_2_AF099140
74
Reference
392
1
ere_A_5_FN396877.R
ere(A)_5_FN396877
74
Reference
23
0
ere_A_2_AF099140.v1
ere(A)_2_AF099140
74
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_31_1_AM283489.R
aac(6’)­31_1_AM283489
75
Reference
3
2
aac_6_31_1_AM283489.v2
aac(6’)­31_1_AM283489
75
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_31_1_AM283489.v1
aac(6’)­31_1_AM283489
75
Variant
1
NA
ere_D_1_KP265721.v1
ere(D)_1_KP265721
76
Variant
50
NA
ere_D_1_KP265721.R
ere(D)_1_KP265721
76
Reference
29
2
ere_D_1_KP265721.v2
ere(D)_1_KP265721
76
Variant
10
NA
nimA_1_X71444.v1
nimA_1_X71444
77
Variant
21
NA
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
49
==PAGE:54==
nimA_1_X71444.v2
nimA_1_X71444
77
Variant
1
NA
nimA_1_X71444.R
nimA_1_X71444
77
Reference
0
2
lnu_G_1_KX470419.R
lnu(G)_1_KX470419
78
Reference
6
2
lnu_G_1_KX470419.v2
lnu(G)_1_KX470419
78
Variant
5
NA
lnu_G_1_KX470419.v1
lnu(G)_1_KX470419
78
Variant
2
NA
dfrA31_1_AB200915.R
dfrA31_1_AB200915
79
Reference
3
0
dfrA6_2_FJ905898.v1
dfrA6_2_FJ905898
79
Variant
2
NA
dfrA6_2_FJ905898.R
dfrA6_2_FJ905898
79
Reference
0
1
aac_3_IId_1_EU022314.v1
aac(3)­IId_1_EU022314
80
Variant
36
NA
aac_3_IIa_1_X51534.R
aac(3)­IIa_1_X51534
80
Reference
20
0
aac_3_IId_1_EU022314.R
aac(3)­IId_1_EU022314
80
Reference
0
1
erm_47_1_KU612222.v2
erm(47)_1_KU612222
81
Variant
5
NA
erm_47_1_KU612222.v1
erm(47)_1_KU612222
81
Variant
1
NA
erm_47_1_KU612222.R
erm(47)_1_KU612222
81
Reference
0
2
lnu_F_1_EU118119.R
lnu(F)_1_EU118119
82
Reference
57
2
lnu_F_1_EU118119.v1
lnu(F)_1_EU118119
82
Variant
3
NA
lnu_F_1_EU118119.v2
lnu(F)_1_EU118119
82
Variant
1
NA
blaCMH_3_1_KX192165.v2
blaCMH­3_1_KX192165
83
Variant
1
NA
blaCMH_3_1_KX192165.v1
blaCMH­3_1_KX192165
83
Variant
1
NA
blaCMH_3_1_KX192165.R
blaCMH­3_1_KX192165
83
Reference
0
2
blaMIR_3_1_AY743435.R
blaMIR­3_1_AY743435
84
Reference
15
1
blaMIR_5_1_FJ237367.R
blaMIR­5_1_FJ237367
84
Reference
5
0
blaMIR_3_1_AY743435.v1
blaMIR­3_1_AY743435
84
Variant
1
NA
blaOKP_B_4_1_AM051153.R
blaOKP­B­4_1_AM051153
85
Reference
4
0
blaOKP_B_3_1_AM051152.R
blaOKP­B­3_1_AM051152
85
Reference
2
0
blaOKP_B_9_1_AM051159.R
blaOKP­B­9_1_AM051159
85
Reference
1
0
qnrVC4_1_GQ891757.R
qnrVC4_1_GQ891757
86
Reference
91
1
qnrVC5_1_JN408080.R
qnrVC5_1_JN408080
86
Reference
3
0
qnrVC4_1_GQ891757.v1
qnrVC4_1_GQ891757
86
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_182_1_HM640278.v1
blaOXA­182_1_HM640278
87
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_182_1_HM640278.R
blaOXA­182_1_HM640278
87
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_205_1_JF800667.R
blaOXA­205_1_JF800667
88
Reference
310
1
blaOXA_205_1_JF800667.v1
blaOXA­205_1_JF800667
88
Variant
1
NA
aph_3_Ib_2_AJ744860.R
aph(3’)­Ib_2_AJ744860
89
Reference
58
1
aph_3_Ib_2_AJ744860.v1
aph(3’)­Ib_2_AJ744860
89
Variant
2
NA
blaOXA_46_1_AF317511.R
blaOXA­46_1_AF317511
90
Reference
114
1
blaOXA_46_1_AF317511.v1
blaOXA­46_1_AF317511
90
Variant
3
NA
lnu_C_1_AY928180.v1
lnu(C)_1_AY928180
91
Variant
161
NA
lnu_C_1_AY928180.R
lnu(C)_1_AY928180
91
Reference
0
1
lnu_D_1_EF452177.v1
lnu(D)_1_EF452177
92
Variant
7
NA
lnu_D_1_EF452177.R
lnu(D)_1_EF452177
92
Reference
0
1
catS_1_X74948.v1
catS_1_X74948
93
Variant
3
NA
catS_1_X74948.R
catS_1_X74948
93
Reference
0
1
aac_6_IIa_1_M29695.v1
aac(6’)­IIa_1_M29695
94
Variant
44
NA
aac_6_IIa_1_M29695.R
aac(6’)­IIa_1_M29695
94
Reference
0
1
catA2_1_X53796.v1
catA2_1_X53796
95
Variant
1
NA
catA2_1_X53796.R
catA2_1_X53796
95
Reference
0
1
vat_B_1_U19459.v1
vat(B)_1_U19459
96
Variant
4
NA
vat_B_1_U19459.R
vat(B)_1_U19459
96
Reference
0
1
aac_6_Ia_1_M18967.v1
aac(6’)­Ia_1_M18967
97
Variant
4
NA
aac_6_Ia_1_M18967.R
aac(6’)­Ia_1_M18967
97
Reference
0
1
dfrA15_2_AF221900.R
dfrA15_2_AF221900
98
Reference
81
0
dfrA15_1_AF156486.R
dfrA15_1_AF156486
98
Reference
18
0
fosA3_1_AB522970.R
fosA3_1_AB522970
99
Reference
9
1
fosA3_1_AB522970.v1
fosA3_1_AB522970
99
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_29a_1_AF263519.v1
aac(6’)­29a_1_AF263519
100
Variant
1
NA
aac_6_29a_1_AF263519.R
aac(6’)­29a_1_AF263519
100
Reference
0
1
dfrB2_2_AY553333.R
dfrB2_2_AY553333
101
Reference
8
0
dfrB2_1_J01773.R
dfrB2_1_J01773
101
Reference
1
0
ARR_3_1_JF806499.R
ARR­3_1_JF806499
102
Reference
41
0
ARR_2_1_HQ141279.R
ARR­2_1_HQ141279
102
Reference
13
0
dfrA1_8_X00926.R
dfrA1_8_X00926
103
Reference
141
0
dfrA1_3_GU726913.R
dfrA1_3_GU726913
103
Reference
1
0
aac_6_Il_1_U13880.R
aac(6’)­Il_1_U13880
104
Reference
10
1
aac_6_Il_1_U13880.v1
aac(6’)­Il_1_U13880
104
Variant
2
NA
nimH_1_KX576455.v1
nimH_1_KX576455
105
Variant
10
NA
nimH_1_KX576455.R
nimH_1_KX576455
105
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_198_1_HQ634775.v1
blaOXA­198_1_HQ634775
106
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_198_1_HQ634775.R
blaOXA­198_1_HQ634775
106
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_85_1_JANA01000064.v1
blaOXA­85_1_JANA01000064
107
Variant
12
NA
blaOXA_85_1_JANA01000064.R
blaOXA­85_1_JANA01000064
107
Reference
0
1
aac_3_IV_1_DQ241380.R
aac(3)­IV_1_DQ241380
108
Reference
7
0
aac_3_IVa_1_X01385.R
aac(3)­IVa_1_X01385
108
Reference
1
0
aadA11_2_AJ567827.v1
aadA11_2_AJ567827
109
Variant
8
NA
aadA11_2_AJ567827.R
aadA11_2_AJ567827
109
Reference
0
1
aph_3_III_1_M26832.R
aph(3’)­III_1_M26832
110
Reference
206
1
aph_3_III_1_M26832.v1
aph(3’)­III_1_M26832
110
Variant
1
NA
aph_3_XV_1_Y18050.R
aph(3’)­XV_1_Y18050
111
Reference
40
1
aph_3_XV_1_Y18050.v1
aph(3’)­XV_1_Y18050
111
Variant
1
NA
ampH_2_HQ586946.v1
ampH_2_HQ586946
112
Variant
1
NA
ampH_2_HQ586946.R
ampH_2_HQ586946
112
Reference
0
1
blaIMP_4_1_AF244145.R
blaIMP­4_1_AF244145
113
Reference
1
0
blaIMP_26_1_GU045307.R
blaIMP­26_1_GU045307
113
Reference
1
0
qnrA1_1_AY070235.v1
qnrA1_1_AY070235
114
Variant
1
NA
qnrA1_1_AY070235.R
qnrA1_1_AY070235
114
Reference
1
1
cat_pC194_1_NC_002013.v1
cat(pC194)_1_NC_002013
115
Variant
12
NA
cat_pC194_1_NC_002013.R
cat(pC194)_1_NC_002013
115
Reference
0
1
cat_5_U35036.v1
cat_5_U35036
116
Variant
5
NA
cat_5_U35036.R
cat_5_U35036
116
Reference
2
1
qnrVC1_1_EU436855.R
qnrVC1_1_EU436855
117
Reference
23
0
qnrVC6_1_KC202804.R
qnrVC6_1_KC202804
117
Reference
1
0
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
50
==PAGE:55==
erm_C_12_Y09003.v1
erm(C)_12_Y09003
118
Variant
1
NA
erm_C_12_Y09003.R
erm(C)_12_Y09003
118
Reference
0
1
catQ_1_M55620.v1
catQ_1_M55620
119
Variant
74
NA
catQ_1_M55620.R
catQ_1_M55620
119
Reference
64
1
catA1_1_V00622.v1
catA1_1_V00622
120
Variant
24
NA
catA1_1_V00622.R
catA1_1_V00622
120
Reference
0
1
aph_2_Ib_1_AF337947.v1
aph(2”)­Ib_1_AF337947
121
Variant
1
NA
aph_2_Ib_1_AF337947.R
aph(2”)­Ib_1_AF337947
121
Reference
0
1
mcr_3_18_1_MH332768.R
mcr­3.18_1_MH332768
122
Reference
1
0
mcr_3_16_1_MH332766.R
mcr­3.16_1_MH332766
122
Reference
1
0
aph_2_Id_1_AF016483.R
aph(2”)­Id_1_AF016483
123
Reference
3
0
aph_2_Ie_1_AY743255.R
aph(2”)­Ie_1_AY743255
123
Reference
1
0
blaBRO_2_1_Z54181.R
blaBRO­2_1_Z54181
124
Reference
43
1
blaBRO_2_1_Z54181.v1
blaBRO­2_1_Z54181
124
Variant
2
NA
cmlB1_1_AM296481.v1
cmlB1_1_AM296481
125
Variant
26
NA
cmlB1_1_AM296481.R
cmlB1_1_AM296481
125
Reference
1
1
blaRAHN_1_1_GU645205.v1
blaRAHN­1_1_GU645205
126
Variant
1
NA
blaRAHN_1_1_GU645205.R
blaRAHN­1_1_GU645205
126
Reference
1
1
vga_B_1_U82085.v1
vga(B)_1_U82085
127
Variant
3
NA
vga_B_1_U82085.R
vga(B)_1_U82085
127
Reference
0
1
ant_6_Ia_3_KF864551.R
ant(6)­Ia_3_KF864551
128
Reference
287
1
ant_6_Ia_3_KF864551.v1
ant(6)­Ia_3_KF864551
128
Variant
1
NA
blaOXY_4_1_1_AY077481.v1
blaOXY­4­1_1_AY077481
129
Variant
1
NA
blaOXY_4_1_1_AY077481.R
blaOXY­4­1_1_AY077481
129
Reference
0
1
blaCTX_M_15_1_AY044436.R
blaCTX­M­15_1_AY044436
130
Reference
47
0
blaCTX_M_3_1_Y10278.R
blaCTX­M­3_1_Y10278
130
Reference
4
0
mcr_4_3_1_MG026621.R
mcr­4.3_1_MG026621
131
Reference
2
1
mcr_4_3_1_MG026621.v1
mcr­4.3_1_MG026621
131
Variant
1
NA
tet_E_2_L06940.v1
tet(E)_2_L06940
132
Variant
5
NA
tet_E_2_L06940.R
tet(E)_2_L06940
132
Reference
0
1
tet_E_3_CP000645.R
tet(E)_3_CP000645
133
Reference
6
1
tet_E_3_CP000645.v1
tet(E)_3_CP000645
133
Variant
2
NA
tet_X4_1_MK134376.R
tet(X4)_1_MK134376
134
Reference
2
0
tet_X_2_M37699.R
tet(X)_2_M37699
134
Reference
1
0
tet_G_2_AF133140.R
tet(G)_2_AF133140
135
Reference
222
1
tet_G_2_AF133140.v1
tet(G)_2_AF133140
135
Variant
1
NA
blaACC_1a_1_AF180953.v1
blaACC­1a_1_AF180953
136
Variant
1
NA
blaACC_1a_1_AF180953.R
blaACC­1a_1_AF180953
136
Reference
0
1
blaCMY_83_1_JX440351.R
blaCMY­83_1_JX440351
137
Reference
1
0
blaCMY_70_1_JX440350.R
blaCMY­70_1_JX440350
137
Reference
1
0
blaCMG_1_AY265892.v1
blaCMG_1_AY265892
138
Variant
1
NA
blaCMG_1_AY265892.R
blaCMG_1_AY265892
138
Reference
0
1
blaDES_1_1_AF426161.v1
blaDES­1_1_AF426161
139
Variant
1
NA
blaDES_1_1_AF426161.R
blaDES­1_1_AF426161
139
Reference
0
1
tet_X_3_AB097942.v1
tet(X)_3_AB097942
140
Variant
1
NA
tet_X_3_AB097942.R
tet(X)_3_AB097942
140
Reference
0
1
blaCMY_48_1_HM569226.R
blaCMY­48_1_HM569226
141
Reference
2
0
blaCMY_152_1_KY978224.R
blaCMY­152_1_KY978224
141
Reference
1
0
blaACT_16_1_AB737978.R
blaACT­16_1_AB737978
142
Reference
4
1
blaACT_16_1_AB737978.v1
blaACT­16_1_AB737978
142
Variant
1
NA
sul4_1_MG649393.R
sul4_1_MG649393
143
Reference
91
1
sul4_1_MG649393.v1
sul4_1_MG649393
143
Variant
5
NA
tet_44_1_NZ_ABDU01000081.R
tet(44)_1_NZ_ABDU01000081
144
Reference
9
0
tet_44_2_FN594949.R
tet(44)_2_FN594949
144
Reference
1
0
str_1_X92946.R
str_1_X92946
145
Reference
16
0
str_2_FN435330.R
str_2_FN435330
145
Reference
1
0
VanG2XY_1_FJ872410.v1
VanG2XY_1_FJ872410
146
Variant
1
NA
VanG2XY_1_FJ872410.R
VanG2XY_1_FJ872410
146
Reference
0
1
tet_32_2_EF626943.R
tet(32)_2_EF626943
147
Reference
346
0
tet_32_1_EU722333.R
tet(32)_1_EU722333
147
Reference
211
0
blaOXA_282_1_APQS01000019.R
blaOXA­282_1_APQS01000019
148
Reference
7
0
blaOXA_283_1_AYHO01000005.R
blaOXA­283_1_AYHO01000005
148
Reference
1
0
tetB_P_1_NC_010937.v1
tetB(P)_1_NC_010937
149
Variant
1
NA
tetB_P_1_NC_010937.R
tetB(P)_1_NC_010937
149
Reference
0
1
tet_S_2_L09756.R
tet(S)_2_L09756
150
Reference
6
0
tet_S_M_2_AY534326.R
tet(S/M)_2_AY534326
150
Reference
1
0
erm_36_1_AF462611.v1
erm(36)_1_AF462611
151
Variant
1
NA
erm_36_1_AF462611.R
erm(36)_1_AF462611
151
Reference
0
1
blaOXA_58_1_AY665723.R
blaOXA­58_1_AY665723
152
Reference
307
0
blaOXA_420_1_AB983359.R
blaOXA­420_1_AB983359
152
Reference
35
0
oqxB_1_EU370913.v1
oqxB_1_EU370913
153
Variant
1
NA
oqxB_1_EU370913.R
oqxB_1_EU370913
153
Reference
0
1
blaACI_1_1_AJ007350.R
blaACI­1_1_AJ007350
154
Reference
214
1
blaACI_1_1_AJ007350.v1
blaACI­1_1_AJ007350
154
Variant
2
NA
msr_E_1_FR751518.R
msr(E)_1_FR751518
NA
Reference
877
0
mph_E_1_DQ839391.R
mph(E)_1_DQ839391
NA
Reference
872
0
tet_39_1_KT346360.R
tet(39)_1_KT346360
NA
Reference
767
0
blaOXA_2_1_DQ112222.R
blaOXA­2_1_DQ112222
NA
Reference
604
0
aadA13_1_AY713504.R
aadA13_1_AY713504
NA
Reference
369
0
catB3_2_U13880.R
catB3_2_U13880
NA
Reference
316
0
aadA24_1_AM711129.R
aadA24_1_AM711129
NA
Reference
300
0
qnrS2_1_DQ485530.R
qnrS2_1_DQ485530
NA
Reference
288
0
blaOXA_347_1_ACWG01000053.R
blaOXA­347_1_ACWG01000053
NA
Reference
212
0
qnrB19_1_EU432277.R
qnrB19_1_EU432277
NA
Reference
118
0
blaOXA_21_1_AB626885.R
blaOXA­21_1_AB626885
NA
Reference
115
0
qnrS1_1_AB187515.R
qnrS1_1_AB187515
NA
Reference
112
0
ant_6_Ia_2_KF421157.R
ant(6)­Ia_2_KF421157
NA
Reference
100
0
blaOXA_20_2_AF024602.R
blaOXA­20_2_AF024602
NA
Reference
94
0
qnrD1_1_FJ228229.R
qnrD1_1_FJ228229
NA
Reference
80
0
dfrA17_1_FJ460238.R
dfrA17_1_FJ460238
NA
Reference
62
0
catB2_1_AF047479.R
catB2_1_AF047479
NA
Reference
62
0
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
51
==PAGE:56==
ant_6_Ia_1_AF330699.R
ant(6)­Ia_1_AF330699
NA
Reference
56
0
dfrB5_1_AY943084.R
dfrB5_1_AY943084
NA
Reference
55
0
tet_H_3_Y15510.R
tet(H)_3_Y15510
NA
Reference
52
0
dfrG_1_AB205645.R
dfrG_1_AB205645
NA
Reference
42
0
nimE_1_AM042593.R
nimE_1_AM042593
NA
Reference
40
0
dfrA5_1_X12868.R
dfrA5_1_X12868
NA
Reference
35
0
blaBEL_1_1_DQ089809.R
blaBEL­1_1_DQ089809
NA
Reference
35
0
erm_T_2_AY894138.R
erm(T)_2_AY894138
NA
Reference
33
0
sul3_2_AJ459418.R
sul3_2_AJ459418
NA
Reference
31
0
mph_F_1_AM260957.R
mph(F)_1_AM260957
NA
Reference
25
0
tet_X3_1_MK134375.R
tet(X3)_1_MK134375
NA
Reference
24
0
blaDHA_1_1_Y16410.R
blaDHA­1_1_Y16410
NA
Reference
23
0
cfr_C_2_CANB01000378.R
cfr(C)_2_CANB01000378
NA
Reference
22
0
ant_6_Ib_1_FN594949.R
ant(6)­Ib_1_FN594949
NA
Reference
22
0
tet_D_1_AF467077.R
tet(D)_1_AF467077
NA
Reference
21
0
tet_31_1_GQ283908.R
tet(31)_1_GQ283908
NA
Reference
19
0
tet_L_2_M29725.R
tet(L)_2_M29725
NA
Reference
17
0
aac_6_IIc_1_NC_012555.R
aac(6’)­IIc_1_NC_012555
NA
Reference
17
0
qnrB4_1_DQ303921.R
qnrB4_1_DQ303921
NA
Reference
16
0
dfrA19_1_EU855687.R
dfrA19_1_EU855687
NA
Reference
16
0
dfrA12_8_AM040708.R
dfrA12_8_AM040708
NA
Reference
16
0
blaOXA_9_1_KQ089875.R
blaOXA­9_1_KQ089875
NA
Reference
16
0
mcr_5_1_1_KY807921.R
mcr­5.1_1_KY807921
NA
Reference
15
0
cat_3_S48276.R
cat_3_S48276
NA
Reference
15
0
tet_Y_1_EF495198.R
tet(Y)_1_EF495198
NA
Reference
13
0
dfrA16_2_AF174129.R
dfrA16_2_AF174129
NA
Reference
13
0
blaOXA_48_1_AY236073.R
blaOXA­48_1_AY236073
NA
Reference
12
0
aac_3_If_1_AY884051.R
aac(3)­If_1_AY884051
NA
Reference
12
0
blaKPC_2_1_AY034847.R
blaKPC­2_1_AY034847
NA
Reference
11
0
aph_4_Ia_1_V01499.R
aph(4)­Ia_1_V01499
NA
Reference
9
0
aac_6_Im_1_AF337947.R
aac(6’)­Im_1_AF337947
NA
Reference
9
0
dfrA21_1_AY552589.R
dfrA21_1_AY552589
NA
Reference
8
0
dfrB1_1_U36276.R
dfrB1_1_U36276
NA
Reference
7
0
dfrA32_1_GU067642.R
dfrA32_1_GU067642
NA
Reference
7
0
blaOXA_5_1_AF347074.R
blaOXA­5_1_AF347074
NA
Reference
7
0
blaNDM_1_1_FN396876.R
blaNDM­1_1_FN396876
NA
Reference
7
0
aac_3_Id_1_AB114632.R
aac(3)­Id_1_AB114632
NA
Reference
7
0
dfrA7_1_AB161450.R
dfrA7_1_AB161450
NA
Reference
6
0
dfrA27_1_FJ459817.R
dfrA27_1_FJ459817
NA
Reference
5
0
VanHAX_2_M97297.R
VanHAX_2_M97297
NA
Reference
5
0
mcr_9_1_NZ_NAAN01000063_1.R
mcr­9_1_NZ_NAAN01000063.1
NA
Reference
4
0
dfrA20_1_AJ605332.R
dfrA20_1_AJ605332
NA
Reference
4
0
blaOXA_278_1_KC771279.R
blaOXA­278_1_KC771279
NA
Reference
4
0
aadA10_1_U37105.R
aadA10_1_U37105
NA
Reference
4
0
qnrB38_1_JN173060.R
qnrB38_1_JN173060
NA
Reference
3
0
fosE_1_AB901041.R
fosE_1_AB901041
NA
Reference
3
0
fosA4_1_AB908992.R
fosA4_1_AB908992
NA
Reference
3
0
dfrA25_1_DQ267940.R
dfrA25_1_DQ267940
NA
Reference
3
0
blaVIM_4_1_EU581706.R
blaVIM­4_1_EU581706
NA
Reference
3
0
blaMOX_2_1_AJ276453.R
blaMOX­2_1_AJ276453
NA
Reference
3
0
mcr_1_1_1_KP347127.R
mcr­1.1_1_KP347127
NA
Reference
2
0
dfrA8_1_U10186.R
dfrA8_1_U10186
NA
Reference
2
0
catP_1_U15027.R
catP_1_U15027
NA
Reference
2
0
blaVIM_2_1_AF302086.R
blaVIM­2_1_AF302086
NA
Reference
2
0
blaTER_2_1_FJ263090.R
blaTER­2_1_FJ263090
NA
Reference
2
0
blaOXA_362_1_KF460532.R
blaOXA­362_1_KF460532
NA
Reference
2
0
blaOXA_296_1_APOH01000009.R
blaOXA­296_1_APOH01000009
NA
Reference
2
0
aph_6_Ic_1_X01702.R
aph(6)­Ic_1_X01702
NA
Reference
2
0
aph_3_IIa_2_V00618.R
aph(3’)­IIa_2_V00618
NA
Reference
2
0
aac_3_Ib_1_L06157.R
aac(3)­Ib_1_L06157
NA
Reference
2
0
tet_36_1_AJ514254.R
tet(36)_1_AJ514254
NA
Reference
1
0
rmtB_1_AB103506.R
rmtB_1_AB103506
NA
Reference
1
0
mph_B_1_D85892.R
mph(B)_1_D85892
NA
Reference
1
0
lnu_E_1_KF287643.R
lnu(E)_1_KF287643
NA
Reference
1
0
ere_B_2_X03988.R
ere(B)_2_X03988
NA
Reference
1
0
dfrK_2_FN677369.R
dfrK_2_FN677369
NA
Reference
1
0
dfrB7_1_DQ993182.R
dfrB7_1_DQ993182
NA
Reference
1
0
dfrA26_1_AM403715.R
dfrA26_1_AM403715
NA
Reference
1
0
dfrA23_1_AJ746361.R
dfrA23_1_AJ746361
NA
Reference
1
0
dfrA10_1_L06418.R
dfrA10_1_L06418
NA
Reference
1
0
blaSCO_1_1_EF063111.R
blaSCO­1_1_EF063111
NA
Reference
1
0
blaROB_1_2_AF022114.R
blaROB­1_2_AF022114
NA
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_72_1_AY739646.R
blaOXA­72_1_AY739646
NA
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_275_1_APPJ01000001.R
blaOXA­275_1_APPJ01000001
NA
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_235_1_JQ820240.v1
blaOXA­235_1_JQ820240
NA
Variant
1
NA
blaOXA_181_1_CM004561.R
blaOXA­181_1_CM004561
NA
Reference
1
0
blaOXA_120_1_EU255289.R
blaOXA­120_1_EU255289
NA
Reference
1
0
blaIMP_13_1_AJ550807.R
blaIMP­13_1_AJ550807
NA
Reference
1
0
blaFOX_3_1_Y11068.R
blaFOX­3_1_Y11068
NA
Reference
1
0
blaEBR_1_1_AF416700.R
blaEBR­1_1_AF416700
NA
Reference
1
0
aac_6_Iq_1_AF047556.R
aac(6’)­Iq_1_AF047556
NA
Reference
1
0
aac_3_VIa_2_NC_009838.R
aac(3)­VIa_2_NC_009838
NA
Reference
1
0
aac_3_Ic_1_AJ511268.R
aac(3)­Ic_1_AJ511268
NA
Reference
1
0
aac_2_IIa_1_AB669090.R
aac(2’)­IIa_1_AB669090
NA
Reference
1
0
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
52
==PAGE:57==
Automated discovery and phylogenetic analyses of novel AMR gene variants in sewage
53
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 204
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.food.dtu.dk
