==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
Wind turbine load estimation using machine learning and 
transfer learning 
 
 
Guanqun Xu 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0487 
June 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Guanqun Xu 
Title: Wind turbine load estimation using machine learning and transfer 
learning 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0487 
June 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January - June 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Taeseong Kim 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Machine learning method has always been popular in terms of building different wind turbine
models to solve related problems in a data level. However, with the fast development and ad­
vanced research in this area, it gradually becomes difficult to obtain relevant data. Therefore,
recently transfer learning has gained constant attention with the aim to deal with a related but
different problem based on a task which has already been solved.
In this thesis, traditional machine learning method of artificial neural networks (ANN), together
with parameter­based transfer learning method has been used to estimate wind turbine load.
First, load model based on ANN was built for DTU 10 MW wind turbine as well as NREL 5
MW wind turbine. Different DTU 10 MW wind turbine models were built with different number
of input samples. For the model of NREL 5 MW wind turbine, training samples were obtained
from a different wind class. Then, parameter­based transfer learning has been applied with
the above mentioned models served as pretrained models to establish load model for a single
different turbine type or mixed turbine types.
Results indicate that ANN method provides good estimation on wind turbine fatigue load. For
the pretrained model of DTU 10 MW, the trend of accuracy becomes steady as the number
of input samples increases and 1500 samples is deemed as the optimal number of samples for
training DTU 10 MW. In addition, with transfer learning, it was succeeded in building NREL 5
MW model with corresponding DTU 10 MW pretrained model but failed in establishing mixed
dataset model neither with DTU 10 MW pretrained model nor with NREL 5 MW pretrained
model.
Key Words
wind turbine, load estimation, artificial neural networks, transfer learning
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Taeseong Kim, in particular for his support and instructions
on this thesis. I would not have finished this thesis smoothly if Taeseong had not given me advice
and showed me the right path. Also, I really appreciated that Taeseong provided this thesis topic
on the combination of wind energy and AI, which turns out to be really interesting and broadens
my vision in both fields.
I would also like to thank Nikolay Dimitrov, who was once one of my supervisor in a special
course, for his patience and precise answer of my questions, which always improves my com­
prehension in related problems.
I also want to thank Laura Schröder for providing the code for me to learn the deep learning
toolbox in MATLAB, without which the progress of my thesis would not go so fast.
In addition, I want to thank all my friends and family who stay with me during covid time, which
brings me huge support and care.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my university, DTU, who provides good research en­
vironment for me even during the hard time of COVID­19. Without the assistance of DTU
databar, this thesis could not be progressed smoothly, neither.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Symbols
P
Aerodynamic power captured by a wind turbine
V
Wind speed
R
Wind turbine rotor radius
Cp
Wind turbine power coefficient
T
Wind turbine thrust force
CT
Wind turbine thrust coefficient
σu
Wind speed stan dard deviation
U
mean wind speed
α
Wind shear exponent
x
Height from the ground
l
Aerodynamic lift on an airfoil
d
Aerodynamic drag on an airfoil
Vrel
Relevant wind speed
Cl
Airfoil lift coefficient
Cd
Airfoil drag coefficient
c
chord length of wind turbine blade
m
Wöhler exponent
neq
Number of cycles of equivalent load
ni
Number of cycles for the ith moment, obtained from rainflow
counting function
Mi
The ith moment, obtained from rainflow counting function
Meq,10min
Short­term DEL
Tlife
Whole working life of a wind turbine
T10min
Working time of of 10 min
p
Probability of a load occurred during the whole working life
Meq,life
Life time fatigue
xi
Input of ANN model
y
Output of ANN model
wi
Weights of neurons in ANN model
b
Bias of ANN model
ϕ
Activation function
ˆyi
Target of ANN model
K
Number of dataset in an ANN model
yi
Mean value of output of ANN model
a
Axial induction factor
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
DLCs
Design load cases
AI
Artificial intelligence
ANN
Artificial Neural Networks
CNN
Convolutional neural networks
BPNN
Back Propagation Neural Network
SCADA
Supervisory control and data acquisition system
NARX
Non linear autoregressive network with external inputs
LSTM
Long short ­term memory
DTU 10 MW
DTU 10 MW reference wind tur bine
NREL 5 MW
NREL 5 MW reference wind turbine
TI
Turbulence intensity
BEM
Blade element moment method
ReLU
Recti fied Linear Unit
MSE
Mean Squared Error
MAPE
Mean absolute per centage error
BRFW
Blade root flapwise bending moment
TTFA
Tower­top fore­aft bending moment
DEL
Damage equivalent load
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Aim and study procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Parameters of wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Aerodynamic load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Aeroelastic simulation with HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Fatigue load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Artificial neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Transfer learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Data acquisition and model declaration
18
3.1
Data acquisition of DTU 10 MW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Data acquisition of NREL 5 MW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Pretrained model declaration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Transfer learning model declaration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Pre­trained model of DTU 10MW wind turbine and NREL 5MW wind turbine
24
4.1
Hyperparameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
DTU 10 MW load model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
NREL 5MW load model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Transfer learning
28
5.1
Transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5 MW dataset . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and DTU
10 MW, using DTU 10 MW pretrained model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and DTU
10 MW, using NREL 5 MW pretrained model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Conclusion of transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Closure
37
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Reference
39
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Wind industry and wind turbine design
As of 23 April 2021, 44 countries and the European Union have pledged to meet the target of
net­zero emissions in a few decades [1]. In the fight against climate change, renewable industry,
such as wind energy and solar energy, plays a crucial role. In 2020, globally wind industry
has been developing in a fast way with 93 GW new installations, bringing global cumulative
installation to 743 GW, which makes it a record year in the wind industry [2].
The booming of wind industry urges engineers and researchers to keep exploring the potential
of wind turbines with new design and advanced technology. In wind turbine design process, the
most important and most frequently appeared situations should be simulated, which corresponds
to a large amount of design load cases (DLCs) specified by IEC standard [3]. Normally, DLCs
are simulated in aeroelastic code such as HAWC2 [4] with the establishment of physical wind
turbine model. However, due to containing high level of design details [5], simulating integrated
DLCs is often costly in time.
1.1.2
Artificial Neural Networks and transfer learning
Nowadays, with the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI), people are seeking more
opportunities in existing difficulties. For example, an alternative way of doing wind turbine load
simulation is from a numerical level by using AI method such as Artificial Neural Networks
(ANN).
With the application of ANN, it is able to build a model that aims to predict load for one type of
wind turbine. However, if a specific AI model can be applied to other types of wind turbines as
well, at least partially, then the process of load simulation would be even more efficient and the
above mentioned problem in data acquisition can be ignored. One way of realising this could
be the use of transfer learning method. In transfer learning, a different but related problem can
be tackled by a solving problem [6], which is especially advantageous when there is a lack of
data.
1.2
Previous study
1.2.1
Wind turbine model with numerical method
Using data­level method [7] to build models for wind turbines or wind is not a new concept
and more and more models are being explored. Since wind power generation is an inevitable
topic in the wind industry, many approaches focus on power estimation. Du et al. [8] eliminated
the noise in wind power data by decomposing wind energy series and then set up the wind
power model with wavelet neural networks (WNN). Liu et al. [9] presented a novel approach
to establish short­term wind power model using convolutional neural networks (CNN) where
input of CNN, which are time series of wind speed and precipitation, were converted into image
matrices with two transformation methods.
Also, since wind power generation is highly influenced by the varying incoming wind, many
researches aim at developing wind model with data­level method for short­term, medium­term
and long­term duration [10]. Kiplangat et al. demonstrated in [11] that week­ahead wind speed
prediction model was well performed with simple linear models (auto­regressive models), with
1
==PAGE:9==
the condition that wind speed data were decomposed into selected frequency using wavelet trans­
form technique in the first step. Besides, Wan et al. [12] applied CNN to predict turbine spe­
cific wind speed where they concluded that compared with Back Propagation Neural Network
(BPNN), CNN has better prediction since the input of BPNN does not contain spatial correlation
of different wind turbine positions.
In addition, data­level method has also been applied to monitor wind turbine conditions. In [13],
a condition monitoring system was built with autoencoder, a type of neural networks that is able
to reconstruct the input, based on the data from supervisory control and data acquisition system
(SCADA).
Besides, models have been built for predicting wind turbine blade deflection, which can be found
in [14] where ANN and non­linear autoregressive network with external inputs (NARX) were
used and compared.
Furthermore, fatigue load estimation in wind energy using data­level method is also a research
hotspot. Kulkarni et al. [15] constructed and compared two deep neural network based mod­
els, which were NARX and long short­term memory (LSTM), to create time­varying load on
blades. Dimitrov et al. [16] constructed five different surrogate models trained with high­fidelity
load databases and compared the life time fatigue load on DTU 10MW reference wind turbine.
Vera­Tudela and Kühn [5] constructed neural network models for fatigue load prediction during
operation of a wind turbine with the use of SCADA signals. Last but not least, in [17], fatigue
load model of DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine was established with six wind related param­
eters established in the database described in [16]. In order to find the optimal architecture of
ANN model, up to 2 hidden layers and up to 20 neurons per layer were tried. Two ANN models
were finally chosen due to higher coefficient of determination and less evaluation time.
Figure 1.1: Application of data­level method in wind energy
1.2.2
Transfer learning
Transfer learning, which is a new machine learning method, recently gains its popularity in
different fields. In [18], transfer learning approaches were divided into four categories: instance­
transfer, feature­representation­transfer, parameter­transfer and relational­knowledge­transfer.
In [19], instance­transfer was applied with the usage of Tradaboost algorithm where part of
the instances from source domain were selected to be the training part of the target domain.
Tajbakhsh et al. [20] applied parameter transfer on CNN where the weights and bias of the
pretrained network were copied to the model to be trained, updating parameters from the last
layer at first and then incrementally including more layers in the process until the optimal result.
2
==PAGE:10==
Xu and Sun [21] proposed a novel parameter transfer called part­based transfer, the idea of which
was that transfer learning between two complex tasks can be decomposed into several small sub­
transfer learning between their parts. In [22], parameter transfer was conducted through deep
neural networks in order to predict short­term wind speed of newly­built wind farms based on
the wind data of existing wind farms.
1.3
Aim and study procedure
Previous work demonstrates that numerical model has huge potential in constructing wind tur­
bine models and wind related models. Meanwhile, transfer learning method can be deemed as
a short cut since the model to be built is based on another model if transfer learning applied.
Thus, the main aim of the thesis is to study wind turbine load estimation on a data­level both
with the usage of ANN and transfer learning method. Besides, in order to apply transfer learn­
ing, two types of wind turbine model were selected, one is DTU 10MW reference wind turbine
[23] (denoted as DTU 10 MW), another is NREL 5MW reference wind turbine [24] (denoted as
NREL 5 MW).
To achieve this goal, the overall study procedure is carried out as shown in Figure 1.2. The first
step was to obtained data for DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW. The data for DTU 10 MW was
obtained form the database established in [16], both for input (parameters of wind) and output
(fatigue load) of the model. NREL 5MW data were generated through HAWC2 simulations.
Then, optimal DTU 10 MW model and optimal NREL 5MW model, which represent optimal
model architecture and optimal predicting accuracy, were obtained through hyperparameter op­
timization. Next, transfer learning were applied on those two kinds of ”pretrained” models.
Figure 1.2: Procedure overview
a. Transfer learning with pretrained model of DTU 10 MW
First, transfer learning method was applied to build load model for NREL 5MW in order to
examine whether the basic goal of transfer learning, which is to tackle another related problem,
can be met. Therefore, pure NREL 5MW model was generated. Secondly, transfer learning
method was applied to predict load for both DTU 10MW and NREL 5MW simultaneously, the
3
==PAGE:11==
aim of which is to study whether transfer learning method could also be applicable when dataset
are mixed and are more complicated. Thus, mixed dataset model was generated. In this thesis,
two mixing method were studied, one is fixed training sample strategy and the other is increasing
training sample strategy.
b. Transfer learning with pretrained model of NREL 5 MW
In the study of transfer learning with pretrained model of NREL 5 MW, only fixed training
sample case for mixed dataset model was built, which acts as a comparison and supplement to
those with pretrained model of DTU 10 MW.
1.4
Thesis layout
This thesis consists of 6 chapters and the rest of the thesis is organized as follows.
• Relevant methods and topics of this thesis including wind­related parameters, wind tur­
bine load, aeroelastic simulation with HAWC2, ANN and transfer learning method are
elaborated in chapter 2.
• In chapter 3, The acquisition of data is first presented. This is then followed by a detailed
description of all the models built in this study.
• In chapter 4, the result for ANN load model (described in chapter 3) of DTU 10MW
together with discussion is presented. Then, result for ANN load model of NREL 5MW
is presented as well.
• In chapter 5, transfer learning based load models (described in chapter 3), which target at
single NREL 5 MW or mixed turbine types, are presented and discussed.
• Finally, in chapter 6, results are concluded and future work are proposed.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
This chapter presents the relevant knowledge behind this thesis, which represents the process of
self­study and acts as the theoretical background of this study. First, three wind related parame­
ters for model inputs are introduced, which is then followed by the introduction on wind turbine
aerodynamic load, aeroelastic simulations with HAWC2 and fatigue load. Second, machine
learning method is introduced, focusing on artificial neural networks and transfer learning.
2.1
Parameters of wind
As will be mentioned in section 3.1, three wind parameters were chosen to be the input of load
model, which are wind speed, standard deviation of wind speed and wind shear. This section
mainly introduces these basic parameters and how they influence wind turbine.
2.1.1
Wind speed
The speed of wind is of vital importance for wind turbine because it directly influences power
production. The aerodynamic power captured by a wind turbine is:
P = 1
2ρV 3πR2CP
(2.1)
where V and R denote wind speed and rotor radius. Cp is power coefficient which is influenced
by blade pitch angle and tip speed ratio. The maximum value of CP is 0.593, found by Betz,
which is often called Betz limit [25]. Therefore, power follows the third power of wind speed and
it is quite advantageous when wind turbines are established in high wind speed cite. However,
high wind speed is not always advantageous, it often comes with the expense of high load. The
thrust force T on the rotor is calculated as:
T = 1
2ρV 2πR2CT
(2.2)
where CT is thrust coefficient.
2.1.2
Standard deviation of wind speed
The real inflow in nature is unsteady and is varying with time. Wind speed standard deviation
σu represents to what extent wind speed is dispersed from its mean value. This parameter is
often linked with turbulence intensity (TI), which represents the fluctuation of wind speed and
is defined as:
TI = σu
U
(2.3)
where U is 10­min mean wind speed. 10­min simulation with mean wind speed of 12 m/s and
reference TI 12% was simulated with Mann model [26] and is shown in Figure 2.1. Mann model
is able to create 3­D velocity field based on Navier­Stokes equations. With turbulence, unsteady
wind speed with a mean wind speed of 12 m/s can decrease to 7 m/s or increase up to 16 m/s in
a short time period.
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Real­time wind speed with mean value 12m/s and reference TI 12%
2.1.3
Wind shear exponent
Wind shear phenomenon often occurs vertically in the air where wind speed varies at different
altitude. The wind shear model used in wind turbine technology is:
V (x) = V (H)( x
H )α
(2.4)
where H is hub height from the ground and α is the wind shear exponent. Typically, the range
of α is bwtween 0.1 and 0.25 [27]. However, it is noted that in the database generated in [16],
negative shear was also included.
Figure 2.2: Wind shear model
Figure 2.3 demonstrates the effect of wind shear in a basic wind condition on DTU 10 MW:
steady incoming wind at hub height of 10 m/s, zero yaw, wind shear exponent 0.2. Note that
azimuthal angle zero (or 360◦) is the position where the blade is at the highest of a rotor, vertical
to the ground and azimuthal angle 180◦is the position where the blade is at the lowest of a
rotor, vertical to the ground. Thus, blades at higher altitude experience higher wind speed,
which highly influences wind turbine loads: different blades on a rotor suffer different loading
according to there azimuthal position.
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Incoming wind velocity on DTU 10 MW wind turbine with hub height mean wind
speed 10 m/s and shear exponent 0.2
2.2
Aerodynamic load
During operation, a wind turbine is mainly subject to aerodynamic load (originated from the
wind­turbine interaction), gravity, inertia load (mass being accelerated or decelerated during
rotation) and structural load (strongly coupled with aerodynamic loads).
Aerodynamic load is mostly influenced by airfoil performance. When analysing, a blade is often
split into different elements, which is often called blade element moment method (BEM).
The force on an airfoil is shown in Figure 2.4. When flow passes through an airfoil, it creates
aerodynamic lift l and drag d, which can be calculated with Equation 2.5 and Equation 2.6:
l = 1
2ρV 2
relcCl
(2.5)
d = 1
2ρV 2
relcCd
(2.6)
where c is chord length of airfoil and Vrel is relevant wind speed, which is composed of incom­
ing wind speed V , blade vibrational velocity Vblade, induced velocity W and rotational speed
ωr (Figure 2.4). Cl and Cd are lift coefficient and drag coefficient respectively, which are de­
termined by angle of attack and Reynolds number.
Figure 2.4: Forces on an airfoil
7
==PAGE:15==
Lift and drag force on the airfoil can be decomposed into forces tangential to the blade (PT )
and perpendicular to the blade (PN). Then, they can be integrated along the blade and further
transformed into in­plane driving force (torque) and out­of­plane thrust force.
2.3
Aeroelastic simulation with HAWC2
HAWC2 is an aeroelastic simulation software that can run simulations for wind turbines that
subject to external forcing conditions. Wind turbine HAWC2 model is defined in a so called
htc file, named after its file extension ”.htc”. A htc file is divided into several blocks for wind
turbine structural model, aerodynamic model, controller, etc.
2.3.1
Structure model
In the htc file, the structure of a wind turbine is defined by multibody framework. In other
words, a wind turbine is split into several main bodies in the model, e.g. tower, towertop, shaft,
blade, etc. Each main body can also be divided into different sub­bodies. For each main body,
there is a data file that contains distributed structural parameters, which is also included in the
htc file.
In addition, the orientation of each main body is also defined. The global coordination system
is firstly defined on the ground at the center of tower with z axis pointing vertical to the ground
and x and y axes horizontal to the ground. Each main body has its own coordination system,
which can be oriented from relative main body via Euler angle rotations.
Last but not least, constraints are also specified in wind turbine structure. For the whole list of
constraints, reader can refer to section 9.4 in [4].
Figure 2.5: Pseudocode of wind turbine structure model in HAWC2
8
==PAGE:16==
2.3.2
Aerodynamic model
The aerodynamic model in HAWC2 follows BEM method mentioned in section 2.2. However,
the BEM in HAWC2 has some difference from the classic one for the reason of less computa­
tional cost. For example, in classic BEM, thrust coefficient CT is subject to Glauert correction
when axial induction factor a becomes large. However, in HAWC2, CT simply follows a third­
order polynomial with a, which saves the procedure for correction.
Similar as structure model, aerodynamic model is also defined with a block. In this block, a
link is set with structure model so that HAWC2 knows which part of a wind turbine is subject
to aerodynamic force. Two external file concerning blade planform (chord length and thickness
ratio) and airfoil data are imported in this block.
Figure 2.6: The aerodynamic block in HAWC2
One of the aim of HAWC2 simulation is to check the performance of controller. This can be
done by setting step wind condition, i.e. increasing wind speed from cut­in wind speed to cut­
out wind speed with 1 m/s increment each time. The controller in wind turbine is introduced in
the following section.
2.3.3
Controller
The global object of wind turbine control is to optimize the power production when it is below
rated and to limit power and load when it is above rated. The control region can be further split
into 3 regions and each region has its own control algorithm.
In the HAWC2 model of DTU 10 MW, DTU wind energy controller [28] is used. DTU wind
energy controller is based on classical proportional­integral control theory and is applicable for
pitch­regulated, variable speed wind turbines. A controller block should be added to the htc
file when it is applied. Before the controller is used, a number of turbine­related and control­
related parameters should be initialized. Since these parameters are provided in the NREL 5
MW HAWC2 model [29] specified for NREL 5 MW, DTU wind energy controller was also
used in the aeroelastic simulation for NREL 5 MW. This is also explained in subsection 3.2.2
and some important controller parameters are listed in Table 3.2.
2.4
Fatigue load
During operation, wind turbine suffers different kinds of loadings, some of them are extreme,
which may lead to serious outcome such as wind turbine collapse. However, wind turbine can
also accumulate damage even when loadings are not too large and when wind condition is not
that serious. The truth is , for those loadings with small amplitude, there are a large amount of
load cycles (counting from the start of a loading, then to another load level and finally back to
the start stage), which damage turbine structure in the long term. A commonly used method to
count cycles for each loading is rainflow counting method.
2.4.1
Rainflow counting
Rainflow counting method can extract the cycles and the corresponding amplitude from a given
time series. The name of this method was given by ”rainflow” because the counting procedure
is similar to the path of raindrops on a pagode roof [30].
9
==PAGE:17==
In this thesis, rainflow counting method is applied by using the rainflow counting function in
MATLAB.
2.4.2
Calculation of fatigue load
Then, after obtaining number of cycles for the corresponding load amplitude, short­term fatigue
damage equivalent load (DEL) can be calculated as:
Meq,10min =
"X
i
ni
neq
Mm
i
#1/m
(2.7)
where,
• m is the Wöhler exponent, which is 10 for composite material (concluded in Section 7.5
in [31]).
• neq is the number of cycles of equivalent load. It equals to 600 assuming 1 Hz equivalent
frequency for a 10­min period.
• ni is the number of cycles for the ith moment, obtained from rainflow counting function.
• Mi is the ith moment, obtained from rainflow counting function.
Then, the life time fatigue is calculated by considering all the cases and their corresponding
probability p:
Meq,life =

X
j
pjTlife
T10min
Mm
eq,10min,j


1/m
(2.8)
where Tlife and T10min are the time for the whole working life of a wind turbine and the time
of 10 min respectively.
2.5
Artificial neural networks
2.5.1
Definition
Artificial neural networks (ANN) is a popular artificial intelligence method which mimics neu­
rons of human brains in terms of data processing and information transfer. Artificial neurons
(nodes) on different layers constitute the architecture of an ANN model. There are three kinds
of layers: input layer, hidden layer and output layer. Typically, there is only one input layer
and one output layer but the number of hidden layer is user­defined. The number of neurons
on the input layer and output layer is related to the number of input and output of the model
respectively, but the number of neuron on the hidden layer(s) is also user­defined. Figure 2.7 il­
lustrates a basic ANN model with 3 inputs, 1 output and 1 hidden layer with 5 neurons. Neurons
in an ANN are highly interconnected: a neuron is connected to all the neurons in the previous
layer and in the next layer, which is also called ”fulled connected”.
10
==PAGE:18==
Input #1
Input #2
Input #3
Output
Hidden
layer
Input
layer
Output
layer
Figure 2.7: ANN structure
Figure 2.8: How data is procedssed by a neuron
Figure 2.8 illustrates how the data is processed by a neuron. The output of a neuron in a hidden
layer or in a output layer is obtained by summing up all the values of the previous layer multiplied
by an individual weight for each neuron plus a global bias:
y = ϕ(
n
X
i=1
(wixi) + b)
(2.9)
where xi and y are input and output of a neuron respectively. wi is the weight associated with
input xi and b is neurons bias. ϕ is neuron’s activation function and is introduced in subsec­
tion 2.5.2. Note that Equation 2.9 can also be written as:
y = ϕ(
n
X
i=0
wixi)
(2.10)
since bias can also be treated as w0.
2.5.2
Activation function
Activation function can be both linear and non­linear, but those non­linear ones are more popular
and more meaningful since it increases the computational power [32] of a model. If linear
11
==PAGE:19==
activation function is applied in an ANN model, then the ANN will be equivalent to a model
with one hidden layer no matter how many hidden layers it has.
There are many kinds of non­linear activation functions. Three of the most commonly used
ones are: logarithmic sigmoid transfer function, hyperbolic tangent transfer function and recti­
fied Linear Unit (ReLU). Their corresponding equations and MATALB command are shown in
Table 2.1 and their plots are shown in Figure 2.9.
Table 2.1: Three commonly used Activation functions in ANN
Name
Equation
MATLAB syntax
logarithmic sigmoid
f(x) =
1
1+e−x
logsig
hyperbolic tangent
f(x) =
2
1+e−2x −1
tansig
ReLU
f(x) = max(0, x)
poslin
Figure 2.9: Activation function
2.5.3
Feed­forward and backpropagation
Feed­forward architecture is often used in ANN. In a feed­forward neural network, the dataflow
is unidirectional from input to output. The output is not connected to other nodes, meaning there
is no feedback [33]. The architecture shown in Figure 2.7 is feed­forward.
On the other hand, backpropagation, refers to the method of how weights and bias are updated
during training. In backgropagation method, first the output of the model is generated and the
performance (error) is evaluated from input layer to the output layer. Then, the error passes from
the output layer back to the input layer to adjust weights and bias [34].
2.5.4
Training algorithm
After activation function has been set up, training algorithm should also be determined. In
MATLAB, a number of training algorithm has been predefined and it is convenient for users to
apply. Several training algorithms are shown in Table 2.2 together with MATLAB syntax. It is
worth mentioning that Levenberg­Marquardt backpropagation method is highly recommended
12
==PAGE:20==
by MATLAB at a first trial since it is faster than other algorithm although it takes up more
memory.
Table 2.2: Some of the training algorithm predefined in MATLAB
Name
MATLAB syntax
Levenberg­Marquardt
trainlm
Bayesian Regulation
trainbr
Gradient descent with adaptive learning rate
traingda
BFGS quasi­Newton
trainbfg
Conjugate gradient backpropagation with Powell­Beale restarts
traincgb
Cyclical order weight/bias training
trainc
During training, the performance of the model is evaluated by error functions which represents
the error between the output of the model and the desired output (target). One of the commonly
used function is Mean Squared Error (MSE):
MSE = (yi −ˆyi)2
K
(2.11)
where yi and ˆyi are output and target of the model respectively and K is the number of dataset.
2.5.5
Dataset
Considering different functions, the dataset to establish a model can be classified into 3 kinds:
training dataset, validation dataset and test dataset. The portion of the three sets is often defined
by users, e.g. 70% for training, 20% for validation and 10% for testing.
Training dataset, as can be seen from its name, is used for training the model. It is often the case
that training dataset accounts for a majority part of the whole dataset in order to obtain a model
with acceptable accuracy. In addition, training dataset should be selected randomly so that it
can represents the whole dataset as much as possible.
Validation dataset is used after training dataset. It is commonly used for fine­tuning a model,
e.g. comparing the performance of models with difference architecture. However, this dataset
can also be useful to check whether a model has a problem of overfitting. Overfitting means
that when training a model, although high accuracy is obtained from a training dataset, when
test the model with new dataset (validation dataset), accuracy is low. Overfitting indicates that,
the model learns too much information from the training dataset and reaches a local optimal.
Therefore, if the accuracy of training dataset is high while that for validation dataset is low, the
model is likely to be overfitted.
Since it is meaningless to test the model with already trained ones, test dataset is used to test the
accuracy of the model. They are new and unseen data to the model.
2.5.6
K­fold cross validation
K­fold cross validation is a method where data is split into small groups for evaluating model
performance statistically. It is used in machine learning especially when there are limited input
samples.
In the process of k­fold cross validation, the global test dataset is selected first and then the rest
dataset is split into k sub­dataset. Each time when the model is trained, a sub­net is generated
with only one sub­dataset for validation and the rest k −1 sub­dataset for training. Then the
13
==PAGE:21==
performance of the sub­net is tested with a global test dataset, obtaining evaluation performance
Ei. This procedure is repeated k times until every sub­dataset has been selected to be the val­
idation dataset for once. Thus, the model is trained k times and the performance of this model
E is the average of Ei.
In the present thesis, both 5­fold and 10­fold cross validation were used depending on the input
size. For 5­fold cross validation, each sub­net has five sub­dataset and four of them are for
training and the rest one sub­dataset is for validation. For 10­fold cross validation, each sub­net
has ten sub­dataset and nine of them are for training and the rest one sub­dataset is for validation.
The algorithms are shown in Figure 2.10 and Figure 2.11 respectively.
Figure 2.10: 5­fold cross validation
Figure 2.11: 10­fold cross validation
14
==PAGE:22==
2.5.7
Evaluation criteria
As mentioned in subsection 2.5.4, the performance during training is evaluated by MSE er­
ror function, according to which weights and bias are updated until optimal MSE is reached.
This error function was chosen because it is a built­in function in MATLAB and can be easily
implemented.
This evaluation criteria could also be used when presenting the result for testing dataset, how­
ever, a more straightforward parameter was pursued in terms of accuracy. The main reason
behind this is that, the values for MSE can sometimes be large (due to the error is squared)
and it is difficult for readers to compare between different model. A parameter that can directly
represent accuracy is better in this study.
Therefore, coefficient of determination (R2) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) were
the chosen candidate parameters. MAPE is calculated as:
MAPE = 1
K
K
X
i=1

yi −ˆyi
ˆyi
 × 100%
(2.12)
where yi and ˆyi are the output and the target of the model respectively. K is the number of data.
The range of MAPE is between 0 to 1.
R2 is a statistic index that evaluates the fitness of regression, which is calculated as:
R2 = 1 −
PK
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
PK
i=1(yi −yi)2
(2.13)
where yi is the average value of output. Usually, the range of R2 is between 0 and 1. When it is
below 0, it means the fitness of regression is poor. When the value is close to 1, it represents a
good fit. The above mentioned two evaluation methods are clear and straightforward in terms of
accuracy. However, through study, R2 method was found to have its shortcoming. An example
is shown as below.
A model with linear activation function was pre­defined with input and target shown in Ta­
ble 2.3. Two outputs were set artificially. The only different of the two outputs lies in the
second point where for input 0.2, corresponding outputs are 0.1 and 0.82 respectively. Apply­
ing Equation 2.12 and Equation 2.13, the evaluation result is shown also in Table 2.3. As can
be seen, R2 for the two cases are similar but output 1 has 20% more MAPE than output 2. In
this case, MAPE can better represent the result since the two outputs have different values.
Seen from the equation for R2 (Equation 2.13), the numerator is the sum of the squared of abso­
lute error between output and target, meaning that a higher absolute error is counted more when
calculating R2. Therefore, a badly­fitted data where absolute error is small is less important.
That is the reason why two outputs have almost same R2 although the outputs are different. In
this thesis, since both small and large data exist in the whole dataset, R2 method was abandoned
and MAPE was adopted as the representation for model accuracy.
15
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.3: A pre­defined linear model with two artificial outputs
NO.
Input [­]
Target [­]
Output 1 [­]
Output 2 [­]
1
0.001
0.0045
0.001
0.001
2
0.2
0.9
0.1
0.82
3
1
4.5
3.5
3.5
4
2
9
7.5
7.5
R2 = 0.897
R2 = 0.905
MAPE = 51.4%
MAPE = 31.4%
(a) Output 1: R2 = 0.897, MAPE = 51.4%
(b) Output 2: R2 = 0.905, MAPE = 31.4%
Figure 2.12: Comparison on R2 and MAPE with two different outputs
2.5.8
Hyperparameter optimization
The optimal architecture of wind turbine is obtained by hyperparameter optimization. During
the process, hyperparameters is keeping updated until the optimal performance is reached. The
hyperparameter of a model can be: learning rate, number of hidden layers, number of neurons
in hidden layer, momentum, activation functions, etc.
A traditional way of realizing this is through random search, where users randomly select the
value for each hyperparameter and find the optimal result by trail and error. However, a draw­
back of this method is that it cannot cover the entire parameter space. A better way of doing
this is called grid search. All possible combinations of hyperparameters are trained, which is
especially advantageous when the number of hyperparameters is few. In addition, an advanced
method is called Baysian optimization, where the past result are kept track of in order to choose
the best hyperparameters for evaluation in the next round [35], which is of high searching ef­
ficiency since the algorithm decides which set of hyperparameters to be evaluated instead of
evaluating all the sets. This method is beneficial when data are complex and when there are a
large amount of hyperparameters.
In this thesis, since the number of hyperparameter is not too much (only two), grid search method
was used. A detailed description on how grid space was defined is shown in section 4.1.
2.6
Transfer learning
Traditional machine learning methods are targeted for problems which assumes that [36]:
16
==PAGE:24==
• Training dataset and test dataset are independent and following the same distribution.
• There are enough data involved in building the model in order to ensure high model reli­
ability.
However in reality, these two conditions sometimes cannot be met. For example, in [22], wind
data could not be obtained for new wind farms. Or, in other cases, it is quite expensive to obtain
those data.
Gradually, transfer learning has attracted extensive attention since the above mentioned two
conditions are relaxed in transfer learning. A definition of transfer learning has been given in
[18]: given a source domain and source domain learning task, a target domain and target domain
learning task, transfer learning aims to improve the target learning performance with the help
of source domain. Therefore, through the application of transfer learning, it is possible to train
a model with good performance but with less time and energy since ”copying” the information
from a base model is much faster than training from scratch. The flow chart of transfer learning
is shown in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: Flow chart of transfer learning
As mentioned in subsection 1.2.2, there are four kinds of transfer learning, namely instance­
transfer, feature­representation­transfer, parameter­transfer and relational­knowledge­transfer.
Parameter­transfer has been applied in this thesis not only because this method was found to be
the most frequently applied in the previous studies with ANN but also it is quite compatible with
MATLAB deep learning toolbox.
In this thesis, ”freeze weight” method was used when applying transfer learning, meaning that
only the weight and bias of the output layer were trained in every epoch and other parameters
were kept the same as pretrained model.
17
==PAGE:25==
3
Data acquisition and model declaration
In this chapter, how data was obtained or generated is described in section 3.1 for DTU 10 MW
and in section 3.2 for NREL 5 MW. Then, a detailed introduction on which kind of model was
built is shown in section 3.3 and section 3.4 respectively for ANN model and transfer learning
model. In all, this chapter acts as a detailed overview of all the data and the models been studied.
3.1
Data acquisition of DTU 10 MW
In the previous study, a database of high­fidelity load of DTU 10MW wind turbine model was
established with six probabilistic wind parameters [16] under wind class IA defined in [37].
These parameters covers most of the wind conditions while at the same time being represen­
tative. In this thesis, three inputs are chosen from the above mentioned six parameters: wind
speed, standard deviation of wind speed and wind shear exponent. The reason for choosing
these three inputs not only is that these three inputs are the most basic parameters representing
wind but also they are relatively easy to obtain. In addition, according to the testing accuracy
presented in section 4.2, load models with three inputs have good result, which verifies that it is
feasible to simplify model complexity by decreasing the number of input.
In addition, fatigue load of blade root flapwise bending moment (BRFW) and fatigue load of
tower­top fore­aft bending moment (TTFA) were chosen from the above mentioned database as
the model target. BRFW was chosen to be the target of one­output load model while BRFW
and TTFA were all selected to be the target of two­output load model. Histograms of inputs and
outputs of all the 9980 samples used in this thesis are shown in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2.
18
==PAGE:26==
(a) Wind speed
(b) Standard deviation
(c) Wind shear exponent
Figure 3.1: Input for DTU 10 MW load model
(a) DEL of BRFW
(b) DEL of TTFA
Figure 3.2: Target for DTU 10 MW load model
3.2
Data acquisition of NREL 5 MW
3.2.1
Input
In order to maintain the same wind condition to compare the load and model performance with
DTU 10 MW, same inputs were applied on NREL 5 MW so that the same wind class IA (pre­
scribed in [37], mentioned in [16]) was kept.
19
==PAGE:27==
Although it is good to set the same wind conditions for two different turbine types during com­
parison, AI model may be confused by the same input while the target values are different for
the two turbines. Thus, in order to check whether training samples of NREL 5 MW with same
wind class would confuse AI when applying transfer learning on DTU 10 MW pretrained model,
a different wind condition of class IC defined by IEC standard [3] was generated. Recall that
three model inputs are wind speed, standard deviation of wind speed and wind shear exponent.
Wind speed were kept the same as pretrained model, standard deviation was calculated as below
and wind shear exponent was scaled with 0.8:
σu = Iref(0.75Vhub + 5.6)
(3.1)
αIC = 0.8αIA
(3.2)
Table 3.1: Reference turbulence intensity of different wind class
Class A defined in [37]
Class C defined in [3]
Iref
18%
12%
3.2.2
Target
Same as DTU 10MW, both one­output and two­output model were established for NREL 5MW.
For one­output model, DEL of BRFW was set as target while for two­output model, DEL of both
BRFW and TTFA were selected as target, which were all obtained from HAWC2 [4] simula­
tions. NREL 5MW reference wind turbine HAWC2 model [29] was used combined with DTU
wind energy controller [28]. The controller parameters were provided in [29] and are shown in
Table 3.2. Then, for each set of three input parameters, a 10­min aeroelastic simulation was car­
ried out together with additional 100 s transient time. In total, 1560 load cases with same wind
class as DTU 10MW and 2577 load cases with different wind class were simulated. The short
term DEL was calculated following Equation 2.7 which are shown as histogram in Figure 3.3.
DEL under wind class IC have smaller range in terms of the magnitude of memont, which is
reasonable in that wind class IC has lower turbulence intensity which leads to lower fatigue.
Table 3.2: Controller parameter for HAWC2 simulation [29]
Parameter
Unit
Value
Optimal Cp tracking K factor
Nm/(rad/s)2
2.25518e6
Proportional gain of torque controller KPg
Nm/(rad/s)
1.93143e7
Integral gain of torque controller KIg
Nm/rad
4.33412e6
Proportional gain of pitch controller KP
rad/(rad/s)
0.649668
Integral gain of pitch controller KI
rad/rad
0.318795
Coefficient of linear term in aerodynamic
gain scheduling KK1
deg
70.70296
Coefficient of quadratic term in aerodynamic
gain scheduling KK2
deg2
808.79462
20
==PAGE:28==
(a) DEL of BRFW
(b) DEL of TTFA
Figure 3.3: Targets for NREL 5MW load model
3.3
Pretrained model declaration
Pretrained model was built both for DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW separately.
3.3.1
Pretrained model of DTU 10 MW
In order to compare the influence of different number of training samples, models were estab­
lished with 500, 1000, 1500 and 9980 (full) samples in turn. In addition, as has been mentioned
in section 3.1, model can be both one­output and twp­output. Therefore in total, there are eight
different pretrained model for DTU 10 MW. The models are shown in the dashed box in Fig­
ure 3.4.
3.3.2
Pretrained model of NREL 5 MW
As a comparison, NREL 5MW pretrained model was also built. 2577 samples were used to
construct this model. The input data were different from those of DTU 10MW, which follows
wind class IC specified in [3] and is explained in section 3.2. In addition, this model is a one­
output model which predicts DEL of BRFW. The model is shown in the dashed box in Figure 3.6.
3.4
Transfer learning model declaration
After pretrained model were established, three types of transfer learning models were built:
• Transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5 MW dataset. This set of models were
only targeted at NREL 5 MW.
• Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and DTU 10 MW,
using DTU 10 MW pretrained model. This set of models were built in order to test whether
a single model can predict loads for two wind turbines simultaneously.
• Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and DTU 10 MW,
using NREL 5 MW pretrained model. Specially, there is only one model built for this
type in order to further check the ”freeze weight” transfer learning method.
3.4.1
Transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5 MW dataset
In order to compare model performance in terms of the number of output, both one­output and
two­output model were established for NREL 5MW with transfer learning. In addition, for
the two­output model, two kinds of pretrained model (DTU 10 MW model and NREL 5 MW
model) were both tried. Therefore, there are three kinds of NREL 5MW load model. For each
21
==PAGE:29==
of them, model were trained 2 times, one with same input (following wind class IA), another
with different input (following wind class IC). The overview of all the models are shown in
Figure 3.4.
Last but not least, it is also worth mentioning that for each model, cross validation method was
also applied to increase reliability of the result. When pretrained model includes 9980 samples,
10­fold cross validation was applied while for other 3 kinds of pretrained models, 5­fold cross
validation were applied.
Figure 3.4: Transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5 MW dataset
3.4.2
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and
DTU 10 MW, using DTU 10 MW pretrained model
Next, whether a model could predict load for both DTU 10MW and NREL 5MW was studied
in order to further explore the potential of transfer learning. Only one­output model was built.
Concerning accuracy, pretrained model with 9980 samples was used. Note that NREL 5 MW
data from wind class IA and IC were both tested. The models are shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset, using DTU 10 MW pretrained
model
22
==PAGE:30==
In the mixed turbine type model, mixed dataset for the two types of wind turbine should be
set for both input and target. Two types of mixing data methods were generated, one for fixed
training sample and one for increasing training sample. All the cases are listed in Table 5.5,
Table 5.6 for same wind class and in Table 5.7 and Table 5.8 for different wind class.
3.4.3
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL 5 MW and
DTU 10 MW, using NREL 5 MW pretrained model
This model was established in order to further check the performance of ”freeze weight” transfer
learning method. This model was built with 2577 NREL 5MW samples in wind class IC. The
models are shown in Figure 3.6 Also, parametric study was carried out by mixing dataset of
NREL5MW and DTU 10MW data with fixed training samples of 2200, which is shown in
Table 5.10.
Figure 3.6: Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset, using NREL 5 MW pretrained
model
23
==PAGE:31==
4
Pre­trained model of DTU 10MW wind
turbine and NREL 5MW wind turbine
After all the data have been acquired, machine learning method of ANN has been applied in
building DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW model. First, the procedure for hyperparameter opti­
mization is presented in section 4.1. Then, analysis are carried out for DTU 10 MW model by
comparing one­output model and two­output model and by varying model input size, which are
shown in section 4.2. Finally, the NREL 5 MW load model is presented in section 4.3 which
was built with input from a different wind class of DTU 10 MW. The result and information pre­
sented in this chapter is important in that the ANN model of DTU 10MW and NREL 5 MW act
as the pretrained model for transfer learning, thus determines the base line for transfer learning
performance.
4.1
Hyperparameter optimization
Grid search approach was used for hyperparameter optimization. The hyperparameters chosen
to be evaluated were the number of hidden layer and the number of neurons per layer since
these two parameters are influential in model performance concerning accuracy. The number
of hidden layer was varied from 1 to 5 and number of neurons per layer was varied from 10 to
50 with an interval of 5. ReLU activation function was used during training. 10% of the dataset
used in each model were extracted for general testing. The rest of the data were used in cross
validation for training and validation.
5­fold cross validation and 10­fold cross­validation were used based on different number of input
samples. For DTU 10 MW model with 500, 1000, 1500 samples and NREL 5 MW model (with
2577 samples), 5­fold cross validation was used. In each fold, 80% of the rest dataset were used
for training, 20% of them were used for validation. The procedure is shown in Figure 2.10. For
DTU 10 MW model with 9980 samples, 10­fold cross validation was used. In each fold, 90%
of the rest dataset were used for training, 10% of them were used for validation. This procedure
is shown in Figure 2.11. Cross validation method is explained in subsection 2.5.6.
4.2
DTU 10 MW load model
DTU 10 MW models were built with one­output case, where DEL of BRFW were the output
and with two­output case, where both DEL of BRFW and DEL of TTFA were the output. The
performance of each model after hyperparameter optimization are shown as heatmaps in Fig­
ure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 for one­output model and two­output model separately. The value on
each color segment is MAPE of test dataset shown in percentage.
24
==PAGE:32==
(a) 500 samples
(b) 1000 samples
(c) 1500 samples
(d) 9980 samples
Figure 4.1: Heatmaps of DTU 10 MW one­output model
For one­output model of DTU 10MW, when number of neurons per layer and number of hidden
layer increases, ANN model has more parameters (bias and weights) to form the relation between
input and output, thus increasing relation complexity and reducing probability of high error,
which results in the increase of accuracy (decrease in MAPE). The trend is especially clear in
the diagonal direction (seen from 1 hidden layer, 5 neurons per layer to 5 hidden layer, 30 neurons
per layer) no matter how many samples were used. However, the increment in accuracy is not
large, approximately 2% to 4%. This is because the number of input and output are small, which
is 3 and 1 respectively. Thus, simple models with small number of hidden layers and neurons
per layer can have good performance. Besides, it is also worth mentioning that there exists
uncertainty in the data, e.g. seed­to­seed uncertainty [16]. This uncertainty is not correlated to
any inputs and further weakens the trend.
Comparing the four kinds of models with different number of samples (from Figure 4.1a to
Figure 4.1d), it is observed that MAPE decreases when there are more samples. This is more
obviously shown in Figure 4.3, where the lowest MAPE in each heatmap were plotted and con­
nected as a curve. This is reasonable because when there are more training dataset, the model
are more systematic and representative, thus have higher accuracy. It can also be concluded
that model established with 1500 samples can be enough concerning accuracy: When the num­
ber of samples increases from 1500 to 9980, MAPE only decreases 0.7%, but the number of
input samples increases 565.3%. Thus, by using 1500 samples, an equivalent accuracy can be
achieved meanwhile computational cost is reduced to a large extent. A possible explanation is
that when input data is too much, more noise is learnt in the model which somehow offsets part
25
==PAGE:33==
of the accuracy.
It can also be observed that there are two dark blue segments among the above one­output mod­
els, one using 1000 samples with 5 hidden layers and 20 neurons per layer and the other using
9980 samples with 5 hidden layers ans 5 neurons per layer. These two results worse than other
cases is mainly due to data randomness. Randomly selected testing dataset happens to follow
another trend instead of the existing distribution which has been well established with the ANN
models. Although there exists data randomness, the overall trend shown in heatmaps is not
influenced.
The heatmaps of test dataset for two­output case are shown in Figure 4.2. In general, two­output
model has larger error than one­output model, which makes sense because two outputs make the
input­output relation more complicated and make the AI more difficult to predict. Also, as the
number of samples increases, MAPE decreases and accuracy increases. This trend is obviously
shown in Figure 4.3, with the lowest MAPE in each heatmap plotted and connected. It is worth
mentioning that although two­output models have larger MAPE, the trend is similar as that of
one­output models : When the number of dataset increases, accuracy increases, but when the
number of samples exceeds 1500, MAPE tends to decrease very slowly. This phenomenon
further verifies that 1500 is the optimal number of samples for building DTU 10 MW model.
(a) 500 samples
(b) 1000 samples
(c) 1500 samples
(d) 9980 samples
Figure 4.2: Heatmaps of DTU 10 MW two­output model
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3: MAPE of DTU 10MW models
4.3
NREL 5MW load model
NREL 5 MW (one­output) load model was built with 2577 (all) samples in wind class IC (dif­
ferent from DTU 10 MW data). How input and target were generated is explained in section 3.2.
Figure 4.4: Heatmap for NREL 5MW model
Similar as DTU 10 MW model, the general trend shown in the heatmap is that model accuracy
increases with increasing number of hidden layer and increasing number of neurons per layer.
The lowest MAPE of one­output model for NREL 5MW is 5.6% where there are 4 hidden
layers and 15 neurons per layer. Comparing the MAPE of DTU 10MW with 9980 (all) samples
shown in Figure 4.1d (the lowest MAPE is 4.8%), it can be seen that this load model of NREL
5MW also provide reliable prediction considering fairly small number of dataset being used.
27
==PAGE:35==
5
Transfer learning
DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW load models were build as shown in chapter 4. Those models act
as pretrained models for transfer learning. In this chapter, transfer learning method was applied
to establish load models for a different turbine type or mixed turbine types. In section 5.1,
transfer learning method was first tested on building pure 5MW load model with DTU 10 MW
pretrained model. Then in section 5.2, DTU 10 MW pretrained models were used in establishing
load model with mixed dataset of both DTU 10MW and NREL 5MW in order to study whether
pretrained model can predict load simultaneously for both of them. Finally in section 5.3, mixed
dataset model was built again but with pretrained model of NREL 5 MW, with the aim to set a
comparison and further check the performance of transfer learning method.
5.1
Transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5 MW
dataset
Transfer learning method was applied both on one­output and two­output DTU 10MW pre­
trained model to build NREL 5 MW load model. Meanwhile, both one­output and two­output
model for NREL 5MW were established. The test cases are listed in Table 5.1. For each kind
of test case, two set of NREL 5MW data were tried, one with inputs from the same wind class
(IA), another with different wind class (IC). All the models can be seen in Figure 3.4.
In addition, for each training, the number of NREL 5MW training samples was varied from 100
to 1000 in order to study the influence of the size of target domain. The upper limit is set to be
not larger than 1000 so that the condition of transfer learning to predict for target domain with
limited data is met. Note that an exception of upper limit 1300 was set when building one­output
model for same wind class condition (Figure 5.1a) in order to make a cross validation with a
same test case in the mixed turbine type model (shown later in section 5.2).
Table 5.1: Test cases for transfer learning with pure 5MW dataset
DTU 10MW
NREL 5MW
one­output model
two­output model
one­output model
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
two­output model
(not applicable)
Figure 5.3
5.1.1
One­output model
MAPE of NREL 5 MW one­output model are shown in Figure 5.1 with the left figure using
data under the same wind class as pretrained model and the right using the different. MAPE
are plotted against the number of training samples of NREL 5 MW dataset. Different colours
represent different pretrained model.
Compared with model using different wind class, model using same wind class in general has
larger error. In Table 5.2, maximum MAPE for same input model is 16.4%, which is 6.9%
larger than that of different input model. This is also the case with minimum MAPE despite
that the difference (2.4%) is smaller. This means that model with same input are more difficult to
predict. For prertained model, it formalized a relation between the input and the output of DTU
10MW. However now it is required to predict a different output distribution of NREL 5MW
with exactly the same input, in which way AI can be confused.
28
==PAGE:36==
When the number NREL 5 MW training samples increases, MAPE decreases in a global trend
though with fluctuations. This is reasonable since when more NREL 5MW samples are in­
volved, the model will be more systematic but the influence of data randomness cannot be elim­
inated. The fluctuation is more significant for same input cases, further verifies that ”same input
confusion” exists and increases difficulty of prediction.
Different colors represent pretrained models with different number of samples. Combining the
result of models using data from same wind class and different wind class, pretrained model
with 500 samples has the worst performance while that with 9980 pretrained samples has the
best performance. This matches the outcome that more pretrained samples leads to a more
accurate prediction for pretrained model (as illustrated in Figure 4.3) and thus lower error for
transfer learning model.
(a) same wind class
(b) different wind class
Figure 5.1: MAPE of one­output 5 MW transfer learning model trained with pure NREL 5
MW dataset
Table 5.2: Maximum and minimum values for one­output load models of NREL 5MW and the
corresponding number of training samples
Number of samples for
pertained model
Minimum
MAPE [%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Maximum
MAPE [%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Same
wind class
500
10.5
1000
16.4
100
1000
9.7
800
14.7
400
1500
9.5
1000
13.5
100
9980
8.5
800
13.4
100
Different
wind class
500
6.7
400
8.7
100
1000
6.6
400
9.3
100
1500
6.1
500
9.5
100
9980
6.2
400
8.4
100
5.1.2
Two­output model
Two­output NREL 5 MW model was built with one­output and two­output DTU 10 MW model
in turn. The reason to use two different pretrained model was to set comparison and to test
whether two loads of NREL 5 MW can be correctly predicted if pretrained model can only
predict one load.
In the first place, by using one­output DTU 10 MW pretrained model, the two­output NREL
5MW model was built and is shown in Figure 5.2. Overall, this model has unsatisfying perfor­
29
==PAGE:37==
mance.
(a) same wind class
(b) different wind class
Figure 5.2: MAPE of NREL 5 MW two­output transfer learning model (one­output pretrained
model)
For both same wind class and different wind class model, MAPE is large: According to Ta­
ble 5.3, the minimum value (18.8%) is located at 1000 training samples in different wind class,
using 500 samples for pretrained model while the maximum value (211.1%) is located at 900
training samples in the same wind class using 1500 samples for pretrained model. The large er­
ror is predictable because pretrained models were targeted for one­output load estimation, which
represents the relation of single output and input. However, the output of two­output transfer
learning model certainly follows a different relation with input data, regardless of whether in­
put are the same as pretrained model or not. Therefore, using one­output pretrained model and
applying transfer learning on two­output model has unsatisfactory result.
In Figure 5.2, a different result from NREL 5 MW one­output model is that when number of pre­
trained samples increases, generally MAPE increases despite similar error between pretrained
models using 1500 and 9980 samples. Note that for one­output model, MAPE decreases with
increasing number of pretrained samples. For the two­output transfer learning model, when there
are more samples in the one­output pretrained model, the pretrained model has higher accuracy
for one­output cases, but it is further away from two­output cases, thus the accuracy decreases.
A reason for similar MAPE when pretrained models using 1500 and 9980 samples can be seen
in Figure 4.3 that the corresponding one­output pretrained models have similar MAPE.
Table 5.3: Maximum and minimum values for two­output load models (using one­output per­
tained model) of NREL 5MW and the corresponding number of training samples
Number of samples for
pertained model
Minimum
MAPE[%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Maximum
MAPE[%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Same
wind class
500
39.5
300
63.9
100
1000
52.2
500
78.1
100
1500
81.0
800
211.1
900
9980
81.8
600
199.6
200
Different
wind class
500
18.8
1000
24.4
300
1000
24.0
400
31.8
600
1500
39.7
400
70.5
100
9980
34.1
700
78.3
200
30
==PAGE:38==
Then, the second two­output NREL 5 MW model was established with DTU 10 MW two­output
pretrained model. MAPE and extreme values are shown in Figure 5.3 and Table 5.4.
(a) same wind class
(b) different wind class
Figure 5.3: MAPE of NREL 5 MW two­output transfer learning model (two­output pretrained
model)
Similar as the one­output NREL 5MW model (Figure 5.1), when number of pretrained sample
increases, MAPE decreases in spite of similar result for pretrained model with 1000 and 1500
dataset, which may due to similar MAPE of pretrained model (Figure 4.3). When training
samples of NREL 5MW increases, the global trend of MAPE is decrease regardless of fluctu­
ations, which is due to randomness. In addition, compared with one­output NREL 5MW model,
two­output model has larger MAPE, which is predictable since two output increases the com­
plexity for prediction and is more likely to be biased. However, the error for two­output NREL
5 MW model pretrained with two­output DTU 10 MW model is within an acceptable range and
is much better than that pretrained with one­output DTU 10 MW model.
Table 5.4: Maximum and minimum values for two­output load models (using two­output per­
tained model) of NREL 5MW and the corresponding number of training samples
Number of samples for
pertained model
Minimum
MAPE[%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Maximum
MAPE[%]
Corresponding number of
training samples
Same
wind class
500
13.8
400
16.4
1000
1000
12.2
800
14.4
100
1500
12.2
400
15.1
100
9980
11.2
400
12.7
1000
Different
wind class
500
11.1
600
12.7
100
1000
9.9
400
12.2
100
1500
10.7
600
12.0
100
9980
9.5
600
10.7
100
5.2
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL
5 MW and DTU 10 MW, using DTU 10 MW pretrained model
5.2.1
Same wind class
Model trained with DTU 10MW and NREL 5MW data with same input (both in class IA) was
first established. Note that ”same input” refers to same distribution here, since using exactly
31
==PAGE:39==
same input to predict two different output with high accuracy is almost impossible. Therefore,
samples with exact same input were eliminated from DTU 10MW samples during training.
Two mixing sample strategy were used: One is fixed training samples where the total training
samples are fixed but the ratio of the two wind turbine samples is changing. The other is in­
creasing sample strategy where the overall training samples is increasing with the two turbine
samples having the same increment each time. The cases are shown in Table 5.5 and Table 5.6
and the results are shown in Figure 5.4.
Table 5.5: Fixed training sample for transfer learning (same wind class)
Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Number of training samples
of DTU 10MW
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Number of training samples
of NREL 5MW
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Table 5.6: Increasing training sample for transfer learning (same wind class)
Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Number of training samples
of DTU 10MW
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Number of training samples
of NREL 5MW
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
(a) fixed training sample
(b) increasing training sample
Figure 5.4: MAPE of transfer learning model with mixed dataset of DTU 10MW and NREL
5MW under same wind class
As shown in Figure 5.4, mixing data from two turbine types does not lead to satisfying perfor­
mance. For fixed training sample cases, only for case number 1 (pure 5MW data), the prediction
for NREL 5MW has acceptable MAPE (9.3%), while other cases have MAPE larger than
100%. Note that case number 1 with 1300 NREL 5MW data is the same case as the correspond­
ing one shown in Figure 5.1a, where the MAPE is 9.7%. For increasing training sample cases,
MAPE is relatively the same no matter how the size of training sample changes: approximately
40% for DTU 10MW and 240% for NREL 5MW. In addition, scatter plot of training and testing
dataset of case 13 in Table 5.6 are plotted in Figure 5.5. Most of the scatters are far away from
the blue dashed line (zero MAPE), with NREL 5MW over predicted and DTU 10MW under
predicted.
32
==PAGE:40==
In conclusion, mixed turbine type model has bad performance when input of DTU 10MW and
NREL 5MW are in the same class.
(a) training dataset
(b) test dataset
Figure 5.5: Scatter plot of AI prediction against database for mixed dataset case under same
wind class (dataset using case 13 in Table 5.6)
In order to check whether transfer learning was correctly implemented, a new ANN model
trained with mixed dataset of 1300 DTU 10MW samples and 1300 NREL 5MW samples was
tested with 130 DTU 10MW samples and 130 NREL 5MW samples. The result is shown in
Table 5.9. Even when training a new ANN model with mixing dataset, the error is still large
(130.6%), meaning that there are no suitable ANN model to predict accurate result for DTU
10MW and NREL 5MW simultaneously when input are the same.
5.2.2
Different wind class
Then, the mixed turbine type model was trained with data from different wind class: DTU 10
MW data in class IA and NREL 5 MW data in class IC. Similarly, as shown in Figure 5.6a,
only when the model trained with pure 5MW data could it have relative good accuracy for
5MW only. As is shown in Figure 5.7, scatterplot of case 10 in Table 5.8 presents also different
prediction trend for DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW, which were under­predicted and over­
predicted respectively. It is noted that the curves in Figure 5.6 look smoother than the plots for
same wind class (Figure 5.4), mainly due to that they are not affected by ”same input confusion”
as mentioned in subsection 5.1.1. In all, this model also failed to predicted both for DTU 10MW
and NREL 5MW.
Table 5.7: Fixed training sample for transfer learning (different wind class)
Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Number of training samples
of DTU 10MW
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Number of training samples
of NREL 5MW
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
33
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.8: Increasing training sample for transfer learning (different wind class)
Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Number of training samples
of DTU 10MW
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Number of training samples
of NREL 5MW
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
(a) fixed training sample
(b) increasing training sample
Figure 5.6: MAPE of transfer learning model with mixed dataset of DTU 10MW and NREL
5MW under different class
(a) training dataset
(b) test dataset
Figure 5.7: Scatter plot of AI prediction against database for mixed dataset case under different
wind class (dataset using case10 in table Table 5.8)
Moreover, using different input, two new models were built with mixed dataset of 1000 sam­
ples for each turbine and 2500 samples for each turbine. The test result is shown in Table 5.9.
MAPE of this two models are acceptable (18.7% and 15.8%), but when transfer learning was
applied (Figure 5.6), error is quite large. Therefore, it is concluded that there exists an ANN
model that can predict load for both DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW well. However, this ”freeze
weight” transfer learning method seems to be not able to reach that goal.
34
==PAGE:42==
Table 5.9: MAPE of newly trained AI model with mixed dataset of DTU 10MW and NREL
5MW
Input type for AI model
same
different
different
Number of training samples
of NREL 5MW
1300
1000
2500
Number of training samples
of DTU 10MW
1300
1000
2500
Total MAPE [%]
130.6
18.7
15.8
MAPE of NREL 5MW [%]
221.3
26.0
20.5
MAPE of DTU 10MW [%]
40.0
11.4
11.1
5.3
Transfer learning model trained with mixed dataset of NREL
5 MW and DTU 10 MW, using NREL 5 MW pretrained model
In order to further check the performance of the ”freeze weight” transfer learning method, source
domain was switched to NREL 5 MW. Namely, transfer learning method was applied on NREL
5 MW pretrained model to build mixed turbine type load model. Then, parametric study was
carried out by mixing dataset of NREL 5MW and DTU 10MW data, with fixed training sample
of 2200. All the parametric study cases are shown in Table 5.10 and the result for MAPE is
shown in Figure 5.8. As shown in Figure 5.8, only when the model was trained with pure 5MW
data (case 12) could it have MAPE of NREL 5 MW less than 100%, which further verifies that
”freeze weight” method is not optimal when building a model with mixed dataset, at least for
the data in this study.
Table 5.10: Fixed training sample for transfer learning (different wind class, using NREL 5MW
pretrained model)
Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Number of training
samples of DTU 5MW
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
Number of training
samples of NREL 10MW
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Figure 5.8: MAPE of transfer learning model with mixed dataset of DTU 10MW and NREL
5MW under different class, using NREL 5MW pretrained model (different wind class)
35
==PAGE:43==
5.4
Conclusion of transfer learning
In conclusion, parameter­based ”freeze weight” transfer learning method provides desirable re­
sults partially. First, this transfer learning method has good performance when using correspond­
ing DTU 10 MW prertained model to build NREL 5 MW model with samples in a different wind
class, which is shown in Figure 5.1b and Figure 5.3b for one­output model two­output model re­
spectively. Secondly, this transfer learning method also presents acceptable accuracy for NREL
5 MW model with training samples in a same wind class of DTU 10 MW (Figure 5.1a and
Figure 5.3a). Although maximum MAPE is approximately 16%, it is deemed as acceptable
considering that it suffers the aforementioned ”same input confusion”. In addition, this transfer
learning method fails to predict two loads for NREL 5 MW if pretrained model can only predict
one kind of load (Figure 5.2). Last but not least, it also fails to predict load for two turbine types
simultaneously (Figure 5.4, Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.8).
36
==PAGE:44==
6
Closure
6.1
Conclusion
In this thesis, a data­level method has been established for wind turbine load estimation. Tradi­
tional machine learning method of artificial neural networks has been applied first for DTU 10
MW and NREL 5 MW separately. Three inputs for the model are wind speed, standard devi­
ation of wind speed and wind shear. Predicting target is damage equivalent load of blade root
flapwise bending moment for one­output model and are damage equivalent loads of blade root
flapwise bending moment and tower­top fore­aft bending moment for two­output model. For
DTU 10 MW model, it was trained with 500, 1000, 1500 and 9980 samples in turn, both for
one­output model and two­output model. For NREL 5 MW model, a different wind class IC
was considered and one­output model was built with all 2577 samples.
In the second step, new machine learning method, namely transfer learning, has been applied
on the aforementioned ANN models. Three types of transfer learning models are: pure NREL 5
MW model with DTU 10 MW pretrained model, mixed turbine type model with DTU 10 MW
pretrained model and mixed turbine type model with NREL 5 MW pretrained model. In the
first two models, NREL 5 MW data from wind class IA and IC were both tried while for the last
model, only data from class IC was considered. In addition, for the pure NREL 5 MW model,
both one­output and two­output model were build while for the mixing turbine type models,
only one­output model was considered.
The main conclusions of this thesis are:
• Traditional machine learning method of artificial neural networks can provide good es­
timation for wind turbine fatigue load, both for DTU 10 MW and NREL 5 MW, even
though the error for predicting two fatigue loads is slightly higher than predicting one
fatigue load.
• For DTU 10 MW pretrained model, as the number of input sample increases, model ac­
curacy increases to a certain extent and then tends to converge. DTU 10MW model with
1500 samples has relatively the same accuracy as that with 9980 samples and 1500 sam­
ples is seen as the optimal number of samples for building DTU 10 MW model.
• The aim of transfer learning, which is to tackle a different but related problem with solved
problems, has been met by successfully building NREL 5 MW model (with samples from
a different wind class) with corresponding DTU 10 MW pretrained model, i.e one­output
NREL 5 MW model pretrained with one­output DTU 10 MW model and two­output
NREL 5 MW model pretrained with two­output DTU 10 MW model.
• This transfer learning method, namely, parameter­transfer based ”freeze weight” method,
failed to build mixed dataset model neither pretrained with DTU 10 MW model nor NREL
5 MW model.
6.2
Future work
Future work of this study could be focusing on why transfer learning method failed to pre­
dict mixed dataset model. Meanwhile, instead of using ANN, other types of machine learning
method can be applied. Also, other transfer learning method, e.g. instance­transfer, can be cho­
37
==PAGE:45==
sen. Last but not least, apart from load model, other types of model can be built based on the
pretrained load model, e.g. power model, in order to further explore the potential of transfer
learning.
38
==PAGE:46==
Reference
[1]
Ner zero by 2050, A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector. International Energy Agency.
2021. URL: www.iea.org.
[2]
Joyce Lee and Feng Zhao. Global wind report 2021. 2021. URL: https://gwec.net/
global-wind-report-2021/.
[3]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Wind turbines Part 1: Design requirements,
IEC 61400­1, 4th edition. eng. Standard. Geneva, CH: IEC, 2019. URL: https://webstore.
iec.ch.
[4]
Larsen, Torben J. and Hansen, Anders Melchior. How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual. eng.
Tech. rep. Roskilde, Denmark: Department of Wind Energy, DTU, 2019.
[5]
Luis Vera­Tudela and Martin Kühn. “Analysing wind turbine fatigue load prediction: The
impact of wind farm flow conditions”. eng. In: Renewable Energy 107 (2017), pp. 352–
360. ISSN: 18790682, 09601481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2017.01.065.
[6]
Wikipedia. Transfer learning — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed 12­
June­2021]. 2012. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfer_learning#cite_note-
1.
[7]
Thomas M. Welte and Kesheng Wang. “Models for lifetime estimation: an overview with
focus on applications to wind turbines”. eng. In: Advances in Manufacturing 2.1 (2014),
pp. 79–87. ISSN: 21953597, 20953127. DOI: 10.1007/s40436-014-0064-3.
[8]
Pei Du et al. “A novel hybrid model for short­term wind power forecasting”. eng. In:
Applied Soft Computing Journal 80 (2019), pp. 93–106. ISSN: 18729681, 15684946.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asoc.2019.03.035.
[9]
Tianyang Liu et al. “Enhancing wind turbine power forecast via convolutional neural
network”. eng. In: Electronics (switzerland) 10.3 (2021), p. 261. ISSN: 20799292. DOI:
10.3390/electronics10030261.
[10]
Saurabh S. Soman et al. “A review of wind power and wind speed forecasting methods
with different time horizons”. eng. In: North American Power Symposium 2010, Naps
2010 (2010), p. 5619586. DOI: 10.1109/NAPS.2010.5619586.
[11]
Dennis C. Kiplangat, K. Asokan, and K. Satheesh Kumar. “Improved week­ahead pre­
dictions of wind speed using simple linear models with wavelet decomposition”. eng. In:
Renewable Energy 93 (2016), pp. 38–44. ISSN: 18790682, 09601481. DOI: 10.1016/j.
renene.2016.02.054.
[12]
Tianhu Wan et al. “Turbine Location Wind Speed Forecast Using Convolutional Neural
Network”. eng. In: Apap 2019 ­ 8th Ieee International Conference on Advanced Power
System Automation and Protection (2019), p. 9225184. DOI: 10.1109/APAP47170.
2019.9225184.
[13]
Niklas Renström, Pramod Bangalore, and Edmund Highcock. “System­wide anomaly
detection in wind turbines using deep autoencoders”. eng. In: Renewable Energy 157
(2020), pp. 647–659. ISSN: 18790682, 09601481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2020.04.148.
[14]
E. E. Supeni et al. “Development of artificial neural network model in predicting perfor­
mance of the smart wind turbine blade”. eng. In: Journal of Mechanical Engineering and
Sciences 6 (2014), pp. 734–745. ISSN: 22318380, 22894659. DOI: 10.15282/jmes.6.
2014.1.0071.
[15]
Pravin A. Kulkarni, Ashwinkumar S. Dhoble, and Pramod M. Padole. “Deep neural net­
work based wind speed forecasting and fatigue analysis of a large composite wind turbine
blade”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C: Jour­
39
==PAGE:47==
nal of Mechanical Engineering Science 233.8 (2019), pp. 2794–2812. ISSN: 20412983,
09544062. DOI: 10.1177/0954406218797972.
[16]
Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov et al. “From wind to loads: wind turbine site­specific load
estimation with surrogate models trained on high­fidelity load databases”. eng. In: Wind
Energy Science 3.2 (2018), pp. 767–790. ISSN: 23667451, 23667443. DOI: 10.5194/
wes-3-767-2018.
[17]
Laura Schröder et al. “Wind turbine site­specific load estimation using artificial neu­
ral networks calibrated by means of high­fidelity load simulations”. eng. In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 1037.6 (2018), p. 062027. ISSN: 17426588, 17426596. DOI:
10.1088/1742-6596/1037/6/062027.
[18]
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. “A Survey on Transfer Learning”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 22.10 (2010), pp. 1345–1359. DOI: 10.1109/
TKDE.2009.191.
[19]
Xuesong Zhang et al. “Transfer boosting with synthetic instances for class imbalanced
object recognition”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Cybernetics 48.1 (2018), pp. 357–370.
ISSN: 21682275, 21682267, 10834419. DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2016.2636370.
[20]
Nima Tajbakhsh et al. “Convolutional Neural Networks for Medical Image Analysis: Full
Training or Fine Tuning?” eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Medical Imaging 35.5 (2016),
p. 7426826. ISSN: 1558254x, 02780062. DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2016.2535302.
[21]
Zhijie Xu and Shiliang Sun. “Part­based transfer learning”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Com­
puter Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics) 6677.3 (2011), pp. 434–441. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-21111-9_49.
[22]
Qinghua Hu, Rujia Zhang, and Yucan Zhou. “Transfer learning for short­term wind speed
prediction with deep neural networks”. eng. In: Renewable Energy 85 (2016), pp. 83–95.
ISSN: 18790682, 09601481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2015.06.034.
[23]
Christian Bak et al. “Description of the DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine”. In: DTU
Wind Energy Report­I­0092 5 (2013).
[24]
Jason Jonkman et al. Definition of a 5­MW reference wind turbine for offshore system
development. Tech. rep. National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United
States), 2009.
[25]
Albert Betz. Introduction to the Theory of Flow Machines. eng. Pergamon, 1966. ISBN:
1322467390, 1483180905, 0080114334, 9781322467399, 9780080114330, 9781483180
908.
[26]
Jakob Mann. WAsP Engineering­comspec. Nov. 19, 1999. URL: http://www.wasp.dk/
weng#details__iec-turbulence-simulator.
[27]
Martin Otto Laver Hansen. Aerodynamics of wind turbines. eng. Earthscan, 2015, pp. 1–
173. ISBN: 9781317671022, 9781138775077, 1317671031, 1315769980, 1317671023,
113877507x, 9781315769981, 9781317671039. DOI: 10.4324/9781315769981.
[28]
Morten Hartvig Hansen and Lars Christian Henriksen. Basic DTU Wind Energy con­
troller. eng. 2013.
[29]
DTU Wind Energy HAWC2 Development Team. NREL 5MW reference wind turbine
HAWC2 model. 2016. URL: https://www.hawc2.dk/Download/HAWC2- Model/
NREL-5-MW-Reference-Wind-Turbine.
[30]
H. Söker. “Loads on wind turbine blades”. eng. In: Advances in Wind Turbine Blade De­
sign and Materials (2013), pp. 29–58. DOI: 10.1533/9780857097286.1.29.
[31]
Herman Frederik Veldkamp. Chances in wind energy: a probalistic approach to wind
turbine fatigue design. 2006.
40
==PAGE:48==
[32]
Alireza Hajian and Peter Styles. “Artificial Neural Networks”. eng. In: Application of Soft
Computing and Intelligent Methods in Geophysics (2018), pp. 3–69. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-319-66532-0_1,10.1007/978-3-319-66532-0.
[33]
Alireza Hajian, Hossein Zomorrodian, and Peter Styles. “Simultaneous estimation of
shape factor and depth of subsurface cavities from residual gravity anomalies using feed­
forward back­propagation neural networks”. eng. In: Acta Geophysica 60.4 (2012), pp. 10
43–1075. ISSN: 18957455, 18956572. DOI: 10.2478/s11600-012-0049-1.
[34]
Simon Haykin. Neural networks : a comprehensive foundation. eng. Macmillan [u.a.],
1994, XIX, 696 S. (unknown). ISBN: 0023527617, 9780023527616, 0132265567.
[35]
A. Helen Victoria and G. Maragatham. “Automatic tuning of hyperparameters using Bay­
esian optimization”. eng. In: Evolving Systems 12.1 (2021), pp. 217–223. ISSN: 18686486,
18686478. DOI: 10.1007/s12530-020-09345-2.
[36]
F.­Z Zhuang et al. “Survey on transfer learning research”. In: Ruan Jian Xue Bao/Journal
of Software 26 (Jan. 2015), pp. 26–39. DOI: 10.13328/j.cnki.jos.004631.
[37]
International Electrotechnical Commission. Wind turbines Part 1: Design requirements,
IEC 61400­1, 3th edition. eng. Standard. Geneva, CH: IEC, 2005. URL: https://webstore.
iec.ch.
41
