==PAGE:1==
Master thesis in Design and Innovation Engineering
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Redesigning family food life with the
use of fermentation. A Master thesis.
Sofie S. Martinussen
s135012
June 25th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Ass. Prof. Jaap Daalhuizen, DTU Management Engineering
Co-supervisor: Sustainability and ESG Manager Louise Rosenmeier, Chr. Hansen
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S
Bøge Alle 10-12
2970 Hørsholm, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Over the last decades, our climate has changed caused by man-made activities. Scientists are
predicting a continuous negative change in the future if action is not taken. Our food system
is a signiﬁcant contributor to climate change, accounting for up to 1/3 of all emissions. With
billions of people consuming food several times daily, changing our eating habits serves as a
considerable opportunity for action.
This project aims at redesigning family food life to become more sustainable through the
use of fermentation. To develop an innovative concept, the design process Vision in Product
design was utilized to envision future opportunities in Danish homes by 2031. Upon deﬁning
the future context for the design, it became evident that a general lack of knowledge on ﬂavor
constitutes the barrier for change. Consequently, fermentation is inappropriate as a solution
before establishing a fundamental familiarity with ﬂavor.
Solutions to aid consumers in managing their food waste and prepare tasteful meals exist.
Although, no uniﬁed solution exists in supporting the consumer from the point of purchase
to the moment of discarding food. A vision was deﬁned to enhance the focus on ﬂavor and
empower consumers to create tasteful and sustainable meals.
The concept Find Flavor was developed to guide and educate consumers in ﬂavor and sus-
tainability. Informative stickers place on products in supermarkets provide relevant detailed
knowledgeontheindividualproductsthroughtheuseoftheapp, leadingconsumerstomake
better decisions. Find Flavor supports consumers in making sustainable and ﬂavorful food
choices.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Motivation
The planet is inhabited by over seven billion people all in need of food to survive. In the
beginning, Earth’s ecosystems ﬂourished in harmony, with humans sustaining themselves
withfoodcollectedfromforestsandhuntinganimals. Theincreasingpopulationandtechno-
logical advancements brought about full-scale industrialized production of our global food
supply. Inevitably having severe detrimental eﬀects on surrounding ecosystems, causing the
extinction of species, global deforestation of rainforests, and much more.
The constant increase of the population leaves tremendous pressure on the food industry
to produce greater quantities of food. With an already unsustainable food demand from an
ever-increasing population, one can only imagine the global consequences that will be no-
ticeable in the future.
Denmark is in many ways a front runner for green initiatives and sustainable behavior, that
serves as inspiration for others. Big danish companies within the food industry, such as Chr.
Hansen, are already contributing to the ﬁght against climate change by utilizing natural in-
gredients to improve the quality of food and global health.
The motivation for conducting this project, investigating how our food culture can become
more sustainable, is situated in a personal drive to do better and lead by example to inspire
others to do the same. Change on a corporate level will do wonders for the climate but if one
could get the individual to focus on sustainability, we may yet leave the world a better place
for future generations.
Kongens Lyngby, 25th June 2021
Soﬁe S. Martinussen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to the people who has contributed to and supported me
throughout this thesis.
First, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my supervisor, Associate Professor
Jaap Daalhuizen, DTU Management Engineering. Throughout the entire process, he has
been fully devoted to the role as a supervisor and provided me with invaluable support, guid-
ance and motivation whenever I was in need.
I would also like to extend my deepest gratitude to David Zilber, Food scientist and former
Head of Fermentation of Noma, for his inspiration and valuable feedback to the concept de-
veloped. Without his contribution the concept would not have turned out the way it did.
Special thanks to Claus Meyer, Gastronimic Entreprenuer, for providing feedback to the con-
cept developed and for presenting me with ideas for improvement.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Louise Rosenmeier, Sustainability and ESG Mananger in
Chr. Hansen for sharing information and thoughts on the topic with me, as well as providing
an assessment of the concept from a business point of view.
Last but not least, my deep appreciation goes to all the people who has supported and en-
couraged me throughout the project. The completion of my master thesis would not have
been possible without them.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Motivation
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction & Methodology
1
1.1
The Importance of Focus on Family Food Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
I
Deconstruction
7
2
Literature review
9
2.1
The Food System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
The Role of Chr. Hansen in Family Food Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
II
Future Context
17
3
Domain
19
3.1
Establishing the domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Context Factors
21
4.1
Generation of Context Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Context factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Prominent ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Context Structure
29
5.1
Structuring of the Context Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Key dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
The framework for food-related behaviors of the future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
The stereotypical food behaviours of the future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Choosing the direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Statement
51
6.1
My Vision for the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
III
Interaction
55
7
Human-product Interactions
57
8
Product Qualities
61
IV
The New Solution
63
9
Concept & Design
65
9.1
Concept vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
9.2
Find Flavor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
10 Validation
81
10.1 Expert validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
V
Discussion & Conclusion
89
11 Discussion
91
11.1 Future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
12 Conclusion
97
Appendices
99
Appendix A
Modern Day Food System Overview
101
Appendix B
Context factors
103
Appendix C
Find Flavor App Flow
115
Appendix D
Email invite to Claus Meyer
119
Appendix E
Narrative-based Assessment
121
Appendix F
Assessment by Experts
133
Appendix G
Future Food Personalities
135
Appendix H
Assessment by David Zilber
137
Appendix I
Email feedback from Louise Rosenmeier
151
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
Bibliography
155
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER1
Introduction &
Methodology
1.1
The Importance of Focus on Family Food Life
When I was a kid I remember speeding down a hill covered in fresh crisp snow on my red
sled. Each year, I crossed my ﬁngers that Christmas would be white and for a few years it was.
However, soon I stopped hoping for snow for Christmas - because I knew it was not coming.
Global warming has been on the agenda for many years now. Scientists predict several neg-
ative eﬀects on the climate among which are rising temperatures, melting of the ice on the
poles resulting in increased sea levels, diﬀerent and more extreme weather conditions in-
cluding more droughts and heat waves, stronger and more intense hurricanes, and changes
in season durability and intensity. These changes to the climate are results of greenhouse
gasses emitted from activities supporting our current way of living [1].
One of the greatest causes of global warming is the source of life for both animals and for
humans [2]. Food. Mhhh food. For breakfast, for lunch, for dinner, in between, for fun, for
pleasure, for comfort but most importantly of all, for survival. Food, and eating, is one of the
most reoccurring activities in our lives and something we cannot live without and as one of
the biggest contributors to climate change, we should not turn a blind eye.
The food system as we know it today is not sustainable. It accounts for up to 1/3 of the global
emissions, deplete our natural resources, destroy biodiversity and while securing life also
contribute to both obesity and starvation [3]. With a growing population and a changing
climate that negatively eﬀects food production the future security of food is at stake.
A study from University of Oxford conducted in 2016 show that by adopting a plant-based
diet one can reduce food related emission with up to 70% compared to the as-is diet [2]. To
change our predicted future we need to act now and with billions of people consuming food
daily this pose a great opportunity for mankind to do something.
==PAGE:14==
2
Deconstruction
1.2
The Challenge
Sustainable consumption is, as a result of the complex system, opaque leaving many con-
sumers with no clear path for change. The system does not provide insights into the eﬀects
of decisions made on a consumer level or what consumers can do to change it - if they want
to change. On the other hand, many families ﬁnd changing their food behavior a great chal-
lenge keeping them from taking actions towards a sustainable future.
As a result, I want to redesign family food life using visioning to develop a concept that in-
creases sustainable consumption. Vision in Product design is used to accomplish this.
1.3
Methodology
The main methodology, which the project is build upon, is introduced to ensure a common
understanding and language of the progression.
Vision in Product Design (ViP)
Vision in Product design (ViP) is an approach developed by Paul Hekkert and Matthijs van
Dijk, which consists of eight steps that are based on three basic principles to support design-
ers throughout the entire design process; "Designers should solve problems of the future and
notofthepresent-day", "Productsobtaintheirmeaningthroughinteractionswithpeople" and
"The appropriateness of the interactions are determined by the context it was designed for".
ViP is thus an opportunistic interaction-centered and context-driven method focusing on
theunderlyingreasonofadesign, "raisondťetre", translatedtowhytheproductexists. Through
these principles ViP support designers in the development of the right solutions for the right
time that add value and meaning to its users.
The approach consists of two sides, four phase divided into three layers that are moving on
two axes visualized in an arch shaped structure of the method as seen in ﬁgure 1.1. Through-
out the approach the designer moves up and down on a vertical axis determining the level of
abstractness from a very concrete level on The product level, through The interaction level to
the abstract level The context level. On the horizontal axis, the movement is from the present-
day to the future, fundamental to this approach. The left side and the Deconstruction phase
represent the present-day and products as we know them while the right-hand side, design-
ing, represents the future and products as we want them. Designing consists of the three
phases Future context, Interaction and New product.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Methodology
3
Figure 1.1. The three levels and steps of the method Vision in Product design [4].
Deconstruction
The ﬁrst step of ViP, is the Deconstruction of the product or service as we know it today to
understand Why it is as it is. Any design is a solution to a problem as it was at the time, and
involves deconstructing on a Product level to understand what the product is, on an Interac-
tion level to understand the use, and lastly on a Context level to understand the conditions
the designer was trying to solve the challenge under. These initial steps can help designers
to unravel the Why.
Product Level
The product level entails looking at the actual product and describing how it is operated, in-
cluding which qualities it expresses and communicates - does it look friendly or complicated.
Interaction Level
In the interaction level the designer considers the use of and interaction with the product,
which is determined by the qualities of the product, ie. is the interaction playful and intuitive
==PAGE:16==
4
Deconstruction
or interrupted. The authors recommend to use any words that come to mind to describe the
interaction.
Context Level
In the last step, the context level, the designer tries to replicate the factors that induced the
original designer to design that exact solution at the time. You try to envision and investigate
what considerations the designer had, and what the persons view on the world was, what
values, standards and opinions the designer had that induced the design as we see it today.
This step is about reconstructing the mind of the designer as well as the domain in which the
design occurred.
The deconstruction phase serves as a preparation for the design process that allows the de-
signer to engage in, and explore the domain he or she is designing for and free ones mind
from preconceptions and bias.
Designing
The design process in the ViP method contains eight steps indicating the necessary actions
to take in order to reach the future design.
Future Context
The phase deﬁning the Future context consists of four steps aiding the designer in anticipat-
ing the future, moving from a very abstract level towards a more concrete level.
Establishing the domain
The ViP process starts with a deﬁnition of the domain, a delimitation of the area you wish to
consider and aim at making a contribution to. The domain allows the designer to assess the
relevance of the contributions and observations one makes in regard to the future design. It
is crucial to deﬁne how far into the future, as this inﬂuences the observations and contribu-
tions.
Generation of context factors
Once the area is delimited, the next step consists of collecting context factors to aid the shap-
ing of the future world. Context factors are "value-free descriptions of world phenomena as
they appear (to you) [4, p.141] generally describing how humans experience the world, and
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Methodology
5
static aspects of it. Context factors can emerge from observations, thoughts, laws of human-
ity, theories, beliefs or opinions. The relevance of factors may be highly inﬂuenced by ones
own values and are fundamental for the design of the future context as the designer sees it.
Structuring the context
After collecting all the relevant context factors, the next step is about determining a context
to design for, reducing complexity. To do so, the designer has to consider how the diﬀerent
factors are connected and interact with one another by clustering the factors that point in the
same direction, or combined point in a new direction. Between the clusters are relationships
that further point towards the same direction or are contradicting, however, when placed in
opposite directions, form two possible options of the future. Upon structuring the context a
clear picture of the future should have emerged.
Statement definition
In the last step, the decision on how you wish to respond to the future world as you have
deﬁned it, is made. The designers values and belief are compiled in to one sentence that
deﬁnes what you want to oﬀer people, within the establish context [4, p.156]. The statement
must be balanced in terms of speciﬁcity - a too generic statement can make it diﬃcult to
chose a direction, while a too speciﬁc statement can inhibit creativity. Lastly, the statement
must be realistic.
Interaction
Establishing a relationship: designing human-product interactions
Beforedivingintothedesigningofthesolution, designersmustdeterminewhichuser-product
interactions will allow for the vision statement to be realized. It is in this interaction the so-
lution absorbs meaning and create value for the user. The identiﬁed interactions also deter-
mine how the product should be used, and it is only when using the product the characteris-
tics of the product can be experienced. To describe the interaction the authors suggest using
analogies to help put words to the interaction.
==PAGE:18==
6
Deconstruction
New Product
Defining product qualities
To enable the previously deﬁned interaction the solution needs to have certain product qual-
ities metaphorically speaking, the characteristics and personality of the solution. The prod-
uct qualities describe how the solution should be used and operated, and a suggestion to
determine this is to think of the user and the solution as two people in a relationship. Ones
partner has speciﬁc traits allowing for a speciﬁc interaction.
Concept design & Designing and detailing
Now that the vision and the qualitative characteristics have been deﬁned it is time to design
the solution that will realize the vision, and ensure ﬁnal manifestation.
==PAGE:19==
Part I
Deconstruction
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER2
Literature review
This section will set the stage and present the food system as we know it today. The concept
of a sustainable food system will also be presented. Lastly, this section will provide an intro-
duction to fermentation historically and how fermentation is used at present times.
2.1
The Food System
Food has been, is, and will always be the indispensable source of life. Food is one of the
founding elements of human life and society as we know it today. Besides keeping humans
alive, food has played a crucial part in the development of our society. The development of
the society we know today is closely linked to the development of agriculture. However, the
development of the food system to secure the survival of the human species may in reality
be one of the leading causes of our distinction if the current system is not changed [5].
The food system entails all the activities that goes into providing and eating food from the
activities involved in production to to all activities related to consumption as shown in ﬁgure
2.1. To secure an understanding of why the food system of today is the way it is, I will present
a summary of the evolution of the food system.
Figure 2.1. Overview of the activities included in the food system
==PAGE:22==
10
Deconstruction
2.1.1
The Evolution of the Food System
1.7 million
years ago
•
The present day food system, and the challenges that arose with it have
evolved over thousands of years, dating back to the ﬁrst human species
on earth, the Home Erectus. With the discovery of ﬁre approximately
1.7 million years ago the oldest known and most simplistic version of
the food system was created, consisting of hunting and gathering of an-
imals and crops. Men were responsible for hunting while women were
responsible for gathering and cooking. Securing food for the small so-
cieties, also known as tribes, were very time-consuming why the shar-
ing of food was a fundamental part of the system [5].
12,000
years ago
•
After millions of years living a nomadic life hunting and gathering to
secure the next meal, humans started to settle down [6]. Wild plants
were cultivated and harvested, and herds were tamed for breeding also
known as the domestication creating a new and more stable type of
food system. The ability to breed animals and harvest crops meant
that the people no longer had to wander to secure food but were self-
suﬃcient [7].
4,000 years
ago
•
The food systems as we know it today, began approximately 4000 years
ago with farming. This resulted in the development of permanent vil-
lages surrounding the cultivated lands, moving society into the era of
civilization. People were now able to produce a surplus of food, al-
lowing them to engage in other activities and professions, as it was
no longer necessary to be directly involved in securing food. People
became dependent on the food system and the few people responsi-
ble for securing the food. The surplus food was either conserved and
stored for later use, or traded for other goods founding the economy.
This increase in the security of food allowed the population to grow [8].
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The Food System
11
Early 1700s
•
For thousands of years the agricultural development was slow, but the
introduction of machinery in the early 1700s, resulted in fundamental
changes, revolutionising the food system. Upon the development of
the horse-drawn seed drill, farmers dramatically increased productiv-
ity and food production. In this period, farmers learned to selectively
breed better animals and crops, in addition to leaving land fallowed
or rotating crops grown, preserving the nutrients in the soil which in-
creased the production of crops [9]. In 1837 the steel plow was intro-
duced making it possible to work through tough soil with much less
horsepower further increasing yields of staple commodities such as
cotton, sugar, wheat, corn, and tobacco and spurring monoculture [5].
Early 1800s
•
Scientists discovered that nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium were
essential to the growth of plants and this discovery led to the devel-
opment of fertilizers replacing natural fertilizers. Fertilizers meant
increased crop yields as losses were reduced, and as a result prices
dropped. However, fertilizers came with the challenges also known
today; the surrounding environment and biodiversity were disturbed
and the chemicals were harmful to people [9]. As a result of less labor-
intensive food production, urbanization began and people started
moving towards the cities to ﬁnd work forever changing the social rela-
tions of family food life [10].
1900-1950s
•
The next great development shaping the food system of today was the
invention of the diﬀerent power sources. Gasoline and electricity were
now widely used to power machinery in farming further increasing
productivity[9]. Duringtheworldwars, scarcityoffoodbecameaprob-
lem. Theindustryincreasedtheuseofconservation, includingfermen-
tation to produce convenience foods made from staples, to feed the
soldiers at the front. This increased the use of plastic in food packag-
ing and induced permanent changes to the food system. By 1950 pack-
aged food was a commodity providing convenient meals to the public
and spiking an evolution of technology [11].
==PAGE:24==
12
Deconstruction
1950s-now
•
With the introduction of the microwave in the 1960s and economic
growth allowing the middle-class to buy large appliances, a shift oc-
curred in the food culture. Less time was spent preparing meals and
women entered the workforce to a greater extend, creating the foun-
dation for the food system we know today [11]. The application of fer-
mentation in the food industry has evolved with the food system from
a necessary technique to preserve and conserve food to also be an im-
portant technique to create ﬂavor. The concept of fermentation will be
described in the following section.
2.1.2
Fermentation: A flavor improving conservation technique
Fermentation dates back millions of years, and has historically been used to preserve and
conserve surplus food to avoid the spoilage, ensure detoxiﬁcation and pre-digestion of foods,
not to mention to produce alcohol. Today fermented foods make up one of the largest in-
dustries in the world oﬀering a wide pallet of ﬂavors and health beneﬁts, and it is estimated
that one-third of all food consumed is fermented. Fermentation occurs at very large scales
in controlled environments but can also occur on the countertop in private homes. Several
products that many of us consume daily are in fact fermented without us knowing. Examples
of fermented products are; yogurt, cheeses, yeast, chocolate, beer, wine, soy sauce, vinegar,
sausages, fruits, and vegetables such as pickles and kimchi, not to forget the bread.
Fermentation is in its essence the transformation of food through the use of microorganisms.
These microorganisms are diﬀerent bacteria and fungi found in the air, on surfaces, on and
in humans which produce enzymes that together transform the sugars present in the food
product to other substances, when oxygen is not present [12].
Themolecularchains, the productsconsistof, arebrokendowntotheiroriginalcomponents,
or as mentioned in the beginning pre-digested, by the microorganisms.
Starch in grain, for example, are long chains made of glucose molecules that are too large for
the human tongue to taste and hard for us to digest. When broken down, the sweetness is
unlocked and we can taste it as well as easier digest it. Much starch is, however, consumed
without being pre-digested in the form of pasta, rice, and potatoes, and we are luckily still
able to digest this, as fermentation also occur in the body. In our intestines are millions of
bacteria, breaking down the food we consume that we would otherwise not be able to digest,
to harvest the nutrients our bodies need [13].
Furthermore, during pre-digestion of the food, the nutritional values have been found to im-
==PAGE:25==
2.1 The Food System
13
prove. Increased levels of B vitamins (B1, B2, B3, and B12) occur in many fermented products
as well as the essential amino acid lysine among other micronutrients not originally present
before fermentation. These are produced by the active bacteria, all of which have health-
related beneﬁts.
One class of these active bacteria is Lactic acid bacteria, most commonly found in probiotics,
that are responsible for the acidic ﬂavor, present in many fermented foods. Since its discov-
ery in 1857, Lactic acid has been found to have signiﬁcant health-related beneﬁts such as
supporting the immune function, helping with digestion and boosting the metabolism [14].
Another beneﬁt from fermentation is the removal of toxic elements present in some foods,
and in some instances, also the transformation from anti-nutrients to nutrients. A good ex-
ample of this, is the historical use of fermentation to make safe drinking water by adding sug-
ars to allow for alcohol production or slight acidiﬁcation, killing the dangerous bacteria [13].
2.1.3
The Modern Day Food System
The Food System of today can be divided into ﬁve yet interrelated elements as seen in ﬁgure
2.2; Food supply chain, Food environment, Individual factors, Consumer behavior and Exter-
nal drivers. By determining what is produced and made available to the population, these
elements control our diets.
Figure 2.2. The activities included in the food system [15]. See appendix A for a full size image.
==PAGE:26==
14
Deconstruction
The food supply chain
The food supply chain is responsible for delivering the food and include; production, storage,
processing, packaging, distribution, marketing and retail. The steps in the supply chain are
interconnected and changes in one step can induce changes in all steps ultimately aﬀecting
the end product [15].
The food environment
The food environment is where the main interaction between the consumer and the food sys-
tem happens - this is where consumers purchase food. However, factors of social, economic
and cultural character are also a part of the food environment inﬂuencing how consumers
access the food and therefore, also their diets. This is determined by food availability, aﬀord-
ability, product properties and marketing [15].
The individual factors
The individual factors ultimately determine what consumers buy and eat. Here ones income,
knowledge, values and preferences come into play as well as the time available to buy and
prepare food [15].
The consumer behavior
Consumer behavior is the decisions made in the interaction with the food environment. This
entails the decisions made on what to eat, how to prepare, store and eat food [15].
The external drivers
Theexternaldriversasseeninﬁgure2.2applyadditionalstresstothefoodsystemsultimately
challenging the security of food. Climate change alters the weather patters and the condi-
tions under which food is produced that can result in lower output and quality hereof. Pop-
ulation growth stresses the system to produce more food, faster to feed the expected popu-
lation of 10 billion people in 2050. As a result of the increased population size more people
will live in the cities increasing the demand for supermarkets. Another factor to mention is
increasing incomes that changes the demands of the population and therefore also the food
system. When people have more money their eating behaviors change to typically include
higher amounts of animal protein. Culture and tradition highly inﬂuence eating behaviors
regardless of where in the world one resides. Globalization and trade have made it possible
to eat what ever one may desire, all year around stressing the infrastructure of the food sys-
tem. Last but not least, politics greatly inﬂuences the entire system through laws, taxes and
==PAGE:27==
2.1 The Food System
15
economic policies.
Several negative eﬀects of the external drivers are mentioned however, many of the driver
also contribute to the wealth and health of both the industry and the population [15].
Outcomes of the food system
The food system shapes our diets and ultimately our health. Through adequate nutrition
that is accessible people can eat a balanced diet and main a healthy life. However, despite a
general increase in wealth, accessibility and availability of food, people around the world are
still starving. While parts of the population have access to unhealthy highly-processed food
at almost every street corner leading to obesity, millions of people do not even have access
to an adequate or diverse amount of food leading to under- and malnutrition. The food sys-
tem hence has great social and economic impacts securing both jobs and societal well-being
around the globe. It is, in fact, one of the main sectors of employment and especially in the
low- and middle-income countries agriculture has major economic impacts.
But, all of this does not come without a catch [15]. The food system has major environmen-
tal impacts and account for up to 1/3 of the green house gasses emitted making the system
a big contributor the climate change. In addition, the system of today has damaging eﬀects
on the quality of the soil and biodiversity that are destroyed through extensive monocultures.
To compensate for depleted soils fertilizers are used which are harmful to both people and
the groundwater. Agriculture uses 50% of the habitual land and 70% of all freshwater to pro-
duce food and feed the livestock that feeds the population [16]. Overall, climate changes are
expected to negatively impact production of livestock and crops and add to the insecurity of
resources like water scarcity, soil degradation and pollution [17].
The sustainable food system
A sustainable food system encompass all of the same activities as the regular food system,
and provides security of food and nutrition to the population without compromising that
of future generations. A sustainable food system must be proﬁtable throughout the entire
system (economical sustainable), beneﬁcial for society (socially sustainable) and have pos-
itive or neutral impact on the environment (environmentally sustainable). To achieve this,
all the above mentioned external drivers must be considered as their inﬂuence on the sys-
tem is inevitable. The food system is such a complex system with endless interdependencies
why a change to the system requires a holistic approach. Change in one element manifests
throughout the entire system [3].
==PAGE:28==
16
Deconstruction
2.2
The Role of Chr. Hansen in Family Food Life
The danish founded company Chr. Hansen, is a global bioscience company, employing 3,600
peopleinmorethan30countriesthatdevelopsnaturalingredientsolutionsfortheindustries
within food, nutrition, pharmacy and agriculture. For more than 145, years Chr. Hansen has
supplied the food industry with their microbial and fermentation technology platforms to
drivepositivechange, enable sustainable agriculture andhealthy living, globally. Infact, over
1 billion people daily consume a product the contains a Chr. Hansen ingredient [18].
For the food industry Chr. Hansen produces cultures, enzymes and probiotics, collectively
also named good bacteria, that are widely used in the dairy industry as well as in the wine
and meat industry [18]. Through controlled fermentation, by addition of good bacteria, the
customers of Chr. Hansen can naturally preserve food products while ensuring just the right
taste, color, nutritional values and health beneﬁts every time [19].
In 2020 Chr. Hansen released the new strategy Grow a better world. Naturally. aiming to
shape a more sustainable future and increase climate literacy [20]. Currently, Chr. Hansen
supplies and supports the business-to-business market with their knowledge and cultures,
however, the consumer market remains untouched.
While fermentation always has been, and still is, a popular food preparation method in Asian
and African cultures it is only in recent years that fermentation, again, has become popular
in western cultures. Fermentation at home is a trend on the rise and as one of the leading
companies within large scale fermentation Chr. Hansen possesses just the expertise to sup-
port the trend and contribute further to a sustainable future [21]. Especially the younger
generations are interested. In fact, up to 49% of millennials and generation Z are interested
in experimenting with ﬂavor [21]. In Denmark alone this is equivalent to a potential market
size of 1,200,000 people [22].
However, fermenting at home is currently learning-by-doing, and not much guidance cov-
ering the entire process is available. This is an opportunity for Chr. Hansen; make expertise
knowledgeandculturesavailableforindividualconsumers. Thiswillenablehome-fermenters
to control the process and secure restorative results and further take responsibility for their
own health, the environment, and the ﬂavor in their food.
==PAGE:29==
Part II
Future Context
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER3
Domain
In this chapter the initial step towards the future context, the world I will be designing for, will
be presented. To deﬁne the future context, a delimitation of the topic How to make family
food life more sustainable through fermentation is conducted to delimit and deﬁne the area
in focus, the domain.
3.1
Establishing the domain
The domain is a lens through which the world is considered, and describes where the design
will contribute. The domain both scopes and guides the exploration of contextual factors
that are inﬂuencing the phenomenon itself. The domain I have chosen is broadly deﬁned to
embrace the complexity of the topic and is as follows:
Meals prepared at home in Danish families.
A deﬁned time frame for the design will allow one to remember to explore what is possible
in the future and design for this, instead of dwelling on the problems of today. As the matter
of action to reverse or at least stop the global warming worsening is pressing, I have chosen
the following time frame:
design for 2031.
==PAGE:32==
20
Domain
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER4
Context Factors
In this chapter the context factors, from the observations and considerations identiﬁed in-
ﬂuencing the domain are presented.
4.1
Generation of Context Factors
Ten years from now families and singles will have a food life, as we need nutrients to live,
but the composition of that food life is unclear. Our eating habits and shopping behaviors
may have changed dramatically, moderately or not at all. As a part of anticipating how the
future will look within the domain of a sustainable family food life, a large part of this project
has been dedicated to investigating factors inﬂuencing the future world of food lives. The
investigation has consisted of research of existing theories, interviews of food consumers,
experts within sustainability and sustainable food, observations, and thoughts from own ex-
periences.
Figure 4.1. An overview of the collection of context factors
sorted according to type and ﬁeld.
The outcome of the extensive inves-
tigation is a collection of 87 diﬀerent
factors, all providing a perspective to
the domain which I ﬁnd relevant for
anticipating the future. Each factor
is categorized according to the type
of factor it is; a Trend [T] or a Devel-
opment [D] describing factors that
induce changes to the human char-
acter or how the world is perceived,
or a State [S] or a Principle [P] de-
scribing static elements, or laws of
the human behavior. Furthermore,
thefactorsarecategorizedaccording
to the ﬁeld they belong to; Cultural,
Psychological, Demographic, Socio-
==PAGE:34==
22
Context Factors
logical, Economic, Biological, Evolutionary, Technological. Figure 4.1 (page 21) displays an
overview of the distribution of all the context factors according to their ﬁeld and type and
in ﬁgure 4.2 four examples of context factor cards can be seen. The complete list of context
factors can been seen in section 4.2 Context factors on page 23, while sources can be found
on the product cards in appendix B.
(a) A context factor representing a
psychological principle.
(b) A context factor representing a
technological development.
(c) A context factor representing a
sociological principle.
(d) A second context factor representing
a sociological principle.
Figure 4.2. Examples of context factors of diﬀerent types and diﬀerent ﬁelds.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Context factors
23
4.2
Context factors
Psychological
Retailers
are
the
gatekeepers
between
consumers
and
eco-
friendly products [D]
Some studies indicate that price
discount (monetary sales promo-
tion) play a vital role to motivate
consumers to buy products [P]
Attitude
greatly
influences
our
shopping behavior [P]
Environmentally friendly consumer
behavior and attitude are directly
influenced by an environmental
lifestyle that acts as a habit factor
and retailers’ environmental repu-
tation that acts as a contextual
factor [T]
There is a significant positive im-
pact of attitude to green pur-
chase behavior towards an eco-
logical packaged product [T]
Many studies have shown that
the more positive an attitude cus-
tomers have towards sustainable
products, the higher level of com-
mitment they demonstrate to the
buying decision [T]
The guidance can be designed in
an attractive way to children, as
children may influence their par-
ents’ purchase decision making
[T]
Consumers who do not identify
as environmentally friendly self do
not shop concerning the environ-
ment (thought) [T]
A consumer’s general beliefs and
care for the environment influ-
ences consumption choices [P]
We throw away food that can
feed 3 billion people [T]
The level of environmental knowl-
edge determines how we act
regarding positive environmental
behavior [T]
Self-identity is a key driver in en-
vironmentally
friendly
consumer
choices [T]
I buy food that looks appealing
and that I feel like eating [P]
People Want to eat healthy and
sustainable [T]
Meals eaten in the public sector
affect choices in the home [D]
Trust in the Organic label (and la-
bels in general) erodes over time.
“Organic is ‘an excuse to charge
more,’ and more than one-third
say they believe ‘organic’ is just
marketing jargon ‘with no real
value or definition” [T]
“My ideals have changed with my
age” [P]
Eating habits are hard to change
and are a larger barrier to a sus-
tainable food life. ”I am used to
eating meat“ [P]
People
are
not
eating
plant-
based or less meat because they
”are not vegans” [P]
Eating less meat requires an iden-
tity change [P]
The upfront examination of fresh-
ness is everything [P]
When grocery shopping people
forget what they have a home [P]
The pandemic has people focus-
ing on the concerns of home
cooking, local produce, and re-
duction of food waste [T]
Implicit priming affects our shop-
ping behavior. When consumers
feel good, they spent more [D]
In-store marketing persuade con-
sumers to buy more and other
products
than
planned
and
needed [D]
Consumer prioritize convenience
and time saved higher [T]
==PAGE:36==
24
Context Factors
We fail to plan our meals, or our
plans change [T]
Consumers
cannot
remember
when, and for how long, products
have been open [P]
We perceive products as bad
after the best before date has
passed [P]
Change is diﬀicult [P]
The longer time we spend in a
store, the more we buy [P]
Consumers can feel manipulated
by supermarkets trying to reduce
CO2 emissions through the con-
sumers (People do not like to be
told what to do) [P]
Sociological
Studies conducted on the meat
paradox show that we as con-
sumers tend to go against over val-
ues as they often are surpassed
by habit-thinking and social norms
(Aaltola, 2014) [P]
Supermarkets are gatekeepers of
the food supply chain with the
power to induce positive change
at consumers and suppliers [D]
Eating habits are influenced by
friends and family. ”My friends eat
meat, so I also eat meat“ [P]
We do not speak up about want-
ing to eat less meat, as we fear be-
ing judged [P]
Economic
80% of the produced crops are
used for livestock feed [D]
Socio-economic
backgrounds
create inequalities in health [D]
Feeding people are degrading
the ecosystems and depleting wa-
ter resources[S]
As people become old their fi-
nances increase. “We can afford
to make the ‘right’ choice now”
[T]
More meals are eaten outside the
home [D]
We produce enough food now
to feed the population of the ex-
pected size in 2050 [D]
Producers of meat want to maxi-
mize profit [P]
Monetary rewards (savings) per-
suade people into buying and
buying in bulk [T]
Consumers
demand
fresh
pro-
duce [T]
Farmers
receive
compensation
from the EU for fallow areas and
cannot let their cows grass on it as
they will lose compensation [T]
Technological
The way we produce livestock is
harmful to the environment [S]
Online
shopping
reduces
food
waste in stores [T]
More unhealthy foods are pro-
moted
online
impacting
the
health of the population nega-
tively [D]
The digital food environment has
people buying more unhealthy
food as this is promoted more in-
tensively [T]
The digital food environment has
grown during covid-19,
greater
use of digital platforms [D]
The emission of a specific food
vary greatly within producers [S]
B-Corps
Movement,
changing
the
role
of
businesses
in
soci-
ety. B-Corps certified companies
are legally required to consider
the impact of their decisions on
their workers, customers, suppliers,
community, and the environment.
This is a community of leaders, driv-
ing a global movement of people
using business as a force for good
[T] It is not where the food is from,
how it is produced, transported or
packaged that matters, it is what
you eat that matters [D]
The eﬀiciency of ecological pro-
ductions are lower than conven-
tional production as the output is
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Context factors
25
less and require more space [S]
Organic does not equal sustain-
able [D]
The ”shopping” mile in the trans-
port chain is the sinner as it causes
high emissions per product [D]
How we produce meat is the sin-
ner, not the meat itself [D]
High-end brand exploit the effects
of marketing to sell more [D]
The energy net consists of “green”
and
“black”
produced
power
and it is impossible to distinguish.
Consumers think they buy prod-
ucts produced with green energy
when they in fact are not [S]
Stores are designed to increase
the time spent in the store [D]
Companies buy climate credits to
compensate for CO2e emissions
and increase the brand value [D]
Cultural
60% of meals are eaten in the
home [T]
A sustainable food culture requires
(support of) bottom-up initiatives
[P]
Eating meat is the norm! [P]
Fermented food can serve as a
taste enhancer and taste creator
in a plant-based diet - contribute
positively to a sustainable diet [D]
Monoculture in the farming indus-
try is killing diversity (bees on Lol-
land are dying) [S]
We throw food out when the size
of leftovers are too small to save
[D]
We are changing in a green direc-
tion [T]
Logistics of family life are challeng-
ing and ends need to meet [D]
Biological
The “best before date” is only a
guide, our senses are the real ex-
piration factor [T]
People are habitual [P]
The flavor from foods can transfer
to other foods spoiling the food [D]
Employees work long hours and
have less surplus energy after work
[T]
Political
Only “pretty” crops are distributed
to the supermarkets [D]
Consumers are confused about
what the sustainable choice is re-
garding organic produce vs. con-
ventional [P]
Demographic
The aging population and smaller
household result in different con-
sumption patterns [S]
”The proportion of single house-
holds is rising which generate up
to 45% more food waste per per-
son than the average home“ [T]
The population estimated to in-
crease from 7.7 billion today to 8.6
in 2030 and 9.8 in 2050 [D]
People live longer [T]
Evolutionary
We do not know how to use left-
overs [T]
Humans are highly driven by lust
and make decisions based on this
[P]
We consume more meat the ever
before [T]
The
fake
news
movement
de-
grades the general trust of the
population [T]
==PAGE:38==
26
Context Factors
4.3
Prominent findings
From my extensive exploration of factors inﬂuencing the domain, it was prominent that sev-
eral factors revolved around two interesting topics:
1. Supermarkets play a vital role in the value chain.
Supermarkets have a great inﬂuence on what is produced and bought as they are the link be-
tween manufacturers and consumers. Today’s consumers are largely disconnected from the
food sources, as grocery shopping is conducted in large stores or online oﬀering pre-cut, pro-
cessed, and packaged food leaving us unaware of what it naturally looks like, as illustrated in
ﬁgure 4.3. We are disconnected to the extent that some children grow up believing that food
comes from the refrigerated display cabinets in the stores [23]. This poses a risk to both the
health of future generations, but also the environment as the children lack knowledge on the
role of nature in supplying food, as well as on the impact food has on nature. Supermarkets
can, to a large extent, control the demand through store design, placement of products, mar-
keting, two-for-one campaigns, and weekly oﬀers that often inﬂuence what ends up in the
basket of the consumers, and thereby also what is produced [24].
Figure 4.3. The interaction between supermarkets, manufacturers and consumers. Supermarkets in-
ﬂuencewhatendupintheconsumersbasketbycontrollingwhatisoﬀeredandtherebyalsoproduced.
Today’s consumers are disconnected from the manufacturers.
2. People want the change but not the sacriﬁce.
Many people recognize the challenges the planet are facing, and that the human population
to a large extent is responsible. Most people also know what to do diﬀerently, and want the
change, but once they realize the personal sacriﬁce required for the change to be realized,
they back out. Psychological aspects such as general attitude toward the environment, and
general willingness to change, are two obstacles for the success of sustainable diets as gener-
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Prominent findings
27
ally:
"People resist change when they think it will cause them to lose something of value" [25].
However, with the younger generations, a green movement has started and more attention
is given to food waste, initiatives to reduce it are rising, more people wish to eat less meat,
and plant-based alternatives are popping up everywhere.
Figure 4.4. Consumers knowing what to change but realizing the sacriﬁce needed and then hesitating.
==PAGE:40==
28
Context Factors
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER5
Context Structure
In this chapter the context factors presented in chapter 4 are categorized into seven diﬀerent
clusters, to present the world of the future.
5.1
Structuring of the Context Factors
To uncover the connectedness of the identiﬁed context factors, the factors that are related
havebeenstructuredinsevenclustersrevealingtheunderlyingdirectionstheypointtowards.
By clustering the context factors in a meaningful way, diﬀerent perspectives of the domain
have emerged, contributing to the process of determining where in the system to intervene
and how to achieve the desired change, while painting a picture of the future as I see it. A de-
scriptionof thesevenclusters arepresentedonthe followingpages, togetherwiththecontext
factors that make up the clusters.
5.1.1
We want to change but change is hard!
We recognize that we need to change, we want to change, we are changing, but change is
hard! A movement towards a more plant-based diet is emerging as people are becoming
more aware of the impacts of our current consumption patterns, however, at a pace too slow.
For many years people have generally had their own interests at heart, but now the world
demandsasacriﬁceforthegreatergood. Thissacriﬁcedemandsthepopulationtodrastically
decrease the intake of certain foods, which they highly value.
Change has always been diﬃcult, and the majority of the population thrives with life in equi-
librium, a steady element in an ever-changing world in which they are in control. A change
requires a transformation, entailing uncertainties and unknown elements, which are major
threats to the familiar and comfortable steady life that people know.
When choosing what to eat, 69% choose a meal they are familiar with and know they like,
to the extent that our repertoire of dishes only spans from 12-17 diﬀerent dishes [26]. More
==PAGE:42==
30
Context Structure
people state that they wish to change their eating habits to contain less meat, yet sales of
meat have only dropped 1-2% a year during the last eight years according to Coop [27].
People generally want to change and have great intentions, in fact, according to the Solution
Menu [28], 52% of Danes between the age of 18 and 35 state that they wish to have a greater
focus on the environmental footprint of diﬀerent foods, but old habits die hard! In general,
people agree that a plant-based diet is better for the environment, however, paradoxically
most people continue to eat meat. This paradox is called the meat paradox, and can most
likely be explained by the habitual nature and herd mentality of humans [27]. We are highly
driven by our habits, and inﬂuenced by our surroundings when deciding what to eat and buy.
We eat what we feel like, and our friends and families inﬂuence the choices we make as we
often follow the heap in fear of standing out.
Change is diﬃcult
Eating meat is the norm (37)
We can aﬀord to make the "right" choice
now (29)
We do not speak up about wanting to eat
less meat, as we fear being judged.
People are habitual.
Eating less meat require an identity
change. (38)
The guidance can be designed in an attrac-
tive way to children, as children may inﬂu-
ence their parents’ decision-making when
purchasing (7)
Studies conducted on the meat paradox
show that we as consumers tend to go
against over values as they often are
surpassed by habit-thinking and social
norms (Aaltola, 2014). (40)
Eating habits are inﬂuenced by friends
and family. "My friends eat meat, so I also
eat meat". (46)
People are not eating plant-based or less
meat because the "are not vegans" (p. 11).
(39)
Eating habits are hard to change and are a
larger barrier to a sustainable food life. "I
am used to eating meat" (p. 11). (36)
The pandemic has people focusing on the
concerns of home cooking, local produce,
and reduction of food waste. (53)
Table 5.1. Context factors in the cluster of We want to change but change is hard!
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Structuring of the Context Factors
31
5.1.2
The supermarket force
Despite the gained footing of meal boxes and
take out, a consumers main interaction with
food remains in the supermarket.
The su-
permarket, psychical or digital, is how we in-
teract with and get access to food.
As the
supermarket is the main option consumers
have to buy food, they possess a great deal
of inﬂuential power. Supermarkets are the
link between the consumers and producers
of food, and can hence inﬂuence what is sold
and how much, through store design and tar-
geted marketing and thereby also what is pro-
duced [29].
The Supermarkets know that a happy cus-
tomer is a spending customer, and exploit
this power over consumers throughout the
stores.
The layout of the store is carefully
planned to ensure that consumers pass every
groupofitems, andpurchasemoreanddiﬀer-
ently than originally planned.
Freshness is essential, as it is what catches
the eye and is the main selection criteria
whengroceryshopping. Consumersdemand
fresh produce! Or are we manipulated into
wanting fresh produce, at least what we per-
ceive as fresh?
The nicely stacked, crisp,
shiny, waxed, and bright colored fruits and
vegetables, maybe even with small droplets
of water to convince us of the freshness, are
chosen and put into the bottom of the bas-
ket [30]. In reality, this is not freshness, it is
an illusion of freshness. Most produce has
been plucked before it was ripe and has been
shipped long distances but only if the shape
was correct [31].
Visual appearance is one of the only param-
eters a consumer can decide upon when
choosing groceries, and to increase sales su-
permarkets transfer the pressure they feel to
satisfy consumers onto the producers. Super-
markets possess the power to inﬂuence the
behavior of the consumers, but also of the
producers.
==PAGE:44==
32
Context Structure
Retailers are the gatekeepers between con-
sumers and eco-friendly products. (1)
The upfront examination of freshness is
everything. (44)
Supermarkets are the gatekeeper of the
food supply chain with the power to in-
duce positive change at consumers and
suppliers (42)
Some studies indicate that price discount
(monetary sales promotion) play a vital
role to motivate consumers to buy prod-
ucts (2)
People do not have the time to eat what
they buy: packaging sizes are too big (50)
In-store marketing persuade consumers
to buy more and other products than
planned and needed (51)
Implicit priming aﬀects our shopping be-
havior. When we feel good, we spent more.
(54)
Monetary rewards (savings) persuade peo-
ple into buying and buying in bulk.
Supermarkets want to maximize proﬁt.
Consumers demand fresh produce.
Stores are designed to increase time spent
in them.
High-end brands exploit the eﬀects of mar-
keting to sell more.
Themoretimewespendinastorethemore
we spend.
Online shopping reduces food waste in
stores (20)
The digital food environment has grown
duringcovid-19, greateruseofdigitalplat-
forms (22)
Consumerscanfeelmanipulatedbysuper-
markets trying to reduce CO2e through the
consumers.
The digital food environment has people
buying more unhealthy food as the is pro-
moted more intensively. (23)
More unhealthy food are promoted online
impacting the health of the population
negatively (24)
Table 5.2. Context factors in the cluster The supermarket force
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Structuring of the Context Factors
33
5.1.3
We don’t have to care!
In the western world, we have never had more money than we do now, and as a result, we
live like there is no tomorrow. We can aﬀord not to care and so we do! We throw out 20 % of
the food we buy because we forgot about it, do not want it, or think it has gone bad.
Todays management of resources will leave the world in scarcity or in need of alternative
resources in the future,if we continue to go about life as we do today. The resource we have
available today can feed the world population of 2050 if we manage it carefully. But then we
must care.
We throw away food that can feed 3 billion
people (10)
When grocery shopping people forget
what they have at home (49)
60% of meals are eaten in the home (21)
We thrown food out when the amount of
leftovers are too small to save
We do not know how to use leftovers
We fail to plan, or our plans change
Humans are highly driven by lust and
make decisions based on this
We perceive products as bad after the best
before date has passed.
The best before date is only a guide, our
senses are the real factor of expiration
Only pretty crops are distributed to super-
markets (also a Supermarket Force factor)
Consumers cannot remember when, and
for how long products have been open.
The shopping mile in the transport chain
is the sinner, as it causes high emission per
product (45)
Producers of meat want to maximize
proﬁt
How we produce meat is the sinner, not the
meat itself
The way we produce livestock is harmful
to the environment (14)
80%oftheproducedcropsareusedforlive-
stock feed (8)
We consume more meat than ever before
People do not have the time to eat what
they buy package sizes are too big(50)
Mono-culture in the farming industry is
killing diversity (48)
More meals are eaten outside the home
(27)
We produce enough food now to feed a
population of the expected size in 2050
Feeding people are degrading the ecosys-
tem and depleting water resources (26)
Table 5.3. Context factors in the cluster We don’t have to care
==PAGE:46==
34
Context Structure
5.1.4
ME, ME, ME! We are on our own.
Millennial’s, the generation Z of emerging adults, have been named the ME generation more
so than the preceding generations. This generation has a positive self-view and high self-
esteem along with high expectations for the future, both educational and privately. All of
this to a higher degree than preceding generations, displaying traits tending to decreased
empathy and narcissism. Self-realization and individuality are the drivers of this generation,
and personal issues overshadow global issues such as the environment [32]. Generation Z
does not want to sacriﬁce or compromise and is in general more concerned with own needs
compared to those of others, and society. Even though this generation has higher self-esteem
and lower empathy, self-belief has not increased. Anxiety and depression are more, common
and paradoxically young adults feel powerless and experiences fear of standing up to their
own beliefs [33]. We eat meat because our family and friends do, and despite wanting to eat
less meat, we refrain from speaking up in fear of being judged [27].
The great focus on me is also apparent in the rise of single households constituting 18.5% of
all households in Denmark [34]. Single households harms the environment as they product
up to 45% more food waste than the average household [35].
Even though Generation Z has a great focus on the me, and what I want, studies show that
how we identify ourselves greatly inﬂuences our behaviors towards the environment which
can be a strength within the Me generation. If a person cares for the environment and identi-
ﬁes oneself as environmentally friendly, the person is more likely to take related factors into
account when shopping [36]. Moreover, the earlier in life concern for the environment arises
the more care for the environment is demonstrated later in life [33].
Several people from preceding generations do not believe that they can make a diﬀerence,
so they do not even bother trying. We generally have a great focus on ourselves, what we
want, self-development and challenges, yet we also want to ﬁt in, to be a part of a group and
belong, so we do not speak up when it comes to food. The conversation about food can be
diﬃcult, as several feelings are related to how we eat; it is tradition-bound and a part of our
identity [27].
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Structuring of the Context Factors
35
We want more time to do fun things, have
free time and me time
Attitude greatly inﬂuences our shopping
behavior (5)
Self-identity is a key driver in environmen-
tally friendly consumer choices (12)
A consumer’s general beliefs and care for
the environment inﬂuences consumption
choices(13)
Environmentally friendly consumer be-
havior and attitude are directly inﬂuenced
by an environmental lifestyle that acts as
a habit factor and retailers environmental
reputation that acts as a contextual factor
(6)
Many studies have shown that the more
positive an attitude customers have to-
wards sustainable products, the higher
level of commitment they demonstrate to
the buying decision (4)
The level of environmental knowledge de-
termines how we act regarding positive en-
vironmental behavior. (11)
Signiﬁcant positive impact of attitude to
green purchase behavior towards an eco-
logical packaged product (3)
Consumers who do not identify as an en-
vironmentally friendly self do not shop
organic or concerning the environment
(thought). (9)
The proportion of single households is ris-
ing which generate 45% more food waste
per person than the average home (47)
A consumer’s general beliefs and care for
the environment inﬂuences consumption
choices(13)
The aging population and smaller house-
holds result in diﬀerent consumption pat-
terns (43)
Table 5.4. Context factors in the cluster ME, ME, ME! We are on our own.
==PAGE:48==
36
Context Structure
5.1.5
Sustainable food is a complex and opaque concept
A sustainable food culture requires
bottom-up initiatives
Organic does not equal sustainable
Organic products are on average 39%
more expensive
People want to eat healthy and sus-
tainable (but dont know how)
Emission of a speciﬁc food vary
greatly within producers
Eﬃciency of ecological productions
are lower than conventional produc-
tion as the output is less and requires
more space
Trust in the Organic label (and la-
bels in general) erodes over time. "Or-
ganicisanexcusetochargemore, and
more than one-third say they believe
organic is just marketing jargon with
no real value or deﬁnition. (30)
Figure 5.1. Context factors in the cluster Sus-
tainable food is a complex and opaque con-
cept
We need to eat sustainably. Several studies show
that we need to change our eating habits, if
we wish to stop and reverse global warming,
but what is sustainable food? For many years
Organic has been perceived as the sustainable
choice, but this is now greatly challenged by eﬃ-
ciency and local food [37] [38]. Sustainable food
is not straightforward, as it depends on what you
assess, and scientists do not agree. Organic is the
sustainable choice if we consider the use of pesti-
cides, fertilizers, and other chemicals as they do
not enter the groundwater or our bodies. But, if
we consider eﬃciency, then organic is not sus-
tainable. Organic crops require more space to
grow, are smaller, and more likely to be destroyed
by fungus and insects, resulting in smaller out-
puts [39]. So what to chose? Adding to the com-
plexity, organic crops from other countries may
be produced with higher amounts of pesticides
and chemicals than a conventionally produced
crop from Denmark. European regulations on
the use of pesticides in conventional and organic
farming are issued. Denmark however, has is-
sued regulations that are more strict to minimize
all use of chemicals in food production. These
limits are, however, next to impossible for the
common person to ﬁnd, understand and trans-
late into guidelines for shopping.
Further adding to the complexity, is the origin of the crops as transportation is required.
TransportingcropslongdistancesemitsCO2, andcandamagecropsturningthemintowaste
before theyevenreachthe supermarkets. Locallyproducedcropsaremoresustainable toeat.
However, crops produced in a naturally warm and sunny country, and then transported to
Denmark, are more sustainable compared to crops grown in Denmark in a greenhouse that
requires energy for heating. Interestingly, the origin of the crop is not the most important
factor in eating sustainably, it is what you eat [16]; 1) we have to eat less meat and 2) meat
products must be sustainable. So now it is clear what to eat! Wait, what about the water used
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Structuring of the Context Factors
37
to produce the crops we should consume more of, now that we consume less meat. Take an
avocado, for example, it takes between 70 and 320 liters of fresh groundwater to produce one
avocado, which in some countries are depleting water resources for the population [40]. We
must not forget deforestation to increase the land to produce certain crops.
Sustainable food is so complex and not transparent for consumers to make an informed de-
cision when deciding what to eat. How can we expect people to eat sustainable when experts
do not even know what sustainable is.
5.1.6
It is all about the flavor and texture!
Flavor from foods can transfer to
other foods spoiling the food
Consumers demand fresh produce
The upfront examination is every-
thing (44)
I buy food that looks appealing and
that I feel like eating.
Table 5.5. Context factors in the cluster It is all
about the ﬂavor and texture!
When it comes to changing our eating habits, ﬂa-
vor and looks of the food we consume are key
drivers. We eat with our eyes, and crave great ﬂa-
vor, something we are not willing to give up. The
ﬂavor of the umami from meat is a major barrier
for many people to reduce their consumption of
meat [27]. In addition, meat is by habit the start-
ing point of planning a meal as this is what we
grew up with, and know how to prepare. Several
plant-based alternatives exist, looking like and
named to easily replace the meat, but we con-
tinue to buy the meat.
5.1.7
Culture
shapes what you eat!
Culture highly inﬂuences how we, eat and dates back several years. Culture is passed down
from past generations and constitutes religion, beliefs, race, social traits, traditions, and in
manycultures, foodissomuchmorethannutrientsforsurvival[41]. Foodistradition-bound,
food is used for celebrating and to comfort, food is used to establish relations, and has a lot of
feelings attached to it; We eat for pleasure [42]. Today in western countries our diets largely
consist of animals and animal products, while in many Asian cultures, the consumption of
animal products is low to none.
In many cultures, fermentation is a strategy for survival during times of scarcity due to the
surrounding environment. In cultures where the weather span from hot summers to freez-
ing winters, the need to preserve food collected and caught during the warm weather is a
necessity for the cold winters, where nothing grows. In cultures where the climate is humid
==PAGE:50==
38
Context Structure
and warm all year round, fermentation ensures that foods are not spoiled before people had
the chance to consume them [13].
5.2
Key dimensions
Each of the seven clusters represent a part of the future related to the sustainable food life
in Denmark, I am trying to reveal. Each one describes a perspective of the domain I ﬁnd rel-
evant, however, to have a coherent and clear picture of my future world, the relationships
between the clusters are yet to be identiﬁed. The relationships have been uncovered by con-
sidering the underlying narratives of the clusters, as well as contradicting forces within, in
collaboration with my supervisor. Several contradictions within and between the clusters
were found, therefore, three dimensions were identiﬁed to embrace, yet reduce, the com-
plexity of the subject and are as follows:
How we make decisions
How you live your daily life, is highly related to how you make decisions. At one end of the
spectrum, we have the people who lead an independent life making decisions that are driven
by their values, and oftentimes then remain loyal to these values regardless of what other
people might think. These individuals have a high level of awareness of what they like, value,
and how to act accordingly. These individuals are typically very conﬁdent, and have high
self-esteem.
On the other end of the spectrum are the people who are easily inﬂuenced by others, their
opinions, actions, and other extrinsic elements. They typically make decisions based on
what they think others think of them, and are most likely less aware of their values, or de-
viate from them as they care more about what others think of them.
Figure 5.2. Dimension of Context structure: Opposite dimensions of Motivation for decisions
Drivers of everyday activities
Howlikelyyouaretochangeyoureverydayactivitiesiscloselyrelatedtoyourintrinsicdrivers.
At one end of the spectrum, we have habitual individuals who thrive with and prefer routines
and familiarity. They do as they are used to, and tend to avoid major risks or changes.
On the other end of the spectrum, the more spontaneous and open-minded people, who
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Key dimensions
39
like to try out new things and keep an open mind towards the unknown. These people are
naturally curious, likes to travel and explore new things. Risks do not scare them and they
are more mindful of the things they do.
Figure 5.3. Dimension of Context structure: Opposite dimensions of Drivers of everyday activities
Orientation of values
How people go about their lives is relatedto the orientation of their values. Individuals whose
values are oriented towards the planet, have a general care for and concern about the envi-
ronment, and will strive to chose the environmentally friendly option. On the other hand,
individuals with values oriented towards the self, care about themselves as individuals, and
what is better for them.
People’s values can be generally oriented towards the environment or themselves.
Figure 5.4. Dimension of Context structure: Opposite dimensions of Orientation of values
==PAGE:52==
40
Context Structure
5.3
The framework for food-related behaviors of the
future
The three dimensions presented, together form a three-dimensional matrix anticipating the
diﬀerent behavioral types of the future related to food, as seen in ﬁgure 5.5. Each dimension
represents a typical behavior within the context and combined they form eight diﬀerent be-
havioral types of the future, as seen in ﬁgure 5.6 and 5.7. This section will describe the diﬀer-
ent generalized behaviors as I see them. The behavioral types are ﬁrst elaborated generically,
and later brought to life as stereotypical behaviors in ﬁctive people. These stereotypes are
not to be confused with personas, as they represent my view of future behaviors and not the
present users.
Figure 5.5. The context matrix displaying the three dimensions serving as the foundation for the food
behaviors of the future.
To easily visualize the diﬀerent behaviors in the matrix, the ﬁgures are illustrated in a two
dimensional matter. The four behavioral types with values generally orientated towards the
self are:
==PAGE:53==
5.3 The framework for food-related behaviors of the future
41
Figure 5.6. The context matrix displaying the four food behaviors of the future with a self-centered
orientation of values.
THE MEAT LOVER
Independent, habitual and self-centered. This behavioral type does generally not care about
others’ opinions, and what others think they should do. They go about life as they have al-
waysdone, anddoastheyplease. Theygenerallysticktowhattheyknowandﬁndsatisfaction
in familiarity. When making a decision, they typically consider their own needs and pleasure.
THE NECESSITY EATER
Under inﬂuence, habitual and self-centered. These individuals can be concerned with what
others think, and are susceptible external elements. How they believe others perceive them,
can drive or inﬂuence their decisions, when they believe it is of beneﬁt to themselves. They
prefer familiarity in the everyday life and prefer not to deviate from routines. These individ-
uals do not feel strongly about food, and see it more as a means to survival. They buy what is
on sale and tend to cook the same dishes without much variation in the food consumed.
==PAGE:54==
42
Context Structure
THE FLAVOURIST
Under inﬂuence, mindful and self-centered. Individuals under inﬂuence can be susceptible
to other’s opinions and values, as they are often driven by the desire for new things and lust
for new ﬂavors. If these individuals ﬁnd it beneﬁcial for themselves, they can change their
beliefs and values.
THE EXPERIMENTER
Independent, mindful and self-centered. These people are motivated by their values and
needs, and seek new experiences. General care for themselves and their health is exerted
(buy organic because it is healthier).
The four behavioral types with values generally orientated towards the planet are:
Figure 5.7. The context matrix displaying the four food behaviors of the future with a planet-centered
orientation of values.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 The stereotypical food behaviours of the future
43
THE VEGETARIAN
Under inﬂuence, habitual and planet-centered. The values and decisions of these individuals
can be inﬂuenced by others and external elements, as they are concerned with what others
think of them. Generally, they live a routine based life, and are concerned with the planet.
THE ANIMAL LOVER
Independent, habitual and planet-centered. These people do generally not care about others’
opinions, and what others think they should do. They go about life as they have always done,
and do as they please, with respect and care for the planet. They generally stick to what they
know, and ﬁnd satisfaction in familiarity.
THE FLEXITARIAN
Under inﬂuence, mindful and planet-centered. These people are easily aﬀected by external
input from both people and the media. General care for the environment drives their actions
as well as the thrill of the unknown and the urge to contribute where they can.
THE VEGAN
Independent, mindful and planet-centered. These people are motivated by their values, and
what they believe is right. They are mindful towards new things, and general care for the
environment drives their actions as well as the thrill of the unknown.
5.4
The stereotypical food behaviours of the future
Based on the three dimensions, and the general description of the individuals belonging to
the diﬀerent areas in the matrix, eight stereotypical food personalities are developed. The
future food personalities are generated based on 14 diﬀerent parameters scored from low to
high which can be seen in appendix G.
Finn the Flavorist
Finn is a man in his 60s with a family of four, but his kids are no longer living at home. He does
not have any education, but has worked his way to a specialized production worker by taking
courses, and has an income slightly above average. Generally, he is aware of his health, but
doesnotactwithspeciﬁcconcernstothis, whyheeatsashepleases. Finnisatraditionalman,
who appreciates traditional dishes sometimes with a creative twist to create some variation.
==PAGE:56==
44
Context Structure
He appreciates high-quality food, and he has a fairly high willingness and ability to pay for it,
if he feels like it, but sometimes the beneﬁts of convenience outweigh freshness.
He thinks about the eﬀects humans have on the environment, but does not take many ac-
tions towards the environment. Generally he does not care about the sustainability of his
food sources, but prioritizes locally produced products due to perception of quality. He is
well aware of the production methods for meat, but is not concerned with animal health yet
he buys meat from free-range animals, or the butcher as the quality is higher and the taste
is better. He enjoys good and ﬂavorful food, and does a little extra when food is shared with
friends or family. When planning a meal meat products are always the main ingredient in
his dishes. He considers himself a hedonist, and he often connects food and drinks to great
moments. Finn is skeptical towards meat-free meals, but as long as the great ﬂavor is present
he is generally open to trying new food.
Eddy the Experimenter
Eddy is a young man is the start 20s. who is studying full time. He lives in student housing
and lives oﬀof the government support he receives, and the money he earns from his stu-
dent job. He has a balanced relationship to health and tries to eat what is good for his body,
but with desire as the main selection criteria when choosing what to eat. He wants the best
possible quality of foods and is willing to pay for it, but has a very low ability to do so why he
often compromises with the quality. He prefers to buy organic foods only as he believes it is
healthier for him, but his budget does not allow for a completely organic diet.
Eddy does put thought into animal welfare, yet does not shop concerning this but would like
to once he earns more money and can pay for the free-range meat. He appreciates good food,
enjoys the act of cooking, and prefers to make everything himself as well as experimenting
with new dishes for dinner. However, the convenience of buying lunch at the university out-
weighs the home-cooked meal on a busy day. He is loyal to his values, but is willing to change
his behavior and listen to others, if he ﬁnds that the beneﬁts gained are higher than the cost
of the eﬀorts. For example, Eddy did not think about food waste and often forgot what he
had in the fridge, but after discussing the topic with friends he became aware, and is trying
to use the food he already has.
Nora the Necessity Eater
Nora is an elderly lady in her 80s living alone in a community of elder people, and receive
the state pension. She does regular exercise to care for her body, but is otherwise not con-
cerned with her health. She is educated as a Clerk, and has been working since she was a
teenager but, retired in her 60s. She eats basic and easy to prepare food, often frozen or ready-
==PAGE:57==
5.4 The stereotypical food behaviours of the future
45
to-eat meals. She cannot always be bothered to cook for herself after her husband passed,
and hence prioritizes convenience highly. She does not prioritize buying high-quality foods
as she ﬁnds them too expensive, yet her ability to pay for them is high as she manages her
economy carefully.
Generally, she is not concerned with the environment, and does not choose foods based on
their sustainability, but based on price and oﬀers of the week but is aware of some of the
challenges. However, she is very concerned with eating everything she buys both because
she does not like to throw food out and because she thinks it is gluttony. Nora often eats
the same things, but is a little sad that she does not know how to cook more dishes like her
children and grandchildren. She easily gets overwhelmed, and is not comfortable with all
the new technology so she sticks to the things she knows.
Martin the Meat Lover
Martin is a man in his late 30s, who is working as a mechanic with an average income. He
lives without concern for his health and enjoys the food he feels like. He loves meat and will
have meat at all meals, if he can. Quality food is not a priority for Martin as he thinks it is
overrated, and too expensive. Even though he could pay for it he is mostly concerned with
value for money so he always buys what is on sale and in bulk. Martin does not care for the
environment, he believes it is publicized nonsense and does not pay attention to the debate
in general, why he also does not think of sustainability when selecting foods.
He loves animals, but is not concerned with animal welfare for slaughter animals as he loves
meat and will not give up eating it. He usually eats the same as he is somewhat picky and
skeptical towards foods he has not tried before, unless they are presented by close friends. He
is loyal to his own beliefs, or slightly stubborn as his friends would say, but they can convince
him to try new things, and he often likes them after all.
Vera the Vegan
Vera is a young woman in her early 20s who is studying literature, she lives in Nørrebro and
receives government support during her studies, and works in a vegan cafe. In her spare
time, she hangs out with friends and does yoga. She has a great focus on her health, and is
very conscious about her diet. In addition, she cares deeply for the environment and animal
welfare, and therefore lives on a completely vegan diet. She ﬁghts to share her beliefs and
convince others to do the same to save the planet.
She prefers to shop in packaging-free supermarkets, and always chooses the most sustain-
able option and will rather live without it, if sustainable products are not available. She prior-
==PAGE:58==
46
Context Structure
itizes her budget so she can aﬀord high-quality and organic food. Vera likes good food, and
spends a lot of time on social media looking for inspiration from other vegans or talking to
like-minded people in diﬀerent groups. Vera does not deviate from her values, as she wants
to do right by the world.
Walter and Victoria the Vegetarians
WalterandVictoria are parentswith two small kids, Oliviawhois twoyearsold, andBenjamin
who is ﬁve. They are both working full time, Victoria as a research scientist and Walter in
planning, and have two incomes above average. Their weekdays are tightly packed so they
prioritize convenience highly and are willing to pay for it. They receive meal boxes weekly,
and have chosen the family-friendly organic and vegetarian version to ensure that their kids
eat well and healthy, but also to save time on cooking and shopping. They often choose the
dishes based on what they know their kids like. They care about their health, but do not have
much spare time so they live a vegetarian life choose and organic food whenever possible as
they believe it is more healthy.
They care for the environment, but do not have the time to take such action as they are simply
trying to make ends meet with two jobs, a home, and two small kids. However, eating vege-
tarian is an easy sustainable choice for them. They would like to change their behavior to be
more sustainable, but they do not know how and do not have the time to investigate. They
prefer animal products from free-range animals as they care about animal welfare. When-
ever they have the time they like to travel, however, since they had kids vacations abroad are
limited to twice a year. When the kids are older they dream of more weekend getaways in
Europe. They try to choose food that matches their values, but on busy days it is not their
ﬁrst priority.
Aiden the Animal lover
Aiden is a man in his 40s, highly educated and with a top position in a big consultancy com-
pany, living in northern Zealand with his wife and two teenage kids. He works long hours,
travels often, and does not want to waste time so he does what he can to optimize his time.
He is moderately concerned with his health so he prioritizes to exercise several times a week
and eats healthy foods, mostly prepared by his wife. The family subscribes to organic meal
boxes and often orders takeout as it is easier.
Aiden does, however, not care much for the environment, but buys organic because he feels
that it is equal to high quality and his wife prefers this. He is willing to pay for quality as
he feels that price and quality are related. Aiden buys meat and animal products from free-
range animals because animal welfare is something he believes in and he ﬁnds the products
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Choosing the direction
47
are better. He eats the same for breakfast every day and has lunch at the oﬃce He does not
like to engage in cooking and creativity in the kitchen, but he appreciates good food.
Frida the Flexitarian
Frida is in her 30s working as a nurse with changing schedules, and with an average income.
She is generally concerned with her health and tries to eat healthily, but mainly eats what
she feels like. She cares for the environment and for animal welfare and she wants to con-
tribute positively to both, so she tries to eat less meat but ﬁnds it a little diﬃcult to know how
otherwise to be more sustainable in her habits. She is willing to pay for the quality of some
products and is fairly able to, but she is also concerned with price.
She prioritizes eating meat from free-range animals when she eats meat, but generally tries
to substitute meat with plant-based alternatives. She loves a home-cooked meal and likes to
cook, but as she is mostly by herself so she tends to also select the convenient choice. She
often spends time with friends and family, and when they eat together she tends to eat what
the others also like, as she does not want to be of any trouble to others.
5.5
Choosing the direction
In an ideal world, the mapped behaviors would guide my design process in the direction of
an intervention that can move everybody to the front lower right quadrant to live as vegans,
removing all meat and animal products from their diets to reduce the carbon footprint to the
bare minimum. This would require fundamental changes, not just for the individual but for
the entire industry, reducing the likelihood of success for my design drastically, and global
veganism is not the goal of this project.
Instead, I will design for individuals with general values and food behaviors oriented towards
the self. The individuals with values already oriented towards the planet are either already
eating with respect to the environment, or on a journey towards a sustainable diet. The be-
havioral changes required for these people to have a completely sustainable food life are mi-
nor compared to those estranged from sustainability, why I believe my design will have a
bigger impact if more people have an orientation of values towards the planet.
I have chosen to design for the mindful behavioral type being the Experimenter, and indi-
rectly the Flavorist, as highlighted in ﬁgure 5.8. The Experimenter, as a type, is open-minded
and likes new things and remains loyal to their values, whereas the Flavorist is more suscep-
tible to external inﬂuence. The Flavorist type is more likely to ﬁnd inspiration in or get inﬂu-
enced by others, why these individuals in time will follow the masses.
==PAGE:60==
48
Context Structure
Figure 5.8. The context matrix focusing of the individual, mindful and self-centred behavior.
5.5.1
The undesirable behavior
The Experimenter enjoys food and eats based on lust or cravings. This person enjoys cooking
and often buys several ingredients, some of which might only be used partially and forgotten
or thrown out. Labels such as organic or local are not in focus, nor is the production of the
ingredient.
The undesirable behavior of an Experimenter is the focus on an animal-based protein source
as the center of a meal, it is the purchasing of excessive amounts of food or the "just-in-
case" food. It is the "I-don’t-want-what-I-have-so-I-buy-something-else" behavior, it is the
"refrigerator-graveyard" behavior, it is the too spontaneous behavior.
This will, as I see it, be the future if we do not intervene. Instead I wish to intervene and
inﬂuence the direction in which we are moving.
5.5.2
The sustainable behavior of the future
The sustainable behavior this project aims to encourage, is a behavior that is beneﬁcial for
the environment, yet considers the needs of the individual. This may sound like a minimal
change in people’s behavior, but if their needs in the future are diﬀerent from those of today
they can be met in a sustainable manner.
A sustainable food behavior is a conscious behavior, and an only-what-I-need behavior. The
future sustainable food consumer will strive to make the most out of what is at hand.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Choosing the direction
49
There is not one solution, no right answer, not one right way to be sustainable in one’s food
life. The complexity is too high, why the aim is to allow consumers to make an informed
decision.
Sustainable food behavior in the future should focus on ﬂavors, nutrients, and responsible
and complete use of resources, to ensure ﬂavourful meals and reduce food waste.
The general guidelines based on the currently available knowledge state that we should con-
sume less meat, more legumes, in-season products and reduce food waste to have a sustain-
able food life. As previously mentioned, most people agree that this food life is more sustain-
able and claim that they want to live more like this, yet they do not.
The success criteria is, therefore, that all meals prepared from home are constructed based
on one of the above elements.
==PAGE:62==
50
Context Structure
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER6
Statement
This chapter presents the vision of the design in a ﬁnal statement, guiding my design process.
Before the vision statement is presented, I will describe my personal vision for the project, as
this will shape and inﬂuence every decision made in the design phase.
6.1
My Vision for the project
As a designer, complete objectivity is impossible to obtain. Even though we strive to cover
every possible angle of a challenge and be objective, we are inevitable subject to bias from
our past experiences and general approach to the world. By explicitly stating my values and
vision for this project, the reasoning for my design choices become clear.
Joined forces individually
Global warming and environmental challenges have been subject to conversation for sev-
eral years, and many people already took matters into their own hands and changed their
behavior to be considerate of the environment. However, the majority of the population has
continued to go about life as they used to, leaving the world in desperate need of action, and
it has to be now.
People are realizing now that they need to do something. The general attitude has been "It
does not make a diﬀerence if I do this, so why to bother" but many a mickle makes a muckle.
If we all do a little, together we do a lot! It does matter, however small it may feel.
I wish to contribute to a sense of action by encouraging people to see every action as a part
of something bigger, to join forces by contributing individually, and let go of the recklessness
towards the planet. We are all responsible for ensuring a future for the generations to come.
Low eﬀort evolution
In a busy day ﬁlled with decision-making and endless choices, people often go for conve-
nience at the end of the day.
==PAGE:64==
52
Statement
My design has to be realistic. In my opinion, realism is closely related to ease of use and low
complexity. I am a strong advocate for designing solutions that make people perceive their
lives as easy. If the sustainable option is the obvious choice, why would you not make it?
==PAGE:65==
"To encourage sustainable
consumption of food I want to
help families adopt a more
planet-centered set of values by
enhancing focus on ﬂavors and
textures in meal construction."
- Vision statement
==PAGE:66==
54
Statement
The Statement Elements
The goal of the intervention is twofold. I aim at nudging Flavorist into becoming more exper-
imental in their food life, to increase the number of Experimenters. I will do this by oﬀering
support and help to the Flavorist, and inspire them to take a more independent stance. At
the same time, I wish to push the system in a planet-centered direction by nudging the Exper-
imenters to adopt a greener value set, without compromising their desire for exciting food.
Thus, I wish to create a new food identity that will co-exist in the same space as vegans, but
not as vegans.
To achieve the changes, I aim to encourage people to focus more on the ﬂavor pallet and the
diﬀerent textures in a meal, and refrain from the focus on the ingredient itself. Speciﬁcally, I
want to nudge people to seek and use plant-based ﬂavor creators and enhancers, as substi-
tutes for the well-known and well-used umami creator, meat.
The focus on ﬂavor needs to arise early on, why the interaction should be applicable through-
out the entire process of constructing meals.
Meal construction encompasses all acts related to a meal from the initial cravings to the han-
dling of the remains of the evening meal. Hence, construction covers planning, whether you
plan from home or spontaneously plan in the supermarket, the act of grocery shopping, the
inclusion of already purchased goods, cooking, eating, and handling of remains by saving to
avoid food being discarded.
Point of interaction
As I aim to encourage people to focus more on the ﬂavor pallet and the diﬀerent textures in a
meal, the point of interaction will primarily be in the act of planning, shopping and cooking.
Once the food is in the shopping basket of a consumer, it is more diﬃcult to intervene in the
food behavior. Food in the basket already have a purpose in the mind of the consumer, and
once you leave the store it is diﬃcult to modify this purpose. Thus, my design process will
focus on inspiring consumers to ﬁnd ﬂavor in plant-based ingredients.
==PAGE:67==
Part III
Interaction
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER7
Human-product
Interactions
With a deﬁned direction for the future in the vision, the next step is to determine the interac-
tions required for this future to be realized. The human-product interactions describe what
relationship should ﬂourish between the product and the user, and how this interaction with
the design will create meaning and value in the given context. The desired interaction be-
tween the user and the design should be characterized by the following:
Exploratory
The interaction should bring out the inner child, who is eager to explore the world free of
prejudice, and with an unappeasable lust for more.
Educational
The interaction should resemble that of a patient and capacious teacher, inspiring the user
to learn and apply the newly acquired knowledge.
Considerately challenging
A considerately challenging interaction should let the user feel a sense of challenge towards
personal beliefs and tendencies, in a matter considering the needs and wants of the user, to
secure a pleasant experience.
Empowering
I believe in giving people the power to achieve anything, therefore, the interaction should
provide users with the necessary means and conﬁdence to explore unknown things.
==PAGE:70==
58
Human-product Interactions
Tempting
Theinteractionshouldcreateamouth-wateringexperience, leavingyouwithnootherchoice
than to jump aboard.
Intuitive
When using the design, the interaction should happen naturally and be experienced as easy-
to-use and self-explanatory.
Analogy for the human-product interaction
I want the human-product interaction to resemble the relationship between a child and a
parent illustrated in ﬁgure 7.1.
Figure 7.1. The image show an adult woman and her mom in a loving hug to illustrate the parental
advisor analogy. Photo: ľ[wavebreak3]/Adobe Stock.
==PAGE:71==
Human-product Interactions
59
Parental Advisor
The relation between a child and a parent will evolve, and the child will in time become more
independent, but the fundamental relation remains regardless of age. You will always be
someone’s child or parent, even when you are 70 and your parent is 95. Parents have a cru-
cial role in the upbringing of children, and will for many represent a safe heaven. A parent is
someone you trust unconditionally, someone you can conﬁde in, ask for support and help,
someone who can advise you and empower you, someone who is always there, one you can
turn to. Your parent has provided you with a toolbox, and will throughout your life ﬁll it with
more tools for you to use in your way, to create what you like, but if you need it, they will also
show you how to use it. In time you will try to free yourself from your parents to become inde-
pendent but you will always come back to the safe, forgiving, and caring space your parents
create.
==PAGE:72==
60
Human-product Interactions
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER8
Product Qualities
To create the interactions described in chapter 7, the design needs to have speciﬁc charac-
teristics or Product qualities, to ensure that the experience will be as intended. Deﬁning the
product qualities is the last step in my vision before the design will take form. The product
qualities are as follows:
Trustworthy
The intervention must provide reassurance to the user so the user experience it as reliable
and credible.
Supportive
The intervention should help and support the user with the task at hand, to secure a good
experience and recurring use.
Intriguing
The intervention should be fascinating and indulging, so people feel inspired to evolve and
become an enlarged version of themselves.
Flexible
To secure a pleasurable experience that is considerate of the individual’s needs, the solution
must be ﬂexible and adaptive to the person who is using it. The solution should encourage
and empower the user to engage at a level that is suitable for the time being, yet spike curios-
ity to ensure reoccurring use.
==PAGE:74==
62
Product Qualities
==PAGE:75==
Part IV
The New Solution
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER9
Concept & Design
This chapter introduces the concept as a whole and the individual elements of the solution.
The chapter is concluded with how the vision has provided guidance for the solution.
9.1
Concept vision
We eat 3 - 6 times a day, and spend a considerable amount of time thinking of, and talking
aboutfood, preparingfood, andeatingfoodyetthefocusonlearningaboutnutrients, ﬂavors,
and preparation is in some instances almost non-existent beyond the walls of our parents’
kitchens. Instead, time is of the essence, and we do not want to waste perceived time on
cooking. Along the way, we seem to have lost touch with the element fueling our bodies.
People still want good and healthy food, but as takeout and meal boxes have gained footing
home-cooked ﬂavorful food may have lost it.
Most people know the concept of the ﬁve basic ﬂavors in cooking, but most people do also
not know how to actively use them while cooking. It takes years of training and experience,
perhaps even education, to be able to think and cook with the basis in the ﬁve ﬂavor proﬁles.
With the concept presented later on, I aim to provide consumers with the power of knowl-
edge on the 5 basic ﬂavors, where to ﬁnd them, and how to extract them to empower the
everyday chefs to create tasteful meals at home.
Even though my overall goal is to get more people to eat sustainable and tasty food, I am
aware that most people have busy everyday lives why convincing people to cook for 10.000
hours to become experts, is impossible. In addition, I also acknowledge that change is diﬃ-
cult and that people appreciate the freedom to choose themselves why I will not dictate what
to eat, but aim to promote sustainable eating through inspiration and ﬂavorful plant-based
meals. I, therefore, strive to encourage and empower people regardless of cooking skill level
to create tasteful meals, whether they have no time or plenty of time.
==PAGE:78==
66
Concept
Know the flavor
Eating is evidently crucial for our survival, but it is the pleasure involved in the eating that
makes it worthwhile [43]. A pleasurable meal is a result of three diﬀerent components; The
immediate perception through our senses, past experiences, and association of the experi-
ences [44]. When chefs create delicious and pleasurable meals they think in terms of appe-
tizing smells, good balance of ﬂavors, presences of umami, a mixture of textures, and ﬂavor
richness. However, when cooking at home most people do not think in line with a profes-
sional chef, simply because we do not have the experience from thousands of hours in the
kitchen working with ﬂavor and ﬂavor composition [45]. The ﬁve basic ﬂavors sweet, sour,
salt, bitter, and umami are crucial for a balanced and tasteful meal, yet it is not clear where
to ﬁnd these ﬂavors or how to use them optimally. It should not be necessary to obtain an ed-
ucation as a professional chef to create tasteful meals at home. Therefore, introducing Find
Flavor as displayed in ﬁgure 9.1.
Figure 9.1. The Find Flavor solution and example of a product sticker to guide consumers.
==PAGE:79==
9.2 Find Flavor
67
Current situation
People buy groceries and cook, not necessarily, constructing meals that are based on the ﬁve
basic ﬂavors necessary for a balanced meal.
Intervention
Encourage and help people to adopt a new cooking behavior where people think diﬀerently
about how to make food, by allowing them to make a choice based on awareness about ﬂavor
and sustainability.
Goal
Encouragesustainablefoodconsumptionthroughﬂavorbyspikingpeople’scuriositythrough
the power of knowledge.
9.2
Find Flavor
Find Flavor is an expert-based food and food preparation solution creating awareness about
sustainable ﬂavor, and providing users with information that allow them to easily excel in the
kitchen. The solution consists of a digital guide, containing all the relevant information and
smart ﬂavor stickers, guiding the users visually in the supermarket, giving them direct access
to the chef’s advice and information through the embedded radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) technology. In the supermarkets, the diﬀerent colored stickers on products guide the
users to identify diﬀerent ﬂavor proﬁles, aiding them in creating sustainable meals with all
ﬂavors present.
Solution elements
The solution consists of two elements; The visual guide (the smart stickers) and the digital
guide (the app).
SMART STICKERS
The smart stickers, portrayed in ﬁgure 9.2, have two main functions; to provide direct access
to detailed information, and to visually guide the consumers in the supermarket through the
I AM statement displaying the ﬂavor proﬁle of the given product - Bitter, Salty, Sour, Sweet or
Umami. The statement is supported by bright colors that studies show people associate with
the ﬂavor [46]. With the main ﬂavor proﬁle clearly stated, the stickers provide the users with
the option to easily choose from diﬀerent products within the same ﬂavor category, substi-
tute ingredients, or modify dishes to their preferences. On the sticker is the climate score for
the speciﬁc product displayed on a scale from 1 - 100, where 1 is bad for the environment,
==PAGE:80==
68
Concept
and 100 is great, making it easy to select sustainable products. This information is linked to a
large climate database [47], and provide the users with the option to make an informed deci-
sion when shopping for groceries. The individual elements will be described on the following
pages.
Figure 9.2. The ﬁve Find Flavor product stickers to guide consumers.
==PAGE:81==
9.2 Find Flavor
69
Shape
The round shape of the sticker provides a friendly appearances, and symbolizes harmony.
Thestickersare4cmindiametertobesuitableformostproducts, yetlargeenoughtocontain
the relevant information. See enlarged example in ﬁgure 9.3 (page 70).
Color
The colors of the stickers are bright to draw attention to the shelves. To ensure that con-
sumers, both consciously and unconsciously, connect and associate the colors with the dif-
ferent ﬂavors. The following colors where chosen; blue was chosen for salty, black for bitter,
yellow for sour, pink for sweet, and brown for umami [46].
Text
The text on the stickers is precise and slightly bold to challenge, yet encourage the user to act.
The text tells the user what the personality of the product is, as if the product was speaking to
them - the ﬂavor displayed, right there in the middle, impossible to miss. Be climate friendly
encourages the user to consider the environment, while the Extract my ﬂavor and Scan me
text call for immediate action.
Climate score
Theclimatescoreprovidestheuserwithconcrete, andrelatablenumberonthesustainability
of the product. The number is based on calculations from The Big Climate Database where
the climate footprint for the diﬀerent stages in production is calculated [47]. The individual
score of a product is used to calculate the overall scores of recipes in the app.
RFID technology
Each sticker contains an RFID chip that holds product-speciﬁc information that, if wanted,
is accessible to the users. The technology directs the users to the app where the data related
to the product can be viewed upon placing a phone, containing the Find Flavor app, over the
sticker [48]. The consumer is taken directly to the product card in the app as shown in ﬁgure
9.6 on page 73. From here the suggested recipes to extract ﬂavor and improve the climate
score can easily be accessed as well.
==PAGE:82==
70
Concept
Figure 9.3. Explanation of the sticker elements.
==PAGE:83==
9.2 Find Flavor
71
The Find Flavor APP
The Find Flavor app is a smartphone app that can be used together with the stickers or in-
dividually. Here the consumer can read about the ﬂavor proﬁle of an extensive list of prod-
ucts, how to extract as much ﬂavor as possible from speciﬁc ingredients, and get inspiration
for sustainable and tasteful sustainable meals. The content of the app is developed in close
collaboration with professionals to ensure trustworthy information, and supportive prepara-
tion procedures. To accommodate the diﬀerent preferences of users, recipes are available in
three levels; Flavor Express, Flavor Explorer, and Flavor Explosion. The app suggests recipes
to improve the overall climate score by combining ingredients with better scores. Flow exam-
ples are given in the following pages while the full overview of the app and ﬂow can be views
in appendix C.
Functions in and design of the Find Flavor app
The Find Flavor app has several functions:
• Provide knowledge about the ﬁve basic ﬂavors
• Provide knowledge of ﬂavor proﬁles of products
• Provide detailed support on how to extract ﬂavor in general
• Provide easy to follow chef-made ﬂavorful recipes
• Inspire users to eat sustainable food
Find Flavor
Users can ﬁnd descriptions of the ﬁve basic ﬂavors in the app, informing about the general
use of the ﬂavors and how to apply them in cooking, to create balance in a dish as seen in
ﬁgure 9.4.
Users can also ﬁnd ingredients within the speciﬁc ﬂavor group by going to Find Flavor in
the menu. Here it is possible to search directly for an ingredient, or select a speciﬁc group
of ﬂavors. All the products with this ﬂavor proﬁle are listed and can be sorted according to
diﬀerent ﬁlters to make it easier for the user to ﬁnd what they are looking for, as shown in
ﬁgure 9.5.
==PAGE:84==
72
Concept
(a)
Find
Flavor
menu
accessed from front page
(b) By pressing The 5 basic
ﬂavors you go to the ﬂavor
menu
(c) By pressing Sweet you go
to the information about the
ﬂavor
Figure 9.4. Example of the ﬂow to ﬁnd a basic ﬂavor explained.
(a) Flavor overview accessed
from the menu
(b) Search for ingredients in
the overview
(c) By searching for mush-
rooms, you go to the mush-
room overview
Figure 9.5. Example of the ﬂow searching for a speciﬁc ingredient.
==PAGE:85==
9.2 Find Flavor
73
Users can get access to the product cards by either scanning the RFID chip in a sticker or by
searching for an ingredient as shown above. The product cards contain information about
the food ingredient, what ﬂavor it has, and how to prepare it, to extract as much ﬂavor as
possible both for individual consumption but also in general when added to other dishes.
Lastly, suggestions for recipes containing the ingredient as seen in ﬁgure 9.6 can be accessed
from the card.
Figure 9.6. Example of product card for brown mushrooms
Find recipes
Recipes can be found in two diﬀerent ways; Through a product card displaying recipes with
thegiveningredientorthroughFindRecipesinthemenu. Heretheuserscanﬁndsustainable
and tasty recipes on three diﬀerent levels:
• Flavor Express for ﬂavorful meals under 30 minutes
• Flavor Explorer for ﬂavorful and creative meals
• Flavor Explosion for intense ﬂavor with fermentation
Therecipessuggestedwillmainlyconsistofplant-basedelementstoencourageclimate-conscious
eating. Therecipesaredesignedtoconvincepeoplethroughﬂavorthatclimate-friendlyfood
==PAGE:86==
74
Concept
is delicious, and that trying new dishes can be sensational.
Consumers who are concerned with the environment can, by adding fermentation to the
repertoire, take sustainable eating to a new level. Flavor explosion recipes will enable users
to create ﬂavor with fewer and more basic ingredients, by exploiting the power of natural
bacteria due to the preserving nature of fermentation.
By adopting fermentation in the new cooking behavior users can have a great impact on
the climate as consumption of foods with low impacts will increase. Additionally, the risk
of spoilage is lowered and so is the potential of food waste.
Increase climate score
The climate score is an indicator of the sustainability of the product, and by combining one
product with other products, the score can de- or increase. Recipes will be marked with a
total score based on the amount of a given product in the dish for a certain number of peo-
ple. In the recipes, it will be possible to swap ingredients, either to increase the climate score
or to use food already in the home. An algorithm will recalculate the recipe and present the
user with a new version. For example, if a recipe contains sun-dried tomatoes that have an
impact of 1.95 CO2e per kg, but you want to make your own from fresh tomatoes that have
an impact of 0.7 CO2e per kg the overall score will increase [47]. The climate score can, in
addition, support users to have the behavior they want to embody in a semi-public environ-
ment. By shopping for products with high scores, people may feel that others perceive them
as healthy and environmentally friendly when glancing down their basket, resulting in a feel-
ing of satisfaction.
Find Flavor results in a sustainable family food life by indirectly helping families to act sus-
tainablethroughtastefulplant-basedexperiences. Greatfoodexperiencesmakepeoplecrave
for more.
How does it work
The Find Flavor system has two main interactions, however, as diﬀerent depths of the inter-
actions are possible, they are divided into one passive and three active interactions.
1. Grocery shopping while unconsciously shopping for ﬂavor (passive interaction)
2. Grocery shopping while consciously shopping for ﬂavor (active interaction)
3. Grocery shopping while actively shopping for ﬂavor and reading product cards/shop-
ping for a recipe (active interaction)
==PAGE:87==
9.2 Find Flavor
75
4. Reading product cards / following recipe (active interaction)
Artefacts involved in the interactions
Unconscious
shopping for
ﬂavor
Conscious
shopping for
ﬂavor
Actively
shopping for
ﬂavor
Reading
product
cards /
following
recipe
The Flavor
stickers
x
x
x
Find Flavor
app
x
x
Table 9.1. Overview of the interactions and the artefacts involved
The unconscious shopper will notice the Flavor sticker, but continue to buy groceries as
usual without directly paying attention to the ﬂavor proﬁle, hence interacting passively with
the artifact. The unconscious shopper may not want to interact with the digital element, and
has the choice not to but the interaction with the stickers displaying the ﬂavor proﬁle will be
inevitable. This might, in time, nudge the shopper to unconsciously become a conscious
shopper. The passive interaction will not be further elaborated, however, the remaining ac-
tive interactions will in the following pages be explained, with a basis in the Actively shopping
for ﬂavor interaction.
==PAGE:88==
76
Concept
==PAGE:89==
9.2 Find Flavor
77
==PAGE:90==
78
Concept
Purpose of solution elements
The smart sticker is the most essential artifact in the solution, being placed on all products
that users buy, to create awareness about the diﬀerent ﬂavors and where to ﬁnd them, even
if you are shopping after a long stressful day. The purpose of the stickers is to nudge and
support consumers to think in terms of ﬂavor in a more distinct matter. The nudging tool
applied to the stickers are 1. simpliﬁed and framed information and 2. changing the physical
environment. The physical environment here constitutes the product packaging [49].
The stickers are placed by the producers on the products in the speciﬁc ﬂavor category, al-
lowing the consumers to quickly identify and buy according to ﬂavor proﬁles, while in the
supermarket. A requirement that producers must meet.
However, thinking in terms of ﬂavor and sustainability when cooking also requires that con-
sumers know how ﬂavors play together, enhance or balance each other, how to extract the
most possible ﬂavor and what impact the ingredients have on the climate. It is, therefore, cru-
cial that consumers have access to this knowledge, both in the situation of planning a meal,
shopping for a meal, and preparing the meal and this is where the app comes into play. The
app has the purpose of delivering high-quality, reliable, and easy-to-understand knowledge.
How the solution elements play into my vision
The goal of my vision is to encourage sustainable consumption of food and to do that I will
help families adopt a more planet-centered set of values. Sustainable consumption entails
a behavior that seeks to reduce the emissions generated through food, however, until now
it remains opaque. Most research points in the direction of a plant-based diet, and most
peoplerecognizethisneed, yethesitatetoadoptitbecauseofthesacriﬁcetheyfeelitrequires
namely good taste.
By enhancing focus on ﬂavors and teaching people how to extract ﬂavor from plant-based
ingredients, the sacriﬁce will in time feel less of a sacriﬁce and more of a choice.
My solution will:
• make sustainable consumption transparent through the Climate score, and adjustable
recipes
• enhancefocusonﬂavorthroughtheSmartstickersonproducts, andeasy-to-understand
knowledge
• help families to adopt planet-centered value sets by inspiring to tasteful and plant-
based meals, on diﬀerent levels
==PAGE:91==
9.2 Find Flavor
79
Vision guidance for design
In my ﬁnal design, the solution includes a climate score on the smart stickers and overall cli-
mate scores of recipes, as well as the option to change this score through ingredient choices.
The stickers are the face of the solution, and are designed to be intuitive, educational, and
slightly provocative without being demanding.
However, in designing the stickers, the aim to fulﬁll all of the above, yet keep simplicity, re-
quired several iterations.
On the initial design of the sticker, no call for action or climate impact was included, the
sticker was purely informative of the ﬂavor proﬁle. Consulting my vision statement, it be-
came evident that such a sticker did not help families to adopt planet-centered values beyond
creating a focus on ﬂavor at the time of purchase.
In the second iteration, a QR code was incorporated as well as instructions, however, in this
design the link to sustainability and purpose were still unclear. Upon consulting with David
Zilber, former Head of Fermentation at Noma, the consumer incentive to scan the QR code
was questioned - this will be elaborated later in chapter 10 Validation, but it led to the third
iteration.
In the third iteration, the climate score was incorporated but I found that the central position
of the score, and the ﬂavor proﬁle near the edge of the sticker deﬁed the purpose of the sticker
- creating awareness on ﬂavor.
Therefore, a fourth and last iteration of the sticker was performed compromising slightly on
simplicity to be intuitive, educational, and slightly provocative.
Help to home-fermenters
An adjacent goal is to make home fermentation more widespread, but before this seems re-
alistic people need to adopt a ﬂavor perspective on food. Fermentation is a niche, and the
success of fermenting at home depends on several variables such as temperature, ﬂuid to salt
balance, and bacteria activity. All of these are Chr. Hansen expert in managing, especially the
bacteria required in the fermentation process.
In the industry, products must taste the same to consumers each time they buy them, but
replication of ﬂavor is just as important in the home. How many times have we not stood in
the kitchen wondering "what did I do last time?" or asking ourselves "why does it not taste
like last time?". Success is important for people to maintain motivation, and motivation is
important to ensure the long-term change in behavior [50]. By helping people succeed it is
==PAGE:92==
80
Concept
possible to maintain the momentum of the change until this behavior is the new norm. But,
before consumers master general ﬂavor creation, fermentation is, in general, too advanced.
You have to walk before you can run.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER10
Validation
Validation of a design before implementing it is always important, however, when designing
for an anticipated future, validation becomes slightly more important. Through an assess-
ment of the design in its early stage, it is possible to identify needs for further development
or possibly a change of direction.
In addition, by validating my design it is possible to get indications of the market potential;
are people interested in using such a solution? Are the anticipated eﬀects of the design likely to
occur? What changes need to be made to make the design appropriate and eﬀective?
10.1
Expert validation
Due to the 10-year time frame of my solution, narrative-based studies were utilized to vali-
date the vision statement and early-stage concept of Find Flavor. The purpose of such a study
is to assess the ability of the solution to induce responsible behavior.
A narrative-based study is formulated in a story that explains how the solution is used, and
the consequences thereof. The story is short, but detailed enough to allow the participants to
assess the solution. The participants can be potential users of the solution or experts within
the domain. For this project three experts, David Zilber, Claus Meyer and Louise Rosenmeier
have performed a validation of the concept. David Zilber, former Head of Fermentation at
the danish world-recognized restaurant Noma, and now collaborating with Chr. Hansen, has
provided an expert validation of both the vision statement and the initial concept, in a stage
earlier than the one presented in chapter 9 Concept & Design, and of the ﬁnal concept. Claus
Meyer, a Gastronomical serial entrepreneur, has performed a general validation of the ﬁnal
concept as a whole, and contributed with ideas for further development. Louise Rosenmeier,
Sustainability and ESG Manager in Chr. Hansen has provided validation of the concept gen-
erally, and from a Chr. Hansen point of view.
==PAGE:94==
82
Validation
David Zilber
Canadian, age 35
Former Head of Fermentation at Noma
Currently Consultant in Chr. Hansen
Author
David Zilber has been cooking since the age of
18, held positions as the sous chef of Canadas
best restaurant, Hawksworth and for the last
ﬁve years, as Head of Fermentation in
world-leading restaurant Noma. At Noma, his
primary job was to discover and create ﬂavor.
Now, he is consulting as a food scientist at Chr.
Hansen to improve sustainability in the food
system and democratize fermentation [51].
==PAGE:95==
10.1 Expert validation
83
Claus Meyer
Danish, age 57
Gastronimic Entreprenuer
Business owner
Author
Claus Meyer holds a Cand. merc. international
from CBS yet have worked with food since his
studies. Today Claus has an impressive résumé
as the owner of the Meyer Group with several
businesses under, co-owner of restaurants
such as Noma, RADIO, NamNam, Hotel
Sakskøbing, and more, and as the founder of
the not-for-proﬁt-institution NordicFoodLab.
A lab that investigates, challenges, and
develops the foundations of the Nordic
cuisine [52].
==PAGE:96==
84
Validation
Initial validation by David Zilber
Thissectionwillpresentasummaryof thevalidationconductedinameetingheldwithDavid
on June 7th.
To explain the narrative of my solution, I created a slide deck setting the scene of the project
and the ViP method to involve David in my line of thinking (see appendix H). I brieﬂy ex-
plained the domain I am working within, how I have gathered my data, summarized the con-
text clusters and the future food behavioral types.
Upon telling stories about the diﬀerent behavioral types, David pointed out that "people are
not one type 100% of the time". This led to a discussion on food behavior of even the most
environmentally aware and skilled chefs, including himself - one day David eats a meal that
is vegan, the next he buys a burger. The behavioral types of the future do not state that people
only eat, or only should eat, in a speciﬁc way, but more importantly how they eat the majority
of the time to which he agrees. The more people who eat with respect to the environment
majority of the time, the greater collective eﬀect can we achieve.
Next, I presented my vision statement and the elements within the statement to which David
responded "Yes, ﬂavor is the essence" and elaborated that mastering ﬂavoring is a tough skill.
This spiked yet another discussion on ﬂavor, and the importance and challenge hereof. I
asked David if he could see a way to cheat one’s way to become a master of ﬂavor with an
immediate reply of "No". He hereafter referred to the expert-rule "it takes 10.000 hours in the
kitchen to become an expert".
Lastly, I presented the concept of Find Flavor to him challenging his "No". David found the
solution great, simple, yet addressing the challenge identiﬁed. He agreed that before con-
sumers can work with ﬂavor they need to know the ﬂavor, and found the idea of utilizing the
power of knowledge to spike curiosity and inspire to a diﬀerent behavior interesting. Consid-
ering the process I had undergone, the challenge I had identiﬁed, David found the solution
to be appropriate.
The validation session evolved to an open discussion, and David presented a valid point
"How do you tempt people to scan the QR code to access the information behind?". This ques-
tion led to several ideas that could provide people with an incentive to scan the QR code;
combine the ﬂavor with an LCA score, scan to get access to lower impact recipes, scan and
unlock the next level of expertise. All of which have contributed to the ﬁnal design.
==PAGE:97==
10.1 Expert validation
85
Narrative-based assessment
All three experts were contacted by email and presented with the narrative of the solution
(see appendix E); a family of three where the dad, James, is struggling to get the ﬂavor right
when cooking. The solution is then presented and the story continues and this time James
succeeds to get the ﬂavor just right with the use of Find Flavor.
David was asked to, again, provide feedback to the solution after I implemented ideas from
the initial validation with him, and complete a short survey. Claus was asked to evaluate the
potential of the solution in the market, and complete a short survey. Louise was asked to
evaluate the potential of the solution for Chr. Hansen, and also complete a short survey.
In the survey, the experts were asked to agree or disagree with the following statements, and
provide a short explanation for their answer based on the narrative they were presented:
1. The suggestion that Find Flavor stimulates enhanced focus on ﬂavor is realistic.
2. It is believable that Find Flavor contributes to the sustainable consumption of food.
Narrative-based assessment by Claus Meyer
I received the following feedback from Claus Meyer in an email, however, the survey was not
completed. I will present his feedback in quotes, while the original feedback I received, can
be seen in appendix D.
Overall Claus seems to agree with the challenge of missing ﬂavor I have identiﬁed Claus
Meyer writes: "The problem you identify is real. It is diﬃcult for most people to get the ﬂa-
vor right. It is even more diﬃcult when it is not meat-based food and the balance in the dish is
shifted and umami is missing."
However, his feedback to the solution entails skepticism in regards to the technological-in-
store element as he does "not understand why one has to stand in the supermarket and ﬁddle
with the phone". Instead, he presents several ideas to modify and improve the solution to
achieve the desired change in behavior. He suggests that the solution should encourage peo-
ple to plan meals from home, and have a focus on "the seasons best/most relevant ingredients
and then select further from there" when planning meals.
Speciﬁcally, he proposes an idea to present the user with "the magical way to go with the cho-
sen green ingredients" in the app in addition to informing about the ﬁrst steps to take towards
a sustainable food life - local, in-season ingredients. Season-based suggestions are an oppor-
tunity to include in the algorithm of the app to further increase sustainable consumption.
==PAGE:98==
86
Validation
He then adds that "on the side one should develop a condensed compendium with ﬂavors and
their interrelationships; the anatomy of relish should be something you have".
Lastly, Claus suggests also to add "some debugging - when I have this dish and miss this in the
ﬂavor, then what", to help users learn and improve while cooking.
Overall, Claus Meyer seems to agree with my ﬁndings yet from the feedback it is not clear
whetherheagreeswiththeabove-mentionedstatementsornot. However, fromthefeedback,
it seems as if he ﬁnds it interesting and with further development, the solution can stimulate
focus on ﬂavors and contribute to more sustainable consumption.
Narrative-based assessment by David Zilber
David Zilber assessed the narrative and completed the survey. The feedback from David is
overly positive and supported by comments to why he agrees to both of the above mentioned
statements. See appendix F for the original survey results.
As explanation to his answer for the ﬁrst statement David writes:
It immediately guides consumers to considerations about the ultimate reason why they’re
choosing to consume the things they consume, taste. That embodied link in the semantics of
the app immediately gets thoughts regarding the ﬁnal act of consumption, cooking, ﬂowing
through the consumer’s mind.
This validates the choice to include both a visual and digital element in the solution, and that
together a focus on ﬂavor can be created.
To the second statement, David explains his answer with the following:
It ranks, nudges and guides consumers to (hopefully) a more transparent view of the
externalities behind the foods they eat.
In his opinion it is believable that Find Flavor will contribute to sustainable consumption,
however, with the word hopefully also communicate the uncertainty of such a future.
Lastly, David, putting aside his expert role, would as a consumer be interested in using a
solution like Find Flavor. For him, the most interesting part is the climate score of products
and recipes. Due to his profession and experience, it is more likely that he will be the expert
providing the knowledge on ﬂavor than a consumer in need of it.
==PAGE:99==
10.1 Expert validation
87
Narrative-based assessment by Louise Rosenmeier
The feedback from Louise was received both as comments in the survey and by email. She
sees a potential in the solution in general, and also for Chr. Hansen. However, the interaction
in the supermarket she consider a challenge. To both of the statements she answered agree
and elaborated why. See appendix F for the original survey results and appendix I or the
feedback provided by email.
To the ﬁrst statement Louise agree that a shift in the minds of consumers are required, and
that in her opinion, textures also are of importance. She commented:
"I agree that a plant-based diet needs a more extended focus on ﬂavor and textures,
something we are not really used to cook from. Basically, shifting to a more
plant-based/climate-friendly diet requires a mind shift in the way we shop and plan our
meals. Flavor could be one of the solutions for composing a meal".
This comment validates the identiﬁed challenge, and that more light must be shed on plant-
based diets and how to make them delicious.
To the second statement Louise endorse Find Flavor as a contributor to the sustainable con-
sumption of food, and writes:
"I believe it can add to a change in mindset in how we plan and put together our meals.
Rather than having the meat at the centerpiece and build around it, you put the ﬂavor and
plant-based ingredients in center."
Overall, Louiseﬁndtheﬂavorperspectiveandapproachtothechallengehighlyrelevantboth
as a consumer, yet also for Chr. Hansen. She ﬁnds that the solution constitute an important
element in an educational process. Within Chr. Hansen the solution is also relevant. In an
email Louise wrote:
"We [sustainability team] often talk about that we must contribute to elevating sustainability
/ climate literacy in Chr. Hansen. This solution can also contribute to that - to heighten the
understanding of alternative (and more tasteful, healthy and sustainable) meals".
From a consumer perspective Louise expresses concerns of the interaction required in the
shopping situation. She ﬁnds that it requires time and surplus energy which she often does
not have in the late afternoon shopping with hungry kids. She is, however, interested in ex-
ploring ﬂavors and plant-based meals, when time is available.
==PAGE:100==
88
Validation
Overall findings from expert validations and implications
Overall, the three experts agree with the identiﬁed challenge and that focus on ﬂavor is the
way towards a sustainable food life. However, the experts do not fully agree that the solution
will contribute to such a focus as it is, yet with further development it will. Claus suggests a
rather invasive solution to drastically alter the behavior of people by limiting their options
to the in-season ingredient. While this may be a necessary means to achieve the behavior
change fast, it contradicts with the product qualities ﬂexible and supportive by dictating a
certain behavior.
David on the other hand, communicates that a solution like this, mostly likely will have the
wanted aﬀects on consumer behavior from his professional point of view.
Louise agree to the challenge, and that the solution will serve as a great educational tool but
demanding too much of the consumer in the purchase situation can be a challenge.
As a result of the feedback received, the concept should be further developed. The purpose
of the sticker and app should be revisited and several features should be considered to add to
the app to improve the chances of inducing a ﬂavor-focus in meal construction and behavior
change.
==PAGE:101==
Part V
Discussion & Conclusion
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER11
Discussion
The following chapter will discuss the results of the project against my vision statement, as
well as the limitations to the solution. In addition future work will be discussed.
The concept
In this project, I have developed a solution to help families adopt a more sustainable food life
through awareness and knowledge on ﬂavor and ﬂavor utilization in plant-based food. The
key here has been to be present where the decisions of consumers can be inﬂuenced, and
make them aware of the thing they did not know they were missing, by exposing consumers
to ﬂavors and making it inevitable to notice. For this, I have included supermarkets in the
solution, the main place of interaction with food, as they possess a great deal of power when
itcomestoconsumerbehavior. First, bydesigninganeducationalplatformtodrawattention
to ﬂavor and spike consumer curiosity in the supermarket, and secondly to make the ﬂavor
more tangible and understandable at home.
I have aimed to inspire consumers to educate themselves, and expand their knowledge on
theconstructionofﬂavorinthemostreoccurringtaskinlife-cooking. Theprimaryobjective
here is to create a user experience that is experienced as empowering, and secondly for users
to understand the science and power of ﬂavor from even the most basic ingredients.
Having designed an informative solution based on the consumers’ own interests and motiva-
tion, I am unable to know if my solution will make people focus on ﬂavor and make sustain-
able choices as a result hereof, when planning, shopping, and preparing meals. The solution
is designed to rely on people’s own desire for pleasure while eating, and curiosity to learn how
to achieve this pleasure through plant-based ﬂavor. The solution is additionally designed to
aid people in adopting a more planet-centered value-set by changing their attitude towards
plant-based meals with the use of ﬂavor. The solution is designed to empower people and
rely on them to voluntarily adopt new behaviors as a result of a widened horizon, yet it is not
possible to know if this behavior-change will occur as a result of a change in attitude.
Considering the expert validations, it can be debated whether a knowledge-based platform
is suﬃcient enough to change the food behaviors of families. Available knowledge provides
==PAGE:104==
92
Discussion
the users with the option to acquire it and ignore it, acquire it and use it, but also with the
option to completely ignore it. Relying on people to make "the right choice" themselves may
result in no change at all. However, as all experts agree with the need to create ﬂavor as a
means to sustainable consumption, and two experts that the solution is a ﬁt to the challenge,
the solution is appropriate. People cannot create ﬂavor if they do not know it. It is therefore
crucial that the solution will be intriguing, and deliver value to the users. Hopefully, the sus-
tainability aspect of the sticker will appeal to some that do not wish to interact with app, but
still appreciate guidance in the supermarket.
The main reason for including fermentation has been the corporation with Chr. Hansen to
explore a potential way into the consumer market. Even though fermentation in the home
is currently a rising trend, it yet remains a niche and an everlasting cooking task to many.
A personal goal with this project has been to hit the masses as many little strokes fell great
oaks. Throughout the design process, I found that widening the knowledge of basic ﬂavor
is a preceding step before introducing advanced ﬂavor creation methods. Fermentation has
therefore not been included as a central part of the solution. However, fermentation is a
powerful means to create ﬂavor, and easing people into the ﬂavor-line-of-though may be too
subtle. Exploiting the ongoing trend by making fermentation for everyone could potentially
result in faster adoption of sustainable eating.
In the ideation process of the design phase, I came across a similar yet diﬀerent solution on
the market. Plant Jammer is an AI based app that helps consumer to empty their fridges
by providing ﬁnished plant-based recipes, build-your-own-recipes with help from AI, and
provide help on ﬂavors adjustments in the cooking process [53]. Despite oﬀering elements
similar to Find Flavor the two solution diﬀers. Plant Jammer focuses on the after-purchase
situation and the cooking situation, while Find Flavor seek to change the before-purchase-
situation and educate people on why ﬂavor is important, how they balance each other, and
how to extract them. While both solution provide recipes, Find Flavor recipes focus much
more on the cooking procedures to extract ﬂavor. Find Flavor, in addition, guide consumers
to purchase the food that is sustainable.
Limitations of the solution
Impact and motivation
You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make it drink. The solution is visible at all times
andprovidestheconsumers withthe informationnecessaryforthemtoimprovetheﬂavorin
their cooking and keep their sustainability score in check, but it is evidently up the consumer
to accept and use the solution. Providing people with what seems obvious change-inducing
==PAGE:105==
Discussion
93
information does mean that people will change their behavior [49]. If the consumer does
not have any motivation to change, it is not likely that he or she will utilize the solution and
realize the potential positive impact. It is therefor crucial to investigate if the consumers are
interested in a solution like this, and what motivates them. This investigation should seek to
uncover if consumers have experienced failure in the kitchen that can serve as motivation or
if they are motivated by their conﬁdence to try new techniques [25]. If Find Flavor were to
create predictable and permanent change the solution should entail conditions that require
people to behavior in a diﬀerent way - as the only way, and not only rely on motivation. This,
however, contradicts with the interaction qualities deﬁned.
Values
Find Flavor is designed to induce meaningful changes to how people make choices when
constructing meals to ultimately change their food behavior in an sustainable direction. For
achieving this goal, nudging is used to remind people of the choices they have in a simple
format. A vision for the solution is to help families adopt a planet-centered set of values,
however, nudging as a tool cannot change a persons values. The framing of the information,
in both the sticker and the app can activate certain existing values, but not change them [49].
Nudging can contribute to a change in peoples behaviors and in time their values will realign
with their behavior [25].
Training the tastebuds
Flavor is important and is the essence of the solution however Find Flavor requires action
from the users to be meaningful. One can read so much about ﬂavor and how to extract it, the
nuances and combination, but the real learning happens in the kitchen. Find Flavor cannot
provide users with a trained tongue but oﬀer the information and techniques to acquire on
if they are willing to invest time in the kitchen.
Purchase situation
Two of the participating experts raised concerns about the use of the app in the purchase
situation. For some consumers, grocery shopping is a stressful experience why it is optional
to use the app. However, in present times consumers use their phones to a wide extent while
shopping. Many consumer use their phones for shopping list, recipes, scanning and paying
for their groceries why I do not share the concern. Find Flavor provides guidance for the
consumers regardless of the app being used in the supermarket or at home. It is up to the
consumer to decide the level of information they want in the shopping situation. They can
shop only with the guidance of the stickers, or they can use the app, in the supermarket or at
==PAGE:106==
94
Discussion
home.
Solution dependencies
Implementation of the solution, as of now, is highly dependent on a corporation with man-
ufacturers and also supermarkets, as the stickers are relatively invasive of their packaging.
Find Flavor can potentially increase sales of the products by providing instructions on how
to extract ﬂavor, leading to more satisﬁed consumer and higher consumption. However, the
climate score can, if low, result in declined participation from producers as a low score can
decrease sales, if this becomes an important parameter for consumers when buying prod-
ucts. Low scores may result in consumer opting out in favor of higher scoring ingredients.
Their participation can ultimately determine the success of the concept as of now or require
extensive redesign. The success of the solution depends on the readiness of the industry and
the consumers.
11.1
Future work
Concept development
The concept should be further developed to include and improve below elements:
• Consumer study investigating the knowledge of ﬂavor
• Flavor cards
• Flavor combination
• Season-based selection
• Debugging tool and additional vocabulary to aid people to reﬁne ﬂavor while cooking
• Recipe levels
Furthermore, visual and market related elements should also be considered:
Increase intuitiveness
To increase the intuitiveness of the climate score it should be considered to change the color
of the score according to how good or bad impact the product has on the climate. By color-
coding the score in the widely known red-yellow-green scale, people are quickly able to iden-
tify the impact of the product without using signiﬁcant cognitive load; is 67/100 good?.
==PAGE:107==
11.1 Future work
95
Involvement of stakeholders
Early on the relevant stakeholders must be involved as this determines the direction of the
solution. If manufacturers and supermarkets do not want to be involved the whole concept
must be reconsidered.
To develop the recipes, skilled professionals must be involved including nutrients experts
and chefs with knowledge on ﬂavor and cooking.
Expanding to digital supermarkets
Grocery shopping online has in recent years gained signiﬁcant footing, why it could be rel-
evant to consider expanding the solution to the digital market [54]. Online supermarkets
can integrate an AI-based algorithm that based on people’s purchase patterns, can suggest
recipes with low impact upon searching for food to put in the basket. The stress-free shop-
ping experience from the couch can allow people to behave according to their values as they
have time to think their purchases through.
Chr. Hansen entering the consumer market
Before Chr. Hansen can enter the B2C market, an extensive process must be undergone. First
the actual potential must be uncovered through an extensive market analysis. The concept
must then be developed, both as a whole but also the diﬀerent application areas for the cul-
tures. Chr. Hansen has a process in place for discovering and testing new application ares
which must be completed. Next, consumer testing must be completed before launch. Simul-
taneously, the business plan must be developed, and a decision to either utilize distributors
or directly supply the product to consumers must be made - this will require a new infras-
tructure setup.
==PAGE:108==
96
Discussion
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER12
Conclusion
The food system of today is highly unsustainable depleting our natural resources, increas-
ing the future insecurity of food. While the system shapes our diets, consumers in Denmark
ultimately have the ﬁnal say in what to eat and possess the power to change. This project
therefore aimed to redesign family food life to be more sustainable with the use of fermenta-
tion, and investigate a potential new business opportunity for Chr. Hansen.
The process Vision in Product Design was used to reframe the challenge, and discover un-
derlying narratives through in-depth research, revealing a general lack of knowledge on and
desire for ﬂavor, serving as major barriers for adopting a plant-based diet. A vision was de-
veloped to drive the development of the concept.
Guided by the vision, the concept Find Flavor was developed to inspire consumers to act
sustainable by providing accessible and understandable knowledge. The concept enhances
focus on ﬂavor in meal construction through expressive stickers guiding consumers in the
supermarket on basic ﬂavors. Together with the app, the solution provide detailed knowl-
edge on ﬂavor, extraction and use hereof to empower consumers to create ﬂavorful meals at
home, every time. To contribute to transparency of the food system, and enable consumer to
make informed and sustainable decisions, a climate score reveal the impact of the individual
product as well as of the recipes.
Itwasfoundthatfermentationremainsaniche. Beforefermentationathomecanbeadopted
as a widespread ﬂavor technique, consumers need basic knowledge on ﬂavor and a ﬂavor-
focused mindset. Fermentation was therefore not included as the main element in the solu-
tion, but as an option for consumer who possess the knowledge or the interest.
Through validation by experts the concept was found to enhance focus on ﬂavor and con-
tribute to sustainable behavior. However, realization of beneﬁts introduced by Find Flavor
require that both the industry and the consumers are ready to implement and adopt the so-
lution, respectively.
As of now, the potential for Chr. Hansen remain unclear as the market it not ready to widely
adopt fermentation at home.
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
Appendices
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIXA
Modern Day Food System
Overview
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIXB
Context factors
==PAGE:116==
1
D
PSYCOLOGICAL
Guyader, Ottosson, & Witell (2017)
Retailers are the gatekeepers between 
consumers and eco-friendly products.
2
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Some studies indicate that price discount
(monetary sales promotion) play a vital role 
to motivate consumers buying products
3
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
There is a significant positive impact of 
attitude to green purchase behavior towards 
an ecological packaged product
4
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Many studies have shown that the more 
positive an attitude customers have towards 
sustainable products, the higher level of 
commitment they demonstrate to the 
buying decision.
5
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Attitude greatly influences our shopping 
behavior
6
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Environmentally friendly consumer behavior 
and attitude are directly influenced by an 
environmental lifestyle that acts as a habit 
factor and retailers’ environmental 
reputation that acts as a contextual factor.
7
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
The guidance can be designed in an 
attractive way to children, as children may 
influence their parents’ purchase decision 
making.
4
D
ECONOMIC
C. Meyer, “Claus Meyer,” 2021.
Claus Meyer – h22.IKEA.com – an insight into the 
collaborative works of IKEA at H22, the worlds first 
citizen fair
80 % of the produced crops are used for 
livestock feed
==PAGE:117==
9
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Consumers who do not identify as an 
environmentally friendly self do not shop 
with respect to the environment (thought).
10
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Meyer (2021)
We throw away food that can feed 3 billion 
people
11
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
The level of environmental knowledge 
determines how we act regarding positive 
environmental behavior. 
12
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
Self-identity is a key driver in 
environmentally friendly consumer choices.
13
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
A consumer's general beliefs and care for 
the environment influences consumption 
choices.
14
S
TECHNOLOGICAL
Su, Duong, Dinh, Nguyen-Phuoc, & Johnson (2021)
The way we produce livestock is harmful to 
the environment.
15
D
ECONOMIC
Solution Menu, p. 101
Socio-economic backgrounds create 
inequalities in health
16
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Sebastian 15/2
I buy food that looks appealing and that i
feel like eating
==PAGE:118==
17
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Halloran et. Al (2018)
People Want to eat healthy and sustainable
18
D
PSYCOLOGICAL
Halloran et. Al (2018, p. 100)
Meals eaten in the public sector affect 
choices in the home
19
P
CULTURAL
Halloran et. Al (2018, p. 87)
A sustainable food culture requires (support 
of) bottom-up initiatives.
20
T
TECHNOLOGICAL
www.nemlig.com (11/2)
Online shopping reduces food waste in 
stores.
21
T
CULTURE
David Zilber
60 % of meals are eaten in the home.
22
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
P. M. Horta, J. de Paula Matos, and L. L. Mendes, “Digital 
food environment during the corona virus disease 2019 
(covid-19) pandemic in brazil: an analysis of food 
advertising in an online food delivery platform,”British 
Journal of Nutrition, no. , 2020.
The digital food environment has grown 
during covid-19, greater use of digital 
platforms.
23
T
TECHNOLOGICAL
The digital food environment has people 
buying more unhealthy food as this is 
promoted more intensively.
24
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
More unhealthy foods are promoted online 
impacting the health of the population 
negatively.
P. M. Horta, J. de Paula Matos, and L. L. Mendes, “Digital 
food environment during the corona virus disease 2019 
(covid-19) pandemic in brazil: an analysis of food 
advertising in an online food delivery platform,”British
Journal of Nutrition, no. , 2020.
P. M. Horta, J. de Paula Matos, and L. L. Mendes, “Digital 
food environment during the corona virus disease 2019 
(covid-19) pandemic in brazil: an analysis of food 
advertising in an online food delivery platform,”British
Journal of Nutrition, no. , 2020.
==PAGE:119==
25
S
TECHNOLOGICAL
Poore, J., & Nemecek, T. (2018)
The emission of a specific food vary greatly 
within producers.
26
S
ECONOMIC
Poore, J., & Nemecek, T. (2018)
Feeding people are degrading the 
ecosystems and depleting water resources. 
27
D
ECONOMIC
Halloran et. Al (2018, p. 101)
More meal are eaten outside the home
28
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Lone, interviewe 3
“My ideals have changed with my age”.
29
T
ECONOMIC
Lone, interviewe 3
As people become old their finances 
increase. “We can afford to make the ‘right’ 
choice now”.
30
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Steinmetz, K. (2015)
Trust in the Organic label (and labels in 
general) erodes over time. “Organic is ‘an 
excuse to charge more,’ and more than one-
third say they believe ‘organic’ is just 
marketing jargon ‘with no real value or 
definition”.
31
T
TECHNOLOGICAL
B Corporation,(2021)
B-Corps Movement, changing the role of 
businesses in society. B-Corps certified 
companies are legally required to consider 
the impact of their decisions on their 
workers, customers, suppliers, community, 
and the environment. This is a community of 
leaders, driving a global movement of 
people using business as a force for good.
32
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
It is not where the food is from, how it is 
produced, transported or packaged that 
matters, it is WHAT you eat that matters.
==PAGE:120==
33
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
Sørensen, P. V., & Grønlund, A. (2012).
Organic does not equal sustainable
34
D
CULTURAL/TECHNOLOGICAL
Louise Rosenmeier, Chr. Hansen
Fermented food can serve as a taste 
enhancer and taste creator in a plant-based 
diet - contribute positively to a sustainable 
diet.
35
S
TECHNOLOGICAL 
Knudsen, J. K. (2019)
Efficiency of ecological productions are 
lower than conventional production as the 
output is less and require more space.
36
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021, p.11)
Eating habits are hard to change and are a 
larger barrier to a sustainable food life. "I am 
used to eating meat".
37
P
CULTURAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
Eating meat is the norm!
38
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
Eating less meat requires an identity change. 
39
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021, p. 11)
People are not eating plant-based or less 
meat because the "are not vegans”.
40
P
SOCIOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021) 
Studies conducted on the meat paradox 
show that we as consumers tend to go 
against over values as they often are 
surpassed by habit-thinking and social norms 
(Aaltola, 2014).
==PAGE:121==
41
T
BIOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
Flavor of the food is an important factor in 
not eating less meat
42
D
SOCIOLOGICAL
Beitzen-Heineke, E. F., Balta-Ozkan, N., & Reefke, 
H. (2017).
Supermarkets are gatekeepers of the food 
supply chain with the power to induce 
positive change at consumers and suppliers
43
S
DEMOGRAFICAL
Beitzen-Heineke, E. F., Balta-Ozkan, N., & Reefke, 
H. (2017).
The aging population and smaller household 
result in different consumption patterns. 
44
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Owen,  M.   (2020).
The upfront examination of freshness is 
everything.
45
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
Beitzen-Heineke, E. F., Balta-Ozkan, N., & Reefke, 
H. (2017).
The "shopping" mile in the transport chain is 
the sinner as it causes high emissions per 
product.
46
P
SOCIOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
Eating habits are influenced by friends and 
family. "My friends eat meat, so I also eat 
meat".
47
T
DEMOGRAFICAL
Beitzen-Heineke, E. F., Balta-Ozkan, N., & Reefke, 
H. (2017).
"The proportion of single households is rising 
which generate up to 45% more food waste 
per person than the average home".
49
S
CULTURAL/ECONOMICAL
Meyer, C. (2021)
Monoculture in the farming industry is killing 
diversity (bees on Lolland are dying)
==PAGE:122==
49
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Petersen, C., Kaysen, O., Manokaran, S., Tønning, 
K., & Hansen, T. (2014)
When grocery shopping people forget what 
they have a home 
50
T
CULTURAL
Petersen, C., Kaysen, O., Manokaran, S., Tønning, 
K., & Hansen, T. (2014)
People do not have the time to eat what 
they buy: packaging sizes are too big
51
D
PSYCOLOGICAL
Namina, A., & Dehdashti, Y. (2019). 
In-store marketing persuade consumers to 
buy more and other products than planned 
and needed  
52
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Owen,  M.   (2020).
Consumer prioritize convenience and time 
saved higher.
53
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Owen,  M.   (2020).
The pandemic has people focusing on the 
concerns of home cooking, local produce 
and reduction of food waste. 
54
D
PSYCOLOGICAL
Hustle Escape. (n.d.).
Implicit priming affects our shopping 
behavior. When consumers feel good, they 
spent more. 
55
P
SOCIOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
56
T
DEMOGRAFICAL
People live longer
==PAGE:123==
57
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Personal observation
Consumers cannot remember when, and for 
how long, products have been open.
58
D
ECONOMIC
Nazarian, S. (2021)
We produce enough food now to feed the 
population of the expected size in 2050.
59
T
EVOLUTIONARY
We do not know how to use leftovers.
60
T
PSYCOLOGICAL
Personal observation
We fail to plan our meals, or our plans 
change.
61
D
POLITICAL
European Commission 
Only “pretty” crops are distributed to the 
supermarkets.
62
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
We perceive products as bad after the best 
before date has passed.
63
T
BIOLOGICAL
The “best before date” is only a guide, our 
senses are the real expiration factor.
64
D
CULTURAL
We throw food out when the size of 
leftovers are too small to save.
Though
Thought
==PAGE:124==
65
P
EVOLUTIONARY 
Humans are highly driven by lust and make 
decisions based on this. 
66
P
ECONOMIC
Producers of meat want maximize profit
67
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
Meyer (2021)
How we produce meat is the sinner, not the 
meat itself.
68
T
EVOLUTIONAL/ECONOMICAL
We consume more meat the ever before.
69
T
CULTURAL
We are changing in a green direction.
70
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Change is difficult.
71
P
BIOLOGICAL
People are habitual. 
72
P
SOCIOLOGICAL
Madsen, M. B., & Berg-Jensen, C. L. (2021)
We do not speak up about wanting to eat 
less meat, as we fear being judged.
==PAGE:125==
73
D
TECHNOLOGICAL 
High end brand exploit the effects of 
marketing to sell more. 
74
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
Interviewe – male 65
Consumer can feel manipulated by 
supermarkets trying to reduce CO2 
emissions through the consumers
(People do not like to be told what to do)
75
P
PSYCOLOGICAL
The longer time we spend in a store, the 
more we buy.
76
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
Stores are designed to increase time spent in 
them.
77
T
ECONOMIC
Monetary rewards (savings) persuade 
people into buying and buying in bulk. 
78
S
TECHNOLOGICAL 
The energy net consists of “green” and 
“black” produced power and it is impossible 
to distinguish. Consumers think they buy 
products produced with green energy when 
they in fact are not.
79
T
EVOLUTIONAL 
The fake news movement degrade the 
general trust of the population.
80
D
DEMOGRAFICAL
The population estimated to increase from 
7.7 billion today to 8.6 in 2030 and 9.8 in 
2050.
==PAGE:126==
81
P
POLITICAL
Consumers are confused about what the 
sustainable choice is regarding organic 
produce vs. conventional. 
82
D
BIOLOGICAL
Flavor from foods can transfer to other 
foods spoiling the food.
83
T
ECONOMIC
Consumers demand fresh produce. 
84
D
TECHNOLOGICAL
Companies buy climate credits to 
compensate for CO2e emissions and 
increase brand value.
85
T
ECONOMIC
Farmers receive compensation from EU for 
fallow areas and cannot let their cows grass 
on it as the will lose compensation.
86
T
BIOLOGICAL/ECONOMICAL
Employees work long hours and have less 
surplus energy after work.
87
D
CULTURAL 
Logistics of family life are challenging, and 
ends need to meet. 
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIXC
Find Flavor App Flow
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIXD
Email invite to Claus Meyer
==PAGE:132==
SV: Speciale der undersøger et bæredygtigt mad liv
Claus Meyer <claus@cmeyer.org>
Søn 20-06-2021 15:18
Til:  Sofie Martinussen <sofiemartinussen@live.dk>
Hej Sofie
 
Problemet du idenficerer er reelt.
Det er svært for de fleste to get the flavour right.
Det er endnu sværere når det ikke er kødbaseret mad og balancen i retten pludselig forskydes og der mangler
umami.
 
Jeg forstår ikke hvorfor man skal stå  nede i supermarkedet og rode med sin telefon. Man burde i stedet
planlægge maden hjemmefra.
Man kunne starte med sæsonens bedste/mest relevante råvarer og så vælge videre derfra.
The magical ways to go med de valgte grønne råvarer….first important steps and things to rmb før være en del
af app
On the side bør man udvikle en kondenseret kompendium og smagene og deres indbyrdes relationer;
velsmagens anatomi bør være noget man har on the
Også noget fejlfinding…når jeg har denne ret og savner dette i smagen hvad så….
MH
C
 
Fra: Sofie Martinussen <sofiemartinussen@live.dk> 
Sendt: 20. juni 2021 13:43
Til: Claus Meyer <claus@cmeyer.org>
Emne: Sv: Speciale der undersøger et bæredygtigt mad liv
Prioritet: Høj
 
Kære Claus, 
 
Det lykkedes mig ikke, at blive færdig rettidigt nok til at sende mine synspunkter til dig - det beklager
jeg meget. Men! jeg sidder nu med en potentiel løsning og vil høre om du har lyst til, som
proffesionel at evaluere potentialet af min løsning?
 
Det drejer sig om en løsning, som skal bidrage til at vi om 10 år ser en ændret adfærd i måden
hvorpå folk tilgår mad. Da det er en fremtidig løsning er det en narrativbaseret vurdering jeg søger
og har derfor sammensat et kort slidedeck der præsenterer udfordringen og en konceptuel løsning.
På sidste side er der et link til en survey med 6 spørgsmål (de sidste to er nok ikke relevante for dig,
da du arbejder med mad).
 
Udover surveyen, må du meget gerne kommentere på om du mener der er et potentiale på
markedet for en løsning som denne.
 
Tidshorisonten er kort, men hvis du har tiden og lysten vil det være fantastisk. Jeg afleverer mit
speciale den 25/6, men kan det ikke lade sig gøre vil jeg gerne inkorporere din feedback til mit
forsvar den 2/7.
 
Jeg ser meget frem til at høre fra dig.
 
De bedste hilsner, 
Sofie Martinussen
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIXE
Narrative-based
Assessment
==PAGE:134==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Assessment of the concept 
Find Flavor
Sofie Martinussen
Master thesis in Design and Innovation, DTU
20-06-2021
1
==PAGE:135==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
The project challenge
Food. Mhhh food. For breakfast, for lunch, for dinner, in 
between, for fun, for pleasure, for comfort but most 
importantly of all, for survival. Food is the key to survival for 
both animals and humans but is also one of the greatest causes 
of global warming1. Scientists predict several negative effects 
on the climate among which are rising temperatures, melting 
of the ice on the poles resulting in increased sea levels, 
different and more extreme weather conditions including more 
droughts and heatwaves, stronger and more intense 
hurricanes, and changes in season durability and intensity2. 
These changes are results of greenhouse gasses emitted from 
activities supporting our current way of living - including the 
production, transportation, processing, consumption, and 
discarding of food. To change our predicted future, we need to 
act now, and with billions of people consuming food daily the 
opportunity is in our hands. A study from the University of 
Oxford conducted in 2016 shows that by adopting a plant-
based diet one can reduce food-related emission by up to 70% 
compared to the as-is diet1.
This project aims to encourage sustainable consumption of 
food by helping families adopt a more planet-centered set of 
values through enhanced focus on flavors and textures in meal 
construction.
In the following slides, a narrative for the assessment is 
presented.
1 P. Hawken, Drawdown : the most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse global warming. Penguin, 2017.
2 Earth Science Communications Team, “Global climate change: Effects.”  accessed 01.06.2021
2
==PAGE:136==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Cooking at home
A family of three, James, Jane, and 
their son Jordan are living outside the 
capital of Copenhagen. James loves to 
cook and serve good food for his 
guests. It is Friday, he invited some 
friends over for dinner and is cooking 
a delicious meal. Before serving 
James wants to ensure that the taste 
is right, but something is missing, the 
dish is not as flavorful as he expected 
from the recipe even though he 
followed it to the letter. He adds some 
more spices, a pinch of salt and it 
improves the taste slightly, but it is 
still not as expected but he just does 
not know how to improve it. James 
gives up and serves it as is it – slightly 
disappointing.
3
==PAGE:137==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
4
The above story is a situation most of us have tried, perhaps 
even several times. Even though we are good cooks the food 
does not always turn out as expected, but why? 
Most people know the concept of the 5 basic flavors in 
cooking, but most people do also not know how to actively use 
them while cooking. And while considering a more plant-based 
diet flavor is a major barrier.
The five basic flavors - sweet, sour, salt, bitter, and umami – are 
crucial for a balanced and tasteful meal yet it is not clear where 
to find these flavors, how to extract as much flavor as possible, 
how to use them optimally while cooking and how to combine 
the flavors. It should not be necessary to obtain an education 
as a professional chef to create tasteful meals at home. 
Find Flavor is the solution!
==PAGE:138==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Find Flavor
Find Flavor is an expert-based food and food preparation solution 
creating awareness about sustainable flavor and providing users 
with information that allow them to easily excel in the kitchen. 
The solution consists of a digital guide containing all the relevant 
information and smart flavor stickers guiding the users visually in 
the supermarket and giving them direct access to the chef's 
advice and information through the embedded radio-frequency 
identification (RFID) technology. In the supermarkets, the 
different colored stickers on products guide the users to identify 
different flavor profiles and aiding them in creating sustainable 
plant-focused meals with all flavors present.
The smart sticker is placed on all products in the specific flavor 
category allowing the consumers to quickly identify and buy 
according to flavor profiles while in the supermarket. The sticker 
contains a chip that is linked to an app. In here detailed 
information about flavor and recipes can be found. By scanning 
the chip, the user is taken directly to the product card of the 
specific product.
An example of a sticker can be seen to the right.
5
==PAGE:139==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Find Flavor
The Find Flavor app is a smartphone app that 
can be used together with stickers or 
individually. Here the consumer can read about 
the flavor profile of an extensive list of 
products, how to extract as much flavor as 
possible from specific ingredients, and get 
inspiration for sustainable and tasteful 
sustainable meals. The content of the app is 
developed in close collaboration with 
professionals to ensure trustworthy information 
and supportive preparation procedures. To 
accommodate the different preferences of 
users, plant-focus recipes are available in three 
levels; Flavor Express, Flavor Explorer, and 
Flavor Explosion. The app suggests recipes to 
improve the overall climate score by combining 
ingredients with better scores.
6
Information about the basic flavor sweet
==PAGE:140==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Preview of the app flow to find a product card in the app
7
==PAGE:141==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
1
The user goes to the supermarket
2
The user installs the Find Flavor app
3
The user starts shopping
4
The user needs mushrooms, see the 
sticker and wants to know more
5
The user scans the sticker
6
The user is directed to the app and 
the product card for mushrooms
How does it work? Page 1.
The next time James goes to the 
supermarket he sees the sign ”Find 
Flavor, now in your store”.
He installs the app and starts 
shopping. He now sees that all 
products have a label with the 
flavor displayed – flavors he did 
not know had those ingredients 
had.
Follow James’ trip to the 
supermarket in the storyboard.
==PAGE:142==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
10
User finds Fast flavor recipes for 
flavor in 30 minutes. Chooses recipe.
9
Flavor explosion for recipes that focus 
solely on flavor through fermentation
12
*Continues shopping* User compares 
products with same flavor profile. 
Chooses the one with the highest score.
13
User now has a basket full of flavor 
and are ready to cook
11
The needed ingredients are displayed 
with freedom to choose and increase 
climate score
How does it work? Page 2.
7
The user reads the product card for 
mushrooms and learn about them
8
In the recipe tab the user finds 3 
levels of recipes *seeks inspiration*
==PAGE:143==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
New cooking at 
home
It is Friday again; James has invited 
some friends over for dinner and is 
cooking a delicious meal. This time he 
has included all 5 basic flavors in his 
dish and cooked the ingredients 
differently. He even used a new type 
of vegetable. Before serving James 
wants to ensure that the taste is 
right, and it is. What a mouthful! He 
serves the dish for his family and 
guests, happy and confident with the 
meal he has prepared.
James uses Find Flavor to guide him in 
the supermarket, study the different 
product cards to learn how to make 
more tasteful food, and has already 
planned to cook several of the 
recipes.
10
==PAGE:144==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Thank you for your time!
Please complete the assessment by answering the four 
questions in this survey:
Assessment Survey
11
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIXF
Assessment by Experts
==PAGE:146==
ID
1
2
Start time
6-21-21 14:03:25
6-22-21 21:02:14
Completion time
6-21-21 14:06:25
6-22-21 21:07:04
Email
anonymous
anonymous
Name
David Zilber
Louise Rosenmeier
The suggestion that Find 
Flavor stimulates enhanced 
focus on flavor is realistic.
Agree
Agree
Please provide a short 
explanation for your 
(dis)agreement with the 
statement in question 1.
It immediately guides consumers to 
considerations about the ultimate 
reason why they're choosing to 
consume the things they consume, 
taste. That embodied link in the 
semantics of the app immediately 
gets thoughts regarding the final act 
of consumption, cooking, flowing 
through the consumer's mind.
I agree that a plant-based diet needs 
a more extended focus on flavor and 
textures, something we are not 
really used to cook from. Basically, 
shifting to a more plant-
based/climate-friendly diet requires 
a mind shift in the way we shop and 
plan our meals. Flavor could be one 
of the solutions for composing a 
meal. 
It is believable that Find 
Flavor contributes to the 
sustainable consumption of 
food.
Agree
Agree
Please provide a short 
explanation for your 
(dis)agreement with the 
statement in question 3.
It ranks, nudges and guides 
consumers to (hopefully) a more 
transparent view of the externalities 
behind the foods they eat.
As above, I believe it can add to a 
change in mindset in how we plan 
and put together our meals. Rather 
than having the meat at the 
centerpiece and build around it, you 
put the flavor and plant-based 
ingredients in center. 
Would you as a consumer 
be interested in using a 
solution like Find Flavor?
Yes
Maybe
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIXG
Future Food Personalities
==PAGE:148==
1
1
E D U C A T I O N
I N C O M E
C O N C E R N  F O R  O W N  H E A L T H
A W A R E N E S S  O F  T H E  E N V I R O N M E N T
B E H A V I O R S  F O C U S E D  O N  T H E  E N V I R O N M E N T
C O N C E R N S  F O R  A N I M A L  W E L F A R E
B E H A V I O R S  F O C U S E D  O N  A N I M A L  W E L F A R E
P R E F E R E N C E  F O R  C O N V I E N I E N C E
P R I C E  C O N S I O U S
H I G H
L O W
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
2
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
P R E F E R E N C E  F O R  F A M I L I A R I T Y
L O Y A L T Y  T O  O W N  V A L U E S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
6
A G E
W I L L I N G N E S S  T O  P A Y  F O R  Q U A L I T Y  
A B I L I T Y  T O  P A Y
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
3
5
7
8
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIXH
Assessment by David Zilber
==PAGE:150==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
The sustainable family
food life
Sofie Martinussen
11.05.2021
1
==PAGE:151==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Agenda
1.
Vision in Design (ViP)
2.
Domain
3.
Context factors
4.
Structuring of factors
5.
The food personalities of the future – a way to understand what I 
mean
6.
The Statement! – ask for feedback
7.
Initial Ideas – common brainstorm 
2
==PAGE:152==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Vision in Product Design
3
==PAGE:153==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
My domain 
MEALS PREPARED 
AT HOME IN 
DANISH FAMILIES.
4
2 0 3 1
==PAGE:154==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
The collection process
86 context factors were collected from 8 different fields as 4 different types 
to ensure variety in the catalogue of factor. 
5
==PAGE:155==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
The Context Clusters
THE SUPERMARKET FORCE
WE DON'T HAVE TO CARE!
ME ME ME! WE ARE ON OUR 
OWN.
IT IS ALL ABOUT THE FLAVOR 
AND TEXTURE!
SUSTAINABLE FOOD IS A 
COMPLEX AND OPAQUE 
CONCEPT
CULTURE SHAPES WHAT YOU 
EAT
6
WE WANT TO CHANGE BUT 
CHANGE IS HARD!
Factors that are correlated are combined to clusters identify the direction 
in which they point. Each cluster represent a perspective of the domain. 
==PAGE:156==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
INDEPENDENT
Driven by and loyal to own values:
“I  do what I believe is right”
UNDER INFLUENCE
Susceptible to extraneous elements:
“What will others think if I…”
MOTIVATION FOR 
DECISIONS
SELF-CENTERED
Motivated by personal benefits:
“I do what is better for me”
PLANET-CENTERED
Motivated by a concern for the planet:
“I consider the environmental impact 
when I choose”. 
ORIENTATION OF 
VALUES
HABITUAL
Preference towards the known:
“I always do like this so I will continue 
to do it”.
MINDFUL
Openminded and adventurous:
“I have never tried that before let’s do 
it”.
DRIVERS OF EVERYDAY 
ACTIVITIES
The three dimensions
==PAGE:157==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Behavioral types 
matrix
8
==PAGE:158==
INDEPENDENT
UNDER 
INFLUENCE
HABITUAL
MINDFUL
PLANET-CENTERED
MOTIVATION FOR  DECISIONS
ORIENTATION OF VALUES
DRIVERS OF EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES
THE VEGAN
THE 
VEGETARIAN
THE 
FLEXITARIAN
THE WELFARE 
FIGHTER
INDEPENDENT
UNDER 
INFLUENCE
HABITUAL
MINDFUL
MOTIVATION FOR  DECISIONS
DRIVERS OF EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES
THE MEAT 
LOVER
THE FLAVORIST
THE NECESSITY 
EATER
THE 
EXPERIMENTER
SELF-CENTERED
ORIENTATION OF VALUES
The behavioral types of the future
==PAGE:159==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
The statement
NUDGE
• Flavorist into becoming more experimental in their food life
• the Experimenters to adopt a greener value set
FOCUS SHIFT
• encourage people to focus more on the flavor pallet and the different 
textures in a meal and refrain from the focus on the ingredient itself
10
To encourage 
sustainable consumption 
of food I want to help 
families adopt a more 
planet-centered set of 
values by enhancing 
focus on flavors and 
textures in meal 
construction.
==PAGE:160==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
11
U M A M I
https://www.figma.com/proto/cW5gzzYI2v
CHaldqgUkqfS/Untitled?node-
id=19%3A0&scaling=scale-down&page-
id=0%3A1
How do you tempt people to scan the 
QR code to access the information 
behind? - David
==PAGE:161==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
But how?
KNOW THE FLAVORS
INVOLVE SUPERMARKETS
12
==PAGE:162==
© 2021 Chr. Hansen. All rights reserved.
Ideas
• Flavor morphology 
- Taste helper: select words you feel match your dish →suggestions 
for improvement
- What do you always have / what we recommend to add
- Fruits and vegetables grouped after flavor-profile
- Tasting instructions 
- Cooking instruction – video
- Scan the product barcode and receive “advice”
• Flavor cards – cooking advise 
• Flavor meal box
• Play box – for kids 
• Green shopping points 
• Tasting kit -
13
==PAGE:163==
APPENDIXI
Email feedback from Louise
Rosenmeier
==PAGE:164==
1
Sofie Stokholm Martinussen
From:
Louise Rosenmeier
Sent:
22. juni 2021 21:16
To:
Sofie Stokholm Martinussen
Subject:
RE: Ekspert validering af løsning til speciale
Hej Sofie 
 
Spændende at du er ved at være færdig med dit speciale – det må da være virkelig dejligt!!  স
হ
঺
঻  
 
Jeg har lige været igennem dit koncept og survey. Ideen er virkelig god synes jeg og du kommer egentlig også ind på 
noget ret essentielt i forhold til skiftet til en mere klimavenlig / plantebaseret kost som er hvordan vi i det hele taget 
sammensætter måltid.  
 
Det er så indgroet i os at tage udgangspunkt i kødet og så bygge på derfra med tilbehør. Når man forsøger at spise 
mindre kød er det virkelig det man i første omgang bliver udfordret på – hvad skal så være omdrejningspunktet. Og 
her synes jeg faktisk at dit perspektiv på smag er ret interessant. Jeg tænker også at tekstur er vigtigt!  
 
Min eneste anke er at det kræver meget af forbrugeren i købssituationen – der skal være tid og overskud til at 
scanne og læse på sin telefon. Men jeg tror det kan være et rigtig vigtigt element i en educational process. I vores 
sustainability team taler vi tit om at vi skal være med til at løfte sustainability / climate literacy i Chr. Hansen. Det 
kan denne løsning også være med til – at højne forståelsen af alternative (og mere smagfulde, sunde og 
klimavenlige) måltider.  
 
Jeg ved ikke om du kender den app der hedder plantjammer? (Plant Jammer | AI, recipes and sustainability). Den 
tager udgangspunkt i hvad du har af rester i dit køleskab. På baggrund af AI har de screenet utallige opskrifter og 
ingredienser der passer godt sammen og appen kan så hjælpe dig med at sammensætte et lækkert plantebaseret 
måltid. den kommer med forslag til forskellige elementer du kan tilføje som tilføjer tekstur/smag etc.  
 
Men overordnet set et rigtig spændende perspektiv med smag – det tror jeg helt sikkert er en af vejene frem mod 
en mere bæredygtig madkultur. 
 
Rigtig meget held og lykke med slutspurten og forsvaret!!  
 
Bedste hilsener 
Louise  
 
 
 
From: Sofie Stokholm Martinussen <DKSOMA@chr-hansen.com>  
Sent: 20. juni 2021 16:20 
To: Louise Rosenmeier <DKLORO@chr-hansen.com> 
Subject: Ekspert validering af løsning til speciale 
Importance: High 
 
Hej Louise,  
 
Jeg håber du har haft mulighed for, at nyde det gode vejr og ikke har haft alt for tralvt.  
 
Jeg er ved (heldigvis), at være ved vejs ende af mit speciale og skriver der ud af. Jeg mangler blot ekspert vurderinger 
af min løsning, så jeg vil høre om du har tid og lyst til, at være en af mine eksperter? 
 
==PAGE:165==
2
Det drejer sig om en løsning, som skal bidrage til at vi om 10 år ser en ændret adfærd i måden hvorpå folk tilgår 
mad. Da det er en fremtidig løsning er det en narrativbaseret vurdering jeg søger og har derfor sammensat et kort 
slidedeck der præsenterer udfordringen og en konceptuel løsning. På sidste side er der et link til en survey med 6 
spørgsmål du meget gerne må udfylde. 
 
Udover surveyen, må du meget gerne kommentere på om du mener der er et potentiale på markedet for en løsning 
som denne. 
 
Tidshorisonten er kort, men hvis du har tiden og lysten vil det være fantastisk. Jeg afleverer mit speciale den 25/6, 
men kan det ikke lade sig gøre vil jeg gerne inkorporere din feedback til mit forsvar den 2/7. 
 
Kind regards/Med venlig hilsen,  
 
Sofie S. Martinussen 
Product Manager, Commercial Development – Meat and Prepared Food 
Chr. Hansen A/S - Boege Alle 10-12 - 2970 Hoersholm - Denmark 
 
dksoma@chr-hansen.com –  http://www.chr-hansen.com 
 
 
==PAGE:166==
154
==PAGE:167==
Bibliography
[1]
Earth Science Communications Team, “Global climate change: Eﬀects.”
accessed
01.06.2021.
[2]
P. Hawken, Drawdown : the most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse global
warming. Penguin, 2017.
[3]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Sustainable food systems
concept and framework,” 2018.
[4]
P. Hekkert and M. van Dijk, Vision in Design A Guidebook for Innovators. BIS Publishers,
3rd printing ed., 2021.
[5]
M. L. Markowitz, “Agriculture and the food system: A short history and country case
study in mongolia,” master thesis, SIT Graduate Institute, 2013.
[6]
National Geographic Society, “The development of agriculture,” 2019.
[7]
National Geographic Society, “Domestication,” 2011.
[8]
Caryl-Sue and National Geographic Society, “Key components of civilization,” 2018.
[9]
Caryl-Sue and National Geographic Society, “Agriculture,” 2011.
[10] T. Brown and National Geographic Society, “Industrialization, labor, and life,” 2020.
[11] M. Burger, H. Casey, and N. Silverman, “Major moments in food & agriculture: 1900’s
until now,” 2020.
[12] R. Redzepi and D. Zilber, he Noma Guide to Fermentation (Foundations of Flavor). Arti-
san, 1 ed., 2018.
[13] S. E. Katz, The art of fermentation : an in-depth exploration of essential concepts and
processes from around the world. Chelsea Green Publishing, 2012.
[14] Chr. Hansen Holding A/S, “Probiotic facts,” 2021. accessed 09.05.2021.
[15] GAIN & Johns Hopkins University, “About food systems,” 2020.
==PAGE:168==
156
Bibliography
[16] H. Ritchie and M. Roser, “Environmental impacts of food production,” 2021.
[17] OECD, “Agriculture and climate change: Towards sustainable, productive and climate-
friendly agricultural systems,” 2021.
[18] Chr. Hansen Holding A/S, “About us,” 2021.
[19] Chr. Hansen Holding A/S, “Fermentation the secret behind all your favorite food,” 2021.
[20] Chr. Hansen Holding A/S, “Purpose and strategy,” 2021.
[21] K. Askew, “’there is a mega-trend around fermentation’: The rising star of fermented
foods,” 2018.
[22] Statistics Denmark, “Population in denmark,” 2021.
[23] Ministry of Higher Education and Science, “Forskere og lærere vil lære skolebørn, hvor
maden kommer fra,” 2020.
[24] A. Namina and Y. Dehdashti, “A hidden side of consumer grocery shopping choice,”
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 48, pp. 16–27, 2019.
[25] J. Hayes, The theory and practice of change management. Palgrave, 5. ed., 2018.
[26] T. Roland, D. Poulsen, M. Steenberg, M. Obelitz, and J. Falk, “Danskernes madvaner,”
report, 2016.
[27] M. B. Madsen and C. L. Berg-Jensen, “Unges madvaner under forandring,” report,
Concito, 2021. accessed 05.03.2021.
[28] A.Halloran, M.F.Fischer-Moeller, M.Persson, andE.Skylare, “Solutionsmenu-anordic
guide to sustainable food policy,” Report Publication number 2018:786, Secretary of the
Nordic Council of Ministers Nordic Council of Ministers, Copenhagen, 2018.
[29] E. F. Beitzen-Heineke, N. Balta-Ozkan, and H. Reefke, “The prospects of zero-packaging
grocery stores to improve the social and environmental impacts of the food supply
chain,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 140, pp. 1528–1541, 2017.
[30] Hustle Escape, “Supermarket psychology: How they use science to make us spend
more.” accessed 18.02.2021.
[31] European Commission, “Fruits and vegetables - marketing standards.”
accessed
15.04.2021.
[32] J. M. Twenge, “The evidence for generation me and against generation we,” Emerging
Adulthood, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–16, 2013.
==PAGE:169==
Bibliography
157
[33] F. Jia, S. Alisat, K. Soucie, and M. Pratt, “Generative concern and environmentalism: A
mixedmethodslongitudinalstudyofemergingandyoungadults,” EmergingAdulthood,
vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 306–319, 2015.
[34] Danmarks Statistik, “Husstande,” 2021. accessed 17.02.2021.
[35] C. Petersen, O. Kaysen, S. Manokaran, K. Tønning, and T. Hansen, “Kortlægning af da-
grenovation i danmark med fokus på etageboliger og madspild,” report, Miljøstyrelsen,
2014.
[36] D. N. Su, T. H. Duong, M. T. T. Dinh, D. Q. Nguyen-Phuoc, and L. W. Johnson, “Behavior
towards shopping at retailers practicing sustainable grocery packaging: The inﬂuences
of intra-personal and retailer-based contextual factors,” Journal of Cleaner Production,
vol. 279, no. , 2021.
[37] K. Steinmetz, “Why consumers don’t trust ’organic’ labels,” 2015. accessed 04.03.2021.
[38] J. K. Knudsen, “Faktatjek skal du købe økologisk, hvis du vil være klimavenlig?,” 2019.
accessed 01.03.2021.
[39] L. M. Sommer, “Klimaekspert aﬂiver myte: økologi er ikke bæredygtigt,” Net Avisen,
2018. accessed 05.03.2021.
[40] Danwatch, “How much water does it take to grow an avocado?.” accessed 07.04.2021.
[41] J. Dwyer and . Freitas, “Food culture,” Encyclopedia of Human Nutrition, vol. 2, pp. 289–
295, 2005.
[42] G. Ma, “Food, eating behavior, and culture in chinese society,” Journal of Ethnic Foods,
vol. 2, pp. 195–199, 2015.
[43] M. L. Kringelbach, “The pleasure of food: underlying brain mechanisms of eating and
other pleasures,” Flavour Journal, 2015.
[44] J. Evans, R. Flore, J. A. Pedersen, and M. B. Frøst, “Place-based taste: geography as a
starting point for deliciousness,” Flavour Journal, vol. 4, 2015.
[45] H. Kawasaki and K. Shimomura, “Temporal design of taste and ﬂavor: practical collab-
oration between chef and scientist,” Flavour Journal, vol. 4, 2015.
[46] C. Spence, X. Wan, A. Woods, C. Velasco, J. Deng, J. Youssef, and O. Deroy, “On tasty
colours and colourful tastes? assessing, explaining, and utilizing crossmodal correspon-
dences between colours and basic tastes,” Flavour Journal, vol. 4, 2015.
[47] CONCITO, “The big climate database,” 2021.
==PAGE:170==
158
Bibliography
[48] J. Spinner, “Intelligent design: eagile launches rﬁd smart packaging,” 2014.
[49] M. Lehner, O. Mont, and E. Heiskanen, “Nudging - a promising tool for sustainable con-
sumption behaviour?,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 134, pp. 166–177, 2016.
[50] S. T. Rabideau, “Eﬀects of achievement motivation on behavior,” 2005.
[51] Chr. Hansen Holding A/S, “David zilber (ex-noma) joins fermentation forces with chr.
hansen,” 2021.
[52] Meyers, “Claus meyers cv,” n.d.
[53] Plant Jammer, “Plant jammer,” 2021.
[54] Danmarks Statistik, “Rekordmange handler på nettet,” 2020. accessed 20.06.2021.
