==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Designing Healthy, Highly-Engaging
Mobile Game Experiences
Design af sunde, højt engagerende
mobilspil-oplevelser
Jacob Harboe Støver Aagaard (s190562)
Miria Emma Clausen Knudsen (s154666)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Digital Media
Engineering. This study has been supervised by Kevin Doherty and Per Bækgaard
during the spring semester of 2021.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Miria Emma Clausen Knudsen (s154666)
Jacob Harboe Støver Aagaard (s190562)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Kevin Doherty for his engagement, for inspi-
ration and guidance, and for asking brilliant questions throughout the project.
We also extend our thanks to our co-supervisor Per Bækgaard for his insights and
for providing constructive feedback to many essential parts of the project.
A big round of thanks to all our participants for dedicating their time to us and
for sharing their experiences and expertise.
Also we appreciate the warm welcome (back) to our oﬀice space, which we received
from CACHET and DTU Health Tech once the circumstances allowed it.
Lastly, we would like to thank our close friends and family, who supported us
directly and indirectly throughout this research project.
Miria Emma Clausen Knudsen
Technical University of Denmark
June 25, 2021
Jacob Harboe Støver Aagaard
Technical University of Denmark
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
Acronyms
vii
ABSTRACT
ix
1
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1
Project Aim & Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
A Design Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
RELATED WORK
5
2.1
Mobile Games as Highly-engaging Experiences
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Relationship between Wellbeing and Mobile Games . . . . . . . .
7
3
METHOD
9
3.1
Research Through Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Phase 2: Initial Concept Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Phase 3: Concept Co-design Workshops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Phase 4: Additional Prototyping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement
. . . . . .
17
3.7
Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
FINDINGS
23
4.1
Participant Descriptive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Phase 2: Initial Concept Development | Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops | Participant Feedback . . . .
55
4.5
Phase 4: Additional Prototyping | Revised Concepts . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.6
Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement | Prototypes 67
4.7
Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development | A Design Manifesto . . . .
73
5
DISCUSSION
77
5.1
Revisiting Our Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.2
Reflections on Our Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.3
Implementing Our Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.4
Reflections on the Ethics of Design and Play
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6
CONCLUSION
95
References
97
Contributions
101
Participant Information Sheets
103
Demographic Questionnaire and Interview Guides
107
Recruitment Banners
119
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
BD
Business Developer
CET
Cognitive Evaluation Theory
DADIU Danish Academy of Digital Interactive Entertainment
DTU
Techical University of Denmark
F2P
Free-To-Play
FOMO Fear of Missing Out
GC
Game Creator
GD
Game Designer
GP
Game Programmer
HCI
Human-Computer Interaction
IAP
In-App Purchase
IARC
International Age Rating Coalition
ITU
IT University of Copenhagen
PEGI
Pan European Game Information
PVP
Player versus Player
RNG
Random Number Generator
SDT
Self-Determination Theory
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
ABSTRACT
This design research thesis aims to understand the engagement, subjective wellbeing,
diverse motivations for interaction, and an ethics of design situated in players’ and
game creators’ lived experiences; with the ultimate aim of increasing opportunities
for healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. Many players get lured into
spending more time and money on mobile games than they plan to. This is because
of ’dark patterns’, design patterns used to manipulate users.
We took a user-centred design research approach to, inviting diverse stakehold-
ers – 8 game players, 3 Game Creators (GCs), 3 Game Programmers (GPs) and
2 Business Developers (BDs) – and employing visual research methods in order to
inspire engagement during 5 co-design workshops.
We found that dark patterns can be ’stumbled into’, i.e. be created inadvertently,
or exist in the game without developers noticing their presence. We also found that
Game Creators (GCs) and Business Developers (BDs) are in conflict regarding mon-
etization, with Game Creators (GCs) being frustrated over their lack of influence.
We found many players are unaware of dark patterns in games, although they can
recognize them when encountered during game play. Thus an inherently adversarial
relationship exists between game professionals striving for profit and players desiring
to avoid manipulative monetization.
To address these shortcomings, we designed three solutions: A Dark Pattern
Badges system to inform players of dark patterns within games before downloading
them, and incentivizing GCs to avoid the use of dark patterns in order to obtain a
’Healthy Game’ stamp. A Healthy Game Design course to give Game Creators (GCs)
the knowledge and tool to implement healthy game patterns through co-operation
with Business Developers (BDs), and a Emotion Assessment Toolkit to help find
areas within the games that might be unhealthy for participants.
The combination of three concepts into a Design Manifesto provides a holistic solu-
tion that benefits all stakeholders – increasing transparency, supporting development,
and facilitating conversation – to increase opportunities for healthy, highly-engaging
mobile game experiences.
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
For many, gaming is a source of pleasure and joy, an important part of our lives,
social and uplifting in nature. Whether to relax at home or to socialize with friends,
gaming as an activity has become a larger and larger part of pop culture. Over the
years, gaming has also become more accessible.
What was previously an activity
bound to the home console or computer can now be engaged in anywhere with the
arrival of mobile games. As smartphones have risen in popularity, so too has the
use of the mobile phone as gaming device. In fact, according to an Entertainment
Software Association 2020 report, the smartphone is the most commonly used device
for game play among adults today [Pie20]. While mobile gaming allows for many
different types of experiences, this report shows that the most popular genre today
consists of casual games – games relaxing in nature. However, mobile games can be
used for more than just relaxing, and users reported playing games also to socialize
and to stimulate their minds.
For others today however, gaming has become engaging to the point of detrimental
effect. As one commenter to an online forum debating the adverse implications of
mobile game design today notes;
“I can’t bring myself to give up a mobile game because of the daily content.
I don’t really play much but I constantly think about the game which is
affecting me in real life” - Reddit user 1.
Players are avidly discussing and sharing their opinions online, and are moving
toward figuring out which parts of mobile games are creating adverse experiences. A
recent post on Reddit – stating that a link between loot boxes and problem gambling
has been robustly verified – yielded many strong responses; “Micro transactions/pay-
to-win ruined gaming” - Reddit user: CantEv3rbeSt0pp3d2
Along with the game mechanics that players are criticizing online, the discourse
also revolves around mobile games as lesser experiences than PC and console video
games.
Mobile games can prove more fleeting experiences and often require less
investment from players. Some players describe mobile gaming primarily as a form
of downtime or a time filler, i.e. implicitly valued less than other pastime activities.
1https://www.reddit.com/r/StopGaming/comments/99i85o/having_trouble_quitting_
mobile_game_need_advice/
2https://www.reddit.com/r/worldnews/comments/mip5xd/the_link_between_gaming_loot_
boxes_and_problem/gt6ppl4?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3
==PAGE:14==
2
1 INTRODUCTION
In contrast, other players describe a need to limit playtime in order to avoid over
engagement and burnout. Such differences in player experiences are further reflected
in the variety of genres.
Mobile game genres span from hyper-casual – easy-to-play games regardless of
prior game experience, where gameplay comes in 30-second intervals followed by an
ad – to Gacha – high budget games that focus on long-term goals where players are
incentivized to engage with in-game micro-transactions in order to progress in the
game, either by winning characters, weapons or in-game items via a lootbox system3.
Both genres yield increasingly high incomes for game companies. Genshin Impact,
for example – the most successful Gacha game in recent times – surpassed $1 billion
in player spending in only five months4 while the biggest hyper-casual game studio
Ketchapp has an estimated annual revenue of $78 million5.
The proven success of game studios and the sheer fun of creating games is attrac-
tive to Game Programmers (GPs) and Game Designers (GDs) – collectively Game
Creators (GCs). Yet, the dream of creating the next big game title is not easy to
achieve due to the complex process for the creation of highly-engaging game expe-
riences. This is a process entailing careful design, implementation and user testing.
User testing often focuses on quantitative measures and business metrics, i.e. reten-
tion and lifetime value. In attempting to improve user engagement, developers often
employ design patterns known as Dark Patterns. These are patterns that manipulate
players to spend more time and/or money on the game, which can lead to unhealthy
player experiences. The adverse effects of highly-engaging game experiences are of-
ten described as as a consequence of Dark Patterns in game design. There are many
different definitions of dark patterns in games, and while the exact wording differs,
they are commonly described as:
“A pattern used intentionally by a game creator to cause negative experi-
ences for players which are against their best interests and likely to happen
without their consent.” [ZBL13]
Generally, dark patterns are hard to define since their effects vary among individ-
uals. Hence, a design pattern that a Game Creator (GC) finds harmless for players
could very well prove a dark pattern that entices the majority of the player-base
into playing or paying much more than they intended to. As argued by Zagal et al.,
game design patterns themselves are best thought of as value-neutral tools for game
designers to include or exclude according to their specific design purpose. But, as
they argue, this “does not necessarily make them useful for identifying problematic or
unethical design choices made by designers” [ZBL13]. Hence, a deeper understanding
of the link between game designers’ intentions, choices and their subsequent impact
on player experiences and wellbeing is needed.
3While many games contain loot boxes as a form of in-game monetization, Gacha games are
different in that they rely on the lootbox mechanic for progression within the game.
4https://sensortower.com/blog/genshin-impact-one-billion-revenue
5https://www.businessinsider.com/ketchapp-is-taking-over-the-app-store-2016-2
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Project Aim & Research Question
3
Preliminary work on understanding the effects of dark patterns has begun in
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) literature and is reflected in recent CHI confer-
ences; whether it is assessing their impact on users [MKM21; Di +20] or providing
guidelines for designers [Luk+21]. Lukoff et al. suggest setting norms for designers
as a way to address dark patterns. Specifically doing so by shaming companies that
employ dark patterns, requiring developers to articulate the values of their ethics-
focused design practice, or incorporating dark patterns material in design education
curriculum. Another example of an attempt to mitigate the impact of dark patterns
is Fitton & Read’s framework to support critical consideration during the design of
Free-To-Play (F2P) games [FR19]. This framework is intended to be applied dur-
ing game design to “help creators of free-to-play apps focus on the experience and
wellbeing of younger users even when monetization is essential”.
Game designers’ intentions are often not aligned with actual player experiences,
as found by Denisova et al. when interviewing 14 indie game designers. The authors
highlight the importance of acknowledging the individuality of player experiences in
particular. As one interviewed game designer puts it: “different kinds of experiences
are meaningful to different people, and that we shouldn’t judge people for what is
meaningful to them” [Den+21]. This also highlights the value of user-centered design
for creating healthy game experiences.
While researchers and the general public focus on avoiding unhealthy mobile game
experiences, gaming companies may well lack the incentives to bring about change
from within their own platforms, and it is often left to individual players to develop the
capacity for self-regulation as means to mitigate the possible negative consequences
of engagement;
”I am a few months micro-transaction free and I can honestly say I haven’t
felt this good about gaming in a long time. MT [Micro-transactions, ed.]
and lootboxes are the cancer everybody thinks it is.”
- Reddit user: DeadJango6
1.1
Project Aim & Research Question
Project Aim
The primary aim of this project is therefore to understand patterns
of highly-engaged gaming, particularly where they have the potential to realise harm,
and in turn to employ this knowledge in support of the design of a new tool to create
more healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences.
In pursuit of this aim, we seek to address the following research questions;
How can we increase opportunities for healthy, highly-engaging
mobile game experiences?
6https://www.reddit.com/r/worldnews/comments/mip5xd/the_link_between_gaming_loot_
boxes_and_problem/gt6b5kt?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3
==PAGE:16==
4
1 INTRODUCTION
• How do players and game creators characterize their experiences of playing and
developing highly-engaging mobile games?
• Which design choices and patterns shape most strongly healthy and unhealthy
player experiences with highly-engaging mobile games?
• How can we design to mitigate the effects of those design patterns that impact
the wellbeing of players negatively?
1.2
A Design Research Approach
To address these research questions and their underlying challenges, we devised a
series of interviews and co-design workshops to engage diverse stakeholders from
the gaming communities and industry.
To understand and structure our findings
from these interviews we employ reflexive thematic analysis [BC06; BC19] and draw
on insights from co-design workshops to guide the design of tools to make mobile
games healthier, highly-engaging experiences. These methods have previously been
employed within HCI to study game design as it relates to ethics [AGA21] and to
“shed light on ethically charged practices of care in their design” [Spi+19].
1.3
Contribution
This thesis therefore contributes to our understanding of how dark patterns arise in
mobile games and their effects on players. This thesis also contributes towards a
more nuanced view of design patterns, drawing on insights from diverse stakeholders.
Our work illustrates how game developers, game designers, business developers and
game players can help increase opportunities for healthy, highly engaging mobile game
experiences through co-design.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
RELATED WORK
The design of healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences draws on theory and
research from a number of related fields, from Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
to psychology.
As we next describe, we employ theoretical framework combining
engagement theory and wellbeing science.
2.1
Mobile Games as Highly-engaging Experiences
Design for user engagement as a topic has received much attention within HCI [DD18].
In the gaming industry in particular, highly-engaging game experiences are the ulti-
mate aim of most Game Creators (GCs). Cowley et al. posit that games have great
potential for generating experiences of flow, stating that “games give immediate ac-
cess to their inherent potential for optimal experience, and that potential is facilitated
by the structured nature of further gameplay. Thus there is a common correlation
between simply completing computer games and getting ’in the flow’.” [Cow+08]. Al-
though potentially ingrained in mobile game experiences, the task for many GCs
remains to balance and maintain flow as players progress through their games, as
means to keep them engaged [Mar15].
Descriptions of flow during gameplay is often linked to immersion, the notion of
getting in the zone and losing track of time within individual play sessions [SW05;
Che07].
Flow experienced during individual sessions describe players’ short-term
engagement with games, which in turn can evolve into long-term engagement. The
desire to design for long-term engagement in games is also present in literature [FG09].
Kayali et al. investigated design considerations for long-term engagement in games for
health, defining this as: “a desire and willingness to stick to a game for a longer time
frame.” [Kay+18]. This intuitive definition places the focus on implicit factors driving
long-term engagement, positing engagement as a measure of involvement between a
player and a game. Huynh et al., in contrast, describe gaming engagement as an
active and interactive experience, and as: “[t]he emotional, cognitive, and behavioral
connection that exists, at any point in time and possibly over time, between a player
and the mobile game” [Huy+18].
In a systematic review of engagement in serious games, Hookham & Nesbitt exam-
ine 107 papers that define engagement and similarly to Huynh et al. [Huy+18], arrive
at a definition of engagement as comprising three distinct parts; behaviour, cognition,
and affect. These are further described as connected in a hierarchical structure to the
==PAGE:18==
6
2 RELATED WORK
concepts of Flow, Immersion, Presence and Absorption [HN19]. These findings are
represented in a UML model reflecting the interconnections between these concepts
(See Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: A Definition of Engagement in Games (Adapted from [HN19]).
These definitions reflect conceptions of users’ engagement with other technologies
[DD18; OT08], as a meta-construct composed of multiple components.
Engagement has also been studied as a component part of the experience of well-
being. According to Huppert, engagement is an integral part of an individual’s sus-
tainable wellbeing; “the experience of functioning well, for instance having a sense
of engagement and competence (…) having good relationships with others, and a
sense of belonging and contributing to a community.” [Hup14, p. 1].
This aligns
with Self-Determination Theory (SDT) and it’s sub-theory Cognitive Evaluation The-
ory (CET), which defines engagement as a construct of three factors; Autonomy,
Competence, and Relatedness [DR85]. Thus, engagement and it’s constituents shape
the experience of wellbeing. In a recent study Peters et al. argue that the basic needs
described by the CET factors in fact are relevant for wellbeing-supportive design as
“the controllers we tweak and adjust to iterate on and improve experience” [PCR18].
Therefore, an understanding of engagement is essential to understanding experiences
of wellbeing and developing means to improve wellbeing, whether through games or
other means.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The Relationship between Wellbeing and Mobile Games
7
2.2
The Relationship between Wellbeing and Mobile
Games
Much academic and public discourse has come to focus on the relationship between
mobile games and wellbeing. The period of time spent playing games often features
at the heart of such discussions [JVP21; EI18]. Overall, a study of the relationship
between the length-of-time spent playing mobile games and self-reported wellbeing
shows that “playing a mobile game for an appropriate length of time results in a
stronger sense of wellbeing than not playing at all”, and found that playing for less
than two hours a day significantly affects life satisfaction positively [Yam20, p 16].
More generally, Allahverdipour et al. found a curvilinear relationship between video
game playing and mental health outcomes and found that ”non-gamers” showed the
worst outcomes [All+10]. However, the importance of the amount of gameplay ap-
propriate in relation to wellbeing impact has also been questioned by Johnson et al.
who posit that researchers’ emphasis should instead be directed towards “how video
games are played, whether they are played with others, and with whom they are played.”
[Joh+13].
Although not the focus of this work, several mobile games have been designed in
recent years for the explicit purpose of increasing wellbeing by proactively or reac-
tively mitigating mental illnesses such as anxiety disorders and post-traumatic stress
disorder. These efforts fall under the category of serious games, the potential benefits
of which cannot be understated, and yet remain a small minority of games played in
relation to games created for the purposes of entertainment which also impact the
wellbeing of players in broad terms.
Feeling connected to others is found to be a factor that increases both motivation,
engagement and wellbeing generally for digital experiences [PCR18]. Specifically for
mobile games, social aspects have received much attention in the literature, often
with references to relatedness as described in Self-Determination Theory (SDT) and
social capital theory [YL17; RRP06; Per+18; VJH13]. The sociability of games is
often considered a means to positive outcomes, yet as Peters et al. emphasize, over-
engagement in games has also been described as leading to a negative impact on
relatedness if human relations are ignored in favor of the game [PCR18].
Another important aspect of mobile game experiences for many concerns emo-
tional regulation. One systematic review of gameplay for emotional regulation, for
example, indicated that “people usually play video games to recover from stress and
negative emotions” [Vil+18].
Similarly, Colwell found that adolescent players use
games as a way of deliberately altering a negative mood to a more positive state
[Col07]. Positive and negative emotions alike shape mobile game experiences and
both must be present to provide good experiences for players [Laz09].
Work in relation to emotional regulation as a feature of wellbeing and gameplay
tends to place the burden of responsibility for wellbeing on individual players. And
this is an underlying theme of much of the discourse around healthy, highly-engaging
game experiences – where the responsibility lies for the practices players, developers,
==PAGE:20==
8
2 RELATED WORK
designers and other stakeholders engage in.
This diffusion of responsibility poses a challenge for creating healthy, highly-
engaging mobile games, as driving this change requires all stakeholders to work to-
gether in creating an environment that supports healthy, highly-engaging mobile
game experiences.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
METHOD
3.1
Research Through Design
We took a user-centred design research approach to the question of how to create
healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. Our approach is grounded within
the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), takes shape as research through
design and is qualitative in nature – choices made as means to understanding the
complex processes of users’ lived experiences and to guiding the design of a tool for
the creation of healthier, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. We follow a design
thinking methodology inspired by d.school’s five-stage model (See Figure 3.1) as a
process for approaching complex problem-solving through a focus on users’ needs
by means of divergent ideation, convergent prototyping and testing.
We adopt a
qualitative methodology in order to generate rich insight into relevant stakeholders’
experiences in seeking answers to our research questions. We explicitly designed and
employed visual research methods in order to inspire participants to engage actively
and creatively in the co-design exercises.
Figure 3.1: The Design Research Process.
This design-research process comprised 6 iterative phases. The first, Phase 1, con-
sisted of empathizing with diverse stakeholders, defining their individual pain points
==PAGE:22==
10
3 METHOD
and identifying common themes via semi-structured interviews conducted with mo-
bile game players, Game Programmers (GPs), Game Designers (GDs), and Business
Developers (BDs). In Phase 2, these initial interview findings guided the creation
of concept solutions through divergent brainstorming and mind mapping exercises.
These initial concepts were then expanded and iterated upon together with stake-
holders during co-design workshops part of Phase 3. Knowledge and insight from
these sessions was then employed to converge upon more concrete mock-ups and
prototypes in Phase 4. In Phase 5, stakeholders were again consulted during work-
shops for the iterative co-designing, testing and validation of these concepts. Finally,
Phase 6 entailed condensing and refining prototypes to present a coherent strategy
for the creation of healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. At the outset
of the project, a Gantt Chart was created to facilitate project planning and execution,
broken down into our main activities, milestones and deliverables (See Figure 3.2).
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Research Through Design
11
Figure 3.2: Original Gantt chart.
==PAGE:24==
12
3 METHOD
3.2
Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews
We first employed semi-structured interviews as a method for understanding individ-
ual stakeholders’ mobile game experiences as situated in their lives, professional and
personal. These interviews were devised to foster rich discussion and produce insight
valuable for guiding the proceeding design research phases. 16 semi-structured inter-
views were carried out online with 8 Players, 6 Game Creators (GCs) comprising 3
Game Programmers (GPs) and 3 Game Designers (GDs), and 2 Business Develop-
ers (BDs).
We recruited GCs and BDs via various channels; LinkedIn and our personal and
professional network. To recruit players we posted a recruitment banner via DTU’s in-
tranet and public social media; Reddit threads, ResetEra1, Twitter, Facebook groups.
We communicated with participants using email and a Discord server designed for the
purpose. Participants were in general approached of as experts capable of enhancing
the researchers’ understanding of highly-engaging mobile game experiences. Separate
interview guides were designed specifically for each stakeholder category to allow us
to empathize with participants of each role Appendix 6. We used participant infor-
mation sheets to communicate the purpose of our research to participants and inform
them of our handling of data privacy, in advance of the interviews (See Appendix 6).
The interviews were staged to last for one hour, but often lasted longer as partic-
ipants were eager and willing to share their insights. At the start of each interview,
participants were asked to fill out a short online form with five demographic questions
followed by questions about their experience with mobile games (See interview guides
in Appendix 6). No personally identifiable information was stored, and instead each
participant was assigned a unique number for distinguishing their answers. Ques-
tions were designed based on the prompts and probes method to inspire participants
to provide more detailed answers, while allowing researchers to steer the conversation
in the intended direction when necessary [Gil00, p 45-52]. Interview questions were
divided into three categories:
Part 1 Developing empathy and understanding with participants
Player habits and motivations to engage with games
i.e. ”Do you enjoy your time spent playing mobile games?”
GC motivations and approaches to creating games
BD opinions on monetization and how it impacts players
Part 2 Understanding highly-engaging game mechanics in relation to
Player experiences and how it impacts wellbeing
GC intentions and methods for engaging players
i.e. ”Do you have a strategy or approach to engage players more in your
games?”
1The self-acclaimed premier online video gaming forum
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Phase 2: Initial Concept Development
13
BD strategies for designing monetization
Part 3 Understanding awareness of and familiarity with dark patterns
Player and how they influence their gaming experiences
GC if they are used (un)intentionally and reflections on their impact
BD and how they connect to monetization design
i.e. ”Which considerations do you have about tweaking the numbers of
game mechanics in regards to monetization?”
Part 4 Participants’ conception of how a tool might alleviate their frustrations
and result in healthier gaming experiences, i.e. ”If we were to design a tool to
alleviate some of your frustrations, what should it include?”
This interview structure was intended to provide insight into players’ and GCs’
characterization of their experiences playing and developing healthy, highly-engaging
mobile game experiences.
Interviews were audio-recorded, anonymized and transcribed in full before being
analysed using reflexive thematic analysis [BC06; BC19]. Both researchers engaged
actively with the gathered data and iterated through interviews several times to gen-
erate key themes. We generated initial codes inductively followed by the development
of common themes across these codes. When coding the interviews, we divided the
interviews among us, such that those transcribed by one author would be coded by
another. Finally, we identified quotes illustrative of each theme to capture and report
interview participants’ sentiment.
3.3
Phase 2: Initial Concept Development
The purpose of Phase 2 then was to generate a broad set of initial concept solutions
inspired by and grounded in our findings from the initial phase of qualitative inter-
viewing. Methods of divergent thinking including brainstorming and mind-mapping
were used to inspire creative and diverse ideas, the only constraint being that our
ideas must target one of the relevant stakeholders. Later we critically reviewed the
generated ideas, for which we created several guiding principles for the solutions. One
principle was that the should help players avoid unhealthy interactions with mobile
games, either directly by altering their engagement patterns or indirectly by altering
the design of the game. Along this notion of avoiding unhealthy interactions, we then
highlighted solutions that could increase awareness of dark patterns for stakeholders.
This would help bringing increased focus on dark patterns before engagement for
players or during development for GCs and BDs. For GCs, we valued whether or not
the solutions could help inform them regarding the creation of healthy experiences,
in support of the first principle. Lastly, a guiding principle was that a solution could
==PAGE:26==
14
3 METHOD
help facilitate better communication between stakeholders, whether players and GCs
or GCs and BDs.
We also merged similar ideas and filtered out ideas too broad for the scope of the
project (See section 4.3 for details of this process in action. Finally, profitability was
an important concern for GCs and BDs alike which is why some concept ideas were
turned down as they did not seem profitable.
3.4
Phase 3: Concept Co-design Workshops
With a list of concepts in hand we then organized co-design sessions to include stake-
holders once more. One purpose of these sessions was to better flesh out our under-
standing of stakeholders’ interpretation of dark patterns as developed during inter-
views – and key to many of our concepts. We also invited participants to iterate on
the six concepts, posing open-ended questions to capture opinions and suggestions
for further development of the concepts. Finally, we included an interactive exercise
for the prioritization of the six concepts to guide our continued scoping of concepts.
The fact that we both participated in all workshops gave us the opportunity to
divide the roles of facilitator and documentor between us. Miro2 was used extensively
both as the tool to facilitate collaborative workflows during workshops, and as a
tool for the research team to structure and visualize findings.
We found Miro to
be a powerful tool to conduct design research, since it gives participants freedom
to interact and co-design, ultimately allowing us to gather insights easier and to a
larger extent. The use of Miro made gathering of data fairly straightforward, since
we designed exercises in which participants provided insights by writing text directly
or verbally, which was then captured by the documentor by writing and attaching
comments directly to the Miro board.
We carried out four sessions with eight participants from the prior interviews,
most of whom had agreed to be contacted again.
This time, we create pairs of
participants from different backgrounds, with the intention of inspiring discussion by
making participants with potentially distinct view points join forces as co-designers
in relation to the design concepts.
The three first sessions were initiated with a warm-up exercise that entailed placing
16 different dark patterns cooperatively along a gradient - shaped like a double-headed
arrow - from dark to bright (See Figure 3.3). One of the participants in the last session
had diﬀiculties with this exercise and it was therefore skipped entirely. Interview
findings from Phase 1 inspired the design of this exercise.
The patterns themselves were sourced from from Offsky’s website3 – an online
database created to highlight dark patterns in games, containing thorough descrip-
tions and user-generated ratings of dark patterns in games – and URLs were inserted
for each pattern to allow participants to seek out more information via the website
2https://miro.com/
3https://www.darkpattern.games/patterns.php
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Phase 3: Concept Co-design Workshops
15
Figure 3.3: Exercise: Dark patterns gradient placement – participants should place
dark patterns along a gradient from dark to bright.
during the exercise, if needed. This exercise both acts as a conversation starter for
participants and helps gather qualitative insights into how the impact of dark pat-
terns is perceived. Answers across sessions were triangulated to find commonalities
and contradictions. For this purpose, comments were gathered throughout the ses-
sion, as participants were asked to argue for their placement of the patterns along the
gradient. Participants did not engage in comment writing themselves, hence captur-
ing arguments for placement and discussions between participants were done by the
researchers.
After this warm-up exercise, participants were invited to take part in iterating
upon the six design concepts. We had described each concept briefly in text form,
which was read aloud to participants, allowing them to ask follow-up questions. Par-
ticipants were asked to fill out their feedback on digital post-it notes, and argue for
their answers verbally once they were ready. We captured their answers in this way
since each participants’ thoughts were then visible to everybody in the session and it
proved an easy way of preserving comments.
Finally, the sessions ended with an exercise where participants once more had to
place items spatially. This time, the exercise entailed placing the six concepts in a 2D
plot, considering how (i) feasible and (ii) valuable each concept was perceived (See
Figure 3.4). We designed this exercise with interactivity in mind, since it allowed
participants to freely rate the design concepts.
Prioritizing ideas in this way provided an indication of which concepts were con-
sidered to have the greatest potential to create healthy, highly-engaging mobile game
==PAGE:28==
16
3 METHOD
Figure 3.4: Exercise: Concept prioritization of Feasibility vs. Value – participants
should prioritize ideas on two axes.
experiences. Similarly to the dark pattern gradient placement exercise, both partici-
pants were asked to reach agreement and argue for their placements, via discussion
captured by the researchers as comments written on the Miro board during discussion.
3.5
Phase 4: Additional Prototyping
The purpose of Phase 4 then was to further develop and refine our initial concept
tools to support healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. We first produced
low-fidelity paper sketch prototypes of all six concepts. By not constraining ourselves
to digital prototyping early on we allowed for more creative and broad ideas to take
shape. As concepts began to take shape discussions started revolving around their
novelty, impact on stakeholders, and business potential. Ultimately, we filtered out
==PAGE:29==
3.6 Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement
17
three of the six original concepts based on these discussions, and specific insights
from our interactions with stakeholders during Phase 3. Specifically, participants’
descriptions about each concept on the post-it notes along with comments during the
value feasibility prioritization exercise provided valuable during design discussions
and prototyping.
Having arrived at three candidate ideas for prototyping, we used Figma4 to refine
sketches for a final set of higher fidelity prototypes. Design choices were guided by
the rich data gathered during previous phases, as we continuously and iteratively
switched between design work, ideation and reviewing data from previous workshops
and interviews. We elaborate on our iterative design work in section 4.5.
3.6
Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype
Refinement
The final workshop session was designed differently to that of Phase 3; whereas the
first sessions allowed participants to work with more abstract concepts, the final
session revolved around making more concrete design decisions for the three prototype
concepts. Our focus remained on creating interactive exercises in which participants
were central actors and researchers were facilitators.
Setting the scene for workshops by discussing dark patterns and their impact
on game experiences proved highly valuable during the first workshops. Several of
our findings from the first workshops were therefore presented to participants at
the beginning of the final workshop session in order to ground participants for the
workshop and involve them in our design research process.
Following the introduction, we intended to divide participants into groups of two to
three with similar backgrounds, i.e. GCs together and players together. We designed
exercises such that each group should present their findings and insights to the other
groups, with the intention of gathering diverse and potentially conflicting viewpoints.
These insights would then help enrich the concept solutions.
In order to get participants started, the simplest of the three exercises was intro-
duced first (See Figure 3.5). Participants were tasked to design the UI of the Healthy
Game Stamp in the Google Play Store by drag-and-dropping icons into designated
fields. In order to inspire participants to engage in the exercise and envision co-design
from our perspective, they were asked to picture themselves as designers. This fram-
ing can prove especially valuable for players who might be inexperienced in such tasks
and thus might benefit from envisioning themselves this way.
After presenting designs to other groups, the game design course exercise was
introduced.
The purpose was to design the content and guidelines for the game
design course. We took inspiration from the structure DTU courses use – learning
objectives, evaluation criteria, etc. – and added participant background and course
4https://www.figma.com/
==PAGE:30==
18
3 METHOD
Figure 3.5: Exercise: Healthy Game Stamp | UI design – participants should design
the appearance of the Healthy Game Stamp in the Google Play Store.
platform in order to broaden the scope to more than traditional teaching settings (see
Figure 3.6). Again, participants were inspired to imagine themselves as educators and
to ground them within the study narrative, participants were asked to peer-review
other groups’ works – by providing critical feedback and asking immediate questions
after looking through another groups’ design. This should inspire discussion, bring
out assumptions and highlight conflicting viewpoints among participants.
Once peer-reviewing was concluded, we presented the final tool and corresponding
exercise. Drawing from our experience with the value of interactive exercises from
previous workshops, we designed another spatial placement exercise.
One of the
challenges related to measuring wellbeing in mobile gameplay is understanding which
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement
19
Figure 3.6: Exercise: Healthy Game Design Course | Content design – participants
should design a course by filling out the post-it notes.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 METHOD
emotions are of most importance to players. Thus, the exercise entails placing 20
emotions on a 2D plot with axes How often I feel it while playing and Impact on
Wellbeing (See Figure 3.7). This aids our understanding of the frequency of emotions
and their impact on player wellbeing and will be elaborated in section 4.6.
The list of emotions was synthesized from various literature on measurements
of wellbeing in technology use [PCR18; HL15] and from the corpus of transcribed
interviews used in the thematic analysis.
We received feedback regarding our design concepts at different levels of abstrac-
tion from the two workshops conducted during Phases 3 and 5. Conflicting feedback
was discussed, i.e. participants disagreed whether the Healthy Game Stamp should
take the shape of a scale or be a binary classification. Often we found it necessary to
re-iterate and rethink design concepts, continuously asking which purpose a concept
served and which identified problems it might solve. The many and rich suggestions
and comments from participants strongly shaped design decisions and resulted in
design concepts reflecting their lived experiences.
3.7
Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development
The purpose of the final phase was to converge our overall findings into one single
concept solution helping to create more healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experi-
ences. This holistic approach combining all three concepts allows for the development
of a strategy targeting all relevant stakeholders and broader societal impact through
and for the creation of more healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences. The
overarching solution – combining the ethos and impact of all three design concepts
– was conceptualized as a design manifesto, presented in the form of a poster. This
poster format will be used to communicate our contributions to future game design
practice by listing values, principles and design implications in line with the overall
objective of this project.
==PAGE:33==
3.7 Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development
21
Figure 3.7: Exercise: Emotion Assessment Toolkit | Emotion rating – participants
should place emotions on the plot after arguing and agreeing with one
another.
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS
In this section, we present the insights developed and design choices made during
each phase of this project in support of healthy, highly-engaging game experiences.
4.1
Participant Descriptive Statistics
First, we provide some background information on our participants.
Across the interview sessions and workshops, we engaged a total of 21 participants,
13 of whom were players, 6 of whom were GCs and 2 of whom were BDs. Participants’
ages spanned from 22 to 40 with an average age of 30. On average, GCs and BDs
played for 31 minutes per day, while players played an average of 136 minutes per day.
Two GCs noted playing games once a day, while the other GCs and BDs played games
occasionally. Players, on the other hand, all played multiple times a day, except for
three, two of whom played once a day and the last playing only occasionally. All of
the GCs and BDs were from Europe, while only three players were from Europe, four
from North America and one from Asia.
During the Phase 1 interviews, we had 16 participants, whose demographic infor-
mation is shown in Table 4.1.
During the Phase 3 workshop, we had 8 participants, two of whom were GCs and
six of whom were players. For this round, four of the participants were returning
participants of the Phase 1 interviews, and four were new participants.
Two participants took part in the Phase 5 workshop, one GC and one player.
Due to the number of participants being lower than estimated, we changed the flow
of the exercise to be more similar to the one in section 4.5. This meant that we
did not divide the participants, but rather had both do the exercises together. This
unfortunately made it impossible to have participants discuss and peer-review their
designs with other groups. Instead we dedicated time for more elaborate discussions
of design choices and underlying arguments. The GC had participated in the phase
1 interviews, although not the phase 3 workshop, while the player had participated
in none of the previous sessions.
We next describe the results of our analysis of each phase of the design research
process in which these participants took part.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 FINDINGS
Table 4.1: Table of interview participants.
ID
Category
Age
Gender
Location
Years with
mobile games
P1
Player
33
Female
North America
7-8
P2
Player
22
Male
Europe
5-6
P3
Game Developer
26
Male
Europe
2-5
P4
Game Designer
29
Male
Europe
2-5
P5
Player
24
Female
Europe
4-5
P6
Game Designer
30
Male
Europe
2-5
P7
Game Developer
25
Male
Europe
1-2
P8
Player
37
Male
Asia
15-16
P9
Game Designer
35
Male
Europe
5-10
P10
Game Developer
28
Male
Europe
2-5
P11
Player
28
Male
Europe
5-6
P12
Player
36
Female
North America
4-5
P13
Player
40
Male
North America
8-9
P14
Player
25
Other
North America
12-14
P15
Business Developer
30
Female
Europe
2-5
P16
Business Developer
30
Male
Europe
2-5
4.2
Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews |
Thematic Analysis Results
As described in section 3.2, we conducted qualitative interviews to obtain insight
into the experiences of players, GCs and BDs in relation to the play and creation of
highly-engaging mobile games. Through thematic analysis of interviews conducted
with 16 participants, we identified several key themes;
• Gaming as Activity & Identity
• The Social Pull of Mobile Games
• Dark Patterns Come in Many Forms
• Negative Perceptions of Mobile Games
• Drivers & Patterns of Engagement
• The Experience of Wellbeing in Relation to Games
• Mobile Games as Business
• Conflicts and Tensions in Game Design
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
25
• The Unique Process of Hyper-casual Game Design
4.2.1
Gaming as Activity & Identity
Players interact with mobile games in a variety of ways, either through quick sessions
or spending hours per session.
While some may view players of mobile games as
’gamers’, the relation players have to that term is slightly more complex.
4.2.1.1
Gaming as Pastime
Many players describe playing mobile games in the same manner as they would any
other hobby; “I’m sure it’d be the equivalent to someone fishing or just playing golf
(…) It just sets off the chemicals in your brain (…) ’I’m enjoying myself to some
degree’, and then you forget about it later” (P1). Fleeting experiences like this indicate
a weaker connection with games interpreted as a matter of enjoyment and a ’time
filler’; “I would say it’s more of a time filler than anything” (P14). Other participants
likewise refer to gaming using terms like ’downtime’ or speak of gaming as a way of
’taking a break’. These comments underline the need to consider how each individual
player acts to find the right place for gaming in their lives.
4.2.1.2
Gaming as Identity
For others however, gaming is considered as much an identity as a pastime; a core
part of one’s self-conception. Many participants indicate how identifying as a ’gamer’
is related to feeling part of a larger community, an experience very much apparent for
the PC/Console platforms. The temporal and dynamic nature of self-identification
is further reflected in, for example, P2’s comment that “I will consider myself a
mobile gamer right now” despite describing themselves as a former hardcore World
of Warcraft PC gamer.
Another participant reflected on this practice of self-identification by commenting
that “I wouldn’t consider myself a hardcore mobile gamer, but I’ve been playing them
pretty much since I had a phone.” (P14).
This participant then seeks to create
distance to the gamer identity, despite a years-long relationship to game playing. As,
one other player similarly stated; “I try not to make it too much of my personality.
There are people that, um, take a little too personally. So like, if anyone talks anything
negative about something and they feel like it’s part of them, that they’re being attacked
with” (P1). Players’ reluctance to identifying as gamers then generally seems like a
protective action, and means to avoid confrontation.
4.2.1.3
Gaming as Part of Everyday Life
The seamless nature of many mobile games in particular allows players to integrate
them effortlessly into a busy day;
==PAGE:38==
26
4 FINDINGS
“I can sneak in a little session right after getting up, [and] right after
going to bed. [When] I have to commit to play Final Fantasy 14 [console
game, ed.], that’s the whole afternoon gone, and I can’t really do that on
weekdays anymore. So yeah, that’s when I mostly play [mobile games]”
(P11).
Participants describe how this lack of commitment to mobile games has led them
to replace less seamless experiences. This also grants mobile games a broader appeal
in society and attracts newcomers, as highlighted by one player’s comment that mobile
games have “brought a lot of other people into gaming that otherwise wouldn’t” (P13).
Many of the designers highlight how this has resulted in significant diversity among
players. In regard to hyper-casual games in particular, many designers comment on
the diversity of the target audience; “the imagined audience is actually in a broader
cut of society.
You have to imagine a non gamer” (P9), “our target audience is
everybody from 10 to 90” (P4). By targeting a broad demographic, designers aim to
fit games seamlessly into people’s lives, replacing other forms of interaction; “I think
it’s a fun way to think about it that you have to steal these people away from their
mindless scrolling, but it can’t be much harder than mindlessly scrolling either, the
gameplay, right. Because that’s what it replaces.” (P4).
4.2.2
The Social Pull of Mobile Games
In addition to the seamless nature of the experience, the social aspect of mobile
games is highly important for players. One player explained what this social pull
means for their experiences; “This is like one of the primary motivators to check in
daily. Because not only do you get your daily bonuses for logging in, but also people
will boot you from their friend list when you’ve been offline for too long” (P11). To
avoid letting down their friends then, some game players feel obligated to play even
when they don’t want to. Designers and developers are well aware of these effects
and often strive to integrate meaningful mechanics built on this social pull.
4.2.2.1
Social Connectedness
Many players and designers describe the social connectedness of mobile games as
important both to making games enjoyable experiences and to increasing player re-
tention.
As one player put it; “mobile games are kind of like my replacement of
socialization compared to in real life (P2)”. Naturally this level of commitment is not
common among all players, but relatedness generally pulls in players and keeps them
playing as explained by another player; “I’m sure that when my partner and all of
our friends are done playing it, like even though I might play it for a little bit, I feel
like I’ll fall off because I’ll have less of an incentive to play the game” (P14). Thus,
communities, relatedness and social connectedness play an important role in mobile
game experiences.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
27
4.2.2.2
Socially-motivation Spending | FOMOnetization
Social games do not only affect game play but also players’ spending behaviors. Gam-
ing communities contribute to social pressure and Fear of Missing Out (FOMO)
among players. When asked about the effect of social media posts from other play-
ers, one player stated; “They push you. I think those are factors that are affecting
your decision in making a purchase” (P8). Similar effects are explained by designers,
who are well aware of the peer pressure that communities can create; “all of them
have clans, for example, where you speak with your friends and you’re like, ’look, I
just spent $200 on this cool thing’. And then your friend is like; ’Oh man, I want
it also’” (P4). This pressure can be of a varying nature; something that is created
solely within the games, or through external channels, as one designer exemplified;
“gambling websites that elicit Youtuber’s to give out promotions. It’s all kids eliciting
other kids to gamble. It’s really just bad” (P9).
Both players and designers are aware of the strong effects relatedness and social
mechanics have on mobile game experiences. As we will explain in the coming sections
the impact on their experiences lies in the how – of how these game mechanics are
designed and combined to create (un)healthy experiences.
4.2.3
Dark Patterns Come in Many Forms
Dark patterns come in many different shapes and sizes, targeting varying parts of
the human psyche. It is therefore important to generate knowledge of players’ and
designers’ understanding of dark patterns and their effects in order to make it possible
to exert influence over these processes by means of design.
Common to all dark
patterns is the goal of convincing the player to invest more time or money into the
game, and if possible without the player ever knowing those patterns exist. Several
participants however describe these patterns as lying on a spectrum from dark to light,
i.e. bad to good. Although as one designer explained, the implementation of dark
patterns evolves over time and depends on the tweaking of various metrics yielding a
more positive or negative game experience;
“So there’s not a moment when like on this side is good and this is bad.
How far are you in the small tricks you make, and the small economy
changes you make to the prices and to the timing, et cetera, et cetera, of
how exploitative or harmful these things are” (P9).
This diffusion of decision-making makes designing healthy games diﬀicult in prac-
tice, requiring a rich understanding of which factors and game mechanics affect the
player’s experience. During interviews, the following dark patterns were discussed
most often by participants;
==PAGE:40==
28
4 FINDINGS
4.2.3.1
Pattern: Pay to Win
Pay to Win entices spending real money in-game gives players an unfair advantage
against others. This pattern is often easy to recognize and caused immense frustration
among players;
“Some characters are just very essential. If you don’t have them, you will
just lose all the time, but once you get them you will win. I think it should
be more about strategy, like use different characters to win but not only be
that character that you put money on to get” (P5).
Players feel cheated when experiencing Pay to Win mechanics which are arguably
tied to a lack of Competence. One developer shares this opinion of their experiences
playing mobile games;
“there’s certain characters that are money-only characters. One of them
is like 125 kr., which is insane for a mobile game character. But people
buy it anyway. And when they buy these and you then play Player versus
Player (PVP), you’re gated by the paying people. They’re going to win
every time, which can also feel shitty for especially kids” (P7).
Kids are often used to amplify explanations of the impact of dark patterns, and
the interviews in this work are no different.
4.2.3.2
Pattern: Playing by Appointment
Playing by Appointment describes the experience of being forced to play according
to the game’s schedule instead of your own. This pattern can exist in isolation or
in relation to other patterns such as Daily Rewards. One player explains that this
is a very common pattern; “That’s just something all the mobile games have where
you spend, they basically force you to play the game every day” (P2).
Generally
speaking, players are well aware of such temporal patterns. Over time players must
either adjust their interaction to fit the game’s schedule or live with the frustration
unless it eventually leads to rejection of the game. P1, in particular, spoke of the
frustration caused by this design pattern;
“it just feels like it becomes work because it just becomes a routine for you
to just do this thing in order just to stay current. And then you feel like
you’re wasting your time if you’re not doing it” (P1).
Frustrations like these can be prescribed to a lack of Autonomy, a negative expe-
rience for users of any digital technology. As one player stated; “No game I know of
is fun when the game tells you to stop playing it” (P12). Players generally do not like
to have their rhythm broken while playing – a recurring theme across participants
underlined by P11;
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
29
“I mentioned the stamina mechanic which does give a certain rhythm to
a day spent on the game.
But of course it also sucks a lot.
At times
you really need something, the game’s obviously engineered in a way to
maximize engagement.” (P11).
This player is fully aware of the underlying motives of these mechanics and the
effects they elicit, yet engages nonetheless.
4.2.3.3
Pattern: Artificial Deficit
Artificial Deficit is making the player’s progress appear reduced after some time to
encourage more investment of time or money. As one designer explained, it entices;
“you are not progressing as well as you did in the first few hours of the game, but you
can make up for it, for this artificial deficit, with a loot box, right, or whatnot, with
some kind of purchase” (P9). This effect therefore stems from tweaking certain game
mechanics by design, resulting in a shifting of the progression/experience curve, i.e.
in terms of required player effort vs. rewards offered by the game (See Figure 4.11).
Designers balance this curve as players progress through their game to keep them
engaged (See Flow Theory in section 2.1).
Figure 4.1: The optimal curve of players’ perceived value vs. effort.
1https://www.gamified.uk/2015/08/04/balancing-rewards-against-effort-in-
gamification/
==PAGE:42==
30
4 FINDINGS
4.2.3.4
Pattern: Invested Value (Sunk Cost Fallacy)
Having already spent time and money to improve your status in the game, it is
diﬀicult to throw this away. Similarly to Artificial Deficit, this pattern exploits how
players grasp progress and their perceived value in relation to it. These feelings grows
stronger over time and eventually attach players so much that they cannot let it go.
As one player commented; “I spent all this time and money on this thing. If I drop
it now it’d feel like a waste” (P1). As for all dark patterns, this effect is greater for
some players than others. One player commented, for example, that they were able
to step back from this although acknowledged the potential negative impact for other
players;
“for those people who are spending money on it, especially for people that
are playing Mobile Legends, buying these hero skins, they have like a hard
time of letting go of that game because they’ve already invested much”
(P8).
Interestingly, designers and developers share the opinion that this effect might
simply evolve over time and not be designed nor implemented on purpose.
4.2.3.5
Pattern: Gacha and Loot Boxes
As explained in chapter 1, many mobile games that target a less casual type of player
often contain elements of loot boxes as a key form of progression. These games are
referred to as ’Gacha’ games, from a Japanese term related to random outcomes.
Gacha elements and loot boxes were commonly referred to during interviews by all
stakeholders as the example of monetary dark patterns. One business developer, for
example, referred to loot boxes as the only real dark pattern;
“if I should categorize, myself personally, anything as dark patterns, I
would say maybe loot boxes or something where as a player, it’s not intu-
itive to see what will I get for the money I use” (P15).
One developer explained that when first learning about loot boxes they were
thrilled to integrate these strategies into their games, but
“[e]ventually, you know, even media has started to lash out on loot boxes
and games, and there was this big dilemma, if it’s actually gambling or
not. (…) it just slowly eats you up inside and then you realize like, okay,
yeah, this is, this is not good” (P10).
Both game developers and players explain that even though they often liked Gacha
elements initially, did not see a problem with them, and perhaps even sought them
out, they often changed their opinion over time. One player, who previously spent
several hours a day interacting with Gacha games, made the point that “if you just
make a quality product around the parts of game play that are less around the Gacha,
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
31
it definitely draws me in more. Because I’ve dropped off a lot just because they’re not
fun” (P1). Similarly, another player stated;
“before I knew what the term Gacha was, I got into a couple of those
games and enjoyed them well enough, but then would eventually kind of
hit that wall where it’s like, ’Oh, this is really starting to need me to pump
money into it, I’m kinda done with this’.” (P13).
Several other interview participants expressed however mixed perceptions of the
necessity of monetization elements in games to sustain the quality of the experience
over time. As P11 commented;
“I really do not think that any game is in any way ever improved by
adding Gacha, but then we’re getting very meta because it makes the
company more money. They can release more content and that content is
what’s improving the game, but the existence of Gacha itself is very much
a negative for me” (P11).
Some participants seem to evolve a negative perception of Gacha games over time,
even though they find the initial lure interesting.
4.2.4
Negative Perceptions of Mobile Games
This brings us to negative perceptions of mobile games, often expressed by partici-
pants, and often for diverse reasons. Some participants’ recollections in this respect
refer to the use of dark patterns, monetary aspects of gaming and ’greed’. Others,
however, view mobile games more generally as simply a waste of time, or ’not real
games’. These negative associations with mobile games can lead to players feeling
alienated, due to a perception that their main pastime is looked down upon by the
general public, as expressed by P13;
“I think it’s a shame people feel that way [mobile games are disposable],
because I think that is what led to the negative opinion that ’gamers’ have
about mobile games. And I think that’s why they’re looked down on” (P13).
These comments touch on a common tension among players and in relation to
gaming platforms; where ’gamers’ as a term is employed to refer only to PC/console
players in line with a belief that mobile games are implicitly inferior to games played
on other platforms.
4.2.4.1
The Stigma of Mobile Games
The stigma around mobile games changes how the public perceives mobile game
players, and how players of mobile game players view the hobby. This creates barriers
for potential newcomers to start engaging with mobile game experiences, as one player
put it;
==PAGE:44==
32
4 FINDINGS
“I started getting into mobile with that mindset of, ’Oh yeah, there’s all
those games with in-app purchases, which you can just ignore because they
are just for suckers’ ” (P9).
Such stigma separates players and non-players into distinct communities, as another
player explains;
“if I post it publicly on my timeline, then most of my friends would say;
’Okay, what’s that? What are you doing? (…) [S]till playing this kind of
game? Grow up’ ” (P8).
Although a view of games and players as immature is not new, perceptions of this
assessment therefore continue to stigmatize players and impact their experiences.
Interestingly, this stigma exists and arises not only outside player communities.
A number of mobile game playing participants themselves spoke of mobile game
experiences as inferior to gaming on other platforms;
“I think that if I really want to just sit down and have a fun experience, I
would probably go play like a console or a handheld game. Traditionally.
I think there are very few mobile games where I have made the conscious
choice to play them over something else” (P14).
This description solidifies the gaming platform hierarchy, as mobile games are
perceived as lesser experiences. Another player described it in more specific terms;
“the emotional draw, I feel, isn’t as strong as, you know, say like a solid like console
J RPG or something, or a narrative game or something” (P1). For this player the
emotional pull of mobile games is weaker compared to the more solid console game
experience. Comments to the emotional draw and fun of gaming experiences point
clearly to the impact of game playing on players’ wellbeing.
4.2.4.2
The Disposability of Mobile Games
Participants also point to the ubiquity of mobile phones as yielding a significant
impact on users’ interactions. This is a fast-paced environment which makes it is
easy to remove apps once no longer perceived as providing valuable engagement. As
one player commented; “I think because people look at them a little more disposable
that leads to people not necessarily caring as much (…) And if they don’t like it, off it
goes” (P13). This disposability of mobile games makes players value them less, since
they are so easy to (un)install, as recognised by developers;
“if you play a game on the bus and you reach a paywall, I don’t think
you’re going to be like; ’Oh, I’m going to buy this right now’. You’re going
to be like; ’I’m not playing this anymore. I’m just downloading another
game’ ” (P3).
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
33
This affects players’ habits and thoughts about mobile games and in turn game
developers’, designers’ and business developers’ pursuit of and considerations for the
creation of engaging experiences.
In this regard, professionals’ comments reflect also the stigma of mobile games
mentioned above; “Internally we call them toilet games, right. Cause you pick them
up when you’re in the bathroom and just play for a bit then” (P10). Not only are
mobile games looked down on, they are connected with toileting. In terms of engage-
ment then this game developer argues that mobile games are less rich experiences2.
One business developer likewise described how certain mobile games are perceived
by some professionals; “I mean, these games are very simple. They have very low
retention and they don’t really care about players in the long term in most cases”
(P16). The disposable nature of mobile games therefore contributes to the profes-
sional development of disposable experiences. This negative spiral might in turn be
attributed to the broader disposable technology paradigm of mobile phones.
4.2.5
Drivers & Patterns of Engagement
As mobile games take up more and more of players’ time, understanding patterns of
engagement with these games is crucial to their healthy consumption. Players and
developers alike speak about how the games are trying to engage players, who holds
responsibility for healthy consumption, and what might be done to ensure healthy
patterns of engagement.
4.2.5.1
The Multi-faceted Pull of Mobile Games
During interviews, the very same games elicit very different depictions of motivations
for and practices of engagement – raising challenges for designers in understanding the
implications of our design choices. The language employed by individual participants
provides insight into their own perceptions of gaming practice and how it affects their
gaming trajectories.
Discovery
Game designers’ and developers’ focus on creating mystery and learning
new things as a proven way to pull in players;
“You know, they’re all about discovery. They’re all about; is there some-
thing new and funny or exciting or weird that’s going to reveal itself (…)
So it’s not only the dopamine shot of getting gold, which is nice. It’s also
the dopamine shot of learning a new thing” (P9).
One game developer broke discovery down further into one of its core components;
“There’s no point to the game other than what’s the next thing going to be. And that’s
2In the context of broader reflection on the experience of wellbeing in relation to games, we argue
that players can benefit from this interaction, as described in subsubsection 4.2.6.3.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 FINDINGS
fun. That’s why people keep playing it” (P7). Hence, discovery draws players in and
keeps them engaged.
Narrative
One player explained how a games’ narrative shapes their highly-engaged
experiences over time; “with every event, with every new story content you get a bit
more attached to the whole thing” (P11). Another player explained how narrative
plays an important role in bringing out strong emotions;
“And with a lot of these games too, like with the narrative things, like
there’s moments where I got sad or little teary and there’s really a lot of
really funny stuff” (P1).
Players experiencing this level of arousal are indeed highly engaged and the game
narrative’s significant role in creating that experience speaks to the scope of design.
Gacha & Characters
Gambling mechanics also foster emotional arousal among
certain players, especially in unison with virtual characters;
“I like the gambling aspect, I guess like the characters a lot (…) a lot of
them I get drawn in because of like franchise crossovers and stuff like that.
So if I didn’t care about the story or whatever, I wouldn’t even care about
these characters or the appeal, then I wouldn’t be playing it” (P1).
This factor appears stronger than other drivers of engagement mentioned in this
section, since its absence makes players disengage from certain games entirely. Fur-
thermore, it is the only driver which players describe in terms of future planning of
and hopes for future excitement; “And since it’s a franchise that’s dear to my heart,
I have characters I’m looking forward to. So I’m looking forward to that banner and
also to the rush of pulling on those banners” (P11).
Gameplay
Another pull, which participants from all stakeholder groups mention
is that of the core gameplay or game loop as a primary engagement factor.
One
developer describes this concisely, as what “in my opinion, make[s] great gameplay.
I mean, that usually reflects on retention” (P3). A designer likewise comments on
their belief in the strength of the core game loop; “It all boils down to the core game
play loop in all these games” (P4). As did a business developer who spoke of solid
gameplay as key to player retention;
“in general you have to have solid game with a solid core mechanic that
in itself can create a decent retention and engagement with your players”
(P16).
As everything else in games builds on the core gameplay, this factor naturally
matters to the diverse pull of mobile games.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
35
Timed events
Mobile games often have limited time events, as “timed events are
very, very useful in bringing players back” (P9). A player stated that they “will want
to spend more time on the new stuff, but if it doesn’t have new events or new things, I
don’t think I will spend more time on that” (P3), confirming that variation in content
and continuous delivery is important in keeping players engaged.
The virtual universe
Other players comment that they engaged more with the
visual and auditory aspects of games; “for me, it’s maybe the universe, it’s always
interesting to know a new world and I don’t really see through all the stories, because
sometimes they’ll take too much time” (P5). And this aspect of engagement was even
described as varying significantly within games, where some parts of the virtual space
are preferred over others, as one player explained; “I enjoy this particular part of the
world, I’m doing it in. Like the design of it or the music” (P13). As shown, some
players have a hard time describing exactly what drives their engagement.
Accessibility & Ease
In addition to gameplay and in-game mechanics the fact
that these experiences occur on a mobile platform allows players access at any time
and in any place. This ease of access directly and eﬀiciently attracts players, as one
designer describes; “I think it’s about accessibility.
In terms of getting players to
the core loop of the game, and then making sure that that core loop of the game is
very hyper social” (P6). According to this designer, accessibility serves as the hook
and the social aspects of gameplay then keep players engaged long term. Ease of use
was also described as playing an important role for mobile games in replacing other
platforms. As player put this experience in relation to board games; “If I’m going to
play this board game by myself, it’s a lot easier to just play the digital version instead
of having to pull out all the components myself” (P13).
Participants’ commentaries then paint a picture of dispersed and multi-faceted
factors combining to yield the pull of mobile games.
In addition to reflecting on
content and their engagement with games, game players were also able to articulate
what healthy gaming experiences meant to them – important insight in light of our
design aims.
4.2.5.2
Over-engagement can Cause Burnout
Surprisingly, despite playing games in their free time and enjoying themselves, several
game players describe a feeling of ’burnout’, much like they would feel if working too
much at their job, in relation to gaming. Avoiding burnout then became a motivator
for several participants to pace themselves with the game – being careful not to spend
to much time with it:
“I want to avoid burnout, which is a big problem with, especially Granblue,
there is such a large grind and that’s what stops a lot of people from playing
is because like, It’s just a never ending goal of, I need to get to this strength
level and you’re never going to reach there.” (P1)
==PAGE:48==
36
4 FINDINGS
According to participants, this feeling of burnout can be temporary, but can also
cause players to quit a game outright, even if previously enjoying themselves: “if
you go on Reddit, you see many people complain about it and then people get burned
out, playing that game at the release.” (P2).
This experience of burnout may be
an important experience often overlooked when designing engagement with mobile
games.
4.2.5.3
Healthy Engagement is a Shared Responsibility
Discussion of drivers of engaging game play and dark patterns often led to reflection
on the responsibility for healthy gaming engagement among participants. A common
perspective among developers in regard to the ethics of the implementation of dark
patterns is grounded in the idea that “if no one would, uh, play with these games, the
industry wouldn’t create these types of games” (P16). Although potentially interpreted
as placing the responsibility solely on players, this was also however elaborated upon
as not an outright rejection of responsibility, but rather a comment to the effect
that the responsibility for healthy highly-engaging game experiences lies not with a
singular group;
“I think it’s everyone’s responsibility a little bit. So, when I have an option,
when I am in a position to decide what kind of monetization strategy we’re
going to use, I try to be less aggressive, and try to consider the product we
are working with as a game. And, that should be a pleasant experience.”
(P16)
This shared sense of responsibility recognizes individuals’ autonomy in regard to
how they choose to spend their time, even if it means engaging in an unhealthy way;
“when I’m making a game, I’m like, I am responsible. Yeah. It’s not just,
it’s only me, that’s responsible. Everybody can, you know, you can always
take something and consume it in a way that is not good for you, but it
doesn’t relieve my responsibility too. I believe in dark patterns. I believe
in a responsibility. I believe in a much deeper responsibility.” (P9)
For players, several felt that the responsibility for engagement in healthy game
experiences lay with the parents, who should ensure that their children engage in a
healthy way, and protect them when necessary;
“that personal responsibility, that falls on the parent. To be knowledgeable
about what their kids are partaking in and that parent needs to play a role
in protecting that kid and educating that kid on what this is, what this
means.” (P13)
While several general themes were apparent among participants, opinions also di-
verged in regard to the allocation of responsibility. One participant believed this to
be ultimately a philosophical stance in regard to individual choice:
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
37
[Other developers say: ’]Parents should restrict their kids until they’re 18,
but not more than that. And other than that, let me do what I want to do.’
(…) Some people do think that, you know, personal liberty to take action
(…) there is a philosophical aspect also. (P9)
While placement of responsibility is a philosophical debate, participants agree
that the responsibility is at least somewhat shared among stakeholders, from GCs
and BDs to parents and players themselves.
4.2.5.4
Mobile Games Described as Addictive
Several participants described mobile games as ’addicting’ or ’addictive’ during inter-
views3. Worth noting is participants’ tendency to use these terms in order to describe
the games, rather than themselves or other players. The focus is not on addiction as
a disorder, but as a characteristic of the games themselves. And, for games, being
’addictive’ is even sometimes seen as a positive thing, as noted by P9;
“it used to be that addictive was a compliment for a game. It’s only in the
last few years that it’s not an absolute consensus that addictive is good.
And I’m saying that because it’s still for many people a compliment for a
game, it’s just not a consensus.” (P9)
For other players however, ’addictive’ was perceived as a negative term, and par-
ticularly in relation to periods during which they did not have their playing habits
under control;
“[T]here are days say I can’t just like stop myself and then, okay. Let
me, let me grab my phone and then, play this game.
(…) I think the
downside here is that, with mobile phones it’s easily accessible. You can
just immediately grab your phone, take a look at it. And then after that
you get lost.” (P8)
There are many reasons why people play mobile games, many strategies employed
by designers, developers and business developers to shape the ways in which we
engage, and many ways to view these practices. To design for better experiences
within this complex context requires then first developing an understanding of what
makes certain forms of engagement more or less healthy.
3The use of these terms touches on a long-standing debate in HCI [Cov06] and psychology
literature in regard to the addictive nature of technology, although many design researchers have
reached a consensus regarding a resistance to the use of the term, and the clinical perspective it
implies.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 FINDINGS
4.2.6
The Experience of Wellbeing in Relation to Games
As found in subsubsection 4.2.1.3, game players and developers consider mobile games
to fit effortlessly into everyday life, making them easily accessible tools for escape and
relaxation. Many players spoke of winding down after a day of studying and work
with an hour or two of their favourite mobile games as carrying them through the
week. However, mobile games were also considered sources of frustrations for some
players, putting them in a bad mood when not receiving the results they worked for.
These diverse experiences challenge how we might think about wellbeing in relation
to gameplay.
4.2.6.1
Positive and Negative Experiences of Gameplay and Wellbeing
As explained in section 2.2 positive and negative emotions alike shape mobile game
experiences and both must be present to provide good experiences for players. Many
participants note that their mood would change when playing mobile games. As one
player described; “When I’m doing Gacha, of course I’m excited and happy (…) if
I get the character I want, I will feel really happy, but if I didn’t, I will feel guilty”
(P5). A few participants mentioned that emotions stick around for a while, but as
P1 commented these feelings are often quite fleeting; “It just sets off the chemicals
in your brain. It is ‘I’m enjoying myself to some degree’, and then you forget about
it later.” (P1).
There are also elements of the games that can prove quite frustrating for partic-
ipants. Some participants note frustrations with Gacha games, with some activities
being too involved or stressful for the relaxing experience they seek when playing the
game;
“I really don’t like PVP, it’s just too intensive and they do it to make
people want to put more money in the game. Yeah. And even though I
just can’t help it, I will just put more money in the game (…) I really regret
that.” (P5)
The randomness of the Gacha pulls is described as another source of frustration
for participants – getting the character or item you want brings much joy, but after
many unsuccessful attempts, players begin to feel frustrated;
“[I] spent a lot on the pool where I didn’t get a certain character. And that
resonated with me for a couple of hours, I guess. But then again, I spent a
couple of hundred of euros on that. (…) [I]f I didn’t feel frustrated about it,
I should really consider quitting. Because then I’d be jaded beyond (sic)”
(P11)
Mobile games can thus have both a positive and a negative impact on wellbeing,
however the participants did not have the same experiences with each of the mechanics.
Players could, to some extent, identify which parts of mobile games affected them
positively, and which affected them negatively.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
39
4.2.6.2
Players Know Unhealthy Gaming Experiences
Our findings reveal each individual participant as to some extent aware of what a
unhealthy game experience means for them. Oftentimes players shared reflections of
their engagement and experiences with mobile games. At other times, game players
recollected instances of forgetting time and place due to gameplay, leading to un-
healthy side effects. Social pressures were also, and in particular, descried as playing
a part in negative experiences, as one player described;
“It’s just too intense for me because my group friends always want to get a
good ranking. Yeah. And PVP is also too intensive. I think PVP shouldn’t
exist on a mobile phone because it just makes you want to play it all the
time” (P5).
P1 described in similar terms an inner struggle to push games away;
“I wish I were playing them less. I’ve tried. I’m trying to get it. I’m
trying. Definitely. I used to play a lot more of them, so I’m trying to
slowly push away from that” (P1).
One designer, on this note, commented that they did not believe players capable
of deciding for themselves; “people don’t always know what’s best for themselves,
especially if they’re not professionals.
going on to say that “people don’t usually
define their life as a mistake, right.
Most people define their habits as you know,
something that they have agency over” (P9).
4.2.6.3
Gaming, Wellbeing & Time. An Escape or a Waste?
Many participants described using mobile games not only to ’turn their brain off’,
but also to immerse themselves in the game as a form of escapism;
“I try not to make myself angry about things (…) [a]nd Gacha helps with
that to some degree, because it just takes you away from thinking about
real life stuff.” (P1)
A developer of hyper-casual games noted that he thinks “most of the hyper games
are quite healthy because they need to like, many of the users just want to relax” (P4),
once more focusing on mobile games as a way to relax for a while.
One participant told us about how they would use this experience of immersion
to alleviate frustrations in an environment where no one would be affected by their
actions:
“I channel my frustration or my anger through [mobile games], instead of
channeling it to people (…) So that’s why I play games, escape reality for
a few hours and then get back to the real world and face problems.” (P8)
==PAGE:52==
40
4 FINDINGS
A developer noted how this form of escapism even factors into how hyper-casual
games get designed, and how they arrange their content: “I’m going to do everything
I can to make sure that you stay here and you click on [our game] again, because I
know that your attention span is so short. I know that you, you don’t actually care
about this stuff I’ve made you just try to distract yourself”.” (P6)
Mobile games can prove relaxing, serving as an escape from the stress and frus-
trations of everyday life for many participants.
However some aspects of mobile
games are also described as inducing more stress or frustration for players, turning
an otherwise positive experience sour. Some of these frustrations stem from personal
preference, as explored in subsubsection 4.2.5.1, yet according to others, the root
cause of many is to be found in choices shaped by the the business-side of game
design.
4.2.7
Mobile Games as Business
The ethics of mobile gameplay and development is grounded in and complicated by
the need for monetization to support development, professionals’ livelihoods, and ul-
timately, profit. The developers that we interviewed shared their thoughts on the
different aspects of monetization and the current state of implementation for moneti-
zation.
4.2.7.1
The Necessary Evil of Monetization
A BD described:
“the numbers suggest that they [players, ed.] prefer to play games like this
[Free-To-Play (F2P), ed.] rather than spending on them or paying the
premium for these games”
Game studios must then consider how to make money as F2P games with some form
of alternative monetization. This can take many different forms, to which players,
designers and business developers all demonstrated strong opinions.
One popular
form comprises in-app purchases, where the game itself is free, but certain content
inside the game can be bought with money. Prices within the game vary greatly, so
that the player can decide how much or how little they wish to spend. This frees
the player to only buy the items that they deem worth the money, as one business
developer put it:
“With the in-app purchases, I think it’s positive. It makes it possible to
also create some deeper layers inside of the game. Because if you want
monetization that actually has a value, you need the player to feel that
the value is big enough that they want to use money on, coins or skins or
whatever, because it makes sense for them.” (P15)
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
41
However, to our surprise, in-app purchases also prove highly polarizing practices
within the game industry according to the comments of other interview participants.
Several developers and designers went as afar as to express extreme aversion to these
practices: “I think that [in-app purchases] are mostly an abusive mechanic, or I don’t
know, monetization form in real life.” (P9) One previous developer who quit the
industry told us in compelling terms, in regards to monetization that;
We definitely started seeing a lot of trickery, I would say to (…) tease the
players with ’Hey see if you can do this or that, then maybe you can get
some more, better skins or the higher high score’, you know, all those stuff.
And then there’s also the loot boxes and all of those issues (…) [That’s]
one of the reasons why I kinda got sick of developing those games.” (P10)
It was in regard to loot boxes in particular that developers and designers expressed
greatest discontent: “I feel dirty almost thinking about making one of those games
[with loot boxes] and especially if it’s like, you know, bright colours and loud sounds
because then it’s going to be for kids.” (P7). As one designer remarked: “There’s a
big dissonance between the ideal of in-app purchases, which is good, and the reality of
in-app purchases, which is they’re are usually tied to very exploitative forms of game
design.” (P9)
These comments then, in stark terms, reflect recognition and description of certain
design choices as dark patterns, and in contrast to other practitioners’ comments
to the dissolution of responsibility in regards to healthy game design choices (See
subsection 4.2.3). One designer noted that while many games are themselves designed
to provide healthy, pleasant experiences, monetization is not; “The majority [of mobile
games] would be healthy, I guess that just wrapped in unhealthy wrapping paper, I
guess, in order to make money.” (P4) This opinion was reiterated during almost all
developer interviews, although viewed as a problem with no solution; [loot boxes are
a] necessary evil in a world where if you don’t do it, then you’re not going to make
income.” (P3)
4.2.7.2
An Industry Standard | “Everybody does it like that”
One sentiment in particular was commonly expressed by most industry professionals
– ’nobody wants to implement dark patterns but the industry allows for no other
option’. Regarding loot boxes, one developer commented, for example, that “I don’t
think anyone really wants loot boxes. But if it’s the way you make money, then it’s the
thing you do.” (P4) Such practices were often described as immutable and irresistible;
“[Aggressive monetization is] a part of the culture on that platform. It’s an established
thing, and that’s just the way it is.” (P6) It was along similar lines that one business
developer described why hyper-casual games serve as many ads as they do;
We have ads every 30 seconds. That’s a lot, right. We do it because that’s
what everyone else does. I cannot afford to only show an ad every minute,
==PAGE:54==
42
4 FINDINGS
if everyone else does it every 30 seconds. They will make twice as much
revenue as I will. And then they will be able to buy the users way more
expensive than I will.” (P15)
This trend is therefore described not as motivated by greed, but instead by a
desire to keep working in the game industry. If a game studio tries to stray from dark
patterns, then they will have a hard time gathering players and staying profitable, as
one business developer put it; “[U]nless you are accepting these rules, you are in a
very diﬀicult position.” (P16). This points to a cutthroat industry standard, where
game studios have to adhere to the practices of dark patterns.
4.2.7.3
Transparent Monetization
In regard to monetary dark patterns, several players noted that it can be diﬀicult
to know what type of monetization a game has incorporated before downloading it.
Looking at the iPhone App Store or the Google Play store, it is only possible to see
if a game contains ads or in-app purchases, but not what kind of in-app purchases it
contains, nor if it contains loot boxes. This can lead to situations where people can
stumble into games with monetization strategies they are especially vulnerable to, as
one player put it: “gambling addicts, I want them to have that info so they can try to
avoid these things and not put themselves in those tempting situations.” (P13). One
player even expressed experiencing this firsthand, recounting an experience of playing
the mobile game version of a high-profile console game, unaware that it contained loot
boxes. After a while, the player got stuck on a particular level, and the game then
incentivized going to the store and buying loot boxes – a classic Pay-to-win pattern.
While they simply quit the game instead of being tempted, the player concluded that
“[Everyone] should have the full knowledge as to what the game is.” (P14)
Many players have, however, become accustomed to the tricks commonly incor-
porated into mobile games, and hyper-casual games in particular, as noted by one
business developer;
“[on] the button it says free, (…) fills up 80, 90% of the button. Uh, then
that’s a small 10% icon showing you will have to watch an ad. I mean,
marketing-wise, isn’t that a little misleading, right? (…) [But] people have
seen these buttons so many times that they know what it means, but if
objectively, I mean, that’s a little sketchy.” (P15)
4.2.7.4
Mobile Games & Mobile Profits
The market for mobile games has seen a dramatic rise within the past few years, to
the point where it now outperforms both PC and console game markets in terms of
revenue4. Some participants mentioned that the future of mobile games is promising:
4https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/global-console-
mobile-and-pc-gaming-drives-175b-in-content-revenue-in-2020
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
43
“It seems like mobile gaming, and this e-commerce side of it has really made like
the mobile industry sexy for investments and stuff.” (P15). Some mobile games have
even focused on a player type previously uncatered to, the mid-core gamer: I think
it’s defined as former hardcore gamers that have now grown up, but don’t have time
to engage with the hardcore games that they used to, but they still want complex
strategical, tactical, or advanced experiences. (P6) This market of mid-core gamers is
growing rapidly, and more games are being targeted towards mid-core gamers. This
is not only due to a growing user base, but also to how they engage with gaming;
The mid-core titles are beating everything. Like with hundreds of percent. A user will
spend 500% more time in a mid-core game than a casual game. And they will stick
with that experience much longer.
This behaviour has attracted not only mobile game companies to cater to this
demographic, but also large game companies, who usually make games for consoles
and PC, as described by P6;
Fortnite, Call of Duty, PUBG. Now we have League of Legends arriving
on mobile.
We have Diablo Immortals by Blizzard being developed for
mobile. Genshin Impact recently. Crazy well-made product. And if you
look at these games, they’re much, much, much less predatory in their
monetization.” (P6).
Mid-core gamers then could pave the way for healthier game experiences in the
future, if indeed these games are, and remain less predatory in their monetization.
This points towards game economy design being an integral part of creating
healthy game experiences. Teaching game developers about monetization, and al-
lowing them to innovate new monetization techniques could serve as one means to
creating better, and less predatory monetization systems. As one designer comments,
“Designers should not shy away from monetization and learning about designing mon-
etization, if anything, they should lean into it and figure out how to innovate it,
innovate on those systems. And I think that’s the best way to battle the cheap tricks,
to make something of quality.” (P6) The GCs participating in our interviews all de-
scribed developing the game first and then adding monetization strategies later, yet
that might not be the only way to do things, as a business developer mentioned: “I
think [the developers of Barista Life actually did it the other way around, thinking al-
ready from the beginning,’Okay, how can we then make this make sense.’ Give it even
more value.” (P15). However, there are some obstacles for GCs when incorporating
monetization into games, as described in subsubsection 4.2.8.1.
4.2.7.5
Creating Value Through Monetization
A number of participants therefore spoke to the idea that monetization strategies
need not be inherently bad nor detract from the game experience turned out to
not necessarily be true. Several participants commented that monetization elements
could even enhance the game experience, or add new aspects to a game; “I always
==PAGE:56==
44
4 FINDINGS
feel excited and happy when [I roll on] Gacha.” (P3) Loot boxes, or Gacha elements,
for example, can create exciting moments for players, even if the variable rewards can
also incite disappointment, as described in subsubsection 4.2.3.5. Another example
of enhancing the existing gameplay experience concerns the purchase of skins: “I love
to buy skins in Counter Strike and stuff like that. I think they look cool and I want
to wear it. So it increases my experience.” (P6)
One model of monetization that has grown increasingly popular recently is the
battle pass, where the player can pay money to gain more rewards by playing the
game; “I really liked the battle pass module because it speaks to the progression and
there’s constantly a feeling of earning something, even though it’s an arbitrary award.
I like that. That extra reward for my gameplay, you know? So I actually engage with
that monetization and it increases the experience that I have.” (P6)
Monetization is a tough subject for mobile games. Developers on the whole dislike
practices of monetization and the design patterns they’re attached to. While some ex-
press hope that the mid-core games will bring about positive change in monetization
practices, making them less predatory, others view the entire practice of monetiza-
tion as predatory and unhealthy. This strong dislike for monetization led to many
developers interviewed fighting against the inclusion of these practices in the games
they are developing, leading to tensions within the workplace.
4.2.8
Conflicts and Tensions in Game Design | “us against the
business guy”
Although necessary in order for studios to remain open for business, the implementa-
tion of monetization in mobile games emerged as a point of conflict between different
professional roles within development studios, as between studios and players.
4.2.8.1
Tensions Between Game Designers and Business Developers
Many developers’ comments provided novel insight into the at times strained emo-
tional context of game design, as P7 describes; “[E]very game, like counter strike for
instance, started out as people with the passion for a thing, and they wanted to make
something cool, right. (…) They’re making something because they want to make, and
as it keeps going, it turns into a company thing, ’how do we make more money?’ And
then they kind of snap into this whole, ’what about loot boxes’ mentality thing.” (P7).
An overarching perception of game designers as attempting to create fun, pure
game experiences, and business developers as showing up and ’corrupting’ those ef-
forts was recounted by many developers within the industry. And several designers
described first-hand experience of such confrontations;
“us designing something and the business person, you know, kind of slowly
drifting into our oﬀice space and looking at what we’re doing and saying
’we’re going to package this in this way.’ And then we’re like, ’no, this is
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
45
unfair’. And he’s like, ’we’re going to do it anyway’, you know, and we’ll
have a little, you know, argument between us.” (P9).
The language of ’corruption’ was often employed by GCs in relation to the work
of BDs; “It’s been a while since I’ve had to think about [monetization] myself. Because
we still haven’t met the requirements of getting to corrupt our game with that”(P4).
This sentiment was also shared by P9, another GC:
“I didn’t get to engage with [monetization] because the game was shelved
after completion, you know, for business reasons. Maybe I’m lucky. Maybe
I was spared some soul crunching thing, because you know, it was us
against the business guy.” (P9)
Implementing monetization, and by extensions dark patterns therefore is rarely a
choice for designers, and in most cases not even a conversation they have a voice in;
“I haven’t been a part of that conversation [about monetization], at least I
can say that much. But I mean, you know what I would say if they invited
me. That’s probably why I’m not invited.” (P6).
While conflict may arise therefore, it is presented as very one-sided in favour of the
business developers, as they always have the final say. This was described as leading
to game developers becoming demotivated, or even outright quitting the industry:
“There was always some game design decision was tied to some moneti-
zation strategies. So you could effectively squeeze out some more money
if we get players in this or that direction. Right. And, in the end, it just,
it feels not great. You sorta lose the passion when you’re making those
games.” (P10)
For developers in the know, they can even spot this conflict when playing games they
were not involved with making, as one designer described his thinking in relation to
a particular popular commercial title;
“I can imagine there’s a bunch of narratives, and a bunch of designers
and developers who had a blast making this game. And somewhere in the
corner, I can imagine just an economy designer, miserable person, and
behind him is the CFO of the company, whispering into his ear: ’Don’t
forget the money’. And this person is just like, you know, like, changing
the structure of the game to extract money from players in a way” (P9).
4.2.8.2
Tensions Between Game Industry Professionals and Game Players
While the presence of monetization in games is therefore described as inevitable, many
players spoke of doing what they could to dodge these elements of gameplay, trying
to optimize free rewards, and reflecting a highly negative perception of many dark
==PAGE:58==
46
4 FINDINGS
patterns despite their engagement; “I wish there was less [Gacha games], but they’re
what make money for a lot of companies, so you can’t really stop that (…) They’re
just really exploitative. (P1)”. Some games appear to recognize this conflict, and try
to ensure that players will eventually get rewarded for spending money, even if this
means capping the potential earnings from elements such as Gacha. This, in turn
helps grant players a more positive perception of the mechanic;
“Genshin [Impact, ed.] has a pity system, so at some point you will get the
character, so yeah, it does make that much less gambling. For example,
in Fate Grand Order, in that game, you don’t have pity. So that’s, I think
that’s purely gambling.” (P5)
This pity mechanic can even make the Gacha system appear more fair, allowing
more risk-averse players to continue spending money on the game;
“a good pity mechanic, I think actually keeps people more engaged. Like if
there was a more robust pity mechanic in the game, I think I’d pull more
on banners and I would probably even spend more on the game.” (P11)
This method of guaranteed rewards has also shaped a different monetization strat-
egy; the monthly pass. Players generally favoured this approach over Gacha elements,
although described some problems with this method as well;
“[The] monthly card, it’s predatory in the sense that it forces you to log in
the game every day. And the moment you log in again, the game can start
to do something else to make you spend money on other things.” (P2)
On the other side of the conflict, however, business developers described trying
to strike a balance between healthy engagement and monetization. The approach to
monetization here revolves mostly around fostering an intrinsic desire among players
to engage with monetization, by making it appear valuable to the players;
“If you can find an intrinsic need of value for the person, like I really need
this, so it makes sense for them to buy it, right. That’s the kind of the
mindset you want the players to be in.” (P15).
Even then, a GC noted that the attention span of players can be very short, giving
the developers little time to earn money: “You have that person’s attention for what,
probably five minutes to make an impact? People are going to try to get some money
if they can.” (P13)
Monetization elements can also, however, impact gameplay so severely that it
drives players away from the game, as one developer recounted in relation to a popular
commercial title;
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Phase 1: Empathy and Need-finding Interviews | Thematic Analysis Results
47
“And this [business developer] is just like, changing the structure of the
game to extract money from players (…) I started the game, played for
probably 20 hours of something that felt really joyful, then [the game]
turned on me” (P9).
The responsibility of creating unhealthy experiences is placed on BDs by both
GCs and players. This conflicts with findings in subsubsection 4.2.6.2 where play-
ers were described as aware of unhealthy experiences. These attempts at diffusing
responsibility creates tension and distance between participants.
4.2.9
The Unique Process of Hyper-casual Game Design
These interviews revealed hyper-casual games as following a slightly different approach
to their development than other games. Each game remains in development for a
period as brief as two weeks (I4). Each is kept as simple as possible in terms of
theme and gameplay, focusing on only one or two gameplay mechanics. This allows
the games to be easily understood, and immediately satisfying to play. Examples of
hyper-casual game titles are of the ’merge type’ Candy Crush Saga5 and the ’swerve
type’ Flappy Bird6. For an overview of hyper-casual game mechanics see Figure 4.27.
Figure 4.2: Types of hyper-casual game mechanics.
5https://www.king.com/game/candycrush
6https://flappybird.io/
7https://clevertap.com/blog/hyper-casual-games/
==PAGE:60==
48
4 FINDINGS
4.2.9.1
Keeping Players in the Hyper-casual Loop
Hyper-casual games therefore focus on being easy to play and win, so that the player
continuously feels rewarded and powerful, as one business developer described; “Peo-
ple in general want to feel that ’This is satisfying, I’m good at this game’ [feeling],
or having some sort of like positive reinforcement from the game.” (P15). One of the
ways in which developers try to fulfill this is by making the games easy, as another
developer explained “[hyper-casual games] have to be super satisfying and broadly
appealing and very easy. But then also like still be diﬀicult enough that [the players]
want to play it the day after.” (P4)
While these games themselves are designed to be very easy to beat, they therefore
instead employ diﬀiculty in a different respect; variable success. While beating each
stage might be easy, if the player is doing well or beats the stage flawlessly, they get
a bonus reward; “if you perfected the first half of the stage, then you will get all the
way up to the cool area. But if you didn’t, you will get stuck. (…) [You will still get
prompted that you win, even though you don’t reach the top] because you need to make
a game that works well for super bad players and super good players. (P4). Winning
is therefore trivial in hyper-casual games, in an effort to keep players in the loop with
small victories as much as possible. This design choice, perhaps unknowingly, is also
how slot machines manipulate users into continuous play[Sch12].
4.2.9.2
The Data-driven Design of Hyper-casual Games
The hyper-casual market is extremely competitive, and so developers try to stay on
the forefront of the market as much as possible, while sticking to the principles known
to work. One developer described this approach to design as “super data-driven (…)
So almost all of them just follow the same overall recipe and then with super different
content. But the structure is the same in almost every [hyper-casual] game. That’s 20
seconds of satisfaction and then the ad and then you can upgrade the visuals and stuff
like that.”. This approach is made possible by gathering a lot of data from players.
This data then guides many design decisions made during development, including
aesthetic choices as one developer described;
“[W]ith any game play on mobile, if you just add water in the background,
instead of whatever else you had, the performance will be 20% better (…)
So I will bet that all games the next month will have water backgrounds in
the market because they said that was, I guess, 20%, right? Why wouldn’t
you put water, instead of a gray plane.”(I4)
This data-driven approach often extends also to game mechanics. One business
developer described a time when their playtime was low, and day one retention lacking,
so they added a feature known to work into their game in a successful effort to increase
player engagement;
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Phase 2: Initial Concept Development | Concepts
49
“We added a [battle royale] feature, locking levels together in a pool of 10.
So you win a tournament instead of just winning one level. (…) Metrics
wise, we raised the playtime to around 15 minutes. That’s almost tripled
from the first one. Day one retention rose to around 36%. (P15)”
Many hyper-casual game studios work under a publisher, which helps the studios
design their games by providing data from other development studios; “We have a
lot of criteria for these hyper-casual games that are sort of our own experiences,
but also the experiences of our publisher who I guess see thousands of games every
week. So in my opinion, I should listen to their advice, at least” (P4). The studios
therefore design not only using their own knowledge, but the knowledge gained from
many other studios, and informed by the successes and failures of thousands upon
thousands of games.
These myriad and diverse practices and experiences combined raise fundamental
questions regarding responsibility for, the ethics of, and means for the creation of
healthy highly-engaging game experiences.
4.3
Phase 2: Initial Concept Development | Concepts
Following the process described in section 3.3, the second phase in this design research
project entailed the development of several novel solution ideas, which we organized
using a mind-map as can be seen in Figure 4.3.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.3: Solution ideas mind-map. Connections reflect the relation between ideas and stakeholders, or each idea as
it relates to another either through combination or as a further evolution of the concept..
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Phase 2: Initial Concept Development | Concepts
51
As part of this process, the broad set of themes arising from the thematic analysis
conducted during Phase 1 of this research was visualized as a network with nodes
representing sub-themes and links representing abstract connections between these
sub-themes (See Figure 4.4). This Thematic Network enabled identification of hubs
– nodes with more links than average – which aided us in understanding those sub-
themes most commonly featured in relation to healthy game experiences as described
by participants.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.4: Thematic Network, double arrows (») indicate a causal relation.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Phase 2: Initial Concept Development | Concepts
53
This list of connections between sub-themes is not exhaustive and the strength of
connections is debatable. However, the intention here was not to provide a ground
truth, but to help visualize patterns present within the collected data to support
ideation and concept development.
We took the most connected nodes from this
thematic network and connected them to our ideas for tools and other solutions to
support healthy highly-engaging game experiences. Doing this allowed us to directly
relate these concept solutions to our interview themes, as described in section 4.2.
The results of this connecting of solutions and themes can be seen in Figure 4.5.
We further developed these concepts by sketching out rough designs for each. This
process resulted in several ideas insuﬀiciently clearly defined falling to the wayside,
such as the Ethics Spectrum. An early design for the Investment Calculator for Players
concept can be seen in Figure 4.6, which serves as an indicator for how detailed the
sketches were in this phase.
Based on the guiding principles described in section 3.3, we further narrowed these
concepts down to six:
• Healthy Game Stamp. A rating system that would appear alongside the Pan
European Game Information (PEGI) rating on the App Store and on Google
Play, which would inform users of the dark patterns present within the game.
• Free-to-Play Alternative.
The development of an infrastructure to more
easily allow players to donate to games they enjoy, or access games through a
subscription service, allowing developers to focus less on monetization and more
on healthy game experiences.
• Game Design Course. A course for universities, online course or workshop for
game industry professionals that would inform participants about dark patterns,
how to avoid them and how to create healthy alternatives to dark patterns.
• Adaptive / Personalised Games. A Reinforcement Learning system that
would tweak aspects of the game to the player, creating a customized experience
that suits the individual player through tweaking factors such as diﬀiculty. This
would help alleviate frustrating game experiences by ensuring the game takes
the skills and needs of the individual player into account, leading to healthier
and more rewarding gameplay.
• Investment Calculator for Players. A tool that would help players plan
their resource usage or strategies in order to obtain items within the games. This
would help alleviate frustrations from new players aimlessly spending resources,
and inform experienced players about the investment of time or money required
to obtain the reward they seek. Furthermore, it would allow players keep track
of their spending over time.
• Investment Calculator for Developers. A development tool that would
help Game Creators identify dark patterns within the game through a combina-
tion of statistics and pattern recognition, offering alternative design strategies
or changes that could be implemented to avoid the dark patterns.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.5: Theme hubs and potential solutions. For completeness, we included the
potential solutions which could not immediately be mapped – from the
solution ideas mind map in Figure 4.3 – to a theme hub..
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops | Participant Feedback
55
Figure 4.6: An early prototype of the Investment Calculator for Players concept.
4.4
Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops |
Participant Feedback
As described in section 3.4, we next organised online co-design workshops to facilitate
feedback from stakeholders in regard to these initial concepts. For this phase, we had
8 participants, 2 of whom were GCs and 6 of whom were players. This feedback
session had multiple parts – a dark pattern grading exercise, a concept evaluation
exercise, and a feasibility and value rating exercise for each of the concepts.
4.4.1
Dark Pattern Grading Exercise
In the first stage of this workshop, as an ice-breaker exercise, and means of gaining
further insight into stakeholders’ knowledge and perceptions of dark patterns, we
asked participants to place numerous dark patterns along a gradient. As described
in section 3.4, we did this to start a conversation between participants, but also
to gather qualitative data on opinions about dark patterns. We then analyzed the
==PAGE:68==
56
4 FINDINGS
resulting placements of these dark patterns, both in relation to each other and on an
absolute scale from 0 to 100. This relative ranking takes into consideration the order
in which the dark patterns were placed, leading to the rankings shown in Table 4.2.
Rank
Pattern
S1
S2
S3
Sum
Range
1
Gambling / Loot Boxes
2
1
1
4
1
2
Friend Spam / Impersonation
1
2
2
5
1
3
Premium Currency
8
3
7
18
5
4
Pay to Win
9
4
6
19
5
5
Fear of Missing Out
4
10
8
22
6
6
Pay Wall
14
5
3
22
11
7
Playing by Appointment
6
14
4
24
10
8
Daily Rewards
7
13
5
25
8
9
Variable Rewards
5
7
15
27
10
10
Advertisements
12
8
9
29
4
11
Invested Value (Sunk Cost Fallacy)
3
14
12
29
11
12
Social Obligation / Guilds
11
6
13
30
7
13
Badges / Endowed Progress
13
12
10
35
3
14
Grinding
16
9
11
36
7
15
Complete the Collection
10
11
16
37
6
16
Reciprocity
15
16
14
45
2
Table 4.2: Dark patterns rated from darkest to lightest, along with the individual
ratings from each session. For the score - A low score indicated a darker
pattern, while a higher score was a lighter pattern. – S: Session.
Gambling / Loot Boxes and Friend Spam / Impersonation were consistently rated
by participants as the darkest design patterns. For Gambling / Loot Boxes, a the
developer in session 2 stated: “The whole mentality is extremely predatory” (Session
2 Developer with a player in session 3 adding: “Psychological warfare - like the
forbidden arts - dark magic.” (Session 3 Player). For Friend Spam / Impersonation,
the developer in session 1 stated: “Impersonation makes it super dark, but friend spam
is not. This is what takes all the kids’ money” (Session 1 Designer) and a session 3
player adding: “It’s very dark - even the lightest examples are terrible.” (Session 3
Player).
Reciprocity was consistently rated as the brightest pattern, with arguments made
including that “it actually adds a new social layer to games and actually entice players
to be more social.” (Session 3 Player)
We measured the absolute ranking of patterns by dividing the gradient into 100
equal slots, and noting which slot each pattern was assigned to for each sessions, with
0 being the darkest and 100 being the brightest. We then calculated the averages for
each pattern, resulting in the rankings shown in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops | Participant Feedback
57
Figure 4.7: Absolute Ranking of the Dark Patterns.
Friend Spam / Impersonation was placed most consistently across the three ses-
sions and thus has the lowest standard deviation, whereas opinions regarding Pay
Wall deviated the most, spanning from being rated as one of the darkest patterns -
“If the game discloses that you get content for free and that you have to pay, it’s fine.
But these hidden pay walls are the worst, especially if they appear out of nowhere.”
(Session 3 Player) to being among the brightest –
“Feels like an honest way to monetize, it’s transparent since it comes down
the line. It’s often a single purchase thing, so it doesn’t drain your wallet.
If it is announced up front, it’s completely fine. If it was hidden, it would
move towards the center.” (Session 1 Designer).
Participants from both Phase 1 and 3 agreed that transparency was key to render-
ing the Pay Wall strategy bright. This difference in perception is a perfect illustration
of how the implementation of the dark pattern is what decides how dark it is, as we
found in section 4.2.
4.4.2
Concept Evaluation Exercise
We next asked participants to engage in reflection and further development of our
initial concept solutions, in order to gather valuable insight for the later design and
prototyping work.
4.4.2.1
Free-to-Play Alternatives
Feedback provided in regard to this concept was on the whole negative. A player
in session 4 reacted with: “I don’t think a donation model is feasible, since most
==PAGE:70==
58
4 FINDINGS
people don’t donate” (Session 4 Player). While some participants expressed positive
perceptions of the concept - “I am all for monetization on alternatives for f2p games.”
(Session 2 Player) - these positive comments came from the players and not from the
Game Creators who had necessary economic motives in mind; “Can be very hard to
maintain as a studio. Should not be primary income.” (Session 2 Developer) .
Free-to-Play alternatives thus are perceived as an excellent option from a consumer
standpoint, but unrealistic from a business standpoint.
4.4.2.2
Healthy Game Stamp
Overall, the reception to the Healthy Game Stamp among participants was positive,
many expressing comments along the lines of “I would like to see something with
a general rating with specifics (think the [PEGI] window) regarding things like loot
boxes and other more predatory or addictive elements in stores” (Session 2 Player).
Some Game Creators noted that when submitting a game to the App Store and
Google Play, you are “forced to fill out privacy questions” (Session 1 Designer), and
that a wellbeing rating system could function in the same way. Some participants
raised concerns about who would judge whether a games was ’healthy’ or ’unhealthy’
however, (“Good idea, but how do you decide that a game is unhealthy?” (Session 3
Player)), noting the importance of a diverse council or committee who might decide
which patterns could be considered healthy or unhealthy.
Thus the Healthy Game stamp was perceived as a benefit the users, while not
having a major impact on the Game Creators.
4.4.2.3
Game Design Course Material
Participants agreed that a course regarding healthy game design should “explore the
consequences of dark patterns” (Session 1 Player). Some Game Creators noted that
“It’s easy to say ’don’t use dark patterns’, but you need to earn money, so a realistic
alternative is necessary.” (Session 1 Designer). Several participants noted that the
course could also be directed at parents, informing them of the types of content that
could be found within the games their kids are playing. Other participants, however,
noted that the problem was, wholly or partly, “a ’corporate disease’ rather than a
lack of education.” (Session 2 Developer) They proposed that the course in itself was
therefore not enough, noting a need for regulatory laws.
The Game Design Course could then provide value to developers through better
educated Game Creators, but might not prove enough on its own as a means for the
creation of healthy, highly-engaging game experiences.
4.4.2.4
Adaptive / Personalised Games
The immediate concern expressed by many participants in relation to this concept
was in regard to how it could be “tuned to maximize spending” (Session 1 Player),
with multiple participants stating something in that effect. Another concern being
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops | Participant Feedback
59
that it “can be boring in practice.” (Session 1 Player) if the game never gets harder
or easier.
One player’s immediate reaction was “How does this relate to healthy game expe-
riences?” (Session 3 Player), signifying an unclear connection between this concept
and the overall goal of the project. On a positive note, it was noted that it’s “super
cool, since it will keep you engaged.” (Session 2 Player).
Overall, ’Adaptive games’ was seen by participants as a tool with little poten-
tial for healthy game experiences, but significant potential to create unhealthy game
experiences.
4.4.2.5
Investment Calculator for Players
Many of the player participants noted that support for planning in-game resource
use was “already done by enthusiasts in the form of wiki pages” (Session 1 Player)
or other community websites. A common interpretation of this concept was that the
tool would be integrated into the game itself. To this interpretation, participants
noted that planning how to use your resources can very much be a part of the fun of
the game, and as such it “should be separate from the game itself, so that it doesn’t
give you the answers inside the game, but you can access it if you’re stuck” (Session
3 Player). However, it was also noted that such a tool integrated into the game itself
“could allow some users to plan out their play so that it better fits into their life.”
(Session 2 Player)
The Investment Calculator for players could then either be integrated into the
game, taking away from the planning some players find fun, or be implemented sep-
arately from the game itself, where it would need to significantly differentiate itself
from existing websites and community platforms in order to provide value.
4.4.2.6
Investment Calculator for Developers
Some Game Creators participants noted here that they already used a primitive
version of such a tool. Currently, they would “note down all these numbers in a
spreadsheet” (Session 1 Designer). As such the Investment Calculator could take
the form of a “template spreadsheet with all the fields necessary. Then it could have
calculations that determined if it was dark or not.” (Session 1 Designer).
One participant noted that the issue with dark patterns arise “if patterns are
combined, since they will amplify the bad experience. It is hard to setup a structure
for.” (Session 2 Developer). However, other participants regarded the solution in a
more positive light, stating that it could “catch issues before implemented into the
game” (Session 3 Player).
Overall, although an Investment Calculator for Developers was better received
among participants than a similar concept for game players, participants still ex-
pressed some concerns over its effectiveness, largely due to the complexity of the
challenge of dark patterns.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 FINDINGS
4.4.3
Feasibility and Value Rating Exercise
We next engaged participants in the completion of a Feasibility and Value Rating
exercise with regard to each concept, in order to provide us a quantified sense of
stakeholders’ perceptions of the feasibility and value of each concept while fostering a
rich participatory conversation in regard to future directions for further development.
We performed the same type of absolute grading as for the subsection 4.4.1 exercise,
as shown in Table 4.3.
Concept
S1
S2
S3
S4-1
S4-2
Mean
Range
Free to Play Alternative [F]
12
72
91
94
62
66
82
Free to Play Alternative [V]
98
56
63
55
99
74
44
Healthy Game Stamp [F]
98
2
73
94
12
56
96
Healthy Game Stamp [V]
48
92
100
38
75
71
62
Game Design Course [F]
98
77
98
58
69
80
40
Game Design Course [V]
36
18
100
79
12
49
88
Adaptive / Personalised Games [F]
46
18
74
44
19
40
56
Adaptive / Personalised Games [V]
53
97
38
67
97
70
59
Investment Calculator (Players) [F]
53
13
63
69
91
58
78
Investment Calculator (Players) [V]
42
53
88
57
67
61
46
Investment Calculator (Developers) [F]
84
100
97
18
91
78
82
Investment Calculator (Developers) [V]
47
100
92
96
40
75
60
Table 4.3: Feasibility and value scores for each of the concepts, measured by place-
ment in the grid in Figure 3.4. For Feasibility, lower score is less feasible.
For Value, lower score is less valuable or impactful. F - Feasibility, V -
Value, S - Session.
It is worth noting here, that most of the concept ratings yielded a high range
in terms of both their perceived feasibility and value. The highest range, 96 in the
feasibility score for the Healthy Game Stamp, for example, stems from the perceptions
of two developers, one of whom felt it might create more barriers to publishing games
as “healthy experiences are much harder to rate, since they are so subjective” (Session
2 Developer), while another described the Healthy Game Stamp as “Super easy to
integrate, and gives value in the form of overview in the app stores.” (Session 1
Designer).
Several participants furthermore noted that many concepts could be placed along
a third axis within the coordinate system of feasibility and value. The Adaptive /
Personalised games concept was placed along such a diagonal line in both sessions 1
and 3, while the Investment Calculator for players was placed alongside the same line
in Session 1. This line signified that as the value of a concept increased in line with
the complexity of its implementation, this made it much less feasible.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Phase 3: Concept Co-Design Workshops | Participant Feedback
61
Figure 4.8: Average of feasibility/value prioritization – The dotted line indicates
participants’ argument to add a third axis on which some of the concepts
could move.
During the session, several participants made comments along lines that we had
previously not considered – that many of these concepts would work best in, and
require, combination in practice. This was particularly apparent in regard to the
Game Design Course, where multiple participants noted that it “wouldn’t make sense
as a standalone thing.” (Session 1 Designer). Some noted that the Game Design
Course could be combined with the Investment Calculator for developers, for exam-
ple, in order to support the principles taught in the course. Others noted that the
“(Investment Calculator for Developers) would pair very well with the healthy game
stamp, and be a tool that designers could use during the design process.” (Session 1
Designer).
4.4.4
Phase Summary
In summary, reactions to these initial concepts were often diverse in nature. A well-
received concept in one session would be harshly criticized in another. This feedback
==PAGE:74==
62
4 FINDINGS
was however very helpful in enabling us to shape more concrete versions of these pur-
posefully abstract concepts – each participant group often shaping their own imple-
mentations. A possibility not considered previously, but which multiple participants
agreed upon, was the need for a combination of solutions as means to raising the
value of each concept. Suggested combinations included the Investment Calculator
for Developers and the Healthy Game Stamp, as well as the Investment Calculator
for Developers and the Game Design Course.
4.5
Phase 4: Additional Prototyping | Revised
Concepts
As described in section 3.5, the purpose of this next phase in our process was to
flesh out our initial concept designs while selecting among our initial six concepts
section 4.3. We narrowed these initial solutions according to those which had received
the most positive feedback, and which we found best fit the overall goals of the
project. During this process, we drew not only on the diverse feasibility and value
scores provided by participants, as shown in Table 4.3, but also on the accompanying
comments provided.
The first concepts to be cut from consideration for further development were
the Investment Calculator for Players and Free to Play Alternatives.
These were
abandoned as they were lacking novelty, and their implementation seemed unfeasi-
ble, despite some initial positive feedback during section 4.4. For the Free-to-Play
alternative solution, while this could be of value to smaller studios, one participant
noted that “There is no big incentive from studios, since F2P makes so much money
currently.” (Session 4 Player). In regard to the Investment Calculator for Players,
many game communities already have tools and websites that serve the same purpose,
and GCs have no incentives to support such a tool. Thus the four prototype solu-
tions we decided to further pursue were: Adaptive / Personalised Games, Investment
Calculator for Developers, Game Design Course and Healthy Game Stamp.
4.5.1
Adaptive / Personalised Games
In order to address the concern of an adaptive diﬀiculty proving boring for players, we
added an element of player interaction to the adaption of this concept. We decided
to focus on the diﬀiculty of hyper-casual games, as GCs noted in the interviews in
section 4.2 that tuning the diﬀiculty of these games is a diﬀicult task, as players with
many different skill levels play hyper-casual games. Our hybrid approach to adaptive
diﬀiculty resulted in a system where the game will passively change the diﬀiculty
slightly, but the player is able to bring about drastic changes in diﬀiculty by opting in
to a challenge, with rewards for completion, or by telling the game to be easier. These
buttons would appear only when certain conditions are met, so as to not overwhelm
the user. The challenge button would appear after a set amount of levels are beaten
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Phase 4: Additional Prototyping | Revised Concepts
63
in a row, appearing faster if the player is doing exceptionally well. The button to
scale down the diﬀiculty would appear after a level has been failed, allowing the user
to skip the level in favour of another, easier level. The resulting interface for the user
can be found in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Left: The screen after the player has just completed a level and met the
conditions for a challenge level to appear. Right: After the player fails
a level, the button to decrease diﬀiculty appears.
The developer would be able to create different obstacles and enemies, granting
each a diﬀiculty rating that the adaptive system would use to create levels. At this
point, however, we realised that the impact of this concept on gaming wellbeing
was not particularly well articulated, as also noted by a participant in subsubsec-
tion 4.4.2.4. As such, we halted development of the Adaptive / Personalised Games
concept to focus on the other concepts.
4.5.2
Healthy Game Stamp
The Healthy Game Stamp took many different forms during prototyping. We decided
to keep the approach to this concept broad, as we wanted to test different design ele-
ments with participants during the next phase of the project. As such, we attempted
to develop as many different types of Healthy Game stamps as possible. Some of
these stamps worked on a binary scale, with an icon signifying the presence or lack of
dark patterns. Others sought to be more granular, either through a star rating from
one to three, or via iconography. Another idea was to describe the ’darkness’ of a
==PAGE:76==
64
4 FINDINGS
game through bars or circles that would fill up the darker the game is rated. Taking a
different approach, we designed a set of icons that would not only show the presence
of dark patterns, but also which ones in particular. We also adopted a different spin
on this idea, by placing the descriptor of the dark patterns below the name of the
app itself, replacing the In-App Purchases descriptor. Several of these designs can be
found in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Four designs for the Healthy Game stamp, displaying different levels
of complexity and different kinds of information.
4.5.3
Healthy Game Design Course
Designing the Healthy Game Design Course was a significantly different task than for
any of the other concepts, as it is the only concept without a user interface. We took
inspiration from the Techical University of Denmark (DTU) Course Database, filling
out each of the course descriptors as for a standardised university course. We chose to
continue with the Healthy Game Design course for GCs, as we wanted to create more
awareness about healthy design choices and alternatives to dark patterns. During
the interviews in section 4.2, many developers expressed that they were unaware of
any ways to create profitable, highly-engaging games that were ’healthier’ in nature.
In order to address this point, we designed the course to be available to as many
developers as possible, with the goal of creating awareness about dark patterns, how
to spot them, and what alternatives exist. The course description can be found in
Figure 4.11.
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Phase 4: Additional Prototyping | Revised Concepts
65
Figure 4.11: Course description for the Healthy Game Design university course.
==PAGE:78==
66
4 FINDINGS
4.5.4
Investment Calculator for Developers
While designing the Investment Calculator for Developers, we envisioned a tool that
would be implemented into the game development programs, and would play a key role
in designing progression during game development. The GC would be able to select
modules, which they could use to specify different types of progression and economy.
The GC would also be able to visualize their choices through graphs, showing either
simulated player data or data from actual players.
A design for the Investment
Calculator for Developers with hyper-casual game development modules open can be
seen in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: Investment Calculator for Developers, with modules selected for hyper-
casual game development.
In a similar fashion to the Adaptive / Personalised Games, we then began to
question the impact this tool might have on the wellbeing of users, as the Investment
Calculator simply allowed developers to see and fix potentially frustrating situations
for players. Instead of dropping the idea entirely, however, we retooled it into focusing
more directly on wellbeing, reshaping the idea into a Emotion Assessment Toolkit.
This tool would help the GCs measure the emotional states of players while playing
the game through in-the-moment surveys, and then identify points in the game where
the player was feeling an unintended emotion or less than ethical experience, such
as manipulation.
This resulted in the survey designs shown in Figure 4.13.
The
content of these surveys is grounded in SDT, presenting questions that relate to
specific wellbeing factors. These questions can be presented as either a short or a
long survey, depending on the level of detail that the developer needs. The short
survey is meant to be used following smaller milestones, and adopts the principles
of Ecological Momentary Assessment, aiming to take no longer than 4 to 5 seconds.
These short surveys pose a singular question, which can then be answered either using
==PAGE:79==
4.6 Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement | Prototypes
67
a rating with four options, or a simpler agree/disagree format. These short survey
designs can be seen in Figure 4.13.
The longer surveys follow a more traditional survey format, and are intended to
be used following a larger milestone during the game. This could be at the end of a
longer sequence of quests, or after beating a boss. The questions for the longer survey
still relate to SDT, but aim for a longer, more detailed engagement with the survey.
When placing the surveys in-game, we designed an interface that is familiar to
a video editor. Here, the GC can view a play-session along a timeline, placing flags
at key times in the session. The tool then records which event and type of survey
the developer has specified, and assigns this flag to the corresponding event in the
game code. All players, while the tool is enabled for the game, will then encounter
a survey at that point in gameplay, regardless of the playtime or in what order they
complete tasks. As the tool is integrated into the editor for the game, it is also able to
record any events encountered during the recorded play session, and can then suggest
placements for surveys. The developer would also be able to place surveys directly
onto the events in the game development editor itself, without using the timeline
interface. This interface can be seen in Figure 4.14.
This data will then be visualised using graphs, much like for the Investment Cal-
culator for Developers. The Emotion Assessment Toolkit would also record the data
recorded by the Investment Calculator for Developers, providing detailed statistics
for the player’s resources and session length over time, making it a useful tool to not
only analyze the wellbeing of players, but also for player statistics.
4.6
Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype
Refinement | Prototypes
In this final phase of stakeholder engagement and participatory design, we sought to
engage diverse stakeholders in reflection on the design and potential of our refined
concept solutions. Two participants took part in this workshop – one who was part of
interviews and one who had signed up via our recruitment banner, which can be seen
in Appendix 6. The workshop took place over Google Meet and Miro, similarly to all
previous workshops, and lasted one hour. As described in section 3.6, we presented
participants a simple exercise designed for each of the three remaining concepts, in
order to facilitate stakeholder involvement and rich and insightful conversations.
4.6.1
Healthy Game Stamp | Dark Pattern Badges
During this task, participants designed a rating system that was strictly binary in
nature; a stamp denoting either a complete lack or presence of dark patterns. However,
participants did not interact with the Miro board during this section as they preferred
simply explaining their solution. As such, their final product from this section cannot
be presented. This stamp was then combined with a descriptive text that simply
==PAGE:80==
68
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.13: A short survey in landscape and portrait mode.
==PAGE:81==
4.6 Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement | Prototypes
69
Figure 4.14: The Timeline interface for placing Wellbeing surveys in a play session.
implied whether the game contained a limited amount of in-app purchases, such as the
removal of ads, or recurring purchases, such as loot boxes. Participants emphasized
the legibility of this system despite its drawbacks in terms of detail provided.
The challenge then was to combine these core principles of glanceability and legi-
bility with the more detailed information communicated by a more traditional rating,
which we believed, and prior sessions had pointed to as, important to the success of
this concept. Our solution was to design a Badge system, where each dark pattern
corresponds to a badge, re-branding our solution to a Dark Pattern Badges system.
These badges are then displayed in stacks according to their types, with icons de-
noting the specific pattern each badge refers to. The total number of dark patterns
present within the game is also presented, giving this precise information to the user.
The user is able to press the badges on the store page to open a detailed list of all
==PAGE:82==
70
4 FINDINGS
the dark patterns that the game contains. If the game contains no dark patterns, a
small ’Healthy Game’ stamp is displayed.
This approach achieves both the clarity of a binary system, with the ’Healthy
Game’ stamp taking the form of a unique icon distinct from the rest, with the detail
of a more granular system by listing all the included patterns. This system does not
contain the ’rating’ part of the previous solutions, as the dark patterns are simply
listed as is. We made this choice in order to address participants’ concern, as expressed
in subsubsection 4.4.2.2, as to who would rate how ’dark’ a dark pattern is. As we
did not want to position ourselves as the judges of this matter, due to the highly
individual impact of dark patterns and the need to maintain industry professionals’
involvement, we chose to present these patterns without judgement. Instead, we chose
to create a unique icon for each dark pattern, with a coloured border denoting the
type of dark pattern. We did this in the hope that users would learn the icons and
borders over time, making the system highly glanceable. The resulting design can be
seen in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: The final design for the Dark Pattern Badges system. Left: Stamp
when there are no dark patterns. Middle: The store page when dark
patterns are present. Right: Explanation screen for the dark pattern
badges.
==PAGE:83==
4.6 Phase 5: Evaluation Workshops and Prototype Refinement | Prototypes
71
4.6.2
Healthy Game Design Course
As described in section 3.6, we presented participants during this phase of the session
with descriptors for the course corresponding to a university style course. The partic-
ipants here instead envisioned a workshop format, during which participants would
actively engage in design problems, analyzing games with dark patterns and working
on healthy alternatives in groups. The workshop would then teach participants about
dark patterns and alternative strategies, but also would simulate the conflicts between
monetization and gameplay design in the real-world, giving participants the tools to
shape the outcomes of such conflicts towards healthier game design. The workshop
would be available to Game Creators who are already familiar with game design,
either working in the industry or through university. This limitation was imposed,
as participants commented that the focus of the workshop should be on advanced
game design principles, and thus requires some existing game design knowledge of
participants. Participants notes during this task can be seen in Figure 4.16.
We then adapted this vision as expressed by participants and shaped it into the
course description which can be seen in Figure 4.17.
4.6.3
Emotion Assessment Toolkit
As described in section 3.6, this final section of the session was dedicated to the
Emotion Assessment Toolkit, and particularly to understanding the key emotions
felt by players during gameplay in relation to healthy and ethical game experiences.
The results of this exercise can be found in Figure 4.18.
Interestingly, those emotions with a negative impact on wellbeing appear to occur
less frequently than those emotions with a positive impact on wellbeing. When we
asked the GC about which of the players’ emotions during gameplay would be most
valuable to know as a means of designing healthy, highly-engaging experiences. For
those emotions the GC chose Interested from the positive emotions, and Annoyed,
Disappointed and Manipulated from the negative part of the scale. They elaborated
that they chose Interested, as it is “very unique and hard to achieve”, and therefore
an indicator of healthy engagement. In terms of the negative emotions, they noted
that Annoyed, Disappointed and Manipulated were “the most unintentional things
that might happen in the game” and that a game would never strive to entice those
feelings in the players. Other negative feelings, such as Frustrated, however, were
described as often intentional, enticed in order to drive further investment from the
player.
We then used this feedback to shape those emotions highlighted by the tool, and
those emotions the tool would suggest targeting with surveys. The resulting questions
can be seen in Table 4.4.
==PAGE:84==
72
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.16: Participants’ answers to the Healthy Game Design course section of
the session.
Interested
I am excited to see what is going to happen next
Annoyed
I feel annoyed
Disappointed
I am disappointed by the game
Manipulated
I feel the game manipulated me
Table 4.4: The four player emotions the GC deemed most valuable to know of, and
their corresponding questions.
==PAGE:85==
4.7 Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development | A Design Manifesto
73
General course objectives
The overall course objective is to develop the student’s abilities to design games 
with wellbeing in mind, and solve conflicts in real-world situations. 

Learning objectives
A participant who has met the objectives of the course will be able to:S
c Identify healthy game designs and how to apply the+
c Adhere to healthy game design principles when designing a gamC
c Solve production conflicts related to the implementation of dark pattern9
c Analyze a game and identify the dark patterns within the+
c Create a policy paper regarding healthy game monetization and mechanics

Course Platform
The course is available on
Universities or through DADIU

Evaluation Criteria
Participants are evaluated after completion by
Adherence to healthy game design principles
Ability in identifying areas within a game that are potential dark patterns
Ability to solve production conflicts related to the implementation of dark patterns

Participant background
It is assumed that participants
Have previous knowledge of game design, and has previously worked on games
Figure 4.17: The finalized course description for the Healthy Game Design course.
4.7
Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development | A
Design Manifesto
As we describe in section 3.7, this final phase of our design process entailed the
combination of our final concept solutions, each targeting different stakeholders, as
means of creating impact in the real-world, and shaping future design choices made
in regard to healthy, highly-engaging game experiences.
We chose to present these final three solutions in the form of a design manifesto
with the idea that this format would enable us to disseminate not only the findings
of our research process but implications for design practice of value to practicing
game industry professionals. This poster took inspiration from other, similar design
manifesto posters found online, and can be seen in Figure 4.19.
==PAGE:86==
74
4 FINDINGS
Figure 4.18: Rating of the emotions players might feel during gameplay, ranked
according to how often they are felt and the impact they have on the
player. For frequency, emotions placed to the left are less likely to
occur during gameplay. For the impact on wellbeing, emotions placed
above the middle have positive impact on wellbeing and below the
middle have negative impact on wellbeing.
==PAGE:87==
4.7 Phase 6: Impact and Vision Development | A Design Manifesto
75
Figure 4.19: The design manifesto poster for game studios, created by combining
the three solution concepts.
==PAGE:88==
76
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
In this final section we revisit our findings, discuss the pros and cons of our approach
to design research, reflect on the future of ethical gaming, and end with design impli-
cations for the future design of healthy, highly-engaging game experiences.
5.1
Revisiting Our Research Questions
First, let us return to our research questions. The aim of this work from the outset was
to understand patterns of highly-engaged gaming, particularly where these activities
have the potential to realise harm, and in turn to employ this knowledge in support
of the design of a new tool to support more healthy, highly-engaging mobile game
experiences.
Our primary research question then concerned means of increasing opportunities
for healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences, informed by knowledge gener-
ated in response to the following questions;
5.1.1
How do players and game creators characterize their
experiences of playing and developing highly-engaging
mobile games?
During each phase of this process we gained new knowledge of players’, designers’,
developers’ and business developers’ perceptions and experiences of highly-engaging
mobile games. We learned that players have adapted to the inclusion of manipulative
design patterns, and have learned to get the most out of the games regardless of
these, leading to themes in Gaming as Activity & Identity and Drivers & Patterns
of Engagement. Many players chose to play with their friends as a means to engage
with games in a healthy way, pointing to themes of The Social Pull of Mobile Games.
We also learned that GCs are frustrated with the current mobile game market, that
makes the inclusion of dark patterns necessary in order to have a successful game
bringing the themes of Conflicts and Tensions in Game Design and Mobile Games as
Business. BDs characterized the experience of developing games differently, similarly,
stressing the need to keep up with industry standards to compete through themes in
The Unique Process of Hyper-casual Game Design. They also found some admiration
==PAGE:90==
78
5 DISCUSSION
in some monetization patterns others might consider dark, though they looked down
on the practice of loot boxes.
The Multi-Session Experience of Flow
One Game Creator (GC) during inter-
views suggested that flow exists not just within play sessions, but might also exist
between sessions. As the GC put it: “maybe you say that flow, you know, in a, flow
inside the session is like a good thing, right? It’s considered something that’s true.
Or like, you know, something that a lot of designers aspire to. But maybe flow in the
meta of the game is just addiction. I don’t know.” (P9). This concept of inter-session
flow could underlie certain key aspects of how players interact with games, in terms
of how they seek information related to the games they are playing, or feel compelled
to return to a game. While flow within gameplay sessions has been subject to sev-
eral studies [Cow+08; Mar15], flow between sessions and how the user experiences
flow between sessions is currently unexplored in the literature, and could prove an
interesting topic for further research.
The Gaming Identity
We posed a question to many of the game playing partic-
ipants: “Do you consider yourself a gamer?” The answers to this question varied
greatly, and often in ways seemingly unrelated to the participants’ actual experience
with mobile games. While none of the participants identified themselves as ’gamers’
if they played very few games, only a small few who engaged heavily with the hobby
called themselves ’gamers’, and only a single participant described themselves as a
’mobile gamer’. Grooten et al. describe the gamer identity as a multi-faceted social
identity that spans personal, social, and virtual contexts[GK15], meaning that the
gamer identity stems from a sense of belonging to a group where gaming is a com-
mon ground. This distancing from the term ’gamer’, and particularly ’mobile gamer’,
could be attributed to participants playing mobile games in their downtime, instead
of actively engaging with them. If mobile games are considered simple pastimes, they
have little influence on the player, and thus do not integrate into their personality as
Grooten et al. describe for gamers.
This distancing from the term ’gamer’ is not just prevalent in our interviews, but
also around the internet. On the forum ResetEra, the “most popular independent
gaming forum on the internet as measured by traﬀic”1, a poll2 with the question
“Do you consider yourself a gamer?”, seen in Figure 5.1, garnered a response of only
51.5% entailing some variation of yes. The largest individual response, comprising of
the phrase “I enjoy games, but would never call myself a gamer”, gathered 42.4% of
the votes. This points towards a broader notion of people distancing themselves from
the term gamer, even if they play video games and participate in gaming culture.
In our interviews, however, it seems that those who identified themselves as gamers
were primarily those who played games alongside other people.
They were those
who could share their hobby with other like-minded people, especially if they played
1https://www.resetera.com/threads/general-guide-to-resetera.9777/
2https://www.resetera.com/threads/are-you-a-gamer.140772/
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Revisiting Our Research Questions
79
Figure 5.1: A poll on the gaming forum ResetEra asking members if they view
themselves as ’gamers’.
games together in an in-game community. The participant who identified themselves
as a mobile gamer even dedicated their mornings and evenings to completing tasks
for their in-game community.
This points towards the social aspect of the game
experience being strongly correlated to identifying games as an identity, moreso than
other aspects of gameplay. Of those we asked that did not consider themselves gamers,
they still however played games often, as one participant stated; “I wouldn’t consider
myself a hardcore mobile gamer, but I’ve been playing them pretty much since I had
a phone.”(P14). This points towards mobile games in particular being valued more
as a pastime and less of an actual hobby.
Mobile games were even compared to
the browser games of old - quick fixes for entertainment but nothing more. Another
possible explanation for distancing oneself from being a mobile gamer, or gamer in
general, could be that gamers, and especially online gamers are regarded as social
pariahs, as found by Kowert[Kow14, p 7], however this we did not further explore
during the limited scope of our interviews.
5.1.2
Which design choices and patterns shape most strongly
healthy and unhealthy player experiences with
highly-engaging mobile games?
As this work continued, we also were able to develop and enrich our understand-
ing of the perception, impact, and design of healthy mobile game experiences. We
framed much of this work in regard to the recent literature and emerging discourse
of ’dark patterns,’ learning how dark patterns impact the player experiences. While
many online regard micro-transactions and loot boxes as having “ruined gaming” and
themes of Negative Perceptions of Mobile Games, many of the players that partici-
pated in our interviews found loot box mechanics exciting and fun, when enjoyed in
moderation. The key to keeping these mechanics healthy was control, ensuring the
players never overstep the budget they have allotted for themselves. In an exercise
where our participants rated dark patterns on a scale from least dark to most dark,
==PAGE:92==
80
5 DISCUSSION
loot boxes and friend spam or impersonation were consistently rated as the darkest,
leading to a notion that participants view these patterns as the most evil, but do not
regard themselves as vulnerable to them. Players regarded transparency of moneti-
zation as important, and wanted to see this increased further. This exercise pointed
to themes in Dark Patterns Come in Many Forms, as players rated the patterns
differently depending on the implementations they had encountered. One driver of
healthy interactions for the players was variation in content, mostly brought about
by timed events. These would bring fresh content to the players, leading them to
engage more than they would normally. These events have a downside, however, as
they drive players to engage more, and thus risks the players encountering burn out,
over-engagement leading to a decrease in wellbeing and disengagement. These point
to themes of The Experience of Wellbeing in Relation to Games
Intentionality & Dark Patterns | How dark patterns arise
As mentioned
earlier, Zagal et al. define dark patterns as “a pattern used intentionally by a game
creator to cause negative experiences for players which are against their best interests
and likely to happen without their consent.” [ZBL13].
One notable aspect of this
definition is the use of the term intentionally.
This description at times clashed
with comments made by our professional participants, who, as one GC stated, at
times commented that “A dark pattern, I think, is, a lot of times something you fall
into inadvertently. You were trying to do something else, probably something that
had to do with engagement rates or retention or monetization, and you fell into a
dark pattern.” (P9) If dark patterns can arise from an attempt to drive engagement,
through mechanics that are not unhealthy by design, how we define dark patterns
may need to be adapted to accommodate those dark patterns that developers might
create inadvertently.
We might then propose an alternate definition, one that focuses on the effect on
the player experience regardless of intent. Another aspect of dark patterns that the
previously mentioned definition fails to encompass concerns their individual impact;
what is a dark pattern and bad experience for one player can result in a positive
experience for another.
Furthermore, as this same GC stated: “Usually the, the
exploitation is not in the definitions, but in the numbers”, meaning that it is not
always a pattern itself which is inherently dark but its particular implementation.
In order to encompass the individual impact of dark patterns, their implementation-
related nature, and their possibly inadvertent origins, we propose a revised definition
as follows:
“A dark game design pattern is a pattern or combination of patterns
implemented in such a way that it drives players towards experiences that
negatively affect their wellbeing”
While this definition moves away from the implication that intentionality is impor-
tant and something GCs and BDs need to be aware of when designing highly-engaging
game mechianics, this definition strives more to encapsulate the player experience
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Revisiting Our Research Questions
81
with mobile games, and the inadvertent nature in which highly-engaging design pat-
terns might evolve into dark patterns.
5.1.3
How can we design to mitigate the effects of those design
patterns that impact the wellbeing of players negatively?
Finally, one of our primary aims during this design research process was to develop
knowledge of how we might design to reduce negative and support more positive,
healthy experiences of highly-engaging mobile games. We learned that players were
often unaware of the dark design patterns a game could contain if they were unfamiliar
with the genre of the game, leading to vulnerability to manipulation. We also learned
that GCs are unaware of how to design healthy alternatives to dark patterns, and
lack the tool to engage with BDs in conversations about monetization. Finally we
learned that GCs are unaware of the impact their games have on the players, leading
to dark patterns being implemented inadvertently. We advise mobile game designers
to take careful consideration during implementation and design of highly-engaging
mobile games, ensuring the wellbeing of players as much as possible.
The final contribution of this thesis, in the form of our three concept solutions,
which each address a negative effect of dark design patterns.
Our Dark Pattern
Badges informs players of the inclusion of dark patterns within games before they
play it, which will help prepare the players for their presence. The Dark Pattern
Badges system also contains the ’Healthy Game’ stamp, a special stamp that denotes
a game free of dark patterns, helping players find healthy games on the App Store
and Google Play. The Emotion Assessment Toolkit helps developers measure the
emotions of testers during gameplay, which helps find places where players are feeling
unintended emotions, such as feeling manipulated or annoyed.
It also helps find
places in the game where players are feeling good emotions such as interest, so that
the GCs can further build on healthy mechanics and sections in the game. Finally, we
give GCs the knowledge to implement healthy alternatives to dark patterns through
the Healthy Game Design course. This course uses real-world examples to simulate
production conflicts over monetization, giving GCs the tools to participate in the
discussion on equal terms with the BDs and shape better, healthier monetization and
engagement strategies in highly-engaging mobile games.
Gaming Redefined
As we described in section 4.2, many diverse stakeholders,
game players and GCs alike, view mobile games as disposable. While playing video
games is becoming more normalized, with large video game franchises attracting
mainstream attention, from The Witcher to DOTA, CS:GO and Fortnite, mobile
games have not benefited from this same normalization. A clear example of this is in
how gamers view players of mobile games online, one online user stating that
“[c]omparing mobile players to gamers is much like comparing professional
ballet, jazz, modern and contemporary dancers to the shuffling and groping
==PAGE:94==
82
5 DISCUSSION
at your average hookup bar. The enthusiasm is there at the bar, certainly.
Sometimes the innate talent is there too.
Just not the same level of
commitment.” (Clayton Jay Hardy on Quora) 3.
While this opinion is coloured in its expression by a self-identifying gamer who encoun-
tered this question online, this opinion is not much different from how video games
in general have been viewed in the past. As children who grew up playing games
on their parents’ phones and tablets grow older, we’re likely to see this sentiment
change towards something more akin to how console and PC games are viewed now.
As one participant stated: “[Mobile games are] just a newer form of gaming that I
think people in their forties like me often are like, ’Nope, that’s new, that’s not how
it should be. (…) This shouldn’t exist because it’s not how it, used to be’.” (P13).
Some of the negative opinions people have formed towards mobile games have
also arisen due to the very presence of dark patterns. Mobile games are often seen as
riddled with ads and micro-transactions, which especially concerns parents whose kids
might play these games unsupervised. One way to change the perception that these
parents have could be to employ further regulation, such that children would not be
subjected to these patterns. This could either be achieved in part through the Dark
Pattern Badges system, which could allow parents to then block games that contain
certain dark patterns.
Another way this could be changed is through regulation,
wherein lawmakers would ban some of the dark patterns contained in mobile games
such as loot boxes4, in order to ensure that children in particular are not subject
to these. Were either of these two implemented, this could help parents feel more
comfortable and safe in allowing their children to engage with mobile games, while
worrying less about the patterns to which they might be exposed. However, children
are not the only groups vulnerable to predatory gambling mechanisms and addressing
this problem may therefore require a multi-pronged approach.
5.2
Reflections on Our Process
This design research process comprised multiple phases of qualitative research in
which we ourselves took part as designers and researchers. We here reflect on our
own experiences in this regard.
As we described in section 3.2, we took a prompts and probes approach to the
interviews conducted during Phase 1. This approach heavily shaped the results we
obtained from these interviews, and as such we want to discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of this approach.
Starting off with the advantages, the prompts and probes provided us with a highly
adaptable interview structure, allowing the interviewer to adapt to the participant.
3https://www.quora.com/Why-do-PC-and-console-gamers-think-mobile-gamers-arent-
gamers/answer/Clayton-Jay-Hardy?ch=10&share=ff2f32e7
4Lawmakers in the European Union have already begun pushing for this, see https://www.
businessinsider.com/loot-boxes-european-regulation-2018-9?r=US&IR=T
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Reflections on Our Process
83
This means that the interviewer can draw on the participant’s experiences rather than
sticking to pre-prepared questions, allowing their individual voices to come through
more clearly. The interview is then more akin to a conversation, which embraces
tangents and reactions that we as interviewers had not prepared for, and allows
us to explore these in the interview itself. The conversation based nature of these
interviews also allowed participants to feel more relaxed in the conversation, with
one participant even stating: “I really enjoyed talking to you guys, so I don’t even
consider this as an interview. It’s I can talk to a friend (sic) right now who is also
developing an app” (P8). This fluid approach can also be a disadvantage, however,
as the structure makes it harder to compare answers between participants. As we
adapted the interview to the participants, the questions were not posed in the exact
same way, or the sequence of questions was altered, which influenced the answers we
got to those questions. This means that comparing answers between interviews is
more a matter of interpretation than explicit comparison. The conversation based
nature of these interviews also meant that parts of the interviews could focus entirely
on aspects and stories less clearly related to the thesis when viewed in hindsight.
In both the interviews and thematic analysis, we influence the project ourselves,
bringing our own experiences and interpretations of the experiences of the participants
into the solutions.
As the project progressed, however, these interpretations and
influences from participants also helped shape the kinds of questions and approaches
we took going forward, shaping the target audience and solutions we designed later on
in the interviews. This process is a participatory, iterative approach to design where
we shape the knowledge gained, and in turn the knowledge gains shapes us and the
process we engage in.
5.2.1
Creative Engagement is Key to Obtaining Insight
During the co-design workshops of Phase 3 and Phase 5, we invested much time
in designing meaningful and interactive exercises for participants, in order to elicit
rich conversations which in turn would inspire our following design research. We posi-
tioned ourselves as facilitators – but not neutral – during workshops in order to inspire
and guide participants through the co-design process. We grouped participants’ with
diverse backgrounds together, which played an important part in eliciting diverse
answers and ensure that our design concepts were meaningful to participants. The
downside of this being the amount of planning and coordination needed to synchronize
meeting times across different time zones.
Our approach of co-designing with novel, visual research methods required much
preparation of templates for participants to fill out during exercises, but the time
spent proved valuable since it allowed capturing participants’ rich insights. During
preparation we often discussed how much of our design work to present to participants
before a co-design exercise, as presenting too much might shape the outcome in a
certain direction, but too little information would leave participants bewildered. For
this, we found it helpful to have prepared a script for the workshops in advance with
==PAGE:96==
84
5 DISCUSSION
an overview of exercises and our design work related to them, which we could fallback
to if exercises proved unclear.
5.2.2
Opportunities and Limitations of the Co-design Approach
During this thesis, we utilized the co-design approach as early and as often as possible.
We did this as we wanted to bring in stakeholders as early as possible, validating our
design every step of the way. This also helped us iterate much faster than normal,
as we can present the stakeholders with more abstract ideas and have them come
up with solutions that work for them. Our approach also involved bringing together
players and GCs as much as possible, allowing them to co-operate and create ideas
that work for both types of stakeholders. Kim et. al. write that “the user role as
informants can often be more beneficial than as co-designers since users tend to focus
on game characteristics rather than the goal of the design”[Kim+20], stating that
players are less useful as co-designers. In our experience, however, the workshops
allowed all participants, players and GCs alike, to act as both informants and co-
designers. This may have been supported by our diversity of stakeholders, who we
engaged across groups in multiple phases. This was particularly present in Phase 3,
where we strove to include a player and a GC or BD in every session where possible.
For Phase 5, we strove to engage across stakeholder groups through peer review and
presentations, hoping to make the session more engaging and less predictable for
participants. For phase 5 however, we ended up engaging stakeholder groups similar
to Phase 3. Engaged participation may also have been enabled by our deliberate
avoiding of presenting concrete design concepts to participants to avoid framing their
thoughts in advance of the exercises, as described in section 3.4.
A downside to the co-design approach we encountered, however, was that feed-
back from stakeholders could vary wildly when presented with an abstract concept.
In order to accommodate this, we worked to figure out and present the core values
of the solutions posed during each session, and combine them with the core values
expressed by others in relation to the same concepts in shaping a final solution. This
was especially a concern however when a solution from one session contradicted ideas
presented during another. These tensions were resolved in part by our own involve-
ment and knowledge as researchers of the litterature and prior interviews.
Another challenge we encountered during co-design was that of gathering partici-
pants for the interviews. Since a co-design session takes time, and requires significant
engagement from stakeholders, it can be harder to gather willing participants com-
pared to an online survey, or a shorter interview where feedback is gathered on a more
concrete design. We mitigated this by putting in effort to recruit participants from as
many places as possible — websites such as the student website DTU Inside, a popular
gaming forum ResetEra, Reddit, messaging people on Twitter, messaging streamers
on Facebook Gaming, sending e-mails to game development studios, handing out fly-
ers at game development studios and pulling on various connections to get in touch
with players, GCs and BDs. This persistence of gathering participants throughout
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Reflections on Our Process
85
the project led to the amount of participants we had throughout the project, despite
the time commitment mentioned above. Throughout the project, we strove to create
high-quality material and engaging topics for the participants to interact with in the
form of our Miro boards and Interview Guides, in an effort to make participants feel
valued for the time commitment to the project and sharing of their experiences. In
engaging actively with the participants every step of the way, we strove to ensure
participants felt listened to and that their participation, experiences and opintions
were key to the furtherment of our project. For the Phase 5 workshop, however, only
two of the nine participants who had signed up for the workshop ended up appear-
ing.5 However, we adapted the workshop then to best utilize the participants who
did show up, and engage them more actively than we would have done otherwise if
more participants had shown up.
Co-design works best when participants can interact directly, drawing creatively
on their differences and experiences. This is harder to do online, however, where
participants cannot see each other and have to interact through a computer screen.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, however, this was the only way we could realise the
sessions, as we did not want to risk the safety of participants. As such, all interview
sessions and workshops were held online. The online nature of the interviews and
workshops did allow us to gather participants from all around the world, however,
with a significant number of participants located internationally. Furthermore, since
we held the interviews and workshops more than half a year into the COVID-19
pandemic, many participants appeared familiar with the process of video calls, making
these interactions more simple to arrange and enabling the involvement of many kinds
of stakeholders.
5.2.3
Facilitating Conversations between Stakeholders
An important part of our design process then lay in facilitating conversations between
diverse stakeholders, and creating a space where stakeholders could make their voices
heard. This desire to bring together diverse stakeholders also shaped, and became part
of our solutions. A key aspect of the Healthy Game Design course, for example, lies in
giving the GCs the tools to participate in monetization design conversations with BDs.
The goal of such conversations is not to overrule the BDs or give GCs the capacity to
keep BDs out of the game design conversation, but rather to have them cooperate and
develop new, healthier methods of monetization. We consider continued conversation
and collaboration between GCs and BDs key to creating healthy, highly-engaging yet
profitable games in the future.
In many ways, the Emotion Assessment Toolkit can also be viewed as an indi-
rect conversation between GCs and players. Since the GCs ask questions at various
points during the game for players to answer, this may be taught of as a series of
5We later learned that this was due to an unfortunate combinations of missed alarms, parental
leaves and mistaken dates.
==PAGE:98==
86
5 DISCUSSION
interview questions, allowing the GCs to gain a better understanding of players and
their reactions to the game – developing also empathy for their experiences.
5.3
Implementing Our Solutions
We were keen in developing these solutions to consider also how they might realisti-
cally be adopted and implemented in practice.
5.3.0.1
Creating a demand for a wellbeing rating system
While pushing a new rating system onto both Google Play, the App Store and myr-
iad other game platforms might appear challenging, such a system does already exist.
While the exact system varies from country to country, most nations have a system
in place for rating the content within video games, whether it be on consoles, PC
or even smartphones. One approach to including a ’wellbeing rating’ onto the video
game market then could be to approach these rating boards and have them incorpo-
rate wellbeing ratings into their considerations when rating the content of a game.
Unfortunately, Denmark lacks its own content rating system, meaning the obvious
first step would be to look to a European scale and approach in PEGI. PEGI is
already prominently displayed on game stores, as an example from the Google Play
store shown in Figure 5.2 illustrates.
Figure 5.2: Ratings of games on the app store, showing how they are portrayed.
It is worth noting, that the ”Editors Choice” marking pushes the age
rating further to the side.
While the current PEGI system is effective at delivering information at a glance,
the small icon fails to convey what the rating entails. This information is accessible,
yet the user needs to press the PEGI icon in order to view the content warnings for
the game. The detailed view for the game Genshin Impact can be seen in Figure 5.3,
for example.
This information is quite limited however, with the only content warning related to
potential dark patterns at present consisting of “Players interact, In-game purchases.
These do nothing to warn potential players as to what those mechanics entail, if
the rewards are random or whether the game entices players to interact with social
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Implementing Our Solutions
87
Figure 5.3: Rating details for the game Genshin Impact on Google Play.
features even should they not want to. The In-Game Purchases label was added in
2018 6. While there was no given reason as to why this label was added when it was,
it did come after the Star Wars Battlefront 2 scandal in November of 2017. 7 This
scandal was grounded in how Star Wars Battlefront 2 allowed users to play as various
iconic Star Wars characters such as Luke Skywalker or Darth Vader, but players had
to unlock them first. This could be done either through paying money for loot boxes,
or by playing the game. The problem was that it took a significant amount time
to unlock anything in the game through gameplay. If the user played for 8 hours a
day, it would take 1 year and 7 months to unlock everything in the game, according
to Twitter user SidAlpha 8. This was at the height of popularity for the Star Wars
sequels, and with Star Wars representing a franchise that also appealled to children,
this gathered mainstream attention from news sites covering the events. 9. Since then,
the discourse around loot boxes has changed dramatically, with politicians getting
involved in the regulation of loot boxes in games, and Belgium declaring them ”in
violation of gambling legislation” 10. Since then, Belgium has also pushed for further
international regulation 11. All of this has been key to creating awareness among the
general population about the systems that video games can employ on their players,
and placed a renewed focus on the wellbeing of players. If a ’wellbeing stamp’ was to
be employed through Google Play and the App Store, one possible means of enticing
content ratings boards to include this in their ratings would be to tap into this
increased awareness around loot boxes, and create further awareness of dark patterns
within games, including their potential to target younger and otherwise vulnerable
players. Highlighting younger players would help drive parents to engage with this
discourse, and telling the stories of players who were affected by dark patterns in
a negative way could help spread awareness about dark patterns and build caution
around games that contain them. This runs the risk of painting video games and
6https://pegi.info/news/new-in-game-purchases-descriptor
7https://www.businessinsider.com/star-wars-battlefront-2-mess-explained-2017-11
8https://www.overleaf.com/project/605893d7bad63b9688ac3a79
9https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-41997252
10https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-43906306
11https://www.pcgamer.com/belgium-says-loot-boxes-are-gambling-wants-them-banned-
in-europe/
==PAGE:100==
88
5 DISCUSSION
especially mobile games as ”evil” and ”manipulative” however, and the campaign
would need to be carefully constructed to highlight games that are healthy also.
Through a combined effort of creating awareness of dark patterns within games,
and highlighting popular games that avoid these dark patterns, this would hopefully
create a demand for information about such patterns, and about which of the patterns
a game contains. This demand would then drive the content ratings board to either
include it in their current rating, or create a subsidiary that would be responsible for
a separate rating to handle the impact on wellbeing of games.
This could be unsuccessful for a number of reasons, however. Such a campaign
could fail if the public simply does not show interest in such a cause, as many aware-
ness campaigns do.
Another way it could prove unsuccessful might stem from a
lack of funds to set up such a system.
Were the system to be implemented into
the International Age Rating Coalition (IARC), a coalition of content rating systems
such as PEGI, it would require further funding from the governing agencies that fund
the IARC. After establishing the system, however, maintenance costs would not be
much more than for the current IARC system, as it would simply add on to the sur-
vey system currently used when publishing mobile games to the mobile storefronts
through the IARC. As a standalone system, however, gathering funding could prove
diﬀicult, as it would require significantly larger funding to set up the systems and
hire moderation staff to handle complaints.
5.3.0.2
Establishing a Healthy Game Design course
While there exist many courses that teach you the skills to create and design games,
both online and at universities, there are few that teach healthy game design in
Denmark.
Game design courses at the DTU teach their students how to create
video games on a technical level, but not to design them in any form. IT University
of Copenhagen (ITU) has a Master’s program dedicated to game development and
game design, which contains a single course that teaches about dark patterns and the
psychological effects of video games, however this is a specialization course for game
designers, and does not ask students to think of healthy design alternatives to dark
patterns, or how to approach these situations in a business-context, according to the
course description.
12. Even Danish Academy of Digital Interactive Entertainment
(DADIU), a program which takes in 100 students from different universities to an
intensive game design course lasting a full semester, makes no mention of healthy
game design as part of their curriculum 13.
One more promising candidate for incorporating a Healthy Game Design curricu-
lum as described in Figure 4.16 then would be DADIU.
Their program partially
revolves around a lecture and design challenge format, making this a perfect candi-
date for a Healthy Game Design problem solving exercise. This could be a lecture
12https://learnit.itu.dk/local/coursebase/view.php?s=ft&view=public&ciid=637
13http://www.dadiu.dk/semester
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Implementing Our Solutions
89
and problem posed during a singular day, or span across multiple days depending on
how much DADIU would want to prioritize teaching the students about wellbeing.
Another candidate would be a course through ITU, as this appears to be the only
university with a program dedicated to game design and not just game development.
This course could then more closely follow the structure outlined in Figure 4.17 in
order to thoroughly teach students about healthy game design principles and how to
incorporate them in real-life situations.
With Denmark often lauded for being at the forefront of the wellbeing discourse,
from the wellbeing of its citizens to the wellbeing of the animals bred and raised in
the country, the country is a good candidate to stand at the forefront of healthy game
design by taking the wellbeing of players into account.
This could prove unsuccessful, however, if universities or DADIU are simply un-
willing to implement such a course into their curriculum, or unwilling to explore the
subject in more detail than they already do. This could be mitigated by transition-
ing the course to a privatized basis, but that is highly exclusionary of participants,
going against the broad intentions of the concept. Another workaround could be to
implement the course as an online course, which would then lose the collaborative
aspect and the production of conflict simulation, as hiring personnel to grade the
submissions would require funding once more, limiting the reach of the course.
5.3.0.3
Developing a tool to measure Wellbeing during Game Development
As we mentioned in Figure 4.14, the Emotion Assessment Toolkit would likely need
to be integrated into the GCs for greatest effect. In 2020, 71% of the top 1000 mobile
games on the App Store and Google Play were made with the Unity game engine.
14 As Unity is currently the market leader within the game development space, it
makes it the ideal candidate for incorporating a testing framework that quantifies
the impact of game design on user wellbeing.
Unity also supports add-ons that
users can purchase in order to extend the functionality of the engine15. A possible
implementation could then be to develop an add-on for the Unity game engine. Once
the implementation is successful, it would then be possible to approach the developers
of the Unity game engine about a partnership, incorporating the tool into the base
functionality of the Unity game engine. This could happen as part of the campaign
described in subsubsection 5.3.0.1, since the developers of the Unity game engine are
situated in Denmark as well. Incorporating our Emotion Assessment Toolkit into
the base functionality of the Unity game engine would help the engine brand itself
as the first game engine that supports the wellbeing of the players directly, allowing
the developers direct knowledge of how their games affect their players. Unity is also
used for developing PC and console games, where this functionality would be directly
applicable as well.
14https://investors.unity.com/news/news-details/2021/Unity-Announces-Fourth-Quarter-
and-Full-Year-2020-Financial-Results/default.aspx
15https://assetstore.unity.com/add-ons
==PAGE:102==
90
5 DISCUSSION
While designing this solution, we considered prior literature including previous
findings from Frommel et al. [FPM21]. They proposed having an in-universe char-
acter pose the survey questions to the player, in order for the survey to prove more
immersive. As we want to break the immersion of the players as little as possible,
having a character in-game ask the survey questions seems beneficial. However, since
our tool is generalised, and needs to work for many different games, the avatar would
need to be altered to the theme of the game so as to not break immersion. This
would create further work for the developers, making them less likely to use our tool.
Another concern arose when Frommel et al. “deliberately decided against a visual
avatar because of previous research indicating changes in behaviour based on its visual
appearance”[FPM21, p 4], as many games that would be supported by this tool use
a player character. An avatar for the surveys would then need to address the player
directly, thus breaking the immersion. As such, we decided against any sort of avatar
for the tool, as we want to minimize the setup for the tool as much as possible, and
keep the quality of answers to the surveys high.
One way to measure emotions without interfering with the player’s experience of
immersion could be to use a facial analysis system as Selvig et al. described[SS20].
Integrating their facial recognition system would help report players’ emotional states
continuously throughout the play session, without the need for surveys. However,
such a tool requires a continuous video feed and a clear view of the participant’s face.
As this tool could be used in various settings, everything from dedicated testers to
regular players beta testing the game, such a consistency in testing environment is
not feasible. Deploying such a tool onto the phones of users who are not dedicated
testers also raises privacy concerns, much as in [Pie19], as participants might not be
aware that they are being recorded, even if clearly stated. This could also interfere
with the gameplay experience, as the facial recognition system would take computing
power away from the game, thus allowing less of the phone’s resources to go towards
running the game. For many hyper-casual games this would not present an issue,
however for more complex games this could bar some participants from playing the
game entirely, until the tool was removed from the game. As such, we decided to go
with the Survey structure.
Implementing this tool into the base functionality of Unity could prove unsuc-
cessful if Unity are unwilling to co-operate, although implementing the tool itself as
a Unity plugin should be feasible, as Unity plugins function entirely on the .NET
framework 16. Thus, the limitations of the plugin are only in regard to how well it
can integrate into the rest of the system, and if it can integrate directly with the
event-centric system that Unity uses for game development.
16https://docs.unity3d.com/560/Documentation/Manual/Plugins.html
==PAGE:103==
5.4 Reflections on the Ethics of Design and Play
91
5.4
Reflections on the Ethics of Design and Play
According to one GC interviewed, opinions about dark patterns are informed by each
individual’s political, ethical and philosophical views and experiences, including even
one’s “conviction about the [independent or manipulatable] nature of the human soul,
it leads to this, you know, approach to monetization. I do, I do believe that truly.”
(P9)
GCs and BDs who expressed viewing each player as “an individual responsible for
your own actions” (P9) saw few problems with the current state of highly-engaging
mobile games, and no need to strive to make highly-engaging mobile games more
ethical or healthy, as they believe these systems to already be the case.
Those GCs and BDs on the other hand who believed players to “need protection
from exploit” discussed striving to find alternatives to dark and manipulative design
patterns. These are the GCs and BDs who would find greatest inspiration in and
would be most inclined to use the tools proposed during the work of this thesis. Most
people, of course, lie somewhere between these two extremes. This was especially
apparent in regard to the players interviewed, several of whom chose to engage in
Gacha games themselves, yet advised others to steer clear.
In this thesis, we have focused on a nuanced perception of human beings as both
capable of independent thought and action, and susceptible to manipulation of diverse
forms, meriting ethical design practices including protection from exploit, through the
use of transparent practices and education in regard to dark patterns in games.
5.4.1
Potential Negative Implications of Our Solutions
While our solutions are meant to drive healthy engagements as much as possible, we
therefore can not ignore the ways in which our solutions could be used for negative
purposes – to enhance dark patterns or ease their implementation.
5.4.1.1
Dark Pattern Badges
Due to the massive amount of mobile games hitting the storefronts every day, it is im-
possible for content rating systems such as PEGI to rate every game manually. Thus,
PEGI and many other content rating boards formed the IARC, which automates this
process via a self-report process as can be seen in Figure 5.4. Since this system is
already used within the mobile game industry, participants in subsubsection 4.4.2.2
noted that the wellbeing rating system could work in the same way, through a survey
posed to the GC. The limitation of this system is, however, that the GCs themselves
report the dark patterns. An unaware or malicious GC could then simply not report
dark patterns contained within their game, illegitimately obtaining a ’Healthy Game’
stamp. One way to mitigate this, however, would be to add a report function to the
system, allowing users to identify games that they feel have been wrongfully classified.
This solution is vulnerable to false reporting however, and would need moderation.
==PAGE:104==
92
5 DISCUSSION
Such moderation could, much like for the IARC, comprise staff to handle these re-
ports, or look through bigger releases to ensure that they are correctly classified. Such
staff costs money, however, and would need to be funded by governments in order to
ensure impartiality.
Figure 5.4: The automatic content rating system, created by the IARC.
5.4.1.2
Healthy Game Design Course
The Healthy Game Design Course aims to teach participants about the effects of
dark patterns, and how alternatives can be avoided. A malicious participant could,
however, use the information about dark patterns and their effectiveness to implement
them into their games following completion of the course. Since the course informs
students about dark patterns in their many forms in order to be able to identify them,
a malicious user could use this as inspiration to learn about the many different kinds of
dark patterns in existence and possibly even combine them into newer, more effective
forms. This cannot be fully avoided, as informing participants about dark patterns
can always inspire malicious users, but through emphasizing their negative effects and
teaching participants how to implement healthy alternatives to support wellbeing, our
==PAGE:105==
5.4 Reflections on the Ethics of Design and Play
93
aim is to inspire course participants to aim for healthier alternatives and to avoid dark
patterns. Another way we might avoid inspiring malicious participants would be to
avoid teaching the implementation of dark patterns, and instead informing students
of their existence and key characteristics.
5.4.1.3
Emotion Assessment Toolkit
Much like for the Healthy Game Design Course, the Emotion Assessment Toolkit
seeks to inform the user of potential dark patterns within their games through the
use of surveys. While the intended use is to mitigate negative impacts on wellbeing
after being informed of them through the surveys, a malicious user could use the
surveys to identify areas where they want the user to feel frustrated or powerless, in
order to drive monetization, or otherwise further engagement to an unhealthy degree.
This use of the tool is counteracted by highlighting the emotions that correlate to
healthy interactions, as described in Figure 3.7. Since the tool needs to be flexible
in order to best suit the needs of developers, however, it cannot be avoided that a
malicious user would use the tool for this purpose, despite our best efforts.
5.4.2
Who’s Responsible?
While interviewing participants, a question we revisited for each of the different stake-
holders was the notion of responsibility. For many GCs, this was a point of debate
they raised themselves, stating that ’dark patterns exist because they work’. Multiple
GCs independently noted that they wanted to create healthy games, but that this
simply was not possible within the current state of the game economy, since they also
needed to make money. The GCs then stated that the only way games would be-
come healthy would be if players simply stopped playing unhealthy games, or if laws
were made against the inclusion of dark patterns. Players, when asked about this
notion of responsibility, had various responses however. Some placed the responsibil-
ity on the GCs, while others placed the responsibility for healthy engagement with
mobile games on the players themselves. This diffusion of responsibility relates to
the bystander effect, described by Blagg; “as the number of bystanders increases, the
personal responsibility that an individual bystander feels decreases” [Bla16]. As each
of the stakeholder groups simply viewed themselves as bystanders to the situation,
unable to influence the current state of mobile games, none felt the responsibility to
change the status quo. Some GCs did feel this responsibility, although they were in
the vast minority among our stakeholders.
Raising consciousness of each stakeholders’ responsibility is key to increase oppor-
tunities for healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences in the future. And this
is, in many ways, the impact we hope our work can inspire.
==PAGE:106==
94
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSION
This design research project has adopted a broad conceptual lens comprising nuanced
interpretation of engagement, subjective wellbeing, diverse motivations for interaction,
and an ethics of design situated in players’ and game creators’ lived experiences; with
the ultimate aim of creating healthy, highly-engaging mobile game experiences.
We found that mobile games fit well into players’ everyday lives and are used
for a variety of reasons; emotional regulation, as a time filler, and to escape reality.
However, the disposability of games and predatory monetization strategies shape
public opinion negatively, resulting in most players avoiding the inferiority stigma of
identifying as ’gamers’.
Business Developers (BDs) and Game Creators (GCs) agree that core gameplay
is at the center of creating highly-engaging experiences and both rely on data-driven
approaches to design highly-engaging experiences, which can distance or disconnect
considerations of the healthiness of the player experience. BDs strive to integrate
monetization seamlessly into mobile game experiences to give them meaning and not
just prove an annoying layer on top of the core gameplay.
GCs strive to create
highly-engaging mobile game experiences but lack knowledge of how to make them
healthier while remaining profitable. An inherently adversarial relationship exists be-
tween game professionals striving for profit and players desiring to avoid manipulative
monetization.
GCs emphasize the importance of critical consideration of design choices during
game creation to avoid dark patterns, and in particular transparency in regard to
monetization strategies. Participants unanimously agree that gambling mechanics
and loot boxes along with impersonation are the darkest patterns in mobile game
experiences – among a selection of sixteen patterns – while Reciprocity is the brightest
pattern. Furthermore, we find that the combination of dark patterns amplifies their
manipulative effect more so than the effect of each pattern in isolation.
The need for transparency about dark patterns guided the design of the Healthy
Game Stamp as a way of creating awareness and informing players about dark pat-
terns. From the perspective of GCs and BDs the stamp can encourage creating more
healthy mobile game experiences. Likewise, the Healthy Game Design course pro-
vides GCs with knowledge about dark patterns, healthy alternatives and facilitates
conversation between GCs and BDs.
Based on GCs’ identified challenges in creating healthy and highly-engaging expe-
riences, the Emotion Assessment Toolkit helps GCs and BDs make informed decisions
==PAGE:108==
96
6 CONCLUSION
during game creation, through Ecological Momentary Assessments of players’ mental
state.
The combination of three concepts into a Design Manifesto provides a holistic solu-
tion that benefits all stakeholders – increasing transparency, supporting development,
and facilitating conversation – to create opportunities for healthy, highly-engaging
mobile game experiences.
==PAGE:109==
References
[AGA21]
Lucy A. Sparrow, Martin Gibbs, and Michael Arnold. “The Ethics of
Multiplayer Game Design and Community Management: Industry Per-
spectives and Challenges.” In: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2021, pages 1–13.
[All+10]
Hamid Allahverdipour et al. “Correlates of video games playing among
adolescents in an Islamic country.” In: BMC public health 10.1 (2010),
pages 1–7.
[BC06]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychol-
ogy.” In: Qualitative research in psychology 3.2 (2006), pages 77–101.
[BC19]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Reflecting on reflexive thematic
analysis.” In: Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 11.4
(2019), pages 589–597.
[Bla16]
Robert D. Blagg. Diffusion of responsibility. 2016. url: https://www.
britannica.com/topic/bystander-effect/Diffusion-of-responsibility.
[Che07]
Jenova Chen. “Flow in games (and everything else).” In: Communications
of the ACM 50.4 (2007), pages 31–34.
[Col07]
John Colwell. “Needs met through computer game play among adoles-
cents.” In: Personality and Individual Differences 43.8 (2007), pages 2072–
2082.
[Cov06]
Rob Cover. “Gaming (ad) diction: Discourse, identity, time and play in
the production of the gamer addiction myth.” In: Game Studies 6.1 (2006).
[Cow+08]
Ben Cowley et al. “Toward an understanding of flow in video games.” In:
Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 6.2 (2008), pages 1–27.
[DD18]
Kevin Doherty and Gavin Doherty. “Engagement in HCI: conception,
theory and measurement.” In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51.5
(2018), pages 1–39.
[Den+21]
Alena Denisova et al. ““Whatever the Emotional Experience, It’s Up
to Them”: Insights from Designers of Emotionally Impactful Games.” In:
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2021, pages 1–9.
==PAGE:110==
98
References
[Di +20]
Linda Di Geronimo et al. “UI dark patterns and where to find them: a
study on mobile applications and user perception.” In: Proceedings of the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2020,
pages 1–14.
[DR85]
Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. “Cognitive evaluation theory.” In:
Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. Springer,
1985, pages 43–85.
[EI18]
Daniel Epstein and Miho Inada. Meet the Man Who’s Spent $70,000
Playing a Mobile Game. March 2018. url: https://www.wsj.com/
articles/meet-the-man-whos-spent-70-000-playing-a-mobile-
game-1521107255.
[FG09]
Alessandro Febretti and Franca Garzotto. “Usability, playability, and
long-term engagement in computer games.” In: CHI’09 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2009, pages 4063–4068.
[FPM21]
Julian Frommel, Cody Phillips, and Regan L Mandryk. “Gathering Self-
Report Data in Games Through NPC Dialogues: Effects on Data Quality,
Data Quantity, Player Experience, and Information Intimacy.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2021, pages 1–12.
[FR19]
Dan Fitton and Janet C Read. “Creating a framework to support the
critical consideration of dark design aspects in free-to-play apps.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design
and Children. 2019, pages 407–418.
[Gil00]
Bill Gillham. Research interview. A&C Black, 2000.
[GK15]
Jan Grooten and Rachel Kowert. “Going beyond the game: Development
of gamer identities within societal discourse and virtual spaces.” In: Load-
ing... 9.14 (2015).
[HL15]
Cynthia A Hoffner and Sangmi Lee. “Mobile phone use, emotion regula-
tion, and well-being.” In: Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Network-
ing 18.7 (2015), pages 411–416.
[HN19]
Geoffrey Hookham and Keith Nesbitt. “A systematic review of the defini-
tion and measurement of engagement in serious games.” In: Proceedings of
the Australasian Computer Science Week Multiconference. 2019, pages 1–
10.
[Hup14]
Felicia A Huppert. “The state of wellbeing science: Concepts, measures,
interventions, and policies.” In: Wellbeing: A complete reference guide
(2014), pages 1–49.
[Huy+18]
Sinh Huynh et al. “EngageMon: Multi-modal engagement sensing for mo-
bile games.” In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
and Ubiquitous Technologies 2.1 (2018), pages 1–27.
==PAGE:111==
References
99
[Joh+13]
Daniel Johnson et al. “Videogames and wellbeing: A comprehensive re-
view.” In: (2013).
[JVP21]
Niklas Johannes, Matti Vuorre, and Andrew K Przybylski. “Video game
play is positively correlated with well-being.” In: Royal Society open sci-
ence 8.2 (2021), page 202049.
[Kay+18]
Fares Kayali et al. “Design considerations towards long-term engagement
in games for health.” In: Proceedings of the 13th international conference
on the foundations of digital games. 2018, pages 1–8.
[Kim+20]
Yoojung Kim et al. “” It Should Be a Game for Fun, Not Exercise”: Ten-
sions in Designing Health-Related Features for Pokémon GO.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2020, pages 1–13.
[Kow14]
Rachel Kowert. Video games and social competence. Routledge, 2014.
[Laz09]
Nicole Lazzaro. “Why we play: affect and the fun of games.” In: Human-
computer interaction: Designing for diverse users and domains 155 (2009),
pages 679–700.
[Luk+21]
Kai Lukoff et al. “What Can CHI Do About Dark Patterns?” In: Extended
Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2021, pages 1–6.
[Mar15]
Andrzej Marczewski. Balancing rewards against effort in Gamification.
2015. url: https : / / www . gamified . uk / 2015 / 08 / 04 / balancing -
rewards-against-effort-in-gamification/.
[MKM21]
Arunesh Mathur, Mihir Kshirsagar, and Jonathan Mayer. “What makes
a dark pattern... dark? design attributes, normative considerations, and
measurement methods.” In: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2021, pages 1–18.
[OT08]
Heather L O’Brien and Elaine G Toms. “What is user engagement? A
conceptual framework for defining user engagement with technology.” In:
Journal of the American society for Information Science and Technology
59.6 (2008), pages 938–955.
[PCR18]
Dorian Peters, Rafael A Calvo, and Richard M Ryan. “Designing for
motivation, engagement and wellbeing in digital experience.” In: Frontiers
in psychology 9 (2018), page 797.
[Per+18]
Ryan Perry et al. “Online-only friends, real-life friends or strangers? Dif-
ferential associations with passion and social capital in video game play.”
In: Computers in Human Behavior 79 (2018), pages 202–210.
[Pie19]
James Pierce. “Smart home security cameras and shifting lines of creepi-
ness: A design-led inquiry.” In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2019, pages 1–14.
==PAGE:112==
100
References
[Pie20]
Stanley Pierre-Louis. July 2020. url: https://www.theesa.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/Final- Edited- 2020- ESA_Essential_
facts.pdf.
[RRP06]
Richard M Ryan, C Scott Rigby, and Andrew Przybylski. “The moti-
vational pull of video games: A self-determination theory approach.” In:
Motivation and emotion 30.4 (2006), pages 344–360.
[Sch12]
Natasha Dow Schüll. Addiction by design. Princeton University Press,
2012.
[Spi+19]
Katta Spiel et al. “” It Started as a Joke” On the Design of Idle Games.” In:
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play. 2019, pages 495–508.
[SS20]
Dines Rae Selvig and Henrik Schoenau-Fog. “Non-intrusive Measurement
of Player Engagement and Emotions-Real-Time Deep Neural Network
Analysis of Facial Expressions During Game Play.” In: International Con-
ference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer. 2020, pages 330–349.
[SW05]
Penelope Sweetser and Peta Wyeth. “GameFlow: a model for evaluating
player enjoyment in games.” In: Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 3.3
(2005), pages 3–3.
[Vil+18]
Daniela Villani et al. “Videogames for emotion regulation: a systematic
review.” In: Games for health journal 7.2 (2018), pages 85–99.
[VJH13]
Kellie Vella, Daniel Johnson, and Leanne Hides. “Positively playful: when
videogames lead to player wellbeing.” In: Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Gameful Design, Research, and Applications. 2013,
pages 99–102.
[Yam20]
Shinichi Yamaguchi. “The Relationship Between Time Spent Playing Mo-
bile Games and Wellbeing.” In: Available at SSRN 3568469 (2020).
[YL17]
Chia-chen Yang and Dong Liu. “Motives matter: motives for playing Poké-
mon Go and implications for well-being.” In: Cyberpsychology, Behavior,
and Social Networking 20.1 (2017), pages 52–57.
[ZBL13]
Jose P Zagal, Staffan Bjork, and Chris Lewis. “Dark patterns in the design
of games.” In: (2013).
==PAGE:113==
Contributions
Task
Jacob
Miria
Initial research
Yes
Yes
Phase 1 interviews
Yes
Yes
Phase 1 transcription
Yes
Yes
Phase 1 coding
Yes
Yes
Phase 2 designs
Yes
Yes
Phase 3 workshop
Yes
Yes
Phase 3 designs
Yes
Yes
Phase 4 prototyping
Yes
Yes
Phase 5 workshop
Yes
Yes
Phase 5 design
Yes
Yes
Phase 6 design
Yes
Yes
Report: Intro
Yes
Report: Related Works
Yes
Report: Method
Yes
Report: Findings
Yes
Report: Discussion
Yes
Report: Conclusion
Yes
Yes
Report: Corrections
Yes
Yes
Table 1: Contributions of each author in this thesis.
==PAGE:114==
102
==PAGE:115==
Participant
Information Sheets
==PAGE:116==
Participant‌ ‌Information‌ ‌Sheet‌ ‌|‌ ‌Players‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Research‌ ‌Project‌ ‌Title‌ ‌ 
Designing‌ ‌Healthy,‌ ‌Highly-Engaging‌ ‌Mobile‌ ‌Game‌ ‌Experiences‌ ‌
 
‌
 
The‌ ‌purpose‌ ‌of‌ ‌the‌ ‌project‌ ‌ 
Thank‌ ‌you‌ ‌for‌ ‌taking‌ ‌the‌ ‌time‌ ‌to‌ ‌participate‌ ‌in‌ ‌this‌ ‌research‌ ‌project.‌ ‌
 
‌
 
The‌ ‌purpose‌ ‌of‌ ‌this‌ ‌design‌ ‌research‌ ‌project‌ ‌is‌ ‌to‌ ‌understand‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌of‌‌ 
highly-engaged‌ ‌gaming‌ ‌in‌ ‌order‌ ‌to‌ ‌guide‌ ‌future‌ ‌research‌ ‌and‌ ‌design‌ ‌efforts.‌ ‌We‌ ‌focus‌‌ 
on‌ ‌the‌ ‌relationship‌ ‌between‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games‌ ‌and‌ ‌wellbeing;‌ ‌and‌ ‌particularly,‌ ‌how‌‌ 
interaction‌ ‌with‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games‌ ‌is‌ ‌perceived‌ ‌by‌ ‌relevant‌ ‌stakeholders‌ ‌-‌ ‌including‌ ‌mobile‌‌ 
game‌ ‌players‌ ‌and‌ ‌their‌ ‌families,‌ ‌designers,‌ ‌developers,‌ ‌gaming‌ ‌counsellors‌ ‌and‌‌ 
authorities.‌ ‌We‌ ‌will‌ ‌accomplish‌ ‌this‌ ‌by‌ ‌conducting‌ ‌semi-structured‌ ‌interviews‌ ‌with‌ ‌the‌‌ 
aforementioned‌ ‌stakeholders.‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Your‌ ‌participation‌ ‌will‌ ‌consist‌ ‌of‌ ‌a‌ ‌1-hour‌ ‌interview‌ ‌regarding‌ ‌your‌ ‌reflections‌ ‌on‌ ‌your‌‌ 
experience‌ ‌with‌ ‌highly-engaging‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games.‌ ‌You‌ ‌will‌ ‌also‌ ‌be‌ ‌asked‌ ‌to‌ ‌complete‌ ‌a‌‌ 
brief‌ ‌questionnaire‌ ‌containing‌ ‌questions‌ ‌regarding‌ ‌your‌ ‌demographic‌ ‌characteristics,‌‌ 
such‌ ‌as‌ ‌age,‌ ‌gender‌ ‌and‌ ‌gaming‌ ‌habits.‌ ‌
 
‌
 
We‌ ‌will‌ ‌record‌ ‌audio‌ ‌during‌ ‌the‌ ‌interview.‌ ‌These‌ ‌recordings‌ ‌will‌ ‌be‌ ‌transcribed,‌‌ 
anonymised,‌ ‌and‌ ‌deleted‌ ‌following‌ ‌transcription.‌ ‌All‌ ‌recorded‌ ‌data‌ ‌will‌ ‌be‌ ‌stored‌‌ 
securely‌ ‌in‌ ‌accordance‌ ‌with‌ ‌General‌ ‌Data‌ ‌Protection‌ ‌Regulations‌ ‌and‌ ‌other‌‌ 
requirements.‌ ‌Data‌ ‌will‌ ‌not‌ ‌be‌ ‌shared‌ ‌with‌ ‌others.‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Your‌ ‌participation‌ ‌is‌ ‌voluntary.‌ ‌This‌ ‌means‌ ‌that‌ ‌you‌ ‌can‌ ‌withdraw‌ ‌your‌ ‌consent‌ ‌at‌ ‌any‌‌ 
point‌ ‌in‌ ‌time‌ ‌without‌ ‌consequences‌ ‌for‌ ‌yourself,‌ ‌and‌ ‌without‌ ‌having‌ ‌to‌ ‌give‌ ‌a‌ ‌reason,‌‌ 
by‌ ‌contacting‌ ‌Jacob‌ ‌Aagaard‌ ‌at‌ ‌s190562@student.dtu.dk‌.‌ ‌
 
‌
 
We,‌ ‌Miria‌ ‌and‌ ‌Jacob,‌ ‌are‌ ‌conducting‌ ‌this‌ ‌project‌ ‌as‌ ‌part‌ ‌of‌ ‌our‌ ‌master’s‌ ‌thesis‌ ‌at‌ ‌the‌‌ 
Technical‌ ‌University‌ ‌of‌ ‌Denmark‌ ‌(DTU)‌ ‌and‌ ‌in‌ ‌collaboration‌ ‌with‌ ‌Copenhagen‌ ‌Center‌‌ 
for‌ ‌Health‌ ‌Technology‌ ‌(CACHET)‌ ‌from‌ ‌late‌ ‌January‌ ‌to‌ ‌the‌ ‌beginning‌ ‌of‌ ‌July‌ ‌2021.‌ ‌If‌‌ 
you‌ ‌have‌ ‌any‌ ‌questions‌ ‌about‌ ‌the‌ ‌project,‌ ‌the‌ ‌methods‌ ‌or‌ ‌your‌ ‌safety‌ ‌and‌ ‌rights,‌ ‌do‌‌ 
not‌ ‌hesitate‌ ‌to‌ ‌contact‌ ‌us.‌ ‌
 
Page‌ ‌1‌ ‌of‌ ‌1‌ ‌
 
==PAGE:117==
Participant Information Sheet​ ​| Developers / Designers 
 
Research Project Title 
Designing Healthy, Highly-Engaging Mobile Game Experiences 
 
The purpose of the project 
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this research project. 
 
The purpose of this design research project is to understand patterns of 
highly-engaged gaming in order to guide future research and design efforts.​ ​We focus 
on the relationship between mobile games and wellbeing; and particularly, how 
interaction with mobile games is perceived by relevant stakeholders - including mobile 
game players and their families, designers, developers, gaming counsellors and 
authorities. We will accomplish this by conducting semi-structured interviews with the 
aforementioned stakeholders. 
 
Your participation will consist of a 1-hour interview regarding your reflections on 
designing highly-engaging mobile games. You will also be asked to complete a brief 
questionnaire containing questions regarding your demographic characteristics, such 
as age and gender. 
 
We will record audio during the interview. These recordings will be transcribed, 
anonymised, and deleted following transcription. All recorded data will be stored 
securely in accordance with General Data Protection Regulations and other 
requirements. Data will not be shared with others. 
 
Your participation is voluntary. This means that you can withdraw your consent at any 
point in time without consequences for yourself, and without having to give a reason, 
by contacting Jacob Aagaard at ​s190562@student.dtu.dk​. 
 
We, Miria and Jacob, are conducting this project as part of our master’s thesis at the 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and in collaboration with Copenhagen Center 
for Health Technology (CACHET) from late January to the beginning of July 2021. If 
you have any questions about the project, the methods or your safety and rights, do 
not hesitate to contact us. 
Page 1 of 1 
==PAGE:118==
106
==PAGE:119==
Demographic
Questionnaire and
Interview Guides
==PAGE:120==
1.
2.
3.
Mark only one oval.
Male
Female
Other
Prefer not to say
4.
Mark only one oval.
Student (Non-university)
Student (BSc)
Student (MSc)
Part-time employee
Full-time employee (37h per week or more)
Unemployed
Prefer not to say
Demographic questionnaire
Before the interview, we would like to ask you some demographic questions. The answers 
are completely anonymous.
* Required
Participant ID *
Enter the number provided by the interviewers
Age *
Gender *
Main occupation *
==PAGE:121==
5.
Mark only one oval.
Europe
North America
South America
Oceania (Australia, New Zealand, etc)
Asia
Africa
Perfer not to say
6.
Mark only one oval.
Gamer
Skip to question 9
Developer / Designer
Skip to question 7
Developer / Designer
A few questions specifically about your professional role
7.
Mark only one oval.
Under 1 year
1-2 years
2-5 years
5-10 years
10-15 years
Over 15 years
Where are you located? *
You are participating in this project as a *
How long have you been a Game Developer / Designer?
==PAGE:122==
8.
Mark only one oval.
Under 1 year
1-2 years
2-5 years
5-10 years
10-15 years
Over 15 years
Skip to question 9
Gamer
A few questions specifically about your gameplay experiences 
9.
Mark only one oval.
Other:
Puzzle (Sudoku etc.)
Match Three (Candy Crush, Bejeweled etc.)
Social (Words with Friends etc)
Clicker / Idle (Cookie Clicker etc)
Racing
Shooter
Gacha
How long have you been working on Mobile Games?
What is your favourite type of mobile game? *
==PAGE:123==
10.
Mark only one oval.
Never played them
I play them occasionally (1-2 times a week)
I play once a day
I play multiple times daily
11.
Mark only one oval.
1-5 minutes
5-10 minutes
10-30 minutes
30-60 minutes
1-2 hours
3-5 hours
5-7 hours
7-10 hours
10+ hours
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google.
What is your experience playing mobile games? *
How much time do you play per day usually?
 Forms
==PAGE:124==
Interview‌ ‌Guide‌ ‌|‌ ‌Players‌ ‌
 
Demographic‌ ‌questionnaire:‌ ‌https://forms.gle/NMrmBukYHNJY1fj77‌‌ ‌
  
Opening‌ ‌questions‌ ‌
 
Can‌ ‌you‌ ‌tell‌ ‌us‌ ‌a‌ ‌little‌ ‌about‌ ‌yourself?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌ ‌your‌ ‌experience‌ ‌with‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games?‌ ‌What‌‌ 
kind‌ ‌of‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌play?‌ ‌For‌ ‌how‌ ‌long‌ ‌have‌ ‌you‌ ‌been‌ ‌playing‌ ‌them?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌‌ 
consider‌ ‌yourself‌ ‌a‌ ‌person‌ ‌who‌ ‌plays‌ ‌games‌ ‌(gamer)?‌ ‌What‌ ‌other‌ ‌technologies‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌use‌‌ 
in‌ ‌relation‌ ‌to‌ ‌gaming‌ ‌(Discord,‌ ‌reddit)?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
How‌ ‌do‌ ‌games‌ ‌fit‌ ‌into‌ ‌your‌ ‌everyday‌ ‌life?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌play‌ ‌them‌ ‌when‌ ‌you‌ ‌need‌ ‌to‌ ‌fill‌ ‌time?‌‌ 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌make‌ ‌time‌ ‌to‌ ‌play‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Has‌ ‌this‌ ‌changed‌ ‌over‌ ‌time?‌ ‌Are‌ ‌you‌ ‌happy‌ ‌with‌ ‌that‌ ‌fit?‌‌ 
Would‌ ‌you‌ ‌like‌ ‌to‌ ‌change‌ ‌that‌ ‌fit?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Understanding‌ ‌playing‌ ‌habits‌ ‌
 
What‌ ‌motivates‌ ‌you‌ ‌to‌ ‌play‌ ‌games?‌ ‌...‌ ‌To‌ ‌what‌ ‌extent‌ ‌is‌ ‌feeling‌ ‌part‌ ‌of‌ ‌a‌ ‌community‌‌ 
important‌ ‌to‌ ‌you?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌the‌ ‌sense‌ ‌of‌ ‌accomplishment‌ ‌important?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌enjoy‌ ‌your‌ ‌time‌ ‌spent‌ ‌playing‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌ ‌positive‌ ‌about‌ ‌the‌‌ 
experience?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌ ‌negative‌ ‌about‌ ‌the‌ ‌experience?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌there‌ ‌anything‌ ‌that‌ ‌makes‌ ‌you‌‌ 
especially‌ ‌enjoy‌ ‌your‌ ‌time‌ ‌playing?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌there‌ ‌anything‌ ‌you‌ ‌would‌ ‌change‌ ‌to‌ ‌alleviate‌ ‌any‌‌ 
negative‌ ‌emotions?‌ 
‌
 
Does‌ ‌your‌ ‌mood‌ ‌change‌ ‌when‌ ‌playing‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Are‌ ‌you‌ ‌in‌ ‌a‌ ‌good‌ ‌mood‌ ‌when‌‌ 
playing‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Are‌ ‌you‌ ‌in‌ ‌a‌ ‌good‌ ‌mood‌ ‌afterwards?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌spent‌ ‌money‌ ‌on‌ ‌a‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌game?‌ ‌Did‌ ‌you‌ ‌buy‌ ‌it‌ ‌upfront?‌ ‌Did‌ ‌you‌ ‌pay‌ ‌for‌‌ 
sometime‌ ‌ingame?‌ ‌Was‌ ‌it‌ ‌a‌ ‌randomized‌ ‌pack?‌ ‌How‌ ‌often‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌spend‌ ‌money‌ ‌on‌ ‌mobile‌‌ 
games?‌ ‌How‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌about‌ ‌your‌ ‌spending‌ ‌habits?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌enjoy‌ ‌the‌ ‌content‌ ‌you‌ ‌got‌‌ 
from‌ ‌paying?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
What‌ ‌is‌ ‌your‌ ‌opinion‌ ‌on‌ ‌in-app‌ ‌purchases?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌they‌ ‌affect‌ ‌your‌ ‌enjoyment‌ ‌of‌ ‌the‌ ‌game?‌‌ 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌purchased‌ ‌any‌ ‌yourself?‌ ‌How‌ ‌often?‌ ‌How‌ ‌much‌ ‌money‌ ‌have‌ ‌you‌ ‌spent‌ ‌on‌ ‌in-app‌‌ 
purchases?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Highly-engaging‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌game‌ ‌mechanics‌ ‌
 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌noticed‌ ‌any‌ ‌features‌ ‌in‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games‌ ‌that‌ ‌are‌ ‌trying‌ ‌to‌ ‌get‌ ‌you‌ ‌to‌ ‌play‌‌ 
more?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌ ‌your‌ ‌opinion‌ ‌on‌ ‌these?‌ ‌Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌played‌ ‌more‌ ‌because‌ ‌of‌ ‌such‌ ‌features?‌‌ 
Did‌ ‌it‌ ‌feel‌ ‌as‌ ‌rewarding‌ ‌or‌ ‌fulfilling‌ ‌as‌ ‌normal‌ ‌playing?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
[Explain‌ ‌a‌ ‌bit‌ ‌about‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌and‌ ‌their‌ ‌goals]‌ ‌
 
[Popular‌ ‌examples:‌ ‌Daily‌ ‌rewards,‌ ‌Pay-to-Skip,‌ ‌Playing‌ ‌by‌ ‌appointment,‌ ‌Premium‌ ‌Currency]‌ ‌
 
‌
 
==PAGE:125==
How‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌about‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌recognize‌ ‌any‌ ‌of‌ ‌them‌ ‌from‌ ‌your‌‌ 
experience‌ ‌playing‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌they‌ ‌affect‌ ‌your‌ ‌opinion‌ ‌about‌ ‌the‌ ‌games‌ ‌that‌ ‌contain‌‌ 
them?‌ ‌Does‌ ‌this‌ ‌change‌ ‌the‌ ‌kinds‌ ‌of‌ ‌games‌ ‌that‌ ‌you‌ ‌want‌ ‌to‌ ‌play?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌these‌ ‌should‌ ‌be‌ ‌included‌ ‌in‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Are‌ ‌there‌ ‌any‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌‌ 
benefit‌ ‌the‌ ‌experience?‌ ‌Any‌ ‌that‌ ‌detract?‌ ‌Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌stopped‌ ‌playing‌ ‌a‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌game‌ ‌because‌‌ 
of‌ ‌any‌ ‌of‌ ‌these?‌ ‌Will‌ ‌you‌ ‌change‌ ‌the‌ ‌ones‌ ‌you‌ ‌play‌ ‌with‌ ‌this‌ ‌new‌ ‌info?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌a‌ ‌game‌ 
you‌ ‌play‌ ‌would‌ ‌be‌ ‌better‌ ‌if‌ ‌it‌ ‌contained‌ ‌one/some‌ ‌of‌ ‌these?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
[Explain‌ ‌Lootboxes‌ ‌/‌ ‌Gacha‌ ‌games]‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌played‌ ‌a‌ ‌game‌ ‌that‌ ‌contained‌ ‌lootboxes‌ ‌/‌ ‌gacha?‌ ‌What‌ ‌was‌ ‌your‌ ‌experience‌‌ 
like?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌still‌ ‌play?‌ ‌What‌ ‌made‌ ‌you‌ ‌stop‌ ‌/‌ ‌What‌ ‌keeps‌ ‌you‌ ‌going?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌spent‌ ‌money‌ ‌on‌ ‌lootboxes‌ ‌/‌ ‌gacha‌ ‌games?‌ ‌If‌ ‌no,‌ ‌did‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌enticed‌ ‌to‌ ‌do‌ ‌so?‌‌ 
What‌ ‌made‌ ‌you‌ ‌spend‌ ‌money‌ ‌on‌ ‌the‌ ‌game?‌ ‌Did‌ ‌you‌ ‌get‌ ‌what‌ ‌you‌ ‌wanted?‌ ‌Was‌ ‌the‌ ‌reward‌‌ 
worth‌ ‌it?‌ ‌Would‌ ‌you‌ ‌do‌ ‌it‌ ‌again?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
Themes‌ ‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌you‌ ‌have‌ ‌all‌ ‌the‌ ‌information‌ ‌about‌ ‌your‌ ‌purchase‌ ‌when‌ ‌you‌ ‌buy‌‌ 
lootboxes?‌ ‌When‌ ‌you‌ ‌buy‌ ‌other‌ ‌things?‌ ‌What‌ ‌information‌ ‌is‌ ‌good‌ ‌to‌ ‌know?‌ ‌What‌‌ 
information‌ ‌are‌ ‌you‌ ‌missing?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Who‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌feel‌ ‌is‌ ‌responsible‌ ‌for‌ ‌the‌ ‌effects‌ ‌of‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌/‌ ‌lootboxes?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌‌ 
your‌ ‌own‌ ‌responsibility?‌ ‌What‌ ‌are‌ ‌the‌ ‌designer’s‌ ‌/‌ ‌developer’s‌ ‌responsibilities?‌‌ ‌
  
Designing‌ ‌a‌ ‌tool‌ ‌
 
If‌ ‌we‌ ‌were‌ ‌to‌ ‌design‌ ‌a‌ ‌tool‌ ‌to‌ ‌alleviate‌ ‌some‌ ‌of‌ ‌your‌ ‌frustrations,‌ ‌what‌ ‌should‌ ‌it‌‌ 
include?‌ ‌What‌ ‌form‌ ‌should‌ ‌it‌ ‌take‌ ‌(app,website)?‌ ‌Should‌ ‌it‌ ‌be‌ ‌for‌ ‌the‌ ‌users‌ ‌or‌ ‌the‌‌ 
developers?‌ ‌Can‌ ‌you‌ ‌think‌ ‌of‌ ‌a‌ ‌way‌ ‌to‌ ‌make‌ ‌the‌ ‌interactions‌ ‌more‌ ‌‘healthy’?‌ ‌How‌ ‌could‌ ‌it‌‌ 
help‌ ‌with‌ ‌some‌ ‌of‌ ‌your‌ ‌frustrations?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌have‌ ‌any‌ ‌final‌ ‌thoughts?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Thank‌ ‌you‌ ‌for‌ ‌your‌ ‌time!‌ ‌
 
==PAGE:126==
Interview Guide | Developers / Designers
Demographic questionnaire: https://forms.gle/NMrmBukYHNJY1fj77
Opening questions
Can you tell us a little about yourself? What is your experience with developing mobile
games? What kind of mobile games do you make? For how long have you been developing
them?
Understanding developer considerations
Do you develop mobile games with a specific goal in mind? For your own enjoyment for
example? What motivates you to do so? Is there anything that makes you especially enjoy
developing games?
Do you develop mobile games with a specific player type in mind? Which player types
do you consider? How does it affect the way you develop games?
What is your opinion on in-app purchases? Do they affect how you develop games? And
how you think about games? Do you prefer them over other methods of payment?
Highly-engaging mobile game mechanics
Have you noticed any features in mobile games that encourage players to play more?
Which features are these? What is your opinion on these? Did you recognise them in others’
or your own games? Are you developing similar features for your games?
Do you have a strategy or approach to engage players more in your games? Is it
effective? Is it easy or hard to implement? Is it inspired from somewhere else?
[Explain a bit about dark patterns and their goals]
[Popular examples: Daily rewards, Pay-to-Skip, Playing by appointment, Premium Currency]
Are you familiar with “Dark patterns”? Have you used dark patterns while developing?
Explicitly or Implicitly? Have you considered using dark patterns to engage players more?
Have you avoided using dark patterns in games? Is this something you reflect upon?
Which feedback about your games do you normally/regularly get from players? Is it
mostly Positive / Negative? How about your own opinion?
[Explain Lootboxes / Gacha games]
Are you familiar with loot boxes / gacha games? Have you used loot boxes or similar
gacha in your games? What are your considerations about these?
==PAGE:127==
Designing a tool
If we were to design a tool to alleviate some of your frustrations, what should it
include? What form should it take (app,website)? Should it be for the users or the
developers? Can you think of a way to make the interactions more ‘healthy’? How could it
help with some of your frustrations?
Do you have any final thoughts?
Thank you for your time!
==PAGE:128==
Interview‌ ‌Guide‌ ‌|‌ ‌Business‌ ‌Developers‌ ‌
 
Demographic‌ ‌questionnaire:‌ ‌https://forms.gle/NMrmBukYHNJY1fj77‌‌ ‌
  
Opening‌ ‌questions‌ ‌
 
Can‌ ‌you‌ ‌tell‌ ‌us‌ ‌a‌ ‌little‌ ‌about‌ ‌yourself?‌ ‌What‌ ‌is‌ ‌your‌ ‌experience‌ ‌with‌ ‌developing‌ ‌mobile‌‌ 
games?‌ ‌What‌ ‌kind‌ ‌of‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌games‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌make?‌ ‌For‌ ‌how‌ ‌long‌ ‌have‌ ‌you‌ ‌been‌ ‌selling‌‌ 
them?‌ ‌For‌ ‌how‌ ‌long‌ ‌have‌ ‌you‌ ‌been‌ ‌a‌ ‌Business‌ ‌Developer?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Understanding‌ ‌developer‌ ‌considerations‌ 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌develop‌ ‌monetisation‌ ‌strategies‌ ‌with‌ ‌a‌ ‌specific‌ ‌player‌ ‌type‌ ‌in‌ ‌mind?‌ ‌Which‌‌ 
player‌ ‌types‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌consider?‌ ‌How‌ ‌does‌ ‌it‌ ‌affect‌ ‌the‌ ‌way‌ ‌you‌ ‌develop‌ ‌the‌ ‌strategies?‌ ‌Does‌‌ 
this‌ ‌change‌ ‌over‌ ‌time‌ ‌as‌ ‌you‌ ‌gain‌ ‌more‌ ‌insight?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
What‌ ‌is‌ ‌your‌ ‌opinion‌ ‌on‌ ‌in-app‌ ‌purchases?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌they‌ ‌affect‌ ‌how‌ ‌you‌ ‌develop‌ ‌monetisation‌‌ 
strategies?‌ ‌And‌ ‌how‌ ‌you‌ ‌think‌ ‌about‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌prefer‌ ‌them‌ ‌over‌ ‌other‌ ‌methods‌ ‌of‌‌ 
payment?‌ ‌Some‌ ‌developers‌ ‌and‌ ‌gamers‌ ‌mentioned‌ ‌that‌ ‌they‌ ‌prefer‌ ‌premium‌ ‌games‌ ‌-‌ ‌what‌‌ 
is‌ ‌your‌ ‌opinion‌ ‌on‌ ‌that?‌ ‌Are‌ ‌there‌ ‌some‌ ‌kinds‌ ‌of‌ ‌in-app‌ ‌purchases‌ ‌you‌ ‌prefer‌ ‌over‌ ‌others?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Highly-engaging‌ ‌mobile‌ ‌game‌ ‌mechanics‌ ‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌have‌ ‌a‌ ‌strategy‌ ‌or‌ ‌approach‌ ‌to‌ ‌engage‌ ‌players‌ ‌more‌ ‌in‌ ‌your‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌it‌‌ 
effective?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌it‌ ‌easy‌ ‌or‌ ‌hard‌ ‌to‌ ‌implement?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌it‌ ‌inspired‌ ‌from‌ ‌somewhere‌ ‌else?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
[Explain‌ ‌a‌ ‌bit‌ ‌about‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌and‌ ‌their‌ ‌goals]‌ ‌
 
[Popular‌ ‌examples:‌ ‌Daily‌ ‌rewards,‌ ‌Pay-to-Skip,‌ ‌Playing‌ ‌by‌ ‌appointment,‌ ‌Premium‌ ‌Currency]‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Are‌ ‌you‌ ‌familiar‌ ‌with‌ ‌“Dark‌ ‌patterns”?‌ ‌Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌used‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌while‌ ‌developing?‌‌ 
Explicitly‌ ‌or‌ ‌Implicitly?‌ ‌Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌considered‌ ‌using‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌to‌ ‌engage‌ ‌players‌ ‌more?‌‌ 
Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌avoided‌ ‌using‌ ‌dark‌ ‌patterns‌ ‌in‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌this‌ ‌something‌ ‌you‌ ‌reflect‌ ‌upon?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
Which‌ ‌feedback‌ ‌about‌ ‌your‌ ‌games‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌normally/regularly‌ ‌get‌ ‌from‌ ‌players?‌ ‌Is‌ ‌it‌‌ 
mostly‌ ‌Positive‌ ‌/‌ ‌Negative?‌ ‌How‌ ‌about‌ ‌your‌ ‌own‌ ‌opinion?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
[Explain‌ ‌Lootboxes‌ ‌/‌ ‌Gacha‌ ‌games]‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Are‌ ‌you‌ ‌familiar‌ ‌with‌ ‌loot‌ ‌boxes‌ ‌/‌ ‌gacha‌ ‌games?‌ ‌Have‌ ‌you‌ ‌used‌ ‌loot‌ ‌boxes‌ ‌or‌ ‌similar‌ 
gacha‌ ‌in‌ ‌your‌ ‌games?‌ ‌What‌ ‌are‌ ‌your‌ ‌considerations‌ ‌about‌ ‌these?‌ ‌What‌ ‌are‌ ‌the‌ ‌benefits?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Themes‌ ‌
 
Which‌ ‌considerations‌ ‌do‌ ‌you‌ ‌have‌ ‌about‌ ‌tweaking‌ ‌the‌ ‌numbers‌ ‌of‌ ‌game‌ ‌mechanics‌‌ 
in‌ ‌regards‌ ‌to‌ ‌monetisation?‌ ‌Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌make‌ ‌sure‌ ‌the‌ ‌goal‌ ‌is‌ ‌reasonably‌ ‌achievable‌ ‌for‌ ‌both‌‌ 
paying‌ ‌and‌ ‌non-paying‌ ‌players?‌‌ ‌
  
‌
 
==PAGE:129==
Designing‌ ‌a‌ ‌tool‌ ‌
 
If‌ ‌we‌ ‌were‌ ‌to‌ ‌design‌ ‌a‌ ‌tool‌ ‌to‌ ‌alleviate‌ ‌some‌ ‌of‌ ‌your‌ ‌frustrations,‌ ‌what‌ ‌should‌ ‌it‌‌ 
include?‌ ‌What‌ ‌form‌ ‌should‌ ‌it‌ ‌take‌ ‌(app,website)?‌ ‌Should‌ ‌it‌ ‌be‌ ‌for‌ ‌the‌ ‌users‌ ‌or‌ ‌the‌‌ 
developers?‌ ‌Can‌ ‌you‌ ‌think‌ ‌of‌ ‌a‌ ‌way‌ ‌to‌ ‌make‌ ‌the‌ ‌interactions‌ ‌more‌ ‌‘healthy’?‌ ‌How‌ ‌could‌ ‌it‌‌ 
help‌ ‌with‌ ‌some‌ ‌of‌ ‌your‌ ‌frustrations?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Do‌ ‌you‌ ‌have‌ ‌any‌ ‌final‌ ‌thoughts?‌ ‌
 
‌
 
Thank‌ ‌you‌ ‌for‌ ‌your‌ ‌time!‌ ‌
 
==PAGE:130==
118
==PAGE:131==
Recruitment Banners
==PAGE:132==
120
Recruitment Banners
==PAGE:133==
Recruitment Banners
121
