==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
June 25, 2021
Experimental Strategies for
Overproduction of Cyclodepsipeptides in
Photobacterium galatheae S2753
Master thesis
Author
Ingrid Lykke Borre
(s153707)
Supervisors
Postdoc Shengda Zhang
Professor Lone Gram
==PAGE:2==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Contents
Preface
1
Abstract
2
1
Introduction
6
1.1
The cyclodepsipeptides solonamides and their bioactive potential . . . . . .
8
1.2
Experimental strategies for overproduction of natural products . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Current knowledge of the solonamide BGCs transcriptional regulation . . .
11
1.4
Transcriptional reporter fusions as a quantitative indicator for BCG tran-
scription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.5
The natural role of secondary metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.6
Aim of study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Materials and Methods
16
2.1
Strains and Plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Media and growth conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Primers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Design and construction of promoter swap using PﬂaD . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Fluorescence screening assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Chemical extraction and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Single-cell ﬂuorescence microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.8
Fluorescent colony microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
22
3.1
Production of solonamides in the ﬂuorescent reporter strain P. galatheae
Psol-GFPsol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Screening for conditions that inﬂuence the sol gene transcription using a
ﬂuorescence screening assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Analysis approaches for the ﬂuorescence screening assay . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:3==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
3.2.2
Fluorescent signal can be detected within the exponential growth-
phase of P. galatheae cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Diﬀerences in maximum relative ﬂuorescence signal between reporter
and wt strain across media compositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Signiﬁcantly less production of solonamides in the MSgg medium
compared to the SSBG medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.5
Addition of nitrogen to the MSgg medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.6
Inﬂuence of pH, salinity and temperature on relative GFP ﬂuorescence 32
3.3
Investigating diﬀerences in ﬂuorescence between wt and Psol-GFPsol strain
using ﬂuorescence microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Fluorescence signal detection in planktonic cells and aggregated cells
36
3.3.2
Fluorescence signal detection in cultures grown on solid medium
. .
37
3.4
Promoter swap using the PﬂaD promoter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Discussion
43
4.1
Evaluation of the ﬂuorescence screening assay as an indicator for sol tran-
scription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Possible regulators of sol transcription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Eﬀect of nutrient composition on sol transcription
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
The physiological role of the solonamides in the producing organism
. . . .
46
4.5
The ecological importance of solonamides to the survival of P. galatheae
S2753 in marine environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Construction of promoter swap mutant was not successful . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Conclusions
53
6
Perspectives
54
Bibliography
55
Appendix
i
==PAGE:4==
List of Abbreviations
agr
Accessory gene regulator
AIP
Autoinducing peptide
APY
Artiﬁcial sea water Peptone Yeast extract medium
BGC
Biosynthetic gene cluster
c-di-GMP Cyclic diguanylate monophosphate
CA
Casamino Acids
DAP
Diaminopimelic acid
GFP
Green ﬂuorescent protein
IO
Instant ocean
LB
Luria-Bertani
LBS
Low-salinity LB
MA
Marine agar
MB
Marine broth
MCP
Methyl-accepting Chemotaxis Protein
MRSA methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSgg
Glycerol and glutamate-basd growth medium
NRP
Nonribosomal peptide
NRP
Nonribosomal peptides
QS
Quorum sensing
SSBG
Sigma Sea salt Buﬀered Glucose medium
sub-MIC Sub-minimal inhibitory concentrations
WHO
World Health Organisation
==PAGE:5==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Preface
This report is the ﬁnal product of a 30 ECTS project to complete my Master of Science
in Biotechnology and Engineering.
The project was conducted in the period January
25th to June 25th 2021.
It was done in the facilities of DTU Bioengineering, Depart-
ment of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, at Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, in
corporation with the research group Bacterial Ecophysiology and Biotechnology (BEB).
Supervisors in the project were Postdoc Shengda Zhang and Professor Lone Gram.
Throughout the project, I have received help and guidance from a number of people. First,
I would like to thank my supervisor Shengda Zhang for your invaluable help in every
step of the project, as well as your undefeated optimism! I am truly thankful. Also, a
huge thank to Lone Gram for the opportunity to make this project, and for your help and
feedback along the way. Furthermore, I would like to thank Yannick Buijs for providing the
andrimid for this project, Thomas Isbrandt Petersen for help with the chemical analysis
and Mario Wibowo for performing the puriﬁcation of the solonamides. Lastly, I would like
to thank the whole BEB group for creating a fun and helpful work environment and Anja
Borre and Lasse Mikkelsen for their patience and encouragement towards the completion
of my project.
The aim of the project was to utilize a ﬂuorescent reporter fusion strain, of the Photobac-
terium galatheae, to construct and develop a ﬂuorescence screening assay for the investiga-
tion of the solonamides NRPS gene cluster (sol) transcription. This was done in the hopes
of identifying biotic and abiotic factors inﬂuencing the sol transcription, and thus provide
clues for understanding the native function(s) of the solonamides within the P. galatheae
S2753.
June 2021
Ingrid Borre
S153707
1
==PAGE:6==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Abstract
The current antibiotic crisis calls for new strategies to prevent and control pathogenic bac-
terial infections. An emerging strategy is ﬁnding and developing new compounds that do
not target the growth of the pathogenic organisms but manipulate their ability to produce
virulence factors. Such compounds are the novel cyclodepsipeptides, named solonamides,
produced by the marine bacterium Photobacterium galatheae S2753. These are not an-
tibiotics, but they interfere with the arg quorum sensing (QS) system of Staphylococcus
aureus, thereby inhibiting the expression of virulence factors by the pathogenic bacterium.
While this bioactive ability gives the solonamides a great drug potential, the vast physical
distance between the native habitats of the two bacteria makes it very unlikely that the
original function of the solonamides is coupled with S. aureus QS interference. Recently,
the biosynthetic gene cluster encoding the solonamides NRPS has been identiﬁed by dele-
tion of the core NRPS gene (sol) [1]. However, factors regulating the transcription and
translation of this BGC as well as the production of solonamides are not yet investigated.
Uncovering biotic and abiotic factors inﬂuencing the transcription of the solonamides BGC
will help further understand important unanswered questions as to why P. galatheae pro-
duces these compounds, and what the native physiological and ecological function(s) of
these compounds are.
In this thesis, a ﬂuorescent transcriptional reporter fusion of the P. galatheae S2753 [2] was
used to construct a high throughput screening assay to investigate sol transcription activ-
ity. Systematic screening of growth media, with varying nutrient compositions, identiﬁed
the SSBG medium as the best medium for sol transcription and solonamides production.
Additionally, the MSgg medium was identiﬁed as capable of sustaining the growth of the
bacterium with only a minimal production of the solonamides. Further screening of deﬁned
nutrients, based on the MSgg medium, found that while diﬀerent carbon sources did not
increase sol transcription, an increased transcription level was observed when supplement-
ing the MSgg medium with the nitrogen NaNO3 and L-Valine, respectively. Additionally,
the antibiotic andrimid was found to signiﬁcantly increase the transcription of the sol-gene,
in accordance with previous studies [3]. The abiotic factors, pH and salinity, did not aﬀect
sol transcription. Due to the temperature sensitivity of the GFP ﬂuorophore, it was not
possible to assess temperature inﬂuence on the sol transcription.
The reporter strain was subsequently used for the investigation of single-cell ﬂuorescence. A
similar level of ﬂuorescence intensity was observed between planktonic cells and aggregated
cells, indicating there is no diﬀerence in the sol transcription. Fluorescence was, at one
point, observed in the reporter strain when grown on the marine agar plates. However, this
2
==PAGE:7==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
result needs to be replicated in the future for a further conclusion.
Additionally, overproduction of the solonamides within the native producer is a desired
ﬁrst step towards commercial solonamides production. In this thesis, overexpression of the
sol-gene was attempted using a promoter swap strategy and the near-constitutive native
promoter of the ﬂagellin encoding ﬂaD-gene. However, the construction was only achieved
at the ﬁrst crossover step due to time limitation.
In conclusion, the ﬂuorescence emission of the reporter strain was successfully used as an
indicator of sol transcription. This led to the discovery of diﬀerent small molecules up-
regulating sol transcription. In combination with recent ﬁndings by Zhang et al. [4], the
native function of the solonamides is hypothesised to be involved in a chemotactic response
system in P. galatheae S2753. This preliminary model paves a way to determine the exact
pathway of the solonamides involvement in this response in the near future.
3
==PAGE:8==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Resumé
Den nuværende antibiotikakrise kræver nye strategier for forebyggelse og kontrol af pato-
gene bakterieinfektioner.
En strategi er at ﬁnde og udvikle bioaktive stoﬀer som ikke
påvirker væksten af de patogene organismer, men derimod manipulerer deres evne til at pro-
ducere virulensfaktorer. De sekundære metabolitter, kaldet solonamider, er cyclodepsipep-
tider produceret af den marine bakterie Photobacterium galatheae S2753. Solonamdierne er
ikke et antibiotika, men de interfererer med arg quorum sensing (QS)-systemet af Staphylo-
coccus aureus og hæmmer derved ekspressionen af virulensfaktorer af den patogene bakterie.
Mens denne evne gør solonamiderne medicinsk relevant, så er det stadig uklart hvad den
oprindelige funktion af stoﬀerne er i P. galatheae. Den store afstand mellem det naturlige
levested for P. galatheae og S. aureus gør det højst usandsynligt at solonamidernes naturlige
funktion er koblet med S. aureus QS interferens. Det biosyntetiske genkluster, der koder
for solonamidernes NRPS, er blevet identiﬁceret ved at fjerne kerne NRPS-genet (sol) [1].
Faktorer, der regulerer transkription og translation af dette BGC såvel som produktionen af
solonamider, er endnu ikke undersøgt. En undersøgelse af biotiske og abiotiske faktorer, der
påvirker transkriptionen af solonamidernes genkluster, kan hjælpe med at besvare vigtige
spørgsmål om hvorfor P. galatheae producerer solonamider og hvad de oprindelige fysiolo-
giske og økologiske funktion(er) af disse stoﬀer er.
I denne afhandling blev en ﬂuorescerende transkriptionel reporterfusion af P. galatheae [2]
anvendt til at opsætte et screeningsforsøg der kan undersøge transkription af sol-genet.
Systematisk screening af vækstmedier med forskellige næringsstofsammensætninger identi-
ﬁcerende SSBG-mediet som det bedste medie for sol transkription og produktion af solon-
amider. Derudover blev MSgg-mediet fundet som værende i stand til at opretholde væk-
sten af bakterierne med kun en minimal produktion af solonamider. Yderligere screen-
ing af deﬁnerede næringsstoﬀer, baseret på MSgg-mediet, viste, at mens forskellige car-
bonkilder ikke øgede transriptionen af sol, blev der observeret et øget transkriptionsniveau
når MSgg-mediet suppleres med henholdsvis NaNO3 og L-Valine. Derudover viste det sig,
at antibiotikummet andrimid signiﬁkant øgede transkriptionen af sol-genet, hvilket er i
overensstemmelse med tidligere undersøgelser [3]. De abiotiske faktorer, pH og saltkoncen-
tration, påvirker ikke transkriptionen af sol-genet. På grund af temperaturfølsomheden af
GFP-ﬂuoroforen var det ikke muligt at vurdere temperaturpåvirkning på transkriptionen
af sol-genet.
Den ﬂuorescerende reporterstamme blev efterfølgende brugt til at undersøgelse ﬂuorescens
i enkeltceller. Et ens niveau af ﬂuorescensintensitet blev observeret mellem planktoniske
celler og aggregerede celler, hvilket indikerer, at der ikke er nogen forskel i transkriptionen
4
==PAGE:9==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
af sol. Der blev en gang observeret ﬂuorescens i reporterstammen, når den blev dyrket på
marine agarplader. Dette resultat skal dog gentages før en endelig konklusion kan drages.
Overproduktion af solonamiderne i den oprindelige organisme er et vigtigt første skridt
mod kommerciel solonamidproduktion.
I denne afhandling blev overekspression af sol-
genet forsøgt ved at anvende en såkaldt promotor-swap-strategi. Til dette blev der brugt en
næsten konstitutiv promotor for ﬂagellin, der regulerer transskriptionen af ﬂaD-genet. Dog
blev konstruktionen kun opnået til det første ”crossover”-trin på grund af tidsbegrænsning.
Som konklusion blev ﬂuorescensemissionen fra reporterstammen med succes anvendt som
en indikator for transkription af sol-genet. Dette førte til opdagelsen af forskellige små
molekyler, der opregulerer transkriptionen af sol. I kombination med nylige fund af Zhang
et al. [4] blev en hypotese omkring den oprindelige funktion af solonamiderne formuleret.
Hypotesen er, at solonamiderne er involveret i et kemotaktisk respons system i P. galatheae
S2753. Disse resultater muliggør yderligere undersøgelser der vil kunne bringe os nærmere
den præcise involvering as solonamider i dette respons.
5
==PAGE:10==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
1
Introduction
The discovery of the antibiotic compound penicillin in 1929 heralded the dawn of the an-
tibiotic age [5]. The period of 1950 to 1970 has later been described as the golden age of
antimicrobial discovery, leading to extensive discovery and use of these compounds to ﬁght
infectious diseases worldwide [6]. However, already in 1962, just two years after the intro-
duction of methicillin as a drug, the ﬁrst case of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) was reported (Figure 1). Similar scenarios repeatedly appeared in the following
decades, creating the need for a continuous supply of novel antibiotics to sustain eﬀective
treatment of pathogenic infections as well as responsible use of the antibiotics already on
the market. In 2017 the World Health Organisation (WHO) established an urgent list of
antibiotic-resistant pathogenic bacteria to guide global research and development into novel
antibiotics [7]. On this list, one of the high propriety pathogens is methicillin-resistant and
vancomycin-resistant S. aureus, which is dangerous not only to humans but also livestock
which are widely used in food production [6, 8, 9].
Figure 1: Timeline showing the year of introduction of new antibiotics classes. Below the
timeline is the year of antibiotic resistance discovery [6]
Even though advances in modern sequencing techniques and genome mining have uncovered
a huge unexplored biosynthetic potential for antibiotic discovery [10], the antibiotic resis-
tance crisis further calls for new strategies to control pathogenic bacteria and infections.
Novel sustainable strategies that reduce the risk of resistance are in high demand, and one
such strategy is ﬁnding and developing compounds that do not interfere with the growth of
6
==PAGE:11==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
the pathogenic bacteria but decrease their ability to be virulent, e.g. by reducing their pro-
duction of virulence factors [11, 12]. On the global research expedition, Galathea 3, more
than ﬁve hundred bioactive marine bacterial strains were isolated based on their antimi-
crobial activity towards pathogenic bacteria [13]. Amongst these were the Photobacterium
galatheae S2753 [14]. This strain was isolated due to its antibacterial activity towards the
ﬁsh pathogen Vibrio anguillarum [13], an ability that was later attributed to the production
of the known antibacterial compound holomycin [15]. However, during a later screening of
the Galathea 3 bacterial strain collection, the P. galatheae S2753 was also found to inter-
fere with the agr quorum-sensing (QS) system that controls virulence gene expression of
the pathogen S. aureus [11]. Further analysis of S2753 led to the discovery of a series of
novel cyclodepsipeptides, designated solonamides and ngercheumicins, which shows great
drug potential as an alternative therapeutic strategy towards antibiotic-resistant S. aureus
[11, 16].
Although chemical synthesis of the solonamides has been achieved, yields have not yet
proven high enough for industrial use, making the solonamides commercially unavailable
[17]. Throughout time, many pharmaceutical industries have preferred chemical synthesis
over natural product-derived compounds, as natural products previously have required
tedious and resource-intensive puriﬁcation to identify the active compounds from complex
mixtures. However, in recent years the fundamental science of natural product biosynthesis
has experienced unprecedented breakthroughs as genome mining, and structural knowledge
of biosynthetic genes clusters (BGCs) have enabled informed modiﬁcation and manipulation
of the natural product synthesis [18].
This allows for faster identiﬁcation of unknown
compounds and informed strategies for over-expression of potential drug candidates, which
could allow for industrial production of biological synthesised solonamides [19].
Furthermore, a grand biological question remains: why does the P. galatheae produce
these compounds? The vast spacial distance between the natural marine habitat of the P.
galatheae and the S. aureus, which inhabits the upper respiratory tract and skin surface of
terrestrial animals, indicates it is not likely that the solonamides have evolved to interfere
with virulence of S. aureus. Thus, one aim of this thesis is to construct a high-throughput
screening assay for the investigation of biotic and abiotic factors inﬂuencing transcription
of the solonamides gene cluster in the native producer. This could be an important step
towards uncovering the native function of the solonamides.
7
==PAGE:12==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
1.1
The cyclodepsipeptides solonamides and their bioactive potential
Cyclodepsipeptides are a type of nonribosomal peptides (NRPs) which in recent years
have received great attention as drug candidates. They have been isolated from a large
variety of organisms ranging from plants and algae to bacteria, ectinomycetes and fungi
[20]. The cyclodepsipeptides, like natural peptides, contain amino acids, and are capable of
interacting with numerous proteins. Consequently, they show a broad spectrum of biological
activities [20]. For example, the halipeptins A-D, produced by the marine sponge Haliclona
sp. show strong antimicrobial and antitumor activities [21] and the cyclomarins produced
by a marine bacterium Streptomyces sp. has anti-inﬂammatory properties. Additionally,
the cyclic nature and frequent N-methylation of amino acid residues enhances resistance
towards hydrolysing enzymes which results in enhanced oral bio-availability.
Figure 2: Chemical structure of the cyclodepsipeptides solonamide A and B. [11]
The Solonamides A and B are composed of a ring of the amino acids L-phenylalanine,
D-leucine, D-alanine and L-leucine cyclized through an ester-bond to a fatty acid precursor
(Figure 2) [11, 4]. As previously mentioned, the solonamides, speciﬁcally solonamide B, is
able to interfere with the QS system of S. aureus. The QS systems in bacteria function as a
communication system, allowing for regulation of certain gene expressions and phenotypes,
which in turn coordinate the behaviour of the population. This communication is facili-
tated by small signalling molecules named autoinducers, which are species-speciﬁc, and can
freely diﬀuse over the cell membrane [22]. With increasing cell density, the autoinducers
accumulate in the extracellular space, and when a certain threshold is exceeded, it will
trigger changes in gene expression.
S. aureus is a Gram-positive, facultative pathogen in which virulence factor expression is
8
==PAGE:13==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
regulated by a two-component system within the agr (accessory gene regulator) QS sys-
tem. In this system, a ligand-bound AgrC phosphorylates and activates the DNA-binding
response regulator AgrA (Figure 3) [22]. This happens when a high accumulation of the
autoinducing peptides (AIPs) binds to the AgrC. The phosphorated AgrA subsequently
binds to the RNAIII transcript that encodes a small RNA. The small RNAIII then func-
tions to active gene expression of secreted virulence factors, as shown in Figure 3 [23, 24].
Solonamide B shows great bio-active potential towards this QS system as it has a highly
similar structure to the AIPs within the system [25]. The solonamide B is thus capable
of binding to AgrC, which prevents binding of the AIP. Thereby it prevents activation of
AgrC and ultimately the expression of the virulence factors (Figure 3) [23, 25]. Solonamide
A, and several ngercheumicins produced by P. galatheae, also possess this ability but to a
lesser extent than solonamide B [23].
Figure 3: A visualisation of the QS system and the inhibitory eﬀect of Solonamide B on
AgrC activation. Borrowed from [1] who modiﬁed from [24]
The anti-virulence response of the solonamides towards S. aureus has great drug poten-
tial as an alternative to traditional antibiotics treatment because they do not promote
antibiotics resistance [26]. In order to apply the solonamides commercially, it is important
to establish large scale feasible industrial production of the compounds.
As previously
mentioned, modern breakthroughs within molecular biology has allowed for faster identi-
9
==PAGE:14==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
ﬁcation of unknown biosynhtetic gene clusters and their compounds [19]. This is also the
case for solonamides. Recently, genome mining of the P. galatheae enabled identiﬁcation
of a speciﬁc BGC, which consists of a core NRPS gene named sol [1]. Deletion of this
core gene abolished the production of solonamides, thus pointing to the solonamide biosyn-
thetic gene cluster. This discovery allows genetic manipulation of the solonamide NRPS
gene cluster, for overexpressing or heterologous expression, resulting in potentially higher
yields of solonamides than chemical synthesis.
1.2
Experimental strategies for overproduction of natural products
In nature, the so-called secondary metabolites, such as the solonamides, are often produced
during speciﬁc growth stages and/or when exposed to external stimuli. Thus, the expression
of the secondary metabolite may not be the same in laboratory settings as it is in nature.
For example, during Galathea 3, more than 300 Vibrionaceae strains were isolated based
on antimicrobial activity; however, only 138 of these strains later showed the same ability
when grown under standard laboratory conditions [15]. This indicates that the ability to
produce the secondary metabolites are inﬂuenced or regulated by environmental factors
which were not recreated in the laboratory.
Several approaches exist to try and up-regulate the production of natural product in the
laboratory. One approach is to mimic the natural growth conditions of the organisms by
altering nutrients availability, temperature, salinity or pH conditions [27]. Many commer-
cial growth media are designed as rich media to provide the organism with all the nutrients
it needs to sustain growth in a laboratory setting. However, the natural environment, espe-
cially the marine environment, is seldom as nutrient-rich [28]. Thus, by utilising knowledge
about the physiology and ecology of the organism for mimicking its natural environmental
growth conditions, it is possible to enhance the expression of a BGC of interest in the
natural host [29]. For example, Wietz et al. demonstrated that shrimp chitin, which is
the most abundant polymer in the marine environment, had a pronounced eﬀect on the
secondary metabolite proﬁle of Vibrio coralliilyticus. When this bacterium was grown on
a chitin rich medium, it was found to double the production of the antibiotic andrimid as
opposed to when grown on a glucose-rich medium [30]. Later, Giubergia et al. [31] found
that when grown on chitin both V. coralliilyticus and P. galatheae up-regulated expression
of several BGCs as compared to growth on glucose.
Alternatively, molecular biology techniques can be used to manipulate the genetic con-
tent/regulation of the BGCs [32]. One example of overproduction of natural products in
the native producer is to manipulate the regulatory elements by, e.g.
substituting the
10
==PAGE:15==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
promoter of the BGC with a strong, inducible or a constitutive promoter [33]. One such
promoter could be a promoter of a ﬂagellin gene. Flagellins are abundant bacterial proteins
comprising the ﬂagellar ﬁlaments that facilitates bacterial movement [34]. The ﬂagellar ﬁl-
aments can be comprised of single or multiple ﬂagellin proteins. The transcription of these
proteins is near constitutive as ﬂagellar ﬁlaments are constantly degraded during use, which
facilitates the need for more ﬂaggilin to rebuild the ﬂagellar ﬁlament [35]. Using a native
constitutive promoter as opposed to synthetic promoters has several advantages, as it is
known that all the co-factors necessary for transcription using this promoter are already
present in the organism, as well as a functional ribosomal binding site for translational
initiation [33].
Finally, heterologous expression can be attempted by moving the entire BGC to a host
organism such as Escherichia coli or B. subtilis. This strategy has advantages because
it allows for description of all essential specialised genes involved in the production of a
microbial natural product, as well as characterisation of BGCs from unculturable microbes
which potentially can lead to novel compound discovery [36]. Heterologous expression has
previously been successfully used to study gene functions.
However, it can be diﬃcult
to obtain high gene expression eﬃciency within the host organism. Additionally, moving
large and complex biosynthetic pathways can be challenging due to the size of the gene
cluster [32]. Finally, the host needs to be equipped with all biosynthetic building blocks
and non-clustered enzymatic machinery or accessory factors essential for production of the
desired product in order for the heterologues expression to be successful [36]. Thus, when
the regulation of the BGC is still unknown, manipulation of the genes within the native
host is preferred.
1.3
Current knowledge of the solonamide BGCs transcriptional regula-
tion
Cornforth and Foster have previously proposed a so-called competition sensing hypothesis
[37], that predicts that bacteria are capable of employing their stress response in response
to competition, and thus use this to initiate a "counter-attack" by increasing their own pro-
duction of small molecules with antibiotic activity. This hypothesis was tested by Buijs et
al. [3] who employed an antibiotic challenging strategy by adding sub-minimal inhibitory
concentrations (sub-MIC) of the antibiotic andrimid to P. galatheae S2753 cultures to inves-
tigate the potential increase of BGC transcription. Andrimid signiﬁcantly stimulated the
transcription of the holomycin gene cluster and enhanced production of holomycin. Also,
expression of the so-called BGC2 (Figure 4), which was later identiﬁed as the solonamide
11
==PAGE:16==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
BGC [1], was induced by subMIC andrimid. Several stress response genes have been found
to be located near the sol-gene [1]. Thus, this ﬁnding could indicate that the solonamides
are involved in competition signalling [38]. However, Buijs et al. also describe that the
increased transcription of the solonamide BGC, after the addition of andrimid, did not
translate to higher levels of solonamide A or B [3].
Figure 4: Transcription of BGCs in P. galatheae cultures, with and without andrimid, in
the exponential, transition and stationary growth phase. BGC2 is the solonamide BGC. [3, 4]
Traditionally, secondary metabolites are thought to be produced in the late stages of the
microbial stationary phase, which implies that the molecule is not necessary for the sus-
tenance of life in the organism [39].
However, the results of Buijs et al.
presented in
ﬁgure 4 reveals higher transcription levels of the sol BGC after 4 hours and 8 hours of
incubation (i.e. in exponential phase) than after 24 hours of incubation, as determined by
qPCR [3]. Additionally, a recent ﬁnding by Zhang et al. saw that the concentration of
solonamide in a P. galatheae S2753 culture does not increase between samples taken at 10
hours (late exponential phase) and 24 hours (stationary phase) as measured by chemical
extraction and LC-MS [4], which indicates that no solonamide is being produced in the
stationary phase. This was further conﬁrmed by a proteomics study which found high-level
expression of the solonamide synthesising NRPS only in the late-exponential phase sam-
ples. Thus, the solonamides are produced mainly during the exponential growth phase.
However, Zhang et al. did not observe signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the growth curves of the
wild type P. galatheae S2753 and a constructed solonamide deﬁcient mutant ∆sol. This
12
==PAGE:17==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
indicates that the solonamides are not vital for sustaining cell proliferation under these
certain laboratory conditions, as is to be expected of a secondary metabolite [4].
Since the solonamides interfere with the QS-system found in S. aureus, Laura Louise
Lindqvist hypothesised that the solonamides could be involved in QS within the P. galatheae
[1]. One well-known phenotype regulated by QS is the bioﬁlm formation ability. Thus,
Lindqvist looked for possible changes in bioﬁlm formation between the P. galatheae wt and
∆sol strain as determined by crystal violet staining. However, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
bioﬁlm production was observed between the two strains. On a similar note, Giubergia et
al. investigated the transcriptomics of P. galatheae S2753 when grown on chitin. Chitin is
often associated with bioﬁlm formation as adhesion of the bacteria to the chitin surface are
highly advantageous for utilisation of the chitin [40]. However, here the results showed a
-0.2 fold change of solonamides in the relative abundance of metabolites detected by LC-MS
when strains were grown on chitin as opposed to glucose. Thus, the question of whether
the solonamides are involved in bioﬁlm regulation remains unanswered [31].
Even though several investigations have been made to try and determine the role of the
secondary metabolite solonamides in P. galatheae, several areas still need to be investigated
to determine these. One hitherto unexplored method for investigation of the solonamides
BGC regulation is the construction of a ﬂuorescent transcriptional reporter fusion for con-
tinuous investigation of sol transcription.
1.4
Transcriptional reporter fusions as a quantitative indicator for BCG
transcription
A desired type of genetic manipulation of BGCs is constructing a transcriptional reporter
fusion for investigation of promoter strength and protein localisation in vivo [41]. A tran-
scriptional reporter fusion is when a chosen reporter gene is fused to the regulatory region
of the target gene, allowing for the expression of the reporter gene to be regulated in the
same manner as the original gene [42]. Thus, the easy detectable end product of the re-
porter gene can function as an indicator of gene expression of genes whose products are
diﬃcult to assay. The most commonly used reporter genes are lacZ (β-galactosidase), cat
(chloramphenicol acetyl transferase), luc (luciferase) and ﬂuorescent reporter genes such as
gfp (green ﬂuorescent protein) and mCherry (a type of red ﬂuorescent protein) [41]. What
separates the ﬂuorescent reporter genes from most other reporter genes is the ability to do
real-time quantiﬁcation of promoter activity via continuous measurements of e.g. the green
ﬂuorescence emitted by GFP using a spectrophotometer [43]. The gene encoding GFP orig-
inates from the jellyﬁsh Aequorea victoria. However, several varieties of the protein have
13
==PAGE:18==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
later been artiﬁcially constructed to make it more suitable as a real-time in situ reporter.
For example, the variant named GFP+ is emitting a 130-fold stronger ﬂuorescence signal
than the wild type GFP [44]. This variant has also been constructed to be a fast folding
variant which means the ﬂuorescence signal appears very shortly after transcription of the
gene, making it easier to asses gene activation accurately.
1.5
The natural role of secondary metabolites
In the marine environment, bacteria can be exposed to numerous diﬀerent environments as
they can be transported vast distances by the ocean currents or modern maritime trade ves-
sels [45]. In order to increase their chances of survival, the bacteria need to produce several
diverse compounds, which can either facilitate nutrient uptake, protection against external
environmental factors or towards predators [46]. Additionally, secondary metabolites can
function as communication molecules within a microbiotic community, where interaction
using small molecules play a role in co-existence.
For example, in nature, the produc-
tion of antibiotics are thought to antagonise competing microorganisms by slowing their
growth or even killing them in order to obtain scarce nutrients or better colonise biotic
surfaces [47]. This observation supports the hypothesis that environmental bacteria are
highly antibiotic-resistant, arguing that antibiotics are toxic environmental chemicals that
deselect organisms with ineﬃcient or no resistance [46].
However, in nature, antibiotics are most often present in sub-minimal inhibitory concen-
trations, meaning the concentration is often too low to have any real growth-inhibiting
or killing eﬀect on neighbouring organisms [39].
Thus, many of them are also thought
to function as cell-to-cell communication molecules, including those that also rely on QS
systems that can induce virulence factors, bioﬁlm formation, swarming motility, or biolumi-
nescence in some species [39, 48, 49]. A well-characterised quorum-sensing system in nature
is the luxI/luxR QS system of the marine bacterium Vibrio ﬁsheri. When the autoinducer
of this system reaches a threshold concentration, LuxR is activated and, the lux locus is
transcribed. This locus includes genes encoding luciferase and other proteins required for
bioluminescence [50].
Furthermore, secondary metabolites can be involved in stress protection as a response to
high UV light exposure and oxidative stress by producing pigments capable of absorbing
the energy from the UV light and thus protect the organism [51]. One such example is
the plant pathogen C. michiganensis which produces carotenoid pigments [52]. In a study
by Jacobs et al.
UVA radiation was applied to the C. michiganensis wild-type and a
pigment-deﬁcient mutant strain. The study found that the non-pigmented mutants of C.
14
==PAGE:19==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
michiganensis were more sensitive to UVA wavelengths compared to the wild-type strain,
indicating that the pigment might be involved in protection against UV light [52].
The natural role of the solonamides is still unknown. However, the compounds must have
some important physiological or ecological role for the P. galatheae to spend energy on
this production. Uncovering biotic and abiotic factors inﬂuencing the transcription of the
solonamides BGC might provide important insights into the regulatory mechanisms of the
solonamide production, thereby providing clues as to the native physiological and ecological
function(s) of these compounds.
1.6
Aim of study
The aim of this study is twofold. The ﬁrst aim is to enhance the production of the solon-
amides in the native host P. galatheae S2753 either by altering growth conditions or chang-
ing the original promoter to a strong constitutive promoter. The second aim is to further
the understanding on why the solonamides are produced in P. galatheae S2753 and what
the native function(s) of these compounds are.
Both aims will be investigated using a ﬂuorescent reporter strain of the P. galatheae wherein
a gfp+-gene is fused to the promoter of the solonamide NRPS gene. Thus, in parallel, an
evaluation of the ﬂuorescence screening assay and its application to answer the scientiﬁc
questions, posed throughout this study, will be made.
15
==PAGE:20==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Strains and Plasmids
All strains and plasmids used in this project are listed in table 1. The E. coli strain GB05-
dir pir116 was used for construction of the suicide plasmid containing the PﬂaD promoter
region (pDM4-PﬂaD-GFPsol) using the plasmid pDM4 as a backbone. The strain WM3064
were subsequently used for conjugation of the plasmid into the P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol
resulting in the intermediate PﬂaD-GFPsol strain. Wild type P. galatheae S2753 was used
as a control for the ﬂuorescence screening assay. Lastly, the E. coli strain λpir pSNW-
1710insert carrying the GFP+ encoding gene on a plasmid, was used for the investigation
of the GFP+ stability over a temperature gradient.
Table 1: Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this project, along with information about
important genotype and/or features
Strain or
plasmid
Relevant Genotype/Feature
Reference
E. coli
GB05-dir pir116
DH10B, fhuA::IS2, ∆ybcC, ∆recET, pir116)
with an arabinose-inducible ETγA operon
(full-length recE, recT, redγ and recA)
[53]
WM3064
thrB1004 pro thi rpsL hsdS lacZ∆M15 RP4-1360
∆(araBAD)567 ∆dapA1341::[erm pir]
Strain developed by William
Metcalf at UIUC.
λpir pSNW-1710insert
Strain containing a pSNW plasmid [54]
with a constitutively expressed GFP+
encoding gene inserted
Plasmid and strain
developed by Xinli Sun at
DTU Bioengineering
P. galatheae
S2753
Wildtype strain, producer of solonamides
[14]
Psol-GFPsol
Fluorescent reporter strain with a GFP+
encoding gene fused to the promoter of the
solonamide NRPS-gene
[2]
PﬂaD-GFPsol
-intermediate
Fluorescent stain pDM4-PﬂaD-GFPsol
plasmid inserted into the chromosome
This project
Plasmids
pDM4
CmR, SacB, R6Kγ origin, Low-copy
number plasmid.
[55]
pDM4-PﬂaD-GFPsol
CmR, SacB, R6Kγ origin, Low-copy
number plasmid. with inserted PﬂaD
promoter region and homology arms
This project
16
==PAGE:21==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
2.2
Media and growth conditions
P. galatheae strains were cultured in several media. This includes i) LB-Broth 1% salinity
(Miller, Difco 244620), ii) Marine Broth 3% salinity (MB, Difco 2216), iii) Artiﬁcial seawa-
ter Peptone Yeast extract 2% salinity (APY)[3], iv) glycerol and glutamate-based growth
medium (MSgg)[56] added NaCl to 2% salinity v) Sea Salts medium 2% salinity 0.4% glu-
cose (SSBG, Sigma S9883)[28] buﬀered with 40mM MOPS, vi) Instant ocean 3% salinity,
0.4% glucose, 40mM MOPS (IO)[28]. Initially, the SS, IO and MSgg media were used with
a single carbon and nitrogen source as described above. It will be described throughout
the project if the carbon or nitrogen source is changed. Unless otherwise stated, all media
were prepared with pH 7. The media MA and SSBG were also prepared to contain 1.5%
agar for the growth of cultures on solid media.
For cloning (described in section 2.4), Low salinity (0.1%) LB (LBS) broth containing:
10g tryptone, 5g yeast extract, 1g NaCl per liter miliQ H2O were used for the growth of
cultures prior to electroporation. For culturing of the donor strain E. coli WM3064, 2,6-
diaminopimelic acid (DAP) were added to the LB-broth to a ﬁnal concentration of 300µM.
Chloramphenicol was used to select pDM4 containing cells at a concentration of 10µg/mL
in liquid cultures and 30µg/mL on solid agar media.
For investigation of Psol activity (Section 2.5) the growth media APY, SS, IO and MSgg
were supplemented with the antibiotic andrimid to ﬁnal concentrations of 3.5µM based
on data produced by Buijs et al.
[3].
Andrimid puriﬁed by the metabolome platform
from V. coralliilyticus were provided by Yannick Buijs. Furthermore, pH of the media SS
and IO were adjusted using MOPS buﬀer (pH 3.5) to pH 5 and 6. For some tests, the
glucose carbon source within SSBG was substituted with 0.5% glycerol, and the carbon
source with the MSgg medium was substituted with 0.4% glucose, 0.4% NAG, respectively.
Additionally the amino acids L-Leucine, L-Histidine, L-Proline, L-Alanine, L-Arginine and
L-Valine and the inorganic nitrogen sources NaNO3 and NH4Cl were added individually
to the MSgg medium to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.18% and the complex nitrogen source
casamino acids (CA) to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.3%. Prior to the screening assay, all
precultures of the P. galatheae strains were grown over night in SSBG medium at 25◦C
200rpm before being subcultures (100x dilution) into fresh SSBG medium and grown for
further 4-6 hours prior to inoculation in microtiter wells (initial OD600 = 0.01).
17
==PAGE:22==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
2.3
Primers
All primers used in this project are listed in Table 2.
Primers were designed in silico
using the free software ApE [57], and synthesised by Integrated DNA Technologies, BVBA
(Belgium).
Table 2:
List of primers used in this project.
Lower case letters represent overhangs of
primers. Tm is the annealing temperature for primers excluding overhang. Tm-total denounce
the annealing temperature including the overhang.
Primer
Sequence (5’-3’)
Tm (◦C)
Tm-Total (◦C)
CG%-Total
Larm_PﬂaD_GFP_Fw
gtggaatcccgggagagctcGTGTCCTAATTTGTTCTTTG
48
70
50
larm_PﬂaD_GFP_rv
aaaaaacggcaaagcCTGAGGAAACAAAATAATATCC
48
64
35
PﬂaD_Fw
attttgtttcctcagGCTTTGCCGTTTTTTTTTG
51
64
35
PﬂaD_Rv
tcctttgctagccatAGTAATTCTCCTTACTTGTGTTTC
52
64
38
Rarm_PﬂaD_GFP_Fw
gtaaggagaattactATGGCTAGCAAAGGAGAAG
53
62
41
Rarm_PﬂaD_GFP_Rv
cctcgagtacgcgtcTTGAAGTTAGCTTTGATTCCATTC
53
67
46
pdm4_PﬂaD_fw
ggaatcaaagctaacttcaaGACGCGTACTCGAGGGTCG
60
69
51
pdm4_PﬂaD_rv
acaaagaacaaattaggacacGAGCTCTCCCGGGATTCCAC
60
70
49
pdm4_seq_p1_Fw
GGAACACTTAACGGCTGAC
-
54
53
GFP_seq_p2_Rv
CTTCAATGTTGTGGCGAATT
-
53
40
GFP_seq_p3_Fw
TGTTCAATGCTTTTCCCGT
-
54
42
pdm4_seq_p4_Rv
TGTCCCTCCTGTTCAGCT
-
56
56
insert_check_P1_Fw
ATTGATACTCGCGGTCATAG
-
53
45
insert_check_P4_Rv
ATTGATGCCCCGTACTTTC
-
54
47
PﬂaD_check_Rv
CTGGGCAAAAAAGTGTGATT
-
53
40
CmR-fw
GGCATTTCAGTCAGTTGCTC
-
55
50
CmR-rv
CCATCACAAACGGCATGATG
-
56
50
2.4
Design and construction of promoter swap using PﬂaD
Prior to cloning, the ﬂaD-gene sequence was found within the genome of P. galatheae S2753
using the online platform MicroScope [58]. Transcriptomic data of P. galatheae growth on
glucose produced by Giubergia et al. [31] was downloaded from NCBI [59]. The ﬂaD-gene
sequence was then blasted against the mRNA sequences within that dataset to determine
the transcriptional start of the ﬂaD-gene and thus estimate the promoter region of the
gene.
Promoter swap of the sol promoter with the ﬂaD promoter region within the P.galatheae
ﬂuorescent reporter strain was performed using a two-step crossover strategy of homo-
logues recombination and SacB mediated counter selection as described by Zhang et al.
[60]. In short, homologues regions (named L-arm and R-arm) of the desired insertion re-
gion were ampliﬁed using P.galatheae Psol-GFPsol gDNA as the template with the primer
pairs Larm_PﬂaD_GFP_Fw & Rv, PﬂaD_Fw & Rv and Rarm_PﬂaD_GFP_Fw & Rv,
respectively (Table 2) and the Q5® Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix according to
manufactures protocol.
The three DNA fragments were assembled using overlap PCR
18
==PAGE:23==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
and the Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix. A conditional suicide plasmid pDM4-
PﬂaD-GFPsol was constructed by direct cloning using the RecET system in E. coli strain
GBdir-pir116 with the pDM4 plasmid as backbone along with the assembled L-arm, PﬂaD
and R-arm DNA fragment [55, 53]. The constructed plasmid was validated by sequencing
(Macrogen Europe, Meibergdreef 31, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) using the
primers pdm4_seq_p1_Fw & Rv and the Q5® Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix.
The plasmid was then transferred into the donor stain E. coli WM3064 by electroporation
before being transferred by conjugation to P.galatheae Psol-GFPsol [61]. The two homo-
logues recombination crossover events were initiated by lack of DAP in combination with
chloramphenicol resistance selection and sucrose supplemented medium, respectively [60].
The ﬁnal promoter swap strain named P. galatheae PﬂaD-GFPsol were validated using
colony PCR with the primer pair: insert_check_P1_Fw & PﬂaD_check_Rv (Table 2)
and OneTaq® Quick-Load® 2X Master Mix. All PCR ampliﬁcations were performed using
a 96-well T100 PCR thermal cycler (Bio-Rad). PCR products were subsequently run on 1%
w/v agarose gel with 1X Tris Acetate EDTA buﬀer (Thermo Scientiﬁc, B49) along with a
1kb DNA ladder (Thermo Scientiﬁc, SM0313) for approx. 25 min at 120 V. For visualising,
the gel was stained in 3µg/mL ethidium bromide solution (Sigma Aldrich, E1510) for 20
min before being photographed under UV radiation.
2.5
Fluorescence screening assay
Transcription of the sol gene was investigated using the ﬂuorescent reporter fusion strain
P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol where the gfp-gene is fused to the promoter of the solonamide
NRPS gene named sol [2]. Activation of the sol gene transcription was determined by
measuring ﬂuorescence with excitation at 485/15 nm and emission at 513/15 nm in a
Cytation 5 Imaging Reader (BioTek®). Strains of P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wild type
strain P. galatheae S2753 were inoculated as biological triplicates in a CellCarrier-96 Ultra
Microplates (PerkinElmer, 6055302) at an initial OD600 of 0.01. Measurements of both
OD600 and ﬂuorescence were obtained at intervals of 20 min for 72 hours at 25◦C. Wells
containing media with no cultures were also included to obtain the background OD of the
individual media compositions. Due to a relatively high background ﬂuorescence of the P.
galatheae wild type strain, ﬂuorescence caused by the GFP protein was determined as the
ﬂuorescence normalized to OD600 ratio between the Psol-GFPsol strain and WT strain.
The method of calculating the relative ﬂuorescence of the reporter compared to the wt
strain is depicted by the following equation (modiﬁed from [43]):
19
==PAGE:24==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
(
GFPreporter
ODreporter −ODmedium
)/mean(
GFPwt
ODwt −ODmedium
)
(1)
It was assumed that a detected relative ﬂuorescence value above one corresponded to ﬂuo-
rescence emitted from the GFP.
The screening assay was performed using all of the media combinations described in section
2.2. Furthermore, the commercial plate PM3B MicroPlate® provided by Biolog was used to
screen 94 diﬀerent nitrogen sources using the MSgg medium as a base medium. In order to
obtain results from both the reporter strain and the wt simultaneously, two Biolog plates
were used. 100 µL MSgg medium containing the reporter strain was distributed into rows
A-D on one Biolog plate before being transferred individually to row A-D on the black
CellCarrier microplate. Likewise, 100 µL MSgg medium containing the WT strain was
distributed into rows A-D on the other Biolog plate before being transferred individually
to row E-H on the black CellCarrier microplate. The same procedure was later used on the
remaining rows (E-H) on the two Biolog plates.
Lastly, ﬂuorescence screening was performed across a temperature range using a subsection
of the above-mentioned media compositions. For this setup, four CellCarrier Microplates
were sat up using the identical media compositions. The plates were incubated at 20◦C,
25◦C, 30◦C and 40◦C, respectively, following the same procedure at previously described.
The data were analysed and visualised using the statistical computing and graphics software
RStudio© (v. 3.3.0). The maximum relative ﬂuorescence was found for each replicate prior
to statistical analysis for comparison of ﬂuorescence signal. Statistical diﬀerences between
media were calculated using one-way ANOVA and Dunnetts test to compare means to a
deﬁned control group [62]. If no control group was available, a students t-test were applied
to ﬁnd statistical diﬀerences in maximum relative ﬂuorescence between media compositions
[62].
2.6
Chemical extraction and analysis
To mimic the growth conditions used in the ﬂuorescence screening assay, precultures were
prepared as previously described before being resuspended in 4.5 mL either SSBG medium
or MSgg medium. Samples were made in three biological replicates with an initial cell
concentration of ∼104. Each culture was then distributed into 96 µL wells with 200 µL in
each well before being incubated at 25◦C 300 rpm for 60 hours. After incubation, 4 mL
culture were collected from the wells for each sample. The chemical extraction was per-
20
==PAGE:25==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
formed by adding 4 mL ethyl acetate to each culture and incubate at room temperature for
15 min. with frequent mixing by inversion. When a clear division layer could be observed,
3 mL of the liquid top layer were carefully transferred into clean glass vials. The glass
vials were subsequently sat for evaporation using N2 gas. After evaporation, the samples
were diluted in methanol according to the ﬁnal cell concentration of the samples (prior
to chemical extraction), as determined by CFU count. Chemical analyses were performed
with help from Thomas Isbrandt as described in [63]. Data analysis and visualisation were
performed using the software MassHunter [64].
2.7
Single-cell ﬂuorescence microscopy
Fluorescence of single cells we observed for both planktonic cells and cells within a bioﬁlm.
Cultures of P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wild type strain were incubated in a black Cell-
Carrier microplate in three replicates as described in section 2.5. For this setup, the fol-
lowing media were used; SSBA, IO, APY, APY added 3.5µM andrimid and MSgg. After
incubation of nine hours at 25◦C, the 200 µL liquid media were carefully transferred from
each well to empty wells to separate planktonic cells and bioﬁlm.
Hereafter, the wells
containing bioﬁlm were carefully washed using fresh medium. Prior to microscopy of the
planktonic cells, 1µL of cells were transfered to a microscope slide in order to see single
cells. Pictures of planktonic cells and bioﬁlm were taken using a Nikon Inverted Fluores-
cence Microscope (Nikon, Eclipse Ti2) with 40x magniﬁcation, using ﬁlters with emission
of 525 nm and excitation of 469 nm and exposure time of 3000 ms. Pictures were analysed
using the open-source image processing software; Fiji [65].
2.8
Fluorescent colony microscopy
P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wild type strain were spot plated in biological triplicates on
plates containing MB + 1.2% Agar and SSBA + 1.2% Agar. The plates were incubated
at 15◦C, 25◦C, 30◦C and 40◦C, respectively, for 9 hours and observed under a ﬂuorescent
microscope (Zeiss, Fluorescence stereomicroscope SteREO Discovery.V8 with EMS3). Pic-
tures of GFP ﬂuorescence were taken after nine and 24 hours using ﬁlters with emission of
525 nm and excitation of 469 nm, and an exposure time of 10000 ms. The pictures were
analysed using Fiji [65].
21
==PAGE:26==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
3
Results
3.1
Production of solonamides in the ﬂuorescent reporter strain P.
galatheae Psol-GFPsol
The green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) usage in transcriptional reporter fusions oﬀers an
eﬃcient approach for visualising near real-time transcription activity of BGCs in vivo.
Prior to this study, the ﬂuorescent reporter strain P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol was successfully
developed [2]. However, the strain had not yet been investigated for how the GFP fusion
potentially could aﬀect solonamide production. Thus, chemical extraction was performed
on wt strain and reporter strain cultures grown in SSBG medium for 60 hours.
The
production of solonamide A and solonamide B was decreased to about 70-80% in the
reporter strain compared to the wt strain (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Extracted ion chromatograms of solonamide A and B produced by the wt P.
galatheae strain and ﬂuorescent P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol reporter strain grown in SSBG
medium.
It is not known if the concentration of solonamides aﬀect the activity of their own promoter
(Psol). The purpose of using the reporter strain is to evaluate transcription of sol by the
Psol promoter. Thus, extracts of solonamide B were added to cultures of the reporter strain
and wt in SSBG medium at diﬀerent concentrations in order to estimate how representative
22
==PAGE:27==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
the GFP signal is of sol transcription (Figure 6). As the amount of solonamides produced
by the P. galatheae is also unknown. An estimation was based on the amount and purity
of the solonamide B, extracted from 1 L of P. galatheae S2753 culture grown in SSBG
medium. A ﬁnal concentration of approximately 67.2 mg/L solonamides were estimated
to be produced by the bacteria. Thus, the concentrations, 10.5 mg/L, 21 mg/L, 42 mg/L,
84 mg/L and 168 mg/L were chosen for investigation of changes in ﬂuorescence signal.
In order to compare the results of the ﬂuorescence measurements for each concentration,
the maximum relative ﬂuorescence measurement for each biological replicate was analysed
(Figure 6A), along with the time-point for which the relative maximum ﬂuorescence was
observed (Figure 6B).
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
SSBG
10.5 mg/L
21 mg/L
42 mg/L
84 mg/L
168 mg/L
Maximum relative fluorescence
A
0
10
20
30
SSBG
10.5 mg/L
21 mg/L
42 mg/L
84 mg/L
168 mg/L
Time (hours)
B
Figure 6: Addition of diﬀerent concentrations of solonamide B to the SSBG medium. A.
Maximum relative ﬂuorescence detected for each reporter strain replicates across diﬀerent
solonamide B concentrations. B. The time-points at which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence,
represented in ﬁgure A, were detected.
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence (p-value > 0.05) was found when comparing maximum relative
ﬂuorescence from each of the added solonamide concentrations to SSBG medium with
no added solonamide (using ANOVA and Dunnetts Test). Likewise, no diﬀerence could be
found in the time-points of the maximum relative ﬂuorescence. The growth curves, however,
showed a large variation between the replicates when grown in SSBG with 84 mg/L and 168
mg/L solonamide B, respectively (Figure S1). Thus, the maximum relative ﬂuorescence
23
==PAGE:28==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
emitting from SSBG cultures to which 84 mg/L solonamide B was added only have three
replicates, and the cultures added 168 mg/L only have one replicate (Figure 6). Based on
these results, the activity of Psol does not seem to be inﬂuenced by the concentration of
solonamides in the culture, even though the growth curve is aﬀected at high solonamide B
concentrations. However, more research is needed to make a ﬁnal conclusion.
3.2
Screening for conditions that inﬂuence the sol gene transcription
using a ﬂuorescence screening assay
3.2.1
Analysis approaches for the ﬂuorescence screening assay
The ﬂuorescent screening assay was designed to detect diﬀerences in ﬂuorescence in the
reporter strain P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol cultures when grown in diﬀerent media, at dif-
ferent temperatures, salinity and pH. Due to a high background ﬂuorescence of the wt
P. galatheae S2753 strain, the ﬂuorescence signal emitting from the GFPs was estimated
as the diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence signal between the reporter and the wt strain over time
(Section 2.5). Thus, it was assumed that a detected relative ﬂuorescence value above one
corresponded to ﬂuorescence emitted from the GFP. The relative ﬂuorescence would later
be expected to decrease, as the GFP will be subject to quenching by several external factors
(model depicted in Figure 7). As previously described, the transcription of the gfp-gene
and the sol- gene are coupled. Thus, the ﬂuorescent signal emitting from the GFP will
function as an indicator of sol transcription.
Figure 7:
The expected result of detectable emission of light from the GFP within the
reporter strain.
Relative ﬂuorescence (solid green line) values over one (dotted red line)
indicate more ﬂuorescence emitting from the reporter strain compared to the wt strain.
24
==PAGE:29==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
For validation of the screening method, the growth conditions, in which Buijs et al. ob-
served increased transcription of the solonamide BGC (Section 1.3), was recreated [3].
Continuous measurements of growth and ﬂuorescence of the P. galatheae wt and reporter
strain were performed using the APY medium with and without added andrimid. Growth
curves of cultures grown in APY were linear up until 4 hours after incubation, indicating
the exponential growth phase. An exponential-stationary transition phase follows this un-
til the stationary phase starts around 15 hours (Figure 8.1). A slight decrease in OD600
was observed during the stationary phase, likely due to cell aggregation. When incubating
samples in APY with 3.5 µM andrimid, the time-frame of the growth phases were approx-
imately the same as described for the APY medium (Figure 8.3). However, the speciﬁc
growth rate was slower when andrimid was added to the culture, and a lower maximum
cell density was reached for this culture after 35 hours.
Figure 8: 1. Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain
and WT strain in APY medium. 2. Mean relative ﬂuorescence in APY medium. 3. Mean
log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain and WT strain in
APY medium added 3.5 µM andrimid. 4. Mean relative ﬂuorescence in APY medium added
3.5 µM andrimid. Vertical black lines indicate the time-point 4 and 15 hours. Horizontal red
dotted line indicates relative ﬂuorescence of 1.
25
==PAGE:30==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
The relative ﬂuorescence of the reporter strain as compared to the wt strain, increased as ex-
pected, in the exponential-stationary transition phase after the addition of 3.5 µM andrimid
to the culture, which indicates sol-transcription within this time frame (Figure 8.4). This
ﬁnding is in accordance with Buijs et al., who also detected an increase in sol transcription
levels after the addition of andrimid (Section 1.3). However, no ﬂuorescence signal could
be detected in the APY medium without andrimid, even though sol-transcription and the
solonamides compounds were previously detected in cultures grown in the APY medium
[3].
3.2.2
Fluorescent signal can be detected within the exponential growth-phase
of P. galatheae cultures
For further validation of the method, continuous growth and ﬂuorescence were measured
for cultures grown in the SSBG medium in which the production of solonamides has been
veriﬁed by chemical extraction (Section 3.1).
Figure 9: Results of ﬂuorescence screening assay using the SSBG medium. A and B indicate
two diﬀerent replicates of the screening assay. 1. Individual log10 transformed OD600 growth
curves of the three reporter strain replicates, and the three wt strain replicates. 2. Individual
ﬂuorescence curves of the three reporter strains relative to the mean wt ﬂuorescence. 3. Mean
log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of the reporter strain and the wt strain. 4. Mean
ﬂuorescence of the reporter strain relative to the mean ﬂuorescence of the wt strain. Vertical
black lines indicate the time-point 4 and 15 hours. Horizontal red dotted line indicates relative
ﬂuorescence of 1.
26
==PAGE:31==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Relative ﬂuorescence of more than one was detected for each replica within the exponential-
stationary transition growth phase (Figure 9A.1 and 9A.2). This ﬂuorescence signal was
also clear when observing the mean relative ﬂuorescence of the three replicates (Figure 9A.3
and 9A.4).
However, when the measurements were repeated, the expected signal was
detected within the same time frame when observing the mean value of the replicates
(Figure 9B.3 and 9B.4), but a variation in the signal can be observed when looking at the
individual replicates (Figure 9B.1 and 9B.2).
Throughout this project, the growth and ﬂuorescence detection were replicated a total of
nine times using the SSBG medium. The growth curves were all near-identical across the
diﬀerent replicated runs, as can be seen for two of the replications depicted in ﬁgure 9A.1 &
3 and ﬁgure 9B.1 & 3, respectively. For most plates, a general agreement in the maximum
relative ﬂuorescence was found between the replicates (Figure 10A). However, when looking
at the time at which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence occurred, quite a large variation
was found both within the biological replicates in each plate and across plates (Figure 10B).
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Plate #
Maximum relative fluorescence
A
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Plate #
Time (hours)
B
Figure 10: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence detected for each reporter strain replicates
across replications of microtiter plate setups. B. The time-points at which the maximum
relative ﬂuorescence represented in ﬁgure A were detected.
27
==PAGE:32==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
3.2.3
Diﬀerences in maximum relative ﬂuorescence signal between reporter
and wt strain across media compositions
Several diﬀerent media compositions were chosen for the actual screening assay to determine
if speciﬁc carbon or nitrogen sources could induce the solonamide BGC transcription. The
three complex media, APY, SSBG and IO have previously been used to investigate sol
transcription or solonamide production within the P. galatheae. In addition, the MSgg
medium was chosen as a deﬁned medium. Lastly, SSBG was prepared with glycerol as
carbon source instead of glucose, and MSgg with glucose instead of glycerol to investigate
the eﬀect of these two carbon sources on sol transcription. The value of the maximum
relative ﬂuorescence detected for each replicate of the reporter strain was determined in
the diﬀerent media (Figure 11A). Likewise, the time-point was determined for which the
maximum relative ﬂuorescence occurred (Figure 11B).
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
MSgg
MSgg (Glu)
APY
SSBG
SSBG (Gly)
IO
A
Time (hours)
*
**
*
***
Maximum relative fluorescence
0
10
20
30
MSgg
MSgg (Glu)
APY
SSBG
SSBG (Gly)
IO
(
)
B
Figure 11: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence detected for each reporter strain replicates
across diﬀerent media compositions.
B. The time-points at which the maximum relative
ﬂuorescence, represented in ﬁgure A, were detected. MSgg (Glu) indicates that the carbon
source is substituted with glucose. SSBG (Gly) indicates that the carbon source is substituted
with glycerol. * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001
The SSBG and IO media had a signiﬁcantly higher maximum relative ﬂuorescence when
compared to the MSgg media (p-value of 0.0012 and 0.0193 respectively) and the APY
medium (p-value of 0.0007 and 0.0112, respectively) (Figure 11A). No signiﬁcant diﬀerence
28
==PAGE:33==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
was found for the maximum relative ﬂuorescence between any of the other media. The time
points at which maximum relative ﬂuorescence were detected were generally found within
5-15 hours. However, later time points were observed for the MSgg media (Figure 11B).
The maximum relative ﬂuorescence signal of the two media, APY and MSgg, were very
close to one (Figure 11A), meaning no ﬂuorescence signal was emitted from the GFP in
these media. Interestingly the substitution of glycerol with glucose in the MSgg medium
increased the ﬂuorescence signal (although not signiﬁcantly); however the signal for these
measurements were neither as clear as the expected signal depicted in ﬁgure 7 or within
the exponential-stationary transition phase (Figure S2). Thus, more replicates need to be
performed in this media to rule out the unclear signal aﬀecting the results. The two media,
SSBG and IO, have a maximum relative ﬂuorescence at around 1.2 to 1.3, meaning the
reporter strains emit 20-30% more ﬂuorescent light than the wt strain (Figure 11A). Based
on these results, it seems there is approximately the same degree of sol-transcription in the
IO as has been validated in the SSBG media (Section 3.1).
3.2.4
Signiﬁcantly less production of solonamides in the MSgg medium com-
pared to the SSBG medium
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence signal between the reporter strain and the wt strain
was observed when grown in the SSBG medium (Figure 12A.2). However, no diﬀerence
was observed when cultures were grown in the MSgg medium (Figure 12A.4). Thus, it
was decided to investigate if this indication in transcription activity could be translated
into higher levels of solonamide A and B. Chemical extraction of organic compounds was
performed on P. galatheae S2753 cultures grown in SSBG and MSgg medium, respectively.
Signiﬁcantly lower amounts of solonamide B was found in the MSgg cultures (approx.
2·102) following 60 hours of cultivation compared to the SSBG cultures (approx. 4·105)
(Figure 12B). Thus, only a 0.05% production of solonamide B was detected in the MSgg
cultures compared to the SSBG cultures, which is in accordance with the ﬁndings of the
screening assay. Additionally, the amount of solonamide A was below the detection level
in the cultures grown within the MSgg medium.
29
==PAGE:34==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure 12: A1. Mean growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain and wt strain in SSBG
medium.
A2.
Mean relative ﬂuorescence of the reporter strain grown in SSBG medium
- Vertical black lines indicate 4 and 15 hours.
A3.
Mean growth curves of Psol-GFPsol
reporter strain and wt strain in MSgg medium.
A2.
Mean relative ﬂuorescence of the
reporter strain grown in MSgg medium. Vertical black lines indicate 12 and 25 hours. B.
Chemical extraction of the solonamides A and B in wt cultures after 60 hours of growth in
SSBG and MSgg medium, respectively. Solonamide A concentration in MSgg medium was
below the detection limit.
Contrary to the growth of the cultures in SSBG medium (Figure 12A.1), the growth in the
MSgg medium showed a reduced speciﬁc growth rate throughout the exponential growth
phase as it reached the exponential-stationary transition phase at around 12 hours and
enters the stationary growth phase after about 25 hours (Figure 12A.3). CFU counts of
the two cultures prior to chemical extraction, however, revealed a ﬁnal concentration of
approx. 2.4·108 in the SSBG cultures and 8.5·108 in the MSgg cultures, meaning despite
a slower growth rate in the MSgg medium, a slightly higher ﬁnal cell concentration was
reached.
3.2.5
Addition of nitrogen to the MSgg medium
Due to the signiﬁcantly lower production of the solonamides in cultures grown in the MSgg
medium, as compared to the SSBG medium, the composition of these were compared as
this could point to substrates inducing solonamide production. Firstly, the SSBG medium
contains glucose as the sole carbon source, and the MSgg medium contains glycerol. How-
ever, as mentioned in section 3.2.3, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found between the MSgg
30
==PAGE:35==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
medium containing glucose and glycerol, respectively, and likewise for the SSBG medium,
indicating that these two carbon sources do not aﬀect sol transcription. Next, the salt
composition is diﬀerent between the two media. SSBG contains unreﬁned salt, which is
harvested from ocean and saltwater deposits, and MSgg contains NaCl as the primary
salt source along with small amounts of deﬁned salts (See section 2.2 for details). Lastly,
an apparent diﬀerence between the two media is the nitrogen composition. The SSBG
medium contains the complex nitrogen source of casamino acids (CA) whereas the MSgg
only contains the two deﬁned nitrogen sources, thiamine and K-glutamate. Thus, it was
decided to do a large screening of deﬁned nitrogen sources using the commercial Biolog
plate containing 94 diﬀerent nitrogen sources. Several nitrogen sources appeared to induce
sol gene expression (results not shown). As only one replicate exists in the Biolog setup,
nine promising nitrogen sources were chosen for a more detailed testing using the setup
described in section 2.5. These were the the CA used in the SSBG medium, the six amino
acids L-Leucine, L-Histidine, L-Proline, L-Alanine, L-Arginine and L-Valine, and two inor-
ganic nitrogen sources NaNO3 and NH4Cl. The nitrogen sources were systematically added
to the MSgg medium (reference) to determine if any of these could induce a ﬂuorescence
signal similar to the one observed in the SSBG medium (Figure 13).
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Reference
CA
L−Leucine
L−Histidine
L−Proline
L−Alanine
L−Arginine
 L−Valine
NaNO3
NH4Cl
A
Time (hours)
Maximum relative fluorescence
*
*
0
10
20
30
Reference
CA
L−Leucine
L−Histidine
L−Proline
L−Alanine
L−Arginine
 L−Valine
NaNO3
NH4Cl
B
Figure 13: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence detected for each reporter strain replicates
across diﬀerent nitrogen sources added to the reference (MSgg) medium. B. The time-points
at which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence, represented in ﬁgure A, were detected. * = p <
0.05
31
==PAGE:36==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
ANOVA and Dunnett’s Test were used for comparison of the maximum ﬂuorescence signal
from each added nitrogen source as compared to the reference medium. Signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences in maximum relative ﬂuorescence were only observed between the reference medium
and L-Valine and NaNO3, respectively (p-value < 0.05) (Figure 13A). The addition of the
complex nitrogen source CA to the MSgg reference medium did not increase the relative ﬂu-
orescence signal as was expected. However, the growth of the Photobacterium in the MSgg
medium containing CA, was very similar to the growth in the SSBG medium (Figure S3).
This indicates that casamino acids might not be the main cause of the sol transcription in
cultures grown in the SSBG medium. Further testing is needed to determine this.
3.2.6
Inﬂuence of pH, salinity and temperature on relative GFP ﬂuorescence
To test the eﬀect of temperature on the sol transcription, four diﬀerent microtiter plates
containing the same media compositions were incubated at 20◦C, 25◦C, 30◦C and 40◦C,
respectively, for 35 hours. ANOVA and Dunnett’s Test were used to compare each tem-
perature using the 25◦C incubated cultures as reference.
MSgg
SSBG
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Temperature (C)
A
Time (hours)
MSgg
SSBG
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
10
20
30
Temperature (C)
(
)
B
***
Maximum relative fluorescence
Figure 14: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence of MSgg, MSgg with glucose as sole carbon
source (Glu), MSgg with NAG as sole carbon source and SSBG at four diﬀerent temperatures.
B. Time-points for which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence was detected for the said media
at four diﬀerent temperatures. *** = p < 0.001
32
==PAGE:37==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in maximum relative ﬂuorescence signal was detected across the
four temperatures using the MSgg medium (Figure 14A). A signiﬁcant decrease in max-
imum relative ﬂuorescence of the cultures was detected at 40◦C (p-value = 0.0004) as
compared to the 25◦C when grown in the SSBG media. As mentioned in section 3.2.3, an
increase in ﬂuorescent signal could be detected in the SSBG medium at 25◦C when com-
paring to the MSgg medium. The same was found when incubating the samples in SSBG
at 20◦C and 30◦C.
When substituting the carbon source in MSgg with glucose, a signiﬁcantly lower maximum
relative ﬂuorescence was found for samples incubated at 20◦C (p-value = 0.005) and 40◦C
(p-value = 0.011) as compared to the samples incubated at 25◦C (Figure 15A). When
adding NAG to the MSgg as the sole carbon source, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was only found
between the samples incubated at 40◦C (p-value = 0.018) compared to 25◦C. Quite a high
variance was observed for these two media compositions when investigating the time points
for which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence was measured (Figure 15B). This indicates
that more replicates need to be carried out in order to make conclusions.
MSgg (Glu)
MSgg (NAG)
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Temperature (C)
A
Time (hours)
MSgg (Glu)
MSgg (NAG)
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
5
10
15
20
25
Temperature (C)
B
*
*
**
Maximum relative fluorescence
Figure 15: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence of MSgg, MSgg with glucose as sole carbon
source (Glu), MSgg with NAG as sole carbon source and SSBG at four diﬀerent temperatures.
B. Time-points for which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence were detected for the said media
at four diﬀerent temperatures. * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01
33
==PAGE:38==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Investigation of diﬀerences in maximum relative ﬂuorescence across temperatures was also
performed using diﬀerent nitrogen sources. For time-saving purposes, only the three ni-
trogen sources CA, NaNO3 and NH4Cl were chosen for this investigation. A signiﬁcant
increase in the maximum relative ﬂuorescence signal was seen for the MSgg medium sup-
plemented with casamino acids (p-value < 0.001) at 20◦C (Figure 16A). However, some
irregularities was observed on the growth curve in the same time frame as the ﬂuorescent
signal, which might explain the high output (Figure S4). A signiﬁcant decrease in the
maximum relative ﬂuorescence was observed for cultures grown in the MSgg medium sup-
plemented with NaNO3 at 20◦C (p-value = 0.005) and 40◦C (p-value < 0.001), respectively,
as compared to cultures grown at 25◦C. For cultures grown in MSgg, supplemented with
NH4Cl, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was only found between samples grown at 40◦C (p-value =
0.019) and 25◦C. A signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescent signal was detected for samples grown
in MSgg medium supplemented with NaNO3 at 25◦C when compared to the reference MSgg
medium (Figure 13A). This was also true for the samples grown in this medium at 30◦C,
however, not for the cultures grown at 20◦C and 40◦C, respectively. A high variance was
observed for the nitrogen supplemented MSgg media (Figure 16B).
MSgg (CA)
MSgg (NaNO3)
MSgg (NH4Cl)
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Temperature (C)
A
Time (hours)
MSgg (CA)
MSgg (NaNO3)
MSgg (NH4Cl)
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
20
25
30
40
10
20
30
Temperature (C)
(
)
B
*
***
**
***
Maximum relative fluorescence
Figure 16: A. Maximum relative ﬂuorescence of MSgg, MSgg with casamino acids added
(CA), MSgg added NaNO3 and MSgg added NH4Cl at four diﬀerent temperatures. B. Time-
points for which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence were detected for the said media at four
diﬀerent temperatures.* = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001
34
==PAGE:39==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
The growth curves previously described for cultures grown in MSgg at 25◦C have changed
noticeably for cultures grown at 40◦C. These growth curves are more similar to those
observed for cultures grown in the SSBG at 25◦C, as the exponential phase is within the
time-frame of 0-8 hours, followed by the exponential-stationary transition phase and the
stationary phase beginning at around 15 hours (Figure S5). More cell aggregation was
observed in the MSgg medium when viewing the liquid cultures under a microscope as
compared to the SSBG and IO media at 25◦C (Figure S9). If cell aggregation aﬀected the
measured growth curve in MSgg, it could indicate that cell aggregation do not take place
when incubating samples in MSgg at 40◦C. However, due to time constraints, this was not
further investigated.
For all media except MSgg, a signiﬁcant lower maximum relative ﬂuorescence were detected
in samples incubated at 40◦C as compared to 25◦C. Concurrently with the temperature
study, an E. coli containing a constitutively expressed gfp+-gene on a plasmid was included
to check the stability of the GFP+ ﬂuorescence at varying temperatures. The ﬂuorescence
emission of the GFP+ was found to decrease more rapidly at higher temperatures (Fig-
ure S6).
This indicates the ﬂuorescence screening assay, using this ﬂuorophore, is not
suitable for investigating sol transcription at high temperatures.
Besides nutrient compositions, the inﬂuence of pH and salinity on transcription of sol was
investigated. For testing of pH, the SSBG and IO media were adjusted to pH 5, 6 and 7
using MOPS buﬀer. After incubation for 30 hours, no diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence signal could
be detected between the diﬀerent pH (results not shown), indicating that sol transcription
is not altered at these pH-values. Likewise, the salinity of the MSgg medium was adjusted
using NaCl to concentrations of 0.5%, 5% and 8%. No diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence could be
detected between the samples containing 0.5%, 5% NaCl and the normal MSgg medium
containing 2% NaCl. Even though the P. galatheae has previously been documented to be
able to survive in up to 9% (w/v) NaCl [14], cultures inoculated in MSgg containing 8%
NaCl did not grow.
3.3
Investigating diﬀerences in ﬂuorescence between wt and Psol-GFPsol
strain using ﬂuorescence microscopy
The solonamides have previously been found to interfere with the QS system of S. aureus
[11].
It was therefore hypothesised that their natural role may also be involved in QS
signalling. A common role of QS in P. galatheae is within bioﬁlm formation. Thus, sol
transcription was investigated between planktonic cells and cells aggregated or composed
in a bioﬁlm using the constructed ﬂuorescent reporter strain P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol.
35
==PAGE:40==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
3.3.1
Fluorescence signal detection in planktonic cells and aggregated cells
The maximum relative ﬂuorescence, of the continuous screening assay, was mostly observed
within the time frame of 5-15 hours for all media except the MSgg. Thus, it was decided
to observe ﬂuorescence in planktonic cells using a ﬂuorescence microscope after 9 hours of
growth in the media SSBG, IO, APY, APY added 3.5µM andrimid and MSgg. In order
to compare the results with the ﬁndings of the ﬂuorescence screening assay, the cultures
were grown in microtiter plate wells using the same growth conditions as for the screening
assay. Prior to the observation of planktonic cells under the microscope, 1µL of culture
was transferred to an optic microscope slide to observe ﬂuorescence in single cells. The
observation at 40x magniﬁcation showed a clear ﬂuorescence signal in the single planktonic
cells grown in the SSBG and the IO media (Figure 17). However, no single cell ﬂuorescence
was observed for either of the two APY media or the MSgg medium (Figure S7).
Figure 17: Bright ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscope pictures of P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol
and wt cultures grown for 9 hours at 25◦C in SSBG and IO media, respectively. Pictures are
taken with 40x magniﬁcation.
Next, ﬂuorescence of cells aggregated together or within a bioﬁlm was investigated. For
this, all liquid was removed from the microtiter wells containing cultures and the wells
were washed with fresh media to leave only cells that were attached to the glass bottom
of the wells.
Smaller aggregations of cells were observed in all of the media; however,
only ﬂuorescence was again observed for cells grown in SSBG and IO media, respectively
(Figure 18 and S8).
36
==PAGE:41==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure 18:
Bright ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscope pictures of aggregated cultures P.
galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wt.
After growth for 9 hours at 25◦C in SSBG and IO me-
dia, respectively, the liquid cultures were removed, and aggregated cells were washed in fresh
media. Pictures are taken with 40x magniﬁcation.
As previously mentioned, a relatively large number of aggregated cells were observed in
the MSgg medium compared to the remaining media (Figure S9). This was somewhat
unexpected as growth curves of cultures grown within this media show a lower cell density
after 9 hours compared to the other media (Figure 12). Thus it was expected to observe
fewer cells in this sample. However, the aggregation of cells might explain the reduced
growth rate of cultures in the MSgg medium, as the aggregation of cells can aﬀect OD
measurements. More research is needed to verify this.
3.3.2
Fluorescence signal detection in cultures grown on solid medium
So far, comparisons of gene expression (GFP ﬂuorescence) were done in liquid media.
Finally it was also studied if the reporter fusion could be used on agar media. The diﬀerence
in ﬂuorescence between the wt and reporter colonies was vague, and any diﬀerences could
not be clearly seen by eye.
Thus, the imaging software Fiji was used to estimate the
diﬀerences in light intensity between colony and background. If a higher diﬀerence between
colony and background was found for the reporter as compared to the wt, it was more
ﬂuorescent. After incubation of 9 hours at 25◦C a diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence between reporter
strain and wt strain was observed for cultures grown on marine agar (MA) (diﬀ. = 0.5)
(Figure 19). However, this diﬀerence could not be detected in cultures grown on SSBG
37
==PAGE:42==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
agar (diﬀ. < 0.04). Additionally, no ﬂuorescence could be detected on the MA plates after
24 hours of incubation at 25◦C (diﬀ. < 0.07).
Psol_GFPsol
WT
Figure 19: P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wt strain gown on MA plate for 9 hours at 25◦C
As ﬂuorescence was observed in a reporter strain culture grown on MA at 25◦C, several
other temperatures were tested. No diﬀerence could be detected between the reporter strain
and the wt strain when incubated for 9 hours at any of the temperatures (15◦C, 30◦C and
40◦C) along with the 25◦C cultures (diﬀ. < 0.06). Neither was a diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence
detected for any of the colonies after a total incubation time of 15 hours. Due to time
constraints, this was not further replicated.
3.4
Promoter swap using the PﬂaD promoter
Giubergia et al., determined the global transcription proﬁle of P. galatheae S2753 grown
on chitin and glucose [31].
This data set was used to locate a suitable native ﬂagellin
promoter for performing promoter swap with the solonamide promoter and thereby create
over-expression of the solonamides within the P. galatheae (Section 2.4). Two individually
transcribed ﬂagellin encoding genes suitable for promoter swap, ﬂaA and ﬂaD were found
when investigating the data. As more mRNA was found in the transcriptomic analysis for
the ﬂaD-gene, this was thought to be more transcribed and thus has a stronger promoter.
The mRNA matching the ﬂaD-gene also revealed transcription to be initiated approxi-
mately 200bp upstream of the gene. As it is diﬃcult to pinpoint the exact sequence of the
promoter, it was chosen to include 300bp upstream of the transcription initiation of ﬂaD
in order to include both SD sequence, -35 sequence and ribosomal binding site.
38
==PAGE:43==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Three individual DNA fragments were puriﬁed before the construction of the suicide plas-
mid for conjugation. The 300 bp fragment containing the PﬂaD promoter was puriﬁed
as described in section 2.4, along with the two 500 bp homologues regions named Larm
and Rarm. Each of these three fragments was designed to have a
20 bp sequence with
homology to each of the two other fragments, which allows for overlap PCR to combine
the fragments. PCR results revealed the puriﬁed fragments to be the expected lengths
(Figure 20). The same was seen for the combined fragment PﬂaD-Rarm of 800 bp and the
ﬁnal fragment Larm-PﬂaD-Rarm of 1300 bp. A linearized pDM4 of approx. 7 kb was also
conﬁrmed.
Figure 20: (a) PCR ampliﬁed fragments of PﬂaD region (300 bp), Larm (500 bp), Rarm
(500 bp) and linearized pDM4 plasmid (7101 bp) (b) Overlap PCR resulting in combined
PﬂaD-Rarm fragment (800 pb) (c) Overlap PCR resulting in combined Larm-PﬂaD-Rarm
fragment, marked with a red arrow (1300 bp).
After direct cloning of the combined Larm-PﬂaD-Rarm fragment into the linearized pDM4,
the relevant region of the plasmid was ampliﬁed, expecting a fragment of 1512 bp if the
fragment was correctly inserted into the pDM4. If the fragment had not been inserted into
the pDM4, the fragment was expected to be only 200 bp long. One of the 13 isolated colonies
showed a correct inserted fragment (Figure 21). The assembled plasmid was puriﬁed from
this colony and send for sequencing using the same primer pairs. Sequencing results revealed
a 100% similarity with the in silico designed pDM4-PﬂaD plasmid, thus validating the
plasmid for further use.
39
==PAGE:44==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure 21: Results of colony PCR on 13 colonies using the primer pair pdm4_seq_p1_Fw +
pdm4_seq_p4_Rv. Puriﬁed pDM4 plasmid was included as a control using the same primer
pair.
Next, the constructed suicide plasmid was conjugated into the P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol
strain via the donor E. coli strain and grown on chloramphenicol-containing plates to
initiate the ﬁrst homologues crossover (section 2.4). A colony showing the correct phenotype
for successful ﬁrst crossover was isolated and validated by colony PCR (Figure S10). This
colony was then regrown in LB and plated on the sucrose selective plates to initiate the
second crossover.
Figure 22: Illustration of the two possible genotypes after second homologues recombination.
The expected PCR products and their lengths are depicted under each genotype.
After the second homologues recombination, two possible genotypes can be found. The
wildtype genotype (in this case, the Psol-GFPsol strain) can be found if the homologues
recombination has happened with the same homology arm as the ﬁrst crossover. Alterna-
40
==PAGE:45==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
tively, the successful insertion mutant genotype can be found if the crossover has happened
with the opposite homology arm as the ﬁrst crossover. The resulting genotype of both
scenarios are depicted in ﬁgure 22, along with the primers used to check if the insertion
of the PﬂaD region was successful.
If the wild-type genotype was restored, a band of
3235 bp would be expected for the insertion_check primer pair, and no band for the in-
sertion_check_P1_Fw & PﬂaD_check_Rv as the last primer anneals within the PﬂaD
region, which is not present in the wild type. For a successful PﬂaD insertion mutant,
bands of 3535 bp and 1301 bp would be expected for the two primer pairs, respectively.
Figure
23:
Results
of
colony
PCR
on
15
colonies
using
the
primer
pairs
in-
sert_check_P1_Fw + PﬂaD_check_Rv (ﬁrst column) and insert_check_P1_Fw + in-
sert_check_P4_Rv (second column). Psol-GFPsol strain was included as a control using
the same primer pairs. The constructed pDM4-PﬂaD plasmid was also included as a control
using the primer pair pdm4_seq_p1_Fw + PﬂaD_check_Rv
After the second crossover, a lot of colonies was capable of growing on the sucrose selection
plates. Of these, 30 colonies were chosen for colony PCR to identify successful insertion
mutants. Unfortunately, no band in the correct length was observed for any of the colonies
(Figure 23, only 15 colonies shown). Several colonies showed the wild-type genotype as
they have a band around the 3 kb, as can also be found for the included Psol-GFPsol
control (although the band is weak). A band of approximately 3 kb is also found in the
41
==PAGE:46==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
ﬁrst well of many of the colonies, indicating contamination of these PCR samples with the
primers from well number two. In order to check if the designed PﬂaD_check_Rv primer
works, the pDM4-PﬂaD plasmid was included using the primer pdm4_PﬂaD_fw primer.
For this, the expected band of 767 bp was seen (Figure 23), meaning the primer does work
as intended. The second crossover step was performed a total of three times in the hopes
of obtaining a PﬂaD insertion mutant. Unfortunately no attempt was successful.
42
==PAGE:47==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
4
Discussion
The discovery of antibiotics has arguably been one of the greatest medical breakthroughs
of the 20th century. However, modern use and misuse of antibiotics have intensiﬁed the so-
called antibiotic resistance crisis. This calls for novel strategies towards the development of
treatments for combating pathogenic bacteria without the introduction of resistance. The
solonamides do not aﬀect growth of the pathogen S. aureus. However, they interfere with its
QS system thereby inhibiting the expression of virulence factors. The regulatory elements
important for the synthesis of the solonamides is still an open question. To answer this
question, a ﬂuorescence reporter fusion of the P. galatheae S2753, with a GFP+ encoding
gene fused to the solonamides BGC, has been utilised to investigate transcription of the
solonamides NRPS encoding gene cluster across diﬀerent media compositions and external
factor inﬂuence.
4.1
Evaluation of the ﬂuorescence screening assay as an indicator for sol
transcription
Chemical extraction of solonamide A and B from wt and Psol-GFPsol reporter strain
cultures, grown in SSBG medium, showed that the reporter fusion produced approximately
70-80% of the wt strain. As the addition of pure solonamide B to the cultures did not
signiﬁcantly aﬀect the ﬂuorescence signal detected from the reporter strain (Figure 6A),
the diﬀerence in actual solonamide production was not thought to aﬀect the results from
the reporter fusion assay.
Antibiotics supplied in sub-MIC concentrations can aﬀect microbial growth and metabolism
by altering gene expression [3, 60]. In this study, the addition of the antibiotic andrimid to
the wt and reporter strains of P. galatheae cultures resulted in a 30% increase in ﬂuorescence
emission as compared to cultures with no addition of andrimid. This ﬁnding is in accordance
with Buijs et al., who found an up to a 102-fold increase in expression of the solonamides
BGC after the addition of andrimid to cultures of P. galatheae S2753 as determined by RT-
qPCR [3]. In the current study, the emission of ﬂuorescence from the GFP+ protein was
used as the indicator of sol transcription. Posttranscriptional regulation is diﬀerent between
the GFP protein and the solonamide NRPS protein [66, 43], responsible for synthesising the
cyclodepsipeptides. Thus, the results of this study and the one performed by Buijs et al.
cannot be quantitatively compared, although they qualitative are similar. This congruence,
however, supports the underlying assumption that the ﬂuorescence signal of the screening
assay is an indicator for transcription of the solonamides gene cluster.
43
==PAGE:48==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
As described in section 1.3, both Buijs et al. and Zhang et al. have found the sol mRNA,
the solonamide NRPS protein and the solonamides to be present in the exponential growth
phase [3, 4]. This is in accordance with the current study’s ﬁndings, where ﬂuorescence
emission of the GFP+ protein from the reporter strain was detected in the exponential
growth phase for most media, including the same media used by Buijs and Zhang (Section
3.2.2). Throughout the project, there was a relatively large variation between the time-
points for which the maximum relative ﬂuorescence was detected (Section 3). An important
factor to consider when comparing the time of ﬂuorescence observation is; even though the
two genes sol and gfp+ are simultaneously transcribed, the maturation time of the GFP+
protein is a lot faster [43]. Furthermore, folding and emission of light from the GFP+ are
aﬀected by several abiotic factors, such as oxygen diﬀusion, pH, temperature and back-
ground ﬂuorescence of other molecular compounds [67]. This might explain the variation
observed in this study. Additionally, the ﬂuorescence from the constructively expressed
GFP+ in the E. coli strain, grown at diﬀerent temperatures, showed a considerable faster
decrease at higher temperatures (Figure S6). This indicates that the GFP+ protein is not
as stable at 40◦C as at 25◦C, which suggests a limitation to the screening assay in terms
of investigating sol transcription across a temperature gradient.
Finally, no diﬀerences in ﬂuorescence signal was observed between the wt and Psol-GFPsol
strain when grown in the APY media without andrimid. However, when using RT-qPCR
on P. galatheae cultures, grown in this media, transcription of the sol-gene was detected
[3], which suggests a detection limit of the sol transcription reporter. Further investigations
are needed to determine the detection limit.
4.2
Possible regulators of sol transcription
In general, two pathways can be envisioned for the up-regulation of a biosynthetic pathway.
Either a BGC, preceded by a weak promoter, needs to be positively regulated, or repres-
sion needs to be lifted from a repressed BGC [68]. In 2016, the transcriptional regulator
ScmR was identiﬁed as an important and global gatekeeper of secondary metabolism in
Burkholderia thailandensis [69]. This regulator silenced the expression of several secondary
metabolite encoding gene clusters via pathway-speciﬁc regulators. Such a regulation might
be direct, by binding and activating transcriptional regulator(s), or indirectly by trigger-
ing global metabolic changes and various stress response pathways [68]. Additionally, in
Streptomyces venezuela, a silent orphan BGC was activated by knocking out a hypothesised
repressor encoding gene. The subsequent de-repression of the BGC led to the discovery
of the compound gaburedin [70]. In the current study, only a 0.05% of the solonamides
44
==PAGE:49==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
were produced by cultures grown in the MSgg medium as compared to the SSBG medium.
The hypothesis throughout this study was that the MSgg lacked an impotent nutrient for
initiating the solonamide NRPS synthesis. However, another explanation could be that
components of the MSgg medium contributes to repression of the sol transcription, either
directly or by up-regulation of another gene. Further research to identify a potential re-
pressor in the MSgg medium requires extensive work. Due to time limitations this was not
investigated.
4.3
Eﬀect of nutrient composition on sol transcription
The composition of bacterial growth media aﬀects bacterial secondary metabolism [68, 71].
As previously mentioned, growth on chitin increased the bio-activity of several Vibrionaceae
strains against the ﬁsh pathogen Vibrio anguillarum as compared to growth on glucose-rich
media [31]. Additionally, chitin also inﬂuenced the global transcription proﬁle of both V.
coralliilyticus and P. galatheae. Here several secondary metabolite encoding BGCs were
up- and downregulated, including the andrimid biosynthetic genes in V. coralliilyticus and
the holomycin biosynthetic genes in P. galatheae [31]. The transcription of solonamide
biosynthetic genes in P. galatheae was not aﬀected by growth on chitin [31]. This is sup-
ported by the current study where no diﬀerence was observed, in ﬂuorescence signal, of
cultures grown on glucose and the chitin monomer NAG (Figure 15).
Nitrogen availability aﬀects secondary metabolite production in several microorganisms
[68, 72].
In this study, production of solonamides was signiﬁcantly lower when the P.
galatheae was grown in the MSgg medium as compared to the SSBG medium.
A key
diﬀerence between these media is the nitrogen composition. Thus, it was speculated that
this aﬀected the sol transcription. The addition of the complex nitrogen source, casamino
acids, to the MSgg medium did not signiﬁcantly increase the ﬂuorescence signal representing
sol transcription. However, an increase in the speciﬁc growth rate was seen, indicating
that the complex nitrogen source is likely more involved in primary metabolism than sol
transcription. A signiﬁcant increase in maximum relative ﬂuorescence was observed when
adding the inorganic nitrogen source NaNO3 to the MSgg cultures. As NO−
3 is an important
part of the global ocean nitrogen cycle, and several microorganisms assimilate this nitrogen
source [73], it is possible that it could aﬀect sol transcription.
45
==PAGE:50==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
4.4
The physiological role of the solonamides in the producing organism
Concurrently with this study, Zhang et al. compared the physiology and proteome of the P.
galatheae S2753 and the solonamide deﬁcient mutant ∆sol [4]. Here the swimming motility
of the ∆sol was signiﬁcantly decreased as compared to the wt strain (Figure 24A). The
swimming ability was later complemented by embedding solonamide B in the swimming
plate (Figure 24B), which indicate a role of the solonamides in triggering the swimming of
this strain.
Figure 24: Result of the swimming assay performed by Zhang et al.. P. galatheae S2753
and ∆sol spot-plated on A. SSBG+0.3% agar medium, B. SSBG+0.3% agar added 28.6µM
solonamide B. Incubation at 40 ◦C [4]
In their analyses of the proteome, Zhang et al. saw a signiﬁcant decrease in the puta-
tive type IV pilin protein and the FlgM negative regulator in the ∆sol as compared to
wt. Additionally, a signiﬁcant decrease in cyclic di-GMP Phosphodiesterase in the ∆sol
strain was observed in the exponential growth phase. The c-di-GMP (cyclic diguanylate
monophosphate) is a bacterial messenger which binds to several eﬀectors [74]. For example,
c-di-GMP aﬀects the ﬂagellar motor output by regulating the methylation of chemorecep-
tors through a single-domain PilZ adaptor protein in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which in
turn would regulate motility and the chemotacitc response [74]. High c-di-GMP levels in
this bacterium have been associated with a low switching frequency of the ﬂagellar, result-
46
==PAGE:51==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
ing in a random swimming behaviour. Low c-di-GMP concentration, on the other hand,
results in high switching frequency leading to directional swimming of the cell, which is
crucial for an eﬀective chemotactic response [74]. Similar observations have been made
in the bacterium Vibrio cholerae, where recently, a model for signal transduction towards
bioﬁlm and ﬂagellum have been proposed (Figure 25).
Figure 25: Proposed signal transduction model towards bioﬁlm and ﬂagellum production
within the Vibrio cholerae.
Lines ending in arrows indicate positive regulation, and lines
ending with a perpendicular line indicate negative regulation [75]
In this model, high levels of c-di-GMP likely activate the VpsR-VpsT, which further increase
c-di-GMP levels and thereby maintain elevated bioﬁlm matrix production. This will even-
tually result in total repression of the ﬂagellar production and activity by repressing FlrA
[75]. Recently a marine sponge colonising strain of the Pseudovibrio spp. has been found
to produce the cyclic heptapeptides termed pseudovibriamides A and B [76]. A knock-out
mutation of a single gene (pppA) in the responsible BGC revealed a signiﬁcant decrease
in the swimming and swarming abilities of the mutant [76]. This indicates that the solon-
amides are not the only NRPS-derived small molecule capable of inﬂuencing swimming or
47
==PAGE:52==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
chemotaxis behaviour of marine bacteria.
The current study found the inorganic nitrogen source NaNO3 to increase sol transcription
in the P. galatheae. The increased sol transcription is presumed to result in an increased
production of solonamides, however this still needs to be validated. This observation adds
the last but essential piece to the puzzle of the native role of solonamides in P. galatheae as
the regulation of swimming, caused by the solonamides, could be involved in a chemotaxis
response to nitrogen availability (Figure 26).
Figure 26: A proposed model of the solonamides physiological role in P. galatheae S2753,
including bacterial swimming, secondary metabolites and several primary cellular processes.
Findings of the current study are highlighted in red.
Dotted line indicates the putative
connection between swimming and nitrogen availability [4]
A connection between nitrogen metabolisms and the motility, bioﬁlm formation and vir-
ulence has been described in P. aeruginosa [77]. Here, the reduction of either nitrate or
nitrite substrates provides energy for P. aeruginosa anaerobic growth, trough a membrane-
bound nitrate reductase and its cognate two-component nitrate sensor-regulator. Addition-
ally, the pathogen Salmonella enterica, requires energy taxis towards nitrate for ﬂagellum-
dependent host invasion [72]. This is mediated by a methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein
(MCP) named Tsr.
MCPs in general are a family of receptors in bacteria that medi-
ate chemotaxis response to a diverse range of signals [78]. MCPs are membrane proteins
that, when stimulated by binding of speciﬁc ligands, e.g. nitrate, transfers information to
downstream signalling proteins and thus initiates the chemotaxic response. The bacterial
48
==PAGE:53==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
species Vibrio alginolyticus, closely related to the Photobacterium, regulates chemotaxis
trough a MCP protein which activates the histidine kinase CheA and its substrate CheY
[79]. This in turn regulates both swimming and surface-swarming in this organism. Some
MCP encoding genes, including the CheA and CheY encoding genes are annotated in the
P. galatheae genome [data not shown]. Thus, it is possible that the swimming behaviour
of P. galatheae is initiated by a nitrogen sensing MCP, and the solonamides are important
for the resulting ﬂagellum cascade. More research is needed to conclude the precise mecha-
nisms of chemotaxis response in P. galatheae S2753 and the speciﬁc role of the solonamides
herein.
As the solonamides interfere with the arg QS-system of S. aureus [11] it was speculated
that they could be involved in QS in the native producer S2753. Quorum sensing signals
have been associated with swimming regulation within some bacteria.
For example, a
N-acylhomoserine lactone (AHL) dependent QS sensing system controls swimming and
swarming in the gammaproteobacteria Yersinia enterocolitica through a ﬂagellum cascade
much like the one described for Vibrio cholerae (Figure 25) [80]. Even though QS is not
involved in bioﬁlm formation in all bacteria [81], it is associated with bioﬁlm formation in
some Vibrio species [40, 82]. Additionally, the arg QS has been linked to bioﬁlm formation
in S. aureus [22]. Thus, it was hypothesised that the solonamides could be involved in
bioﬁlm formation within P. galatheae S2753.
In the current study, the relation between transcription of the solonamides gene cluster and
bioﬁlm formation in P. galatheae was investigated. This was done by observing diﬀerences
in ﬂuorescence of the reporter strain between planktonic cells and aggregated cells as proxies
for relatively low and high density cultures. Fluorescence was detected in both planktonic
and aggregated cells; however, it was not possible to distinguish the intensity of the signal
between the two states. This indicates that sol transcription occurs in both planktonic and
aggregated cells, even though the transcription level can not be determined. No pictures of
large bioﬁlm structures of the P. galatheae were obtained, leaving the question of whether
sol transcription occurs within bioﬁlm of P. galatheae unanswered.
Another observation of the swimming assay performed by Zhang et al. is the decrease
in motility observed for both wt and ∆sol strain of P. galatheae strain at 40◦C. The
ﬂagella are less stable at higher temperatures, creating a higher demand for new structural
components constantly being provided [83].
If the ﬂagellar assembly is correlated with
the regulation of the solonamides as hypothesised, a higher ﬂuorescence signal would be
expected in the screening assay performed in the current study for cultures grown at 40◦C
compared to 25◦C. However, due to the previously mentioned decrease in GFP+ stability
at this temperature, the expected results were not observed (section 3.2.6).
49
==PAGE:54==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
4.5
The ecological importance of solonamides to the survival of P.
galatheae S2753 in marine environments
Nutrients in the ocean are not evenly distributed, and often scarce [84]. Thus, collective
behaviours such as swarming, swimming and bioﬁlm formation are beneﬁcial for bacterial
survival and the colonisation of eukaryotic hosts (Figure 27) [85, 86, 87]. Although this
process requires substantial cellular energy, it also aﬀords key physiological beneﬁts [88].
For example, the ﬂagellar motility of bacteria allow the cell to seek out favourable chem-
icals (attractants) or avoiding detrimental chemicals (repellents) [85, 89]. Here, allosteric
interactions with the chemotaxis histidine protein kinase at the cell surface allow the bac-
terial cells to respond to very small relative changes in chemoeﬀector concentrations over a
wide range of background concentrations. Therefore, the bacterial cells are able to react to
very low concentrations of chemicals in the environment [90]. For example, the bacterium
Geobacter metallireducens, which is capable of using insoluble Fe(III) oxide as an electron
acceptor, has been found to speciﬁcally express ﬂagella and pili in order to move towards
higher concentrations of Fe(III) in nutrient-poor sediments [91].
Figure 27: The role of motility in the interactions of bacteria with their natural environment
[85]
Attractant and repellent gradients arise naturally in the environment as the cause of a range
of processes. For example, bacterial metabolism generates a gradient as the cells metabolise
nutrients in the near environment and thus decrease the local concentrations. Therefore, by
swimming outwards, the bacteria will likely be able to ﬁnd higher nutrient concentrations
[84]. Nitrogen is a key element for life and the functioning of marine ecosystems [73]. The
50
==PAGE:55==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
most accessible form of nitrogen in the ocean is dinitrogen (N2), but this nitrogen source is
only available to nitrogen-ﬁxing microbes [92]. A few Vibrionaceae strains including Vibrio
parahaemolyticus isolated from the rhizophere are able to ﬁxate nitrogen [93]. However,
this ability is not widely spread within the Vibrionaceae family. On the other hand, several
Vibrionaceae species can assimilate nitrate and ammonium directly as nutrients into the
cells [94].
The current study hypothesised that the availability of speciﬁc nitrogen regulates sol tran-
scription as the inorganic nitrogen source sodium nitrate (NaNO3) increased the ﬂuorescent
signal representing sol transcription. As described in the previous section, the solonamides
may regulate the amount of c-di-GMP in P. galatheae, which in turn regulates the shift
between random and directional swimming by controlling the switching frequency of the
ﬂagellar within the P. aeruginosa [74]. If this is the case, the switch to directional swimming
potentially caused by the solonamides could direct the Photobacterium towards higher ni-
trogen concentrations, and in general, facilitate the spread of P. galatheae within the ocean.
Additionally, the study found a higher transcription of the sol-gene when exposed to the
antibiotic andrimid (Section 3.2.1). Even though a previous study has found this increase
in sol transcription does not result in higher amounts of the solonamides [3], the transcrip-
tion may be up-regulated in response to the andrimid as a repellent [85]. Although this
requires further experiments, this ﬁnding, in combination with the ﬁndings of Zhang et al.
[4] indicates that the natural function of the solonamides is likely a part of a chemotaxis
response of P. galatheae S2753.
4.6
Construction of promoter swap mutant was not successful
An attempt was made to perform a promoter swap in P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol using
the near-constitutive promoter of the ﬂaggilin encoding ﬂaD-gene. The method chosen
for the mutant construction was a well-documented method for molecular manipulation
of P. galatheae [66, 2]. The conditional suicide plasmid pDM4-PﬂaD-GFPsol was success-
fully constructed, and almost all subsequent steps of the cloning strategy were likewise
successful. However, completing a fully constructed P. galatheae PﬂaD-GFPsol strain was
never achieved as no colonies matching the expected PﬂaD-GFPsol genotype were obtained
following the second crossover on the sucrose selective plates (section 2.4). Genetic ma-
nipulation has not previously been used to construct an overexpression of the solonamides
in P. galatheae. As mentioned in section 3.1, high concentrations of solonamides (conc.
> 84 mg/L) aﬀected growth of the cultures. Thus, the solonamide in high concentrations
may be toxic to the P. galatheae, explaining why the overproduction of the solonamides
51
==PAGE:56==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
in the native organism was not successful. Alternatively, introducing the 300 bp promoter
region of the ﬂaD-gene creates a homologues region with the native ﬂaD promoter region,
which could cause spontaneous homologues recombination. This is potentially lethal to
the bacterium due to a large chromosomal segment loss [95]. However, this spontaneous
crossover would not be expected to happen at such a rate that all the successfully con-
structed mutants would die.
52
==PAGE:57==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
5
Conclusions
During this study, a ﬂuorescent reporter strain of the P. galatheae was successfully used to
investigate sol transcription in the native producer. The ﬂuorescence screening assay was
validated by detecting a positive relative ﬂuorescence signal, representing sol transcription,
in the SSBG medium, in which solonamides are produced. Additionally, the ﬂuorescence
assay was validated by detecting increased sol transcription after adding the antibiotic
andrimid to bacterial cultures.
The screening assay was subsequently used to determine sol transcription across several
nutrient compositions, pH, salinity and temperature. The highest sol transcription level
was seen in the SSBG and IO media at 25◦C. No change in ﬂuorescence signal was observed
across pH and salinity gradients. Due to the varying stability of the GFP+ protein across
a temperature gradient, no conclusive results for sol transcription could be made according
to temperature.
No sol transcription was detected in cultures grown in the MSgg medium, and the pro-
duction, veriﬁed by chemical extraction, revealing meagre amounts of solonamide B in
this medium as compared to cultures grown in the SSBG medium. Systematic addition
of nitrogen sources to the MSgg medium revealed an increased sol transcription after the
addition of L-Valine and NaNO3, respectively, which suggests a possible link between ni-
trogen availability and sol transcription. In combination with the ﬁndings of Zhang et al.,
these ﬁndings provide more details into the ecological meaning of solonamides and their
eﬀect on the swimming abilities of the native producer.
Ultimately, this study resulted in the proof of concept for applying the ﬂuorescent reporter
strain P. galatheae Psol-GFPsol. Although, limitations of the current setup has also been
discussed in this thesis. Additionally, a new hypothesis was formed as to the involvement of
the solonamides in a chemotactic response system as the native function of the compounds
in P. galatheae S2753.
53
==PAGE:58==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
6
Perspectives
Throughout this study, evaluation of the signal-to-background noise level of the GFP+
protein was diﬃcult. Several organic compounds, such as ﬂavins, emit ﬂuorescence at the
same wavelengths as the GFP protein [96]. Investigations of the P. galatheae genome using
the online MicroScope platform reveals several ﬂavin producing genes in the bacterium.
Thus, using the GFP as the ﬂuorophore might not be the best option for transcriptional
reporter fusions in P. galatheae.
To improve the ﬂuorescent screening assay, one could
avoid similar diﬃculties in the future by constructing a pre-screening of ﬂuorophores within
the organism of choice before incorporating the ﬂuorescent protein gene into the genome.
For example, Phelan et al. screened seven diﬀerent ﬂuorescent proteins in Streptomyces
venezuelae using expression vectors [97]. The mCherry ﬂuorescent protein had the highest
signal-to-background output and thus was the most promising protein for investigating
transcription in this organism. Alternatively, Xu et al. have successfully developed a so-
called HiTES (high-throughput elicitor screens) method to help discover small-molecule
elicitors of silent BGCs. This study found that three times insertion of the eGFP encoding
gene signiﬁcantly increased the signal of low transcriptional level BGCs, making it easier to
detect the ﬂuorescence signal and distinguish diﬀerences in transcriptional eﬃciency [42].
The use of this method might also allow for ﬂuorescence detection on solid media, where
no ﬂuorescence signal from the reporter strain could be observed in the current study.
In this study, an increase in sol transcription was observed when adding the inorganic
nitrogen source NaNO3 to the growth media. Due to limited time, an insuﬃcient number
of replicates were carried out. Thus, in future studies, it would be crucial to carry out
more replications of this setup. Also, several nutrients besides nitrogen have been found to
increase transcription of natural products BGCs. For example, antimicrobial tropodithietic
acid production is induced in a Pseudovibrio strain under limited phosphate conditions
[98] and iron limiting conditions cause induction on siderophore production [99]. Thus, it
would be interesting to investigate the eﬀect of these nutrients on sol transcription using
the designed ﬂuorescence screening assay.
The results of the swimming assay performed by Zhang et al. in combination with the
ﬁndings of this study have formed the hypothesis that the solonamides are involved in a
chemotactic response towards nitrogen assimilation. In order to test this hypothesis, a
swimming assay in which a nitrogen gradient was incorporated could be performed to see
if swimming would be observed in the direction of the highest nitrogen concentration.
54
==PAGE:59==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
References
[1] L. L. Lindqvist, “Role of the secondary metabolites , solonamides , in Photobacterium galatheae,”
no. June, 2019.
[2] I. Borre, “Construction of a ﬂuorescent reporter fusion in Photobacterium galatheae,” 2021.
[3] Y. Buijs, T. Isbrandt, S.-D. Zhang, T. O. Larsen, and L. Gram, “The Antibiotic Andrimid Produced
by Vibrio coralliilyticus Increases Expression of Biosynthetic Gene Clusters and Antibiotic Production
in Photobacterium galatheae,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 11, p. 3276, 12 2020.
[4] S.-D. Zhang, L. L. Lindqvist, T. Isbrandt, I. Borre, T. O. Larsen, and L. Gram, “Inﬂuence of dep-
sipeptide, solonamide, on the native producer, Photobacterium galatheae S2753,” In prep.
[5] A. Fleming, “On the Antibacterial Action of Cultures of a Penicillium, with Special Reference to their
Use in the Isolation of B. inﬂuenzæ,” pp. 226–236, 1929.
[6] G. Annunziato, “Strategies to overcome antimicrobial resistance (AMR) making use of non-essential
target inhibitors: A review,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 20, no. 23, 2019.
[7] L. C. De Freitas, “WHO (2017) Global priority list of antibiotic-resistant bacteria to guide research,
discovery, and development of new antibiotics.,” Cadernos de Pesquisa, vol. 43, no. 148, pp. 348–365,
2013.
[8] J. V. Olsen, F. F. Calvo-Artavia, P. Sandøe, and N. Toft, “Cost of LA-MRSA eradication from Danish
pig herds (poster),” Svepm, 2018.
[9] C. Cuny, L. H. Wieler, and W. Witte, “Livestock-Associated MRSA: The impact on humans,” 11 2015.
[10] H. Machado, R. N. Tuttle, and P. R. Jensen, “Omics-based natural product discovery and the lexicon
of genome mining,” 10 2017.
[11] M. Mansson, A. Nielsen, L. Kjærulﬀ, C. H. Gotfredsen, M. Wietz, H. Ingmer, L. Gram, and T. O.
Larsen, “Inhibition of virulence gene expression in Staphylococcus aureus by novel depsipeptides from
a marine Photobacterium,” Marine Drugs, vol. 9, pp. 2537–2552, 12 2011.
[12] D. A. Rasko and V. Sperandio, “Anti-virulence strategies to combat bacteria-mediated disease,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 117–128, 2010.
[13] L. Gram, J. Melchiorsen, and J. B. Bruhn, “Antibacterial activity of marine culturable bacteria col-
lected from a global sampling of ocean surface waters and surface swabs of marine organisms,” Marine
Biotechnology, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 439–451, 2010.
[14] H. Machado, S. Giubergia, R. V. Mateiu, and L. Gram, “Photobacterium galatheae sp. nov, a bioac-
tive bacterium isolated from a mussel in the Solomon Sea,” International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology, vol. 65, pp. 4503–4507, 12 2015.
[15] M. Wietz, M. Mansson, C. H. Gotfredsen, T. O. Larsen, and L. Gram, “Antibacterial compounds from
marine Vibrionaceae isolated on a global expedition,” Marine Drugs, vol. 8, pp. 2946–2960, 12 2010.
[16] L. Kjaerulﬀ, A. Nielsen, M. Mansson, L. Gram, T. O. Larsen, H. Ingmer, and C. H. Gotfredsen, “Identi-
ﬁcation of four new agr quorum sensing-interfering cyclodepsipeptides from a marine Photobacterium,”
Marine Drugs, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 5051–5062, 2013.
[17] B. Kitir, M. Baldry, H. Ingmer, and C. A. Olsen, “Total synthesis and structural validation of cy-
clodepsipeptides solonamide A and B,” Tetrahedron, vol. 70, no. 42, pp. 7721–7732, 2014.
55
==PAGE:60==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[18] H. Machado, E. C. Sonnenschein, J. Melchiorsen, and L. Gram, “Genome mining reveals unlocked
bioactive potential of marine Gram-negative bacteria,” BMC Genomics, vol. 16, pp. 1–12, 12 2015.
[19] G. D. Wright, “Unlocking the potential of natural products in drug discovery,” Microbial Biotechnology,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 55–57, 2019.
[20] S. Sivanathan and J. Scherkenbeck, “Cyclodepsipeptides: A rich source of biologically active com-
pounds for drug research,” Molecules, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 12368–12420, 2014.
[21] W. Li, A. Schlecker, and D. Ma, “Total synthesis of antimicrobial and antitumor cyclic depsipeptides,”
Chemical Communications, vol. 46, no. 30, pp. 5403–5420, 2010.
[22] R. P. Novick and E. Geisinger, “Quorum sensing in staphylococci,” 12 2008.
[23] A. Nielsen, M. Mansson, M. S. Bojer, L. Gram, T. O. Larsen, R. P. Novick, D. Frees, H. Frøkiær,
and H. Ingmer, “Solonamide B inhibits quorum sensing and reduces Staphylococcus aureus mediated
killing of human neutrophils,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, p. e84992, 1 2014.
[24] K. L. Painter, A. Krishna, S. Wigneshweraraj, and A. M. Edwards, “What role does the quorum-
sensing accessory gene regulator system play during Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia?,” Trends in
Microbiology, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 676–685, 2014.
[25] J. Brango-Vanegas, L. A. Martinho, L. J. Bessa, A. G. Vasconcelos, A. Plácido, A. L. Pereira, J. R.
Leite, and A. H. Machado, “Synthesis of novel sulﬁde-based cyclic peptidomimetic analogues to solon-
amides,” Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry, vol. 15, pp. 2544–2551, 10 2019.
[26] B. Heras, M. J. Scanlon, and J. L. Martin, “Targeting virulence not viability in the search for future
antibacterials,” British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 208–215, 2015.
[27] H. B. Bode, B. Bethe, R. Höfs, and A. Zeeck, “Big Eﬀects from Small Changes: Possible Ways to
Explore Nature’s Chemical Diversity,” ChemBioChem, vol. 3, p. 619, 7 2002.
[28] S. Giubergia, C. Phippen, C. H. Gotfredsen, K. F. Nielsen, and L. Gram, “Inﬂuence of niche-speciﬁc
nutrients on secondary metabolism in Vibrionaceae,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 82,
no. 13, pp. 4035–4044, 2016.
[29] S. Sarkar, M. Saha, D. Roy, P. Jaisankar, S. Das, L. Gauri Roy, R. Gachhui, T. Sen, and J. Mukher-
jee, “Enhanced production of antimicrobial compounds by three salt-tolerant actinobacterial strains
isolated from the Sundarbans in a niche-mimic bioreactor,” Marine Biotechnology, vol. 10, no. 5,
pp. 518–526, 2008.
[30] M. Wietz, M. Månsson, and L. Gram, “Chitin stimulates production of the antibiotic andrimid in a
Vibrio coralliilyticus strain,” Environmental Microbiology Reports, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 559–564, 2011.
[31] S. Giubergia, C. Phippen, K. F. Nielsen, and L. Gram, “Growth on Chitin Impacts the Transcrip-
tome and Metabolite Proﬁles of Antibiotic-Producing Vibrio coralliilyticus S2052 and Photobacterium
galatheae S2753,” mSystems, vol. 2, 2 2017.
[32] Y. Buijs, P. K. Bech, D. Vazquez-Albacete, M. Bentzon-Tilia, E. C. Sonnenschein, L. Gram, and
S. D. Zhang, “Marine Proteobacteria as a source of natural products: Advances in molecular tools and
strategies,” Natural Product Reports, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 1333–1350, 2019.
[33] W. R. McCleary, “Application of promoter swapping techniques to control expression of chromosomal
genes,” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 641–648, 2009.
[34] B. Mohari, M. A. Thompson, J. C. Trinidad, S. Setayeshgar, and C. Fuqua, “Multiple Flagellin Proteins
Have Distinct and Synergistic Roles in Agrobacterium tumefaciens Motility,” Journal of Bacteriology,
vol. 200, 12 2018.
56
==PAGE:61==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[35] X. Y. Zhuang and C. J. Lo, “Construction and loss of bacterial ﬂagellar ﬁlaments,” Biomolecules,
vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1–14, 2020.
[36] J. J. Zhang, X. Tang, and B. S. Moore, “Genetic platforms for heterologous expression of microbial
natural products,” Natural Product Reports, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 1313–1332, 2019.
[37] D. M. Cornforth and K. R. Foster, “Competition sensing: The social side of bacterial stress responses,”
Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 285–293, 2013.
[38] J. Davies, G. B. Spiegelman, and G. Yim, “The world of subinhibitory antibiotic concentrations,”
Current Opinion in Microbiology, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 445–453, 2006.
[39] S. Sengupta, M. K. Chattopadhyay, and H. P. Grossart, “The multifaceted roles of antibiotics and
antibiotic resistance in nature,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 4, no. MAR, pp. 1–13, 2013.
[40] S. Sun, Q. X. M. Tay, S. Kjelleberg, S. A. Rice, and D. McDougald, “Quorum sensing-regulated
chitin metabolism provides grazing resistance to Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlms,” ISME Journal, vol. 9, no. 8,
pp. 1812–1820, 2015.
[41] L. H. Naylor, “Reporter gene technology: The future looks bright,” Biochemical Pharmacology, vol. 58,
no. 5, pp. 749–757, 1999.
[42] F. Xu, B. Nazari, K. Moon, L. B. Bushin, and M. R. Seyedsayamdost, “Discovery of a Cryptic Anti-
fungal Compound from Streptomyces albus J1074 Using High-Throughput Elicitor Screens,” Journal
of the American Chemical Society, vol. 139, no. 27, pp. 9203–9212, 2017.
[43] W. Overkamp, K. Beilharz, R. D. O. Weme, A. Solopova, H. Karsens, T. Kovács, J. Kok, O. P. Kuipers,
and J. W. Veening, “Benchmarking various green ﬂuorescent protein variants in Bacillus subtilis,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Lactococcus lactis for live cell imaging,” Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, vol. 79, no. 20, pp. 6481–6490, 2013.
[44] O. Scholz, A. Thiel, W. Hillen, and M. Niederweis, “Quantitative analysis of gene expression with an
improved green ﬂuorescent protein,” European Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 267, no. 6, pp. 1565–1570,
2000.
[45] O. K. Hess-Erga, J. Moreno-Andrés, Enger, and O. Vadstein, “Microorganisms in ballast water: Dis-
infection, community dynamics, and implications for management,” Science of the Total Environment,
vol. 657, pp. 704–716, 2019.
[46] J. O’Brien and G. D. Wright, “An ecological perspective of microbial secondary metabolism,” Current
Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 552–558, 2011.
[47] J. B. Bruhn, L. Gram, and R. Belas, “Production of antibacterial compounds and bioﬁlm formation
by Roseobacter species are inﬂuenced by culture conditions,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 442–450, 2007.
[48] M. E. Teasdale, J. Liu, J. Wallace, F. Akhlaghi, and D. C. Rowley, “Secondary metabolites produced
by the marine bacterium halobacillus salinus that Inhibit quorum sensing-controlled phenotypes in
gram-negative bacteria,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 567–572, 2009.
[49] C. C. De Carvalho and P. Fernandes, “Production of metabolites as bacterial responses to the marine
environment,” 3 2010.
[50] T. Miyashiro and E. G. Ruby, “Shedding light on bioluminescence regulation in Vibrio ﬁscheri,” Molec-
ular Microbiology, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 795–806, 2012.
57
==PAGE:62==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[51] S. Takshak and S. B. Agrawal, “Defense potential of secondary metabolites in medicinal plants under
UV-B stress,” Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology, vol. 193, no. February, pp. 51–
88, 2019.
[52] J. L. Jacobs, T. L. Carroll, and G. W. Sundin, “The role of pigmentation, ultraviolet radiation tolerance,
and leaf colonization strategies in the epiphytic survival of phyllosphere bacteria,” Microbial Ecology,
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 104–113, 2005.
[53] H. Wang, Z. Li, R. Jia, Y. Hou, J. Yin, X. Bian, A. Li, R. Müller, A. F. Stewart, J. Fu, and Y. Zhang,
“RecET direct cloning and Redαβ recombineering of biosynthetic gene clusters, large operons or single
genes for heterologous expression,” Nature Protocols, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1175–1190, 2016.
[54] D. C. Volke, L. Friis, N. T. Wirth, J. Turlin, and P. I. Nikel, “Synthetic control of plasmid replication
enables target- and self-curing of vectors and expedites genome engineering of Pseudomonas putida,”
Metabolic Engineering Communications, vol. 10, no. February, p. e00126, 2020.
[55] D. L. Milton, R. O’Toole, P. Hörstedt, and H. Wolf-Watz, “Flagellin A is essential for the virulence of
Vibrio anguillarum,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 178, no. 5, pp. 1310–1319, 1996.
[56] A. Dragoš, H. Kiesewalter, M. Martin, C. Y. Hsu, R. Hartmann, T. Wechsler, C. Eriksen, S. Brix,
K. Drescher, N. Stanley-Wall, R. Kümmerli, and T. Kovács, “Division of Labor during Bioﬁlm Matrix
Production,” Current Biology, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 1903–1913, 2018.
[57] E. Paradis and K. Schliep, “ape 5.0: an environment for modern phylogenetics and evolutionary
analyses in R,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35, pp. 526–528, 2 2019.
[58] D. Vallenet, A. Calteau, M. Dubois, P. Amours, A. Bazin, M. Beuvin, L. Burlot, X. Bussell, S. Fouteau,
G. Gautreau, A. Lajus, J. Langlois, R. Planel, D. Roche, J. Rollin, Z. Rouy, V. Sabatet, and C. Médigue,
“MicroScope: An integrated platform for the annotation and exploration of microbial gene functions
through genomic, pangenomic and metabolic comparative analysis,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 48,
no. D1, pp. D579–D589, 2020.
[59] E. W. Sayers, T. Barrett, D. A. Benson, E. Bolton, S. H. Bryant, K. Canese, V. Chetvernin, D. M.
Church, M. Dicuccio, S. Federhen, M. Feolo, L. Y. Geer, W. Helmberg, Y. Kapustin, D. Lands-
man, D. J. Lipman, Z. Lu, T. L. Madden, T. Madej, D. R. Maglott, A. Marchler-Bauer, V. Miller,
I. Mizrachi, J. Ostell, A. Panchenko, K. D. Pruitt, G. D. Schuler, E. Sequeira, S. T. Sherry,
M. Shumway, K. Sirotkin, D. Slotta, A. Souvorov, G. Starchenko, T. A. Tatusova, L. Wagner, Y. Wang,
W. John Wilbur, E. Yaschenko, and J. Ye, “Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnol-
ogy Information.,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 38, no. Database issue, pp. 5–16, 2010.
[60] S.-D. Zhang, T. Isbrandt, L. L. Lindqvist, T. O. Larsen, and L. Gram, “Holomycin, an antibiotic
secondary metabolite, is required for bioﬁlm formation of the native producer <i>Photobacterium
galatheae<i/> S2753,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. submitted, 2021.
[61] H. Chen, S. D. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Cai, W. J. Zhang, T. Song, and L. F. Wu, “Eﬃcient genome
editing of Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1 by CRISPR-Cas9 system for analyzing magnetotactic
behavior,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 9, no. JUL, 2018.
[62] G. Upton and I. Cook, A Dictionary of Statistics. Oxford University Press, 1 2008.
[63] M. L. Nielsen, T. Isbrandt, L. M. Petersen, U. H. Mortensen, M. R. Andersen, J. B. Hoof, and T. O.
Larsen, “Linker ﬂexibility facilitates module exchange in fungal hybrid PKS-NRPS engineering,” PLoS
ONE, vol. 11, no. 8, 2016.
58
==PAGE:63==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[64] A. M. Software, “Agilent MassHunter Software-Your faster route to insight,” Brochure.Agilent, 2015.
[65] J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rue-
den, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J. Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, and
A. Cardona, “Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis,” Nature Methods, vol. 9,
no. 7, pp. 676–682, 2012.
[66] L. L. Lindqvist, L. Louise, S. Lindqvist, and L. L. Lindqvist, “Molecular Manipulation of Photobac-
terium galatheae S2753,” 2018.
[67] R. Y. Tsien, “The green ﬂuorescent protein,” Annual Review of Biochemistry, vol. 67, pp. 509–544,
1998.
[68] A. Romero-Rodríguez, N. Maldonado-Carmona, B. Ruiz-Villafán, N. Koirala, D. Rocha, and
S. Sánchez, “Interplay between carbon, nitrogen and phosphate utilization in the control of secondary
metabolite production in Streptomyces,” Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, International Journal of General
and Molecular Microbiology, vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 761–781, 2018.
[69] D. Mao, L. B. Bushin, K. Moon, Y. Wu, and M. R. Seyedsayamdost, “Discovery of scmR as a global
regulator of secondary metabolism and virulence in Burkholderia thailandensis E264,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 114, no. 14, pp. E2920–E2928,
2017.
[70] J. D. Sidda, L. Song, V. Poon, M. Al-Bassam, O. Lazos, M. J. Buttner, G. L. Challis, and C. Corre,
“Discovery of a family of γ-aminobutyrate ureas via rational derepression of a silent bacterial gene
cluster,” Chemical Science, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 86–89, 2014.
[71] Y. Iwai and S. Ömura, “Culture conditions for screening of new antibiotics,” the Journal of Antibiotics,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 123–141, 1982.
[72] F. Rivera-Chávez, C. A. Lopez, L. F. Zhang, L. García-Pastor, A. Chávez-Arroyo, K. L. Lokken,
R. M. Tsolis, S. E. Winter, and A. J. Bäumler, “Energy taxis toward host-derived nitrate supports a
salmonella pathogenicity island 1-independent mechanism of invasion,” mBio, vol. 7, no. 4, 2016.
[73] S. Pajares and R. Ramos, “Processes and Microorganisms Involved in the Marine Nitrogen Cycle:
Knowledge and Gaps,” Frontiers in Marine Science, vol. 6, no. November, 2019.
[74] L. Xu, L. Xin, Y. Zeng, J. K. H. Yam, Y. Ding, P. Venkataramani, Q. W. Cheang, X. Yang, X. Tang,
L. H. Zhang, K. H. Chiam, L. Yang, and Z. X. Liang, “A cyclic di-GMP-binding adaptor protein
interacts with a chemotaxis methyltransferase to control ﬂagellar motor switching,” Science Signaling,
vol. 9, no. 450, 2016.
[75] D. C. Wu, D. Zamorano-Sánchez, F. A. Pagliai, J. H. Park, K. A. Floyd, C. K. Lee, G. Kitts, C. B.
Rose, E. M. Bilotta, G. C. Wong, and F. H. Yildiz, Reciprocal c-di-GMP signaling: Incomplete ﬂagellum
biogenesis triggers c-di-GMP signaling pathways that promote bioﬁlm formation, vol. 16. 2020.
[76] L. P. Ióca, Y. Dai, S. Kunakom, J. Diaz-Espinosa, A. Krunic, C. M. Crnkovic, J. Orjala, L. M. Sanchez,
A. G. Ferreira, R. G. S. Berlinck, and A. S. Eustaquio, “A novel family of nonribosomal peptides
modulate collective behavior in Pseudovibrio bacteria isolated from marine sponges,” Angewandte
Chemie International Edition, vol. 60607, 2021.
[77] N. E. Van Alst, K. F. Picardo, B. H. Iglewski, and C. G. Haidaris, “Nitrate sensing and metabolism
modulate motility, bioﬁlm formation, and virulence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa,” Infection and Immu-
nity, vol. 75, no. 8, pp. 3780–3790, 2007.
59
==PAGE:64==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[78] P. Derr, E. Boder, and M. Goulian, “Changing the speciﬁcity of a bacterial chemoreceptor,” Journal
of Molecular Biology, vol. 355, no. 5, pp. 923–932, 2006.
[79] M. Kojima, R. Kubo, T. Yakushi, M. Homma, and I. Kawagishi, “The bidirectional polar and uni-
directional lateral ﬂagellar motors of Vibrio alginolyticus are controlled by a single CheY species,”
Molecular Microbiology, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 57–67, 2007.
[80] S. Atkinson, C. Y. Chang, R. E. Sockett, M. Cámara, and P. Williams, “Quorum sensing in Yersinia
enterocolitica controls swimming and swarming motility,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 188, no. 4,
pp. 1451–1461, 2006.
[81] C. Liu, D. Sun, J. Zhu, J. Liu, and W. Liu, “The Regulation of Bacterial Bioﬁlm Formation by
cAMP-CRP: A Mini-Review,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 11, no. May, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[82] C. M. Waters, W. Lu, J. D. Rabinowitz, and B. L. Bassler, “Quorum sensing controls bioﬁlm formation
in Vibrio cholerae through modulation of cyclic Di-GMP levels and repression of vpsT,” Journal of
Bacteriology, vol. 190, no. 7, pp. 2527–2536, 2008.
[83] S. Humphries, “A physical explanation of the temperature dependence of physiological processes me-
diated by cilia and ﬂagella,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, vol. 110, no. 36, pp. 14693–14698, 2013.
[84] A. E. Mattingly, A. A. Weaver, A. Dimkovikj, and J. D. Shrout, “Assessing travel conditions: Envi-
ronmental and host inﬂuences on bacterial surface motility,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 200, no. 11,
2018.
[85] O. A. Soutourina and P. N. Bertin, “Regulation cascade of ﬂagellar expression in Gram-negative
bacteria,” FEMS Microbiology Reviews, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 505–523, 2003.
[86] G. H. Wadhams and J. P. Armitage, “Making sense of it all: Bacterial chemotaxis,” Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1024–1037, 2004.
[87] K. Cooksey, “Adhesion of bacteria and diatoms to surfaces in the sea,” 1985.
[88] M. A. Matilla and T. Krell, “The eﬀect of bacterial chemotaxis on host infection and pathogenicity,”
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 40–67, 2018.
[89] S. L. Porter, G. H. Wadhams, and J. P. Armitage, “Signal processing in complex chemotaxis pathways,”
Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 153–165, 2011.
[90] V. Sourjik and H. C. Berg, “Receptor sensitivity in bacterial chemotaxis,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 123–127, 2002.
[91] S. E. Childers, S. Ciufo, and D. R. Lovley, “Geobacter metallireducens accesses insoluble Fe(III) oxide
by chemotaxis,” Nature, vol. 416, no. 1996, pp. 767–769, 2002.
[92] M. Voss, H. W. Bange, J. W. Dippner, J. J. Middelburg, J. P. Montoya, and B. Ward, “The ma-
rine nitrogen cycle: Recent discoveries, uncertaintiesand the potential relevance of climate change,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 368, no. 1621, 2013.
[93] J. D. Criminger, T. H. Hazen, P. A. Sobecky, and C. R. Lovell, “Nitrogen ﬁxation by Vibrio para-
haemolyticus and its implications for a new ecological niche,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
vol. 73, no. 18, pp. 5959–5961, 2007.
[94] Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Fu, Y. Gao, H. Zhao, and W. Zhou, “Aerobic-heterotrophic nitrogen removal through
nitrate reduction and ammonium assimilation by marine bacterium Vibrio sp. Y1-5,” Bioresource
Technology, vol. 230, pp. 103–111, 2017.
60
==PAGE:65==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
[95] Andre Kuzminov, “Homologous Recombination-Experimental Systems, Analysis and Signiﬁcance,”
EcoSal Plus, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1124–1129, 2011.
[96] I. Mihalcescu, M. Van-Melle Gateau, B. Chelli, C. Pinel, and J. L. Ravanat, “Green autoﬂuorescence,
a double edged monitoring tool for bacterial growth and activity in micro-plates,” Physical Biology,
vol. 12, no. 6, 2015.
[97] R. M. Phelan, D. Sachs, S. J. Petkiewicz, J. F. Barajas, J. M. Blake-Hedges, M. G. Thompson,
A. Reider Apel, B. J. Rasor, L. Katz, and J. D. Keasling, “Development of next generation synthetic
biology tools for use in streptomyces venezuelae,” ACS Synthetic Biology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 159–166,
2017.
[98] S. Romano, H. N. Schulz-Vogt, J. M. González, and V. Bondarev, “Phosphate limitation induces drastic
physiological changes, virulence-related gene expression, and secondary metabolite production in Pseu-
dovibrio sp. strain FO-BEG1,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 81, no. 10, pp. 3518–3528,
2015.
[99] J. B. Neilands, “Siderophores: Structure and function of microbial iron transport compounds,” Journal
of Biological Chemistry, vol. 270, no. 45, pp. 26723–26726, 1995.
61
==PAGE:66==
Appendix
Figure S1: log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of the P. galatheae S2753 grown in
SSBG medium at 25◦C with added solonamides to ﬁnal concentrations of: A. 0 mg/L B.
10.5 mg/L C. 21 mg/L D. 42 mg/L E. 84 mg/L F. 168 mg/L
==PAGE:67==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure S2: 1. Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain
and WT strain in MSgg(Glu) medium. 2. Mean relative ﬂuorescence in MSgg(Glu) medium.
3. Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain and WT
strain in MSgg medium with glucose as sole carbon source. 4.Mean relative ﬂuorescence in
MSgg(Glu) medium. Vertical black lines indicate the time-point 12 and 25 hours. Horizontal
red dotted line indicates relative ﬂuorescence of 1.
Figure S3: 1. Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter strain
and WT strain in MSgg(CA) medium. 2. Mean relative ﬂuorescence in MSgg(CA) medium.
Vertical black lines indicate the time-point 8 and 15 hours. Horizontal red dotted line indicates
relative ﬂuorescence of 1.
ii
==PAGE:68==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure S4:
1.
Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter
strain and WT strain in MSgg(CA) medium grown at 20◦C. 2. Mean relative ﬂuorescence
in MSgg(CA) medium grown at 20◦C. Vertical black lines indicate the time-point 8 and 15
hours. Horizontal red dotted line indicates relative ﬂuorescence of 1.
Figure S5:
1.
Mean log10 transformed OD600 growth curves of Psol-GFPsol reporter
strain and WT strain in MSgg medium grown at 40◦C. 2.
Mean relative ﬂuorescence in
MSgg medium grown at 40◦C. Vertical black lines indicate the time-point 8 and 15 hours.
Horizontal red dotted line indicates relative ﬂuorescence of 1.
iii
==PAGE:69==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure S6:
Fluorescence signal of constitutively expressed gfp+ -gene in E. coli at four
diﬀerent temperatures. Peak of ﬂuorescence curve corresponds to the exponential-stationary
transition growth phase for all samples
Figure S7:
Bright ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscope pictures of planktonic cultures P.
galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wt. After growth for 9 hours at 25◦C in APY, APY with added
andrimid and MSgg media, respectively. Pictures are taken with 40x magniﬁcation.
iv
==PAGE:70==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure S8:
Bright ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence microscope pictures of aggregated cultures P.
galatheae Psol-GFPsol and wt. After growth for 9 hours at 25◦C in APY, APY with added
andrimid and MSgg media, respectively. The liquid cultures were removed, and aggregated
cells were washed in fresh media. Pictures are taken with 40x magniﬁcation.
Figure S9: Bright ﬁeld microscopy (40x) of aggregated P. galatheae S2753 grown in SSBG,
IO and MSgg media, respectively, for 9 hours 25◦C
v
==PAGE:71==
Ingrid Lykke Borre
s153707
Figure S10: Result of colony PCR on one sample. Expected band of either 1948bp in well
nr. 1 or 1604bp in well nr. 2 no expected band for well nr 3. For Psol-GFPsol, bands were
expected of 1. 1648bp, 2. 1604bp, 3. 3235bp
vi
