==PAGE:1==
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies
for Ship Surveillance
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Emma Silke Borre
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
ESA/ATG medialab, 2014
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Akademivej, Building 356, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Center for Security, National Space
Institute, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in electrotechnology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of physics, mathematics,
machine learning and statistics.
Emma Silke Borre ­ s162590
Signature
Date
ii
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
18 - 06 - 2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The purpose of this project is to use space­based SAR and big data technologies for ship
surveillance. The objectives were to describe and compare SAR data from Sentinel­1,
TerraSAR­X and F­SAR, to perform change detection for ships in harbours in Murmansk
and Nuuk, run and train a convolutional network on DTU­, Kaggle databases and new
detected ships and icebergs, and lastly to perform a concluding analysis of detection,
classification and data quality.
The SAR data from Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR were described in terms of sys­
tem parameters and availability, where data examples from each system were displayed.
The information from the descriptions was then compared in relation to big data technolo­
gies and ship surveillance, where the Sentinel­1 data was very accessible compared to
TerraSAR­X and F­SAR data. The TerraSAR­X and F­SAR system could however pro­
vide considerably higher spatial resolution, and the F­SAR system could record with up
to four different frequency bands simultaneous out of five possible bands.
Change detection was performed from temporal series of Sentinel­1 images, that were
combined into an RGB image, from which the changes could be manually detected from
the dominance of a given colour channel. The change detection was performed in the area
around Nuuk and Murmansk, where changes such as ships, tides and possibly icebergs
were detected in Nuuk, and many ships were detected in Murmansk.
A convolutional neural network was trained on DTU­ and Kaggle training databases, re­
sulting in two classifiers. The performance of the classifiers was evaluated from plots of
classification probabilities and their correct labels, plots of accuracies and losses, confu­
sion matrices, ROC curves and AUC. Both classifiers performed well, where the DTU clas­
sifier converged towards an accuracy of 0.985 and the Kaggle classifier towards 0.900,
and with high precisions. The performance of the DTU classifier was generally higher in
the evaluation, which is expected to be the result of training with data from a considerably
larger training database since deep learning is a big data technology that heavily relies
on the amount of training.
In this project, many different processes were involved in solving the objectives, with ac­
ceptable results. For future work, these procedures could be optimized and the work can
be extended to include more different SAR systems and investigations, and extend the
purpose to include aircraft surveillance as well.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Emma Silke Borre, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Henning Heiselberg, Head of Center, PhD, DTU Security
I want to thank Henning Heiselberg for proposing this project and doing an excellent job
as my main supervisor, during the difficult time of the Covid­19 pandemic. Thank you for
helping me solving the problems in a smart and creative way.
Ole Winther, Professor, Data Science and Complexity, PhD, DTU Compute
I want to thank Ole Winther for providing, as co­supervisor, feedback and suggestions in
the deep learning aspect of this project.
Peder Heiselberg, PhD student, DTU Space
I want to thank Peder Heiselberg for providing the database and python code for the
CNN, and for helping me setting up the code to match my existing implementation and to
interpret the results from the training.
Ernst Krogager, Senior Scientist, Dr.techn., DALO
I want to thank Ernst Krogager for assisting this project as supervisor from DALO, by
providing valuable information on the SAR­ and data aspect on this project. I want to
thank you for being attentive to the timeline and formalities of this project, besides helping
with ongoing feedback, answering technical questions and to generally show great interest
and enthusiasm in this project.
Katrine Feld, Technology Advisor, DALO
I want to thank Katrine Feld for assisting this project as supervisor from DALO, for giving
feedback throughout the project and to help me navigate and download the data provided
by DALO.
Martin Laimonis Veicherts, Technology Advisor, DALO
I want to thank Martin Laimonis Veicherts for giving feedback throughout the project and
to help me with the geocoding in the Murmansk area, that otherwise caused a lot of frus­
tration.
Claus Sølvsteen, Senior Data Analyst, PhD, DALO, Joint GeoMETOC Support Center
I want to thank Claus Sølvsteen for providing the AIS data and to show great interest in
the project.
iv
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Aim and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Data Description
27
3.1
Sentinel­1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
TerraSAR­X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.3
F­SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.4
Automatic Identification System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Implementation
37
4.1
Data handling of SAR image examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Geocoding and AIS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Change Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.5
Ship Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Results
47
5.1
Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Geocoding and AIS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Change Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.5
Ship Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6
Discussion
77
6.1
Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6.2
Geocoding and AIS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
6.3
Change Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
6.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6.5
Ship Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
7
Outlook
85
8
Conclusion
87
Bibliography
91
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
The automatic identification system, also called AIS, is a surveillance system developed
mostly to avoid ship collisions on the sea. AIS data contains information of unique identifi­
cation, geographic positions, course and velocity among other parameters. Although it is
mandatory for international voyage ships of a certain size, and passenger ships, in gen­
eral, to carry AIS transponders and transmit AIS data, not all ships obey this rule. These
ships are called dark ships since they cannot be monitored using AIS transmissions. The
so­called dark ships could for example be illegal fishing boats or other ships, that do not
want to be detected by authorities. Although they cannot be detected by AIS data, they
can be seen on synthetic aperture radar data, which is radar images of locations on earth,
that are unaffected by clouds and rain, and can be used for surveillance both night and
day, unlike optical systems.
To detect and recognize dark ships, change detection can be performed on synthetic
aperture radar images to detect the ships from the stationary surroundings, and big data
technologies including deep learning can be applied to recognize the ships from other
objects, by learning the ship features from training databases that include ship­ and non­
ship examples.
In this thesis, the objective is to utilize big data technologies on SAR images, combined
with AIS data to perform ship surveillance, and to detect dark ships. Firstly, three SAR
systems are considered; Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR. These SAR systems are
described and compared in terms of system parameters and availability among other at­
tributes, for the use in big data technologies and ship surveillance. Then change detection
is performed in the area around Nuuk, which is the capital of Greenland, and in the area
around Murmansk in Russia. And lastly, some classifiers are trained on data containing
ship and iceberg examples, tested on extracted SAR image data and their overall perfor­
mance in classifying ships is evaluated.
The thesis is made in collaboration with The Danish Ministry of Defence Acquisition and
Logistics Organisation (DALO) in relation to the ongoing NATO STO research task group
SET­279. This research group investigates the usage of space­based SAR and big data
technologies to support NATO operations, with a focus on harbour activity monitoring in
Murmansk and dark ship detection in the Arctic ocean, among other use cases.
1.2
Motivation
Big data technologies and artificial intelligence have become more powerful tools in recent
years. The main attribute of using these technologies is to train a ”machine” on a large
database to learn patterns and features, that are challenging to detect otherwise.
The features of the dark ships that are mentioned in section 1.1, can be difficult to spot,
especially in the Arctic ocean, where many icebergs are present.
The motivation of carrying out this project is based on the actualities of the subjects men­
tioned above, and on personal interest in the remote sensing­ and machine learning area,
combined with the interests of DTU Security and DALO that supervises the project, and
the SET­279 NATO research group.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Aim and Objectives
The overall objective of this project can be divided into four sub­objectives:
1. General description of SAR data from Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR, including
data handling, downloaded examples and comparative analysis
2. Change detection for ships in harbours: case studies in Murmansk and Nuuk in
relation to the NATO STO research task group SET­279
3. Run Convolutional Neural Network developed at DTU Security, and train on the
Kaggle ship­iceberg database, on new detected ships from e.g. Murmansk and
icebergs
4. A concluding analysis of detection and classification accuracies vs. object type and
sizes, and data quality
For solving the first objective, each of the SAR systems is explained in terms of a gen­
eral description of the system including system purpose, system parameters, acquisition
modes, availability and data format. Then the data is handled by reading downloaded
image examples from each of the systems and then visualized. Lastly, a comparative
analysis is performed based on the information in the description of the different SAR
systems in terms of system parameters and data availability in relation to big data tech­
nologies and ship surveillance and detection, where the pros and cons of each system
are listed.
For solving the second objective, change detection is performed on Sentinel­1 data in
Murmansk in Russia and Nuuk in Greenland, to assist the SET­279 NATO group. The
change detection is performed in a simple way using a temporal series of images in the
exact same location of interest to create an RGB image, from which the changes can be
manually detected.
The third objective is solved by training a classifier for the DTU­ and Kaggle databases.
Geocoding of transmitted AIS positions to Sentinel­1 images is performed to label com­
ponents in the Murmansk­ and Nuuk area with the purpose of extracting ships to test or
train the DTU classifier, which is based on Sentinel­1 image extraction as well. Besides
the ship extractions, objects from the Disko Bay in Greenland are then extracted using the
two­pass connected­component labeling algorithm, these objects are then thresholded to
fit the approximated size of icebergs. These icebergs can then be used as training or
testing for the DTU classifier.
The last objective includes a concluding analysis from the detection­ and classification
results, which is performed in discussion on the preliminary results achieved from the
other three objectives, and evaluation of the classifiers from the training­ and validation
accuracies and losses, confusion matrices, etc.
1.4
Structure of the Report
The structure of this report is based on a classical report structure including the main
contents:
• Theory
• Data description
• Implementation
• Results
2
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:11==
• Discussion
• Outlook
• Conclusion
The theory chapter includes a priori knowledge that is relevant to this project and to solve
the objectives that are listed in section 1.3. To solve these objectives, some knowledge
of image analysis, synthetic aperture radar and deep learning are required including ex­
planations of the connected­component labeling for ship­ and iceberg extraction, basic
SAR principles, polarimetric SAR, backscattering, distortions, geocoding, basic neural
networks, convolutional neural networks, training neural networks and lastly general eval­
uation of neural networks.
After the theory chapter, is the data description chapter. This includes an overview of each
of the data types from the SAR systems; Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR, and of the
AIS data in general. The purpose of this chapter is to give insight into the relevant system
parameters and the possibilities of data acquisition such as different acquisition modes,
the data availability and lastly the format of which the data product is acquired from the
supplier. This information is relevant for both the implementation of the different theories,
but also for the comparative analysis that is mentioned in the first objective of this project.
The next chapter is the implementation, which combines the theory and the information
in the data description chapter. The implementation chapter is divided into the following
sections; data handling of SAR examples, geocoding and AIS data, change detection,
extraction of ships and icebergs and ship detection. In the section of data handling of
SAR image examples, the process of preparing and visualizing the SAR images from the
Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR systems from the format in which they are received
from the Copernicus open access hub, and from DALO that provided the TerraSAR­X and
F­SAR data from the DALOEX 2015 campaign in Greenland. The next section contains
the explanation of the procedure of geocoding and AIS data reading for the AIS data
matching with positions in the Sentinel­1 images in both the Nuuk area in Greenland and
the Murmansk area in Russia. The section after the geocoding, explains the change
detection method that uses temporal series sentinel­1 images, whereafter the procedure
of the extraction of ships and icebergs using the connected­component labeling algorithm
is explained in detail. Lastly, the ship detection procedure is explained using the theory of
deep learning to explain the convolutional neural network provided from DTU security, the
training of two classifiers with the DTU­ and Kaggle databases and lastly the methods used
to evaluate the classifiers and testing with the extracted components from the previous
section.
The results from implementing the methods in the previous chapter are displayed and
discussed in the results chapter, where all the relevant image examples, plots, graphs
and preliminary results are evaluated in relation to the project objectives, and according to
expectations from the theory. The discussion from the results chapter is summarized in the
discussion chapter, where the results also are compared to the state­of­the­art research
publications including work related to the objectives of ship surveillance or to the methods
used for ship surveillance in this project. The discussion leads to the outlook chapter,
in which the possibilities of future work are discussed based on studies where similar
problems are solved with other procedures, or based on optimized and more complex
methods than the ones used in this project. Lastly, a conclusion is made based on the
results and discussion, where the solutions to the project objectives are summarized.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:13==
2
Theory
2.1
Image analysis
2.1.1
Connected­component labeling
Connected­component labeling is an algorithmic technique used in computer vision and
image analysis. It also goes by the names; connected­component analysis, blob extrac­
tion, region labeling, blob discovery, or region extraction. In this technique, subsets of
components that are connected, with a specified connectivity, are given a unique label
based on a specified heuristic. This technique can be used to detect connected regions
in a thresholded binary image.
The term connectivity, or connectedness, that is used in the connected­component label­
ing technique is a measure of the minimum amount of vertices that should be removed
from a graph to be disconnected. The connectivity of a graph is therefore said to be
k­connected for the greatest integer k.
Visual examples of 4­, 6­ and 8­connectedness are illustrated in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Examples of 4­, 6­ and 8­connectedness (Benn 2020)
There are several algorithms to perform this technique. In this report, only the two­pass
algorithm is explained.
The two­pass connected­component labeling algorithm iterates over the pixels in a two­
dimensional binary image in two passes. In the first pass, temporary labels are assigned
and are then replaced with the smallest label of the equivalent class in the second pass.
The labeling is based on connectivity checks, where either 4­ or 8­connectedness is as­
sumed. There are more ways to perform the connectivity checks, a fast scanning algo­
rithm is presented below.
First pass
1. Each element of the binary image is iterated with Raster Scanning ­ by column and
then by row
2. It is checked whether the element is part of the background
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
5
==PAGE:14==
(a) Acquire the neighbouring elements according to the assumed connectedness
(b) If the element is without neighbours, a unique label is assigned to the current
element
(c) If the element has neighbours, the smallest label of the neighbours is assigned
to the current element
(d) The equivalence between the neighbouring labels is recorded
Second pass
1. Each element of the binary image is iterated with Raster Scanning ­ by column and
then by row
2. It is checked whether the element is part of the background
(a) The current element is relabeled with the lowest equivalent label
The flowcharts of the first­ and second pass of the fast scanning algorithm for two­pass
connected­component labeling are displayed in figure 2.2, to visualize the procedure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Flowcharts of the fast scanning algorithm, where (a) is the flowchart of first
pass and (b) is the flowchart of second pass
6
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar
2.2.1
Basic SAR principles
Synthetic Aperture Radar ­ or SAR ­ is a side­looking high­resolution imaging radar, that
creates two­dimensional images. Normally a larger antenna size means higher resolu­
tion, the SAR however uses motion to synthesize a larger antenna than the one used, to
achieve better spatial resolution without the trouble of needing a large antenna. A SAR is
a pulsed radar that transmits and receives echoes of the pulses and has to be mounted
on a moving platform to synthesize the larger antenna, it is therefore usually mounted on
either an aircraft or a spacecraft.
The SAR moves on a platform along the flight trajectory at a height, that varies whether
the platform is an aircraft or a spacecraft. The direction of the flight trajectory is the along­
track or azimuth dimension, and the projection on the ground is called the nadir track. The
SAR antenna is tilted with an incidence angle and illuminates an area on the ground called
the antenna footprint, wherein the swath lies according to the mode, that ranges from the
near­range to the far­range. Normally the stripmap mode is used, which assumes a fixed
incidence angle.
The overall SAR acquisition geometry is displayed on figure 2.3, where l and W are the
dimensions of the antenna, H is the height of the antenna from the ground and roff is the
near range.
Figure 2.3: The SAR acquisition geometry (Mohr 2005)
The SAR principle of synthesizing a larger antenna through motion is illustrated in figure
2.4, where figure 2.4a represents the motion of an aircraft on which a SAR is mounted
and figure 2.4b represents the corresponding synthesized antenna size of the SAR. In
the figures, the curve represents the antenna footprint on the ground, and the narrow
dark grey strip is the synthesized azimuth resolution that is described by l/2, where l is
the length of the antenna.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
7
==PAGE:16==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: (a) Moving aircraft with SAR onboard (b) corresponding antenna size from the
motion on (a), with the formula of SAR resolution (Dall 2020)
A property of the SAR is that it is coherent and transmits frequency modulated pulses.
The coherency and frequency modulation allow pulse compression of the received echo
and thus higher resolution. Normally the range­ and azimuth resolutions of a real aperture
radar with uncompressed echoes are described by equations (2.1) and (2.2).
ρr = cTp
2
(2.1)
ρa,real = rβa ≈rλ
l
(2.2)
Where c is the speed of light in vacuum, Tp is the pulse duration, r is an arbitrary range
and βa is the angular beamwidth that is described from the antenna length l and the
wavelength of the transmitted pulse λ.
With pulse compression, the range resolution is improved to the expression in eq. (2.4).
The SAR principle is to use motion to synthesize a larger antenna (see fig. 2.4), and
thus a narrow beamwidth. The synthesized 3­dB beamwidth can be described as half the
length of a real aperture in eq. (2.3).
βsynt ≈λ
2L
(2.3)
Where λ is the wavelength of the transmitted pulse and L is the trajectory L = rβreal, that
makes the synthesized antenna length. The maximum azimuth resolution with synthetic
aperture can thus be described as in eq. (2.5), and is no longer range dependent.
ρr,pc =
c
2B
(2.4)
ρa,synt = rβsynt = r λ
2L = r
λ
2 (rβreal) = r λl
2rλ = l
2
(2.5)
Where c is the speed of light in vacuum, B is the compressed bandwidth of the transmitted
pulse and l is the antenna length. Fig. 2.5 illustrates the volumes containing scatterers
8
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:17==
that contribute to the received echo at point (r, x), where the larger volume on fig. 2.5a is
for a real aperture radar with uncompressed echoes and the perceived smaller volume ­
and thus better resolution ­ on fig. 2.5b is for the SAR.
Figure 2.5: Illustration of (a) the real aperture­ and (b) SAR resolutions (Mohr 2005)
Besides being a pulsed radar, the SAR is also an imaging radar. The two­dimensional
images has dimensions slant range and azimuth. Figure 2.6 illustrates how the acquired
data shows on the raw and the processed SAR image on fig. 2.6b and 2.6c, in slant range
and azimuth coordinates respectively.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of range at (a) the data acquisition, (b) SAR signal space and (c)
the SAR image space (Cumming and Wong 2005)
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2.2
Polarimetric SAR
Electromagnetic radar waves have a polarization, where different surfaces and objects
can reflect the waves with different intensities and polarizations. Polarimetric SAR trans­
mits and receives radar waves with certain polarizations; HH­pol, VV­pol, HV­pol and
VH­pol (where HV­ and VH­pol often are considered the same) that differs depending on
the mission objective. These polarizations are described in the following listing.
• HH­pol: Co­polarization ­ Horisontal polarized transmission, horisontal polarized
reception
• VV­pol: Co­polarization ­ Vertical polarized transmission, vertical polarized recep­
tion
• HV­pol: Cross­polarization ­ Horisontal polarized transmission, vertical polarized
reception
• VH­pol: Cross­polarization ­ Vertical polarized transmission, horisontal polarized
reception
SAR polarimetry is a technique that can be used to achieve additional information on the
targets and terrains that are monitored such as land, snow and ice, ocean, ships, icebergs
and urban areas. The general information of the targets in terms of intensity and polariza­
tion can be expressed in three ways; with the Jones vector, the polarization ellipse and
the Stokes vector, which contains information such as the electrical field and the phase
difference. The additional information is however represented with a scattering matrix
that displays the scattering in each polarization from the transmission to the reception in
terms of the electric field intensities. The relationship is described by eq. (2.6) and (2.7).
Er = eikr
r SEt
(2.6)
( Er
v
Er
h
)
= eikr
r
( Svv
Svh
Shv
Shh
) ( Et
v
Et
h
)
(2.7)
Where Er is the received Jones vector, S is the scattering matrix, Et is the transmitted
Jones vector, r is the distance between the scatterer and receiving antenna and k is the
wavenumber of the illuminating wave. The scattering contributions in the scattering matrix
each have an amplitude and a phase, as described in eq. (2.8)
Spq = Apqeiϕpq
(2.8)
Where p and q can be either v or h, Apq is the amplitude and ϕpq is the phase.
Additional information of the theory of polarimetric SAR, can be found in Skriver 2019b.
10
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:19==
2.2.3
Backscattering
Radar backscattering is a part of a transmitted signal that is reflected towards the radar.
The backscattering of the signal differs depending on the surface on which it is reflected,
and its dielectric properties.
There exist different types of backscattering depending on the roughness, moisture con­
tent, etc. of the surface, on which the signal is reflected. In the case of ship detection,
the ship will mostly be characterized by a smooth surface, since most ships are made
with steel which will result in a single bounce ­ or reflection ­ in the opposite direction of
the transmitted signal. Orthogonal surfaces from rooms or containers will also appear on
ships. The backscatter of these orthogonal surfaces can for example be either dihedral or
trihedral scattering from double­ or triple bounces on orthogonal surfaces, which is strong
backscatter since the transmitted signal will be reflected in the direction it originates from.
These scatterers are also called discrete scatterers or point targets from their appearance
on SAR images and often appear with sidelobes resulting in a cross­like shape from the
strong backscatter intensity.
On fig. 2.7 the dihedral and trihedral scattering is illustrated as arrows pointing towards
the upper left corner, in the same direction the signal is transmitted, and thus creating a
strong backscatter.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of backscattering from dihedral and trihedral scattering (Skriver
2019a)
Backscatter can be described with a backscatter coefficient, also called the radar cross­
section. The backscatter coefficient is a measure of the area in which the power of a
signal is reflected. This backscatter coefficient can be normalized in various ways, as
described in equations (2.9), (2.10) and (2.11).
σ0 = σ
Ag
(2.9)
γ0 = σ
Ai
= Ag
Ai
σ0 =
σ0
cos θ
(2.10)
β0 = σ
A = Ag
A σ0 =
σ0
sin θ = Ai
A γ0 =
γ0
tan θ
(2.11)
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
11
==PAGE:20==
Where σ is the backscatter coefficient, θ is the incidence angle and A, Ai and Ag are the
areas displayed in the geometry on figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Geometry in relation to the backscatter coefficients (Skriver 2019a)
In figure 2.8, the geometry of the direction of the transmitted signal from the SAR system
is displayed as the decreasing line, to the ground, which is displayed as the horizontal
line. The area Ai denotes the area that is orthogonal to the transmitted signal, and thus
parallel to the incidence plane towards the ground, that is tilted at an angle θ. Ag is the
corresponding area on the ground, and A is the area orthogonal to Ai.
Besides the mentioned types of scattering, there is a special phenomenon called Bragg
scattering. This is a special case of the reflection of the transmitted signal on periodic
structures with a constant distance, such as ocean waves, that are in the range of a
wavelength. In this case, smaller individual reflections can be added in a superposition
to an echo signal with constructive interference, resulting in stronger backscatter. The
phenomenon is illustrated in figure 2.9, with ocean waves with wavelength λs is displayed
with an incoming radar wave with wavelength λr.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of the principle of Bragg scattering (ESA 2021a)
From the geometry on fig. 2.9, an expression of the wavelength of the periodic structures
in relation to the radar wavelength and incidence angle can be described as in equation
(2.12).
12
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:21==
λs =
λr
2 sin θ
(2.12)
Where λs is the sea surface wavelength, λr is the radar wavelength and θ is the radar
incidence angle of the incoming radar wave.
2.2.4
Distortions
With the SAR acquisition geometry explained in section 2.2.1, distortions can occur on
the SAR image. Three general discussed types of geometric distortions on SAR images
are foreshortening, layover and shadowing, that all are seen in terrain with varying topog­
raphy.
Foreshortening is a distortion, which mostly appears when very steep targets are illumi­
nated, such as icebergs or mountains, with steep­looking spaceborne SARs, where the
incident electromagnetic wave is reflected at the foot of a target near at almost the same
time as the tip of the target. Since the slant range dimension of the SAR image is calcu­
lated from the time delay between transmitting and receiving echoes, the tip of the target
will appear a lot closer to the foot of the target than it actually is.
If the slope of the target is a lot steeper towards the sensor, or if the SAR is pointed even
steeper than before, the tip of the target will even appear closer to the SAR, than the foot.
This type of distortion is called layover.
Lastly, there is shadowing. This type of distortion occurs when the slope target away from
the SAR is very steep, or if the incidence angle of the SAR is large, and the foot of the
target away from the SAR will appear further away than it is. This results in shadowing of
the area between where the foot of the target is and where it appears on the image, and
therefore a loss of information.
The three types of distortion are illustrated in figure 2.10, with examples of scenes and
the corresponding distorted SAR images. In these figures, the radar beam is drawn as
a light grey triangle illuminating the dark grey target. There are three points; a, b and c,
where a is the foot of the target, b is the tip of the target and c is the foot of the target on
the other side of b. The points a’, b’ and c’ are the corresponding points in the SAR image
plane.
On the foreshortening scene, a’ and b’ are very close, and b’ and c’ are very distant in the
image plane, whereas the corresponding positions on the ground are equally distant.
In the layover scene, b’ is displayed before a’, and c’ is very distant to the other points in
the image plane, whereas the true positions on the ground are a, b and then c, where a
and b are close.
Lastly, in the shadowing scene, a new point d is introduced, which denotes the position
on ground that is visible on the other side of b. a’, b’ and d’ are displayed in the correct
order in the image plane according to the ground positions, whereas the point c that is the
foot of the target will be shadowed.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.10: Illustration of layover, foreshortening and shadowing (Confuorto 2016)
The before mentioned distortions are in the slant range dimension, there can however
also be distortions in the azimuth dimensions if the target is moving.
If the target is moving perpendicular to the flight path of the SAR, there will be a contri­
bution from the Doppler shift of the moving target to the frequency of the backscattered
echo signal. This contribution will be positive if the target moves towards the SAR, and
negative if it moves away from the SAR. If there is a positive Doppler shift, the target will
appear southward to the true position, and northward if the Doppler shift is negative.
If the target however moves in parallel with the flight path, there will be no contribution
from the Doppler shift if the velocity of the target and the SAR is the same, and the target
will appear stationary although it moves. If the target moves slower or faster than the
SAR, there will, however, be a Doppler shift contribution since the target will move away
from or towards the SAR depending on the relative position and velocity.
2.2.5
Geocoding
SAR geocoding is the process of converting the image with a spatial shift or rotation, so
the coordinates are geometrically correct to a given cartographic projection. This process
is an important step in the data handling of SAR in general since it allows comparison or
integration with other types of data such as other satellite images, GPS, or AIS among
other types.
Normally the procedure of geocoding includes a look­up table (LUT) that compliments
the image. This LUT contains information of the transformations between the SAR and
14
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:23==
ground geometries, and thus allows one to find the georeferencement of a point ­ or pixel
­ in a SAR image to the same point on ground. A LUT is however not always included in
the acquired SAR data, other methods can therefore be used to approximate the position
from geographic coordinates to pixels in the SAR image.
A method is to simply shift and rotate a given point in geographic coordinates around the
center of the image. The information that is required for this method includes; the center
of the SAR image in both SAR pixel coordinates and geographic decimal coordinates
(latitude and longitude), orbit inclination, and pixel spacing.
First the radius of earth is converted as in equation (2.13).
Re = 6, 367, 000m
2π
pixelspacing
(2.13)
From this information, the distance between the point and image center in longitude and
latitude is found as in equation (2.14) and (2.15) respectively,
xt = Re · (Lp −Lc)cos λp
360
(2.14)
yt = Re
λp −λc
360
(2.15)
where Lp is the longitude of the given point, Lc is the image center longitude, λp is the
latitude of the point and λc is the latitude of the image center.
These distances can thus be used to find the position of the point in the SAR image as in
equation (2.16) and (2.17),
x = xc −
(xc
2 + xt · cos(t) + yt · sin(t)
)
(2.16)
y = yc
2 + xt · sin(t) −yt · cos(t)
(2.17)
where xc and yc are the pixel coordinate of the image center and t is the orbit inclination.
It should be noted that the method described above yields an approximation of the pixel
coordinates based on the center of the SAR image. The method should therefore mostly
be used for positions close to the center, where the accuracy will be higher than at the
outermost positions in the image. The method is however still very useful to determine
the pixel positions if the geographic coordinate of the center is precisely known and at low
computational cost due to the simple calculations.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Deep Learning
2.3.1
Basic Neural Network principles
The artificial neural network is a deep learning algorithm, that is structured in the same
fashion as the organization of the neurons in a human brain. The neural networks are
composed of layers of nodes, that behave as the neurons in the brain. The layers of the
network is first an input layer, then a some hidden layers, and lastly an output layer, where
each layer has a bias node to provide flexibility to the neural network model. An example
of a simple neural network is the feed­forward neural network (FFNN) presented in figure
2.11.
Figure 2.11: Illustration of a simple neural network (M. Nielsen 2019)
In the hidden­ and output layers, the nodes are activated with an activation function and
associated with weights. The activation function defines the output of a given layer and
introduces non­linearity in the overall model of the network. The weights indicate the
”importance” of a given note in predicting the output, where a weight close to zero indicates
low importance, compared to weights with large values that indicate high importance.
There are many types of activation functions, where the most common are the Sigmoid,
Hyperbolic Tangent, and Rectifier linear unit activations (see figure 2.12) and the softmax
activation for the output layer.
The expressions for each of the mentioned activation functions are listed below.
• Sigmoid σ(x) =
1
1+e−x
• Hyperbolic tangent tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x
• Rectifier linear unit
{
0
ifx ≤0
x
ifx > 0
• Softmax softmax(xi) =
exi
∑J
j=1 exj
16
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.12: Visualization of the Sigmoid, Hyperbolic Tangent and Rectifier linear unit
activations
From the input layer to the first hidden layer, the weights assigned to each node are
initialized. Two popular initializations are the Glorot­ and He initializations, which ensures
the variance of the forward and backward signals are constant from layer to layer. The two
initializations that Glorot proposes are for the tangent hyperbolic (tanh) activation function,
and depend on the number of inputs and outputs as described in equations (2.18) and
(2.19).
wij ∼U
(
−
√
6
nin + nout
,
√
6
nin + nout
)
(2.18)
wi,j ∼N
(
0,
2
nin + nout
)
(2.19)
Where U (a, b) is a uniform distribution from a to b and N
(
µ, σ2)
is the Gaussian distribu­
tion with mean µ and variance σ2.
He however proposes initializations for the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation func­
tion, that only depends on the number of inputs as described in equations (2.20) and
(2.21).
wij ∼U
(
−
√
6
nin
,
√
6
nin
)
(2.20)
wi,j ∼N
(
0, 2
nin
)
(2.21)
When the weights are initialized, each output from the input layer can be described as in
equation (2.22), and then activated as in equation (2.23).
a(1)
j
=
D
∑
i=0
w(1)
i,j · xi
(2.22)
z(1)
j
= h1
(
a(1)
j
)
(2.23)
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
17
==PAGE:26==
Where D is the amount of nodes in the input layer, w(1)
i,j denotes the weight from node i
to j in the first layer, xi is the i’th input and h1(·) is the non­linear activation function at the
first layer. These equations can be rewritten to the general case as in equations (2.24)
and (2.25).
a(l)
j
=
Ml
∑
i
w(l)
i,j · z(l−1)
i
l = 2, . . . , L
(2.24)
z(l)
j
= hl
(
a(l)
j
)
l = 1, . . . , L
(2.25)
Where l is the index for layer, L is the total amount of layers, and Ml is the number of
nodes in the previous layer. From the above expressions, the output of the network can
then be determined as in equation (2.26).
yj = hL
(
a(L)
j
)
(2.26)
Where the output activation function is usually the softmax function as described earlier.
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a class of deep neural networks in deep learning
and is mostly used to analyze visual imagery. As the name indicates, CNN is a neural
network in which the mathematical operation convolution is used.
In image analysis, convolution process where each element of an image is weighted by
a filter kernel and added to its local neighbours. The result of the convolution is called
a feature map, in which the features of the given image are mapped in a matrix. The
expression of convolution is described in equation (2.27) in general notation.
g(x, y) = w ∗f(x, y) =
a
∑
dx=−a
b
∑
dy=−b
w(dx, dy)f(x + dx, y + dy)
(2.27)
Where g(x, y) is the filtered image, f(x, y) is the input image and w is the filter kernel, in
which each element fulfils the boundaries −a ≤dx ≤a and −b ≤dy ≤b.
The concept of convolution is visualized in figure 2.13, with an example of the initial image,
the convolution kernel, and the resulting feature map.
18
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.13: Visualization of the convolution process (Guyu 2019)
The CNNs are similar to the classical FFNNs that are explained in section 2.3.1 since
the network is still organized into layers that are parametrized by weights and biases and
have non­linear activations. The difference is however that each node is not connected to
each input of the layer, but to a subset of the inputs, also called the receptive field of the
neuron. This subset is the result of the convolution visualized in fig. 2.13, that depends
on the number of channels in the image, the filter kernel, and the stride among other
parameters, where the filter kernel is a learnable set of parameters that learns the most
important features of the input image. The output of these convolutional layers is called
a feature map.
The input image is a 3D tensor with dimensions (channel, height, width). The amount of
channels in the input image is usually one or three, where the image with one channel
is called a grayscale image, and an image with three channels is usually an RGB (Red,
Green, and Blue) image.
For the convolution of the input image, a set of hyperparameters is specified. These in­
clude; the amount of filters, filter kernel, stride, and sometimes padding, and is chosen
based on the desired complexity of the analysis and the dimensions of the input image.
The amount of filters indicates the number of output subsets in a given layer and is some­
what equivalent to the number of output nodes in a classical FFNN. A high amount of
filters, therefore, leads to higher complexity. The filter kernel is a matrix of dimensions
(channel, height, width) that is smaller than the input image, with a height and width that
is divisible with the height and width of the input image, and preferably with the same
amount of channels. The size of the filter kernel is also related to the complexity, where
a smaller kernel leads to higher complexity. The stride indicates the number of steps in
each direction of the image, the filter kernel should be moved, where smaller steps lead
to higher complexity. Lastly, there is the padding. Image padding is to add pixels around
the edges of the input image, where the padding in each dimension is specified. Padding
can be used to weigh the pixels at the edges as high as the mid pixels and keep the size
of the image, to ensure most of the information is kept. The type of padding can vary,
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
19
==PAGE:28==
but the most common is zero­padding. Zero­padding is simply to add zeros around the
edges of the image.
The size of the image can be reduced from the convolution, but maintained by padding.
The output dimension of the image is related to the hyperparameters in equation (2.28).
dimout = dimin −dimfilter + 2 · padding
stride
+ 1
(2.28)
Where dimin is the dimension of the input image and dimfilter is the dimension of the
kernel.
The effects of the convolution are visualized in figure 2.14 with an example of an input
image of a cat and two filters, where the reduction of the image and feature mapping using
the two different filters becomes clear.
Figure 2.14: Example on the effects of the convolution (Winther 2016)
As with FFNNs, the layers in CNNs are fully connected. This means that each neuron
in one layer is connected to the ones in the next layer, which can lead to overfitting of
the data. To avoid overfitting, the network should be regularized. Typical regularization
methods include dropout, pooling, and batch normalization.
Dropout is a method, where individual nodes are dropped out at each training stage with a
specified probability 1−p. With this dropout, the number of node interactions are reduced
and the network will learn more robust features of the inputs, and overfitting is thus de­
creased. Another regularization method is pooling, which is a type of down­sampling, but
where some of the information is kept. The most common type of pooling is max pooling,
where the input image is divided into sub­regions and the maximum in each region is the
output of the layer, given a specified filter and stride. Lastly, there is batch normalization.
This is a regularization method to avoid internal covariate shift, which is a term for the
change of distribution of the inputs to each layer. The purpose of batch normalization is
to accelerate the training and to make it robust to the weight initialization by normalizing
the inputs to a layer for each mini­batch and thereby acts as regularization of the model.
An example of a convolutional network to classify an image of a robot is illustrated in
figure 2.15, including subsample layers that could be either dropout or pooling layers,
visualization of the feature maps that include different features of the image and the final
output, and classification.
20
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.15: Example of a convolutional neural network for classifying an image of a robot
(Aphex34 2015)
2.3.3
Training Neural Networks
In machine learning the learning can be either supervised or unsupervised, where super­
vised learning uses labeled data to predict the outcomes, and unsupervised does not. In
this report, the focus will only be on supervised learning.
For a neural network to achieve good results, some training is required. To train the
network, a large labeled dataset is needed to achieve the highest accuracy. The main
objective of the training is to minimize the deviation of the predicted results from the correct
results, by tuning the weights of the neurons. This deviation is measured as loss or cost,
and calculated with a specified loss function. There are several loss functions, and three
popular functions are the sum of squares, cross entropy loss and binary cross entropy
loss, where the sum of squares is good for regression, the cross entropy loss is good
for classification and the binary cross entropy loss is good for binary classification. The
expressions for the three loss functions are described in equations (2.29), (2.30) and
(2.31) respectively.
Esum(w) =
N
∑
n=1
||y(xn) −tn||2
2
(2.29)
Ecross(w) = −
N
∑
n=1
K
∑
k=1
tnk log yk(xn)
(2.30)
Ebcross(w) = −1
N
N
∑
n=1
tn log(y(xn)) + (1 −tn) log(1 −y(xn))
(2.31)
With the training set D = {(xntn)|n = 1, . . . , N}, where xn is the n’th input, tn is the n’th
target and y(xn) is the prediction from the n’th input.
Since the objective of the training is to minimize the loss, the loss function should be
optimized. Since the loss function is differentiable, the gradient information can be used
for optimization.
A simple gradient­based algorithm is called the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). The
stochastic part of the algorithm is that the gradient is computed on a subset, also called
mini­batch, of the training data, and the gradient descent means that the input moves with
steps of size η in the negative direction towards the minimum. The update of the weights
to achieve the minimum loss is described as in equation (2.32).
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
21
==PAGE:30==
wnew = w −η∇E(w)
(2.32)
Where η is the step size, also called the learning rate and ∇is the gradient operator. The
learning rate is an important hyperparameter in training neural networks since a too big
learning rate ­ or step ­ can result in a skipping of the minimum and a too small learning
rate will take too much time and converge towards a local minimum. Once each of the
mini­batches in the training dataset is trained upon, an epoch of training is completed.
Then another epoch is trained and so on in a specified amount of epochs.
Another gradient­based algorithm is the Adam optimizer, which is an extension of the
SGD. The name Adam is derived from adaptive moment estimation, which indicates the
principle of the optimizer. In the algorithm, exponential moving averages ­ or moments ­
of the gradient and the squared gradient are calculated, where the two parameters β1 and
β2 are used to compute these running averages. The Adam optimizer is often a preferred
gradient­based algorithm because of the ability to achieve good results very fast.
A way to compute the gradient in layered models for the gradient­based optimizers, in a
fast and effective way, is by the backpropagation algorithm. To apply the algorithm, two
assumptions about the loss function should be made. The first assumption is that the loss
function can be written the average over loss functions for individual training examples,
and the second assumption is that it can be written as a function of network outputs.
First, an intermediate quantity called the error, that is related to the gradient, is introduced.
The error is defined as in equation (2.33).
δ(l)
j
≡∂E(w)
∂a(l)
j
(2.33)
Where E(w) is the loss function and a(l)
j
is the j’th weighted input at layer l. This informa­
tion, and the two assumptions, then leads to two sets of equations, which is the error and
gradient of the last layer in the network and for all layers l < L. These sets of equations
are called the backpropagation rule for the last layer and layer l < L, and are defined in
equations (2.34), (2.35), (2.36) and (2.37) respectively.
δ(L)
j
= ∂E(w)
∂a(L)
j
(2.34)
∂E(w)
∂w(L)
ji
= δ(L)
j
z(L−1)
i
(2.35)
δ(l)
j
=
K
∑
k=1
δ(l+1)
k
w(l+1)
kj
h′
l(a(l)
j )
(2.36)
∂E(w)
∂w(l)
ji
= δ(l)
j z(l−1)
i
(2.37)
Where L is the last layer in the neural network, a(l) is the weighted input, w(l) is the weight,
hl is the activation function at layer l and z(l−1) is the output at layer l −1.
From equations (2.34), (2.35), (2.36) and (2.37), the backpropagation algorithm can be
defined:
22
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:31==
1. Input x:
Set the activation a(1) for the input layer
2. Feedforward:
for each layer l = 2, . . . , L, the weighted input a(l) and activation output z(l) is com­
puted
3. Output error δ(L):
The output error is computed with equation (2.34)
4. Backpropagate the error:
for each layer l = L −1, . . . , 2, the error is computed with equation (2.36)
5. Output:
the gradient of the loss function can not be computed with equation (2.37)
From this algorithm, the name backpropagation becomes clear, since the error vector is
computed backward. The backward process is necessary, since the loss is a function of
the network outputs, and the earlier weights and biases throughout the network contribute
to these outputs.
2.3.4
Evaluation of Neural Networks
There are different ways to evaluate the performance of a neural network. Normally when
training, a split of the training dataset into training data and validation data is performed.
This way, the model can be evaluated at each epoch of the training in terms of accuracy
and loss for the training dataset and the validation dataset. Where accuracy is a measure
of how often the model predicts the data correctly, and loss is calculated from the specified
loss function (see section 2.3.3).
The split of the training data can be done in various ways, an example of a popular method
is the k­fold cross­validation. The k­fold cross­validation is a statistical method to evaluate
the performance of machine learning models in general. The procedure contains a pa­
rameter k, that is the number of subsets the data is to be split into. The general procedure
of the k­fold cross­validation can be listed as below:
1. The training data is shuffled randomly
2. The data is split into k subsets
3. For each unique subset, first the subset is chosen as a hold out or validation data,
then the remaining subsets are chosen as training data. A model is then fitted with
the neural network on the training data and evaluated on the validation data, where
the evaluation score is recorded and the model is discarded
4. Lastly the model is evaluated using the recorded model evaluation scores.
The loss of the training is computed from the determined loss function, where different
examples are presented in section 2.3.3. The accuracy is however computed from the
true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN) and false negatives (FN).
TP is a measure of the number of correctly classified objects in a specific class in e.g.
a classification problem, where FP would be the number of incorrectly classified objects
in the current class, TN would be the amount of correctly classified object in a different
class than the current class and FN would be the number of incorrectly classified objects
in a different class. TP, FP, FN and TN are typically represented in a confusion matrix,
as illustrated in figure 2.16. These numbers are determined from the output value of the
neural network, which is often activated with the softmax or sigmoid function (see section
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
23
==PAGE:32==
2.3.3) that gives an output that can be interpreted as the probability of a ”true hit”, the
output with the highest value will therefore be predicted label from the network. This
result can therefore be compared with the true label when training the network.
Figure 2.16: Example of a confusion matrix (Mohajon 2020)
The accuracy can then be calculated from these measures as described in equation
(2.38).
accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(2.38)
Another evaluation of the given network, that is specifically used for classification, is to
analyze the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under the ROC
curve (AUC). The ROC curve is a graph that shows the performance of a classification
model at all thresholds. It contains two parameters; the True Positive Rate (TPR) and the
False Positive Rate (FPR). The parameters can be described as in equations (2.39) and
(2.40),
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(2.39)
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(2.40)
where TP are the true positives, FP are the false positives, TN are the true negatives and
FN are the false negatives of the classification.
With the ROC curve as a graph of the TPR versus FPR at different classification thresh­
olds, the AUC is the area under the two­dimensional ROC, and thereby the integral, from
(0,0) to (1,1). It is a measure of the model performance at all classification thresholds and
ranges from 0 to 1, where an AUC of 0.0 indicates that all model predictions are 100%
wrong, and 1.0 indicates that all model predictions are 100% correct. In figure 2.17 an
example of a typical ROC curve and a geometric visualization of the AUC is presented.
24
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.17: Illustration of (a) an example of ROC curve and (b) a geometric visualization
of AUC (Google 2020)
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:35==
3
Data Description
3.1
Sentinel­1
Sentinel­1 is a mission launched by ESA1 that includes two polar­orbiting satellites, Sentinel­
1a and Sentinel­1b, where each satellite carries a dual­polarimetric C­band SAR and
share the same orbital plane. The use of two satellites in the same orbital plane en­
ables the use of SAR interferometry that is useful in several applications such as ground
motion and topological information. One of the Sentinel­1 satellites is illustrated in figure
3.1.
Figure 3.1: An artists view of a Sentinel­1 satellite (ESA 2021b)
Sentinel­1 is the first mission for the Copernicus programme, which is an initiative for im­
plementing services concerning environment and security, and provides easily accessible
information from earth observation satellites and ground­based information including SAR
images.
The services benefited from the Sentinel­1 mission are for example:
• Monitoring of Arctic sea­ice extent
• Routine sea­ice mapping
• Surveillance of the marine environment, including oil­spill monitoring
• Ship detection for maritime security
• Monitoring land­surface for motion risks
• Mapping for forest, water and soil management
• Mapping to support humanitarian aid and crisis situations
This project falls in the category Ship detection for maritime security, which makes the
Sentinel­1 data suitable for the project. Some of the relevant specifications of the SAR
payload are listed in table 3.1.
1The European Space Agency.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.1: List of relevant specifications for the Sentinel­1 SAR payload in general (ESA
2012)
Specifications of the Sentinel­1 SAR payload
Parameter
Value
Antenna type
Active phased array
C­band Center Frequency
5.405 GHz
Antenna Aperture Size
12.3m x 0.821m
Polarization modes
HH/VV/HV/VH (single or dual)
Incidence angle
20◦­45◦
The Sentinel­1 configuration includes four acquisition modes; the strip map (SM) mode,
the interferometric wide (IW) swath mode, the extra­wide (EW) swath mode and the wave
(WV) mode. These different modes provide various swath widths and resolutions etc.,
where each mode can be used depending on the scientific objective. Selected specifica­
tions for each mode is presented in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Different Modes with the corresponding specifications (ESA 2012)
Different Modes with the corresponding specifications
Mode
Swath width [km]
Spatial resolution [m]
NESZ2 [dB]
DTAR3 [dB]
SM
80
5x5
­22
­22
IW
250
10x10
­22
­22
EW
410
20x40
­22
­22
WV
20x20
5x5
­22
­22
The different acquisition modes are visually presented in figure 3.2, where the general
geometry and swaths, and incidence angles of each mode are illustrated.
2Noise­Equivalent­Sigma­Zero, a measure of the SAR sensitivity
3Distributed Target Ambiguity Ratio
28
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the different Sentinel­1 modes (ESA 2021c)
Besides the different acquisition modes, the Sentinel­1 system covers the earth at a given
coverage frequency and a specific revisit frequency, which differs according to the location
of interest. The Sentinel­1 revisit and coverage frequency of the earth is illustrated in figure
3.3.
Figure 3.3: The Sentinel­1 Constellation Observation Scenario including mode, polarisa­
tion and observation geometry around the earth (ESA 2021d)
The objective of the project is partly to classify ships from the SAR images, a high reso­
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
29
==PAGE:38==
lution is therefore required to achieve high precision. The areas of interest in this project
are Nuuk in Greenland and Murmansk in Russia. From the constellation on figure 3.4 and
the specifications in table 3.2, the highest achievable resolution in these areas is 5x20 m
using the IW mode, with HH+HV polarisation in Nuuk and VV+VH in Murmansk.
Figure 3.4: The Sentinel­1 Constellation Observation Scenario including mode, polarisa­
tion and observation geometry around the earth (ESA 2021d)
The Sentinel­1 data is produced into Level­0, level­1 Single Look Complex (SLC), level­
1 Ground Range Detected (GRD) and level­2 Ocean (OCN), and is available in single
polarization for Wave mode and dual or single polarization for stripmap (SM), IW and
extra wide swath mode (EW).
The different levels correspond to different amounts of data processing. The level­0 data
is the compressed unfocused raw SAR data. The level­1 SLC data is focused and geo­
referenced SAR data, including a single look in each dimension with complex samples
to preserve the phase information. The level­1 GRD data also consists of focused SAR
data, but the data is multi­looked and projected to ground range, and phase information
is lost. Lastly, the level­2 OCN data includes components for Ocean Swell spectra, such
as Ocean Wind Fields (OWI) and Surface Radial Velocities (RVL).
In this project, the level­1 GRD data in IW mode is chosen, since the data is preprocessed
and is therefore ready to use for ship­ and change detection.
The data described above can be accessed from the Copernicus open access hub on
https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home for free and is downloaded as a .zip folder with
the chosen data and various metadata. On the graphical user interface in the Copernicus
open access hub, the desired area is marked and all Sentinel products that are recorded
in the area appear on a list. The list can be filtered by mission (Sentinel­1 in this case),
satellite platform (Sentinel­1a or Sentinel­1b), product type (SLC, GRD, OCN or RAW),
polarization (HH, VV, HV, VH, HH+HV, VV+VH), sensor mode (SM, IW, EW or WV) and
30
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:39==
relative orbit number (from 1 to 175). The desired product can then be downloaded as a
SENTINEL­SAFE folder that includes:
• General product information in XML (manifest.safe)
• Measurement datasets containing the image data
• Quicklooks in .png format, Google Earth overlays in .kml format and HTML preview
files
• Product metadata
Where the image data in the measurement datasets are stored in a GeoTIFF format, that
are raster files containing image data with the corresponding geographic metadata.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
31
==PAGE:40==
3.2
TerraSAR­X
The TerraSAR­X is a SAR satellite mission for both scientific and commercial applications
and is a national project supported by the German Ministry of Education and Science
(BMBF) and the German Aerospace Center (DLR), where the satellite is owned and op­
erated by DLR that has the scientific data rights. The TerraSAR­X contains ­ as the name
indicates ­ a high­resolution X­band SAR as a payload with multiple modes. The satellite
configuration is illustrated in figure 3.5 with selected parameters and specifications.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the organization of data according to level and mode (ESA
2021e)
The configuration is designed with high geometric and radiometric resolution and the ca­
pability of single, dual and quad polarization mode, multi­temporal imaging, repeat­pass
interferometry and Along­Track Interferometry to enable multiple scientific applications
such as:
• Geospatial/Image Intelligence
• Digitial Surface & Terrain Models (DSM & DTM)
• Maritime Monitoring
• Change Detection
• Environmental Monitoring
• Surface Movement Monitoring
• Emergency Response Information
where the Maritime Monitoring and Change Detection applications are the most relevant
for this project.
Some of the relevant specifications of the X­band SAR payload are listed in table 3.1.
32
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.3: List of relevant specifications for the TerraSAR­X SAR payload in general (DLR
2013)
Specifications of the TerraSAR­X SAR payload
Parameter
Value
Antenna type
Active phased array
X­band Center Frequency
9.65 GHz
Antenna Aperture Size
4.8m x 0.7m
Polarization modes
HH/VV/HV/VH (single, dual or quad)
Incidence angle
15◦­60◦
The TerraSAR­X can operate in six different modes; staring spotlight mode, high­resolution
spotlight (HS) mode, spotlight (SL) mode, strip map mode, ScanSAR mode, and wide
ScanSAR mode. As with the Sentinel­1 modes, these different modes provide different
swath widths, spatial resolutions, noise­equivalent­sigma­zero, and distributed target am­
biguity ratios. The different modes with the respective specifications are listed in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Different Modes with the corresponding specifications (Airbus 2021)
Different Modes with the corresponding specifications
Mode
Swath width [km]
Spatial resolution [m]
NESZ [dB]
DTAR [dB]
Staring Spotlight
4x3.7 or 2.5x7.5
0.25
­20
<­17
Spotlight HS mode
5­10
1
­23
<­17
Spotlight SL mode
10
2
­23
<­17
Strip Map Mode
30
3
­22
<­17
ScanSAR mode
100
18.5
­21
<­17
Wide ScanSAR mode
200
40
­21
<­17
Unlike the Sentinel­1 images, the TerraSAR­X images are not for free. The prices per
product image are listed in table 3.5, and vary depending on the number of products
needed.
Table 3.5: The prices for TerraSAR­X products for scientific use (DLR 2021)
Price list
Products
Prices pr. product
1­30
200,­ e
31­100
175,­ e
> 100
160,­ e
The basic data structure of a TerraSAR­X product can be listed as such:
• Annotation Parameter Files
• Image Raster Files
• Auxiliary Raster Files
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
33
==PAGE:42==
• Image Preview Files
• Administrative Parameter File
Where the image raster files contain the polarimetric channels in separate binary data
matrices, with the 16­bit integer data format for the geocoded products and 16/16 bit
integer complex for Single Look Slant range Complex (SSC) images, and is stored in the
GeoTIFF format as with Sentinel­1 images.
For this project, some TerraSAR­X images are provided by DALO in the staring spotlight
acquisition mode, and thus only in HH­polarization, acquired from Airbus Defence and
Space in connection with the DALOEX 2015 campaign mentioned in section 3.3.
3.3
F­SAR
F­SAR ­ or Flugzeug­SAR ­ is a development by DLR, that can operate fully polarimetric in
five different frequency bands; X­, C­, S­, L­ and P­band, where four of the bands can be
used simultaneously. The F­SAR is also capable of using single­pass polarimetric inter­
ferometric SAR in X­ and S­band. On figure 3.6 is an illustration of an artist’s view on the
F­SAR radar onboard an aircraft acquiring data in X­, C­, L­ and P­bands simultaneously,
where the blue beam illustrates acquisition in X­band, green in S­ or C­band, purple in
L­band and red in P­band.
Figure 3.6: An artists view on the F­SAR radar on board an aircraft acquiring data in X­,
C/S­, L­ and P­bands simultaneously (Horn and al. 2021)
Some of the relevant specifications of the F­SAR at different frequency bands are listed
in table 3.1.
34
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:43==
Table 3.6: Different frequency bands with the corresponding specifications (Horn and al.
2021)
Different frequency bands with the corresponding specifications
X­band
C­band
S­band
L­band
P­band
Frequency [MHz]
9600
5300
3250
1325
435
Polarization
HH,VV,
HH,VV,
HH,VV,
HH,VV,
HH,VV,
VH,HV
VH,HV
VH,HV
VH,HV
VH,HV
Bandwidth [MHz]
750
384
300
150
50
Swath width [km]
1­5
1­5
1­5
1­5
1­5
Resolution [m]
0.25
0.5
0.6
1.0
4
Off­nadir angle range
25◦­57◦
25◦­57◦
25◦­57◦
25◦­57◦
25◦­57◦
The most common F­SAR data products include; Focused SAR data in radar geome­
try (RGI), Geocoded SAR data (GTC), or Co­registered image stacks for interferometry
(INF). The binary image data of the mentioned products are stored in the RAT format and
accompanied by .hdr files, so the data can be used in ENVI, which is a remote sensing
software to perform image analysis, image enhancement, and feature extraction. It is
however possible to export the data to other formats such as GeoTIFF with the relevant
software.
The availability of the F­SAR data varies depending on scientific­ or commercial use. For
scientific use, the F­SAR data can be requested and at no cost. For commercial use, the
data however has a price and needs special agreements.
The F­SAR data that is used in this project is provided by DALO in the PNG image format,
from the DALOEX 2015 campaign in Greenland that occurred in April and May 2015, and
sponsored by the Danish MoD working group on the future missions and task solutions in
the Arctic (AGFOA).
3.4
Automatic Identification System
Automatic Identification System ­ or AIS ­ is data protocol used in marine trafficking. AIS
is transmitted periodically from vessels and received by either coastal receiving stations
or by satellites. The AIS information is primarily used as a method for avoiding collision
between vessels.
Furthermore, AIS is required aboard international voyaging ships with 300 or more gross
tonnage and all passenger ships according to the International Convention for the Safety
of Life at Sea that is endorsed by The International Maritime Organization.
The information contained in the AIS transmissions is categorized as either Dynamic mes­
sages or Static messages. Where dynamic messages are transmitted every 2­10 seconds
for moving vessels and every 6 minutes from anchored vessels that is equipped with
Class A transponders, and static messages are transmitted every 6 minutes regardless
of whether the vessel moves or not. The information contained in the two categories are
listed in table 3.7 and 3.8.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 3.7: Dynamic AIS messages
Dynamic messages
Class A
Class B
MMSI number4
MMSI number
Latitude
Latitude
Longitude
Longitude
SOG5
SOG
COG6
COG
True heading
True heading
Timestamp7
Timestamp
ROT8
Navigational status
Table 3.8: Static AIS messages
Static messages
Class A
Class B
MMSI number
MMSI number
IMO number9
Ship name
Ship name
Call sign
Call sign
Type
Type10
Dimensions
Dimensions11
Vendor ID
Destination
ETA12
Draught
In this project, both dynamic and static AIS data is provided by DALO from four Norwe­
gian satellites and 60 exactEarth satellites, where exactEarth is a company that provides
Satellite AIS data services. The AIS data is already decoded and selected in the timespan
of a couple of hours before and after the desired time of day.
The AIS data is provided in the comma­separated values (CSV) file format in the same
order as listed in tables 3.7 and 3.8 according to the AIS category.
1Maritime Mobile Service Identity number
2Speed over ground
3Course over ground
4Timestamp in UTC seconds
5Rate of Turn
6International Maritime Organization number
7Type of ship and cargo
8Ship dimensions
9Estimated time of arrival
36
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:45==
4
Implementation
The objectives of this project are to perform a comparative analysis of the three different
SAR systems, perform change detection, extract ship and icebergs, and lastly to perform
ship detection on different sets of data.
As part of the comparative analysis, data handling and downloaded examples are pre­
sented for each type of SAR, the procedure of downloading and visualization of these
examples is therefore explained in section 4.1. The concluding analysis itself will then be
performed and discussed in section 5.1 and is therefore not included in this implementa­
tion section.
After the data handling and presenting the SAR image examples, the procedure of geocod­
ing sentinel­1 images to match apparent ships with transmitted AIS data. Then the pro­
cedure of change detection of sentinel­1 images in the Nuuk and Murmansk region is
described in section 4.3.
Then the procedure of extraction of ships and icebergs is described in detail in section 4.4,
using the theory in section 2.1.1 about connected­component labeling, and lastly, the ship
detection procedure is explained with an introduction of the provided CNN and the imple­
mentation hereof in section 4.5 with an introduction of ways to evaluate the performance
of the network in general and the results of the classification.
In this project, the high­level programming language Python is used due to the open­
source license, simple syntax, and extensive library support.
4.1
Data handling of SAR image examples
In this project, the data handling of SAR images includes reading the image data as arrays
and visualizing the examples as intensity images or RGB images. The Sentinel­1 images
can be downloaded from the Copernicus Open Access Hub, and the TerraSAR­X and
F­SAR images are provided from DALO. The format of the different images are explained
in section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3.
Both the Sentinel­1 and TerraSAR­X images are provided in the GeoTIFF format and
the F­SAR images in the PNG format, which should be loaded into an array using the
proper library. The chosen library of this project is the GDAL library, which is used for
raster and vector geospatial data formats, and is released by the Open Source Geospatial
Foundation.
First the GDAL Open() function should be used with the filename of the relevant SAR
image, that outputs the dataset stored in the file which contains a list of the image raster
bands, metadata, a coordinate system, a georeferencing transform, and various other
information.
Then the GetRasterBand() function is used to fetch a specified raster band of the SAR
image. If the image is an intensity ­ or grayscale ­ image, there will only be one raster band,
and if the image is an RGB image, there will be three raster bands where the channels
usually are defined from a specified polarimetric decomposition. In this project, Sentinel­
1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR data are used, where the Sentinel­1 images are grayscale
images and the TerraSAR­X, and F­SAR images are preprocessed RGB images. Since
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
37
==PAGE:46==
the GetRasterBand() function only fetches one raster band at a time, each band of the
RGB images is fetched separately.
When the bands are fetched, they are converted to arrays that complement the numpy
library using the ReadAsArray() function from the GDAL library. When each of the bands
are converted to arrays, the bands from the RGB images should be stacked depth wise
using the numpy function dstack() in the appropriate order.
When the images are converted to numpy arrays, they can easily be displayed using the
imshow() function from the matplotlib library, that is generally used for visualizing and
plotting data. The function however only takes images with one to three channels, the F­
SAR images for each frequency band can therefore only be visualized for one frequency
band at a time.
The flow chart of the general data handling process of the SAR images is displayed in
figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Flow chart of the general data handling process of the SAR images
4.2
Geocoding and AIS data
To be able to detect ships, and even dark ships, the provided AIS data should be used to
identify ships on the SAR images. Firstly, the AIS data should be read and processed.
The AIS data is read as a .csv file with the headers specified on the tables 3.7 and 3.8 in
section 3.4, according to the type. Both types are provided by DALO, but only the dynamic
AIS data is used, due to the larger amount of data points. To read the file containing the
AIS data, the read_csv() function from the pandas library is used. This function reads
CSV data and outputs a data frame with the potential of specifying headers, wherefrom
the data that matches a given header easily can be accessed.
To detect the ships, the MMSI number, timestamp, and the corresponding latitude and
longitude position is necessary. The ship path can then discovered on the SAR image,
using geocoding to convert the geographic position to pixel coordinates. For simplicity,
the method described in section 2.2.5 is used to approximate pixel positions in the SAR
image.
For ship detection, Sentinel­1 images are used. These images are provided in the Geo­
TIFF format, which includes geographical information. This information can be extracted
using the Sentinel Application Platform (SNAP), which is an open­source program with
Sentinel toolboxes developed by ESA. In this platform, the center of the image can be
found in both pixel and geographic coordinates, from the SAFE­file, downloaded on the
Copernicus Open Access Hub, along with the necessary metadata for the geocoding in­
cluding the orbit inclination angle.
To match a contour on the image with the ship that transmitted the AIS data, the timestamp
on the images should be the same as the timestamp of the AIS data. This can be a difficult
task since there will be a time delay from the AIS data is transmitted to received by satellite
or ground station, and this time delay varies depending on the area of interest among other
things. In the situation of a large time delay or if the given AIS timestamp does not match
38
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:47==
the timestamp of the SAR image, the timestamp closest to when the image is acquired
should be used to indicate the area in which the ship is sailing or at harbour.
4.3
Change Detection
To perform the change detection of a given area, a temporal series of images is needed.
A method to visualize the temporal anomalies of the area is to use three images at three
different dates that include the same geographical coordinates for comparison. The first
step in the process of change detection is therefore to select three images that display
the same geographical location. The selection of the images is explained in more detail
in section 4.3.1.
In this project, the change detection is performed on Sentinel­1 images. The reading of
these Sentinel images is therefore the next sub­process of the change detection and is
explained in section 4.1.
Lastly is the procedure of making the RGB images. This process is explained in section
4.3.2.
The flow chart of the change detection process is displayed in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Flow chart of the change detection process
4.3.1
Selecting the data
In the selection of the temporal series of images, the main objective is to ensure that the
images display the same location. Since the images used for the change detection are all
from the Sentinel­1 configuration, the dates where the recorded images are in the same
location can be found from the revisit frequency at specific areas on earth in figure 3.3 in
section 3.1. Since the locations of interest in this project are the area around Nuuk and
Murmansk, the revisit frequency is read as 12 days.
The temporal series of images should therefore be chosen with an interval of 12 days
between the images.
4.3.2
Creating RGB image
When the data is selected and read to an array in grayscale, the RGB image can be
created, by stacking the images depth­wise. The temporal changes will appear in the
colour of either red, green, or blue depending on the date of the image ­ or channel ­ of
the change.
Typically the different images will not be perfectly aligned in the RGB image but slightly
shifted in either slant range or azimuth. This shift can be corrected by examining the RGB
image, and check for ”edges” where the red, green, and blue pixels look as though they
should be aligned. These edges are usually found along shores, islands, or harbours,
where it is certain that these locations should not be changed over time. An example of
such shift is presented in figure 4.3a, where the red channel is shifted eight pixels to the
left compared to the green and blue channel.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
39
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Example of (a) an image where the red channel is shifted compared to the
green and blue channels and (b) where the shift has been corrected
This shift can then be corrected by shifting the image in the opposite direction in the
number of pixels that is clear from the RGB image. An example of the correction of figure
4.3a is displayed in figure 4.3b.
After the shift correction, the RGB image can then be examined and the changes become
clear from the dominant colour channels.
4.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
The extraction of ships and icebergs consists of four subprocesses; reading the image
data into a temporal RGB image, converting the image to a binary image using thresh­
olding, extracting the sub­images of ships and icebergs using the two­pass connected­
component labeling algorithm, and threshold these connected objects.
The process of reading the SAR image data into a temporal RGB image is explained
in detail in section 4.3. After reading the data, the image is then converted to a binary
image by thresholding the intensity values in the image matrix, so that pixel values above
the threshold are labeled as one and pixel values below the threshold are denoted zero.
The process of converting the image is explained in section 4.4.1. When the image is
converted to binary values, the two­pass connected­component labeling algorithm can
be used and the connected components of the binary image can be thresholded in size,
by change and extracted as explained in section 4.4.2.
The flow chart of the process of extracting ships and icebergs is displayed in figure 4.4.
40
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.4: Flow chart of the process of extracting ships and icebergs
4.4.1
Conversion to binary image
After the creation of the RGB image, it should be converted into grayscale using the func­
tion cvtColor() from the cv2 library. When the SAR image is converted to a grayscale
image array, it can be converted to a binary image using thresholding. The threshold
should be chosen, so unwanted clutter is removed and most of the high­intensity values
remain. The histogram of pixel intensity values should therefore be computed, where the
clutter mostly will be represented as a large number of low­intensity values. An example
of a histogram of intensity values is displayed in figure 4.5, with a suitable threshold at
100 that removes most of the clutter contribution to the resulting binary image.
Figure 4.5: Histogram of pixel intensity values for HH­ and HV­polarization with a threshold
at Intensity=100 represented by a red dotted line
When the threshold is chosen based on the intensity histogram, the values below the
threshold should be removed. For the removal of clutter, a logical expression is defined
in equation (4.1).
g(x, y) =
{ 0
f(x, y) < threshold
1
f(x, y) ≥threshold
(4.1)
Where g(x, y) is a pixel from the resulting binary image and f(x, y) is a pixel from the
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
41
==PAGE:50==
image array.
4.4.2
Extracting sub images
When the conversion from intensity­ to a binary image is done, the extraction of sub­
images of the desired objects can be performed. The two­pass connected­component
labeling explained in section 2.1.1 extracts connected objects in the image at given con­
nectivity. For this project, the connectedComponentsWithStats() function from the cv2
python library is used, which originates from the openCV project, that is commonly used
for image analysis. The function outputs numLabels which is the total number of labels in
the binary image, labels which is the destination labeled image, stats which includes the
statistics for each label (leftmost­ and topmost coordinate of the bounding box, horizontal­
and vertical size of the bounding box and the total area in pixels of the connected com­
ponent) and centroids which is the center pixel coordinates of the connected component.
Besides the binary image as input, the desired connectivity shall be specified as either
4­connectedness or 8­connectedness. In this project, the 4­connectedness is chosen,
primarily to avoid connected objects with holes.
When the connected components for the binary image are found, new thresholds can
be defined for the area of these components that fits the approximate sizes of ships and
icebergs. The areas included in the stats output of the algorithm are provided in a number
of pixels, since the converted image is from the Sentinel­1 configuration in IW mode, each
pixel will be 10m x 10m. The areas of ships and icebergs are assumed to be in the range
of 1500­70,000 square meters, which corresponds to 15­700 pixels in the image. The
upper­ and lower boundary can then be determined as in the expression below.
15pix < area < 700pix
When the connected objects in the given boundary are selected, the SAR sub­image con­
taining these objects can be extracted using the centroid of the given object. Since the
ship detection procedure that is explained in section 4.5, uses 75x75 pix images, this will
be the size of the sub­images that are extracted. The centroid is the weighted object cen­
ter, and the centroid information in the stats output of the function is the pixel coordinates
of the centroid. The sub­image will be defined from this centroid, where the coordinates
will be rounded to integers, and the image will extend from the centroid coordinates minus
37 pixels to the coordinates plus 38 pixels as described in the expression below, to ensure
size of 75x75 pixels.
xmin = cx −37
xmax = cx + 38
ymin = cy −37
ymax = cy + 38
If an object is positioned close to the corners of the image, the sub­image will be slightly
shifted to fulfill the image size requirement. Another requirement for ship detection, is
that the sub­image is represented in two polarizations. The Sentinel­1 data includes two
identical images at different polarizations, therefore the same pixel coordinates in one
polarization can be used in the other. The two sub­images of different polarization can
then be stacked in the depth dimension, and thus linked.
42
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:51==
4.5
Ship Detection
The ship detection procedure in this project consists of running a convolutional neural
network to classify whether an image of size 75 pix x 75 pix in two polarizations is a
ship or not. For the network to perform well, a large training set that represents different
types of ships and other labeled objects is needed. The ship detection procedure can
therefore be split into three subprocesses; preparing the training data, defining the neural
network and the corresponding hyperparameters, and lastly to evaluate the model and
performance of the network in terms of correct classification of objects.
The preparation of the training data mostly includes fetching and splitting the data into
training and validation and is further explained in section 4.5.1. Then the neural network
and the corresponding hyperparameters are defined, which includes a definition of layers,
regularization, subsampling and training parameters, etc. The definition of the network is
explained in section 4.5.2. Lastly, the different methods to evaluate the neural network in
this project are explained in section 4.5.3.
The flow chart of the process of ship detection is displayed in figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Flow chart of the process of ship detection
4.5.1
Preparing training data
In this project, two models are being approximated; one for training data provided by DTU
Security and one for data that is used for Kaggle competition on ship detection.
The data provided by DTU Security consists of a large set of Sentinel­1 images cropped
around connected objects that are found with the two­pass connected­component labeling
algorithm in sizes of 75 pix x 75 pix in a similar way as described in section 4.4. The objects
in the training data can be either ships or icebergs.
The Kaggle competition for classifying icebergs and ships is proposed by the compa­
nies Statoil and C­CORE, where Statoil is an international energy company that operates
worldwide and C­CORE is a company that uses satellite data, and have built a computer
vision based surveillance system. The competition is a challenge to build an algorithm to
automatically identify a ship or iceberg from given remote sensed targets, which is simi­
lar to the objective of this project. The data from the Kaggle competition is presented in
the same format as the DTU data, and therefore ready to use in the same type of neural
network as the one used for the DTU data.
Both sets of data are complete training datasets and should be split into training­ and
validation datasets. The split is performed using k­fold cross­validation as explained in
section 2.3.4, with k = 5 which corresponds to a split of 80% for training and 20% for
validation.
4.5.2
Defining Neural Network and hyperparameters
The neural network that is used in this project is a CNN as described in section 2.3.2,
which is a predefined network provided by DTU security. The different types of layers in­
clude; two­dimensional convolutional layers, two­dimensional maxpooling layers, dropout
layers, dense layers, and batch normalization layers. The order and amount of these lay­
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
43
==PAGE:52==
ers are presented in figure 4.7 along with the corresponding hyperparameters, activation
functions, and amount of total parameters.
Figure 4.7: Table with information of hyperparameters and layers in the CNN (Heiselberg
2020)
The architecture displayed in figure 4.7 is used on both the dataset provided by DTU and
the Kaggle dataset but as two separate models, and thus trained on the two different
training datasets.
Each model is trained with the same loss function which is the binary cross entropy, since
the models are trained to perform binary classification, during 30 epochs of batch size 24.
Furthermore, the Adam optimizer is used with the hyperparameters listed in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: List of hyperparameters for the Adam optimizer
Adam optimizer hyperparameters
Parameter
Value
Learning rate
0.001
β1
0.9
β2
0.999
ϵ
10−8
Decay
0.0
44
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:53==
4.5.3
Evaluation of model
The evaluation of each model is based on the methods described in section 2.3.4, which
includes looking at the individual probabilities in a scatterplot and the corresponding his­
togram as well as calculating loss, accuracy, AUC, and analyzation of the ROC curve.
The different probabilities of the inputs are found as the outputs of the network since the
output activation is the sigmoid function. These probabilities can be illustrated in a scat­
terplot, to see how the different inputs are classified and how the outputs are distributed.
This distribution also becomes clear, when looking at the corresponding histogram.
Loss and accuracy are measures of the network performance at each epoch of the train­
ing. These measures are calculated for both the training­ and validation data in the cur­
rent batch, where the loss is calculated by the binary cross entropy as explained in section
4.5.2 above from equation (2.31) in section 2.3.3, and the accuracy can be calculated from
equation (2.38) in section 2.3.4. The loss and accuracy of the network at each epoch can
thus be plotted to evaluate how fast the network achieves high performance and the over­
all performance after full training.
Besides computing and plotting the loss and accuracy at each epoch separately, the re­
lation between the two parameters throughout the training can be examined. From the
publication Heiselberg 2020, it is discovered that the relation between the binary cross
entropy loss and accuracy are related as described in equation (4.2).
Ebcross = 2(1 −accuracy)
(4.2)
Where the slope of the linear relation can vary depending on the non­classified com­
ponents, which are the components that are not classified as definitive 1 or 0 but are
assigned a probability in the binary classification. The network can thus be evaluated by
looking at the converging rate towards this known relationship, throughout the training
epochs, and whether the slope of the relation deviates from the expectation.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:55==
5
Results
In this section, the results from the implementation explained in section 4 is displayed.
These results are continuously discussed as they are displayed according to the theory
explained in section 2 and the objectives of this project.
First, the comparative analysis of the three SAR systems; Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X, and
F­SAR is performed by discussing and comparing the specifications and the availability of
each system for the application of big data technologies and ship surveillance, and lastly,
the pros and cons of each system are listed and image examples from each system are
displayed.
After the comparative analysis, the results from the geocoding and AIS data matching
with Sentinel­1 images are displayed in both the Nuuk­ and Murmansk area, where the
appropriate parameters for performing the geocoding are listed.
Then the change detection is performed in both the Nuuk­ and Murmansk area by cre­
ating RGB images from temporal series of Sentinel­1 images. These changes are thus
discussed according to the theory of backscattering.
Then the results from the extraction of the icebergs are displayed, where the relevant
parameters are presented, and lastly the ship detection is performed from training and
testing the DTU­ and Kaggle classifiers where the specifications of the training data are
listed, the classifiers are evaluated according to the methods introduced in the theory­ and
implementation sections, and the DTU classifier is tested and evaluated with the extracted
icebergs from the Disko Bay in Greenland.
5.1
Comparative Analysis
For the comparative analysis, the three SAR systems Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR
are compared from the information in the data description sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. In
this comparative analysis, the specifications and data availability are evaluated for the
application of big data technologies, and more specifically for ship surveillance.
The analysis is divided into three sections, where the first subsection includes a discussion
of the selected specifications that are listed in table 5.1 and complimented with more in­
depth information from section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. In the next subsection, the availability of
data from each of the SAR systems is discussed, then the pros and cons for each SAR
system are listed to get an overview of the points in the two previous subsections, and
lastly some image examples of each SAR system is displayed.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
47
==PAGE:56==
5.1.1
Specifications
The specifications in table 5.1 are chosen based on the common provided information
and based on parameters that indicate the general performance for the configurations.
Table 5.1: List of relevant specifications for the Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR pay­
load
Comparison: Specifications in general
Parameter
Sentinel­1
TerraSAR­X
F­SAR
Frequency Band
C
X
X
C
S
L
P
RF [GHz]
5.405
9.65
9.60
5.30
3.25
1.325
0.435
Polarization modes
Dual
Quad
Quad
Quad
Quad
Quad
Quad
Incidence angle [deg.]
20­45
15­60
25­57
25­57
25­57
25­57
25­57
Resolution [m]
10
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.6
1.0
4.0
On table 5.1 it is clear that the F­SAR overlaps both the Sentinel­1 and TerraSAR­X in
terms of radio frequency, and also provides the possibility of recording in multiple fre­
quencies simultaneously. It is known from the theory of backscattering, that the radio
frequency is closely connected to penetration depth and how easily the radar pulse is
reflected or backscattered, when ”hitting” a target or surface. A higher frequency cor­
responds to shorter wavelengths, and a lower frequency corresponds to longer wave­
lengths. The radar pulses of high frequencies are thus easily deflected compared to
pulses of low frequency. This becomes clear in the F­SAR image examples on figure
5.3, where example in the L­band has contours in the sea areas, that are not as clear
in the C­band image and almost non­existing in the X­band image. The contours in the
L­band image are a result of a deeper penetration due to the low frequency. For ship de­
tection, the optimal frequency will be short enough to avoid unnecessary reflection deep
in the ocean and the risk of penetrating important features of the ships. If the frequency,
however, is too short, the signal can weaken during the travel from the transmission to
reception from e.g. atmospheric disturbances, precipitation, etc. It should however be
noted, that the ability to record SAR images in multiple frequencies simultaneously would
contribute to more complex analysis since more features of the ships and ship wakes
would be detected using more frequencies.
The next specification in the table is ”polarization modes”, which indicates in which polar­
ization modes the SAR systems can operate. As listed in the table, the Sentinel­1 system
can operate in dual­polarization, and the TerraSAR­X and the F­SAR system can both
operate in quad­polarization. The Sentinel­1 system can however only operate in HH
single polarization or HH+HV dual polarization, or VV single polarization or VV+VH dual
polarization at specific regions on earth, which are specified in figure 3.4 in the bottom
left corner. This is not a constraint for the TerraSAR­X and F­SAR, that both can oper­
ate in quad polarization, which means they are fully polarimetric. The polarized wave of a
transmitted radar pulse can be reflected in a different polarization depending on the target
or surface the pulse is reflected upon. Different polarimetric modes of the SAR can thus
reveal different characteristics of a ship in terms of ship detection. The TerraSAR­X and
F­SAR systems are therefore considered advantageous in terms of polarization for ship
detection, because of the constraint of the Sentinel­1 system.
The incidence angles, which corresponds to a measure of the width in degrees the SAR
will illuminate, span differently for each SAR. The width on ground will depend on the
height the SAR system moves. From the table, the TerraSAR­X is the system with the
48
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:57==
largest incidence angle interval, followed by the F­SAR system and lastly the Sentinel­1.
The intervals are 45 −20 = 25, 60 −15 = 45 and 57 −25 = 32 for Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X
and F­SAR respectively. Since both the Sentinel­1 and the TerraSAR­X are mounted on
satellites, and the F­SAR is mounted on an aircraft, the Sentinel­1 and TerraSAR­X will
therefore cover more ground on earth and the TerraSAR­X will cover the most. In terms of
ship detection, the TerraSAR­X will detect more ships in one image than the others, since
it covers more ground. The TerraSAR­X is however fixed in a satellite orbit, whereas the
F­SAR system can record images in a local area of interest and different views.
Lastly, there is the spatial resolution of each SAR system. The resolutions in the table
apply for the desired acquisition mode for this project, there are however other acquisition
modes for Sentinel­1 and TerraSAR­X with different spatial resolutions than the ones listed
in the table. In the table, the highest spatial resolution is 0.25 meters from the TerraSAR­X
and the F­SAR operating in X­band. As in most cases with the resolution, the lower the
value, the higher ­ and better ­ the resolution is. The resolution of the TerraSAR­X and the
F­SAR is therefore considerably better than the resolution of the Sentinel­1 at 10 m. In
terms of ship detection, a SAR system with high resolution is preferred, since more ship
features can be detected and contribute to easier and more precise recognition of ships
and even the type of the ships. High resolution can however also be a downside when
using big data technologies since a lot of computational power is needed to process these
high­resolution images.
5.1.2
Availability
Besides the specifications of the SAR systems, the availability of the image data for each
type is relevant. In sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3, the availability and price of the SAR images
are introduced.
As described in section 3.1, the Sentinel­1 images can be downloaded for free from the
Copernicus Open Access Hub, which is an initiative to provide free satellite data recorded
each day from 2014 to the present day. The Sentinel­1 images are therefore easily ac­
cessed and can be downloaded from the website https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/
home. The easy process of collecting the images for free is a great advantage in perform­
ing big data technologies, where ­ as the name indicates ­ big data is required.
The TerraSAR­X products are however not for free. The price list on table 3.5 contains the
cost pr. product for scientific use, where the products are ordered from DLR that provides
the recorded images. This cost and the process of ordering and applying for scientific use
is a slight disadvantage for performing big data technologies since a substantial amount
of funds is required to collect the sufficient amount of data.
Lastly, there are the F­SAR products. As described in section 3.3, the products can be
ordered from DLR for free for scientific use, at the approval of a request in an application.
The products are therefore not as available as the Sentinel­1 products that are ready to
download but do not need funds as the TerraSAR­X products. It should also be noted
that the F­SAR database is limited, since a flight in the specific area has to be organized,
in contrast to the TerraSAR­X and Sentinel­1 that are mounted on satellites and record
images continuously, and thus larger databases.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
49
==PAGE:58==
5.1.3
Pros and Cons
From the discussion above, the pros and cons of each SAR system can be listed as below.
Sentinel­1
Pros
• Large swath
• Large database
• Products are free
• Products are ready to download from
the website
Cons
• Dual­polarization in either HH+HV or
VV+VH depending on the geographic
location of the area of interest
• Low spatial resolution of 10 m
TerraSAR­X
Pros
• Fully polarimetric
• Large swath
• High resolution of 0.25 m
• Large database
Cons
• Product cost, needs a lot of funds to
acquire ”big data”
• Products are not ready to download,
but ordered
F­SAR
Pros
• Five different Radio frequencies
• Can record up to four frequencies si­
multaneously
• Fully polarimetric
• Mounted on aircraft, able to provide
different views in local areas
• High resolution of down to 0.25 m
• Products are free
Cons
• A flying session in the area of interest
needs to be arranged
• Products are not ready to download,
but ordered
• Limited database
5.1.4
Image Examples
The different examples of SAR images are displayed in figures 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 for Sentinel­
1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR respectively. The images are cropped to roughly display the
same area around Nuuk in Greenland for comparison.
The first image example is from the Sentinel­1 configuration, which is displayed in figure
5.1. This area around Nuuk can only be recorded in HH­ and HV­polarization by Sentinel­
1. The example is in the HH­polarization with backscatter that ranges from 0 to 300.
50
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.1: Sentinel­1 image of the Nuuk area
The second image example is from the TerraSAR­X configuration and is displayed in figure
5.2. As with the Sentinel­1 image, this example is displayed in a grayscale HH­polarized
image, whereas the backscatter on this image ranges from 0 to 100 instead of 300. Due
to the improved resolution of the image, the amount of pixels in almost the same area is
more than doubled.
Figure 5.2: TerraSAR­X image of the Nuuk area
The third example consists of three F­SAR images in C­band, L­band and X­band, that
are displayed in figure 5.3a, 5.3b and 5.3c. These images differ from the Sentinel­1 and
TerraSAR­X images, since the result of the preprocessing is an RGB image made from
polarimetric decomposition. The three images are recorded simultaneously, which is spe­
cial for the F­SAR configuration.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
51
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.3: Simultaneous F­SAR images of the Nuuk area in (a) C­band, (b) L­band and
(c) X­band
52
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:61==
5.2
Geocoding and AIS data
In this section, the geocoding of specific Sentinel­1 images is performed and the AIS
positions are matched with these images.
Two images are used for the geocoding; one of the Nuuk area and one of the Murmansk
area. To perform the geocoding, several parameters need to be defined. These include
the image center in geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude), the image center
in pixel coordinates (x and y), and the orbit inclination.
For the AIS matching, a polygon including the area of interest for each location and the
exact time of the SAR image is needed. The polygons are defined from four edge points
in geographical coordinates.
The geocoding parameters and the polygon points for the Nuuk­ and Murmansk areas
are listed in table 5.2. The time of the respective Sentinel­1 image can be read from the
metadata in the SAFE folder but is also included in the name of the folder. There are two
timestamps in the folder name, which is the start­ and stop time of the product. The AIS
data should therefore cover the whole interval.
Table 5.2: Parameters for the geocoding in the Nuuk­ and Murmansk areas, and the
corner points of the polygon for AIS data
Geocoding parameters and AIS polygon
Parameter
Nuuk
Murmansk
Centre in (lat, lon)
(64.036944, ­51.512222)
(68.727222, 33.218055)
Centre in (x, y)
(25996, 16659)
(25443, 16639)
Orbit inclination [deg.]
­11.0
­13.2
Polygon, P1 in (lat, lon)
(64.239444, ­51.237222)
(69.046825, 32.999503)
Polygon, P2 in (lat, lon)
(64.296667, ­51.901944)
(69.041939, 33.075994)
Polygon, P3 in (lat, lon)
(63.996389, ­52.217778)
(68.920208, 33.059842)
Polygon, P4 in (lat, lon)
(63.893056, ­51.541389)
(68.919267, 32.998667)
The center of the image in both geographical­ and pixel coordinates are found using the
SNAP program with the Sentinel­1 toolbox, the inclination angle for the Nuuk area is
provided by DTU Security and the inclination angle for the Murmansk area has been
manually adjusted from observing the alignment of recognizable points in the image from
their geographical coordinates.
5.2.1
Nuuk
The polygon that surrounds the Nuuk area with the edges P1, P2, P3, and P4 is displayed
on figure 5.4. All of the provided AIS data for the Nuuk area lies within this polygon and
was ordered in the time interval the Sentinel­1 image was acquired.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.4: Polygon surrounding the Nuuk area in which the AIS data is located
The AIS data in the Nuuk area is recorded from 01:00:16 UTC to 09:15:44 UTC on the
25th of August 2020, and the Sentinel­1 image is recorded from 09:53:05 UTC to 09:53:30
UTC on the 25th of August 2020. These data are transmitted from 16 ships with different
MMSI numbers, that sailed in the area in those routes. The times and amount of different
ships are listed in table 5.3 as an overview.
Table 5.3: Specifications of the acquired AIS for the Nuuk area
Nuuk
Parameter
Value
AIS, start time
01:00:16 UTC
AIS, stop time
09:15:44 UTC
Image, start time
09:53:05 UTC
Image, stop time
09:53:30 UTC
Amount of different ships
16
From table 5.3, it is clear that the time of the AIS recordings and the Sentinel­1 image
do not match. The AIS data is received by satellite over the Nuuk area, which is quite
remote, so the reception of the data can be delayed. This means that the AIS data could
be received around the time the image was recorded, the ship has however possibly
moved in the meantime, and will therefore not show at the transmitted location.
Despite the mismatch of the time intervals, the AIS data is geocoded with the parameters
listed in table 5.2 and the method described in section 4.2 as a proof of concept. An
example of the AIS data is a ship with MMSI number 219667000, whose geographical
coordinates are converted to pixel coordinates with geocoding. The pixel coordinates of
this ship are then plotted as a route in the discussed Sentinel­1 image and displayed in
figure 5.5 as green­, red­ and yellow arrows that indicate the direction the ship is sailing,
54
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:63==
where the green arrow is the path from the first received geographical location to the
second, the yellow arrow is the path from the second last­ to the last position and the red
arrows are paths in between.
Figure 5.5: AIS data plotted in the Sentinel­1 image of the Nuuk area as red dots
In figure 5.5, there is a clear route from the green arrow at around (13000,10000) to the
yellow arrow at (12100,6250). There do not appear any anomalies from an apparent
”normal” route, such as locations inside land areas or unnatural maneuvers, the route is
therefore considered probable. The geocoding is thus considered a success.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
55
==PAGE:64==
5.2.2
Murmansk
The polygon that surrounds the Murmansk area with edges P1, P2, P3, and P4 is dis­
played in figure 5.6a. The AIS data of the Murmansk area is recorded from 10:00:58 UTC
to 15:00:22 UTC on the 18th of July 2020, and the Sentinel­1 image is recorded from
04:23:17 UTC to 04:23:42 UTC on the 18th of July 2020. The AIS data is geocoded in the
same way as with AIS data around Nuuk, but with the parameters for the Murmansk area.
The pixel coordinates of the AIS data are plotted on the Sentinel­1 image and displayed
in figure 5.6b as red dots.
Unlike the AIS data in Nuuk, there are no clear paths or routes in the area around Mur­
mansk, because of the large number of ships in general. In the data, there are trans­
missions from 111 different ships for around five hours. The timestamps and amount of
different ships are listed in table 5.4 as an overview.
Table 5.4: Specifications of the acquired AIS for the Murmansk area
Murmansk
Parameter
Value
AIS, start time
10:00:58 UTC
AIS, stop time
15:00:22 UTC
Image, start time
04:23:17 UTC
Image, stop time
04:23:42 UTC
Amount of different ships
111
From table 5.4 it is clear, that the timestamp of the AIS data does not match the timestamp
of the Sentinel­1 image. The AIS data in the correct time interval did not arrive in time for
this project, the provided data in the incorrect time interval is therefore used as a proof of
concept, as with the Nuuk case, and evaluate whether the apparent route seems probable.
As an example, one ship from the AIS data is selected. This ship has MMSI number
257286000, and its path during the period listed in table 5.4 is plotted on the Sentinel­
1 image and displayed on figure 5.6b as green­, red­ and yellow arrows, with the same
colour coding as with the Nuuk case.
From the position and direction of the arrows on this image, the path begins at around
(14164, 5422), then the ship sails slight upward and circularly at around (14150,5360)
downward, make a turn at around (14150, 5449), and then goes upward until (14136,
5214). This route is not as straightforward as the example in the Nuuk area but is char­
acterized by many turns and a shifting course. These turns and shifts cannot be a result
of the geocoding, but perhaps a maneuvering close to a harbour with much activity. The
route however stays in the Kola bay (also called the Murmansk Fjord), which would indi­
cate a correct geocoding of the AIS data.
56
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Display of (a) the polygon surrounding the Murmansk area in which the AIS
data is located and (b) AIS data plotted in the Sentinel­1 image of the Murmansk area as
red dots
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
57
==PAGE:66==
5.3
Change Detection
Change detection has been performed in two areas of interest; Nuuk in Greenland and
Murmansk in Russia, from images of the Sentinel­1 configuration.
The change detection is performed according to the implementation in section 4.3, where
a temporal series of three images are chosen with 12 days intervals and an RGB image
is created from stacking the images depth­wise. The small shift between the images is
corrected by shifting the image array in the direction opposite to the observed shift, where
an apparent dominance of a specific colour on all shores and the like is clear.
The change detection of both Nuuk and Murmansk is performed on cropped images, to
lower the computational cost. These images are manually cropped from looking at the
features that match the desired location, which can be seen in optical images from e.g.
Google Earth.
5.3.1
Nuuk
The first result is from Nuuk with a series of Sentinel­1b images in the summertime, where
the number of icebergs and snow should be low. The image on figure 5.7 is an optical
image from Google Earth of the area around Nuuk that is examined. This image can be
used to relate the SAR backscattering on the SAR images with optical data.
Figure 5.7: Optical image of the area around Nuuk in Greenland from Google Earth
The three images that are used as the temporal series are chosen with an interval of 12
days according to the explanation of the implementation in section 4.3.1, so the images
will be at the same location. The dates of the images are:
• 25th of August 2020 (25­08­2020)
• 6th of September 2020 (06­09­2020)
• 18th of September 2020 (18­09­2020)
These images are cropped to display the same area around Nuuk as displayed in figure
5.7. This area is chosen, because it is assumed to include most of the ships of the image
because of the population density of Nuuk and the presence of a harbour compared to
the other locations in the image, and is illustrated in figure 5.8a, 5.8b and 5.8c. It should
58
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:67==
be noted, that the images are recorded at descending orbit direction, and have therefore
been flipped to resemble the optical image on figure 5.7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.8: Visual display of Sentinel­1b images in the Nuuk area at dates (a) 25­08­2020,
(b) 06­09­2020 and (c) 18­09­2020
In the above images, the dark colours represent low backscatter and bright colours repre­
sent high backscatter. On these images, there is a clear tendency that both the lower and
higher backscattered areas intensify throughout the period of 24 days, as both the dark
and brighter areas turn even brighter. The brighter backscatter can be a result of volume
scatterings such as precipitation in the shape of snow or rain, or sleet in the ocean sur­
face. Normally the snow can fall from September to May in Greenland (DMI, DTU, and
GEUS 2020), the brighter backscatter, especially in figure 5.8c, could therefore possibly
the early snowfall.
After the three images are loaded, they are combined in an RGB image, to illustrate the
change over time, where the image from the 25th of August 2020 is the red channel, the
image from the 6th of September 2020 is the green channel and the image from the 18th
of September 2020 is the blue channel.
The change can then be detected from the colour dominance at distinct areas, where the
areas of white dominance will be an equal mix of the three channels and thus represent
areas with no change during the 24 days. The resulting RGB image is displayed in figure
5.9.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.9: RGB image made of the images from the 25th of August 2020, the 6th of
September and the 18th of September, that represents the change over time
On the RGB image, bright ­ and almost white ­ areas appear on the locations that are de­
picted as land areas in the optical image. As explained above, these white areas indicate
that no change has occurred during the period, which can be expected at land areas, since
the ”ground” rarely moves at a period of 24 days. These bright areas and partly the ocean
area are slightly blue, which reinforces the theory of early snowfall in mid­September that
will appear all over the image ­ both on land and sea.
Besides the bright areas, there are also areas of red, blue, and green dominated areas,
and thus changes between the timestamps, in the image. Three areas of interest on
figure 5.9 are selected and displayed in the figures 5.10a, 5.10b and 5.10c. In these
areas, distinct changes appear from the dominant colours.
The image on figure 5.10a illustrates a strong target that is dominated by the blue channel,
and thus from the image recorded on the 18th of September 2020. The target is located
just below the Nuuk harbour, as can be seen from the range of pixels in the slant range­
and azimuth dimensions. This target has the expected contour of a large ship, because
of the oval or rectangular shape and strong sidelobes, that appear as crosses, that can
occur from double­ or triple bounce when the radar pulse is reflected upon walls on a ship.
The image on figure 5.10b is an area located on the left side, which is the geographical
west, of Nuuk. In this image, the red­ and partly green channels, that combined appear
yellow, are most dominant. This is a relatively large area of the image, and all the change
is at the shore between land areas and the ocean. This change could be the result of tides.
The tides in the Nuuk area can vary with a difference of up to five meters and maybe more
between low and high tide (DMI 2020), which would be visible on a SAR image during a
timespan of 24 days. Besides the changes along the shores, small targets are appearing
from green­ and red dominance, with a contour that would match the expected contour
60
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:69==
of either a ship or an iceberg. This expected contour would be an oval or rectangle as in
figure 5.10a, but also an almost round shape for small ships or icebergs.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.10: Display of the selected areas of interest in the Nuuk area, with (a) an area
with a dominant blue target, (b) an area with red and green dominance and (c) the area
around the Nuuk harbour
The image on figure 5.10c shows the area around the Nuuk harbour, where most of the
ships are expected to be either docked, arriving, or departing. On the shores, there ia a
slight red dominance, and left ­ or eastward ­ to the harbour there is a clear small area
with green dominance and an even smaller area with red dominance above the green one.
These small targets has the shape of either ships or icebergs based on the description
matching the targets on figure 5.10a and 5.10b, which states that ships and icebergs are
expected to have an apparent oval­, rectangular­ or round shape. It should also be noted
that besides the small targets, clear sidelobes are present at the harbour. These sidelobes
usually appear from double­ or triple bounces, which can occur in urban areas and areas
with many corners or with perpendicular surfaces, such as the target on figure 5.10a that
is expected to be a ship. Since the sidelobes appear in all channels, because of the bright
colour, they are stationary and could be either docked ships or buildings.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
61
==PAGE:70==
5.3.2
Murmansk
The second result is from the area around Murmansk in Russia with a series of Sentinel­
1b images, which is also in the summertime to avoid snow and ice clutter. In figure 5.11,
the optical image from Google Earth of the chosen area is displayed.
Figure 5.11: Image of the area around Murmansk in Russia from Google Earth
The three images used for the change detection in Murmansk are, as with the images
used for the change detection in Nuuk, chosen with intervals of 12 days, so the images
all share the same location. The dates of the three images are:
• 5th of August 2020 (05­08­2020)
• 17th of August 2020 (17­08­2020)
• 29th of August 2020 (29­08­2020)
The images are also cropped to display the area around Murmansk and are flipped to
resemble the image on figure 5.11 due to the descending orbit direction of the satellite.
When the three images are read and converted to an image array, they are stacked depth­
wise to create the RGB image for the change detection. In the RGB image, the image
from the 5th of August 2020 makes the red channel, the image from the 17th of August
2020 makes the green channel and the image from the 29th of August 2020 makes the
blue channel. The resulting RGB image is displayed in figure 5.12.
62
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.12: RGB image made of the images from the 5th of August 2020, the 17th of
August 2020 and the 29th of August 2020, that represents the change over time
As with the RGB image of Nuuk, the large areas on the above image appear very bright
and are located on the land areas as expected. The dark green areas in between the bright
land areas make the Kola bay, where the green colour dominance represents changes
from the 17th of August 2020 compared to the 5th­ and 29th of August 2020, which is
expected to be the result of a change in weather. From the weather history of Murmansk,
the most striking difference is that precipitation fell on both the 5th­ and 29th of August
2020, whereas the 17th of August 2020 was dry (AccuWeather 2020). The lack of pre­
cipitation on the 17th of August 2020 could lead to specular and thus weaker backscatter,
which does not agree with the result on this image, where the backscatter is stronger.
Another explanation could however be the phenomenon of Bragg scattering, which is the
result of constructive interference between the ocean waves and the radar signal, and
thus stronger backscatter. Inside the bay that is dominated by the green colour channel,
there are many different colour dominated targets scattered more or less all over the bay
in all three colour channels, with many targets that are also characterized by sidelobes
from the apparent crosses. It is known, that many ships sail through Murmansk and no
icebergs should be present. These colour dominated targets are therefore all assumed
to be ships.
Two areas of interest are selected from the image; at the Murmansk harbour and an area
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
63
==PAGE:72==
with much change and examples of sidelobes. The image on figure 5.13a is the area
around Murmansk harbour, and the image on figure 5.13b is in the Murmansk area but
further above the harbour.
In the area near the harbour, on figure 5.13a, there is strong backscatter in the right, and
eastward, side of the image which is where the docking ships will be located. This strong
backscatter is characterized by the almost white colour with clear sidelobes along the
shore and is assumed to be stationary backscatter originating from either docked ships or
from buildings on the sites, from either double­ or triple bounce scattering. In the harbour
area, there are also strong targets dominated by either the red­, blue­ or green channel,
which is assumed to be either arriving or departing ships. Besides the backscatter in the
harbour, there are strong targets in the Kola bay each from a different channel and time at
both the upper­ and lower part of the bay, counting three red targets, three blue targets,
and two green targets, all assumed to be ships in motion.
In the other area further up the bay on figure 5.13b, there are many targets represented
in each colour. The three largest targets appear in the green and the blue colour chan­
nels which are on 17th of August 2020 and 29th of August at pixel locations (1460,775),
(1475,540), and (1490,890) respectively, and are also the targets with very clear side­
lobes. Besides the mentioned large targets, there are smaller targets that count five in
the red channel, two in the green channel, and two in the blue channel. All of the targets
are assumed to be ships, as they all are located in Kola Bay.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13: Display of the selected areas of interest in the Murmansk area, with (a)
an area around the Murmansk harbour and (b) an area further up Kola Bay with many
detected changes
64
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:73==
5.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
In this section only icebergs are extracted, the method however also applies to extracting
ships, but in this project, the purpose of this extraction is mainly to test the neural network
explained in section 4.5. To test the neural network, the data must be labeled to know if
the data is classified correctly, and the absence of simultaneous AIS data makes it difficult
to label the ships.
The icebergs used for the testing are extracted from Sentinel­1 images of the Disko bay
in Greenland, which is an area known to contain many icebergs and extremely few ships
because of the remote location, and the presence of a glacier. The extracted connected
components from this image can therefore all be labeled as icebergs. The optical image
from Google Earth of the Disko bay area is displayed in figure 5.14, where the Jakobshavn
glacier can be seen on the eastern side of the bay.
Figure 5.14: Display on the optical Google Earth image of the Disko bay
To ensure the detection of icebergs and not stationary targets such as islands, change
detection is performed as in section 5.3 with an RGB image made from a temporal series
of three SAR images in one polarization. The chosen SAR for the iceberg extraction is
Sentinel­1 to ensure compatibility with the DTU classifier for the ship/iceberg detection,
and the HH­polarization is chosen for the RGB image for the initial detection. For the
creation of the RGB image, three images with an interval of 12 days are selected. The
dates of these images are:
• 30th of August 2020
• 11th of September 2020
• 23rd of September 2020
These images are stacked depth­wise, where the 30th of August 2020 is the red channel,
the 11th of September 2020 is the green channel and the 23rd of September 2020 is the
blue channel. The resulting RGB image is displayed in figure 5.15.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.15: Display on the Sentinel­1 image of the Disko bay
In figure 5.15 there are clear changes from each of the colour channels in the bay at the
glacier tongue, which is located at around pixel location (15000,5000), and upward. These
changes are supposedly icebergs targets, and thus the objects that should be extracted.
After manually locating an area with many changes, the image is cropped around this
area and is displayed on figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Display on the Sentinel­1 image of a zoomed view in the Disko bay
In figure 5.16, these changes, and the contours of the targets, become more clear. The
targets generally vary in terms of dominant colour channel, shape, and size. These are
representable for very different kinds of icebergs, and thus suitable for the test of the
ship/iceberg detection later on. This cropped image is then used for the iceberg extraction,
66
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:75==
and therefore converted to a grayscale image that contains information from each channel
in the RGB image.
The histogram of the grayscale image of HH­polarization, the corresponding grayscale
image in HV­polarization with the chosen threshold of 100 is displayed on figure 5.17a.
This threshold has been chosen to filter out most of the clutter, which is expected to
accumulate at a low backscatter intensity, which in this case is below 100. From this
threshold, the binary image is generated, where the pixels with backscatter intensity below
100 are filtered out, and the resulting image is displayed in figure 5.17b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.17: Display of (a) the histogram of the backscatter values in the HH­ and HV­
polarized grayscale images, where the threshold is illustrated with a red dotted line, and
(b) the binary image of the Disko Bay at threshold=100
From the binary image on figure 5.17b, it is clear that the land areas are still present and
not filtered out as clutter. The land areas on this image will be connected with a signifi­
cantly large area, that can be filtered out from thresholding the areas of the components
from the two­pass connected­component labeling that is used for detecting probable ice­
bergs.
The two­pass connected­component labeling has been performed on the binary image,
where 9877 objects are detected. These objects are of various areas and sizes, and a
threshold must be applied as indicated above to filter out the land areas and more clutter.
The icebergs are expected to be of areas between 15 and 700 pixels, the objects outside
this threshold are thus ignored. The detected amount of icebergs within this threshold is
1151.
The images of these icebergs are then extracted from their respective centroids, with the
procedure described in section 4.4.2. Examples of the iceberg sub­images are displayed
in figure 5.18a and 5.18b, in HH­ and HV­polarization respectively.
It is clear from the images, that there are many different targets in the same sub­image,
which is expected from the apparent density of objects in the RGB image. On some of
the images, there is no target in the middle which would be expected from the use of
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
67
==PAGE:76==
centroids. This is because the algorithm also detects components in the edges of the
image, and there might not be a space of +­ 37 pixels on each side. To fulfill the image
size of 75x75 pixels, the center of the image will be slightly shifted but still include the
respective iceberg.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18: Display of nine examples on icebergs extracted from the Disko bay in (a)
HH­polarization and in (b) HV­polarization
5.5
Ship Detection
Ship detection has been performed on two datasets; one from DTU Security and one from
the Statoil and C­CORE Kaggle competition. The ship detection is performed as explained
in section 4.5, with the network that is described in section 4.5.2. After the training of the
classifier with the two datasets, the classifiers are tested with the whole training set, and
the DTU classifier is tested with the icebergs extracted from the Disko Bay in section 5.4.
The specifications of the data for each classifier are listed in table 5.5, where it is clear
that the data from DTU Security is more extensive compared to the data from the Kaggle
competition.
Table 5.5: Data specifications for the DTU­ and kaggle classifiers
Data specifications for classifiers
DTU
Kaggle
Training, ships
1445
640
Training, icebergs
1427
644
Validation, ships
360
210
Validation, icebergs
356
109
Total ships
1805
850
Total icebergs
1783
753
Total
3588
1603
The classification is binary, which means that an image can be classified as either True
or False, where True is the desired class in the detection, which is ”ships” in this project,
68
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:77==
and False is everything else. Since the classifier is trained on either ships or icebergs,
the False class will only be icebergs. These classes are denoted with the numbers one
for the True class and 0 for the False class.
The first result consists of nine examples of ships in HH­polarization from the DTU data,
and their respective probabilities from the testing of the DTU classifier. The image exam­
ples are displayed in figure 5.19 with their probabilities assigned by the classifier above
the images. From these results, it is clear that the classifier is confident in classifying the
ships in general, with probabilities that range from 0.975 to 1.0. These ships are mostly
characterized with a rectangular or round shape, where some of them seem to have faint
sidelobes, which is expected from the discussion in section 5.3.
Figure 5.19: Result for nine ship examples from DTU Security dataset with images in the
HH­polarization and their respective probabilities assigned by the DTU classifier
The overall performance of the DTU­ and Kaggle classifiers is visualized in a scatterplot
of probabilities and the corresponding histogram, which is displayed in figure 5.20a and
5.20b respectively.
In the scatterplot on figure 5.20a, the probability of each true type of class has a unique
colour, where the probabilities of true ships and icebergs from the DTU dataset are blue
and orange respectively and the probabilities of true ships and icebergs from the Kaggle
dataset are green and red respectively. Since the order of the probabilities is arbitrary, they
are sorted to get an overview of the number of correct classifications versus the incorrect.
From the scatterplot, the classifier can be evaluated from how fast the apparent curves
stabilizes. In this particular plot, the assigned classification of icebergs from the DTU
classifier seems to stabilize much faster than from the Kaggle classifier, whereas the rate
of correct classification of ships in both classifiers is approximately the same. The rate of
correct classification of ships compared to the total amount of data is however faster in
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
69
==PAGE:78==
the DTU classifier.
In the histogram on figure 5.20b, the same colour codes of the ship­ and iceberg labels are
used. The histogram displays the probabilities from the scatterplot organized into bins,
where the amount of targets with the given probability of the respective bin is the height of
the bin. The resulting histogram reinforces the conclusion above, that the classification of
icebergs from the DTU classifier is by far the most successful, and the other classifications
are in general successful with a slight variance.
From these plots, it is clear, that both classifiers seem to classify correctly in most cases
since the true labels generally match the predicted labels, which is either one for ships
and zero for icebergs, where the DTU classifier gets more correct classifications than
the Kaggle classifier. Based on the fact that the DTU classifier trains on more labeled
data, it would be expected to classify more nuanced, because more ship features can
be recognized from the training, than from the Kaggle dataset that contains far fewer
data. Since neural networks only adjust the model parameters from the input data, more
data will result in the more accurate tuning of the parameters and thus a more accurate
classification in general, assuming the data is of good quality.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.20: Classification probabilities of ships and icebergs in (a) a scatterplot and in
(b) a histogram
Besides the scatterplots and histograms, the loss and accuracy have been calculated
throughout the epochs and the training. The accuracy and loss at each epoch and each
classifier have been plotted and then visualized in figure 5.21a and 5.21b respectively.
In figure 5.21a, the blue and red graphs are the training­ and validation accuracies for
the DTU classifier respectively, and the green and yellow graphs are the training­ and
validation accuracies for the Kaggle classifier. From these graphs, the accuracies seem
to improve very fast during the first five epochs, and then increase slowly during the next
25 epochs. The training accuracies are converging steadily, whereas the validation ac­
curacies tend to vary much with dips throughout the epochs and are less stable. The
overall accuracy of the DTU classifier is however much better than the Kaggle classifier,
70
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:79==
since the accuracy of the DTU classifier converges towards 0.985, and the accuracy of
the Kaggle classifier converges towards 0.900. This result is expected from the same
basis as mentioned with the scatterplots and histograms, which is the larger amount of
labeled data for the training of the DTU classifier than for the Kaggle classifier since the
exact same hyperparameters are used for both classifiers.
The same colour representations are used in figure 5.21b for the losses. As the accu­
racies tend to increase rapidly during the first five epochs, the losses decrease rapidly,
and then slowly decrease during the next 25 epochs. Since the loss represents the de­
viation of the predicted result from the correct result, it is expected to decrease as the
accuracy increases. The observation of the rate the loss decreases during the epochs is
therefore expected to match the rate the accuracy increases during the same epochs of
the training to some extent. The same variations of the validation accuracy are clear in
the loss graphs, but instead of the dips in the accuracies, the variation shows as peaks in
the losses. For the DTU classifier, the loss converges towards 0.040 and for the Kaggle
classifier, the accuracy converges towards 0.25.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.21: (a) training and validation accuracies throughout the epochs (b) training and
validation losses throughout the epochs
The relation between the accuracy and loss of the classifiers is plotted and related to the
expected relation in the expression explained in section 4.5.3. The plots of accuracy ver­
sus loss are displayed in figure 5.22, with the same colour representations as in figure
5.21a and 5.21b, and with a dotted black line that represents the expected relation be­
tween the accuracy and loss that is expressed in equation (4.2). On figure 5.22, each of
the graphs seem to lie roughly around the expected relationship with a small deviance.
This was already clear when discussing the accuracy­ and loss graphs in figure 5.21a
and 5.21b, where the increase in accuracy and decrease in loss seemed to match some­
what linearly. From these observations, the accuracy and loss thus seem to be related
as expected in practice.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.22: Loss vs. accuracy throughout the epochs
The performance of the classifiers is also measured by the amount of true positive and
­negative versus the false positive and ­negative predicted labels. These amounts are
visualized in a confusion matrix, which is displayed on figure 5.23a and 5.23b for the
DTU­ and Kaggle classifier respectively. From both figures, it is clear that most of the
predictions are correct, since the number of true positives and ­negatives are a lot higher
than the false positives and ­negatives, which applies to both classifiers. From these
measures, the percentage of correct versus incorrect classifications can be calculated.
These percentages are calculated in expressions (5.1), (5.2), (5.3) and (5.4).
pn,DTU =
TN
TN + FN · 100% =
1781
1781 + 2 · 100% ≈99.89%
(5.1)
pn,Kaggle =
TN
TN + FN · 100% =
702
702 + 51 · 100% ≈93.23%
(5.2)
pp,DTU =
TP
TP + FP · 100% =
1782
1782 + 24 · 100% ≈98.67%
(5.3)
pp,Kaggle =
TP
TP + FP · 100% =
774
774 + 77 · 100% ≈90.95%
(5.4)
From these calculations, it is still evident that the DTU classifier performs better than the
Kaggle classifier since the percentages of correct predictions of both ships and icebergs
from the DTU classifier are a lot higher than the ones from the Kaggle classifier.
72
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:81==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.23: Confusion matrix of the (a) DTU classifier and (b) Kaggle classifier
The elements in the confusion matrix are now used to compute the ROC curve and AUC
for each classifier, which is displayed in figure 5.24. In the figure, the blue graph is the
ROC curve of the DTU classifier, the green graph is the ROC curve of the Kaggle classifier
and the red dotted line represents the relation of the TPR and FPR in the case of random
predictions.
Figure 5.24: ROC curve and AUC of the DTU­ and Kaggle classifiers
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
73
==PAGE:82==
From the graphs, it is clear that both classifiers generally predict the labels of the data
correctly, with a very fast increase towards a TPR of one, and the AUC of both classi­
fiers is very close to one. This is the expected result, based on the earlier discussion of
the performance of both classifiers, where the DTU classifier proved to be the superior
classifier in all the evaluations.
Besides evaluating the classifier from the above graphs, the DTU classifier is tested on
the extracted icebergs in the Disko bay from section 5.4. The Kaggle classifier could
however not be tested with these icebergs, since there is no transfer between this data
and the Kaggle training data.
Nine examples from the iceberg data and their classification probabilities are displayed
in figure 5.25, where the iceberg images are displayed in HH­polarization. From these
results, it is clear that the classifier predicts correctly in all examples, with lesser certainty
of the middle­ and bottom­left image. Despite the lesser certainty, the deviation is only
≈0.01 from the true label, whereas the deviation is ≈0.99 from the false label, which is
still a very good result.
Figure 5.25: Result for nine iceberg examples from the Disko bay in HH­polarization and
their respective probabilities assigned by the DTU classifier
To assess the overall performance on the extracted icebergs, the scatterplot and his­
togram of the probabilities of each of the iceberg images are displayed in figure 5.26a
and 5.26b respectively. From these plots, it is clear that almost all of the icebergs are
classified correctly, with few false predictions, which is consistent with the result from fig­
ure 5.20a and 5.20b. The amount of True­ and false negatives are found for the iceberg
testing as:
74
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:83==
• TN = 1126
• FN = 25
This means that the true iceberg predictions from the DTU classifier are
1126
1126+25 · 100% ≈
97.83% of the total amount of icebergs.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.26: Classification probabilities of icebergs in (a) a scatterplot and in (b) a his­
togram
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:85==
6
Discussion
In this section, the discussion in section 5, which includes the results from solving the
project objectives, are summarized for each process and the outlook and future work
related to this project is discussed. A literature study has been performed in relation to
the project and is thus included as an addition to summarizing the discussion of the results.
For summarizing the discussion of the results, the preliminary discussions are divided into
sub sections for each process; the comparative analysis, the geocoding and AIS data, the
change detection, the extraction of icebergs, and the ship detection.
6.1
Comparative Analysis
In the comparative analysis, a set of parameters from each of the SAR systems; Sentinel­
1, TerraSAR­X, and F­SAR is discussed in relation to the application of big data tech­
nologies for ship surveillance. The parameters included in the analysis were as listed
below.
• The frequency band
• The radio frequency
• The polarization modes
• The incidence angle
• The resolution
In the analysis, it was discovered that the preferred frequency band for ship detection,
includes radio frequencies that are neither too high nor too low, in terms of penetration
depth. The bands that include higher radio frequencies, could introduce risks that the
radar pulses would be weakened from the transmission to reception, and the lower fre­
quency bands would penetrate too deep which would include unnecessary contributions
from deep in the ocean, in the case of ship detection, and perhaps penetration of impor­
tant features from the ships. In the publication Tings and Velotto 2018, the TerraSAR­X,
Sentinel­1, and RADARSAT­2 images for ship wake detectability were compared, where
TerraSAR­X operates in X­band, and Sentinel­1 and RADARSAT­2 operate in C­band.
In this article, it was concluded that the X­band was preferred over the C­band since
both types of images showed dependencies on vessel size, velocity, and prevailing wind
speed, but with a reduction of correlation in the C­band. These SAR systems however
only operate in one frequency band at a time, whereas the F­SAR system can operate in
up to four different frequency bands simultaneously with either X­, C­, S­, L­ or P­band,
and thus provide more complex information of the ship features, which could lead to more
accurate detection and classification. Several of the other reports for ship detection used
images from the Sentinel­1 configuration, which is the same system that is used in this
report in the C­band with a radio frequency at 5.405 GHz, the reason for choosing the
Sentinel­1 data could however be from the free access to a large amount of data all over
the earth on the Copernicus open access hub, and not necessarily from the frequency
band in which the SAR is operating.
The TerraSAR­X and the F­SAR system were both fully polarimetric, whereas the Sentinel­
1 system was either single­ or dual polarimetric in either HH or HH+HV, or VV or VV+VH
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
77
==PAGE:86==
polarization depending on the location of interest. The constraint of Sentinel­1 is a down­
side for ship detection since there would not be a transfer between the data, if the mea­
surements were taken at e.g. Greenland and Murmansk which would be recorded in
HH+HV and VV+VH polarization, respectively.
The TerraSAR­X and the F­SAR sys­
tem have the advantage of being fully polarimetric, which means that the constraint of
Sentinel­1 does not apply to them, and there would be transfer between the data despite
the locations of interest.
The incidence angles of the system combined with the information of flight altitude provide
information of the swath size of the acquisition. The TerraSAR­X had the largest span of
incidence angles, followed by the F­SAR and lastly the Sentinel­1. Since both TerraSAR­
X and Sentinel­1 are satellite­borne systems, their swaths would cover a larger area on
earth, than the swath of the F­SAR. In relation to big data technologies, the swath size wil
influence on the size of the SAR images depending on the resolution of the SAR.
From the resolutions of the SAR systems listed in the results, the TerraSAR­X and the
F­SAR in X­band have the highest resolution of 0.25 m, whereas the Sentinel­1 system
only can provide a resolution of 10 m in the given acquisition mode. Concerning ship
surveillance, a higher resolution has a higher potential of providing detailed information of
the ship, than with lower resolutions. The resolution of the Sentinel­1 system should still
be sufficient to detect ships since many ships are bigger than 10 meters. The resolution of
TerraSAR­X and F­SAR will however provide more detailed images of the ship contours
and backscatter, and could be used for multi­classification, where the type of ship also
could be detected.
In terms of availability, the Sentinel­1 data is by far the most available as part of the
Copernicus programme that allows free access to SAR data that is recorded from 2014
to the present time. The Sentinel­1 data can easily be downloaded from the Copernicus
open access hub, whereas the TerraSAR­X and F­SAR need to be ordered from DLR with
an application for scientific use. In terms of price, the TerraSAR­X comes with a cost that
limits the availability of the data, whereas the F­SAR data is free. The F­SAR database is
however very limited, and would most likely require planning a flying session to record the
desired data. The free access to SAR images from Sentinel­1 is a very big advantage for
the application of big data technologies since a vast amount of data is needed to achieve
acceptable results.
The discussed pros and cons of each of the mentioned SAR systems are listed in section
5.1.3. In this section, the system with most pros versus cons is the F­SAR system due to
the possibility of using five different radio frequencies, where up to four frequencies can be
used simultaneously at a high resolution because the system is fully polarimetric and the
products are for free. Despite the many advantages of the F­SAR system, the Sentinel­1
system is the preferred system for ship detection based on the usage in many other studies
and the availability from the open access hub, where the data can be downloaded when
needed. For the simple purpose of recognizing ships from other targets, the Sentinel­1
system proves to be sufficient with the parameters discussed above, and the free access
provides a large amount of data for the big data technologies, such as deep learning using
deep neural networks that require training, where more data leads to better classification
assuming the data is representative for the purpose.
6.2
Geocoding and AIS data
In the results from the geocoding and AIS data matching, the geocoding method was
evaluated using the AIS data from the Nuuk­ and Murmansk areas. A polygon over each
78
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:87==
area was specified, in which all of the AIS data is located.
The problem with the AIS matching in both areas was that the timestamp of the ordered
AIS data did not match the timestamp of the Sentinel­1 images. The evaluation of the
geocoding was therefore based on apparent routes of the ships that transmitted the AIS
data. In AIS data from the Nuuk area transmissions from 16 different ships was included,
and the route of the ship with MMSI=219667000 was examined. It stretched from further
below Nuuk, then around the Nuuk harbour and eastward, which is left on the image. The
route lay in the Godthaab Fjord and was relatively close to the shore, with a clear path. The
route was therefore considered probable and the geocoding was considered acceptable.
In the Murmansk area, the AIS data contained transmissions from 111 different ships,
where the route of the ship with MMSI=257286000 was examined. In this route, there
was not a path as clear as in the Nuuk area, the route was however characterized with
many turns and shifting directions. Since the route is close to the shore in a presumed
trafficked area with many ships and is positioned inside the Kola Bay at all times, the
geocoding is considered acceptable.
It should be noted that this method is a simplified and approximating procedure. Since
the method is based on rotation and translation from the center of the SAR image and
does not include the curvature of the earth, there will be imperfections when geocoding
at the corners of the image. To achieve a more precise result, a lookup table should be
used or the curvature of the earth should be included in the model. If the timestamp of
the AIS data matched the timestamp on the SAR image, it would however be easier to
evaluate the method, since the geocoded positions from the AIS data should match ship
contours on the image and the ships could be detected. This information could later be
used to label ships that are extracted from the connected component algorithm, and the
ship detection classifier could be tested on these extracted ships, which was the original
purpose of performing the geocoding and AIS matching.
6.3
Change Detection
The change detection was performed on Sentinel­1 images of two locations, which are
the areas around Nuuk and Murmansk. For the change detection, a temporal series of
three Sentinel­1 images were chosen with 12 days in between, where each image would
correspond to a colour channel in an RGB image.
In the Nuuk area, the three images were chosen in late August and start September.
First, each of the images was displayed as grayscale images in HH­polarization, where
an overall change of brightness was discovered throughout the time span of 24 days. This
brightness was assumed to be the result of volume scattering in the form of precipitation,
and based on the information from Polar Portal, that is a website from DMI, DTU Space,
and GEUS, the accumulation season spans from September to May, which means that
snowfall could occur on the 6th and 18th of September 2020 when the two brighter images
were recorded. When the images were combined to an RGB image, there was a blue
dominance due to gradual brightness discussed above, but also changes in the shape of
targets and areas at the shore westward to Nuuk.
Three areas were selected for further analysis, which included a strong target of blue
dominance, shore areas westward to Nuuk, and the area around the Nuuk harbour. The
blue target on the first image has the expected contour of a ship due to the overall rectan­
gular/oval shape, the size and the presence of sidelobes. In several of the literature that
was studied concerning ship detection, most of the ship examples from Sentinel­1 images
had the contour of a rectangular shape, where some of them also had sidelobes. The ap­
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
79
==PAGE:88==
pearance of these examples reinforces the assumption that the blue target is a ship that
sailed in the Nuuk area on the 18th of September 2020. The red and yellow dominance
in the area westward of Nuuk is along the shore, where the area dominated by the red
colour channel is on the outer part between the land and the ocean, and the part of yellow
dominance is between the red dominance and the land areas. This change is expected
to be from tides, because of the location of the dominated areas and according to the tide
tables from DMI’s archives, the high­ and low tides can vary up to five meters. On the
image that displays the area around the Nuuk harbour, little change was detected with
red dominance around the shores, which fits with the explanation of tides in the image
of the area westward to Nuuk. Besides this change, there were also two small targets;
one with red dominance and one with green dominance. These targets were however too
small to know whether they are ships or icebergs.
In the Murmansk area, three images in August were chosen for the RGB image, with
intervals of 12 days as before. In the RGB image, there was a clear dominance of the
green colour channel in the Kola Bay, which corresponds to the image from the 17th of
August 2020. From the weather archives in the AccuWeather website, the 5th and 29th of
August 2020 were days with precipitation, whereas the 17th of August 2020 was dry, which
is expected to result in specular, and thus weaker backscatter. Another explanation of the
change in the Kola bay from the green colour channel was the event of Bragg scattering,
which would lead to stronger backscattering due to the constructive interference of the
radar signal and the ocean waves. Besides the overall change in the Kola Bay, there are
generally many clear targets in the bay in all three channels.
Two specific areas that contain these targets are selected; an area around the Murmansk
harbour and an area further up the Kola bay. All of the targets are assumed to be ships
since the area is known to contain many ships. In the area around the harbour most
of the targets were very strong backscatters, where some of the ships are either arriving,
departing, or stationary docked ships. Besides the targets in the Murmansk harbour, there
are also ships that sails in the Kola bay present in all three colour channels, with three
red­, three blue­ and two green targets in the bay. The area further up the Kola bay is
chosen from the density of ships, and the apparent different types of ships in terms of
shape and size. In this area, there are five red­, two green­ and two blue targets, where
two green­ and one blue target have very prominent sidelobes.
Overall, the change detection method was used to find changes in all colour channels in
both the Nuuk and Murmansk area. Some of the targets were assumed to be ships from
the contour of the backscatter that matched the expected shape of a ship, but could not
be confirmed since there were no matching AIS data. Besides monitoring the presence
of ships, other changes such as tides in the Nuuk area were discovered.
It should also be mentioned, that are multiple ways to perform the change detection with
a more advanced and automatic procedure, where this method is a simple way to indicate
changes with the use of colours.
80
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:89==
6.4
Extraction of ships and icebergs
In this project, only icebergs were extracted from SAR images, since the AIS data could
not be matched from the absence of simultaneous data. The icebergs were extracted
from the Disko bay at the tongue of the Jakobshavn glacier. This area was chosen based
on the remote area that is known to contain many icebergs from the presence of a glacier,
and all of the targets are thus assumed to be icebergs.
First, an RGB image was made in the same way as in the change detection procedure from
a temporal series of images, that span from late August 2020 to mid­September 2020. An
area in this RGB image that contains many targets that are dominated by the three colour
channels is cropped from the image, to improve the computational time of the iceberg
extraction. The cropped image is then binarized with a backscatter intensity threshold
at 100, on which the two­pass connected­component labeling is performed. From the
connected­component labeling, 9877 components were detected. These components
were filtered with a lower­ and higher threshold of 15­ and 700 pixels, then the average
intensity in each colour channel was computed, to detect whether a change occurred,
where the stationary components are removed. After the filtering, 1151 components re­
mained. The sub­images of these components ­ or icebergs ­ were extracted from their
respective centroids and cropped to a size of 75 x 75 pixels in two channels; the HH­ and
HV polarization.
A subset of the extracted images was displayed in both HH­ and HV polarization. These
images contained multiple targets in both polarizations, where the target, from which the
image is extracted, does not stand out. Some images do not contain the target in the
center, because some of the targets are located near the edges of the overall image, with
not enough pixel space to fulfill the image size of 75 x 75 pixels.
Another procedure of extracting the icebergs is to perform landmasking by a Digital El­
evation Model (DEM), which is an elevation model of the area that matches the area on
the given SAR image. To mask out the land, the areas with an elevation above the mean
sea level (MSL) should be masked out of the image. With this method, small targets such
as islands subject to tides would also be masked out and will not be mistaken as ships or
icebergs.
6.5
Ship Detection
The ship detection was performed with two classifiers; the DTU­ and the Kaggle clas­
sifier. These classifiers were evaluated from different parameters including examples of
classifications, scatterplots of classification probabilities, histograms of classification prob­
abilities, training­ and validation accuracies, training­ and validation losses, training­ and
validation losses versus ­accuracies, confusion matrices, ROC curves, AUC, and lastly a
test of the DTU classifier on the icebergs extracted from the Disko Bay.
First a set of nine ship detection examples was displayed in HH­polarization with their
respective probabilities assigned by the DTU classifier. From these results, the ships were
in general classified correctly with high precision that ranged from 0.975 to 1.000, where
a probability of 0 corresponds to an assumed classification of an iceberg and a probability
of 1 is a ship. The overall classification probabilities of both the DTU­ and Kaggle classifier
were then visualized in scatterplots and organized into histograms. From the scatterplots
and histograms, it was clear that both classifiers predicted correctly in most cases, where
the DTU classifier performed significantly better than the Kaggle classifier.
The accuracies and losses throughout the training epochs were then displayed for the
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
81
==PAGE:90==
training­ and validation data batches. From these plots, the accuracies of the DTU classi­
fier were significantly higher than the accuracies of the Kaggle classifier, where the result
from the DTU classifier converged towards an accuracy of 0.985 and the Kaggle clas­
sifier towards 0.900. The losses of the DTU classifier were correspondingly lower than
the losses of the Kaggle classifier, which also indicated a linear relationship between the
accuracy and loss in general. This linear relationship became clear when plotting accura­
cies versus losses for both classifiers, and was approximately related with the expression
Ebcross = 2(1 −accuracy), which was also noticed in the publication by Heiselberg 2020.
In this publication, it was also noticed that the slope of the mentioned linear relation would
either decrease or increase, depending on the distribution of non­classified components,
which denotes the components with probabilities somewhere between 0 and 1. The re­
sults of both classifiers are close to the approximated relationship, the slope of the curve
for the Kaggle classifier however seems to be slightly lower than expected, which would
indicate that the distribution of non­classified components are shifted towards correct clas­
sification, whereas the slope for the DTU classifier is closer to the expected slope, which
is assumed to be due to the lack of non­classified components.
Besides evaluating from the above­mentioned plots, the performance of the classifiers
is evaluated from the classification results displayed in confusion matrices, in which the
true­ and false positives and ­negatives are listed. From these numbers, the precision of
the classifiers was calculated, where the precision for the DTU classifier was 99.89% in
classifying the negatives, or icebergs, and 98.67% in classifying the positives, which are
the ships. The precision for the Kaggle classifier was 93.23% for negatives and 90.95% for
positives, which is a significantly lower precision in both negatives and positives compared
to the precision of the DTU classifier. The results are then used to compute the ROC curve
and the AUC for each classifier. In the figure, both ROC curves ascend fast towards
a true positive rate of 1.0, which indicates that the rate of true predictions of ships for
both classifiers increases fast. The AUC, which is the area under the ROC curve, is
thus considered a measure of the correctness of the predictions from the given classifier,
where an AUC=0 is the situation where the classifier predicts 100% wrong, and an AUC=1
corresponds to 100% correct predictions. The AUC of the DTU­ and Kaggle classifier was
0.99835 and 0.97881 respectively, which indicates that both classifiers predict correctly
in 99.8% and 97.9% of the components.
Based on the above discussion, the DTU classifier proved to be superior in terms of overall
performance in the classification of ships. The superior performance of the DTU classi­
fier is assumed to be caused by the significantly larger dataset used for the training of the
network, which consists of 3588 labeled images, whereas the training for the Kaggle clas­
sifier consists of 1603 labeled images. This means that the DTU classifier was trained on
a dataset with is more than double the size of the Kaggle dataset. Since the performance
of neural networks in general almost entirely relies on the training dataset, an increased
amount of labeled data will improve the accuracy of the classification.
The DTU classifier was then tested on the extracted icebergs from Disko Bay. A set of
nine iceberg examples was displayed in HH­polarization with their respective probabilities
assigned by the DTU classifier. From these results, the icebergs were in general classified
correctly with high precision that ranged from 0.016 to 0.00088, where a probability of 0
corresponds to an assumed classification of an iceberg and a probability of 1 is a ship.
The scatterplot and histogram of classification probabilities were displayed, where almost
all of the icebergs were classified correctly. The true­ and false negatives were found from
the test and were 1126 and 25 respectively. The precision was thus calculated, and the
result was that 97.83% of the icebergs were classified correctly.
82
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:91==
Although the classification results of both the DTU­ and Kaggle classifier were impres­
sively accurate, there exists other methods for ship detection than using deep neural
networks, such as Support Vector Machines (SVM), which is compared to convolutional
neural networks in Heiselberg 2020. In this publication, the SVM method however proved
to be less accurate than the CNNs on SAR images. Since ship detection is a classical
binary classification problem on image data, and CNN is commonly used to analyze visual
imagery, the method is assumed to perform well which was also the case in the results.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:93==
7
Outlook
In this project, multiple processes including big data technologies have been performed to
achieve the overall goal of ship surveillance and ­detection. For future work, other ­ and
more complex ­ methods can be used in each to ensure higher precision, and perhaps
more efficient procedures for ship detection.
For future work, the comparative analysis could include more SAR system examples in
multiple acquisition modes, and a more thorough and in­depth analysis could be per­
formed. In this project, only the Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X, and F­SAR systems were com­
pared, where few examples of data were displayed. A more thorough analysis of the
systems, with more examples in e.g. different modes, could be performed in future work,
to conclude the analysis from more complex investigations. The analysis could also be
extended with systems operating with different parameters and in different configurations
than the Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X, and F­SAR systems. To further analyze the usage of
these systems in relation to big data technologies and ship detection, some image exam­
ples of ships and ship wakes from the different systems could be analyzed from feature
extraction in relation to some known metadata and afterward compared, where an ideal
system would be found from more complex investigation than the comparative analysis
in this report. In the mentioned publication Tings and Velotto 2018, a linear detectability
model was trained based on logistic regression, in which the image acquisition param­
eters, met­ocean conditions, and ship features are considered and ranked according to
a correlation analysis based on wake visibility. More systems with different image ac­
quisition parameters could be compared with a similar procedure to be more accurately
evaluated for ship detection, in a more systematic way than this comparative analysis.
For future work, geocoding and AIS matching could also be performed including AIS data
with the correct timestamps, that match the given SAR image acquisitions. With matching
AIS data, the geographical locations can be matched with targets from the SAR images
and thus labeled as ships, but also indicate the heading of the ship from previous AIS
transmissions to predict future ship locations. These ships could then be used for testing
the ship detection classifiers, as was the intended purpose for the geocoding and AIS
matching procedure in this report. Besides the matching of AIS data from the timestamps,
the geocoding could be performed with another procedure, than the simplified method
used in this report. As mentioned in section 2.2.5, a usual geocoding procedure is to
use a look­up table that contains information of the transformations between the SAR­
and ground geometries. If look­up tables could be generated for the images that are
considered, a more precise geocoding, and thus AIS matching, could be performed.
In the future, the change detection could be performed in an automatic procedure, instead
of the manual detection of changes from dominant colour channels. There are many
different methods for change detection, where the procedure used in this project is a
simple way to get visual clues where changes appear. Another example includes studies
on applying test statistics to detect a change, such as the publications from Conradsen,
A. A. Nielsen, and Skriver 2014 and Conradsen, A. A. Nielsen, and Skriver 2016, which
could be further explored to assist the SET­279 group and to extend the work in this
project.
Besides further examination of change detection, another procedure for landmasking
could be performed. The landmasking in this project is not an exact method for filtering
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
85
==PAGE:94==
out stationary land clutter, but an approximation. In future work, the landmasking could
be performed from e.g. a digital elevation model, which is a precise model of the eleva­
tion above mean sea level of points on earth. This landmasking with the digital elevation
model would most likely be a more precise method, than the one used in this project with
the two­pass connected­component labeling algorithm, since very precise elevation mod­
els can be achieved and since the labeling algorithm depends on the connected points in
the binary image which depends on a manually defined threshold.
For ship detection and classification, there are more ways to extend the procedures and
investigations. In future work, more classifiers could be trained for the other SAR systems
that are discussed, which are the TerraSAR­X and the F­SAR systems. The existing
classifiers would not be applicable to the image data from these systems, because of
the lack of data transfer between the TerraSAR­X and F­SAR data, and the Sentinel­1
data. These new classifiers could provide other models for ship classification, since the
parameters of the SAR systems differ from each other, which results in different extracted
features from the ships. The F­SAR classifier could also include more image dimensions,
because of the possibility of simultaneous acquisition with different frequency bands. The
ship detection could also be extended from a binary­ to a multiclassification, where the ship
versus iceberg classification would be extended to a non­ship versus multiple different
ship types classification. This would require more labeled data, where the data from this
project cannot be used unless it is modified so the images of ships could be labeled with
the specific ship type, which should be available from AIS data transmissions. Besides the
modification on the training data, some modifications in the hyperparameters and choice
of loss function would be necessary.
Besides using SAR data for ship surveillance, the application on aircraft surveillance was
also considered in this project, which would require a large annotated database, that has
not yet been made. The aircraft surveillance could be performed from a classification us­
ing convolutional neural networks in the same way as with the ship surveillance, where
either a binary­ or multiclassification could be performed, where the binary classification
would include a class for aircrafts and one for non­aircrafts, and where the multiclassifi­
cation could include non­aircrafts and different types of aircraft.
Overall, some future work that includes extending the work done in this project would
mainly consist of optimizing each of the sub­processes or investigating new methods for
achieving higher performance and accuracy or extending the purpose of ship surveillance
with e.g. aircraft surveillance.
86
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:95==
8
Conclusion
The actuality of artificial intelligence and ship surveillance in the arctic, combined with the
personal interests of remote sensing and machine learning techniques and the interests
of DTU security, DALO, and the SET­279 NATO research group was the motivation for
performing this project.
The overall objective the project was divided into these sub­objectives:
1. General description of SAR data from Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X and F­SAR, including
data handling, downloaded examples and comparative analysis
2. Change detection for ships in harbours: case studies in Murmansk and Nuuk in
relation to the NATO STO research task group SET­279
3. Run Convolutional Neural Network developed at DTU Security, and train on the
Kaggle ship­iceberg database, on new detected ships from e.g. Murmansk and
icebergs
4. A concluding analysis of detection and classification accuracies vs. object type and
sizes, and data quality
The objectives were solved by examining and comparing different SAR systems, perform­
ing change detection, and ship classification including evaluation thereof.
The solution to the first objective was first to describe the Sentinel­1, TerraSAR­X, and
F­SAR systems. These systems were described in section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 in terms of
mission objective, system parameters, data availability and data formats. Image exam­
ples of each system were read and visualized to be discussed in section 5.1.4, where
the difference between the considered SAR systems became clear especially in terms of
radio frequency band and resolution. These SAR systems were then compared in a com­
parative analysis, in which the system parameters and data availability were discussed.
The pros and cons of each system were listed, where each showed potential in relation
to big data technologies and ship surveillance. The main conclusion from the analysis
was that the Sentinel­1 data was very accessible compared to data from TerraSAR­X and
F­SAR, but was limited from the location­specific polarization modes and low spatial res­
olution. The TerraSAR­X and F­SAR system was however the ones with a considerably
higher resolution, where the F­SAR had the advantage of being able to record data in up to
four different frequency bands simultaneously out of five possible frequency bands, which
could lead to more complex feature detection in terms of ship surveillance and detection.
To solve the second and third objective of the project, geocoding and AIS matching was
attempted on Sentinel­1 images. The purpose of the geocoding was to match transmitted
AIS coordinates with targets on the SAR images in Nuuk and Murmansk, the AIS data
could however not be provided in the exact same time interval as the recorded SAR im­
ages, and could therefore not be matched properly since the targets would have moved
from the time of the transmissions to the position in the SAR image. The concept of
geocoding was however still proved with the acquired AIS data, where ship routes were
visible in both Nuuk and Murmansk. Since both routes appeared probable from the head­
ing and maneuvering, the geocoding was considered acceptable, and the learning pro­
cess of using AIS data was appreciated.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
87
==PAGE:96==
The second and partly fourth objective was solved by performing change detection from
a temporal series of three images in 12 days intervals, that was stacked depth­wise to
create an RGB image. In this image, changes could be detected from the dominance
of a given colour channel, so for example an area that is dominated by the red channel
has high backscatter intensity in the image that was used as the red colour channel in
the RGB image, but will be absent in the other images that are 12 and 24 days apart,
which results in a change from one image to the other in the given area. The change
detection was performed in the area around Nuuk in Greenland and in the area around
Murmansk in Russia. In Nuuk, three areas of interest were discussed; an area with a
target with strong backscatter in the blue colour channel, an area with changes in the red­
and green colour channels along the shore, and the area around Nuuk harbour. In the first
area, the target was assumed to a large ship from the strong sidelobes and the rectangular
shape. In the second area, the changes are assumed to be from tides, which are known to
appear in the area since the changes occurred on the shores with a systematic decreasing
intensity over time. In the Nuuk harbour, the same change along the shore occurred, and
two targets were found; one dominated by the green colour channel, and one by the
red colour channel, that could be either icebergs or ships due to the size and shape of
the targets. In the Murmansk area, two areas of interest were selected; one around the
Murmansk harbour and one further up the Kola bay. In the first area, there was intense
backscatter with strong sidelobes along the harbour, where the targets subject to change
were assumed to be ships, and the stationary targets were assumed to be either docked
ships or buildings. In the second area further up the Kola bay, there were many different
targets in terms of shape and colour dominance. Each of the targets was assumed to be
ships from a priori knowledge of the ship activity in the area and the lack of icebergs in
the bay.
The third objective was solved from two sub­processes, besides the geocoding and AIS
matching, that included extraction of icebergs in the Disko bay and running and training the
provided convolutional neural network. For the iceberg extraction, change detection was
performed from a series of Sentinel­1 images in the area around the Disko bay, to extract
many targets from the area and to later ensure the extracted components were not sta­
tionary targets. This RGB image was then converted to grayscale, and then thresholded
to a binary image, where the threshold was chosen from the histogram of backscatter
intensities in the grayscale image and was chosen at 100. The two­pass connected­
component labeling algorithm was then applied to the binary image, whereafter the area
of the found connected components were thresholded between 5 and 700 pixels. The
centroids of the remaining components are then used as centrum in cropped images of
pixel size 75x75, and sub­images of the components are thus found. The components
were then filtered, so components subject to change wer kept. The Disko Bay area was
chosen, from the knowledge that many icebergs and almost no ships should be present.
All of the remaining components are therefore assumed to be icebergs, and 1151 was
found from the procedure.
Two classifiers were then trained; one from the DTU database and one from the Kaggle
database. To solve objective four, these classifiers were evaluated from ship examples
and their respective probabilities, scatterplots, and histograms of the classification proba­
bilities and true classes, accuracies and losses for the training and validation data during
each epoch, the accuracy versus loss, confusion matrices, ROC curves, and AUC. In all of
the above­mentioned plots, the DTU classifier was superior in terms of performance. This
was assumed to be the result of a considerably larger training database, compared to the
Kaggle database, since the architecture of the networks were identical with the same hy­
88
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:97==
perparameters, and the deep learning concept is a big data technology that heavily relies
on the amount of training data. Since the data from the extraction of icebergs in the Disko
bay was extracted from Sentinel­1, there was no transfer between this and the Kaggle
database, therefore only the DTU classifier was tested using these icebergs. The DTU
classifier performed well on this testing from the iceberg examples with their respective
classification probabilities and from the scatterplot and histogram of classification proba­
bilities. In the test, 97.83% of the icebergs were classified correctly, which is considered
a good result.
In conclusion of this thesis, the objectives of the project are considered fulfilled from the
above results, where a comparative analysis of the SAR systems is performed along with
change detection and ship classification using big data technologies for ship surveillance,
among other sub­processes.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
Benn, Mathias (2020). Binary Images.
Mohr, Johan Jacob (2005). SAR Light, an introduction to Synthetic Aperture Radar.
Dall, Jørgen (2020). SLAR and SAR.
Cumming, I.G and F.H Wong (2005). Digital Processing of Synthetic Aperture Radar Data.
Skriver, Henning (2019a). Surface/Volume Interaction.
ESA (2021a). Bragg Scattering. URL: https : / / earth . esa . int / web / guest / data - access /
content/-/asset_publisher/3Bha/content/radar-course-2-bragg-scattering;jsessionid=
8BEF163F741815BF12113FA49141860D.jvm1?redirect=https%3A%2F%2Fearth.esa.int%
2Fweb%2Fguest%2Fdata-access%2Fcontent%3Bjsessionid%3D8BEF163F741815BF12113FA49141860D.
jvm1%3Fp_p_id%3D101_INSTANCE_3Bha%26p_p_lifecycle%3D0%26p_p_state%
3Dnormal%26p_p_mode%3Dview%26p_p_col_id%3Dcolumn-1%26p_p_col_count%
3D1%26_101_INSTANCE_3Bha_cur%3D296%26_101_INSTANCE_3Bha_keywords%
3D%26_101_INSTANCE_3Bha_advancedSearch%3Dfalse%26_101_INSTANCE_3Bha_
delta%3D10%26_101_INSTANCE_3Bha_andOperator%3Dtrue.
Confuorto, Pierluigi (2016). Geometric distortion in SAR imaging. URL: https : / / www .
researchgate.net/figure/Geometric-distortion-in-SAR-imaging-https-earthesaint-handbooks-
asar-CNTR1-1-2html_fig27_303377557.
Nielsen, Michael (2019). Neural Networks and Deep Learning. URL: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.
com.
Guyu, Zhao (2019). Convolution process. URL: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com.
Winther, Ole (2016). 2 Convolutional Neural Networks.
Aphex34 (2015). typical CNN architecture. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:
Typical_cnn.png.
Mohajon, Joydwip (2020). Confusion Matrix for Your Multi­Class Machine Learning Model.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/confusion-matrix-for-your-multi-class-machine-
learning-model-ff9aa3bf7826.
Google (2020). Classification: ROC Curve and AUC. URL: https://developers.google.com/
machine-learning/crash-course/classification/roc-and-auc.
ESA (2021b). Sentinel­1 Overview. URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/
sentinel-1/overview.
– (2012). Sentinel­1, ESA’s Radar Observatory Mission for GMES Operational Services.
URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/documents/247904/349449/S1_SP-1322_1.pdf.
– (2021c). Instrument Payload. URL: https : / / sentinel . esa . int / web / sentinel / missions /
sentinel-1/instrument-payload.
– (2021d). Observation Scenario. URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/
sentinel-1/observation-scenario.
– (2021e). Data Products. URL: https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/
sentinel-1/data-products.
DLR (2013). TerraSAR­X, Ground Segment, Basic Product Specification Document. URL:
https://sss.terrasar-x.dlr.de/docs/TX-GS-DD-3302.pdf.
Airbus (2021). TerraSAR­X/TanDEM­X. URL: https://www.intelligence-airbusds.com/en/
8694-terrasar-x-tandem-x.
DLR (2021). COFUR Prices for TerraSAR­X ­ products (scientific use). URL: https://sss.
terrasar-x.dlr.de/docs/pricelist_04.pdf.
Horn, Ralf and et al. (2021). F­SAR ­ Recent Upgrades and Campaign Activities. URL:
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/84275943.pdf.
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
91
==PAGE:100==
Heiselberg, Henning (2020). Ship­Iceberg Classification in SAR and Multispectral Satellite
Images with Neural Networks.
DMI, DTU, and GEUS (2020). Heavy Snowfall in Greenland. URL: http://polarportal.dk/
en/news/news/heavy-snowfall-in-greenland/.
DMI (2020). Tidevandstabeller. URL: http://ocean.dmi.dk/tides/2021/Nuuk.pdf.
AccuWeather (2020). August weather ­ Murmansk. URL: https://www.accuweather.com/
en/ru/murmansk/294076/august-weather/294076.
Tings, Björn and Domenico Velotto (2018). Comparison of ship wake detectability on C­
band and X­band SAR.
Conradsen, Knut, Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen, and Henning Skriver (2014). CHANGE DETEC­
TION IN POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA OVER SEVERAL TIME POINTS.
– (2016). Determining the Points of Change in Time Series of Polarimetric SAR Data.
Unknown (2021a). Connected­component labeling. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Connected-component_labeling.
Skriver, Henning (2019b). SAR Polarimetry.
– (2019c). SLAR and SAR Principles.
Brownlee, Jason (2018). A Gentle Introduction to k­fold Cross­Validation. URL: https://
machinelearningmastery.com/k-fold-cross-validation/.
ESA (2021f). Thematic Areas and Services. URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/
missions/sentinel-1/thematic-areas.
Zeidel, Alex (2020). What are GeoTIFF files and Why are They So Useful in Drone Map­
ping? URL: https://www.propelleraero.com/blog/what-are-geotiff-files-and-why-are-they-
so-useful-in-drone-mapping/.
Unknown (2021b). Automatic Identification System. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Automatic_identification_system.
Sølvsteen, Claus (2021). Basic information on AIS.
92
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
==PAGE:101==
Space­Based SAR & Big Data Technologies for Ship Surveillance
93
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 356
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
