==PAGE:1==
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Build­
ings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Frederik Stani Albrechtsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Frederik Stani Albrechtsen ­ s154656
Signature
Date
ii
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no
information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain
all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no
need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Frederik Stani Albrechtsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
iv
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Indoor Environment
3
2.1
Thermal Comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Indoor Air Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Acoustic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Visual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
9
3.1
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Building Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Field measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Indoor evaluation and assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results
19
4.1
Thermal Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
IAQ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Analysis
31
5.1
Temperature and influence on performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Temperature and window openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Field measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Temperature outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Conclusion
37
A Appendix
41
A.1 Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
A.3 Building 103 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
A.4 Building 301 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.5 Building 302 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
v
==PAGE:8==
A.6 Building 303 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.7 Building 304 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
vi
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This project is done as a part of a ph.d. study, these are the first real field measurements.
All the methods were developed in previous pilot studies. Additionally to the indoor envi­
ronment parameters measured, this study includes window openings as a means of mea­
suring occupant behaviour. Window openings are interesting as it affects both comfort
and energy consumption. The ph.d. study aims to characterize the indoor environment
in office buildings in Denmark and Greenland. The study includes indoor environment,
occupant well­being, health and productivity. The goal is to create a database to be used
in a new benchmarking tool which can be offered to building owners to evaluate building
and workplace performance. A study at a potential building owner would then be bench­
marked against the existing database, to see how the building compares and scores.
In this study the first measurements takes place in Danish office buildings and although
the methods have been tested in pilot studies, new knowledge regarding carrying out the
field measurements is expected to come up, along with potential issues when conducting
large­scale field measurements. As this is in the early stages of building the database,
a focus point for this thesis will be to discuss the methods for measuring the indoor en­
vironment and the limits of these methods. The field measurements include qualitative
measurements, quantitative measurements carried out as a questionnaire and registra­
tion lists. The registration lists are carried out at three different levels of abstraction for
the building. There is an office registration noting anything that could potentially influence
the indoor environment, health, comfort or productivity for the offices where equipment is
setup. Moving up a level there is the building registration list, noting more general informa­
tion of the building. Finally there is a manager list, designed to get information regarding
the building operation.
The ph.d. study provided a great opportunity to study occupant behaviour in office build­
ings. Large comprehensive data­sets assessing the physical environment surrounding
the occupants as well as a questionnaire providing inside in the psychological factors that
could affect patterns of the occupants. One drawback is the length of the period of field
measurements, which is one week. One week does limit the insight into the physical en­
vironment. Another drawback is that purpose of the field measurements is assessing the
indoor environment and not assessing occupant behaviour, so the questionnaire does
not include questions directly related to occupant behaviour. In a field measurement this
scale however, it is difficult to account for everything.
Occupant behaviour has gotten more attention as building simulation tools has gotten in­
creasingly more accurate at implementing the processes governing heat, air and moisture.
The human factor on energy consumption is being neglected and so the simulation tools
has reached a plateau, where further increasing the precision is redundant argues [5].
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
1
==PAGE:10==
There is big gap between calculated energy consumption and actual energy consump­
tion post occupancy [1], and the next step in improving the simulations is accounting for
occupant behaviour [2]. Based on the adaptive principle [? ], stating that if a change
in the thermal environment occurs and it causes discomfort, people will react to try and
stay comfortable. Occupants will take measures to ensure comfort. Window openings
are a key control behaviour as it influences the thermal environment and the freshness of
air. An open windows also has the potential to influence the energy consumption mas­
sively. In this thesis, the study is limited to assessing what drives occupants to opening
the windows and energy consumption is omitted.
All though everybody is tired of hearing about Covid­19, there is no getting around that the
current pandemic has had an influence on this study. Besides from restrictions making it
difficult to visit buildings, the pandemic also influenced the results. Many people working
from home meant that occupancy at the offices were reduced, in some buildings by half.
Due to the low internal pollution and heating load, it is expected that field measurements
does not provide a full picture of the indoor environment in a normal weekday pre or post­
Covid­19. The qualitative part of the field measurements are expected to produce results
within ranges for a good and comfortable indoor environment. Here the questionnaires
will hopefully yield a better insight on environment as it covers questions about the indoor
environment dating back further than the measured environment.
All measurements were performed during heating season. The first field measurements
started on the 8th of March and the last measurements ended on the 21st of April. During
this time of the year, the external heating loads from the sun and ambient temperatures
should not be enough to cause overheating for a longer period of time. During heating
season, outdoor temperatures are still relatively low, which affects the humidity. Cold
air cannot hold as much water as warm air, and so the relative humidity is expected to
be low indoors, as the cold outdoor air is heated when brought inside. Cold outdoor
temperatures may also influence the number of window openings measured during the
field measurements as large temperature differences can feel uncomfortable.
2
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:11==
2
Indoor Environment
Indoor environment is plays an important role in buildings today. The indoor environment
affects the human health, well­being and comfort. There is also an economic perspective
related to indoor environment, in costs of operation. The Danish Building Code specify the
requirements of the Danish Building Act that all constructions must comply with [? ]. The
Danish Standard are often cited or referenced in the Danish Building Code, as guidelines
for the demands of the indoor environment. DS/EN 16798 [? ] is the newest Danish Stan­
dard for design values, to be used in new constructions. As well as the Danish Building
Code changes through the years so does the Danish Standards, as new technology or
a focus to reduce energy consumption in building arises. This means that buildings con­
structed in different time periods also were constructed according to different standards.
The indoor environment across different building could therefor differ from one another
due to a difference in construction. How should indoor environment then be evaluated?
An argument could be made that using new standard like DS/EN 16798, and applying the
categories from the standard to evaluate the indoor environment is a great way of doing so.
The guidelines from the Danish Working Environment Authority could also be used. The
Danish Working Environment Authority supervises companies and provides guidance on
the working environment, and is responsible for for ensuring a safe and healthy working
environment, and so their guidelines is related to these focus points.
However, the purpose of this thesis is to evaluate and not categorise the indoor envi­
ronment. It is serving as the initial gathering of data towards a database of the indoor
environment in Danish office buildings and investigating occupant behaviour. It includes
field measurements at Danish workplaces, and therefor this thesis relies heavily on the
guidelines from the Danish Working Environment Authority to provide limits for when In­
door Environmental Quality (IEQ) parameters are too high or too low and increases the
chances of discomfort. Categories from DS/EN 16798 will serve as a tool for establish­
ing additional limits to investigate correlations on occupant behaviour at different limits.
IEQ are divided into four categories: thermal environment, IAQ, visual environment and
accoustics. Figure 2.1 illustrates IEQ parameters.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: IEQ categories and their parameters [? ] [? ]
2.1
Thermal Comfort
Thermal comfort is primarily a result of the body’s heat exchange with the surroundings.
This is influenced by air temperature, radiant temperature, humidity and air velocity, the
thermal environment. Two personal factors also influences the thermal comfort which is
clothing and the metabolic rate[8]. The metabolic rate is an expression of the activity level.
Air velocity and radiant temperature is not included in the study and clothing varies from
person to person, but can be estimated. However, in most buildings the air temperature
and the radiant temperature is close to one another, and is a reasonable estimate of the
temperatures a person experiences.
2.1.1
Temperature
Temperature is divided into three types: air temperature, radiant temperature and oper­
ative temperature. The operative temperature expresses the experienced temperature
by a person, and is combination of air velocity, air temperature and radiant temperature
[? ]. A decrease in productivity has been linked to too low temperatures and too high
temperatures [11]. Furthermore high temperatures affects the comfort and well­being of
occupants, such as nose irritation, rashes, headaches and fatigue [? ] [? ] [? ].
Table 2.1: Recommended temperature intervals during occupancy
The Danish Standard Association
Heating season
20­24 ◦C
Cooling season
23­26 ◦C
The Danish Working Environment Authority
Offices
20­22 ◦C
As seen in table 2.1 the Danish Working Environment Authority recommends a narrow
interval for the operative temperature, as temperatures above 23◦C increases the amount
4
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:13==
of complains [6]. Temperatures are not allowed above 25◦C, but the guidelines recognises
that during heat waves this can be difficult to maintain. The Danish Standard Association
operates with design criterias for heating and cooling season. During cooling season
the maximum temperature is 26ircC. The threshold of 25◦C will be used as the limit for
overheating, when later analysing temperatures in offices.
2.1.2
Relative humidity
High relative humidity makes it difficult for the body to release latent heat, resolving in
discomfort. When the relative humidity is too low, it can result in irritated mucous mem­
branes, in eye, nose and throat and can cause dry skin and irritation. In DS/EN 16798
humidification and dehumidification is only needed in special buildings, and is not re­
garded in offices. Is is assumed that humidity is taken off through basic ventilation. To
avoid discomfort, the relative humidity should be between 25 and 60% [6].
2.2
Indoor Air Quality
A good indoor air quality contains a controlled concentration of harmful particles and
gasses [12]. Poor IAQ has been linked to a decrease in productivity of up towards 6­
9% compared to buildings with acceptable IAQ [? ]. Poor IAQ can also lead to health
issues and is one a global level acknowledges a health issue.The indoor air can be up to
five times as polluted as outdoor air [? ]. The primary reason for ventilation systems is to
either replace the indoor air with fresh outdoor air, displacement ventilation or dilute the
polluted air with fresh air. bla bla find lige på noget klogt.
2.2.1
CO2
Carbon dioxide is a common indicator of IAQ, if the CO2 concentration is high it is a sign
of insufficient ventilation rates. If CO2 is accumulated in the indoor air, other contami­
nants will also likely accumulate. CO2 is a result of occupant respiration and is the main
source of pollution indoor. CO2 is commonly measured in ppm (parts per million) indi­
cating the concentration of CO2 molecules per 1 million molecules. CO2 is not harmful
in the concentration usually found indoor but high concentrations can affect comfort and
cause responses in the human central nervous system, seen as tiredness and fatigue.
The outdoor CO2 level is around 400 ppm, small variations can explained by time of day,
location or even floor level. It is not possible to find indoor CO2 concentrations below 400
ppm and limits are often seen as a concentration above the outdoor level.
Table 2.2: CO2 concentration limits
DS/EN 16798
Cat. I
+ 550 ppm
Cat. II
+800 ppm
Cat. III
+1350
The Danish Working Environment Authority
Offices
1000 ppm
Table 2.2 shows the three categories of CO2 concentrations above the outdoor level. The
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
5
==PAGE:14==
Danish Working Environment Authority does not recommend values above 1000 ppm. In
addition the CO2 should not be above 2000 ppm more than short periods of time.
2.2.2
Volate Organic Compounds
Volatile organic compounds is group of chemicals with high vapor pressure and low water
solubility [3]. Typical emitters are paint, lacquers, cleaning supplies, furnishing building
materials and office equipment like printers or photocopiers. VOC’s are man­made and
concentrations are up to ten times higher indoor than outdoor [3]. Commonly TVOC is
used when measuring VOC’s. TVOC is the total concentration of VOC’s present in the
air. There are no guidelines in Denmark concerning concentrations of TVOC in the air.
2.2.3
Particulate Matter
PM (Particulate Matter) is another common indicator for air pollution. It consists of a mix­
ture of both solid and liquid particles of organic and inorganic substances. Particulate
matter is a major health risk, and can cause repsiratory diseases, lung cancer cardiovas­
cular diseases. PM is divided into three categories, PM10, PM2.5 and ultrafine particles.
The number following PM is the size of the particles. PM10 is particles 10 microns in
diameter or less, and is commonly dust. The health risk comes from particles to enter
and lodge in the lungs. The even smaller particles PM2.5 can penetrate the lung barrier
enter the blood system [13]. The Danish Standard refer to WHO­guidelines for limits of
concentration on particulate matter in the air. The guidelines can be seen in table 2.3.
Table 2.3: WHO guidelines for particulate matter
Annual mean
24 hours mean
PM2.5
10 µg/m3
25 µg/m3
PM10
20 µg/m3
50 µg/m3
2.3
Acoustic
Acoustic comfort is often understood as noise, unwanted, disturbing or unpleasant sound.
But acoustic comfort is more complex than noise. It include other factors, such as rever­
beration time, absorption and sound insulation. Acoustic comfort is the capacity at which
a building can protect occupants from noise. Noise can come from either internal or exter­
nal sources. External sources can be traffic, machinery, etc, while indoor sources often
comes from co­workers talking and office equipment like phones ringing, printers or key­
boards. Noise have been linked to health issues like tiredness fatigue and even more
severe issues like high blood pressure and an increase in stress hormones [14]. Sound
pressure level of a sound is measured in deciBel (dB), but humans do not perceive all
frequencies of sound equally. It is quite common to see dB(A) used which is a weighted
sound pressure level which tries to accommodate and adjust for the difference in how the
human ear perceives different frequencies. The Danish Working Authority has an upper
limit for noise at 85 dB(A).
6
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Visual
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
3.1
Equipment
To produce data on IEQ and user behaviour, equipment is needed to perform field mea­
surements. Three devices were used to measure and obtain data on the indoor environ­
ment ­ Roomalyzer, Flow and Hobo State loggers. The RoomAlyzer and the Flow meter,
were bundled in an equipment package the size of a pizza tray, accompanied by a tablet.
The tablet was used only to store data from the flow meter due to a limited build­in mem­
ory. The packages made for easy setup and dismantling when the measuring period was
over. The HOBO state loggers were separate from the bundle, and used to measure win­
dow openings. The measuring packages were positioned as close to the occupants as
possible, without being in the way of them performing their work.
3.1.1
RoomAlyzer
Based on the findings from [4], RoomAlyzer was chosen for its ease of use, a wide range
of parameters, local support and high accuracy. RoomAlyzer has working conditions of
0­50 ◦C and 0­95% Relative humidity. It can cover rooms up 100 m2 if the air circulation
sufficient. List of parameters:
• CO2 (± 45 ppm)
• TVOC (± 15% of measured value)
• Air temperature (± 0.2◦C )
• Relative humidity (± 2%)
• Light and light colour
• Movement
• Noise
RoomAlyzer is placed vertically on a wall at a height equal to occupants head level when
sitting. The device is turned on with a magnet and the CO2 calibrations is also done with
a magnet. The device is advertised to be able to be calibrated outdoors with relative
humidity below 70%. The logging interval can be changed through the online service
at pre­defined intervals. During this field measurement, the company has installed a 5
minute interval, which is not a standard logging interval. The data is transmitted through
NB­IoT every hour.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Picture of Roomalyzer [? ]
Roomalyzer runs on two C batteries, and can also be plugged into a power supply. The
device is connected to an online interface, the RoomAlyzer Dashboard. From the dash­
board, live data is available. The data is also downloaded through the dashboard, with
the possibility to only download data from a pre­defined time period. Starting date for the
time period can be selected to any given date.
3.1.2
Flow2
The second device included in the equipment packages is Flow2. Flow2 is an air quality
measuring device made by an American company called PlumeLabs. It is a handheld
device, meant to increase focus on air quality and health by being a portable device to
bring along as you make your way through the day. The device is relatively accurate,
and the company advertises that the measurements has 90­95% statistical correlation
with static reference monitors [? ]. One issue with devices this small is the gas chamber.
Due to the size it will register zero as a concentration for a short period of time. List of
parameters:
• NO2 [ppb]
• VOC [ppb]
• PM10 [µg/m3]
• PM2.5 [µg/m3]
10
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:19==
• PM1 [µg/m3]
It is however unclear from the manufacturer whether the VOC’s measured are TVOC. The
initial assumption is that TVOC is measured, but that may very well change. The battery
life is estimated to be between 24 ­ 72h depending on use and have an average charge
time of 2.5h [? ]. The built­in memory can store around 3 days worth of measurements.
The battery life and built­in memory is not quite sufficient to cover one whole measurement
period. To accommodate for this, each Flow2 is paired with a smart device and a docking
station. The docking station ensures power throughout the measurement period. Each
smart device has downloaded the Flow app.Through the app, it is possible to follow live
data, and watch the particulate pollution exposure. To use the app, you have to be logged
in and connected via bluetooth. Data can also be exported via the app. The exported
data is sent as a .zip compressed folder to your email.
Figure 3.2: Picture of Flow2.
Flow2 works by electric firmware changing the particles into electric currents. The device
then turns changes in the electrical current into digital signal, which is then turned into
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
11
==PAGE:20==
concentrations. [9]
3.1.3
HOBO StateLogger
Hobo State logger is a very simple and yet effective tool made by Onset. The basic
function is binary, it either measures 0 for open window, or 1 for a closed window. It
logs the output to a date and time. The state logger is able to measure the state with a
magnet. When the magnet is close to the state logger, it registeres as closed, and then
the magnet is moved, the state logger registeres as open. The HOBO logger is mounted
on the window frame, to minimize the risk of severe damage to the logger in case it falls
off, and the magnet is mounted on the window.
Data is read out through HOBOware. The data ouput contains a list of logged events,
start, open, closed, stopped.
3.2
Building Selection
Office buildings were found using the BBR­register, all Danish buildings used for offices
were pulled from the website. The population of office buildings were then divided into
subgroups, categorized by their building typology. An initial list of 320 buildings were cre­
ated using Random Stratified Random Sampling. The study [10], divided office buildings
in Denmark into seven typologies based on year of construction, geometry and facade
materials, and these are applied to the buildings derived from BBR. Stratified Random
Sampling were used to get representative sampling of Danish office buildings. The pre­
requisites for a healthy and or good indoor environment can vary depending on the ty­
pology. A rather new building with mechanical ventilation, a modern heating solution and
better insulation have more parameters to control the indoor environment.
The companies situated on the addresses, were found using google map, krak and the
yellow pages. Krak and the yellow pages were used to find contact information.
Finding buildings to carry out field measurements in this project were challenging partly
due to the corona situation, and partly due to the information provided by BBR. A building
indicated as offices, wasn’t always used as an office. The corona restrictions meant,
that many companies didn’t allow outside visitors. Therefor using personal contacts and
references to find offices were also used to try and accommodate for the situation and
provide a more continuous flow of locating buildings to perform field measurements.
3.3
Field measurements
There were three components to the field study: Quantitative measurements of indoor
environment parameters, a user survey and building/office registrations. The duration of
the measuring period were a one­week period. The rooms selected should represent the
entire office. This were in some cases an entire building, or in other cases it was one floor.
The rooms should best represent the types of offices in the building. For some offices this
was primarily open plan office, in others it was primarily private or shared offices and in
some it was a mixture of all of the before mentioned. The placement of the measuring
12
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:21==
equipment, is also important. The placement should comply with standards, this was how­
ever, not always possible as the people working at the desk, should be able to continue
working for the duration of the measuring period. The placement of the equipment should
also comply with the guidelines of use of devices. It should not be placed in direct sunlight
to avoid radiant heating from the sun. It should also be placed in the occupied zone, so
more than 0,5 meters from the walls. To measure the light correctly according to [? ], the
equipment should be placed on the work plan.
3.3.1
IEQ parameters
The equipment used provides a total of 12 parameters describing the indoor environment
and one parameter measuring occupancy. 7 of those measures IAQ, two parameters
describes the thermal environment, on describes noise and two parameter describes the
visual environment.
Figure 3.3: Measured parameters.
Figure 3.3 highlights the measured IEQ parameters. To limit the scope of the study, not
all of the above mentioned parameters are included. Noise are not included, all though
noise can impact user behaviour in cases of offices placed near construction work, heavy
traffic or other outdoor noise polluting sources, the way that IEQ is measured does not
provide sufficient information on the sources of noise and changes in the noise level can
therefore not be assigned to a noise. An example of this is in an office, the window is
opened and the door is opened to create draught. The noise level then rises, but the
source of the noise pollution could come from the hallway, outdoors or the noise pollution
could come from the inside the office. Lighting is also not included in the study. This is
due to interior lighting is not impacted by opening a window. Instead the focus is on the
thermal environment and the IAQ, which is directly affected by opening a window.
The RoomAlyzer also measures movement, which could be useful in terms of measuring
occupancy. However, the equipment is not mounted on the wall, which is the intended
positioning of the RoomAlyzer. Instead it is lying down in the equipment package. This
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
13
==PAGE:22==
position is to accurately measure the illuminance of the task area. This positioning means
that PIR­sensor measuring movement is facing the ceiling. So although, an interesting
feature it becomes rather useless due to the use of the device. As a matter of fact, the
decision to position the RoomAlyzer horizontally may also affect other parameters. The
gas chamber measuring CO2 levels are placed on the sides, and is designed to use buoy­
ancy to ensure sufficient air flow through the device. When placed horizontally, the device
relies on sufficient air flow in the room to provide enough air to accurately measure the
CO2 levels.
3.3.2
Questionnaire
The questionnaire is divided into three categories: Demographic and workplace, indoor
climate conditions and comfort, and health and well being. The design of the questionnaire
is illustrated in fig. 3.4 .
Figure 3.4: Design of questionnaire
The first category in the questionnaire covers three subcategories. The first subcategory
”Demographic” covers questions about the respondents, such as age, gender, type of
work but also asks more specific questions like smoking status, which could influence the
perception of smell or influence health symptoms.
The second subcategory covers the subject of the workplace, in which respondents are
asked about things like orientation of windows, distance to windows, office type, number
of people sharing, etc. These questions builds a picture of the office, but also identifies
potential explanations or sources for indoor climate conditions. For instance, orientation
and distance to window affect the amount of daylight and radiant heat from the sun in an
office. Number of people in an office can affects the thermal environment, as humans
emit both convective, radiant and latent heat.
The third subcategory covers ergonomics. Ergonomics asses the comfort conditions at
the desk or in the chair. ergonomics could potentially influence the respondents assess­
ment of the indoor environment as it influences the respondents comfort or well­being.
Indoor climate conditions contains questions about the respondents perception of the IEQ.
14
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:23==
The four categories of IEQ are, thermal environment, IAQ, visuals and noise. The respon­
dent’s perception of the thermal environment are covered through questions on humidity,
temperatures and air movement. IAQ is more tricky, as humans can’t feel the concen­
tration levels of particulate matter or gasses, but it can be expressed through odours. If
unpleasant odours are consistent throughout the workday, it could be an indication of poor
IAQ and low ventilation rates. Questions on brightness, dimness and glare assesses the
lighting conditions.
Health and well­being is the last category of the questionnaire. This topic covers potential
health issues related to working in the office or symptoms of poor IEQ. These symptoms
are typically related to sick building syndrome. These symptoms can be divided into four
categories depending on the types of organs is affected [7]. Below in table 3.1 questions
related to health can be seen.
Table 3.1: Questions on health and well­being categorised by types of affected organs.
Mucous membranes
Sore or dry nose
Sneezing
Dry or irritated eyes
Skin
Dry skin
Respiration and airways
Cough
Shortness of breath
Central nervous system
Tiredness
Headache
Fatigue
Frequency of reported health issues are important to establish a correlation between poor
indoor environment. Correlating health issues and well­being to poor indoor environment
is difficult as comfort and well­being are subjective and respondents can have personal
and social bias [7]. Often health related questions are followed up by questions, whether
the symptoms get better or worse after leaving the building, to establish a connection to
the investigated building. It is important that a questionnaire is accompanied by technical
factors and quantitative data to proper assess the indoor environment. The questionnaire
sent to participants in the study can be seen in appendix A.1. The questionnaire tries
accommodate for inaccuracies in the measured indoor environment, as it is sent to all
occupants in the building, and the questions goes further back than the measurement
period.
3.3.3
Building registration
Alongside the user survey and the quantitative measurements, a registration for the of­
fice, the building as a whole and a manager list were done. The office registrations served
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
15
==PAGE:24==
as a reminder of which equipment were placed in which room, but also provided ques­
tions that could help explain certain results, e.g. the presence of mechanical ventilation
in the room, desk lamp to provide additional lighting, orientation of the windows and op­
erable window area.The office list also covered the state of the materials in the building,
moisture problems etc. The office list can be seen in ??. The building registration list
dealt focused on the building in a broader perspective. Is there dedicated ventilation in
restrooms, cleaning supply closets, etc. The surrounding environment and usage of the
the different floors. The building manager list can be seen in appendix ??. The manager
list covered questions about the day the day to use of the building, cleaning schedules
occupancy hours, etc. The manager check list can be seen in appendix ??.
3.4
Indoor evaluation and assessment
Companies vary in number of employees, so the size of office buildings must vary ac­
cordingly to fit the employees. The office buildings in this study is randomly selected to
avoid bias towards a certain typology or certain size, which results in the buildings differ
from one another. In this study it is not intended to measure every room of a building,
as it is rarely feasible, when comparing time and effort with the accuracy of the results.
More data requires more time to process and at a certain point, more data does not pro­
vide any significant chance to the overall evaluation of indoor environment at a building
level. The number of rooms selected for the field measurement is compromise between
equipment available, economics, time spent and accuracy of results. Economics affect
the how much equipment can be bought to convey the study. Neither is it ideal to use
all available equipment in one building, the equipment could be used in other buildings to
increase the rate of data gained from buildings. Some equipment may also be serve as
backup, if devices are faulty. When performing field measurements, knowledge is gained
throughout the process, and this knowledge could be used to perform more studies on
the equipment. However, enough equipment should be used in each building to gain a
representative sample of the indoor environment. How many rooms needed to gain a rep­
resentative sample differs depending on the size of the building. The intended number
of rooms to be measured in field measurement are 3­5, but these numbers are merely
guidelines and can vary based on available equipment at the time of the measurements
and the size of the building. When sampling the indoor environment, the selected rooms
becomes important. The rooms should represent the most common scenarios occurring
throughout the building. Offices with different orientation, size and occupancy should be
selected. The most frequent occurring types of offices, should be prioritized over less
frequent types of offices in cases of lack of equipment. It is necessary to draw assump­
tions before the indoor environment can be assessed for the whole building. For reasons
listed above, the data from field measurements are assumed to be representative of the
whole building/floor. This is essential when analysing association between the qualitative
measurements and results from the questionnaire between all buildings in the study. In
this study, associations are made on a building level due to the limited number of occu­
pants sitting close to the equipment packages, when looking at respondents close to an
16
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:25==
equipment package, the data is insufficient.
3.5
Calibration
After the first field measurements it became clear that the RoomAlyzers were not cali­
brated correctly. It was initially thought to be caused by the outdoor condition. As men­
tioned in section 3.1.1, the relative humidity must be below 65% percent to successfully be
calibrated outdoors. This can be challenge during period with cold weather, where the air’s
ability to hold water vapor is poor. There also seemed to be large discrepancies between
the devices so the equipment was brought back to DTU and set up in climate chamber
to proper calibrate the devices under controlled conditions. After calibration, the Room­
Alyzers were left inside the climate chamber for observation. Large discrepancies were
still observed, and another calibration was done. Still having large discrepancies between
devices under controlled conditions prompted pH.d. student Emilie Patricia Dam­Krogh,
who also supervises this thesis, to launch a study on the CO2 loggers in the RoomAlyz­
ers. Emilie managed to make correction curves for multiple devices, by dosing the climate
chamber with CO2 and measure the concentration, using more a accurate device, Innova,
as reference. These correction curves, provided additional information besides from cor­
recting the data. The slope of the curves varied in between devices. The slope expresses
”how wrong” the measurements are depending on the measured concentration. For some
devices this meant that the inaccuracy was decreased as concentrations were higher, for
other the inaccuracy was increased the higher the concentration. The lowest slope was
0.6698 and the highest being 1.0082. One solution to faulty measurements could have
been taking the lowest measured concentration level and using that as a new point of
reference and then shift the rest of the measurements based on the difference between
the outdoor concentration and the new point of reference. As the slopes are different in
between devices, this would cause equally wrong data.
The producers of RoomAlyzer made a new update to more accurately measure CO2 after
contact with their support on this issue. These issues with inaccuracies did however
persist throughout the field measurements even with the update.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
In this chapter the general results from the measurements will be presented. The rooms
selected are assumed to be representative of each building and can be used to generalise
and provide averages for each building. Results for each room can be seen in Appendix
appendix A through appendix. Too compare the buildings, it was necessary to generalize
the results.
4.1
Thermal Environment
4.1.1
Temperature
Allthough, the results mainly focus on results on a building level, some context is needed.
In fig. 4.1, boxplots for each room measured in every building can be seen. Figure 4.1
shows the distribution of temperatures during occupied hours.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Boxplots showing the distribution of temperatures during occupied hours for
each room of each building.
Table 4.1 shows main results from the measurements of the five buildings. The recom­
mended guidelines from the Danish Working Environment Authority has been used as
limits for overheating and time during occupied hours when the temperature is too low.
When inspecting the results, building 103 stands out as the building with the highest tem­
peratures. The average and median temperature is around 25 ◦C, which explains the
high percentage of time the building experiences overheating during the occupied hours.
Building 302 and 304 also experiences a high percentage of the time above 25 ◦C at 25%
and 32% respectively.
The ranges provide some indication of the variations in temperature during the occupied
hours, albeit can be a bit misleading as the ranges also include outliers. When comparing
the range of building 301 with the boxplot in fig. 4.1, the large range in temperatures is
due to extreme outliers, with one being below 14 ◦C. The distribution of temperatures
20
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:29==
in building 301 operates in general within a narrow range as seen by the small boxes.
Building 301 is a special case, as it is the only building where temperatures fall outside
of the temperature range one would expect to find in an office building. This point will be
elaborated in chapter 6.
None of the buildings experience temperatures below 18 ◦C for a significant period of time
during the measurement period.
Table 4.1: Results from the measurements presented on a building level during occupied
hours.
103
301
302
303
304
Avg. T [◦C]
24.9
23.7
24.5
24.4
24.7
Median T [◦C]
25.1
23.9
24.4
24.4
24.7
Range [◦C]
6.1
11.3
6.8
4.2
10
% of occ. hours >25◦C [%]
51
0
25
2
39
% of occ. hours <18◦C [%]
0
0
0
0
0
δT >4 ◦C [d]
The survey sent out to each office had questions on comfort and performance. This pro­
vided additional data on the indoor environment to analyze and compare to the qualitative
measurements.
Figure 4.2: Normalized bar chart of frequency of too high temperatures.
Figure 4.2 shows a normalized bar chart, where the number of respondents to each fre­
quency divided by the total number of respondents who chose to answer. Some respon­
dents chose the leave the question blank, these are not included in the bar charts to
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
21
==PAGE:30==
provide an easier readable table. The responses from the questionnaire can be seen in
table A.1 in appendix A.2. In all building about 50 % of the occupants are satisfied with
the temperatures in the sense that it is not too warm. Building 301, 302 and 304 all have
a high proportion, reporting that the temperature is too high on a weekly basis. Building
103 is the only building with occupants reporting too high temperatures on a daily basis,
which is also the building where on average the temperature was above 25 ◦C more than
half of the occupied time.
Figure 4.3: Normalized bar chart of frequency of too low temperatures.
Figure 4.3 shows a bar chart with normalized results of occupants responding that the
temperature is too low. Only building 103 have the lowest percentage of respondents
claiming to never experience too low temperatures, less than 40 %. The remaining four
buildings follow the expected trend that the higher frequency of too low temperatures, the
lower is the proportion of respondents.
Figure 4.4: Normalized bar chart showing the distribution of respondents rating on tem­
perature’s influence performance.
22
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:31==
In figure fig. 4.4, the respondents answer on how the temperature in their office influences
their performance. The scale goes from 0 meaning the temperature has a very negative
influence on their performance at work and 6 being a positive effect on their performance.
The results have been normalized. The responses in the building 103 looks like a normal
distribution, with an average around 3. Building 303 and 304 also seems to have a normal
distribution but with averages around 4 and 2 respectively. Building 301 has a very even
distribution and so does building 302. These two buildings also have the lowest number of
responses, with 7 and 6 responses respectively. The averages can be seen in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Average scores on temperature’s influence on performance
103
301
302
303
304
Average Score
2.87
3.1
4
3.7
2
Standard deviation
1.9
2.1
1.8
1.3
1.3
Blanks
14
7
0
7
16
Total responses
29
16
6
29
66
4.1.2
Relative humidity
4.2
IAQ
In this section the results regarding IAQ are shown. As discussed in ?? there was issues
related to the IAQ measurements, and a the scope of these issues will also be shown, to
see the scope of these issues.
4.2.1
CO2
In fig. 4.5 boxplot of the CO2 levels during occupied hours for each room in each building
can be seen. The boxplots is meant to provide context for the results in table 4.3.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.5: Boxplot showing the distribution of CO2 levels during occupied hours for all
buildings
In fig. 4.5 several rooms reportedly had measurements way below 400 ppm during oc­
cupied hours. This indicates faulty measurements. As a result the minimum CO2 values
from the measurement period, weekend excluded, are listed as a range in table 4.3. The
range covers the minimum values measured in every room. This information is very use­
ful, as not only does it show that every building had equipment measuring CO2 concen­
trations way below what can reasonably be expected, but it also shows the inaccuracy of
the equipment as there is a factor of 1.5 and up to 4 in difference between the minimum
values in a building.
Table 4.3: Results from CO2 measurements on a building level during occupied hours,
and minimum values from measurements.
103
301
302
303
304
Min CO2 level range [ppm]
212 ­ 332
45 ­ 195
181 ­ 620
170 ­ 355
213 ­ 410
Avg. CO2 occ. hours [ppm]
576
532
855
586
656
Median CO2 occ. hours [ppm]
569
448
822
582
601
% of occ. hours >1000 ppm [%]
0.2
0.2
30.9
0.2
7.2
24
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:33==
Given that at least one piece of equipment in each building measures CO2 concentrations
way below what can be expected, it stands to reason that the percentage of occupied time
above 1000 ppm is limited. Interestingly, building 302 still has around 30 % of the occupied
hours above 1000 ppm. Given this many faulty measurements, it is difficult to compare
each building. CO2 is however, not the only factor of determining the IAQ but merely
the most common indicator. Other particulate matter or gasses can be used to elaborate
the IAQ. Unpleasant odours can also be a sign of poor IAQ as the ventilation rate is not
sufficient remove odours from the air. Figure 4.6 shows the normalized results from the
survey on unpleasant odours excluding blank answers. The number of respondents and
number of blank respondents can be seen in table A.5 in appendix A.2.
Figure 4.6: Normalized bar chart showing the frequency of the respondents reporting
unpleasant odours
According to fig. 4.6, all buildings have the vast majority of the respondents reporting
no unpleasant odours. More than 70 % of respondents Between 10 and 20 % reported
unpleasant odours as something they experienced on a monthly basis and 10 % and
less reported it as weekly occurrence. In no buildings the respondents found unpleasant
odours as an issue that occured on a daily basis.
4.2.2
VOC’s
As mentioned in section 3.1 both the Flow2 and the Roomalyzer measures VOC’s. Since
both pieces of measuring equipment measures VOC’s it is ideal to show both results and
later do a comparison. If both devices measure TVOC, the results are expected to be
similar.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.7: Boxplots showing the distribution of temperatures during the occupied hours,
for each room in each building. Roomalyzer was used to measure the VOC’s.
Figure 4.7 shows the concentration of VOC’s in ppb measured by Roomalyzer, for all
rooms. Below in fig. 4.8 is VOC concentration is measured by Flow2. Results have been
obtained during the same periods.
26
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.8: Boxplots showing the distribution of temperatures during the occupied hours,
measured with Flow2
Immediately one thing in particular shows. Several rooms are missing in figure fig. 4.8
compared to fig. 4.7. This is due to missing data. Presenting the data from Flow2 can
be misleading as in some buildings, data is missing. The period of which data is missing
varies between rooms. Table 4.4 Presents the amount of missing data.
Table 4.4: Overview of the scope of missing data from Flow2
103
301
302
303
304
No. of devices with no data
2
1
2
2
4
No. of devices woth 3 days missing
0
0
0
3
0
No. of devices with 2 days missing
0
2
0
0
0
No. of devices with 1 day missing
0
1
2
0
0
No. of devices used in building
8
4
5
5
7
Looking at the values for the boxplots in fig. 4.8 and fig. 4.7, it is also immediately obvious
that there is large discrepancy between the two devices. For reference building 301 is
examined further as it had the least issues with missing data. In both cases where data
could not be exported, another device was present in the room. This means data is
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
27
==PAGE:36==
available for the entire duration of the measurement period.
Table 4.5: Comparing averages VOC concentration, standard deviation and ranges in
building 301.
RoomAlyzer
Flow2
Average
Std
Range
Average
Std
Range
Room 28
1050
275.3
1551
191
58.5
451
Room 29
959
179.5
1235
183
29.5
147
Room 45
1738
467.5
2979
191
65
24.3
Room 46
1831
1528
12420
232
67.5
430
4.2.3
Particulate matter
The measurements on PM pollution suffers from the same issues as VOC’s regarding
missing data. The results from each building may therefor not be a completely accurate
depiction of the level of pollution in the buildings, but nonetheless it should be included in
the project.
PM10
4.2.4
Window Openings
Table 4.6 shows the number of window openings recorded in each building. Building 302
accounts for 62% of the total recorded window openings. One room in building 302, room
2, has a total of 26 openings and accounts for 72 % of openings in that building and 42
% of the total window openings recorded. The particular room, is a shared office with
two occupants. This will affect any further analysis on window openings and associations
between physical parameters as two occupants temperature or IAQ preferences account
for nearly half of all measurements. This is quite an extreme observation, but should
nevertheless be included as it is depicts the reality in that particular office.
Table 4.6: Number of window openings in each building.
103
301
302
303
304
Openings
7
1
36
None
14
28
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:37==
temperature
Table 4.7: Average temperatures for window events.
103
301
302
303
304
Avg. opening temp[◦C]
24.9
17
24.4
­
24.6
Std, opening temp
0.4
­
1.1
­
1.0
Avg. closing temp [◦C]
24.9
17
24.3
­
23.6
Std, closing temp.
0.3
­
1.05
­
2.5
Figure 4.9 shows the total number of window openings across all buildings for temperature
intervals of 1 ◦C intervals, to see when the windows were opened.
Figure 4.9: Total number of window openings at 1◦C intervals.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:39==
5
Analysis
In this chapter, the results from the field measurements are investigated to find association
between user behaviour and indoor environment and how the measured data correlates
with occupants level of comfort. These investigations should correlate with existing liter­
ature on occupant behaviour and human comfort described in chapter 2.
5.1
Temperature and influence on performance
Figure 5.1: Graphic depiction of association between temperature and performance.
Figure 5.1 shows the average score on temperature’s influence on performance from
buildings plotted against the mean temperature in each building. The trend line seems
to show a small tendency that higher temperatures is associated with negative impact
on performance. This does correlate with the guidelines [6], but the responses in the
questionnaire is a sample, and so any biases should be investigated. The demographics
of the respondents can be used to investigate sociological biases, to verify that results
seen in fig. 5.1 or to investigate whether the sample is representative of the population at
the workplace. All though questions include questions on gender, an estimate of the ratio
between men and women in the population is unknown. The same is true for all questions
regarding demographics. Instead an investigation of gender bias is used, to see whether
the ratio of men and women participating the investigation affects the results. First the
responses between men and women were split up and plotted as seen on the left graph
in fig. 5.2, then the average male scores were plotted against ratio of male responses.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: Left: Average score from men and women, of temperatures influence on per­
formance plotted against average temperature. Right: Ratio of male respondents plotted
against average male responses
The two graphs in fig. 5.2 do suggest a gender bias. It would seem as a high ratio of
men is associated with a higher tolerance for high temperatures or even a preference for
working under high temperatures. To verify this hypothesis, a Welch two sample t.test
was carried out for each building comparing the male responses with sample responses
and male with female responses testing for the hypothesis. h0 : x −y = 0
Table 5.1: Welch two­sample t.test of male responses and all responses.
103
301
302
303
304
p­value
0.65
0.53
0.31
0.31
0.52
Table 5.2: Welch two­sample t.test of male responses and female responses.
103
301
302
303
304
p­value
0.51
0.43
­
0.12
0.51
Table 5.1 shows the p­values from performing a t.test on male responses compared with
the responses from the entire sample. Table 5.2 shows the resulting p­values from per­
forming the Welch two­sample t.test on male responses compared with female responses.
Notice that building 302 had no female respondents. Using a significance level 95% the
the From the t.tests it can be concluded that there is no gender bias on the temperature’s
influence on performance. It should however be mentioned that the sample sizes were
relatively small, which do affect the t.test.
32
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:41==
5.2
Temperature and window openings
In fig. 4.9 the number of window openings at small temperature intervals were counted and
plotted in a bar graph to show the at what temperatures windows are opened. This may be
misleading when taking into consideration what time of the year the measurements were
done. It could seem like windows are primarily opened at 23­24◦C, but during March and
April temperatures are not very high in general, it would therefore be a more accurate
depiction to plot the number of openings at temperature divided by the total amount of
measurements at that temperature. This plot can be seen in fig. 5.3.
Figure 5.3: No window openings at a temperature divided by the total amount of mea­
surements.
Figure 5.3 shows a trend more in line with the expected results. That the window is more
likely to be opened when the indoor temperatures are high.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
6.1
Results
CO2 in building 301 and 103 are properly incorrect, all Roomalyzer were calibrated the
day before, under the same conditions. The equipment measuring values well below
400 ppm, are not working properly. However, it is difficult to discard all the equipment.
Occupancy were low during the measurement period, so it is expected to see results close
to the outdoor level. Bla bla bla, more discussion. Excluding data from the weekends,
were
6.2
Field measurements
This section focuses on the issues related and sources of error met during field measure­
ments, but also knowledge gained from being in the early stages of gathering data.
6.2.1
IAQ
The CO2 measurements were an issue throughout the entirety of the field measure­
ments. As seen in table 4.3, measuring indoor CO2 concentrations way below the outdoor
level was a consistent issue in every building and in three of of five buildings all devices
recorded minimum values way below what could be expected. These issues invalidates
the CO2 measurements in this study as more than 60% of the measurements are in­
correct. Even after an update, and with correction curves for building 302 data was still
wrong. It should be considered, to add other CO2 measuring devices to the equipment
package. The fact that the faulty measurements were recurring after the update, raises
serious questions if any measurements are correct. There is no way of validating mea­
surements once out in the field, and if one half of the devices are measuring inaccurately
can the the other half of the devices be trusted, so to speak. In general there were many
issues when it came to measuring IAQ. which will be further described in section 6.2.2.
6.2.2
Flow2
There were many issues and inconveniences regarding the use of Flow2. Firstly, ex­
porting data is very inconvenient and time consuming. The data can as of now only be
extracted through the app. The data is sent via email as .zip compressed folder. The rel­
evant .csv file then needs to be extracted. This is where the second issue arises, missing
data. Sometimes it is just a few hours that are missing, sometimes it is whole days miss­
ing. Missing short periods of time could be explained by occupants plugging the power
inlet in and out, causing the device to skip some measurements. However, missing whole
days of the measurement is an issue, especially the measurement periods are relatively
short. The days which are missing seems somewhat arbitrary. It can be any random day,
in building 301 two days in the middle of the measurement were missing in room 2 and
3, while in room 1 only the last day was missing. For some equipment there is simply
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
35
==PAGE:44==
no data from the measurement period. This prolongs the time it takes to extract the data
significantly as it is necessary to check every .csv file if it contains all, if any data, from the
measurement period. Usually, more data will appear the more times the data is extracted
via the app. A likely reason for the missing data could be the docking station. The dock­
ing station is necessary to supply power due to the limited battery. Mounting Flow2 in the
docking station is unstable, and small pushes could disrupt the power supply. This is not
ideal when placed around people working, who could easily give the equipment package
a small bump, by pushing a paper stack, reaching for something or bumping into the table.
It is unknown whether this is the reason, but it is a likely candidate to explain the missing
data. A study could be made to investigate whether equipment placed on the desk at the
occupant is more or less likely to lose data compared to equipment placed at a separate
desk or on a shelf, next to the occupant, less likely to be interfered with.
Missing data during short measurement periods is big issue as it becomes more difficult to
evaluate the indoor environment. It also makes the Flow2 unreliable. As a consequence
more than one equipment package should be used in each room, to increase the chances
of actually receiving data. During the later stages of field measurements the amount of
data from Flow2 also became an issue. Flow2 does not have an option to select a time
period from which to receive data, it is all or nothing. As the equipment had been used
several times, data tables became so long that built­in features in excel could not handle
the amount of data. This called for manual sorting of data to find the correct dates which
makes it less attractive when processing data in excel. Other data handling software is
probably better suited for Flow2, like R. There are off course positives to the use of Flow2,
it is a small device which is ideal when measuring in offices where fitting equipment as
close to the occupants as possible is essential. However, the pro of being small falls
short when an extra smart device is needed, to ensure that there is sufficient memory. It
becomes clear that Flow2 was not designed for large­scale measurements, but rather a
gadget for an individual to use and examine their exposure to particulate matter.
The fact that Flow2 is so unreliable, should be addressed and possibly an alternative
should be considered
6.3
Temperature outliers
36
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:45==
7
Conclusion
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
[2] Verena M. Barthelmes, Yeonsook Heo, Rune Korsholm Andersen, Valentina Fabi,
and Stefano P. Corgnati. Towards a comprehensive model of window control be­
haviour: A survey­based investigation on interdisciplinary drivers in danish dwellings.
Proceedings of Bso 2018: 4th Building Simulation and Optimization Conference,
pages 649–656, 2018.
[3] EPA. What are volatile organic compounds (vocs)?, unknown.
[4] Feodora Olivia Friesdal and Rebekka Katrine Pallesen.
Indoor environment in a
digital future. 2020.
[5] Frédéric Haldi, Davide Calì, Rune Korsholm Andersen, Mark Wesseling, and Dirk
Müller. Modelling diversity in building occupant behaviour: a novel statistical ap­
proach. Journal of Building Performance Simulation, 10(5­6):527–544, 2017.
[6] Jens Jensen. Temperatur i arbejdsrum på fast arbejdspladser. 2005.
[7] L. Mølhave. Sick building syndrome. Encyclopedia of Environmental Health, pages
663–669, 2019.
[8] Bjarne W. Olesen. The new ashrae standard 55. A S H R a E Journal, August:21–26,
2004.
[9] Plumelabs. How accurate is flow, unknown.
[10] Glad Nadja Sundbjerg and Myrtue Amanda Thorsen. Kontorbygninger i danmark
­ en undersøgelse af sammenhænge mellem bygningskaristika og energimærker.
2020.
[11] S. Tanabe. Indoor temperature, productivity and fatigue in office tasks. Hb 2006 ­
Healthy Buildings: Creating a Healthy Indoor Environment for People, Proceedings,
1:49–56, 2006.
[12] unkown. Components of good indoor air quality, unknown.
[13] WHO. Ambient outdoor pollution, unknown.
[14] WHO. Noise, unknown.
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Questionnaire
Figure A.1: Page 1 of the questionnaire
Figure A.2: Page 2 of the questionnaire
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.3: Page 3 of the questionnaire
Figure A.4: Page 4 of the questionnaire
Figure A.5: Page 5 of the questionnaire
42
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.6: Page 6 of the questionnaire
Figure A.7: Page 7 of the questionnaire
Figure A.8: Page 8 of the questionnaire
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.9: Page 9 of the questionnaire
Figure A.10: Page 10 of the questionnaire
A.2
Results
Table A.1: Results from survey ­ Temperature too high.
103
301
302
303
304
No days
8
5
3
11
26
1­3 days per month
5
1
1
8
9
1­3 days per week
2
3
2
1
18
Every day
2
0
0
0
0
Blank
12
7
0
9
13
Total
29
16
6
29
66
44
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:53==
Table A.2: Results from survey ­ temperature too low
103
301
302
303
304
Never
6
7
4
11
29
1­3 days per month
7
1
1
5
14
1­3 days per week
3
1
1
2
9
Every day
0
0
0
2
0
Blank
13
7
0
9
14
Total
29
16
6
29
66
Table A.3: Results from survey ­ Air too dry
103
301
302
303
304
Never
7
7
6
16
28
1­3 days per month
3
0
0
2
9
1­3 days per week
4
1
0
3
5
Every day
1
1
0
0
9
Blank
14
7
0
9
15
Total
29
16
6
29
66
Table A.4: Results from survey ­ Air too humid
103
301
302
303
304
Never
15
9
6
19
46
1­3 days per month
0
0
0
1
2
1­3 days per week
0
0
0
0
2
Every day
0
0
0
0
0
Blank
14
7
0
9
16
Total
29
16
6
29
66
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
45
==PAGE:54==
Table A.5: Survey results ­ Unpleasant odours
103
301
302
303
304
Never
11
7
5
16
37
1­3 days per month
3
1
1
2
8
1­3 days per week
1
1
0
2
5
Every day
0
0
0
0
0
Blank
14
7
0
9
16
Total
29
16
6
29
66
A.3
Building 103
Figure A.11: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
46
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.12: Time series showing the CO2 levels
Figure A.13: Boxplot of temperature during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.14: Time series showing Temperature
Figure A.15: Boxplot of noise during occupied hours
48
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.16: Boxplot of relative humidity during occupied hours
Figure A.17: Time series showing the relative humidity
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.18: Boxplot of illuminanace during occupied hours
Figure A.19: Boxplot of TVOC during occupied hours
50
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:59==
0
Table A.6: Key results from building 103
Room 28
Room 29
Room 45
Room 46
25% >RH >65
28h 55m
21h 55m
27h 5m
37h 30m
T >25◦C
20h 45m
15h 20m
10h
34h 55m
CO2 >1000 ppm
0h
0h
0h
20m
Illuminance >500 lux
5h 40m
10m
55m
1h 15m
Noise >85 dB
0h
0h
0h
0h
Total occ. hours
39h 50m
39h 50m
39h 50m
39h 50m
A.4
Building 301
Figure A.20: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.21: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
Figure A.22: Boxplot of temperature during occupied hours
52
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.23: Time series showing the temperature
Figure A.24: Boxplot of relative humidity during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.25: Time series showing the relative humidity
Figure A.26: Boxplot of TVOC during occupied hours
54
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.27: Boxplot of illuminance during occupied hours
Figure A.28: Boxplot of noise during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
55
==PAGE:64==
A.5
Building 302
Figure A.29: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
Figure A.30: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
56
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.31: Boxplot of temperature during occupied hours
Figure A.32: Time series showing the temperature
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.33: Boxplot of relative humidity during occupied hours
Figure A.34: Time series showing the relative humidity
58
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.35: Boxplot of TVOC during occupied hours
Figure A.36: Boxplot of illuminance during occupied hours
Figure A.37: Boxplot of noise during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
59
==PAGE:68==
A.6
Building 303
Figure A.38: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
Figure A.39: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
60
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.40: Boxplot of temperature during occupied hours
Figure A.41: Time series showing the temperature
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.42: Boxplot of relative humidity during occupied hours
Figure A.43: Time series showing the relative humidity
62
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.44: Boxplot of TVOC during occupied hours
Figure A.45: Boxplot of illuminance during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.46: Boxplot of noise during occupied hours
A.7
Building 304
Figure A.47: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
64
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.48: Boxplot of CO2 during occupied hours
Figure A.49: Boxplot of temperature during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.50: Time series showing the temperature
Figure A.51: Boxplot of relative humidity during occupied hours
Figure A.52: Time series showing the relative humidity
Figure A.53: Boxplot of TVOC during occupied hours
66
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.54: Boxplot of illuminance during occupied hours
Figure A.55: Boxplot of noise during occupied hours
Indoor Environment in Danish Office Buildings and Effects on Occupants’ behaviour
67
==PAGE:76==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
