==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Review and modelling of bolted connections with focus
on block tearing
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Review and modelling of bolted connections with focus on block tearing
June 21, 2021
By
Dardan Badivuku
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Dardan Badivuku, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
Tel.: 4525 1700
Mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months, from January 27th to June 21th at the
Section for Structures and Safety, Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng. The project is credited a total of 30 ECTS points. Furthermore,
it is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statics.
The supervisor of this thesis project has been Jeppe Jönsson, professor at the department
of civil engineering at DTU. A great appreciation goes out to Jeppe for his admirable
guidance throughout the thesis period.
Lyngby, the 21th of June, 2021
Dardan Badivuku - s193550
Dardan Badivuku, s193550
ii
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Bolts and bolted connections are a central part of steel design. As bolted connections
are used to support steel construction, it is necessary to verify the capacity calculations.
Although that is the case, bolted connections may not always be comprehensive, as steel
constructions are affected by complex loading where a type of failure on the bolted connec-
tions may occur. These types of failures can occur in different incidents and at different
types of loading intensities.
Block tearing is one of many failure mechanisms that occur in bolted connections and is
therefore considered in the DS/EN 1993-1-8 [1] to be treated. However, for most national
codes, including Eurocode 3, block tearing has only been investigated for concentric load-
ing. Although, the eccentricity has an enormous impact on the substantial moment, and
therefore the capacity of a steel connection.
In earlier literature studies, limited research was done on eccentric loaded connections.
Although concentric loading was in focus, several discoveries were found, which lead to
more accurate results regarding theoretical calculation on block tearing. Nonetheless, a
Generalized block tearing method [2] was later proposed to further investigate block tear-
ing affected by eccentric loading.
Using plasticity theorem and assumptions of simple
combinations of normal force, shear force, and moment stress distributions, new theoret-
ical capacity equations for eccentric loading were established. However, the method was
embossed to several assumptions.
This thesis presents a further investigation on the Generalized block tearing method. Ini-
tially, the yield criterion of the theoretical method was given by von Mises yield condition.
However, the initial Generalized block tearing method neglected a tangential stress compo-
nent in association with the yield condition. By including the tangential stress, an updated
yield condition was established. The updated yield condition increased the normal stress
capacity, and by using the same stress tractions, a new updated capacity equation was
established.
Furthermore, it was a necessity to discover how much the new updated Generalized block
tearing method would increase in terms of capacity compared to the initial method. By
comparing many test results exposed to both concentric loading and eccentric loading, a
capacity increase was notable.
By examining all tests, a correlation was perceptible between the test that had similar
block-cuts. The examination showed that overall, an increase was found for both types of
block tearing-cuts. However, for an L-cut type, the increase of capacity was almost three
times the increase for a C-cut-out. Finally, the increase showed results closer to the test
results from the experimental data. Hence, an updated Generalized block tearing method
is found.
M.Sc. Thesis
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Symbols
αβ
Varying parameter for edge bolt and inner bolt
∆
Difference in strain
δd
Change in rate of energy dissipation per area
δf
Change of forces
∆l
Relative prolongation of the material
λ
Flow rate proportionality factor
σ
Stress
σn
Normal stress component
σt
Tangential stress component
σu
Ultimate stress
σx
Normal stress in x-direction
σY
Yield condition
σy
Yield stress
σy
Normal stress in y-direction
σz
Normal stress in z-direction
σxx
Normal stress in x-direction
σyy
Normal stress in y-direction
σzz
Normal stress in z-direction
τxy
y-directional shear stress in x-direction
τxz
y-directional shear stress in z-direction
τxz
z-directional shear stress in x-direction
τyx
x-directional shear stress in y-direction
τyz
z-directional shear stress in y-direction
τzx
x-directional shear stress in z-direction
ε
Strain
εu
Ultimate strain
εy
Yield strain
ε11
Strain in x-direction
ε12
x-directional strain in y-direction
ε22
Strain in y-direction
εαβ
Plastic strain of the plate in the yield line
iv
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:7==
Ag
Gross area
Agv
Gross area of block component
Agv
Gross area subjected to shear
Ant
Net area of block component
Atn
Tension plane net area
Avb
Shear plane net area
bg
Gross width of block component
bn
Net width of block component
Cl
Connection length
cl
A length factor related to block tearing
e1
Edge distance of plate
e1
End distance of plate
es
Shear eccentricity
ex
Horizontal eccentricity of block component
ey
Vertical eccentricity of block component
fm
Mean yield strength fm = (fy + fy)/2
FR
Force capacity equation
FR
Table value for Force capacity proposed by Jönsson [2]
FR∗
Table value for updated Force capacity
Fb,Rd
Bearing resistance
feff
Effective shear stress
FR.EC3 Table value for EC3 force capacity equation
FR.EC3∗Table value for new EC3 force capacity equation
Fu.exp Table value for test result at ultimate stress
fub
Tensile strength of the bolts
Fv,Rd
Shear resistance
Fy.exp Table value for test result at yielding
hg
Gross height of block component
hn
Net height of block component
kl
Varying parameter for edge bolt and inner bolt
l
Length of arbitrary test
ltn
Shear plane length
lvn
Tension plane length
MR
Moment force capacity
M.Sc. Thesis
v
==PAGE:8==
MRd
Resistance against bending moment
np
Plastification factor
NR
Normal force capacity
nαβ
Total uniformly distributed forces in the yield lines
Nc,Rd Resistance capacity for normal force in compression
NRd
Resistance capacity for normal force
Nt,Rd
Resistance capacity for normal force in tension
Ny,Rd Resistance capacity for normal force at yield condition
Ppred
Force capacity equation
Rn
Force capacity equation
Rt
Stress factor
Rv
Stress factor
VR
Shear force capacity
Veff,1,Rd Block tearing equation exposed to concentric loading (New proposed EC3 equa-
tion)
Veff,1,Rd Block tearing equation exposed to concentric loading (New proposed EC3 equa-
tion
Veff,1,Rd Block tearing equation exposed to concentric loading
Veff,2,Rd Block tearing equation exposed to eccentric loading
VRd
Resistance against shear force
Wn
Modulus of the net section
αv
Correction factor dependent on the bolt class
γM2
Safety factor used for steel structures
A
Area of the bolt shaft
a
Eccentricity from load to block center
d
Rate of energy dissipation per area
d0
Diameter
E
Young’s modulus
f(nαβ) Yield function
M
Moment force
m
Bolts located in tension
N
Normal force
n
Bolts located in shear
n
Number of bolts in a connection
vi
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:9==
t
Thickness
V
Shear force
x
Displacement
y
Vertical displacement
M.Sc. Thesis
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Description of Block tearing cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory of Steel material
4
2.1
Elasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Yielding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Plasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Yield condition - Von Mises’ theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Literature Observations on Block tearing
15
3.1
Research studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Summary of the observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Capacity Theory according to EC3
22
4.1
Bearing resistance (Plate) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Shear resistance (Bolts)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Reduction of Cross-section strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Block tearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Generalized block failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Theoretical improvement of the Generalized block tearing method
32
5.1
Optimized yield condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
C-cut-Out Capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
L-cut-Out Capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Updated interaction formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Optimized force capacities due to updated yield condition . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Comparison of theoretical capacity equations
45
6.1
S. Norgaard’s Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Nissen & Winterskov test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
L. Mølsted test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
K. Czerniak test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.5
A. Nielsen test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
61
8
Future Research
63
Bibliography
64
A Deformation of the block affected by block shear failure
68
A.1 Component method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2 Elastic springs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
M.Sc. Thesis
ix
==PAGE:12==
A.3 Spring interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.4 Block component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.5 Stiffness regarding Shear stresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.6 Rotational Stiffness on block component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.7 Deformation of C- and L-cut block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B Derivation of new proposed generalized block tearing method
85
C Yield strengths and Test results of experimental data
94
D Capacity calculations for the generalized block tearing method, and the
updated generalized block tearing method
96
E Matlab Script for Plot data
98
x
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Structural steel constructions are designed daily around the world. Steel constructions
can be complex and time-consuming as many design approaches have to be verified and
completed. Therefore, standards have been created to shorten the time during the de-
sign phase. By having national and international standards, the expected capacities of
structural elements can be theoretically calculated simpler than having advanced modeling
tools. These academic standards are based on mathematical principles and are supported
by experimental data. An example of a standard that is mostly used around Denmark
today is the Eurocode 3 (EC3) [1]. Eurocode 3 is used to design all steel structures in
Denmark, developed to specify the required capacity verification is for all steel structures.
Bolts and bolted connections are a central part of steel design. As bolted connections
are used to support steel construction, it is necessary to verify the capacity calculations.
Although that is the case, bolted connections may not always be comprehensive, as steel
constructions are affected by complex loading where a type of failure on the bolted connec-
tions may occur. These types of failures can occur in different incidents and at different
types of loading intensities. [3]
Block tearing is a failure mechanism that occurs in bolted connections [3]. During the
phenomena of block tearing, the block where the bolted connections are placed is either
exposed to pure tension, shear failure, or a combination of both. This failure mechanism
is an essential part of steel design and is also included in Eurocode 3 [1]. However, the
European standard describes what has been found in the experimental field for only a
concentric loaded connection in a conservative sense. In contrast, cases with connections
exposed to an eccentric loading are not investigated by the Eurocode and instead only
assumed with a reduction parameter equal to 50%. [4]
This thesis will present one of the failure modes occurring in bolted connections, knows
as block tearing. The failure mode will further be investigated from earlier literature to
give more accurate capacity results in comparison to the experimental field.
1.1
Project description
When a steel construction is exposed to eccentric loading, a new load combination oc-
curs.
This is the rotational moment that is included by the eccentricity of the force.
The rotational moment from earlier litterateur studies has not been included in block
tearing calculations but has only been replaced with a reduction constant. This enables
investigation to be possible on block components affected by eccentric loading.
In 2014 and 2015, professor Jeppe Jönsson inspected the misusage from the Eurocode and
presented a new approach where eccentric loading was included. The introduction was
named the Generalized Block Failure (GBT) [5] [2]. In the presented theory, the inclusion
of rotational moment was included by assuming how the forces acting on a steel structure
would distribute along the yield lines of the block component. By having these distributed
forces, using the theorem of force equilibrium to determine a new investigated capacity
for the block component was possible. This is further elaborated in Section 4.5.
M.Sc. Thesis
1
==PAGE:14==
Although Jeppe Jönsson proposed an approved method for block component calculation
with eccentric loading, some assumptions were still made on the formal yielding condition,
meaning that the newly proposed method was not theoretically complete. Therefore, this
thesis will present an further investigation from the proposed model by Jönsson [5] [2],
and update the formal yield condition. The aim is to achieve a theoretically complete
yield condition that is applicable for all block failures.
The content of this thesis is divided as the following:
• Chapter 1: Introduction
• Chapter 2: Theory of Steel material - A theoretical background about steel material,
which is needed for the reader to understand steel behavior.
• Chapter 3: Literature Observations on Block tearing - An analysis of earlier literature
regarding block tearing to showcase how much the research has developed.
• Chapter 4: Capacity Theory according to EC3 - A background about capacity cal-
culations for block tearing according to Eurocode 3.
• Chapter 5: Theoretical improvement of the Generalized block tearing method - An
investigation of the generalized block tearing method, with an updated formal yield
condition.
• Chapter 6: Comparison of theoretical capacity equations : An comparison of earlier
experimental test with respect to Jönsson’s method [2], and the newly proposed
method.
• Chapter 7: Conclusion - A summary of the most important findings throughout the
thesis.
Throughout the present thesis, many symbols will be presented. These symbols and their
definitions are given in the List of Symbols , for an easier overview.
1.1.1
Disclaimer
Due to the global pandemic, Covid-19, the laboratories at DTU have been closed. There-
fore new test experiments have not been available to analyze. However, as earlier students
at DTU have performed several experimental tests regarding block tearing throughout the
years, their test data is available and will be analyzed throughout the thesis.
Moreover, an additional Chapter regarding stiffness analysis is presented in Appendix A.
The stiffness analysis is not fully complete, it was chosen to have it out of the main thesis
to keep the thread-line for the thesis precise. The chapter analyzes how the improved
proposed method will affect the stiffness behavior of steel at the yield bands of the block
component.
1.2
Description of Block tearing cuts
When investigating block tearing, the structural steel component that is subjected to
bolted connections is analyzed. It is this ”block” that is torn from the rest of the structural
system, creating a failure mechanism on the structural design. These cuts can either be
in the middle of a steel plate, on top/bottom of the steel plate.
These types of cuts are called L-cuts and C-cuts after their respective cutting geometry.
These types of cuts are illustrated in Figure 1.1 below and will be termed as L-cuts and
C-cut for this thesis.
2
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:15==
(a) C-cut block
(b) L-cut block
Figure 1.1: Types of cuts appearing due to block tearing
M.Sc. Thesis
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Theory of Steel material
Steel is one of the most used construction materials in addition to concrete and wood. Al-
though all three types of construction materials are used, they share different properties
and application areas. This makes each construction material special for specific infras-
tructure. In this chapter, steel material will be further elucidated to give an understanding
of how steel behaves during different types of load combinations.
Firstly steel elasticity will be presented, where an analysis is done on steel’s elastic limit,
i.e., how much stress can be applied on steel properties before the material turns plastic.
This is the first step of the Stress-strain curve. Moreover, after the steel has reached its
maximum elastic state, the material turns into yielding, which is the maximum stress that
can be applied to the material before the material starts to change shape [6]. Finally, after
yielding, the material turns plastic, also known as un-elastic. At this stage, the material
has surpassed its elastic state and can not form back to its initial geometry. At this stage,
the material is exposed to maximum stress before the material eventually fractures. The
stress-strain curve is showcased in Figure 2.1 with each part of the chart colored after
their respective phases.
Figure 2.1: Stress-strain chart
As shown above, in Figure 2.1, the behavior of the steel material is given after how the
stresses (σ) and strain (ϵ) are developed throughout loading. The graph on the stress-strain
chart shows that, as the stresses increase, the graph develops into the three respective
phases. The three phases are shown in order, and the next phase only starts when the
previous phase has been surpassed. As Figure 2.1 shows, the first phase is the Elastic
phase.
4
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:17==
2.1
Elasticity
In the elastic phase, the stresses (σ) and the strain (ϵ) are linear towards an upper limit,
as the first circle on Figure 2.1 shows. At this point, the yield strength (σy) and the
(ϵy) have been reached. The yield strength represents the upper limit that a load can be
applied to the material without it deforming [6]. This means that the material is still not
deformed up to the point of yield strength, i.e., if unloading were to happen, the material
would go back to its initial state. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2 below.
Figure 2.2: The elastic part of the Stress-strain chart
The arbitrary test specimen is subjected to a linear relationship between stress and strain.
This is expressed as Young’s Modulus (E), which is the denoted name for the stiffness of
any steel material. Young’s modulus can be expressed by utilizing the theorem of Hooke’s
law [7], as the following;
Hooke’s law:
F = k · x
(2.1)
Young’s Modulus:
E = σ
ε
(2.2)
In the following case, Young’s modulus is the spring constant (k), while the stress is
the applied force (F), and the strain is the displacement (x). Furthermore, the strain is
ε = ∆l/l. Where l, is the length of the arbitrary test, and ∆l is the relative prolongation
of the material due to the yield stress (σy), i.e., the length after a load is applied minus
the initial length. [8] [9]
Furthermore, it is necessary to point out that when steel material is subjected to a load
combination which leads to yielding, then outer fibers of the steel material will be yielding,
while the center of the material will not have any stress exposed to its point. This can be
expressed by Figure 2.3.
M.Sc. Thesis
5
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Stress distribution for a steel material exposed to a load combination
As Figure 2.3 illustrates, the red arrowed line illustrates the elastic linear stress distribution
in a steel beam web. The blue dashed line symbolizes how the web would look if the
material would have turned fully plastic. This is also the ideal state, as the entire web
would yield simultaneously. Although this would be ideal, it would not happen in reality
due to the elastic phase before yielding. By the points given above, it is only the outer
fibers that will yield. This has to be considered when doing an elastic analysis and is
further detailed in Section 5. [9] [10]
To conclude, the elasticity phase of any arbitrary steel material is where Young’s Modulus
is determined and where the specimen can endure temporary deformation that returns to
its initial state after unloading. Moreover, after a certain loading, the steel will reach its
yield strength (σy), and yield strain (ϵy). At this point, the material develops irreversible
strain moment, meaning that it becomes permanently deformable [6] [9]. This is further
detailed in Section 2.2.
6
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Yielding
As marked in yellow on Figure 2.1, the area where the test specimen starts to yield
can be seen. At this point, the material starts to make irreversible changes. As Figure
2.1 showcases, the stress is relatively constant while the stress is increasing. This is a
normal development for steel materials and occurs due to small crystals in the steel,
called dendrites, that expand when stress is applied. The dendrites only starts to deform
permanently when the force is applied to overcome the forces among the atoms in the steel
[10]. This can be seen in Figure 2.4.
(a) Crystalline grain Structure [10]
(b) Stress representation [10]
Figure 2.4: Crystalline atoms in arbitrary steel material
By further investigating Figure 2.3, it can be seen that the yield area, marked in red,
varies along with the steel material. Also, as the yield stresses in the stress-strain charts
vary along with the yielding phase, it is not specified which magnitude to utilize in the
Eurocode [1], this means that the magnitude of the yield stresses is based on several
assumptions.
Mostly, it is the peak stress value of the yielding phase that is used. This occurs on the
transfer from the elastic phase to the yielding phase. This is also known as the upper yield
stress. Although the upper yield stress is most used, it is also possible to use the lower
yield limit to be more conservative in terms of steel safety. However, to get more realistic
results, the mean value of the lower yield limit and the upper yield limit will be utilized
throughout the present thesis. This is by reason of a more realistic yielding result that
also is somehow conservative.
M.Sc. Thesis
7
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Plasticity
The plastic phase is the last phase of the stress-strain chart.
During this phase, two
processes occur before the material eventually fractures. These are called Strain hardening,
and Necking, and can be seen on Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The phases during the plastic phase
During strain hardening, the test specimen is subjected to enormous stress, which is huge
enough to exceed the yield stress. In this phase, the test specimen deforms permanently,
meaning that even if unloading occurs, the specimen has changed shape. This will create
an unchanged loading curve for the test specimen that follows the elastic unloading curve,
i.e., follows the same slope as for the Young’s Modulus (E) in the elastic phase. This is
illustrated in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Permanent deformation at the Plastic phase
As ∆shows in Figure 2.6, it can be seen how much strain is still on the test specimen when
unloading at certain points along the plastic part. During strain hardening, the ductility
of the material is reduced, and the strength is increased. The stress-strain graph will have
8
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:21==
strain hardening occurring until the highest point of the chart. This is pointed with a red
arrow on Figure 2.5 and is the point where the stresses are biggest on steel material. This
is called the ultimate yield stress and is symbolized as σu.
After strain hardening has occurred, the material enters the necking phase. During this
phase, the tensile stresses are smaller while the strain increases. As the length of the
test specimen increases, the width decreases. This phenomenon leads to a thinner cross-
section, which eventually leads to Fracture. Figure 2.7 below illustrates the necking of a
cross-section in the center.
Figure 2.7: Necking on a test specimen [11]
From Figure 2.7 necking occurs in the center. However, there is to note that necking
normally occurs in the thinnest part of the cross-section, which is not necessarily in the
center.
2.4
Yield condition - Von Mises’ theorem
As not only uni-axial stress leads to yielding, but more a general state of stresses can
create yielding of steel due to multi-dimensional stress, it is of interest to know the general
condition of yielding for material, by finding a general condition, the maximum allowable
stresses in steel, before the material starts to reach its ductile state and reach its plastic
state. Because of this, yield conditions are normally used for the serviceability state of
the stresses in steel structures for elastic analysis. [12] [8] [13] [14]
Normally two yield conditions of metals are differentiated. The first one is the Von mises
yield conditions which focus on the maximum distortion energy, while the other yield
condition for metals, called Tresca’s yield condition, focuses on the maximum shear stress.
[13]
Von mises yield condition is of normal focused from the maximum distortion energy but is
also equivalent to stress components. Moreover, for isotropic materials, the yield condition
will be independent of the particular coordinate system.
As the coordinate system is
of respective x-direction, y-direction, and z-direction axis system, the following stress
components are named respectively. On the other hand, Tresca’s yield condition assumes
that yielding occurs when the maximum shear stress exceeds certain threshold stress.
Tresca’s yield condition is in correlation with Mohr’s circle. By looking at the plane stress
yield surface, it is possible to compare the yield condition as mentioned above. Figure 2.8
below shows both yield condition in their each respective color. [12] [13]
M.Sc. Thesis
9
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Graph of Tresca’s and Von Mises’ yield condition
By comparing both yield conditions, it is noticeable that Tresca’s yield surface lies entirely
inside the von Mises surface. In that way, it can be said that Tresca’s condition is more
conservative. By looking at the biggest stress differences between von Mises and Tresca’s
condition, the maximum difference is 15.5%. This means that the von Mises stresses cover
more of the yield surface and agree better with experimental data. For that reason, Von
Mises will be further utilized. [8] [13]
Von mises yield condition follows the (x,y,z) coordinate system and may, for a cylindrical
contour, be expressed by Equation 2.3. Moreover, the yield condition for a cylindrical
contour can be seen in Figure 2.9 below Equation 2.3.
(σx −σy)2 + (σx −σz)2 + (σy −σz)2 = 2 · σY 2
(2.3)
Figure 2.9: Yield criteria depicted as a cylinder [12]
For a uniaxial stress state in the z-direction of (0,0,σz), the yield stress at σz will be equal
to ±σY , where σY is the yield condition. From Figure 2.9 above, the few components in
the arbitrary coordinate system can be generalized. By doing so, a newly derived equa-
tion for a three-dimensional von Mises yield condition is determined. This is expressed on
Equation 2.4 below. [12] [13]
10
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:23==
σY =
1
√
2
q
(σxx −σyy)2 + (σxx −σzz)2 + (σyy −σyy)2 + 6
 τ 2yz + τ 2zx + τ 2xy

(2.4)
Where σxx, σyy and σzz are the normal stress components while τyz, τzx and τxy are the
shear stress components. The following components in the three-dimensional equation can
also be more visually understood from Figure 2.10 below. Moreover, The three-dimensional
equation is applicable for any continuum made of isotropic metals, such as steel. [12] [8]
[13]
Figure 2.10: Three dimensional Von Mises stress components [15]
As block tearing will be further investigated in this paper, it is necessary to derive the
yield condition into a stress plane, where the stress only act on a xy-plane i.e. where the
stress components in the z-plane is equal to 0 (σzz = 0,τzx = 0 ,τzy = 0 ). By deriving the
three-dimensional yield criterion with respect to the xy-stress plane, the following two-
dimensional yield condition is expressed: [12] [8] [13]
σY =
q
σxx2 + σyy2 −σxx · σyy + 3τxy2
(2.5)
To simplify the equation, components as σxx, σyy will further in the report be denoted as
σn and σt respectively. Additionally, will the shear stress τxy be expressed as τ. As a
result, the two-dimensional yield condition can be presented as Equation 2.6.
σY 2 = σn2 + σt2 −σn · σt + 3τ 2
(2.6)
2.4.1
Von Mises theorem with the inclusion of the Flow rule
When looking into block tearing, and as assumed earlier in Section 2.4, the force is act-
ing on the plane stress, i.e., two-dimensional stress instead of three-dimensional stresses.
When investigating at what moment the plate starts to yield further, an assumption that
the material is perfectly plastic is included, as shown in Figure 2.11. As steel is an isotropic
material with equal compression and tension yield strength capabilities, a uniform distri-
bution of a plastification factor can be expressed as the following. [12] [8] [14]
M.Sc. Thesis
11
==PAGE:24==
np =

Z
t
σy dz
 = fy · t
(2.7)
Figure 2.11: Illustration of perfectly plastic condition
Where σy is the yield stress, and fy is the yield strength of steel, with t being the thickness
of the steel plate. [14]
By looking into the Plasticity Theorem by Jacob Lubliner [14], the yield criterion can be
further determined by a yield function expressed as f(nαβ), where nαβ is the total of the
uniformly distributed forces in the yield lines, aroused from the eccentric applied force.
Furthermore, the plastification force, np, is the maximum force allowed before yielding
starts to occur. The von Mises yield criteria by the flow rule are presented below: [14]
Figure 2.12: Yield criterion by the Flow rule [14]
From what Figure 2.12 presents, it is notable that when f(nαβ) < 0, the combination
of forces are inside the yield criterion ellipse, which means that no yield occur. When
f(nαβ) = 0, the combination of forces are at the ellipse boundary, which is where the
state is perfectly plastic, and yielding takes place. If f(nαβ) exceeds 0, then the forces are
outside of the ellipse boundary and are therefore over the capacity of the steel material.
Furthermore, Von Mises stated the following: [14]
”The rate at which plastic energy is dissipated is the maximum
possible” [14]
12
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:25==
By analyzing the quote from above, the rate of energy dissipation per area can be calcu-
lated as the work of the distributed plastic forces acting through the strain of the plate,
which gives the following equation:
d = nαβ · εαβ
(2.8)
From Equation 2.8 above, εαβ is the plastic strain of the plate in the yield line. To follow
up on von Mises’s statements, the maximum resistance of the isotropic material can not
have any changes in the energy dissipation rate, i.e., no change in the forces applied.
Mathematically, this is expressed as the following equation: [14] [12]
δd = δ (nαβ · εαβ) = 0
(2.9)
By replacing the strain, as the combination of forces needs to stay on the ellipse line,
Equation 2.9 can be derived as the following:
∂f
∂nαβ
δnαβ = 0
(2.10)
As all of the constants above are equal to 0, it can be noticed that
∂f
∂nαβ is on the yield
surface and works as a normal due to the fact that the dot product between the parameters
and the variation of the plastification factor, δnαβ equals to 0. This allows for the flow
rule to be determined as a proportionality between
∂f
∂nαβ . By those discoveries, εαβ can be
determined by the use of the flow rule, which is expressed below. [14]
For f (nαβ) = 0
εαβ = λ ·
∂f
∂nαβ
(2.11)
For f (nαβ) < 0
εαβ = 0
(2.12)
In this case, λ is the flow rate proportionality factor. As aforementioned, the following
flow rule is only applicable for perfectly plastic material.
For the case of block tearing, and uni-axial strain is assumed in the plane stress. An
assumption of the rate of the uni-axial strain rate is shown below based on the yield
criteria by the flow rule Figure showed on Figure 2.12.


ε11
ε22
2 · ε12

=


ε11
0
0


(2.13)
From the flow rule established earlier and the dot product regarding the derivative of
the combined force, the strain rate was established to be normal to the Von mises yield
condition. As the deformation corresponds to the yield line that is parallel with the vertical
axes of the coordinate system shown above, it can be seen that there is no rate of strain
in the direction ε22. As there is no shear in the assumed yield line of 2 · ε12, i.e. 2 · ε12 =0.
As the yield line follows the coordinate direction it can be concluded that σ12(n12) = 0.
By the following information established, it is possible to determine a single point on the
M.Sc. Thesis
13
==PAGE:26==
yield surface, as it attains the normal vector associated with the strain rates assumed
above (ε11,ε12 ) = (1,0.5). With the strain rates for the point assumed, it is possible to
find the corresponding force combination. The following force combination is expressed as
the following. [14]


σ11
σ22
σ12

=
2
√
3 · np ·


1
0.5
0


(2.14)
σ11 =
2
√
3 · np
and
σ22 = 1
2
2
√
3 · np =
1
√
3 · np
(2.15)
In this case, as aforementioned in Section 2.4 σ11 is replaced with σn and σ22 is replaced
with σt, which further can be replace with σt = 0.5 · σn.
By deriving the Von Mises
stresses for plane stress with respect to the inclusion of the flow rule, a new optimized
yield condition is established, which is presented below. [14][12] [8]
σn2 + σt2 −σn · σt + 3τ 2 = σY 2
Replace with [σt = 0.5 · σn]
(2.16)
σ2
n + (0.5 · σn)2 −σn · (0.5 · σn) + 3τ 2 = σY 2
5
4 · σn2 −1
2 · σn2 + 3τ 2 = σY 2
3
4 · σn2 + 3τ 2 = σY 2
(2.17)
The new updated yield condition with respect to the Flow rule will be further utilized in
Section 5.
14
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Literature Observations on Block tearing
Block tearing is a failure mode occurring in bolted steel connection. The failure phenomena
have been known for many centuries. However, the research of the failure phenomena is
narrow. Today, standards and guidelines have different theoretical approaches to capacity
verification of this phenomenon. This means that there still is not a global proposal for
how the failure mode can be calculated.
In this chapter, a deeper investigation will be taken into earlier research of this phenomena,
with a goal to find a theoretically complete verification that covers this type of failure
phenomena.
3.1
Research studies
Previously many studies have been done on block tearing, but only with respect to con-
centric loading, which means that most of the earlier literature is mainly focused on pure
forces without rotational moment. However, much research has been done on different
types of steel components, e.g., gusset plate, angles, and coped beams.
Whitmore [16] was among the first to study the stresses in a gusset plate. His work done
in 1952 was to investigate a common gusset plate in a Warren truss structure. The re-
search was done by using a concentric tension force on a gusset plate, although Whitmore
predicted that the bending stresses would have an influence on the failure. However, the
experimental test data showed that the failure line developed between bolts on the outer
end, perpendicular to the tension force. As the cracking line started to expand, it was
noticeable that a pattern started to form around the bolted area.
These results were
the first result established and became the background research for block shear failure.
Furthermore, the article proposed another method to figure out chances for the block com-
ponent to tear out of the gusset plate at the same lines as earlier discovered. This method
suggested that the forces are uniformly distributed over an area which was calculated by
the thickness, multiplied by an arbitrary width, that was angled at an angle of 30◦from
the first bolt row, as illustrated in Figure 3.1 [16]
Figure 3.1: Whitmore’s arbitrary width [16]
M.Sc. Thesis
15
==PAGE:28==
Although Whitmore proposed that a more complex load combination would affect the test,
no more research investigated the following. Therefore, Whitmore’s method was utilized
as a design approach for many years to come. However, in 1985, Hardash & Bjorhovde
presented an article where the block-shear concept of steel gusset plates was examined
[17]. In the following article, the block-shear concept was tested of steel gusset plates
that were loaded in pure tension. The 28 test subjects were exposed to pure tension as
compared to theoretical calculations. The results from Hardash & Bjorhovde was that the
shear failure occurred on the gross area of the bolts, i.e., at the outer edges. At the same
time, the tension failure develops on the net area of the bolts, i.e., gross area minus the
bolt diameter. Moreover, it was suggested that the connection length should be included
as a parameter in the theoretical calculation of block shear failure. Additionally, 14 other
tests were included in the research to recommend a new equation presented below.[16] [17]
Rn = fu · Ant + feff
√
3 · Agv
(3.1)
Where Ant and Agv represent the gross area and net area of the block component. feff is
the effective shear stress and given by the following equation
feff = (1 −cl) fy + clfu
(3.2)
Where, cl = 0.95 −0.047 · l ≥0, and l is the connection length - given in inches. Further-
more, the parameters of fy and fu respectively are the steel materials yield-, and ultimate
strength. With the equation established, the article furtherly concluded that there is lim-
ited test data and that finite element simulations are imperative to continue examining
block shear failure. [17]
Ten years later, in 1995, Cunningham et al. researched the effect of diverse geometric
parameters. In the research article, the load was investigated as the loading on the experi-
mental test was given with an eccentricity to the shear plane, as well as one to the tension
plate. The problem was that the eccentricity was minimal. Out of 12 tests, the maximum
eccentricity applied to a test was 79mm, with most of the tests having an eccentricity
under 50mm. The reasoning behind this was because their essential goal was to test out
block shear in single angle members. In that way, it was possible for Cunningham et al.
to study equations, based on its experimental test data, to equations found in the Ameri-
can Standard (AISC). Moreover, an optimization approach on identifying the coeﬀicients
with a focus on different parameters was used with the goal of maintaining a professional
factor of the test-to-predicted ratio mean within 2% of unity. Their research showed that
whereas aspect ratio and eccentricity to the shear plane may have a significant impact on
shear force contribution, they do not appear to have an impact on tension load contribu-
tion. Their research made it possible to develop a similar equation to the AISC, but with
the variation of geometrical- and material parameters. This is presented on Equation 3.3
below. [18]
Ppred = 0.55Atn fu +
 
1.55
 lvn
ltn
−0.25
−0.1es
!
Avnfy
(3.3)
In Equation 3.3 above, Atn and Avn are respectively the tension plane net area and the
shear plane net area. The lvn and ltn are the respective tension plane and shear plane
16
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:29==
lengths. Moreover, the es is the shear eccentricity, while fu and fy are as earlier presented,
the yield strength and ultimate strength of the steel material. [18]
To conclude, Cunningham et al. discovered a failure in the steel behavior when the fracture
occurred. It was discovered that the steel fractured in the tension plane, whereas the shear
plane showed plastic distortion but no rupture. This was determined to imply that the
ultimate strength should be considered when tension is considered, while the yield strength
should be considered when shear is considered. [18]
Throughout the time span of 2001-2006, several more articles were published, with exper-
imental data to support - and to investigate block shear failure further. These researchers
have done different experimental tests and suggested their own equations. Firstly, Kulak
& Grondin [19] presented an article where the experimental test results were compared to
North-American, European, and Japanese standards, plus earlier suggested equations. In
the comparison done by Kulak & Grondin, the experimental data were categorized after
their respective connection type, i.e., gusset plate coped beams and angles [19].
Furthermore, in 2002, Franchuk et al. wanted to test how the bolt layout would affect block
shear failure. Therefore, 17 experimental tests were done on coped beams with different
bolt connection layouts. The test results presented a capacity that was slightly less than
the AISC standard. Nonetheless, for some of the test data, it was seen that the capacity
was larger than presented in the AISC. It was making the capacities presented in AISC
unreliable for the calculation of block shear failure. The experimental tests were all done
until fracture occurred on the test specimens. This made it clear that the steel material
had a huge ductility, meaning that much deformation occurred prior to the fracture of
the material.
Although fracture occurred, it was not clear, nor stated, if the fracture
occurred primarily to the tension or the shear force. Moreover, in the experimental tests,
different gross shear areas (Agv) were tested. The results from the different gross shear
areas showed that the capacities increased with the tests that had a higher gross shear
area, aiding the theoretical investigation that the gross shear area (Agv) should be included
in capacity calculations of bearing capacity. To conclude, it was clear that the bolt spacing
and end distances of the bolted connection affected the coped beams the same as for gusset
plates. Additionally, it was concluded that beam end rotation had no effect on block shear
capacity. [20]
One year later, in the article from Franchuk in 2003[21], different factors were presented,
and their effects on the block shear capacity of coped beams were explored.
Due to
uniform stress distribution, their work supported prior studies suggesting that the tension
contribution to block shear capacity should be lowered by 50% for eccentric loads. Finally,
it was concluded that end rotation does not appear to substantially impact capacity,
according to the research. The shear failure occurred near the gross shear region, according
to the experimental results. This is because the failure line crosses a minor portion of the
bolt holes, which leads to the governing shear area being somewhere between the gross
and net shear areas. The failure lines experienced in Franchuck et al. experimental tests
are visible in Figure 3.2. [21]
M.Sc. Thesis
17
==PAGE:30==
(a) Classic tear-out
(b) Partial tear out
Figure 3.2: Failure Modes occuring in Franchuk et al. Tests [21]
Franchuk et al. also compared many older experimental results to the standard and its
method of calculation. The comparison results showed that the standards were incon-
sistent, as the variation between the standards and the results from the experimental
data was enormous. This meant that the standards were not conservative - especially in
capacities of numerous bolt lines (2 bolt lines or more). This is visible on a Table 3.1. [21]
Table 3.1: Mean test-to-predicted ration for design equations
To summarize Franchuk et al.’s findings during the years, it was discovered that the net
tension area (Ant) and gross shear area (Agv) are the only things that need to be treated
when designing for block tearing.
In 2004, Topkaya [22] researched, by using finite element parameters, how the eccentricity
would be correlated with block tearing. After doing simulations of over a thousand times,
it was found that the amount of eccentricity was declared at approximately 20-40% of
the depth of the member - although the depth of the member was not described. The
simulations were also tested with varying lengths.
The results showed that the block
shear capacity got reduced for some of the connections where eccentricity was in place.
Moreover, Topkaya [22] concluded that the existent of eccentricity reduced the block shear
capacity. However, it was clear that the longer connection decreased the capacity even
18
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:31==
more. Therefore, Topkaya proposed a new capacity equation for block shear failure, which
is presented below. [22]
Rn =

0.25 + 0.35fu
fy
−
Cl
2800

fyAgv + fuAnt
(3.4)
In this case, Cl is the connection length, representing the length from the prominent bolt
to the end of the plate - given in mm. Topkaya’s equation does not have eccentricity
included, but Topkaya concluded that an additional reduction of 10% should be included
when the block component is subjected to eccentric loading. [22]
In 2006, Driver et al.[23] published an article regarding block shear failure. In this article,
the main objective was to compare the results to the AISC, plus the equation proposed
from Cunningham et al.[18], in addition to the equation by Topkaya [22] and others. In
total there a comparison was made between 17 research projects. This is showed in Table
3.3. By comparing all of the 17 test results, Driver et al. were able to develop a design
equation governing all earlier equations and included all components necessary to design
for block shear failure. Their suggested Equation 3.5 is shown below. [23]
FR = RtfuAnt + Rv
fy + fu
2
√
3

Agv
(3.5)
Where Rt and Rv respectively represent the stress factors, which are dependent on the
type of steel connection, these stress factors vary with the steel connection, and their
coeﬀicients are presented in Table 3.2. The article states that these parameters take the
non-uniform stresses that occur from eccentric loading into consideration. Furthermore,
it can be seen that the equation uses the mean yield strength, fm = fy+fu
2
to maintain
realistic results compared to the tests, while also being conservative.
Table 3.2: Equivalent stress factors for unified equation
Furthermore, from Driver et al.’s proposed design equation, it is noticeable that the gross
area is used, which means that the design equation proposes a design for the shear failure
to happen on the outside of the bolt connections. Moreover, based on numerous investi-
gations, it is seen that the shear capacity is higher.
M.Sc. Thesis
19
==PAGE:32==
Table 3.3: Mean test-to-test predicted ratios by research program
In 2013, S.Norgaard [24], compared most of the research programs shown on Table 3.3
above. This was done to try and test new equation combinations that had the closest
mean ratio to the different test results and the least deviation. From S.Norgaard’s results,
it was noticeable that Driver et al. Equation 3.5 gave a mean ratio that was closest to the
total of 186 tests compared for. These experimental researched tests will further in the
thesis be compared to newer investigated equations. This is presented in Section 6. [24]
Although many equations and research programs were being compared, the equations
were mostly regarding concentric loading on the block components. However, in 2014 &
2015, J. Jönsson [5] [2] proposed a method regarding block tearing - called Generalized
block tearing. In this proposed method, the capacities of C-cut and L-cuts for gusset
plates were further investigated. The proposal of block tearing investigated the capacities
for both respective cuts, subjected to eccentric loading. By looking at the yield bands
around the block components. This is further elaborated in Section 4.5. Moreover, several
students have since then investigated the design procedure further and elaborated on
further experimental results on both L-cuts and C-cuts. These experimental data will be
further analyzed, and discussed in Section 6 [25] [26] [27] [28]
3.2
Summary of the observations
Already in 1952, stresses were tested on a gusset plate. The gusset plate was exposed to
a concentric loading, and the test research showed that the failure line developed on the
outer line of the bolt connections. This became one of the first investigations done on
block shear failure.
For the next decades, many more experimental tests were done, and different research
programs tried to investigate the most accurate solution possible for block tearing. As
the experimental tests were done over the years, new findings were discovered. Firstly,
Hardash & Bjorhovde [17] discovered that the shear failure occurred on the gross area of
the bolts, while the tension failure occurred at the net area of the bolts.
Several tests were done on coped beams and angles to investigate how different structural
20
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:33==
connections would be affected by block shear failure. For the experimental tests done
on angles, a small eccentricity was included. This was the first time eccentric loading
had been included in calculations of block tearing. Nonetheless, the equations regarding
concentric loading did not change.
Furthermore, in 2002, it was discovered that the gross shear area and the net shear area
should be included and that the connection length was of relevancy when investigating
block tearing. From work done at that time and research observations earlier, it was also
determined that tension contribution to block shear capacity should be lowered by 50%
for eccentric loading. In addition, results showed that the shear failure occurred near the
gross shear region, which became important research for further notice. Later, Franchuk
et al. compared many older experimental test data to capacity equations found in codes.
The results showed great inconsistency, meaning that the capacity equations were not
accurate enough.
In 20014, Topkaya [22] used finite element parameters to analyze how the eccentricity was
correlated with block tearing. After many simulations, it was noticeable that block shear
capacity got reduced where eccentricity was in place. However, Topkaya concluded that
only a 10% decrease was necessary when eccentricity was in place.
Moreover, in 2006, Driver et al. [23] presented an Equation 3.5. This equation was then
compared to earlier experimental test data and earlier capacity equations found in codes.
The results showed that the newly proposed equation from Driver et al.
became the
governing equation regarding block shear failure. Although, the capacity equation was
suggested for only concentric loading.
In 2014
2015, J. Jönsson [2] presented a new method regarding block tearing, named
the Generalized block tearing method. In this proposed method, the capacities of plates
subjected to eccentric loading were further investigated. By comparing the newly presented
equations to test results subjected to eccentric loading, it was noticeable that the capacity
results had a resemblance to the eccentric action of the block component. Hence, a new
way of calculating block tearing subjected to eccentric loading was established.
M.Sc. Thesis
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Capacity Theory according to EC3
In Section 3, several tests and equations were proposed for block shear failure. Today, stan-
dards are mostly used to calculate capacities regarding bolted connections. In Denmark
and most of Europe, Eurocode 3 is used for all calculations regarding bolted connections.
In this chapter, the capacity theories proposed from Eurocode 3 [1] are presented. The
capacities regarding the bearing resistance, shear resistance, and block failure will be taken
into account, and a section regarding the reduction of the cross-section strength. These
capacity investigations are all according to Eurocode 3 - part 1-8 [1]. Table 4.1 below
showcases where the different capacities can be found in the Eurocode.
Table 4.1: Overview in Eurocode 3
Capacity Theory
Section in EC3
Bearing resistance
3.6
Shear resistance
3.6 & 3.7
Block Failure
3.10.2
Furthermore, when investigating the aforementioned theory capacities, a bearing-type
connection should be established. This is of Category A, according to [29] The bearing
type connection that will be further investigated are classified from class 4.6 up to 10.9
[1].
Moreover, the proposed Generalized block tearing from Jönsson [2] is presented.
The
capacity theory presented from Generalized block tearing will be used as the fundamental
background knowledge for Section 5, where an improved method of the Generalized block
tearing is presented.
Although bolt bearing and shear resistance capacities will be presented, the thesis will
mainly focus on the block tearing mode and block tearing capacity.
4.1
Bearing resistance (Plate)
The bearing resistance of a plate needs to be estimated when having bolted connections.
This ensures that the plate has suﬀicient strength when the bolted connections are exposed
to a huge loading. When the plate is exposed to a huge loading, which exceeds the bearing
resistance, a failure will occur. This is presented in Figure 4.1 below.
Figure 4.1: Bearing resistance
22
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:35==
As shown above, when the plate is exposed to a large loading, the bolt holes deforms,
which will loosen the bolts and increase the chances of failure. Furthermore, the bearing
resistance depends on the bolts’ formation, i.e., the end, edge, and internal lengths between
each other. From Eurocode 3, a capacity equation for a bearing resistance is presented.
This is shown on Equation 4.1 below
Fb,Rd = n · kl · αb · d · t · fu
γM2
(4.1)
Where n is the number of bolts in the connection. kl and αb are parameters that vary for
edge bolts and inner bolts. As the focus is on block tearing, only the parameters for edge
bolts are presented below. Moreover, the thickness is indicated as t, while the diameter is
indicated as d. fu is the ultimate strength of the platen, while γM2 is a safety factor used
for steel structures.
kl = min



2.8e2
d0
−1.7
1.4p2
d0
−1.7
2.5
,
αb = min



e1
3d0
p1
3d0 −1
4
1.0
(4.2)
From the geometrical parameters of kl and αb, their values are the minimum of the follow-
ing showed above. In this case, e1 and e2 is respectively, the end- and edge distances of
the plate, while p1 and p2 are the internal distances for each respective direction. Figure
4.2 is presented below to give a clearer overview of all the distance parameters presented.
Figure 4.2: Distance Parameters
For cases where there are two shear planes as shown in Figure 4.3, Equation 4.1 can be
further reformulated as the following.
Figure 4.3: Multiple shear planes
Fb,Rd = min





n · k1 · αb · d · t1 · fu,1
γM2
n · k1 · αb · d · t2 · fu,2
γM2
(4.3)
M.Sc. Thesis
23
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Shear resistance (Bolts)
When the bolts are connected to two plates or more, and the plates move in a different
direction, then shear occurs on the bolts. Figure 4.4 is showed below to illustrate shear
on bolts.
Figure 4.4: Shear resistance
As the shear planes move in relation reciprocally to each other, shear occurs on the bolt,
leading to the bolt’s shear failure. Therefore, capacity calculation of shear resistance is
important for bolted connections exposed to shear plane. In accordance with Eurocode 3,
the shear resistance is calculated as the following.
Fv,Rd = αv · fub · A
γM2
(4.4)
Where αv is the correction factor dependent on the bolt class and whether the forces
acting on the bolts are transferred through the shank or thread. This can be seen in
Table 4.2 below. A is the bolt shafts area, and fub is the tensile strength of the bolts. As
aforementioned in Sectioned 4.1, γM2 is a safety factor related to steel structures.
Table 4.2: Values for αv
Bolt Class
Shear plane through
Shear plane through
Shear plane through
Rolled thread
Cutted thread
Untreated shaft
4.6, 5.6 & 8.8
0.6
0.51
0.6
4.8, 5.8, 6.8 & 10.9
0.5
0.425
0.6
As Table 4.2 shows, the bolt class correction factor gives a reduction on the shear resistance
of approximately 50%.
4.3
Reduction of Cross-section strength
When a steel structure is supported with bolts, the area of the cross-section is reduced.
By reducing the cross-section, the steel connection is weakened, which needs to be ac-
counted for. In addition, each cross-section in a steel structure needs to be able to handle
normal-, shear forces and bending moment. Therefore the different resistance capacities
are presented below, respectively.
4.3.1
Normal force capacity
The resistance capacity for normal capacity is presented below.
NRd = min
(
Nt,Rd = Nc,Rd = 0.9An
fu
γM2
Ny,Rd = Ag
fy
γM2
(4.5)
Where the first equation is equal for tension and compression, respectively, in this case,
An is the net area of the cross-section. For the bottom equation, that is calculated as a
24
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:37==
yield condition and utilizes the gross area of the cross-section, as it is assumed that the
yield lines are acting outside of the bolt line, as mentioned in Section 3.
4.3.2
Shear force Resistance
Regarding the resistance against shear force, EC3 has proposed the following equation,
shown below.
VRd = Anv
fy
√
3γM0
(4.6)
From the equation shown above, the Anv is the net shear area of the component, while
√
3 is a reduction factor used for shear stresses. [17]
4.3.3
Bending Moment Resistance
In addition to the normal force and shear force - the bending moment needs to be taken
into account. The following capacity equation is given for bending moment.
MRd = 0.9Wn
fu
γM2
(4.7)
Where the Wn is the modulus of the net section. fu is the ultimate strength of the material,
and γM2 is the safety factor for the connection.
4.3.4
Interaction combination
As normal forces, shear forces, and bending moment can occur at the same time on the
cross-section, it is necessary to verify the interaction combination. The verification for the
interaction combination is presented below.
 V
VRd
2
+
 N
NRd
+ M
MRd
2
≤1
(4.8)
This verification will later be used in Section 4.5, and in Section 5.
4.4
Block tearing
Eurocode 3 describes block tearing as failure in shear along the sheer face of the bolt
group, and also tensile rupture along the line of bolts on the tension face, at the same
time [1]. This means that block shearing can occur in two different ways, along the shear
line or the tension line. As described in Section 1.1, there are two types of block tearing
cuts, hence L-cut and C-cut. An example of block tearing is presented in Figure 4.5 below.
Figure 4.5: Block tearing
For design equations regarding block tearing, Eurocode has presented two different capac-
ity equations, dependent on whether the bolt connection is subjected to concentric loading
M.Sc. Thesis
25
==PAGE:38==
or eccentric loading. The following equations are presented as Equation 4.9 and Equation
4.10 respectively.
For concentric loading:
Veff,1,Rd = fu · Ant + fy
√
3Anv
(4.9)
For eccentric loading:
Veff,2,Rd = 0.5 · fu · Ant + fy
√
3Anv
(4.10)
Where Ant is the tensile net area and Anv is the shear net area. These areas are calculated
by the following equations.
Ant =

a −

m −1
2

· d0

· t
(4.11)
Anv =

b −

n −1
2

· d0

· t
(4.12)
Where the parameters m and n are the number of bolts located in the tension and shear
line, respectively. In addition, the parameters a, and b are the length of the investigated
failure line. Furthermore, on Equation 4.9 and Equation 4.10, it is seen that the only
difference between a concentric loading and an eccentric loading is a reduction of 50%
for eccentric loading’s. This means that eccentricity has no influence on block tearing,
although that is important in regards to the rotational moment. In addition, it is seen
that the net area is the only parameter that influences the capacity. Hence, why a deeper
investigation is done on block tearing [1].
Furthermore, a proposed Eurocode 3 standard was presented in 2020 to develop norm
work and newer updates on design equations. A part of the proposed method is also on
block tearing. [30]
4.4.1
Proposed method on Block tearing (EC3)
Eurocode 3 is currently working on updated equations for newer generations.
In the
presented standard updates, a new proposal for the design of block tearing is presented
[30]. In comparison with what is stated in the current Eurocode, the newly proposed
method introduces the section of block tearing by the paragraph ”Block tearing should be
avoided”. This paragraph symbolizes that block tearing capacities currently have a high
degree of uncertainties and are clearly not suﬀicient enough. The new proposed capacity
equations focus on deriving the shear term of block tearing, as can be seen on Equation
4.13 and Equation 4.14 below. [30]
For concentric loading:
Veff,1,Rd = fu · Ant + min
Agv · fy
√
3
; Anv · fu
√
3

(4.13)
For eccentric loading:
Veff,2,Rd = 0.5 · fu · Ant + min
Agv · fy
√
3
; Anv · fu
√
3

(4.14)
26
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:39==
Where, Agv is a new area parameter, that is, the gross area subjected to shear. Moreover,
it can be seen that the only difference between concentric and eccentric loading is still
a reduction of 50% for eccentric loading. Meaning no limit is given for the eccentricity.
Nonetheless, the new proposed equations suggest that the capacities are governed by yield
in the gross area or by rupture that occurs in the net area. [30]
Calculations using the initial Eurocode 3 equations and the new proposed Eurocode 3
equations are presented in Section 5, for comparison of newly proposed methods.
4.5
Generalized block failure
In Section 3, Jeppe Jönsson proposed method for block failure was shortly presented [2].
This method was firstly presented in an event named Eurosteel in 2014, with an aim
to investigate block failure exposed to eccentric loading. In 2015, the investigation was
presented for both L-cuts, and C-cuts respectively. By looking into the distribution of
normal force (N), the shear force (V), and the rotational moment (M), Jönsson proposed
an analysis in order to account for an interaction combination of these following forces,
acting on the block to be torn out [2].
As the individual forces are perfectly plastic
permissible, a distribution based on horizontal, vertical, and rotational equilibrium could
be used. [5] [2]
Several assumptions needed to be presented when an investigation of the generalized block
failure method was presented. Firstly, it was assumed that the equilibrium stress fields of
the rigid parts of the connection are either below or at yield everywhere simultaneously.
Furthermore, the stress fields that act along yield bands, which are shown in Figure 4.6
and Figure 4.7. On these yield bands, it is assumed that the normal stresses (σ) act on the
net yield bands length (hn and bn), while the shear stresses (τ) act on the gross yield band
(hg and bg). This is based on earlier experimental observations as mentioned in Section
3. Moreover, as the straining of the yield lines varies along each of the yield bands, strain
hardening will arise prior to the yield phenomena fully forming. Hence, a formal yield
stress fm will be used. [5] [2]
fm = fy + fu
2
(4.15)
The formal yield stress is the mean value of the yield stress and the ultimate stress in the
steel material. On the basis that strain hardening occurs before yield has fully formed, a
mean value will be more conservative and more realistic for the case mentioned. [5] [2]
The yield criterion proposed is given from a simple form of two-dimensional von Mises
and is presented below.
σ2 + 3τ 2 ≤f2
m
(4.16)
The assumed yield condition above is not theoretically complete due to a neglection of
tangential stress (σt = 0).
A new updated yield condition is presented in Section 5
regarding an updated generalized block failure method. Furthermore, is it possible to
derive the formal yield condition above with respect to the normal stress (σ), and shear
stress (τ). [5] [2]
M.Sc. Thesis
27
==PAGE:40==
Normal stress:
σn + 3τ 2 ≤fm2
σn ≤fm2
σn ≤
p
fm2
σn = fm
(4.17)
Shear stress:
σn + 3τ 2 ≤fm2
3τ 2 ≤fm2π
τ =
r
fm2
3
τ = fm
√
3
(4.18)
The resistance of normal force (NR), shear force (VR), and rotational moment (MR) , are
given below for both cuts, respectively.
4.5.1
C-Cut-Out capacities
For a C-cut-out, there are four yield bands around the block component that needs to
be taken into account. From Jönsson’s [2] investigations, the following admissible stress
distribution is presented in Figure 4.6
Figure 4.6: Force distribution for a C-cut-out [2]
Normal force capacities:
By using the first block component, as Figure 4.6 shows, it is possible to use simple
horizontal equilibrium calculations to find the normal force capacity. This is presented
below.
NR −fmhnt −2bg
fm
√
3t = 0
NR = fmt

hn + 2bg
√
3

(4.19)
Where the height and width parameters are hg, hn, bgandbn, and t is the thickness of the
plate.
28
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:41==
Furthermore, it is important to find the center of the normal force, i.e., where the normal
force is acting according to the placement of forces and bolt connections on the block
component. This is done using rotational equilibrium on point A, as shown in Figure 4.6.
NR · ey −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg −t · hn · fm
√
3 · hg
2 = 0
ey = hg
2
(4.20)
Shear force capacity
By using the second block component, as Figure 4.6 shows, it is possible to use simple
vertical equilibrium calculations to find the shear force capacity. This is presented below.
VR −2bntfm −hgt fm
√
3 = 0
VR = tfm

2bn + hg
√
3

(4.21)
Repeatedly, it is possible to find the center of shear force, i.e., where the shear force is
acting according to the placement of forces and bolt connections on the block component.
This is done using rotational equilibrium on point B, as shown in Figure 4.6.
−VR · ex + 2 · t · bn · fm
√
3 · bg
2 + t · hg · fm
√
3 · bg = 0
ex =
bg

bn + 2 · hg
√
3


2 · bn + 2 · hg
√
3

(4.22)
Rotational moment capacity:
The rotational moment capacity is necessary for eccentric loading on the block. As the
third block component on Figure 4.6 shows, the rotational moment rotates along with a
vertical displacement (y). For the case of a C-cut-out, it can be seen that the forces acting
on the yield bands are symmetrical, hence ey = hg
2 . Therefore, the moment capacity is
placed on the middle of the block from the top/bottom yield line. Visually, this is seen on
point C on Figure 4.6. Furthermore, by taking the rotational equilibrium around point C,
it is possible to find the rotational moment capacity for a C-cut, which is presented below.
M −tbg
fm
√
3
hg
2 −thn
2 fm
hg
4 −thn
2 fm
hg
4 −tbg
fm
√
3
hg
2 = 0
M = fmthg
 bg
√
3 + hn
4

(4.23)
M.Sc. Thesis
29
==PAGE:42==
4.5.2
L-Cut-Out capacities
For a C-cut-out, there are three yield bands around the block component that needs to
be taken into account. From Jönsson’s [2] investigations, the following admissible stress
distribution is presented in Figure 4.7
Figure 4.7: Force distribution for a L-cut-out [2]
Normal force capacities:
By using the first block component, as Figure 4.7 shows, it is possible to use simple
horizontal equilibrium calculations to find the normal force capacity. This is presented
below.
NR −thnfm −tbg
fm
√
3 = 0
NR = tfm

hn + bg
√
3

(4.24)
Where the height and width parameters are hg, hn, bgandbn, and t is the thickness of the
plate.
Furthermore, it is important to find the center of the normal force, i.e., where the normal
force is acting according to the placement of forces and bolt connections on the block
component. This is done using rotational equilibrium on point A, as shown in Figure 4.7.
NR · ey −t · fm
√
3 · hn · hg
2 −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg = 0
ey =
hg

hn + 2 bg
√
3

2hn + 2 bg
√
3
(4.25)
Shear force capacity
By using the second block component,as Figure 4.7 shows, it is possible to use simple
vertical equilibrium calculations to find the shear force capacity. This is presented below:
30
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:43==
VR −thg
fm
√
3 −tbnfm = 0
VR = tfm
 hg
√
3 + bn

(4.26)
Repeatedly, it is possible to find the center of shear force, i.e., where the shear force is
acting according to the placement of forces and bolt connections on the block component.
This is done using rotational equilibrium on point B, as shown in Figure 4.7.
−VR · ex + t · hg · fm
√
3 · bg + t · bn · fm
√
3 · bg
2 = 0
ex =
bg

2 hg
√
3 + bn


2hn + 2 · bg
√
3

(4.27)
Rotational moment capacity:
The rotational moment capacity is necessary for eccentric loading on the block. As the
third block component on Figure 4.6 shows, the rotational moment rotates along with a
vertical displacement (y). For the case of an L-cut-out, it can be seen that the yield bands
are not fully symmetrical as for the C-cut-out. This is mainly because an L-cut only has
three yield bands, which creates a vertical displacement that is lower than half of the block
height. To find the vertical placement, calculations using horizontal equilibrium are used.
thn
hg
yfm −thn
hg
(hg −y) fm −tbg
fm
√
3 = 0
y = hg
2

1 +
bg
hn
√
3

(4.28)
Furthermore, by taking the rotational equilibrium around point C, it is possible to find
the rotational moment capacity for a C-cut, which is presented below.
MR −t · hn
hg
· y · fm
√
3 · y
2 −t · hn
hg
· (hg −y) · fm
√
3 ·
hg −y
2

−t · bg · fm
√
3 · (hg −y)
MR = t · fm · hg
 
bg
2 ·
√
3 −
b2
g
12hn
+ hn
4
!
(4.29)
By following the same interaction for all capacities, as presented in Section 4.3.4, the
different basic stresses can be distributed as the following;
 V
VRd
2
+
 N
NRd
+ M
MRd
2
≤1
(4.30)
In Chapter 5, the generalized block tearing method proposed by Jönsson [2] will be further
updated with respect to inclusion of the tangential stress (σt) in the yield condition.
M.Sc. Thesis
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5
Theoretical improvement of the
Generalized block tearing method
This chapter presents a proposed change to the generalized block failure method proposed
from Jeppe Jönsson in Eurosteel 2014 and NCSS 2015. In the reports from Jeppe Jönsson,
it is mentioned that the current generalized block tearing method does not include the
tangential stress component along the yield line. By this means, it can be said that the
proposed generalized block tearing method is not theoretically complete. [5] [2]
In this chapter, a deeper investigation into the tangential stress will be executed, and new
equations for calculations off the normal force capacity (NR), shear force capacity (VR),
and the moment capacity (MR) on the block is presented.
Furthermore, the updated
capacity equations will be used to develop an improved Force capacity equation. [5] [2]
5.1
Optimized yield condition
As derived in Section 2.4, a new updated yield condition with respect to the flow rule
was presented. This yield condition had not been utilized earlier when investigating block
tearing, as the tangential stress (σt) had been assumed to be zero in earlier articles of the
generalized block tearing method [2]. As established in Section 2.3, the optimized yield
condition is presented below.
3
4 · σ2
n + 3τ 2 = σ2
Y
(5.1)
Furthermore, the mean value of the yield- and ultimate strength will be used as the yielding
criterion. This assumption is made due to the fact that strain hardening (As presented
in Section 2.3) will vary along the yield lines, meaning that strain hardening inaugurates
before the yield mechanism has fully been developed. Hence, the mean strength value is
calculated as:
fm = fy + fu
2
(5.2)
By replacing the new mean strength value with the yield criteria, the new updated yield
condition can be expressed as the following.
3
4 · σ2
n + 3τ 2 ≤f2
m
(5.3)
In this case, it is noticeable that the normal stresses increase with the new yield condition.
By further deriving the yield condition with respect to the normal stresses, the normal
stress can be expressed as the following:
32
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:45==
Updated normal stresses:
3
4 · σn2 ≤fm2
σn =
q
4
3 · f2m
σn =
2
√
3 · fm
(5.4)
As seen on the optimized yield condition, the shear stress has not changed from the
proposed yield condition from the generalized block tearing method and is, therefore, the
same (τ = fm
√
3). Furthermore, with the optimized yield condition, it is noticeable that the
normal stresses increase. The amount of increase is calculated to be ( 2
√
3 = 1.155), which
corresponds to an increase of 15.5% extra normal stress. The increase is exactly the same
as the maximum difference between Tresca’s yield condition and von Mises yield condition,
meaning that the new updated method more precisely follows Von mises’ theorem [13].
With the updated stress distribution established, the normal force capacity, shear force
capacity, and moment capacity can be calculated for both respective ways of failure (C-
cut and L-cut). Moreover, as the stress distributions are relatively simple, the derived
proccess of the different capacities are not fully presented in the report. However, the full
derivations are given in Appendix B.
5.2
C-cut-Out Capacities
A C-cut out is, as aforementioned in Section 1.1 a Cut, formed like a C. During these types
of block failure, the block component is dragged out in the middle of the cross-section. By
following the assumptions of how the forces distribute along the yield lines of the block
component, with inclusive of the optimized yield condition, an updated force distribution
is presented. This is seen on Figure 5.1 below.
Figure 5.1: Normal, shear, and rotational moment distributions for block tearing in a
C-cut-out.
As seen in Figure 5.1, the normal stresses have increased with
2
√
3, giving different capac-
ities for the normal forces, shear force, and the rotational moment. Below, the different
force capacities are derived with respect to the updated yield condition.
M.Sc. Thesis
33
==PAGE:46==
5.2.1
Derivation of Normal forces (C-cut-out)
To determine the distribution of forces acting as normal forces, a horizontal equilibrium
is calculated off the forces showcased in Figure 5.1.
Fx = 0 →
NR −hn · t · 2fm
√
3 −2 · bg · fm
√
3 · t = 0
NR = 2fm
√
3 · t (hn + bg)
(5.5)
5.2.2
Eccentricity in Y-direction (C-cut-Out)
In order to determine the center of normal force corresponding to the yield lines, the ec-
centricities in the y-direction need to be determined. This is done by taking the rotational
equilibrium at point A (As Figure 5.1 illustrates).
NR · ey −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg −t · hn · 2·fm
√
3 · hg
2 = 0
ey = hg(hn+bg)
2·(hn+bg) = hg
2
(5.6)
5.2.3
Derivation of Shear forces (C-cut-out)
To determine the distribution of forces acting from shear forces, a vertical equilibrium of
the forces acting on Figure 5.1 is calculated.
VR −2 · bn · t · 2·fm
√
3 −t · hg · fm
√
3 = 0
VR = t · fm
√
3 (4 · bn + hg)
(5.7)
5.2.4
Eccentricity in X-direction (C-cut-Out)
In order to determine the center of the shear force corresponding to the yield lines, the
eccentricity in the X-direction need to be determined. This is done by taking the rotational
equilibrium at point B (As Figure 5.1 illustrates).
−VR · ex + 2 · t · bn · 2·fm
√
3 · bg
2 + y · hg · fm
√
3 · bg = 0
ex = bg(2bn+hg)
(4·bn+hg)
(5.8)
5.2.5
Derivation of Moment (C-Cut-Out)
In order to determine how the moment is distributed over the yield lines, it is necessary
to find the vertical placement of the moment. For the instance of a C-cut-out, it is equal
to ey, i.e., half of the gross height of the block. The vertical displacement y is the distance
from the upper yield band of the block to the center. By taking the rotational equilibrium
at the bottom of y, the moment can be determined. Therefore, rotational equilibrium
about point C is taken, as shown in Figure 5.1.
34
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:47==
y = ey
2
MR −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg
2 −t · hn
2 · 2·fm
√
3 · hg
4 −t · hn
2 · 2·fm
√
3 · hg
4 −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg
2 = 0
MR = fm
√
3 · t · hg
 bg + hn
2

(5.9)
5.3
L-cut-Out Capacities
An L-cut out is, as aforementioned in Section 1.1 a cut, formed like an L. During these
types of block failures, the block component is dragged out in the top or bottom part of
the connection. By following the assumptions of how the forces distribute along the yield
lines of the block component, inclusive of the optimized yield condition, an updated force
distribution is presented. This is seen on Figure 5.2 below.
Figure 5.2: Normal, shear, and rotational moment distributions for block tearing in a
L-cut-out.
As seen in Figure 5.2, the normal stresses have increased with
2
√
3, giving different capac-
ities for the normal forces, shear force, and the rotational moment. Below, the different
force capacities are derived with respect to the updated yield condition.
5.3.1
Derivation of Normal forces (L-cut-out)
To determine the distribution of forces acting as normal forces, a horizontal equilibrium
is calculated off the forces showcased in Figure 5.2.
NR −t · hn · 2·fm
√
3 −t · bg · fm
√
3 = 0
NR = t · fm
√
3 (2 · hn + bg)
(5.10)
5.3.2
Eccentricity in Y-direction (L-cut-Out)
In order to determine the center of normal force corresponding to the yield lines, the ec-
centricities in the y-direction need to be determined. This is done by taking the rotational
equilibrium at point A (As Figure 5.2 illustrates).
M.Sc. Thesis
35
==PAGE:48==
NR · ey −t · 2·fm
√
3 · hn · hg
2 −t · bg · fm
√
3 · hg = 0
ey =
hg( hn
2 +bg)
(2·hn+bg)
(5.11)
5.3.3
Derivation of Shear forces (L-cut-out)
To determine the distribution of forces acting from shear forces, a vertical equilibrium is
calculated.
VR −t · hg · fm
√
3 −t · bn · 2·fm
√
3 = 0
VR = t · fm
√
3 (hg + 2 · bn)
(5.12)
5.3.4
Eccentricity in X-direction (L-cut-Out)
In order to determine the center of the shear force corresponding to the yield lines, the ec-
centricities in the X-direction need to be determined. This is done by taking the rotational
equilibrium at point B (As Figure 5.2 illustrates).
−VR · ex + t · hg · fm
√
3 · bg + t · bn · 2·fm
√
3 · bg
2 = 0
ex = bg(hg+bn)
(hg+2·bn)
(5.13)
5.3.5
Derivation of Moment (L-Cut-Out)
In order to determine how the moment is distributed over the yield lines, it is necessary
to find the vertical placement of the moment. This is done by taking force equilibrium in
the horizontal direction.
t · hn
hg · y · 2·fm
√
3 −2·fm
√
3 · t · hn
hg (hg −y) −t · bg · fm
√
3 = 0
Vertical displacement:
y = hg(bg+2hn)
4·hn
(5.14)
With the vertical placement determined, the transfer point of where normal stress changes
from tension to compression is established. By further taking the rotational equilibrium
at this point (Point C on Figure 5.2), an equilibrium expression may be expressed to
determine a term for the rotational moment of an L-cut-Out.
Mn −t · hn
hg · y · 2·fm
√
3 · y
2 −t · hn
hg · (hg −y) · 2·fm
√
3 ·

hg−y
2

−t · bg · fm
√
3 · (hg −y)
MR = t · fm
√
3 ·

hg(4·hn2+4·bg·hn−b2
g)
8·hn

(5.15)
With all capacity equations determined for both respective cuts, it is possible to fuse the
stress fields with each of the respective capacities so that they obey the Von Mises along
each yield line. This is further detailed in Section 5.4.
36
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:49==
5.4
Updated interaction formulas
The interaction formulas proposed on the Generalized block tearing method are initially
based on the 2D Von Mises yield condition given for the yield condition that does not
consider the tangential stress. As the yield condition has been optimized and the stress
distribution has differed, it is necessary to update the existing interaction formulas by
scaling the normal stresses and shear stresses by the capacities of
h
N
NR , M
MR , V
VR
i
. The
following normal stresses and shear stresses as presented below.
Normal Stresses:
σn =
2
√
3 · fm
(5.16)
Shear Stresses:
τ = fm
√
3
(5.17)
The new integration formulas are presented below for respectively both a C-cut-out and
an L-cut-out.
5.4.1
Updated interaction Formula for a C-cut-Out
In all yield lines affecting a C-cut-out, stresses interact as either normal stress σ, or shear
stresses τ. In the case of a C-cut, three different yield lines can be found, but as the
vertical yield line varies between compression and tension, it has been decided to divide
it into two interactions respectively for tension and compression. In total, four different
interactions formulas are presented below:
Interaction formula 1 for C-cut-out:
Figure 5.3: Interaction of the compression part of the C-block
The first interaction takes into the moment area that is in compression to the block. The
calculations are presented below.
3
4 · σn2 + 3τ 2 ≤fm2

3
4

N
NR −M
MR

· 2·fm
√
3
2
+ 3 ·

V
VR · fm
√
3
2
≤fm2
3
4 ·

N
NR −M
MR
2
· 22·fm2
√
3
2
+ 3 ·

V
VR
2
· fm2
√
32

≤fm2
M.Sc. Thesis
37
==PAGE:50==
By cancelling out the mean strength, fm, and by simplifying the equation, the formula
can be expressed as the following:
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
−M
MR
2
≤1
(5.18)
Interaction formula 2 for C-cut-out:
Figure 5.4: Interaction of the tension part of the C-block
The second interaction takes into the moment area that is in tension to the block. The
calculations are presented below.
3
4 · σn2 + 3τ 2 ≤fm2
3
4 ·

N
NR + M
MR

·

2·fm
√
3
2
+ 3 ·

V
VR · fm
√
3
2
≤fm2
3
4 ·

N
NR + M
MR
2
· 22·fm2
√
3
2
+ 3 ·

V
VR
2
· fm2
√
32

≤fm2
By cancelling out the mean strength, fm, and by simplifying the equation, the formula
can be expressed as the following:
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
+ M
MR
2
≤1
(5.19)
38
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:51==
Interaction formula 3 for C-cut-out:
Figure 5.5: Interaction of the top shear stress area of the C-block
The third interaction takes into the area where the shear stress direction for the normal
force, and the moment are equal.
3
4 · σ2
n + 3τ 2 ≤f2
m
3 ·

N
NR −M
MR

· fm
√
3
2
+ 3
4 ·

V
VR · 2·fm
√
3
2
≤f2
m
By cancelling out the mean strength, fm, and by simplifying the equation, the formula
can be expressed as the following:
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
−M
MR
2
≤1
(5.20)
Interaction formula 4 for C-cut-out:
Figure 5.6: Interaction of the bottom shear stress area of the C-block
The fourth interaction takes into the area where the shear stress direction for the normal
force, and the moment are opposite.
3
4 · σ2
n + 3τ 2 ≤f2
m
3 ·

N
NR + M
MR

· fm
√
3
2
+ 3
4 ·

V
VR · 2·fm
√
3
2
≤f2
m
M.Sc. Thesis
39
==PAGE:52==
By cancelling out the mean strength, fm, and by simplifying the equation, the formula
can be expressed as the following:
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
+ M
MR
2
≤1
A summary of all findings gathered from the different interaction formulas is presented in
Section 5.5.
5.4.2
Updated interaction Formula for a L-cut-Out
In all yield lines affecting an L-cut-out, stresses interact as either normal stress σ, or shear
stresses τ. In the case of an L-cut, two different yield lines can be found, but as one of
the yield lines varies between compression and tension along its yield line, two interaction
formulas are proposed for that yield line. In total, three different interactions formulas
are presented below:
Interaction formula 1 for L-cut-out:
Figure 5.7: Interaction of the compression part of the L-block
The first interaction follows the same interaction distribution as the first interaction for-
mula for C-Cut and therefore does not need to be calculated.
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
−M
MR
2
≤1
(5.21)
40
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:53==
Interaction formula 2 for L-cut-out:
Figure 5.8: Interaction of the tension part of the L-block
The second interaction follows the same interaction distribution as the second interaction
formula for C-Cut and therefore does not need to be calculated.
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
+ M
MR
2
≤1
(5.22)
Interaction formula 3 for L-cut-out:
Figure 5.9: Interaction of the shear stress part of the L-block
The third interaction follows the same interaction distribution as the Fourth interaction
formula for C-Cut and therefore does not need to be calculated.
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
+ M
MR
2
≤1
(5.23)
A summary of all findings gathered from the different interaction formulas is presented in
Section 5.5.
M.Sc. Thesis
41
==PAGE:54==
5.5
Optimized force capacities due to updated yield
condition
In the yield lines and yield combinations established in Section 5.4.1, the block switches
from compression to tension at the different interaction formulas, as well as some yield
sections are affected by normal stress, while others are affected by shear stress. This leads
to many interaction formulas. There, the interaction formulas are further investigated to
find a general expression that is applicable for all yield combinations. Firstly, to give an
overview of all the interaction formulas, Table 5.1 is presented below.
Table 5.1: Overview over all the interaction formulas identified
Updated Interaction formulas
C-Cut-Out
L-Cut-Out
First interaction formula:

V
VR
2
+

N
NR −M
MR
2
≤1

V
VR
2
+

N
NR −M
MR
2
≤1
Second interaction formula

V
VR
2
+

N
NR + M
MR
2
≤1

V
VR
2
+

N
NR + M
MR
2
≤1
Third interaction formula:

V
VR
2
+

N
NR −M
MR
2
≤1

V
VR
2
+

N
NR + M
MR
2
≤1
Fourth interaction formula:

V
VR
2
+

N
NR + M
MR
2
≤1
-
As what can be seen in Figure 5.1, there are several interaction equations that look iden-
tical to each other, as the first interaction formula for both cuts and the third interaction
formula for a C-cut has the moment negative in the bracket, the formulas might look
different, but as the terms of the moments are raised in the power of 2, then the negative
sign would turn positive out of mathematical rules, this means that the interaction for-
mulas will be similar when inserting for the capacity parameters. Therefore, by analyzing
all interaction formulas, it is noticeable that all formulas lead to the same formula. This
interaction formula is the same as what is proposed by Jönsson in his Generalized block
tearing method [5] [2]. The difference from Jönsson’s proposal and the new proposal is
that the capacities of NR, VR and MR are larger than in the proposed method from Jöns-
son. The final interaction formula that will be further utilized is expressed in Equation
5.24 below.
 V
VR
2
+
 N
NR
+ M
MR
2
≤1
(5.24)
To be able to utilize the Equation 5.24 further, it is necessary to correlate the equation
to theoretical capacity factors. Firstly, the force working can be introduced as the pulling
42
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:55==
force, named respectively FR. This pulling force could be looked like a horizontal force or
a vertical force. By looking at the pulling force as horizontally to the block components,
the force can be set as equal to the normal force, hence FR = NR. In the case of the pulling
force working vertically to the block component, the shear force can be expressed as the
following VR = FR. As known from mechanics, the moment is the force times the moment
arm, i.e., the distance from the pulling force. Therefore, the moment can be express as
the following MR = FR · a. Where a is the eccentricity of the force, as what can be seen
in Figure 5.10 below
Figure 5.10: Illustration of how the forces act on a simple test experiment
By the aforementioned expressions for normal-, shear force and rotational moment, the
interaction formula established in Equation 5.24 can be expressed as the following:
FR
VR
2
+
 FR
NR
+ FR · a
MR
2
≤1
(5.25)
By re-arranging the following formula, the pulling force can be isolated in order to find an
expression for the pulling force. This is presented below.
F 2
R ·

1
VR
2
+

1
NR +
a
MR
2
≤1
FR ≤
r
1
(
1
VR
)2
+
(
1
NR +
a
MR
)2
FR =

1
VR
2
+

1
NR +
a
MR
2−0.5
(5.26)
As aforementioned, the stresses can vary from the yield strength fy, the ultimate yield
strength fu, and the mean yield strength fm. In that case, when looking into the most
critical pulling force, it is necessary to know which stress has been utilized. Therefore the
M.Sc. Thesis
43
==PAGE:56==
final equations for the pulling force are given as a function of the steel strength. This is
shown on Equation 5.27
FR(f) =
 
1
VR(f)
2
+

1
NR(f) +
a
MR(f)
2!−0.5
(5.27)
When comparing the new force equations to earlier experimental data in Section 6, dif-
ferent tests are affected by various forces. Some test only has pure tension in terms of
only normal forces affecting, while others only have a shear force affecting the block, and
the rest have a combination of some sort. To give an overview of the different types of
interaction formulas that will be used in Section 6, Table 5.2 is presented.
Table 5.2: Overview over interaction formulas
Cases
Capacity equation
Only Normal Force
FR =

1
NR(f)
2−0.5
= NR(f)
Only Shear Force
FR =

1
VR(f)
2−0.5
= VR(f)
Both Shear force and Moment
FR =

1
VR(f)
2
+

a
MR(f)
2−0.5
Normal- , Shear force and Moment
FR(f) =

1
VR(f)
2
+

1
NR(f) +
a
MR(f)
2−0.5
By having the force capacity expressions, as shown above, it is possible to examine ex-
perimental test data further and analyze how the data differs from the theory proposed
by Jönsson [2]. Normally, a friction force should be included from the bolts, but as most
earlier reports and cases investigated only determines the friction force by approximation,
it has been assumed to neglect friction for this case. The comparison is further detailed
in Section 6.
44
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Comparison of theoretical capacity
equations
As generalized block tearing has been further investigated in Section 5, it is necessary
to see how the improved equations from Section 5 are compared to earlier experimental
data regarding block shear failure. In this way, it is possible to see if the new investigated
equations for block tearing have improved the capacity for block shear failure.
Firstly, as mentioned in Section 3, a comparison will be made from S. Norgaard’s data
[24]. As S. Norgaard’s comparison includes many results from earlier experimental data,
it will be possible to analyze how the new capacity proposed compares to the earlier
experimental test results.
Furthermore, several experimental tests have been done by
earlier DTU students. These tests will be used to compare the updated formula in Section
5, to Jönsson’s method [2], and the Eurocode [1]. The equations proposed by the thesis’s
authors will not be taken into consideration.
To give an overview of all the data that will be compared, Table 6.1 is created. As what
can be seen below, the table shows which experimental tests will be compared, as well as
the components cuts that are related to each test, and whether the loads acting on the
blocks are concentric or eccentric.
Table 6.1: Overview of experimental tests
Experimental tests
Year
Plate type
Cut-type
Eccentric
loading
Forces acting
on block
Hardash & Bjorhovde [17]
1985
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Rabinovitch & Cheng [31]
1993
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Udagawa & Yamada [32]
1998
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Nast, Grondin & Cheng [31]
2000
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Aalberg & Larsen [33]
2000
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Swanson & Leon [34]
2000
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Huns, Grondin & Driver [35]
2006
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Mullin [36]
2002
Gusset Plate
C-Cut
No
Normal Force
Aalberg & Larsen [33]
2000
Coped Beams
L-Cut
No
Shear Force
Ricles & Yura [37]
1982
Coped Beams
L-Cut
No
Shear Force
Franchuk, Driver & Grondin [21]
2003
Coped Beams
L-Cut
No
Shear Force
Gross, Orbison & Ziemann [38]
1995
Angles
C-Cut
Yes
Shear F & Moment
Orbison, Wagner & Fritz [39]
1999
Angles
C-Cut
Yes
Shear F & Moment
Nissen & Winterskov [25] [40]
2013
Gusset Plate
C-cut
Yes
Shear F & Normal F
& Moment
L. Mølsted [41]
2020
Gusset Plate
C-cut
Yes
Shear F & Moment
K. Czerniak [42]
2020
Gusset Plate
L-cut
Yes
Shear F & Moment
A. Nielsen [26]
2020
Gusset Plate
L-cut
Yes
Shear F & Moment
M.Sc. Thesis
45
==PAGE:58==
6.1
S. Norgaard’s Test data
As earlier presented in Section 3, S. Nordgaard [24] has compared earlier experimental
test results and compared them to suggestions of his own. In this comparison, only test
data from earlier literature is further investigated.
In total, S. Norgaard [24] compared a total of 186 experimental tests, where 128 tests were
for gusset plates, 33 tests were of coped beams, and the final 25 tests were for angles.
For these types of experimental data, it was only the angles that had a minor eccentricity
exposed to them. While the gusset plates, and the coped beams were solely exposed to a
concentric force. By including Jönsson’s [2] proposed generalized block tearing equations,
seen on Table 5.2, and the new investigated proposed method, described in Section 5 it
was possible to compare the two methods to earlier data. This is expressed in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Test/Equation ratio of all 186 Test results with inclusive of GBT method
Jönsson’s Generalized method [2]
Updated Generalized method
[-]
[-]
Gusset Plate (128)
Mean ratio
1,19
1,11
Standard Deviation
0,16
0,15
Coped Beams (33)
Mean ratio
0,93
0,90
Standard Deviation
0,19
0,19
Angles (25)
Mean ratio
0,90
0,85
Standard Deviation
0,14
0,13
All (186)
Mean ratio
1,01
0,95
Standard Deviation
0,20
0,19
As seen in Table 6.2 above, the initial generalized block tearing method from Jönsson [2],
as well as the updated generalized block tearing method, is presented. The 186 test results
that have been tested are given in articles, presented in Table 6.1. Furthermore, it can be
seen that the results in Table 6.2 present the mean ratio and deviation for gusset plates,
coped beams, and angles against the actual experimental ultimate strength results. This
means that if a test results in a force of ≈200kN, and the generalized block tearing method
gives a capacity of ≈180kN, then the Test/Equation ratio is equal to 200kN
180kN = 1.12 for
the mean ratio. The results of the comparison are further analyzed in Section 6.6.1.
46
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:59==
6.2
Nissen & Winterskov test data
In 2013 and 2014, Jonathan Stær Nissen, and Steen Winterskov-Andersen investigated
block tearing [25] [40].
They presented an experimental test on a C-cut-out exposed
to eccentric loading, as well as a tensile test of steel subjects to find the yield strength
and ultimate strength of the steel material.
The tests were presented, with a goal of
investigating equations presented from S. Norgaard [24]. However, for this present thesis,
the experimental data will only be used for comparison of the proposed method in Section
5, Jönsson’s method [2], and the EC3. Below, in Figure 6.1, the test plates used in Nissen
& Winterskov are presented.
(a) Plate B1 - Gathered from J.Nissen [25]
(b) Plate B4 - Gathered from J.Nissen [25]
Figure 6.1: Test plates from J.Nissen [25]
Furthermore, the plate parameters used for plate B1 and plate B4 are presented below, in
Table 6.3
Table 6.3: Geometrical parameters of Plate B1 and B4 [25]
Geometric Parameters
Thickness
t
10,000
Gross width
bg
122,500
Net width
bn
83,500
Gross height
hg
139,000
Net height
hn
87,000
As aforementioned, tensile tests were done on steel specimens to discover the strengths
of the plate component. The yield strengths and ultimate strengths for each of the plate
tests are presented in Appendix C.
Furthermore, by using the geometrical parameters in Table 6.3 and the strength values
found in Appendix C, it is possible to calculate the force capacities from Jönsson’s gen-
eralized block tearing method [2], the newly proposed method, and the capacities from
Eurocode 3. The results are presented in Table 6.4, and the full calculations are presented
in Appendix D.
M.Sc. Thesis
47
==PAGE:60==
Table 6.4: Force capacities from Nissen & Winterskov test data
Plate
Eccentricity
Force Capacity (J*)
Force Capacity
EC3 [1]
EC3 * [30]
BX-X
e [mm]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-H1-1(f)
400,000
104,716
108,634
298,501
342,853
B1-H1-2(f)
400,000
104,038
107,931
296,239
344,233
B1-H1-3(f)
400,000
103,632
107,510
294,292
351,454
B1-H1-4
400,000
103,903
107,791
295,087
352,097
B1-H1-5
400,000
103,744
107,625
294,648
351,408
B1-H1-6
400,000
104,787
108,708
298,430
346,073
B4-H1-1
274,000
149,206
154,957
292,938
350,074
B4-H1-2
274,000
149,932
155,711
294,469
350,626
B4-H1-3
274,000
148,434
154,155
291,412
348,372
B4-H4-1
274,000
126,337
131,590
298,293
345,107
B4-H4-2
274,000
125,933
131,169
297,276
344,693
B4-H4-3
274,000
125,058
130,258
295,258
341,796
Where the Force Capacity (J*) is the capacity calculated by utilizing Jönsson’s capacity
equations, while the ”Force capacity” is the new proposed equations with the optimized
yield condition. The equations used for both respective methods are given in Table 5.2.
The other capacities are respectively for the capacity calculated in the Eurocode [1] named
EC3, and the newly proposed method to the Eurocode [30], named EC3 *. The capacity
equations regarding Eurocode, are given in Equation 4.10 and Equation 4.14 respectively.
Furthermore, the plate which the capacity calculations are presented with are exposed to
a shear force and rotational moment. Although for the last three test data, as marked in
red on Table 6.4, a normal force is included as the plate is rotated with a specified angle.
This is further discussed in Section 6.6. To visualize, Figure 6.2 is given to show how the
different force capacities vary over the eccentricity.
Figure 6.2: Comparison of capacity calculations on Nissen & Winterskov test data
48
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:61==
As seen in Figure 6.2 the experimental test results for yielding capacity (Fy.exp), and ulti-
mate capacity (Fu.exp) are included to showcase how the theoretical capacity calculations
compare. The test results data for Fy.exp, and Fu.exp are given in Appendix C. Moreover,
from the plot on Figure 6.2, and Table 6.4, it is possible to see that the optimized gen-
eralized block tearing method capacity is increasing in comparison to the block tearing
method by Jönsson [2]. It is also noticeable that the force capacity decreases with the
same decline angle as the actual test result, which means that the eccentricity is treated
correctly for the generalized block tearing method. Furthermore, the presented theoretical
capacities are discussed in Section 6.6.2.
6.3
L. Mølsted test data
In 2020, four DTU students further investigated block tearing with a focus on eccentric
loading.
Two students investigated eccentric loading at a L-cut-out [8] [43], while L.
Mølsted investigated eccentric loading to a C-cut, as done previously with Nissen & Win-
terskov [25] [40]. The goal of this research was to optimize the stress distribution to receive
a higher theoretical capacity. Although a higher capacity equation was developed, it will
not be presented as it is not theoretically complete. However, the test data will be used
to compare the capacity equations as presented in Section 6.2. Below, in Figure 6.3, only
one out of the four plates is presented, as all plates have equal geometrical dimensions.
Figure 6.3: Test plate B1 [28]
Moreover, the parameters given for the plate B1 shown in Figure 6.3, and other plate
tested by Mølsted, are expressed in Table 6.5 below.
Table 6.5: Geometrical parameters of test plates [41]
Geometric Parameters
Thickness
t
10,000
Gross width
bg
122,500
Net width
bn
83,500
Gross height
hg
139,000
Net height
hn
87,000
M.Sc. Thesis
49
==PAGE:62==
The strength of the steel material was determined by a co-student of Mølsted, K. Olsen
[27], who performed a tensile test on a dog-bone test with the same properties as for the
plate shown in Figure 6.3. Although test data were available for L. Mølsted, it was chosen
to only use one pair of values for all test plates due to the tensile tests being confirmed
inadmissible. Therefore, as a conservative choice, the yield and ultimate strength values
were based on an average of the minimum value of the inadmissible tests [27] [28]. The
strength values determined are presented on Table 6.6 below.
Table 6.6: Strength values for L. Mølsted’s test data
Yield strength
Ultimate strength
Mean strength
Fy [MPa]
Fu [MPa]
Fm [MPa]
228
358
293
Moreover, by using the geometrical parameters in Table 6.5 and the strength values,
in Table 6.6, the force capacities from Jönsson’s generalized block tearing method, the
newly proposed method with the inclusion of tangential stress, and the capacities from
Eurocode 3 can be computed. The results are presented in Table 6.7, and the calculations
are presented in Appendix D.
Table 6.7: Force capacities from L. Mølsted test data
Plate
Eccentricity
Force Capacity (J*)
Force Capacity
EC3 [1]
EC3* [30]
BX-X
e [mm]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-1
392,870
95,037
98,596
263,988
329,287
B1-2
392,870
95,037
98,596
263,988
329,287
B1-3
392,870
95,037
98,596
263,988
329,287
B2-1
350,870
106,181
110,186
263,988
329,287
B2-2
350,870
106,181
110,186
263,988
329,287
B2-3
350,870
106,181
110,186
263,988
329,287
B3-1
308,870
120,245
124,826
263,988
329,287
B3-2
308,870
120,245
124,826
263,988
329,287
B3-3
308,870
120,245
124,826
263,988
329,287
B4-1
266,870
138,523
143,878
263,988
329,287
B4-2
266,870
138,523
143,878
263,988
329,287
B4-3
266,870
138,523
143,878
263,988
329,287
In comparison to Table 6.7, the Force capacity (J*) is the generalized block tearing equa-
tions calculated from Jönsson [2], while the ”Force Capacity” is the new proposed equa-
tions. The equations regarding the generalized block tearing method can be seen in Table
5.2. The rest of the capacity equations are related to the Eurocode, as earlier explained.
[30] [1].
For the case of Plate B1-B4 for in Mølsted’s experimental data, all tests were subjected to
a shear force and a rotational moment with a given eccentricity as seen in Table 6.7. To
visualize the results, the capacities have been plotted on Figure 6.4, with the experimental
yield strength (Fy.exp) and experimental ultimate strength (Fu.exp) of the tests included
as a comparison. The experimental strength values are presented in Appendix C, and the
theoretical capacity calculations are presented in Appendix D.
50
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.4: Comparison of capacity calculations of L. Mølsted’s test data
As seen in Figure 6.4, it is noticeable that by following the equations for the generalized
block tearing method, it follows the yield strength- and ultimate strength test result.
Furthermore, it is noticeable that when the test specimen gets exposed to an increased
eccentricity, the capacity of the steel connection decreases, which Jönsson’s method [2],
and the newly proposed method follows. This also is to show that the equations from
Eurocode give an overestimation of the force capacity, as their capacity plots on Figure
6.4 are way larger than the actual strength of the test specimen.
M.Sc. Thesis
51
==PAGE:64==
6.4
K. Czerniak test data
Along with the co-students in 2020, K. Czerniak and A. Nielsen investigated block tearing
for L-cut-outs exposed to eccentric loading [43] [8].
The plate used for K. Czerniak’s
experiment is shown below.
Figure 6.5: Test plate C1 [43]
Although only one plate is shown in Figure 6.5, the experimental tests were done on four
identical test plates, named respectively, C1, C2, C3, and C4. As the plates are of an
L-cut, the geometrical parameters differ from a C-cut. For the four L-cut-out plates, the
following parameters were determined, shown in Table 6.8
Table 6.8: Geometrical parameters of test plates [42]
Geometric Parameters
Thickness
t
10,000
Gross width
bg
122,500
Net width
bn
83,500
Gross height
hg
164,500
Net height
hn
112,500
Moreover, the yield strength and ultimate strength of the plates were found using K.
Olsen’s tensile Dog-bone tests [27].
The yield strength, mean strength, and ultimate
strength of the test plate are given in Appendix C. Furthermore, by using the block
tearing equations for a L-cut-out given in Section 4.5.2 and Section 5.3, as well as the EC3
equations given in Section 4.4, the force capacities can be computed, and are presented
on Table 6.9
52
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:65==
Table 6.9: Force capacities from K. Czerniak test data
Plate
Eccentricity
Force Capacity (J*)
Force Capacity
EC3 [1]
EC3* [30]
CX-X
e [mm]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
C1-1-X
380,156
68,296
75,867
312,35
378,38
C1-2-X
380,156
66,229
73,571
299,03
367,67
C1-3-X
380,156
65,712
72,997
296,61
364,61
C1-4-X
380,156
66,074
73,399
298,14
366,36
C1-5-X
380,156
68,382
75,962
312,75
378,83
C1-6-X
380,156
65,923
73,231
297,50
365,63
C2-3-X
338,156
73,414
81,540
295,22
362,73
C2-4-X
338,156
76,958
85,476
313,78
379,85
C2-5-X
338,156
74,409
82,645
300,60
370,79
C2-6-X
338,156
80,469
89,376
328,24
396,51
C2-7-X
338,156
74,388
82,622
299,72
368,88
C2-8-X
338,156
76,153
84,583
310,50
375,88
C3-1-X
296,156
83,544
92,771
294,89
362,08
C3-2-X
296,156
87,140
96,764
312,08
377,94
C3-3-X
296,156
83,822
93,080
296,21
364,06
C3-4-X
296,156
83,669
92,909
295,55
363,11
C3-5-X
296,156
84,405
93,727
298,53
367,18
C3-6-X
296,156
86,316
95,849
309,17
374,17
C4-1-X
254,156
97,436
108,162
296,83
364,78
C4-2-X
254,156
97,919
108,698
298,42
366,87
C4-3-X
254,156
98,968
109,863
303,02
374,01
C4-4-X
254,156
96,879
107,543
298,30
366,09
C4-5-X
254,156
100,399
111,450
310,00
375,41
C4-6-X
254,156
100,024
111,034
308,78
374,30
The force capacities given in Table 6.9 are for an L-cut-out exposed to a shear force and
a rotational moment on a given eccentricity between 254mm to 380mm. To give a clearer
view of the results, Figure 6.6 is presented.
Figure 6.6: Comparison of capacity calculations of K. Czerniak’s test data
M.Sc. Thesis
53
==PAGE:66==
As seen in Table 6.9, the increase between the new optimized generalized block tearing
method, and the initial block tearing method, is larger for an L-cut-out. This is further
elaborated in Section 6.6.
6.5
A. Nielsen test data
A Nielsen also performed an L-cut-out with the same geometrical parameters as K. Cz-
erniak [26]. Even though the plate had the same dimensions, the yield strength (fy) and
ultimate strength (fu) of the plates were different, as A Nielsen followed a different type
of Dog-bone test from K. Olsen [27]. Moreover, A Nielsen utilized four test plates with
equal parameters. Therefore only plate B1 is shown in Figure 6.7 below.
Figure 6.7: Test plate B1 [26]
The plate showed is respectively named B1 and is one out of four plates tested. The rest
are respectively named B2, B3, and B4. Moreover, as the parameters were equal to K
C.zerniak, Table 6.3 shows the parameters also applicable for all four plates of A Nielsen
[8].
As aforementioned, the yield strength (fy) and ultimate strength (fu) of the plates were
found using K. Olsen’s tensile Dog-bone tests [27]. The yield strength, mean strength,
and ultimate strength of the test plate are given in Appendix C. Moreover, by using the
block tearing equations for a L-cut-out given in Section 4.5 and Section 5, as well as the
EC3 equations given in Section 4.4, the force capacities can be calculated as the following
shown on Table 6.10
54
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:67==
Table 6.10: Force capacities from A. Nielsen test data
Plate
Eccentricity
Force Capacity (J*)
Force Capacity
EC3 [1]
EC3* [30]
BX-X
e [mm]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-1
474
54,878
60,974
310,38
384,08
B1-2
474
54,254
60,281
306,59
379,12
B1-3
474
54,608
60,675
308,56
381,52
B2-1
432
60,235
66,921
311,13
384,79
B2-2
432
59,353
65,941
306,02
378,44
B2-3
432
59,732
66,363
307,95
380,79
B2-4
432
59,369
65,960
306,22
378,81
B3-1
390
66,521
73,897
310,33
384,03
B3-2
390
66,201
73,542
308,63
381,72
B3-3
390
65,924
73,235
307,52
380,52
B4-1
348
74,581
82,840
311,33
385,24
B4-2
348
73,605
81,756
306,43
378,62
B4-3
348
73,535
81,678
306,81
379,79
Where the Force Capacity (J*) is the capacity calculated by utilizing Jönsson’s capacity
equations, while the Force capacity is the new proposed equations with the optimized yield
condition. The equations used for both respective methods are given in Table 5.2. The
other capacities are respectively for the capacity calculated in the Eurocode, and the newly
proposed method in the Eurocode given in Equation 4.10 and Equation 4.14 respectively.
For the case of Plate B1-B4 for in A Nielsen’s experimental data, all tests were subjected
to a shear force and a rotational moment with a given eccentricity as seen on Table 6.10.
To visualize the results, the capacities have been plotted in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.8: Comparison of capacity calculations of A. Nielsen’s test data
As seen in Figure 6.8 above, it is visible that the capacities using the generalized block
tearing method give an incline corresponding to the actual strengths of the plate compo-
nent, meaning that the capacity method is decreasing with a higher eccentricity and acting
M.Sc. Thesis
55
==PAGE:68==
more realistic towards the actual test results, in comparison to the Equations presented
from Eurocode 3.
6.6
Discussion
In this Section, the most important discoveries from Section 6.1, 6.2 , 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 will
be further analyzed to investigate how the inclusion of tangential stress have influenced
the generalized block tearing method.
6.6.1
Analysis of S. Norgaard’s Data [24]
As seen in Table 6.2, tests have been done on gusset plate, coped beams, and angles.
This allows for the methods to be investigated for several types of bolted connections.
Firstly, it is notable that the updated generalized block tearing method gives a higher
capacity in terms of gusset plate. As the initial generalized block tearing method gives
a Test/Equation ratio of 1.19, the newly proposed method gives an updated value of
1.11. The difference can be explained by the increase in normal stress. As normal stress
is governing in terms of concentric force calculations, a capacity increase is expected.
Furthermore, it is notable that the standard deviation also decreases from 0.16 to 0.15,
meaning that in comparison to the 128 test results, the updated generalized block tearing
method has been slightly more accurate.
For coped beams, both the initial generalized block tearing method and the newly inves-
tigated method had a higher capacity than the actual test results, with mean ratios of
0.93 and 0.9, receptively. The standard deviation is the same at 0.19, and therefore only
a slight capacity increase can be observed.
In terms of angles, which were subjected to a minor eccentric loading, it is notable that
the capacity results are yet again higher than the actual test results. Furthermore, it can
be seen that the standard deviation is repeatedly, as for a gusset plate, decreasing from
0.14 to 0.13, which means that for test results subjected to eccentric loading, the accuracy
of the newly proposed method is increased.
In total, it can be concluded that for all 186 test results, the standard deviation has
decreased from 0.16 to 0.15 for the new proposed generalized block tearing method. Al-
though the deviation is still at 0.15, the results are as expected, as the generalized block
tearing method is mainly investigated for block components exposed to eccentric loading.
56
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:69==
6.6.2
Analysis of Nissen & Winterskov [25] [40]
On Table 6.4, and on Figure 6.2 it is possible to see all the capacity calculations regarding
the test plates from Nissen & Winterskov [25] [40]. To investigate the results gathered
further, a percentage comparison Table is developed. This is done to visually see how the
other force capacities are in comparison to the new optimized block tearing method. This
is presented on Table 6.12 below.
Table 6.11: Percentage Increase/Decrease from the optimized GBT method to other ca-
pacity equations from Nissen & Winterskov test data [25] [44]
Test
Fy.exp
Fu.exp
FR (J*)
Eurocode 3
New Eurocode 3
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
B1-H1-1(f)
-31,00
-39,41
3,74
-63,61
-68,31
B1-H1-2(f)
-28,63
-36,25
3,74
-63,57
-68,65
B1-H1-3(f)
-31,02
-35,38
3,74
-63,47
-69,41
B1-H1-4
-29,23
-34,15
3,74
-63,47
-69,39
B1-H1-5
-28,09
-36,01
3,74
-63,47
-69,37
B1-H1-6
-25,57
-35,65
3,74
-63,57
-68,59
B4-H1-1
-30,46
-35,91
3,85
-47,10
-55,74
B4-H1-2
-29,87
-35,157
3,85
-47,12
-55,59
B4-H1-3
-33,67
-35,41
3,85
-47,10
-55,75
B4-H4-1
-53,39
-57,520
4,15
-55,89
-61,87
B4-H4-2
-53,60
-57,20
4,15
-55,88
-61,95
B4-H4-3
-53,51
-57,01
4,15
-55,88
-61,89
As seen in Figure 6.2 it is expected that the experimental loading results (Fy.exp & Fu.exp)
and the capacities computed from Eurocode 3 are higher than the new proposed general-
ized method. This is due to the Eurocode overestimating the capacity when exposed to
eccentric loading and that the actual test results have an inclusion of friction and other
unexplored supporting parameters.
However, it is noticeable to see that the new proposed generalized block tearing method
gives an increase over the initial generalized block tearing method. From what Table 6.12
shows, the percentage increase is slightly higher when the eccentricity is reduced from
e = 400mm to e = 274mm. Additionally, for the last three test experiments, the normal
force is included on the plates, giving the percentage capacity an slight increase due to the
extra normal stress being applied on the block component. In total, the biggest increase
of the newly investigated generalized block tearing is 4.15%.
To conclude the results, the optimized yield condition only gives a capacity increase of
3-4%. Although this seems small, for a C-cut, the normal stresses do not have as huge
an impact as, for example, an L-cut, where the increase is expected to be larger. Finally,
for the test data presented by Nissen & Winterskov [25] [40], the updated yield criterion
gives an increase of the generalized block tearing method by ≈4%.
M.Sc. Thesis
57
==PAGE:70==
6.6.3
Analysis of L. Mølsted [28] [41]
On Table 6.7, and on Figure 6.4 it is possible to see all the capacity calculations regarding
the test plates from L. Mølsted [28] [41]. To investigate the results gathered further, a
percentage comparison Table is developed. This is done to visually see how the other force
capacities are in comparison to the new optimized block tearing method. This is shown
on Table 6.12 below. However, as L. Mølsted chose to have the same yield strength for
all tests, and as the test plates have the same eccentricities, then there is no increase of
capacity within the different tests of each plate (See Table 6.7). Therefore, Table 6.12
only shows the capacity increase for plate B1, B2, B3, and B4 - and not the different tests
within the same plate, e.g., B1-1, B1-2.
Table 6.12: Percentage Increase/Decrease from the optimized GBT method to other ca-
pacity equations from L. Mølsted’s test data
Test
Fy.exp
Fu.exp
FR (J*)
Eurocode 3
New Eurocode 3
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
B1
-20,43
-35,70
3,75
-62,65
-70,06
B2
-22,52
-38,53
3,77
-58,26
-66,54
B3
-21,95
-37,60
3,81
-52,72
-62,09
B4
-21,18
-35,16
3,87
-45,50
-56,31
As explained in Section 6.3, the test is exposed to shear force, and a rotational moment
with an eccentricity ranging from e = 266mm to e = 392mm. From the results in Table
6.12 above, it is noticeable that the Eurocode and the new proposed equation for the
Eurocode have the biggest percentage difference. Additionally, it is noticeable that the
percentage difference decreases when the eccentricity is less.
Moreover, it can be seen that the increase of the initial generalized block tearing method
is ≈3.8%. The increase is similar to the increase found in Table 6.12, which also is done
for a C-cut. Therefore it is possible to conclude that by including the tangential stress,
the updated generalized block tearing method increases the force capacity by ≈3.8−4.0%
compared to the initial generalized block tearing method. .
58
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:71==
6.6.4
Analysis of K. Czerniak [43] [42]
On Table 6.9, and on Figure 6.6 it is possible to see all the capacity calculations regarding
the test plates from K. Czerniak [43] [42]. To investigate the results gathered further,
a percentage comparison Table is developed. This is done to visually see how the other
force capacities are in comparison to the new optimized block tearing method. This is
shown on Table 6.12 below. However, as K. Czerniak has a long list of data, it has been
chosen to use the average of each test plate and thereby analyze the percentage difference.
Therefore, Table 6.13 only shows the capacity increase for plate C1, C2, C3, and C4 - and
not the different tests within the same plate, e.g., C1-1, C1-2.
Table 6.13: Percentage Increase/Decrease from the optimized GBT method to other ca-
pacity equations from K. Czerniak test data
Test
Fy.exp
Fu.exp
FR (J*)
Eurocode 3
New Eurocode 3
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
C1
-21,22
-37,54
11,09
-75,50
-79,97
C2
-18,93
-36,10
11,07
-72,60
-77,55
C3
-22,30
-37,85
11,04
-68,71
-74,41
C4
-21,90
-36,34
11,01
-63,82
-70,44
The L-cut-out tests are exposed to shear force and a rotational moment with an eccentricity
ranging from e ≈380mm at plate C1 to e ≈392mm at C4. From the results in Table 6.13
above, it is noticeable that the Eurocode and the new proposed equation for the Eurocode
have the biggest percentage difference. Additionally, it is noticeable that the percentage
difference decreases when the eccentricity is less.
Moreover, it can be seen that the increase of the initial generalized block tearing method
is ≈11%. It can be seen that the increase of 11% is higher than the capacity increase
of ≈3 −4% as determined for a C-cut-out. This is due to the fact that the increase of
normal stresses is higher for the L-cut. Due to the vertical displacement (y) that is given
on the block (For C-cut, = hg
2 and for L-cut, the center is lower due to only one horizontal
yield band), the normal stresses have a higher impact on the normal stresses for L-cut,
compared to C-cut when looking into the moment. Therefore, since the updated yield
condition only updates the normal stresses, it can be concluded that the high capacity
increase difference between a C-cut-out and an L-cut-out is correct.
M.Sc. Thesis
59
==PAGE:72==
6.6.5
Analysis of A. Nielsen [8] [26]
On Table 6.10, and on Figure 6.8 it is possible to see all the capacity calculations regarding
the test plates from A. Nielsen [8] [26].
To investigate the results gathered further, a
percentage comparison Table is developed. This is done to visually see how the other
force capacities are in comparison to the new optimized block tearing method. This is
shown on Table 6.14 below.
Table 6.14: Percentage Increase/Decrease from the optimized GBT method to other ca-
pacity equations from A. Nielsen test data
Test
Fy.exp
Fu.exp
FR (J*)
Eurocode 3
New Eurocode 3
[mm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
B1-1
-32,23
-49,28
11,11
-80,34
-84,12
B1-2
-32,86
-50,11
11,11
-80,34
-84,10
B1-3
-32,50
-49,20
11,11
-80,34
-84,10
B2-1
-33,46
-51,38
11,10
-78,49
-82,61
B2-2
-32,75
-51,22
11,10
-78,45
-82,58
B2-3
-32,40
-50,55
11,10
-78,45
-82,57
B2-4
-34,65
-50,49
11,10
-78,46
-82,59
B3-1
-35,58
-52,42
11,09
-76,19
-80,76
B3-2
-23,35
-52,45
11,09
-76,17
-80,73
B3-3
-36,17
-51,62
11,09
-76,19
-80,75
B4-1
-36,21
-52,00
11,07
-73,39
-78,50
B4-2
-36,82
-52,53
11,07
-73,32
-78,41
B4-3
-35,37
-51,98
11,07
-73,23
-78,49
The L-cut-out tests from A. Nielsen are exposed to shear force and a rotational moment
with an eccentricity interval from e = 3480mm at plate B4 to e = 474mm at B1. From
the results on Table 6.14 above, in conformity with the other test comparisons in Section
6.6, it is noticeable that the Eurocode and the new proposed equation for the Eurocode
have the biggest percentage difference. Additionally, it is noticeable that the percentage
difference decreases when the eccentricity is less.
Moreover, it can be seen that the increase of the initial generalized block tearing method
is ≈11% again. This is due to the plates being an L-cut, and the increase is equal to
the increase found in Section 6.6.4. Therefore, with the updated yield condition, it can be
concluded that the optimized generalized block tearing method gives an increase of 11%
capacity for L-cut-outs.
60
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
From earlier literature research, it was observed that although many research experiments
were performed, most studies investigated rotational block tearing exposed only to concen-
tric loading. Hence, research programs exposed to eccentric loading were highly limited.
Although the research observations showed that factors as; bolt connections, length of
connections, steel strength, and areas of the block component were relevant when inves-
tigating block tearing. Therefore, those aspects became the focal point in the research of
block tearing, and the influence of eccentricity was only limited by a reduction of 10%.
Moreover, the theoretical capacities regarding block tearing from Eurocode 3 were further
investigated. From Eurocode, it was possible to see that two equations were proposed,
one for concentric loading and the other one for eccentric loading. However, the formula
regarding eccentric loading was equal to the equation regarding concentric loading, with
a reduction of 50% of the tension capacity. The reduction of 50% had no limits, meaning
that the eccentricity could increase to be infinite, governing an incalculable moment that
would not impact the theoretical capacity.
A newly proposed block tearing method was then prepared to be in the updated version
of the Eurocode. Although the new method gave an overall higher capacity, it did not
interact with the eccentricity, and the reduction of 50% was still applicable for eccentric
loading.
An approach of how theoretical capacity was calculated when the block was exposed ec-
centric loading was given in 2015, by J. Jönsson [2]. This approach assumed simple stress
traction distribution of Normal-, Shear force and rotational moment along the boundaries
of the block component. By that fact, simple equilibrium calculations could determine the
respective capacities of Normal force, shear force, and rotational moment. The approach
was titled as Generalized block tearing method and is applicable for both types of cuts.
Although the generalized block tearing method gave a more approximate theoretical ca-
pacity, the results from test researches showed that the capacities yielded a lower capacity
than the test results. Therefore, the method was not complete.
From the generalized block method, some assumptions were established.
As the yield
criterion for the generalized block tearing method followed a formal two-dimensional Von
mises yield criterion, the tangential stress was neglected as a simplicity.
By deriving
the Von mises stresses for plane stress with respect to the inclusion of the flow rule, it
was possible to include the tangential stress, giving a new yield condition with a 15.5%
increase of normal stresses for the generalized block tearing method. Moreover, as the
stress traction on the block had to fulfill the new formal yield condition, new capacity
equations were given for normal force, shear force, and rotational moment. Hence, a new
investigated generalized block tearing method was proposed.
By the inclusion of the new generalized block tearing method, it was necessary to test
out the capacity differences from the initial generalized block tearing method to the new
investigated block tearing method. Firstly the two receptive methods were tested against
13 earlier research studies, in a total of 186 experimental results. For these experimental
M.Sc. Thesis
61
==PAGE:74==
tests, the connection type varied between gusset plates, coped beams and angles that
were mostly tested specimens exposed to concentric loading, while a few of the angles
connections were exposed to a minimal eccentricity, i.e., e > 100mm. The comparison of
the initial generalized block tearing method and the new block tearing method showed
that the deviation was highest for the coped beams (At 0.19 for both methods), while the
deviation was lowest for angles exposed to eccentric loading. For angles, the deviation for
the initial generalized block tearing method was at 0,14. While for the newly proposed
method, the standard deviation was at 0.13, meaning a positive decrease. Although the
total of 186 test results was compared to the test data, it was noticeable that the total
deviation was at 0.15, which is fairly high. However, expected as the generalized block
tearing method mainly investigates block tearing components exposed to eccentric loading.
Moreover, four additional types of research were compared. Two C-cut-out and two L-cut-
outs. Contrary to the earlier research programs, the four programs were all gusset plates
tested with eccentric loading. For these test results, the generalized block tearing method
was compared in addition to the equations presented in the EC3 (The original block tearing
equation and the new presented equation). The results were to show that the generalized
block tearing method followed the test results incline in terms of capacity, meaning that
the generalized block tearing methods are realistically affected by the eccentricity.
Furthermore, it was seen that the equations proposed from EC3 were way larger than
the actual test results and can therefore be concluded as inaccurate for eccentric loading.
Moreover, by comparing the initial generalized block tearing method to the newly proposed
block tearing method, it was noticeable that for a C-cut, a capacity increase of ≈3 −4%
was computed, while for an L-cut-out, a capacity increase of ≈11% was measured. The
difference in capacity increase is due to the fact that normal stress affects an L-cut-out
more than a C-cut-out.
To conclude, the inclusion of tangential stress has increased the theoretical capacities for
the generalized block tearing method by respectively ≈3 −4% for a C-cut and ≈11% for
an L-cut.
62
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 8
Future Research
Although block tearing calculations have been investigated for a long time, a lot still
needs to be investigated for block components exposed to eccentric loading. This chapter
presents some important future investigating possibilities regarding block tearing.
Firstly, as the amount of experimental test data done where the block component is
exposed to eccentric loading is limited, it is necessary to perform significantly more tests on
rotational block tearing. Within further experimental test data that should be performed,
different bolt connections, bolt layouts, and thicknesses should be investigated to analyze
how the block component acts when exposed to different parameters.
This should be
further researched for both cuts, respectively. Furthermore, there should be included new
experimental tests where a smaller eccentricity is investigated. In that way, it will be
possible to evaluate at what eccentricity the shear forces govern the rotational moment in
the experimental test data, which leads to a vertical deformation instead of a rotational
deflection.
Moreover, as the generalized block tearing method from Jönsson is in focus, the stress
traction distribution of stresses along the boundaries of the block component should be
further investigated, as this currently is assumed to act the way it does. But, again, this
is something that needs to be done in correlation with further test experiments.
The newly investigated generalized block tearing method shows that the force capacities
are relatively smaller than the result forces from the experimental data. This could be
because friction contribution between the shaft and the bolts is neglected in the generalized
block tearing method. By finding an accurate way of including the friction, it will be
possible to increase the theoretical capacity. Hence, it reaches closer to the actual capacity
behavior of the test material.
Moreover, further analysis should be done on the stiffness of the block component and
the stiffness of the bolt connections in the block. When the block component is exposed
to high stresses, the bolts start to yield one by one, and not simultaneously (See Section
2.1). Therefore, the stiffness will affect how the block component reacts and how much
force is applied to the block before rupture occurs. This should be further investigated to
increase the knowledge of all aspects occurring during the block tearing phenomena.
Finally, it could be of relevancy to further investigate the upper bound solution to gener-
alized block tearing proposed by J. Jönsson [2]. A further comparison between the lower
bound solution and the upper bound solution can indicate the theoretical capacity for
block tearing more accurately.
M.Sc. Thesis
63
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
Dansk Standard. “DS/EN 1993-1-8: Eurocode 3 : Stålkonstruktioner Del 1-8: Sam-
linger Eurocode 3 : Design of steel structures - Part 1-8:Design of joints”. In: (2007).
[2]
Jeppe Jönsson. “Generalized Block Failure.” In: Nordic Steel Construction Confer-
ence 2015. 2015.
[3]
Guo-Qiang Li and Yan-Bo Wang. Behavior and Design of High-Strength Construc-
tional Steel. Elsevier Science & Technology, 2020.
[4]
Castalia srl. “Block tearing Checks”. In: C.S.E. - 2001-2021 (2018). url: https:
//www.steelchecks.com/connections-guide/index.html?check_blocktearing.htm.
[5]
Jeppe Jönsson. “Block failure in connections-including effets of eccentric loads”. In:
7th European conference on steel and composite structures. University of Naples
Federico II. 2014.
[6]
Clifton Steel. “Tensile strength of steel vs yield strength of steel”. In: (2018). url:
https://www.cliftonsteel.com/knowledge-center/tensile-and-yield-strength.
[7]
Britannica. “Hooke’s law”. In: The Editors of Encyclopaedia (13 Jan 2020). url:
https://www.britannica.com/science/Hookes-law.
[8]
Andreas Eide Astrup Nielsen. “Experimental investigation of block tearing capac-
ity for a L cutout-Theoretical Report”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of
Denmark), 2020.
[9]
Danielle Collins. “Mechanical properties of materials: Stress and strain”. In: (March
8, 2019). url: https://www.linearmotiontips.com/mechanical-properties-of-materials-
stress-and-strain/.
[10]
Technical Tidbits. “What Happens During Yielding?” In: Brush Wellman Publica-
tion (August 2000). url: https://materion.com/- /media/files/alloy/newsletters/
technical-tidbits/issue-no-14---material-yielding.pdf.
[11]
Instron. “Necking”. In: Website (Unknows). url: https://www.instron.us/en-us/our-
company/library/glossary/n/necking.
[12]
Kenneth Olsen. “Theoretical Investigation of Rotational L-block Tearing”. MA the-
sis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[13]
The Eﬀicient Engineer. Understanding Failure Theories (Tresca, von Mises etc...)
Youtube. June 2020. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkbQnBAOFEg%5C&
t=2s.
[14]
J Lubliner. “Plasticity Theory, revised ed”. In: University of California, Berkeley,
CA (2006).
[15]
Reena Patel et al. “A Transdisciplinary Approach for Analyzing Stress Flow Patterns
in Biostructures”. In: Mathematical and Computational Applications 24 (Apr. 2019),
p. 47. doi: 10.3390/mca24020047.
[16]
Richard E Whitmore. Experimental investigation of stresses in gusset plates. Engi-
neering Experiment Station, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, 1952.
[17]
Steve G Hardash and R Bjorhorde. “New design criteria for gusset plates in tension”.
In: Engineering journal 22.2 (1985).
[18]
TJ Cunningham, JG Orbison, and RD Ziemian. “Assessment of American block
shear load capacity predictions”. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 35.3
(1995), pp. 323–338.
[19]
Geoffrey L Kulak and Gilbert Y Grondin. “Block shear failure in steel members–a
review of design practice”. In: Engineering Journal, AISC 38.4 (2001), pp. 199–203.
[20]
Cameron R Franchuk. “Block shear failure of coped steel beams”. In: (2002).
64
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:77==
[21]
Cameron R Franchuk, Robert G Driver, and Gilbert Y Grondin. “Experimental
investigation of block shear failure in coped steel beams”. In: Canadian Journal of
Civil Engineering 30.5 (2003), pp. 871–881.
[22]
Cem Topkaya. “A finite element parametric study on block shear failure of steel ten-
sion members”. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 60.11 (2004), pp. 1615–
1635.
[23]
Robert G Driver, Gilbert Y Grondin, and Geoffrey L Kulak. “Unified block shear
equation for achieving consistent reliability”. In: Journal of Constructional Steel
Research 62.3 (2006), pp. 210–222.
[24]
Sune Schmidt Nørgaard. “Bolted gusset plate connections and block shear failure”.
MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2013.
[25]
Jonatan Stær Nissen. “Test of gusset plate connections”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical
University of Denmark), 2014.
[26]
Andreas Eide Astrup Nielsen. “Experimental investigation of block tearing capacity
for a L cutout- Test Report”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark),
2020.
[27]
Kenneth Olsen. “Tensile Test Report - Dog-bone Test of Steel Material”. MA thesis.
DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[28]
Lasse Mølsted. “Block tearing capacity of eccentric loaded bolted connections - The-
oretical report”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[29]
Thomas Hansen. “Bolted Connection (11352 Advanced Steel Structures)”. In: Lecture
(2020).
[30]
CEN/TC. “Eurocode 3: Design of Steel Structures”. In: Evolution of EN 1993-1-8 -
Joints and connections, CEN/TC250/SC 3/WG 8 N230 (2020).
[31]
JJ Roger Cheng, Gilbert Y Grondin, and Michael CH Yam. “Design and behavior
of gusset plate connections”. In: Steel Connection IV Workshop, Roanoke, VA. 2000.
[32]
K Udagawa and T Yamada. “Failure modes and ultimate tensile strength of steel
plates jointed with high-strength bolts”. In: Journal of Structural and Construction
Engineering, Architectural Institute of Japan 505 (1998), pp. 115–122.
[33]
A Aalberg and PK Larsen. “Strength and ductility of bolted connections in normal
and high strength steels”. In: Proceedings of the seventh international symposium on
structural failure and plasticity. 2000.
[34]
James A Swanson and Roberto T Leon. “Bolted steel connections: tests on T-stub
components”. In: Journal of Structural Engineering 126.1 (2000), pp. 50–56.
[35]
Bino BS Huns, Gilbert Y Grondin, and Robert G Driver. “Tension and shear block
failure of bolted gusset plates”. In: Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering 33.4
(2006), pp. 395–408.
[36]
D Mullin. “Unpublished test data”. In: Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineer-
ing, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada (2002).
[37]
Joseph A Yura, Peter C Birkemoe, and James M Ricles. “Beam web shear connec-
tions: an experimental study”. In: Journal of the Structural Division 108.2 (1982),
pp. 311–325.
[38]
Jeremy M Gross, James G Orbison, and Ronald D Ziemian. “Block shear tests in
high-strength steel angles”. In: Engineering Journal, AISC 32.3 (1995), pp. 117–122.
[39]
James G Orbison, Mark E Wagner, and William P Fritz. “Tension plane behavior in
single-row bolted connections subject to block shear”. In: Journal of Constructional
Steel Research 49.3 (1999), pp. 225–239.
[40]
Steen Winterskov-Andersen. “Capacity of Gusset Plate Connections”. MA thesis.
DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2014.
M.Sc. Thesis
65
==PAGE:78==
[41]
Block tearing capacity of eccentric loaded bolted connections -Test report. “Lasse
Mølsted”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[42]
Kamil Edward Czerniak. “Block tearing capacity for bolted connection Part 2 – test
report for L-type”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[43]
Kamil Edward Czerniak. “Block tearing capacity for bolted connection Part 1 –
theoretical report”. MA thesis. DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
[44]
Steen Winterskov-Andersen. “Tensile Test of Steel Subjects”. MA thesis. DTU (Tech-
nical University of Denmark), 2014.
[45]
Engineering.com. “What is strain hardening?” In: Website (2009). url: https://
www.engineering.com/Ask@/qactid/1/qaqid/1783.aspx.
[46]
Amanda Jaconelli Ibfelt. “Stiffness Modelling of Bolted Steel Joints”. MA thesis.
DTU (Technical University of Denmark), 2020.
66
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:79==
List of Appendix
Appendix A - Stiffness Analysis
Appendix B - Derivation of new proposed generalized block tearing method
Appendix C - Yield strengths and experimental test results
Appendix D - Capacity calculations of block tearing
Appendix E - Matlab Script for Plot data
Files included in USB-stick
File 1 - Comparison of GBT data. Data used for capacity calculations
File 2 - S. Norgaard comparison data. Data used from S. Norgaard [24] for capacity
calculations of older research experiments.
M.Sc. Thesis
67
==PAGE:80==
Appendix A
Deformation of the block affected by
block shear failure
In this chapter, the deformation of a block affected by block shear failure is further in-
vestigated. From structural background knowledge, the deformation of any material is
correlated to the stiffness of the material. Therefore, the deformation of the block compo-
nent will be expressed from the block’s stiffness, which is further explained in the report.
The following sections below consider both L-cut and C-cut block components.
A.1
Component method
The component method investigates a connection and the connection’s mechanical behav-
ior of the system while focusing on the individual components of the connection. As for a
steel system, the mechanical properties that are of relevance are resistance, stiffness, and
deformation capacity. In that way, stiffness is affecting the majority of the mechanical
properties. Furthermore, only the component of the block will be further investigated
to combinedly determine the resistance, the stiffness, and the rotational capacity of the
block. [45]
The component method is also included in the Eurocode 1993-1-8 [1] and introduces
the connection between angular displacements and moments. A deeper investigation is
presented in the following sections, whereas the theory is expanded due to an encompassing
of the rotational moment on the block component.
A.2
Elastic springs
From Eurocode 3, it is explained that the action of the different components is expressed
through so-called elastic springs. These elastic springs could either be connected in single,
parallel, or serial connections, where the spring follows the theorem reported in Hooke’s
Law. This physics law states that the force (F) that is needed to extend or compress a
spring by a distance of x scales linearly concerning the length. On that note, the following
equation represents Hooke’s law. [7]
F = δ · k
(A.1)
Where, as stated above, F is the force, k is a constant factor characteristic, i.e., the
stiffness, and x is the distance of the spring, i.e., the deformation that the experiences of
the spring. With the stiffness formula established, the stiffness of the steel material can
be expressed. For steel material, the stiffness parameter is given by Young’s Modulus (E),
which is defined as the following.
E = σ
ε
(A.2)
By rearranging Young’s modulus, it is possible to find the deformation caused by normal
stress as the following.
68
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:81==
σ = E · ε
(A.3)
Where ε is the normal strain of the steel material. As the normal stress displacement
is established, displacement due to shear stress (τ) needs to be defined. The following
equations define this.
G =
E
2(1 + v)
(A.4)
τ = G · γ
(A.5)
In this case, λ is the shear strain of steel, while v is a material characteristic known as the
Poisson’s ratio. This is the relative of the contraction strain normal to the applied load,
divided by the relative extension strain (in the direction of the applied load). For steel
material, Poisson ratio is normally set to be equal to v = 0.3. Hereby, all spring constants
are described, and a look deeper investigation is done on the different spring interactions
that can occur.
A.3
Spring interaction
As aforementioned in the Section above, there are three different types of spring connec-
tions [12]. The first interaction is a normal single interaction that follows Hooke’s law
without any adjustments, while the serial connection follows springs that are in a series.
The last types of strings are so-called parallel interactions, whereas more springs follow
and are connected to the same force.
A.3.1
Single connection
A single connection is rare and has only one spring which gives the same force. A single
spring connection follows Hooke’s law, and Figure below expresses the following interaction
for one spring connection:
Figure A.1: Single spring connection
When looking into a series connection, the force at the end of the spring gives a total
displacement after what each spring provides. Therefore, the total deformation of a series
connection is each of the spring’s deformation summed up as showed below.
δtot = δ1 + δ2 + . . . δn
(A.6)
By rearranging Hooke’s law, the total deformation of the connection can be defined as the
full force divided by each spring stiffness. This is showcased below.
F
ktot
= F
k1
+ F
k2
+ . . . + F
kn
M.Sc. Thesis
69
==PAGE:82==
The following equation above could then be derived in order to separate the spring stiffness.
This is presented below.
ktot =
 1
k1
+ 1
k2
· · 1
kn
−1
(A.7)
A.3.2
Parallel connection
The spring stiffness is summed up with the displacement to give the total force in a parallel
connection. This is showcased in the Figure below.
Figure A.2: Parallel spring connection
This means that the total displacement of the entire system is equal to each displacement.
Mathematical the connection can be showcased as the following.
δtot = δ1 + δ2 + . . . δn
By rearranging the following equation as Hooke’s law, the following expression can be
derived for the spring stiffness.
F = kn · δtot = k1 · δtot + k2 · δtot + kn · δtot
F = kn · δtot = δtot · (k1 + k2 + kn)
(A.8)
ktot = k1 + k2 + kn
(A.9)
A.3.3
Rotational Moment
In a serial and parallel connection, it is the force, F, that creates displacement [7]. In this
following thesis, the block components of L-block and C-cut both have eccentricities when
being investigated, which creates a moment, M, that needs to be included. Therefore, the
70
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:83==
stiffness against rotation is given as Rφ. The stiffness rotation is equal to the moment
divided by the angle of rotation. This is showcased as the following below.
Rϕ = M
ϕ
(A.10)
Furthermore, using the rotational spring stiffness, the rotational stiffness can be derived
as a product of the spring stiffness ki.
ki = F
δ
(A.11)
Where,
F = Rϕ
ai
and
δ = ai
(A.12)
By replacement, the following elastic stiffness can be expressed:
ki = Rϕ
a2
i
(A.13)
To illustrate, the Figure below shows how the rotational moment is connected with a
parallel connection.
Figure A.3: Springs connected in a parallel connection that are subjected to rotation
As what is illustrated in Figure A.3 above, it is noticeable that the springs that are
connected in parallel are both connected regarding normal- and shear stiffness.
This
means that the sum of the stiffnesses due to the rotational behavior is given as the total
of all the individual springs. This is showcased below.
M = ki · a2
i · ϕ =
 k1 + a2
1 + k2 + a2
2 + kn + a2
n

· ϕ
Rϕ =
 k1 + a2
1 + k2 + a2
2 + kn + a2
n

(A.14)
M.Sc. Thesis
71
==PAGE:84==
A.4
Block component
In the Eurocode 1993-1-8 [1], it is noticeable that there is no existence of stiffness data
corresponding to a block tearing component. Therefore, it is diﬀicult to find out how a
block component deforms under yielding. In this chapter, a proposal of a spring stiffness
regarding normal force, shear force, and the rotational moment are presented. By finding
a proposal for the stiffness, it is possible to determine the deformation of the block – as
the stiffness and deformation are related. In Figure A.5 and Figure A.4 below, two-block
components of respectively block C and block L are showcased, with the yield line stiffness
showed through springs. Normally, from earlier thesis work, the total width of the yield
area is given to be two times the bolt diameter [46], but as the width of the yield bands is
not interpolated correctly, it is assumed to be set as a parameter (x) times the diameter,
i.e., the width of the yield area = x·d0. Below, illustrations of the block tearing component
are given, for respectively both a C-cut and an L-cut.
Figure A.4: Block tearing component for an L-cut
Figure A.5: Block tearing component, C-cutout
A.4.1
Stiffness regarding Normal stresses
As aforementioned, the stresses in normal stress and shear stress affect the deformation
of steel. Initially, in a two-dimensional plane, the stress is the linear load in the yield line
over the thickness of the yield line. This can furthermore be derived as a function varying
on the relation between the E-modulus and the yield line. This will be the same case for
both a C-cut and an L-cut, showcased below.
72
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:85==
σ = Fn
t
,
σ = E · ε
,
σ = E · δn
by
As the equations above state, the formula for E-modulus has been re-written to acquire
the equation shown on the right-hand side. Whereas E is Young’s modulus, and the strain
is a relation of the deformation of the yield zone (δn) divided by the thickness of the yield
zone (by). To visualize, a section of the yield zone exposed to normal stresses is showcased
below.
Figure A.6: A section of the yield zone subjected to the normal force.
From Figure A.6 showcased above, the equations to find the displacement can be rear-
ranged. By doing so, the following equation is presented.
δn = Fn · by
E · t
(A.15)
From the principle of Hooke’s law, Equation A.15 can be derived to find the stiffness
constant, kn.
kn = Fn
δn
Which is equal to
kn =
Fn
Fn·by
E·t
(A.16)
Furthermore, the stiffness constant can hereby be presented as the following, expressed
below.
kn = E · t
by
(A.17)
From what is noticeable from the stiffness constant, it can be seen that the stiffness
constant is given in N/mm2, i.e., the stiffness constant should be multiplied with the net
M.Sc. Thesis
73
==PAGE:86==
length of the yield line in order to obtain the total stiffness of the block, when the block
component is subjected to a normal force.
As presented in Jönsson’s article [5] [2], a new thickness should be introduced. As it is
assumed that the normal stresses are acting on a reduced section due to the net area, the
thickness formulation should be changed for normal stress. This will not be the case for
shear stresses as the force acts along the yield line and is not perpendicular to it. The
new thickness equation used when further investigating stiffness regarding normal stress
is presented below.
th = t · hn
hg
and
bh = t · bn
bg
(A.18)
A.5
Stiffness regarding Shear stresses
When the yield line is subjected to shear stresses, the forces act perpendicular to the
normal stresses, making the block component move along the shear stress.
Below, a
section of the yield which is subjected to shear stresses is shown.
Figure A.7: Segment of yield zone subjected to shear
As Figure A.7 above illustrates, the shear stress (τ) moves the yield zone along the shear
direction. By analyzing Figure A.7, the following equation can be established.
Fv = G · γ · t
(A.19)
In this case, the thickness (t) of the plate does not need any reduction as the shear
stresses work along the yield line. Furthermore, the displacement of the Section by using
trigonometrical rules. By calculating the width of the yield zone with the angle movement
(γ), the following equation for displacement can be expressed.
δv = by · γ
(A.20)
74
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:87==
With both expressions for the displacement of respectively the normal stress and shear
stress established, it is possible to derive the formulas in respect to the spring stiffness
regarding shear stress.
kv = Fv
δv
and
kv = G · γ · t
by · γ
= G · t
by
(A.21)
In similarity to the spring stiffness for normal forces, the spring stiffness for shear stress
is given per the unit length.
A.6
Rotational Stiffness on block component
As the block component is exposed to a moment, deformations of the block occur due
to the rotation on the block component. This needs to be taken into consideration, as is
presented in this following Section.
A.6.1
Horizontal stiffness on vertical yield line
By further investigating the vertical yield band of the block component, the rotational
moment will have an effect on both the x-directional and y-direction, and the stiffness
for both needs to be addressed. Firstly, in this subsection, the horizontal stiffness on the
vertical yield line is presented. Figure A.8 shows how the forces act along with the vertical
yield for both respective cuts.
Figure A.8: Vertical yield block for L-cut and C-cut
When looking at the vertical yield zone, it is noticeable that the stiffness of the vertical
line consists of parameters from the normal stresses and the shear stresses. As the rotation
φ is affected by both these stresses, it will yield a deformation in both x and y-direction of
M.Sc. Thesis
75
==PAGE:88==
the vertical block. By looking at the Figure presented on the left-hand side, it is possible
to find the deformation in the x-direction as a linear function, as the normal stresses work
linearly. In that way, the deformation in the x-direction can be expressed as the following.
δx.ym.L (uy) = ϕ · (y −uy)
(A.22)
δx.yn.C (uy) = ϕ ·
hg
2 −uy

(A.23)
By utilizing Hooke’s law, the normal force used to create horizontal deformation can be
expressed.
Fn,y (uy) = E · t
by
· δx,yn (uy)
(A.24)
The force can furtherly be integrated concerning the vertical yield line length to find the
moment along the vertical yield line. This is presented below.
Mn.x =
Z hg
0
Fn.y (uy) · (y −uy) duy
(A.25)
By solving for the integral, the following derivation can be expressed for a block-cut.
Mn.x = ϕ · t · E
by
·
 
h3
g
3 −h2
g · y + hg · y2
!
(A.26)
Furthermore, the angle of ϕ is fairly small, and it can be removed for further use. In
addition, as the moment is working in the x-direction from the normal stresses, it is
necessary to include the equivalent thickness as explained in Section A.4.1. This is due
to the stresses working only in the net area of the vertical yield zone.
Moreover, by
investigating the stiffness regarding change In the x-direction, the following x-directional
vertical yield line stiffness can be expressed.
Snx.y = Mn.x
ϕ
= th · E
by
·
 
h3
g
3 −h2
g · y + hg · y2
!
(A.27)
As Equation A.27 is expressed with the vertical displacement (y), it can be further derived
for a C-cut. For the case of a C-cut-out, the distances of (y) can be exchanged with hg/2.
In that case, the x-directional vertical yield line stiffness can be expressed as the following.
L-cut-out:
Snx.y = Mn.x
ϕ
= th · E
by
·
 
h3
g
3 −h2
g · y + hg · y2
!
(A.28)
C-cut-out:
Snx.y = Mn.x
ϕ
= th · E
by
·
 
5 · h3
g
6
!
(A.29)
76
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:89==
A.6.2
Vertical stiffness on vertical yield line
In this Section, the vertical stiffness on the vertical yield line due to shear stress is inves-
tigated. Since the shear does not vary along the yield line, the equation becomes simpler
and can be expressed as the following.
δy.v = ϕ · (bg −x)
(A.30)
With an expression for the deformation on the vertical line established, the shear load on
the vertical yield line can be expressed as the deformation showed above, as well as the
shear stiffness described in Section A.5. Hence, the shear load is displayed below.
Fv.y = t · G
by
· δy.v
(A.31)
As a result of this, the same method can be utilized as in Section A.6.1, i.e., the moment
can be found by multiplying the shear load with the length of the vertical yield line and
the span from the rotational moment to the yield line.
Mv.y = Fv.y ·(bg −x)·hg = t · G
by
·δy.v ·(bg −x)·hg = t · G
by
·ϕ·(bg −x)·(bg −x)·hg (A.32)
By deriving the equation above, the following moment can be expressed.
Mv.y = t · G
by
· ϕ · (bg −x)2 · hg
(A.33)
As the shear stresses are perpendicular to the vertical yield line, it does not act on the
block but rather along with it, which means that the equivalent thickness earlier used for
the normal stresses does not need to be included. Hence, the rotational stiffness regarding
the change in the y-direction of the vertical yield line can be expressed as the following.
Sy,v = Mv·y
ϕ
=
t·G
by · ϕ · (bg −x)2 · hg
ϕ
= t · G
by
· (bg −x)2 · hg
(A.34)
A.6.3
Vertical stiffness on horizontal yield line
The horizontal yield line will vary more than the vertical yield line for L-cut blocks and
C-cut blocks. This is because the C-block is consistent with two horizontal yield lines.
Although the blocks have different yield properties, the calculation method is done in the
same way as for the vertical yield line. To visualize, a Figure of the bottom yield line for
both L-cut and C-cut is showcased. As Figure A.9 shows, the yield zone marked in red is
for an L-cut-out, while the yield line marked in green is for a C-cut-out.
M.Sc. Thesis
77
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.9: Horizontal yield block for C-cut and L-cut
As shown above, the difference between the two cuts is where the rotational center (RC)
is placed. As there is an equal horizontal yield block on top of the C-cut, it will move the
rotational center to the middle of the block component. In addition, the parameter x will
vary between the C-cut and L-cut. As the distance x is not defined, the displacement in
the y-direction can be expressed as the same for both a C-cut and L-cut.
δy·xn (ux) = ϕ · ((bg −x) −uy)
(A.35)
By following the same calculation method as the vertical yield line, the normal force acting
on the yield line can be expressed equally as done for the vertical yield line.
Fn.y (uy) = E · t
by
· δy·xn (ux)
(A.36)
As aforementioned in Section A.6.1, the moment is found by integrating the force with
the moment arm over the yield line.
Mn.x =
Z bg
0
Fn.y (uy) · ((bg −x) −uy) duy = ϕ · tb · E
by
·
bg3
3 −bg2 · x + bg · x2

(A.37)
As the normal forces act perpendicular to the yield line, the equivalent thickness is utilized
when executing the integral. Moreover, the stiffnesses regarding the moment in the y-
direction can be expressed as the following.
78
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:91==
L-cut-out:
Sy·x = Mn·x
ϕ
= tb · E
by
·
bg3
3 −bg2 · x + bg · x2

(A.38)
C-cut-out:
Sy·x.C = Sy·x.L∗· 2
(A.39)
A.6.4
Horizontal stiffness on horizontal yield line
The deformation occurring from shear stresses in the horizontal yield line is constant, as
for the vertical yield line. Therefore, the deformation in the x-direction can be expressed
as the following.
L-cut-out:
δv.x.L = −(hg −y) · ϕ
(A.40)
C-cut-out:
δv·x.C = −
hg
2

· ϕ
(A.41)
The x-directional deformation on the horizontal yield line is given as negative, as the yield
block will go in the opposite x-direction of the δy, δx axis system. In resemblance of Section
A.6.3, the force acting on the horizontal yield line due to the sheer force is given as the
following for both respective cuts.
L-cut-out:
Fv.x.L = t · G
by
· δv.x.L
(A.42)
C-cut-out:
Fv.x.C = t · G
by
· δv.x.C
(A.43)
Furthermore, the moment can be found by following the same procedure as in Section
A.6.3.
L-cut-out:
Mv.x.L = −(hg −y) · ϕ · t · G
by
· bg · (hg −y) = −

ϕ · t · G
by
· bg · (hg −y)2

(A.44)
C-cut-out:
Mv.x.C = −
hg
2

· ϕ · t · G
by
· bg ·
hg
2

= −
 
ϕ · t · G
by
· bg · h2
g
4
!
(A.45)
The rotational stiffness concerning the action in the x-direction of the horizontal yield line
can be expressed as the following for both L-cuts and C-cuts.
M.Sc. Thesis
79
==PAGE:92==
L-cut-out:
Sx.x.L =

Mv.x.L
ϕ
 =
ϕ · t·G
by · bg · (hg −y)2
ϕ
= t · G
by
· bg · (hg −y)2
(A.46)
C-cut-out:
Sxx.C =

Mv·x.C
ϕ
 =
ϕ · t·G
by · bg ·
h2
g
4
ϕ
= t · G
by
· bg · h2
g
4
(A.47)
The rotational stiffness for the C-cut showed above will be the same for the upper part
of the horizontal yield line, which leads to the stiffness found above being 2x multiplied
when concerning a C-block component.
A.6.5
Total stiffnesses from rotation moment
As the yield lines have been analyzed for normal and shear stresses and rotational moment,
it can be concluded that the total stiffness of the block component is the sum of the
stiffnesses found by the vertical and horizontal yield lines.
L-cut-out:
SL.tot = Sy.y.L + Sx.y.L + Sx·x.L + Sy.x.L
(A.48)
C-cut-out:
SC.tot = Sy.y.C + Sx.y.C + Sxx.C + Sy.x.C
(A.49)
80
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:93==
A.7
Deformation of C- and L-cut block
With the stiffness of both block components established in Section A.6.5, it is possible
to find the deformation of the entire blocks. When either a C-cut or L-cut is exposed
to a force, the block component will start to deform. In this Section, both a C-cut and
L-cut deformation will be further investigated for all cases of normal force, shear force,
and rotational moment.
Figure A.10: Deformation direction for C-cut and L-cut block
A.7.1
Deformation due to normal forces
By rearranging Hooke’s law, it is possible to express how the normal force affects the
deformation in the horizontal direction. As shown in Figure A.10 above, it is noticeable
that when normal force occurs in the block components, the block shifts horizontally out
of the block. This causes normal stress to appear on the vertical yield line and shear stress
on the horizontal yield line. By that means, the deformation occurring due to the normal
force will be the sum of the stiffnesses arising due to normal stresses and shear stress. For
both types of component cuts, this is expressed below.
L-cut-out:
δxN.L =
NR
kn · hn
+
NR
kv · bg
=
NR
kn · hn + kv · bg
(A.50)
M.Sc. Thesis
81
==PAGE:94==
C-cut-out:
δx.N.C =
NR
kn · hn
+
NR
kv · bg
+
NR
kv · bg
=
NR
kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg)
(A.51)
As seen in the equations above, the deformation is originally derived from Hooke’s law.
Moreover, the net area is used for the normal stress springs, while for the shear stiffness,
the gross area has been utilized. From the equations, it is noticeable that the horizontal
deformation for an L-cut is two times the size of a C-cut. This is due to the upper horizontal
yield line in the C-cutout that supports the block component and resists deformation.
A.7.2
Deformation due to shear forces
The same procedure can be followed for the case regarding shear force. In this case, the
vertical yield line will be affected by shear, while the horizontal yield lines are affected by
normal stress. As also shown in Section A.7.1, the C-cutout will have less deformation
than the L-cutout due to the two horizontal yield lines. The formulas for deformation due
to shear forces are presented for both cuts, respectively, below.
L-cut-out:
δy.V.L =
VR
kv · hg
+
VR
kn · bn
=
VR
kv · hg + kn · bn
(A.52)
C-cut-out:
δy.V.C =
VR
kv · hg
+
VR
kn · bn
+
VR
kn · bn
=
VR
kv · hg + 2 · (kn · bn)
(A.53)
As earlier, Hooke’s law has been derived to find the deformation occurring due to shear
force. In this case, as the vertical line (height) of the block component is in shear, the full
gross height has been utilized, while for the horizontal yield lines, the net area has been
used.
A.7.3
Deformation due to rotational moment
The rotational moment acting on a block component is a reaction from an eccentric force,
normally a shear fore. When the block component is affected by rotational moment, it
affects deformation in both directions in the XY plane. This creates an angle of rotation,
as earlier symbolized as (φ). Normally, the rotational moment is placed at a so-called
rotation center, where the distance to the center is given as x and y for each respective
direction. The directions vary for a C-cut and L-cut, whereas the rotational moment for
a C-cut is placed vertically in the middle of the block component due to symmetry. On
the other hand, the L-cutout is placed at a displacement parameter called y.
In section A.6, several expressions are presented for deformation in both x and y-direction
for the vertical and horizontal yield lines. By adding the deformations in each direction
together, the deformation in the XY-plane can be expressed as the following.
L-Cut:
δx.M.L (uy) = ϕ · (y −uy) −(hg −y) · ϕ = ϕ · (2 · y −uy −hg)
(A.54)
δy.M.L (ux) = ϕ · (bg −x) + ϕ · ((bg −x) −uy) = ϕ · (2 · (bg −x) −uy)
(A.55)
82
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:95==
C-Cut:
δx.M.C (uy) = ϕ ·
hg
2 −uy

−

hg −hg
2

· ϕ +

hg −hg
2

· ϕ = ϕ ·
hg
2 −uy

(A.56)
δy.M.C (ux) =ϕ · (bg −x) + ϕ · ((bg −x) −uy) d = ϕ · (3 · (bg −x) −2 · uy)
+ ϕ · ((bg −x) −uy)
(A.57)
As shown in the deformation functions for C-cut and L-cut above, the deformation is
given after the constant uy is placed. To make the deformation for both respective cuts
dependent on the moment, the rotational angle can be replaced with the moment divided
by the stiffness as done in Section A.6 to find the total rotational stiffness. By replacing
the rotational angle for the deformation functions shown above, the deformations in x and
y-direction for both cuts can be presented as the following given below.
L-Cut:
δx.M.L (uy) = MR · (2 · y −uy −hg)
SL.tot
(A.58)
δy.M.L (ux) = MR · (2 · (bg −x) −uy)
SL.tot
(A.59)
C-Cut:
δx.M.C (uy) =
MR ·

hg
2 −uy

SC.tot
(A.60)
δy.M.C (ux) = MR · (3 · (bg −x) −2 · uy)
SC.tot
(A.61)
A.7.4
Deformation due to forces and moment acting simultaneously
With the earlier findings shown in Section A.7, it is possible to find the total deformation
occurring in the XY-plane when all forces are working simultaneously. Below, the different
formulas for deflection for each direction are presented for both respective cut components
(L- and C-cut).
L-Cut:
Sum Horizontal displacement:
δx.L (uy) =
NR
kn · hn + kv · bg
+ MR · (2 · y −uy −hg)
SL.tot
(A.62)
Sum vertical displacement:
δy.L (ux) =
VR
kv · hg + kn · bn
+ MR · (2 · (bg −x) −uy)
SL.tot
(A.63)
M.Sc. Thesis
83
==PAGE:96==
Rotational angle:
ϕ = MR
SL.tot
(A.64)
C-Cut:
Sum Horizontal displacement:
δx.C (uy) =
NR
kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg) +
MR ·

hg
2 −uy

SC.tot
(A.65)
Sum vertical displacement:
δy.C (ux) =
VR
kv · hg + 2 · (kn · bn) + MR · (3 · (bg −x) −2 · uy)
SC.tot
(A.66)
Rotational angle:
ϕ = MR
SC.tot
(A.67)
Lastly, the distance from the rotational center to the upper edge of the block component
is found. This is done by solving the equations above with respect to ux and uy for both
cuts. When solving for the following, the displacements in each direction are set equal to
zero in order to express the parameters. The results are shown below.
L-Cut:
uy (δx.L = 0) = −−NR · SL.tot −2 · MR · y · (kv · hg + kn · bn) + hg · MR · (kv · hg + kn · bn)
MR∗(kv · hg + kn · bn)
(A.68)
ux (δyL = 0) = −−SL.tot · VR −2 · MR · (−x + bg) (kn · hn + kv · bg)
MR · (kn · hn + kv · bg)
(A.69)
C-Cut:
uy (δx.C = 0) = −−NR · SC.tot −hg · MR (kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg))
2 · MR (kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg))
(A.70)
ux (δy.C = 0) = −−VR · SC.tot −3 · MR · (bg −x) (kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg))
2 · MR (kn · hn + 2 · (kv · bg))
(A.71)
Although expressions for the displacement and stiffnesses have been investigated in this
chapter, the yield of bolts has not been considered. Therefore the results may lead to
somehow inaccurate results, as the bolts will not yield simultaneously, but rather one by
one bolt at the time. To give more precise results on the displacement and stiffness of a
block component, further investigation should be done on stiffness on bolts in a bolted
connection.
84
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:97==
Appendix B
Derivation of new proposed generalized
block tearing method
M.Sc. Thesis
85
==PAGE:98==
Derivation of updated Generalized block tearing method
In this appendix, the derivation of the new updated generalized block tearing method 
is presented for both cuts respectively
For a C-Cut-Out
Derivation of Normal forces:
To determine the distribution of forces acting as normal forces, an horizontal 
equilibrium is calculated.
＝
-
-
NR
⋅
⋅
hn t ――
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
t
0
＝
NR
+
⋅
⋅
hn t ――
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
t
＝
NR
⋅
――
2 fm
‾‾
3
t⎛⎝
+
hn
bg⎞⎠
Eccentricity in y-direction: The center of the normal force corresponding to the yield 
lines, the eccentricities in the y-direction needs to be determined. This is done by 
taking the rotational equilibrum at point A (As showed in Figure for C-cut)
＝
-
-
⋅
NR ey
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
⋅
⋅
⋅t hn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
0
86
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:99==
＝
ey
―――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
⋅
⋅
⋅t hn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
NR
＝
ey
―――――――――
⋅
⋅
fm t ――
1
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜⎝
+
⋅
bg hg
⋅
⋅
2 hn ―
hg
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
⋅
fm t ――
2
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
hn
bg⎞⎠
＝
ey
――――
+
⋅
bg hg
⋅
hn hg
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
hn
bg⎞⎠
＝
＝
ey
――――
hg⎛⎝
+
hn
bg⎞⎠
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
hn
bg⎞⎠
―
hg
2
Derivation of Shear forces:  To determine the distribution of forces acting from 
shear forces, an vertical equilibrium is calculated.
＝
-
-
VR
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 bn t ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
0
＝
VR
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 bn t ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
＝
VR
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
4 bn
hg⎞⎠
Eccentricity in x-direction: The center of the shear force corresponding to the yield 
lines, the eccentricities in the x-direction needs to be determined. This is done by 
taking the rotational equilibrum at point B (As showed in Figure for C-cut)
＝
+
+
⋅
-VR ex
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
0
＝
ex
――――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅
y hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
VR
M.Sc. Thesis
87
==PAGE:100==
＝
ex
――――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
2 t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅
y hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
4 bn
hg⎞⎠
＝
＝
ex
――――――――
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
⋅
2 bn bg
⋅
hg bg⎞⎠
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
4 bn
hg⎞⎠
―――――
+
⋅
⋅
2 bn bg
⋅
hg bg
+
⋅
4 bn
hg
＝
ex
――――
bg⎛⎝
+
2 bn
hg⎞⎠
⎛⎝
+
⋅
4 bn
hg⎞⎠
Derivation of Moment: The moment is distributed over the yield lines, it is 
neccessary to find the vertical placement of the moment. For the instance of a C-
cut-out it is equal to 
i.e. half of the gross height of the block. The vertical 
ex
displacement y, is the distance from the upper yield of the block to the center. By 
taking the rotational exulibrum at the bottom of y, we can determine the moment 
by taking the rotational equilbrium about the point C 
(As showed in Figure for C-cut). 
＝
y
ey
＝
-
-
-
-
MR
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
2
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
4
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
2
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
4
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
0
＝
MR
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
2
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
4
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
2
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
4
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
―
hg
2
＝
MR
⋅
⋅
――
fm
‾‾
3
t hg
⎛
⎜⎝
+
+
+
―
bg
2
―
hn
4
―
hn
4
―
bg
2
⎞
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅
――
fm
‾‾
3
t hg
⎛
⎜⎝
+
bg
―
hn
2
⎞
⎟⎠
88
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:101==
For a L-Cut-Out
Derivation of Normal forces:
To determine the distribution of forces acting as normal forces, an horizontal 
equilibrium is calculated.
＝
-
-
NR
⋅
⋅t hn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
0
＝
NR
+
⋅
⋅t hn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
＝
NR
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 hn
bg⎞⎠
Eccentricity in y-direction: The center of the normal force corresponding to the yield 
lines, the eccentricities in the y-direction needs to be determined. This is done by 
taking the rotational equilibrum at point A (As showed in Figure for L-cut)
＝
-
-
⋅
NR ey
⋅
⋅
⋅t ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
hn ―
hg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
0
＝
ey
―――――――――
-
⋅
⋅
⋅t ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
hn ―
hg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
NR
＝
ey
―――――――――
-
⋅
⋅
⋅t ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
hn ―
hg
2
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 hn
bg⎞⎠
M.Sc. Thesis
89
==PAGE:102==
＝
ey
――――――
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
hg
⎛
⎜⎝
+
―
hn
2
bg
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 hn
bg⎞⎠
＝
ey
――――
hg
⎛
⎜⎝
+
―
hn
2
bg
⎞
⎟⎠
⎛⎝
+
⋅
2 hn
bg⎞⎠
Derivation of Shear forces:  To determine the distribution of forces acting from 
shear forces, an vertical equilibrium is calculated.
＝
-
-
VR
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
0
＝
VR
+
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
＝
VR
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
hg
⋅
2 bn⎞⎠
Eccentricity in x-direction: The center of the shear force corresponding to the yield 
lines, the eccentricities in the x-direction needs to be determined. This is done by 
taking the rotational equilibrum at point B (As showed in Figure for L-cut)
＝
+
+
⋅
-VR ex
⋅
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
⋅
⋅
⋅t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
0
＝
ex
―――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
⋅
⋅
⋅t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
VR
＝
ex
―――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
⋅t hg ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg
⋅
⋅
⋅t bn ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
bg
2
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
hg
⋅
2 bn⎞⎠
90
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:103==
＝
ex
――――――
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
bg⎛⎝
+
hg
bn⎞⎠
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
+
hg
⋅
2 bn⎞⎠
＝
ex
――――
bg⎛⎝
+
hg
bn⎞⎠
⎛⎝
+
hg
⋅
2 bn⎞⎠
Derivation of Moment: To determine how the moment is distributed over the yield 
lines, it is neccessary to find the vertical placement (y) of the moment. This is 
done by by taking force equilibrum in the horizontal direction.
＝
-
-
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
hg
y ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
t ―
hn
hg
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
0
We can divide by 
and 
on both sides of the equations
――
fm
‾‾
3
t
＝
――――――――――――――
-
-
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
hg
y ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⋅
⋅
――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
t ―
hn
hg
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
⋅
――
fm
‾‾
3
t
―――
0
⋅
――
fm
‾‾
3
t
＝
-
-
⋅
⋅
―
hn
hg
y 2
⋅
2 ―
hn
hg
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
bg
0
＝
+
-
⋅
⋅
―
hn
hg
y 2
⋅
⋅
2 ―
hn
hg
hg
⋅
⋅
2 ―
hn
hg
y
bg
＝
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
hn
hg
2 y (( +
1
1))
+
bg
⋅
2 hn
＝
⋅
―
hn
hg
4 y
+
bg
⋅
2 hn
＝
y
――――
hg⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
⋅
4 hn
With the vertical placement determined, we know where the normal stress 
dsitribution changes from tension to compression. By further taking the rotational 
equilibrium at this point (Point L in Figure for L-cut), a term for the rotational 
moment of a L-cut-Out can be determined
M.Sc. Thesis
91
==PAGE:104==
-
-
-
MR
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
hg
y ――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
―
y
2
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅t ―
hn
hg
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠――
⋅
2 fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜⎝
――
-
hg
y
2
⎞
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
⋅t bg ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
The vertical placment is hereby inserted in the equation
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
+
⋅
―
hn
hg
y2
―
hn
hg
⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
2
bg⎛⎝
-
hg
y⎞⎠
⎞
⎟
⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
+
 ↲
+
⋅
―
hn
hg
⎛
⎜
⎝
――――
hg⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
⋅
4 hn
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
―
hn
hg
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
hg
――――
hg⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
⋅
4 hn
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
bg
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
hg
――――
hg⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
⋅
4 hn
⎞
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
+
 ↲
+
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――
hg⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
2
⋅
16 hn
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――
⎛⎝
+
⋅
-hg bg
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn⎞⎠
2
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜
⎝
―――――――
⋅
bg ⎛⎝
+
⋅
-hg bg
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn⎞⎠
⋅
4 hn
⎞
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
+
 ↲
+
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――
⋅
hg
2
⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
2
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
――――――
⎛⎝
-
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn
⋅
hg bg⎞⎠
2
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜
⎝
――――――――
⋅
⋅
⋅
bg 4 hg ⎛⎝
-
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn
⋅
hg bg⎞⎠
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
――――――――――――
+
 ↲
+
⋅
hg
2
⎛⎝
+
bg
2 hn⎞⎠
2
⎛⎝
-
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn
⋅
hg bg⎞⎠
2
⋅
⋅
⋅
bg 4 hg ⎛⎝
-
⋅
⋅
2 hg hn
⋅
hg bg⎞⎠
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
Expanding the paranthesis:
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――――――――――――
+
 ↲
+
⋅
hg
2
⎛⎝
+
+
4 hn
2
4 hnbg
bg
2 ⎞⎠
⎛⎝
+
-
hg
2 bg
2
4 hg
2 bghn
4 hg
2 hn
2 ⎞⎠
⎛⎝
+
-4 hg
2 bg
2
8 hg
2 bghn⎞⎠
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
 ↲
-
+
+
+
4 hn
2 hg
2
4 hnbghg
2
bg
2 hg
2
hg
2 bg
2
4 hg
2 bghn
4 hg
2 hn
2
-4 hg
2 bg
2
8 hg
2 bghn
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
92
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:105==
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
 ↲
-
+
+
+
4 hn
2 hg
2
4 hnbghg
2
bg
2 hg
2
hg
2 bg
2
4 hg
2 bghn
4 hg
2 hn
2
-4 hg
2 bg
2
8 hg
2 bghn
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――――
+
+
-2 hg
2 bg
2
⋅
8 hg
2 bghn
⋅
8 hg
2 hn
2
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――――
+
+
-2 hg
2 bg
2
⋅
8 hg
2 bghn
⋅
8 hg
2 hn
2
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
―――――――――
⋅
⋅
2 hg
2
⎛⎝
+
+
-bg
2
4 bghn
4 hn
2 ⎞⎠
⋅
⋅
16 hn hg
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
＝
MR
⋅
⋅t ――
fm
‾‾
3
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
――――――――
hg⎛⎝
-
+
⋅
4 hn
2
⋅
⋅
4 bg hn
bg
2 ⎞⎠
⋅
8 hn
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
M.Sc. Thesis
93
==PAGE:106==
Appendix C
Yield strengths and Test results of
experimental data
Table C.1: Strength properties and Test results from Nissen & Winterskov’s test data [25]
[40]
Plate
Yield strength
Ultimate strength
Mean strength
Test result at Yield
Test result at Ultimate stress
BX-X
Fy [MPa]
Fu [MPa]
Fm [MPa]
Fy.exp [kN]
Fu.exp [kN]
B1-H1-1(f)
284,450
372,750
328,600
136,3
179,3
B1-H1-2(f)
278,700
374,250
326,475
129,1
194,1
B1-H1-3(f)
268,300
382,100
325,200
128,6
195,5
B1-H1-4
269,300
382,800
326,050
125,8
192,2
B1-H1-5
269,050
382,050
325,550
123,7
197,4
B1-H1-6
281,400
376,250
328,825
125
193,3
B4-H1-1
266,850
380,600
323,725
183,7
284,3
B4-H1-2
269,400
381,200
325,300
183,9
281,4
B4-H1-3
265,350
378,750
322,050
191,5
280,7
B4-H4-1
282,000
375,200
328,600
242,3
353,7
B4-H4-2
280,350
374,750
327,550
242
350,7
B4-H4-3
278,950
371,600
325,275
240,3
346,2
Table C.2: Strength properties and Test results from K. Czerniak test data [42]
Plate
Yield strength
Ultimate strength
Mean strength
Test result at Yield
Test result at Ultimate stress
CX-X
Fy [MPa]
Fu [MPa]
Fm [MPa]
Fy.exp [kN]
Fu.exp [kN]
C1-1-X
252,96
354,61
303,785
92,395
117,931
C1-2-X
228,63
360,55
294,59
92,395
117,931
C1-3-X
226,5
358,08
292,29
96,248
120,444
C1-4-X
227,26
360,54
293,9
96,248
120,444
C1-5-X
253,29
355,04
304,165
93,809
117,965
C1-6-X
226,93
359,53
293,23
93,809
117,965
C2-3-X
224,85
357,31
291,08
102,004
133,197
C2-4-X
254,27
355,99
305,13
102,004
133,197
C2-5-X
233,82
356,23
295,025
103,067
131,024
C2-6-X
266,49
371,61
319,05
103,067
131,024
C2-7-X
230,35
359,53
294,94
107,140
131,949
C2-8-X
251,61
352,27
301,94
107,140
131,949
C3-1-X
223,8
358,16
290,98
121,677
151,869
C3-2-X
252,81
354,2
303,505
121,677
151,869
C3-3-X
226
357,9
291,95
122,232
150,795
C3-4-X
225,05
357,78
291,415
122,232
150,795
C3-5-X
228,66
359,3
293,98
119,738
151,921
C3-6-X
250,6
350,67
300,635
119,738
151,921
C4-1-X
226,35
358,82
292,585
138,489
172,592
C4-2-X
228
360,07
294,035
138,489
172,592
C4-3-X
236,475
357,895
297,185
142,361
172,455
C4-4-X
238,72
343,1
290,91
142,361
172,455
C4-5-X
251,13
351,83
301,48
139,613
170,822
C4-6-X
249,92
350,79
300,355
139,613
170,822
94
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:107==
Table C.3: Strength properties and Test results from A. Nielsen test data [26]
Plate
Yield strength
Ultimate strength
Mean strength
Test result at Yield
Test result at Ultimate stress
CX-X
Fy [MPa]
Fu [MPa]
Fm [MPa]
Fy.exp [kN]
Fu.exp [kN]
B1-H1-1(f)
284,450
372,750
328,600
136,3
179,3
B1-H1-2(f)
278,700
374,250
326,475
129,1
194,1
B1-H1-3(f)
268,300
382,100
325,200
128,6
195,5
B1-H1-4
269,300
382,800
326,050
125,8
192,2
B1-H1-5
269,050
382,050
325,550
123,7
197,4
B1-H1-6
281,400
376,250
328,825
125
193,3
B4-H1-1
266,850
380,600
323,725
183,7
284,3
B4-H1-2
269,400
381,200
325,300
183,9
281,4
B4-H1-3
265,350
378,750
322,050
191,5
280,7
B4-H4-1
282,000
375,200
328,600
242,3
353,7
B4-H4-2
280,350
374,750
327,550
242
350,7
B4-H4-3
278,950
371,600
325,275
240,3
346,2
M.Sc. Thesis
95
==PAGE:108==
Appendix D
Capacity calculations for the generalized
block tearing method, and the updated
generalized block tearing method
For this section, several Tables are included to show how the different capacities are
calculated for the generalized block tearing method, and the new improved generalized
block tearing method. There is one symbol in the Tables that are unknown, as it has
been presented in the Report.
The symbol (J*) is used to symbolise which equations
are related to the inital generalized block tearing method i.e. (J*) = Jeppe Jönsson’s
Generalized block tearing method [2].
Table D.1: Capacity calculation from Nissen & Winterskov’s Test data [25] [44]
BX-X
e [mm]
MR [kNm]
VR [kN]
MR (J*) [kNm]
VR (J*) [kN]
NR (J*) [kN]
NR [kN]
FR (J*) [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-H1-1(f)
400,000
43,775
897,363
42,239
812,469
-
-
104,716
108,634
B1-H1-2(f)
400,000
43,492
891,560
41,965
807,215
-
-
104,038
107,931
B1-H1-3(f)
400,000
43,322
888,078
41,801
804,062
-
-
103,632
107,510
B1-H1-4
400,000
43,436
890,399
41,911
806,164
-
-
103,903
107,791
B1-H1-5
400,000
43,369
889,034
41,846
804,928
-
-
103,744
107,625
B1-H1-6
400,000
43,805
897,977
42,267
813,025
-
-
104,787
108,708
B4-H1-1
274,000
43,126
884,050
41,612
800,416
-
-
149,206
154,957
B4-H1-2
274,000
43,336
888,351
41,814
804,310
-
-
149,932
155,711
B4-H1-3
274,000
42,903
879,476
41,397
796,274
-
-
148,434
154,155
B4-H4-1
274,000
43,775
897,363
42,239
812,469
750,689
794,915
126,337
131,590
B4-H4-2
274,000
43,635
894,495
42,104
809,873
748,291
792,375
125,933
131,169
B4-H4-3
274,000
43,332
888,283
41,811
804,248
743,093
786,872
125,058
130,258
Table D.2: Capacity calculation from L. Mølstad’s Test data [41]
BX-X
e [mm]
MR [kNm]
VR [kN]
MR (J*) [kNm]
VR (J*) [kN]
FR (J*) [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-1
392,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
95,037
98,596
B1-2
392,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
95,037
98,596
B1-3
392,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
95,037
98,596
B2-1
350,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
106,181
110,186
B2-2
350,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
106,181
110,186
B2-3
350,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
106,181
110,186
B3-1
308,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
120,245
124,826
B3-2
308,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
120,245
124,826
B3-3
308,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
120,245
124,826
B4-1
266,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
138,523
143,878
B4-2
266,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
138,523
143,878
B4-3
266,870
39,033
800,144
37,662
724,447
138,523
143,878
96
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:109==
Table D.3: Capacity calculation from K. Czerniak’s Test data [42]
CX-X
e [mm]
y [mm]
MR (J*) [kNm]
VR (J*) [kN]
MR [kNm]
VR [kN]
FR (J*) [kN]
FR [kN]
C1-1-X
380,156
127,03
26,172
542,178
29,090
581,419
68,296
75,867
C1-2-X
380,156
127,03
25,379
525,767
28,210
563,821
66,229
73,571
C1-3-X
380,156
127,03
25,181
521,662
27,989
559,419
65,712
72,997
C1-4-X
380,156
127,03
25,320
524,535
28,144
562,500
66,074
73,399
C1-5-X
380,156
127,03
26,204
542,856
29,127
582,146
68,382
75,962
C1-6-X
380,156
127,03
25,262
523,340
28,079
561,218
65,923
73,231
C2-3-X
338,156
127,03
25,077
519,502
27,874
557,103
73,414
81,540
C2-4-X
338,156
127,03
26,288
544,578
29,219
583,993
76,958
85,476
C2-5-X
338,156
127,03
25,417
526,543
28,251
564,653
74,409
82,645
C2-6-X
338,156
127,03
27,487
569,422
30,552
610,635
80,469
89,376
C2-7-X
338,156
127,03
25,410
526,392
28,243
564,490
74,388
82,622
C2-8-X
338,156
127,03
26,013
538,885
28,913
577,888
76,153
84,583
C3-1-X
296,156
127,03
25,068
519,324
27,864
556,911
83,544
92,771
C3-2-X
296,156
127,03
26,148
541,678
29,063
580,883
87,140
96,764
C3-3-X
296,156
127,03
25,152
521,055
27,957
558,768
83,822
93,080
C3-4-X
296,156
127,03
25,106
520,100
27,906
557,744
83,669
92,909
C3-5-X
296,156
127,03
25,327
524,678
28,151
562,653
84,405
93,727
C3-6-X
296,156
127,03
25,900
536,556
28,788
575,390
86,316
95,849
C4-1-X
254,156
127,03
25,207
522,189
28,018
559,983
97,436
108,162
C4-2-X
254,156
127,03
25,332
524,776
28,156
562,758
97,919
108,698
C4-3-X
254,156
127,03
25,603
530,398
28,458
568,787
98,968
109,863
C4-4-X
254,156
127,03
25,062
519,199
27,857
556,777
96,879
107,543
C4-5-X
254,156
127,03
25,973
538,064
28,869
577,007
100,399
111,450
C4-6-X
254,156
127,03
25,876
536,056
28,762
574,854
100,024
111,034
Table D.4: Capacity calculation from A. Nielsen’s Test data [26]
BX-X
e [mm]
y [mm]
MR [kNm]
VR [kN]
MR (J*) [kNm]
VR (J*) [kN]
FR (J*) [kN]
FR [kN]
B1-1
474
127,03
29,062
580,864
26,147
541,660
54,878
60,974
B1-2
474
127,03
28,732
574,261
25,849
535,503
54,254
60,281
B1-3
474
127,03
28,920
578,012
26,018
539,001
54,608
60,675
B2-1
432
127,03
29,103
581,677
26,183
542,419
60,235
66,921
B2-2
432
127,03
28,677
573,160
25,800
534,476
59,353
65,941
B2-3
432
127,03
28,860
576,826
25,965
537,894
59,732
66,363
B2-4
432
127,03
28,685
573,323
25,807
534,628
59,369
65,960
B3-1
390
127,03
29,056
580,740
26,141
541,544
66,521
73,897
B3-2
390
127,03
28,916
577,945
26,015
538,938
66,201
73,542
B3-3
390
127,03
28,796
575,534
25,907
536,690
65,924
73,235
B4-1
348
127,03
29,125
582,108
26,203
542,820
74,581
82,840
B4-2
348
127,03
28,743
574,491
25,860
535,717
73,605
81,756
B4-3
348
127,03
28,716
573,945
25,835
535,208
73,535
81,678
M.Sc. Thesis
97
==PAGE:110==
Appendix E
Matlab Script for Plot data
98
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:111==
Matlab Code 
clear all 
clc 
close all 
T = readtable('Tables1.xlsx','ReadRowNames',true,'Sheet',1); 
figure, 
plot(T.(1),T.(2),'b') 
xlabel('Eccentricity [mm]') 
ylabel('Force Capacity [kN]') 
% title('Table A') 
hold on 
plot(T.(1),T.(3),'r') 
plot(T.(1),T.(4),'y') 
plot(T.(1),T.(5),'--k'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(6),':g'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(7),'-.m'); 
hold off 
legend('F_R','F_R*','F_{R.Ec3}','F_{R.Ec3*}','F_{y,exp}','F_{u,exp}','Locati
on','bestoutside') 
saveas(gcf,'TableA.png') 
  
T = readtable('Tables1.xlsx','ReadRowNames',true,'Sheet',2); 
figure, 
plot(T.(1),T.(2),'b') 
xlabel('Eccentricity [mm]') 
ylabel('Force Capacity [kN]') 
% title('Table A') 
hold on 
plot(T.(1),T.(3),'r') 
plot(T.(1),T.(4),'y') 
plot(T.(1),T.(5),'--k'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(6),':g'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(7),'-.m'); 
hold off 
legend('F_R','F_R*','F_{R.Ec3}','F_{R.Ec3*}','F_{y,exp}','F_{u,exp}','Locati
on','bestoutside') 
saveas(gcf,'TableJ.png') 
  
  
T = readtable('Tables1.xlsx','ReadRowNames',true,'Sheet',3); 
figure, 
plot(T.(1),T.(2),'b') 
xlabel('Eccentricity [mm]') 
ylabel('Force Capacity [kN]') 
% title('Table A') 
hold on 
plot(T.(1),T.(3),'r') 
plot(T.(1),T.(4),'y') 
plot(T.(1),T.(5),'--k'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(6),':g'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(7),'-.m'); 
hold off 
legend('F_R','F_R*','F_{R.Ec3}','F_{R.Ec3*}','F_{y,exp}','F_{u,exp}','Locati
on','bestoutside') 
saveas(gcf,'TableK.png') 
M.Sc. Thesis
99
==PAGE:112==
  
T = readtable('Tables1.xlsx','ReadRowNames',true,'Sheet',4); 
figure, 
plot(T.(1),T.(2),'b') 
xlabel('Eccentricity [mm]') 
ylabel('Force Capacity [kN]') 
% title('Table A') 
hold on 
plot(T.(1),T.(3),'r') 
plot(T.(1),T.(4),'y') 
plot(T.(1),T.(5),'--k'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(6),':g'); 
plot(T.(1),T.(7),'-.m'); 
hold off 
legend('F_R','F_R*','F_{R.Ec3}','F_{R.Ec3*}','F_{y,exp}','F_{u,exp}','Locati
on','bestoutside') 
saveas(gcf,'TableL.png') 
 
 
100
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:113==
M.Sc. Thesis
101
==PAGE:114==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
