==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Electrical Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering
DTU Energy, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Design and implementation of a low­power
energy storage wake­up circuit for a
one­dimensional energy harvester based
on magnetic induction
Submitted by:
Krzysztof Mróz (s192331)
Supervisor:
Rasmus Bjørk
Co­supervisors:
Carlos Enrique Imbaquingo
Muñoz,
Mark Medum Bundgaard
25th of June 2021
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
Foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my advisors Prof. Rasmus
Bjørk and Carlos Enrique Imbaquingo Muñoz for the continuous support in my Master
Thesis research, for their patience, motivation, enthusiasm, and immense knowledge.
Their guidance helped me in both research and writing of this thesis. I could not have
imagined having a better advisors and mentors for those last five months.
I would like to acknowledge the invaluable cooperation with Toit ApS throughout the whole
project. The access to the amazing technology and the expertise of the team behind it
was of a great value for the development of this Master thesis. I would like to thank Mark
Medum Bundgaard for his support through those recent months and for sharing interest
in the project even when other tasks were in overwhelming amounts. Next I would like
to thank Kasper Lund, the entrepreneur behind the creation and development of Toit, for
his decision on getting involved in the Energy Harvesting project from its very first stage.
Moreover, I would gladly like to thank Florian Loitsch, Anders Johnsen and Erik Corry
for their guidance and fast Slack replies whenever I was facing difficulties with using the
platform.
I am grateful to my parents Edyta and Marcin and my sister Magdalena for supporting me
spiritually throughout my life. You were always there for me through all the challenges
and endeavours I have taken upon.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature overview
3
2.1
Selection of the harvester design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Choosing application for the energy harvester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Review of rectifier designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Initial data gathering
7
3.1
Measuring acceleration on the bike rim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Attaching harvester to the wheel and recording it in slow motion . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Espressif ESP32 power consumption measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Selecting components
13
4.1
Harvester model for simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Components for building the energy harvesters and initial simulation results 16
4.3
Electronic components selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Simulating rotating harvester behaviour
19
5.1
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Response to the gravitational force at 3Hz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3
Response to the centrifugal force at 3Hz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4
Response to the gravitational and centrifugal force at 3Hz . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.5
RMS in a function displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.6
Placing the harvester at the wheel rotation axis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Designing and building prototypes
27
6.1
Electrical circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Assembling energy harvesters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3
Harvester on the wheel holders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.4
Central unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.5
Development of Bluetooth Low­Power Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7
Testing prototypes
35
7.1
DC converter tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.2
Testing AC output of built harvesters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7.3
First holder for the wheel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7.4
Second holder for the wheel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.5
Third holder for the wheel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.6
Four harvesters shaker tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.7
Four harvesters shaker with bigger coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8
Discussion
51
8.1
Measurements on the bicycle wheel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.2
Rectifier performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
9
Final conclusion and possibilities for the future research
53
ii
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
The recent years have brought an explosion of Internet of Things technologies [1]. The
IoT describes the network of physical objects, that are embedded with sensors, software,
and other technologies for the purpose of exchanging data with other devices and systems
over the Internet. Being at the forefront of the 4th Industrial Revolution, the IoT equipment
has become the majority of the devices connected to the Internet. Moreover, it is projected
that between 2019 and 2030 their numbers will rise from 7.6 billion to 24.1 billion [2]. That’s
an unprecedented growth. The Internet of Things has been a driving force of development
in a number of fields csuch as computer science, Communication and IC design and
manufacturing. However, supplying power has still been a drawback of any IoT device
implementation. In most applications the solution is either providing an external energy
source or a battery.
The first solution might pose high costs in remote locations, involve technical difficulties
when the electrical installation needs to be added to the already existing system and is
vulnerable to electrical cuts and other types of failures. Therefore, the engineers often
have to think of another way to supply power to the device.
The simplest approach to the aforementioned issues is to use the battery and in the ma­
jority of cases it is a satisfactory solution to the problem. Nonetheless, that doesn’t come
without its own disadvantages. First of all, batteries have limited capacity. Depending
on how power­hungry the appliance is, this might bring the necessity of a regular main­
tenance of the system. When the particular task is not important enough to bare the cost
of regular battery replacements, the IoT device will not be implemented at all[3]. This im­
plies the existence of a vast market of IoT applications that are too cost sensitive to base
them on the battery power. Finally, the lifetime of the battery can significantly shorten the
potential operational time of the product.
Difficulties related to the two mentioned approaches to power IoT devices, resulted in
the emergence of the Self­Powered IoT Devices [4]. The process of extracting ambi­
ent energy from the surrounding environment is called ”Energy Harvesting” [5]. Modern
energy harvesters are based on mechanical, aeroelastic, wind, solar, radiofrequency,
and pyroelectric mechanisms that generate power. Those technologies are still in their
early development stages, but their potential impact can be of a great magnitude. More
widespread implementation of IoT monitoring devices can both contribute to optimisa­
tion of industrial processes resulting in more sustainable and efficient manufacturing and
it can also increase our life expectancy when introduced to healthcare[6]. IoT can also
make our life safer and more comfortable when present in infrastructure and home appli­
ances. The usage of energy harvesters can make this transformation cheaper and more
environmentally friendly.
In my Master thesis I designed and built a Self­Powered IoT system based on magneti­
cally levitated electromagnetic vibration harvester. It was planned to perform the task of
monitoring pressure within a bike tire and wirelessly sending data using Bluetooth Low
Energy [7] to the central unit placed somewhere else on a bicycle frame or in cyclist’s
pockets. The reasoning behind using 1D harvester instead of a dynamo was that it could
be implemented in already existing bicycle without alternations to its structure. An energy
harvester and a tire with a pressure sensor inside could be placed on a regular bicycle
rim and then connected to the central unit. With this approach a new feature could be
1
==PAGE:5==
added to an existing vehicle past the manufacturing stage. The mechanical simplicity
of 1D energy harvester could keep the manufacturing price of such a product low, thus
reaching a broad potential customer base. The main theoretical basis for the harvester
design was ”The full phase space dynamics of a magnetically levitated electromagnetic
vibration harvester” by Jensen et al. [8] as well as their laboratory research.
The system was planned to consist of:
• Energy harvester attached to the bike wheel
• Rectifier circuit for converting AC voltage to DC and stabilising it
• Simple digital pressure sensor
• Low power Bluetooth microchip for reading the pressure values and sending them
to the central unit
• Central unit consisting of ESP32 microcontroller, Bluetooth module and powerbank
energy supply
The project was carried out in collaboration with the company Toit ApS that develops
the software platform for IoT of the same name ­ Toit. It consists among others of Toit
Virtual Machine[9] for Espressif ESP32 microcontrollers. Moreover, the platform allows
for over­the­air code deployment and data transfer. That was particularly important due
to characteristics of this project where hardware was attached to a moving vehicle.
2
==PAGE:6==
2
Literature overview
2.1
Selection of the harvester design
The theoretical basis for analysis of a 1D energy harvester were ”The full phase space dy­
namics of a magnetically levitated electromagnetic vibration harvester”[8] and ”Analytical
Force and Flux for a One­Dimensional Electromagnetic Vibration Energy Harvester[10]”.
Figure 2.1 shows the scheme of the proposed one­dimensional electromagnetic vibration
energy harvester. This 1D­EMVEH system consists of three cylindrical permanent mag­
nets in coaxial positions, enclosed in a tube and facing each other with repelling polarities.
This results in levitation of the central magnet in the position where both counteracting
forces equalise. This placement allows middle magnet to vibrate, and through alternat­
ing the distance from the coils to induce electromotive force. This design mitigates the
mechanical friction compared with the more classical one where the permanent magnet
is attached to a spring. An additional result of such solution is an extension of a lifetime
of the device, because less heat is being exerted and the spring material is not getting
worn off. However, an enclosing tube is still necessary, since Earnshaw’s theorem [11]
prevents a stable equilibrium of the levitating magnet. The dynamics of such 1D­EMVEH
can be approximated using the second order system. The interaction between the levi­
tating permanent magnet and the coil behaves as a damper, while the force between the
magnets provides a restoring force.
Figure 2.1: The model of a 1D energy harvester from Ref. [8]
3
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2.2: Dimensions and position of the permanent magnet and coil from Ref. [10]
Figure 2.2 shows the model of an interaction between a levitating permanent magnet
and a single coil turn. It is useful for understanding the meaning of some dimension and
position parameters used in calculations. The changes of the magnetic flux within the coil
result in induction of electromotive force. The formula for calculating the voltage induced
in a single coil turn is given in the Equation 2.1:
emfin = Kfvz
∫inf
0
J1(q)J1(qRc/R)sinh(qξ)e−qτdq
(2.1)
where:
Kf = 2πµoMrRc,
q = kperpendicular ∗R
J1 ­ Bessel function of the first kind [12]
vz ­ velocity along the tube axis,
Rc ­ radius of the coil
R ­ radius of the levitating magnet
Mr ­ residual magnetization
µo ­ permeability in free space
ξ ­ dimension from Figure 2.2
τ ­ dimension from Figure 2.2
kperpendicular ­ wave number perpendicular to the z axis
Figure 2.3: The prototype of a 1D energy harvester from Ref. [10]
Figure 2.3 presents an example of this energy harvester prototype from Ref. [8]. The ac­
tual design used in realisation of the project was a variation of the one presented above.
Instead of the single magnet in the middle, two magnets attached to a dogbone and re­
pelling each other have been used. Also the fixed magnets have been set in a slightly dif­
ferent way, so that they repel each other. This way the lines of flux field turn more sharply
resulting in larger induced voltage. In addition, placing the coils over the operation point
4
==PAGE:8==
of each magnet guarantees the maximum flux changes in operation. The harvesters built
during the project can be seen in the Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: The harvesters used in the project
2.2
Choosing application for the energy harvester
The scientific paper that describes the self­powered TPMS[13] system development is
”Vibration energy harvesting technology for smart tire monitoring” by Seo et al. [14]. A
smart tire monitoring system uses tire information, such as temperature, pressure, ac­
celeration, force, tire­road friction coefficient, in real time to monitor the driving safety of
cars.
The South Korean team managed to build a self­powered monitoring system with me­
chanical energy harvesters. It utilised variation of the acceleration on the inner part of
the tire and used it to power the acceleration sensor as well as wireless communication
module.
Tire monitoring systems nowadays are usually battery powered or have complicated en­
ergy transmission solutions included at the time of car manufacturing. The necessity to
replace batteries poses a burden on the car user. Moreover, extreme working conditions
of car wheels make it likely for battery powered system to suffer from failures.
The South Korean team was able to prove that such a system can be self­powered and
successfully operate for a long time. In their major experiment they managed to power
the system continuously at a rotation speed of the wheel corresponding to driving 60km/h
for over a 1000 km distance. I decided to implement analogous system for the bike wheel
where the access to electrical power is even more of an issue.
The crucial difference between their car TPMS system and the one on the bicycle is the
origin of vibrations utilised for energy harvesting. The car tire has larger space inside
5
==PAGE:9==
which allowed researchers to place small size energy harvesters inside of them. A tire
in a car carries multiple times larger weight which results in its deformation. Nearby the
edge of contact of the wheel with the surface changes in normal acceleration can reach
up to 20 g. Those impulse signals were resulting in sudden spikes of voltage output of the
energy harvesters and later fading oscillations of this signal. Such impulses happen twice
during a single wheel rotation: at the beginning of a surface contact and when surface
contact is being lost. When cruising at around 60 km/h the rotation frequency of regular
18 inch car wheel is around 23 Hz, so with sufficient time constant of the rectifying circuit
this signal can result in stable DC output for external load.
When considering the TPMS for a bicycle placing energy harvesters inside the tire tube
would be a difficult task due to space limitations. Also the deformation of the tire wouldn’t
result in such acceleration changes of the same range. That is due to lower rotation fre­
quency of around 3 Hz and smaller forces acting on the wheels. The ambient vibration
that can be used in this application is the rotating vector of gravity that can cause sinu­
soidal movement of the levitating magnet inside of energy harvester. Lower frequency
and amplitude of the input vibrating force means that harvesters need to be larger as well
as the time constants of the rectifier. The 1 mF capacitor used to stabilise input voltage
in the project of Seo et al. [14] would not be enough to ensure steady DC signal in the
bicycle application.
2.3
Review of rectifier designs
The paper Self­Powered Rectifier for Energy Harvesting Applications[15] gives an overview
of the rectifier architectures that could be used in this project.
Standard and Schottky Diode Rectifiers are the simplest solutions to transforming AC
to DC voltage. They work passively and have predictable, stable characteristics. They
are usually a preferable solution for most technical applications, but their main issue is
a relatively high voltage drop that can be in the range of 0.2 ­ 0.7 V. Additionally, even
though it is possible to manufacture Shottky diodes in CMOS processes[16], it is often
not a viable solution, since it would cost additional masking layers. Thus, in some cases
diode­connected transistors are utilised to mimic the operation of a standard diodes.
Self­driven rectifiers allow for effectively lowering the voltage losses. They are particularly
useful in RFID applications[17] where input signals are in range of 0.1 ­ 1 V. Efficiency
Enhancement Techniques (EVC) lower the voltage threshold by providing input signal to
the gates of NMOS diodes and thus overcoming internal bias. The internal Vth cancel­
lation (IVC) technique utilises the additional battery to provide the necessary voltage to
the transistor gate. SVC is a method that reduces the threshold even further by both
employing input and output voltages to the gates. One of the disadvantages of all these
structures is floating of the rectifier threshold but the main drawback of is the necessity
to occasionally reprogram the threshold voltage via the floating gate pin. In the practical
application of energy harvesting this could result in system suddenly stopping to work and
without technical expertise could not be brought back to operation.
Other mentioned methods are: bootstrapped, inverter­based and comparator­based. They
include additional types of electronic components and their complexity is significantly
higher compared to the previously mentioned ones. Therefore, their implementation was
not considered in the scope of this project.
6
==PAGE:10==
3
Initial data gathering
Before proceeding with simulating and designing the system I had decided to gather the
data about acceleration on the bike rim and power consumption of various electronic com­
ponents. With this data I could evaluate if realising the project was even possible. The
physical measurements were also necessary for proceeding with simulations and com­
ponents selection.
3.1
Measuring acceleration on the bike rim
In order to gather data about acceleration affecting the harvester, I attached a Toitbox to
the wheel. The Toitbox is a prototype device by Toit ApS that has an ESP32 chip, a set
of sensors and communication modules on board. It runs the Toit Virtual Machine[9] and
therefore is suited for gathering acceleration data and transferring it over WiFi for later
analysis.
Figure 3.1 shows the attachment of the Toitbox to the bike wheel. The second device was
used as a counterweight to the measuring unit.
Figure 3.1: Attachment of the accelerometer device to the bike rim
Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show values of normal and tangent acceleration while manually ro­
tating the wheel in the position presented in Figure 3.1. This was the easiest approach to
collecting the data but means that the exact rotation speed cannot be determined. The
goal of this experiment wasn’t to determine exact absolute values of accelerations but
to check the characteristics of acceleration curve. By performing the measurements in
stationary position, the impact of road unevenness and other random accelerations was
7
==PAGE:11==
excluded. The sampling rate was relatively low ­ 10Hz because of the limitations of the
wireless data transfer delays.
Stationary measurements showed the expected sinusoidal oscillations of 1g in amplitude
caused by gravitational force. In the Figure 3.2, that presents normal acceleration, the
red arrow points at the example of peak­to­peak difference being approximately 2 g. The
oscillations were caused by gravitational force while constant offset by the centrifugal
force. As can be seen in the figure the offset due to centrifugal force can have multiple
times higher value than gravitational acceleration.
For tangent measurements in Figure 3.3 for the majority of time the accelerations stayed
between 1 g and ­1 g. That was the result of gravitational acceleration. The maximal
absolute values were reached while braking but those are temporary.
Figure 3.2: Stationary normal acceleration
Figure 3.3: Stationary tangent acceleration
8
==PAGE:12==
After the initial stationary test, I did a test ride on the bicycle. While cycling in a typical
manner, increasing and decreasing the velocity few times, the value of normal acceler­
ation on the rim had a constant component between 2g ­ 5g. It is shown in Figure 3.4
where I some description of it is additionally overlayed. The red lines are present on the
plot to visualize peak­to­peak amplitude caused by oscillating gravitation while the green
line is supposed to present centrifugal acceleration.
The tangent acceleration was varying between 1g and ­1g but this time more often reach­
ing higher peaks due to unevenness of the road and changes in speed. The plots can be
seen in Figures 3.4 and 3.5.
Figure 3.4: Normal acceleration while riding with overlayed description‘
Figure 3.5: Tangent acceleration while riding
9
==PAGE:13==
3.2
Attaching harvester to the wheel and recording it in slow
motion
In order to estimate the optimal way of placing the harvester on the rim, I gathered the slow
motion recordings of rotating wheel with a GoPro camera at 240 frames/sec. Again the
exact speed of rotation cannot be determined because the wheel was rotated manually.
The goal of this test wasn’t to determine exact behaviour at some specific velocity but to
see the general characteristics of movement for various harvester attachment. I compared
normal, diagonal and tangent position of the harvester as visible in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Normal, diagonal and tangent harvester placements
The acceleration data had suggested that tangent position would be the most convenient
for utilising oscillation’s energy. Unfortunately, the slow motion recordings showed the
opposite. In tangent position the magnet wasn’t moving at all after reaching the desired
rotation speed. The movement for diagonal setup was smaller in amplitude in relation to
the normal position. While in normal position the levitating magnet was moving by around
2 cm in every wheel rotation.
Since displacement amplitude is related to the voltage induced in the coil, the normal
position was the only one that could be used in the project. My hypothesis on the reason
for aforementioned harvester behaviour is that in tangent position the vector of centrifugal
force is perpendicular to the harvester’s tube walls. Therefore, increasing the value of
static friction to the level that prevents levitating magnet from moving due to actuation by
smaller gravitational force.
10
==PAGE:14==
3.3
Espressif ESP32 power consumption measurements
The microcontroller used in the project is Espressif ESP32­WROOM­32E. The initial idea
was to use energy harvesting for powering it, performing sensor readings and data trans­
fer.
According to the ESP32 datasheet the current consumption in the least power­
consuming 802.11n WiFi RF mode is on average 165 mA with 3.3V power source. I
performed actual current consumption tests to compare real application with datasheet
information. I also checked the voltage operating range for the device.
3.3 Volts
5 Volts
Boot up and connect to the server
40 ­ 200 mA
40 ­ 200 mA
Deep sleep
below scale
below scale
Running two programs and reporting to the
cloud every second each
40­140 mA
40­140 mA
Table 3.1: ESP32 devkit power consumption measurements
Table 3.1 shows the results of current measurements for ESP32 powered either from 5V
or 3.3V supply. The tests were run in three different scenarios: the device is booting
and connecting to the server, it is working in deep sleep mode, the device is running two
concurrent apps that report to the server every second.
The results were in line with the data from the datasheet [18]. The current consumption
was relatively large for performing a simple task of reading and sending data. Conse­
quently, I decided to find a simple Bluetooth module able to send simple data packages
over RF connection to another device performing the role of a central unit. This central
unit would be built with ESP32 microcontroller and battery power.
11
==PAGE:15==
12
==PAGE:16==
4
Selecting components
This chapter describes the component selection process. The first section covers the sys­
tem model simulations with different set of components from manufacturers’ catalogues.
Section 4.2 covers physical components for harvester assembly and section 4.3 lists elec­
tronic components for voltage rectification and communication.
4.1
Harvester model for simulation
To perform the simulations I have used the state space model that was implemented as
a MATLAB script by Carlos Enrique Imbaquingo Muñoz based on the theoretical calcu­
lations from ”Analytical Force and Flux for a One­Dimensional Electromagnetic Vibration
Energy Harvester” [10]. The set of equations describing the model is presented in the
Equation 4.1.
∂z
∂t (t) = v
∂v
∂t (t) = Fmag(z(t) −zdrive(t))
m
−cl
m ∗(v(t) −vdrive(t)) −2 ∗∂flux
∂z (z(t) −zdrive(t)) ∗a(t)
m
−g
∂a
∂t (t) = 2 ∗∂flux
∂z
(z(t) −zdrive(t)) ∗(v(t) −vdrive(t))
Li
−2 ∗Req ∗a(t)
Li
(4.1)
where:
• z ­ relative displacement of the levitating magnet
• v ­ relative velocity of the levitating magnet
• a ­ relative acceleration of the levitating magnet
• Fmag ­ magnetic force between levitating magnet and fixed magnets
• cl ­ damping coefficient
• m ­ mass of the levitating magnets and plastic dogbone
• zdrive ­ driving amplitude
• vdrive ­ driving velocity
•
∂flux
∂z
­ derivative of the flux in respect to the position
• Li ­ coil internal inductance
• Req ­ equivalent electrical resistance
• g ­ gravitational acceleration
The amplitude of the movement used in the simulation was 1.5 cm and the signal fre­
quency was 3Hz. The selection of frequency operating point was based as a realistic
operating point for the bike user. Since it is corresponding to the 26 inch wheel bike
cycling at the velocity of approximately 22.4 km/h.
13
==PAGE:17==
The model describes the behaviour of the 1D harvester in the vertical setup, where the
movement is performed in one vertical direction and in a sinusoidal manner. The labora­
tory shaker setup can be seen in the Figure 4.1 The shaker is a simple crank and slide
mechanism that changes the rotational movement of the motor shaft into a sinusoidal drive
of an attached harvester. The numbers in the figure correspond to following elements:
1. Electrical DC motor
2. Crank ­ Cylindrical component placed on the motor shaft with threaded holes drilled
at different distances from rotation axis. The pusher is screwed to it and connects it
with a slider.
3. Vertical rail for the slider.
4. Holder attached to the slider.
5. Energy harvester attached to the slider. The held energy harvesters were kept at
a distance of 90 mm in order to mitigate the impact of magnet attraction on the
performance.
6. Electronic breadboard is attached on the other side of the holder. All electronic
components are placed there and all cables are connected to it.
7. DAC cables. Grey one is connected to the GND the yellow is measuring the gen­
erated voltage. The DAC used for experiments was NI USB­6351 from National
Instruments [19].
14
==PAGE:18==
Figure 4.1: Laboratory shaker setup
15
==PAGE:19==
4.2
Components for building the energy harvesters and
initial simulation results
I performed multiple simulations with various combinations of the components available
from manufacturers’ catalogues. Regarding coils I tried components of: 0.20 mH, 0.33
mH, 0.35 mH, 0.44 mH, 0.46 mH, 0.50 mH, 1.00 mH and 1.15 mH inductance from the
producer ­ Jentzen[20]. Regarding magnets the ones with maximal external diameter
were chosen from Supermagnete catalogue[21]. The largest magnets of this type were
15 mm in diameter. I compared the simulations while using disc 15 x 8 mm and 15 x 6 x
6 mm ring magnets in various combinations. The criterion for evaluating the simulations
was the maximal amplitude of output voltage. In order to fit the selected magnets inside
and selected coils outside, the Ø20mm acrylic tubes with Ø16mm internal diameter were
selected. The distance between fixed magnets was set for 200mm, while the distance
between two levitating magnets attached to a plastic dogbone was chosen for 40mm.
The rest of the elements of the Energy Harvesters were created using ”FDM”[22] addi­
tive manufacturing technology. I have designed and 3D printed them using PLA filament
material. The in­depth description of the designed components is given in Chapter 6.
For the assembly, I selected two types of coils from the catalogue of a manufacturer ­
Jentzen. First had an inductance of 1 mH and second 0.460 mH. I planned on building
two energy harvesters with the first type of coil and two with the second type. The following
list of components was ordered:
• The Ø20mm x 2000mm (internal ø16mm) acrylic pipe
• Air Core Coil 0,460mH +/­3% 1,470Ωwire 0,40mm=26AWG OD­26 / 10mm
• Air Core Coil 1,000mH +/­3% 2,240Ωwire 0,40mm=26AWG OD­29 / 10mm
• Cylindrical neodymium magnets 15x8mm ­ S­15­08­N,
• Ring neodymium magnets 15x6x6mm ­ R­15­06­06­N,
(a) Simulation of energy harvester be­
haviour with 0.460mH coils
‘
(b) Simulation of energy harvester be­
haviour with 1mH coils
16
==PAGE:20==
4.3
Electronic components selection
After selecting the components for building the energy harvesters I proceeded with order­
ing the electronic components for rectification of the alternating current from the harvester
and for measuring and sending the data.
4.3.1
Microchip RN4871 Bluetooth Low Power module
For the communication between ESP32 microcontroller and the pressure sensor I se­
lected the Microchip RN4871 BLE module[23]. Its main advantages are:
• Low power consumption ­ with 3.3V power input it can transfer data over BLE with
electrical current consumption at as low as 10mA.
• Wide operating range ­ 1.9V to 3.6V which was a large advantage when combined
with unpredictable nature of the voltage generated by energy harvesters.
• UART, SPI and I2C communication protocols are included. They allow communica­
tion with a wide range of other electronic devices.
• Capability of running simple scripts as a standalone device. Therefore allowing for
reading data from the pressure sensor and sending it over to the ESP32 module,
without the need for additional devices.
4.3.2
Honeywell MPRLS0300YG00001B pressure sensor
This pressure sensor was selected based on the following features[24]:
• Using a digital I2C and SPI communication protocols, that can work with RN4871
module.
• Pressure operating range up to 2.5 bar. Usually those size of sensors are operating
in the ranges of atmospheric pressure.
• Low power consumption of around 10mW while transferring.
• Wide supply voltage operating range between 1.8V and 3.6V.
4.3.3
Texas Instruments TLV61220DBVR step up converter
Inspired by the work of Seo et al. [14] I have decided to use the TLV61220DBVR step up
DC­DC converter[25]. The main reasoning behind selecting it was wide input operating
range as low as 0.7V. That’s the range of voltage I should reach with four harvesters
connected in a series.
4.3.4
Shottky 1N914TR Diode
For rectification Shottky 1N914TR diode was used. It has a minimum operational voltage
of 0.63 V and a forward drop of around 250 mV [26].
4.3.5
Ultracapacitor selection
The selection of an ultracapacitor was one of the most difficult tasks. For that purpose
I have created a mathematical model of the rectifier circuit in MATLAB Simulink toolbox.
That was done after the energy harvesters had already been built and their output mea­
sured.
I feeded into the model the measured output voltage of energy harvesters in experiments
with an open circuit. The diode voltage drops and external load were included in the sim­
ulation. Then I generated the simulations of voltage output with various ultracapacitors
over time. Larger capacitance resulted in smoother output DC voltage while smaller ca­
pacitance meant that operational voltage could be reached faster. In the end Finally, I
17
==PAGE:21==
tested four different ultracapacitors: 0.22 F, 0.47 F, 1 F, 2.2 F by measuring their time
constants in the laboratory and compared their performance in the rectifying circuit.
After performing tests with all aforementioned ultracapacitors, I decided to use the small­
est one with the capacitance of 0.22 F [27]. This choice resulted in less stable output
voltage, however, using the larger ultracapacitor could mean that to reach necessary
voltage, the cyclist would need to maintain the required speed over 5 minutes. This could
limit the real usability of the whole tire monitoring system.
18
==PAGE:22==
5
Simulating rotating harvester behaviour
5.1
Mathematical model
I proceeded with performing simulations of the harvester behaviour in a real application
setup. In order to do it, I had to rewrite the mathematical model so that the input signal
to the system became the gravitational acceleration instead of the displacement of the
shaker[28]. In addition, the centrifugal force due to rotation of the wheel had to be added.
The equation set describing the system is presented in the Equation 5.1. It is similar to
the Equation 4.1 but the zdrive variable got removed and gdrive(t) function was added at
the end of the second equation.
The model assumes the gravitational force to be changing sinusoidally the same way
the component of the gravitational force that is parallel to the harvester does. The zinit
displacement is the distance between the middle of a harvester and the axis of the rotation
wheel, in the direction parallel to the axis of the harvester tube. By changing the value of
zinit I could estimate the impact of harvester placement on the power output of the system.
∂z
∂t (t) = v
∂v
∂t (t) = Fmag(z(t))
m
−2 ∗∂flux(z(t))
∂z
∗a(t)
m
+ Fcentrifug(ω, z(t) + zinit)
m
−cl
mv(t) + gdrive(t)
∂a
∂t (t) = 2 ∗
∂flux
∂z (z(t)) ∗v(t)
Li
−2 ∗Req ∗a(t)
Li
(5.1)
where:
• z ­ relative displacement of the levitating magnet
• v ­ relative velocity of the levitating magnet
• a ­ relative acceleration of the levitating magnet
• zinit ­ displacement of the harvester from the axis of the wheel along the direction
parallel to the harvester axis
• Fmag(z) ­ magnetic force between the levitating magnet and fixed magnets
• cl ­ damping coefficient
• m ­ mass of the levitating magnets and plastic dogbone
• gdrive(t) ­ gravitational acceleration
•
∂flux(z)
∂z
­ derivative of the flux in respect to the position
• Li ­ coil internal inductance
• Req ­ equivalent electrical resistance
• Fcentrifug(ω, z) ­ centrifugal force calculated based on the angular speed of the
wheel, the displacement of the energy harvester from the rotation axis and the cur­
rent position for the levitating magnets in relation to the harvester’s tube
• ω ­ angular speed of the wheel
19
==PAGE:23==
5.2
Response to the gravitational force at 3Hz
Having the model ready, I performed a simulation of the system response to the input
of a sinusoidal acceleration of 1 g amplitude. In this first step I didn’t include the impact
of the centrifugal force on the levitating magnet. The Figure 5.1 presents the result for
simulation done for the frequency of 3 Hz and coils of 0.460 mH inductance.
As it can be seen in Figure 5.1, the amplitude of output voltage is reaching 0.5 V for
two 0.460 mH coils on the harvester, the amplitudes of levitating magnet displacement is
reaching around 5cm in both directions.
Figure 5.1: System response to the sinusoidal gravitational force at 3Hz speed and no
centrifugal force
20
==PAGE:24==
5.3
Response to the centrifugal force at 3Hz
In this simulation I included only the impact of centrifugal force on the harvester, while the
levitating magnet was initially placed in the middle of the harvester without any velocity.
The plot in Figure 5.2 can be interpreted as the step response of the system. The cen­
trifugal force in this simulation corresponds to the centrifugal force that would affect the
harvester attached to the rim of a 26 inch wheel. That means it was placed at the distance
of 330.2 mm from the wheel rotation axis.
The result was that levitating magnet moved to the new equilibrium point at around 67 mm
in an oscillatory manner. The oscillations were decreasing in amplitude in exponential
way. This could be predicted because the induction of voltage inside the coil results in
transforming kinetic energy of the moving magnet into electrical potential.
Figure 5.2: System response to the centrifugal force at 3Hz rotation speed
5.4
Response to the gravitational and centrifugal force at 3Hz
The next step was to perform simulation that included both centrifugal and gravitational
force. The distance used was again 330.2 mm from the axis of rotation. Figure 5.3 shows
the response at 3 Hz and with two 0.460 mH coils placed around 0 mm operation point.
Except for the initial transitional state, the voltage output is close to 0.
The dominant constant centrifugal force places the levitating magnets around a new oper­
ating point at approximately 64 mm. Then the oscillatory gravitational acceleration results
in a sinusoidal movement of levitating magnet around this new operation point. Those
oscillations have an amplitude of around 0.4 mm and does result in voltage changes in a
range of 10−3 V.
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 5.3: System response to the centrifugal and gravitational force at 3Hz rotation
speed
Considering the results of the previous simulation I moved the coils to the new operating
point at 64 mm. Figure 5.4 shows the results of this simulation. The resulting voltage
and characteristics of the plots were nearly the same as in the Figure 5.3. Therefore, I
concluded that placing the harvester next to the rim would not result in any useful range
of power output.
Figure 5.4: System response to the centrifugal and gravitational force at 3Hz rotation
speed with coils displaced to the 64mm operating point
22
==PAGE:26==
5.5
RMS in a function displacement
After analysing the simulation results from Sections: 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, I performed simula­
tions of the impact that displacement from the axis of rotation have on the voltage output of
the Energy Harvester. The metrics that I selected for this purpose was root mean square
voltage [29]. RMS is relatively close to the actual DC voltage that can be generated after
rectification and smoothing of the voltage, when energy losses are neglected.
The model from Equation 5.1 was used and the initial displacement was incremented
by 1 cm in each simulation iteration. The program was then calculating voltage RMS in
the time window between 5 ­ 10 sec of the simulation. The reasoning behind choosing
this time window was to ensure the mitigation of the impact of voltage generated in initial
transitional period. The simulations were performed for two rotation frequencies: 2 Hz
and 3 Hz.
Figure 5.5 shows the RMS values with 1 cm of displacement increments. Here it can be
seen that the plot stays relatively flat until 15 cm of displacement. Then it goes down
nearly to 0 V, and then at 17 cm rises to its maximum value, just to go down again and
stay at nearly 0 V for all the displacements above 20 cm.
Figure 5.5: Voltage output RMS at 2Hz rotation speed in relation to harvester displace­
ment
23
==PAGE:27==
The plot in Figure 5.6 has similar shape to the one in Figure 5.5 with the difference that
the first drop is at around 4 cm of displacement and another local maximum is at around
10 cm.
Figure 5.6: Voltage output RMS at 3Hz rotation speed in relation to harvester displace­
ment
24
==PAGE:28==
5.6
Placing the harvester at the wheel rotation axis
The simulations from Section 5.5 showed the inconstant character of the system voltage
output when centrifugal force gets involved. Therefore, I came up with a conclusion that
the reliable approach would be to place the energy harvesters next to the axis of rotation
of the wheel. There the values of centrifugal force are low enough to have a minimal
impact on the system performance.
The Figure 5.7 shows the system model response when energy harvester is placed on
an axis perpendicular to the axis of rotation. The displacement from rotation axis along
the harvester’s tube is equal to 0 mm.
The chosen speed for system operation was 3 Hz, where the voltage amplitudes of a
single energy harvester were at around 0.4 V and RMS at over 0.2 V. The plan was to
use four devices in a series, to reach the minimum voltage of 0.7 V needed for the step
up converter to generate enough voltage to power the Bluetooth Module.
Figure 5.7: Simulation comparison of energy harvester voltage output at different frequen­
cies when attached to the hub
25
==PAGE:29==
26
==PAGE:30==
6
Designing and building prototypes
In this chapter the process of designing and building energy harvesters is described. In
Section 6.1 a description of the planned electrical circuit is shown, then in Section 6.2 the
process of building harvesters is explained. Section 6.3 presents the different holders that
bind harvesters and electronics to a bicycle wheel. The last Section 6.4 covers the central
unit of the planned system. Central unit was battery powered and remotely collecting the
measurement data.
6.1
Electrical circuit
Figure 6.1 contains electrical schematics of the rectifier that transform alternating current
extracted from the harvester coils into a direct current that can be utilised for powering
external devices. The alternating current is rectified using a 4­diode electrical bridge. The
DC voltage on the output is used to charge the C1 = 0.22F ultracapacitor that can store
energy for a relatively long time, even in the range of weeks [30].
The selection of this rectifier design was preceded by reading Self­Powered Rectifier
for Energy Harvesting Applications [15]. This paper gives an overview of rectifier ar­
chitectures with: diodes, NMOS, CMOS, EVC, IVC, SVC, bootstrapped, inverter­based,
comparator­based. NMOS and CMOS architectures are using logical gates to imitate the
behaviour of diodes within the printed integrated circuits. Such solution did not add any
advantage compared to simply using ready­produced diodes. Other more complex de­
signs required using additional energy source to lower the voltage drop or had a highly
complex structure. On those grounds and the fact that the design from Seo et al. [14] had
already been used in TPMS application, it was selected as a baseline for the project. The
alternations to it were: replacement of one of the capacitors with larger C1 supercapacitor
due to lower frequency of an input signal and adding R1 resistor and L1 inductor. Imple­
mentation of those additional components was decided during experiments in a heuristic
way, because it was resulting in lowering the relative size of fluctuations to the mean
output voltage value.
The voltage from the bridge is supposed to be appearing only for short periods of time
in spikes and then used to charge the ultracapacitor slowly, that can later be used to
power external load. The additional capacitors C2, C3 and R1 resistor were added to the
system to stabilise the voltage and remove high frequency signals from it. The resulting
DC voltage was expected to be in the range of 0 ­ 2.0 V.
The grounding was necessary for the DAC measurements to accurately and without any
major offset measure the output on the terminals [19].
Figure 6.2 presents the whole electrical setup that was used in the project. The Step­Up
converter is connected to the output of the rectifier. It is supposed to convert 1V input
voltage into 3.3V that is necessary to wake up RN4871 Bluetooth module. In practice the
power output can be lower because the operating range of the BLE module is as low as
1.9V.
The inductor L2 is important for the efficiency of the conversion process. The higher the
inductance the larger in amplitude are the oscillations of the output voltage and lower
the frequency of switching. Increasing the frequency of switching results in increased
energy losses on the converter. The voltage divider formed with resistors R2 and R3 is
27
==PAGE:31==
VAC
R1
L1
C1
C2
+
−
VDC
Figure 6.1: Rectifier circuit
feeding back the information about output voltage to the DC­DC converter. By modifying
the proportion between those two resistances, it is possible to adjust the desired output
power of the device.
The resulting voltage is being measured by the external DAC or oscilloscope. Sometimes
during tests, RN4871 module was being replaced with a resistor to provide a known ex­
ternal load or a LED with 330 Ωresistor to simulate the behaviour of a pressure sensor.
VAC
Rectifier
StepUp
GND
VBAT
EN
L2
SW
R2
R3
FB
VOUT
C3
V cc
GND
RN4871
V
DAC
Vout
Figure 6.2: Experimental setup for Bluetooth module powering tests
The following list contains all components present in the Figures 6.1 and 6.2:
• VAC ­ alternating voltage from the coils of energy harvesters put in series
• R1 ­ resistor 2.2 Ω
• R2 ­ resistor 1M Ω
• R3 ­ resistor 180k Ω
• C1 ­ capacitor 10 µF
• C2 ­ ultracapacitor 0.22 F
• C3 ­ capacitor 10 µF
• L1 ­ inductor 4.7 µH
28
==PAGE:32==
• L2 ­ inductor 4.7 µH
• RN4871 ­ Microchip RN4871 Bluetooth Low­Energy module
• Diodes ­ Shottky diodes 1N914TR
• StepUp ­ DC­DC step­up converter TLV61220
6.2
Assembling energy harvesters
Once the theoretical analyses had been finished, I continued with building the energy har­
vesters. The final result can be seen in the Figure 6.3. Some components were modelled
using Autodesk Inventor and then 3D printed using PLA filament.
Figure 6.3: Four built harvesters
All components used for harvester assembly can be seen in the Figure 6.4. The tubes
had to be milled down by 1 mm in order to place the coils on them. Also some electrical
tape was used to ensure the coils won’t slide over the tubes.
29
==PAGE:33==
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Figure 6.4: Elements
The list of components:
1. Fixed Ø15 mm ring neodymium magnet that maintains the fixed magnetic field within
which the levitating magnets are moving.
2. Magnet holder that is attached to the tube and stops the fixed magnet from moving
inside the tube.
3. Lid that blocks other components from falling outside of tube.
4. Inductive coils.
5. So called ”dogbone” ­ a PLA component with two repelling Ø15 mm neodymium
magnets glued to its ends. This is the levitating part that induces voltage in the
coils.
6. Plexiglas tubes with Ø16 mm internal diameter and Ø20 mm external diameter. They
were cut to the lengths of around 230 mm in order to place the fixed magnets at the
distance of 200 mm.
30
==PAGE:34==
6.3
Harvester on the wheel holders
As the simulations from Chapter 5 shown, the distance of energy harvester from the axis of
rotation had a significant influence on its output. Hence, one of the crucial matters for this
project was to design a holder that could bind the harvesters to the bicycle wheel while
fitting inside its limited space and providing minimal distance from the axis of rotation.
In the span of the project development three different prototypes were built and tested.
Figure 6.5 contains visualisations of those holder designs from Autodesk Inventor.
• Subfigure 6.5a ­ The first holder design with 32 mm space between centers of
harvesters that are placed 32 mm from the rotation axis. Test results in Section 7.3.
• Subfigure 6.5b ­ The second holder design with 51 mm space between centers of
the harvesters that are placed 83 mm and 34 mm from the rotation axis. Test results
in Section 7.4.
• Subfigure 6.5c ­ The third holder design with 76 mm space between centers of the
harvesters that are placed 101 mm and 26 mm from the rotation axis. Test results
in Section 7.5.
The test results for these designs are shown in Chapter 7. This chapter includes also
pictures of the prototypes and evaluation of each design.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.5: Holder designs
31
==PAGE:35==
6.4
Central unit
Figure 6.6 shows the Espressif ESP32 microcontroller development kit and RN4871 de­
velopment kit on the same breadboard. ESP32 is being powered through its USB port
from a powerbank. Pins 3V 3 and GND of ESP32 are connected to the RN4871 module
in order to provide power to it. During actual development UART pins of RN4871 were
connected to corresponding pins on ESP32 to establish communication between them.
The cables were removed in order to make the picture clearer.
The setup from Figure 6.6 would be placed inside a 3D printed holder and attached to
the bike frame. It would be serving as a central unit collecting data wirelessly from an­
other RN4871 placed on the wheel with the pressure center. Moreover, the central unit
could serve a purpose of the on­board computer of a more sophisticated IoT smart bicycle
system.
Figure 6.6: Central Unit
32
==PAGE:36==
6.5
Development of Bluetooth Low­Power Communication
6.5.1
Physical development setup
In order to use the Bluetooth Low­Power module for communication between the sensor
on the wheel and the central unit, a driver had to be developed. The RN4871 Bluetooth
was used in pair with ESP32 microcontroller in the setup similar to the one presented
in previous section in Figure 6.6. For the communication an UART ASCII interface was
being used.
To be able to validate the correctness of the exchanged commands and data, I have
been connecting the Bluetooth module to the PC computer. Subfigure 6.7a presents the
RN4871 clickboard connected via USB­UART adapter to the USB port of a computer.
Using the terminal I could manually write ASCII commands and see the response of the
device. I could also connect the ESP32 to the PC and validate that the commands it sends
to the BLE module are correct.
Due to some stability issues when using the simple clickboard, I have decided to order
a more advanced development board. Subfigure 6.7b shows the RN4871 Bluetooth Low
Energy PICtail board that can be connected directly to computer’s USB port.
(a) RN4871 clickboard UART connection
(b) PICtail RN4871 daughterboard
Figure 6.7: Bluetooth development boards used
6.5.2
Writing the driver in Toit
Toit is a new language and does not contain any libraries for utilising Bluetooth protocol so
far. Therefore, the driver had to be developed from the scratch. As inspiration the Github
repository: ”Microchip_RN487x” [31] was used. It contains a base of useful functions for
RN487x family of devices provided by the manufacturer ­ Microchip Technology Inc.
Certainly due to the fundamental differences between Toit ­ the language utilised in ESP32
devices and C++ in which the Arduino driver was written, the driver code is significantly
different. However, the original driver was highly useful for ensuring the proper Command
Set and algorithms usage. Especially, when it comes to timing and interpreting module
responses.
The driver code is planned to be released as an open­source repository, to allow future
Toit developers to apply it in their projects. At the current stage the issues of licensing the
driver code with hardware manufacturer is being resolved. Once I ensure that everything
regarding intellectual property rights is legitimate, the repository will be released to the
public.
33
==PAGE:37==
34
==PAGE:38==
7
Testing prototypes
In this chapter the results of prototype tests are presented. Section 7.1 covers the test of
the electrical circuit that was presented earlier in Section 6.1. The point of that test was
to estimate, using laboratory power supply, the minimum DC voltage that is sufficient for
the Bluetooth module and pressure sensor to perform their operations.
Section 7.2 presents the initial measurements performed on the shaker in order to validate
the characteristics of built prototypes. It compares AC voltage output of harvesters made
with 1 mH coils against 0.460 mH coils.
Sections 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 contain the overview of the three harvester holder designs. The
AC output voltage measurements and their interpretation are also present there.
The last two sections 7.6 and 7.7 display the results of laboratory tests performed on the
1D shaker. Those tests were done with a whole rectifier with external devices connected
to its output. Those were the final tests for the proposed system design.
7.1
DC converter tests
I started assembling the circuit that was presented in Figure 6.2 on top of the electronic
breadboard. The modification to the aforementioned circuit was that I added an LED with
330 Ωresistor in parallel to the RN4871 module. The resistor with LED was supposed
to represent the additional load caused by pressure sensor. Due to time limitations and
technical difficulties I couldn’t use the actual sensor. The setup can be seen in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Setup for estimating minimal DC­DC converter input voltage
According to the Microchip Technology Inc. ­ RN4871 chip manufacturer [23] the minimal
operational range for it is 1.9 V. The test result was that to reach such voltage on the
circuit output, it is necessary to provide at least 1.5 V at its input. Therefore, in the further
tests this value was considered as an indicator of success in validating feasibility of using
proposed system.
35
==PAGE:39==
7.2
Testing AC output of built harvesters
In Section 6.2 the assembly of energy harvesters was described. Before attempting to
build the whole system, energy harvesters needed to be tested. Figure 7.2 compares two
harvesters with the same type of coils actuated simultaneously at the frequency of 4 Hz.
The figures are similar in shape, although it seems like Harvester 2 is delayed compared
to Harvester 1 by around 50 ms. Voltage of Harvester 1 was reaching slightly higher
amplitudes as well. The conclusion was that the difference between output plots of two
energy harvesters is not significant enough to take them into account while building the
system.
Figure 7.2: Comparison of two separate harvesters with 0.46 mH at 4 Hz
As mentioned before, two types of energy harvesters were assembled. One with coils
of 0.460 mH inductance and another with 1 mH. The simulations from Chapter 5 were
inconclusive regarding superiority of one version over another. Consequently, I conducted
a comparison using real prototypes by connecting them in series of two. The comparison
is shown in Figure 7.3.
36
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.3: Comparison between 0.46 mH and 1 mH coils at 4 Hz with 5 Ohm load at­
tached
The plots in Figure 7.3 were not generated at the same time, therefore no conclusions
regarding phase shift can be made. The RMS of voltage for 1 mH coils was equal to
0.883V while for 0.383V . The tests were performed at 4 Hz frequency ­ approximately the
resonance frequency. It was an open circuit, that means no external load was connected
to it.
The resulting voltage RMS was clearly higher for 1 mH coils. Anyway for the time being,
I decided to continue performing tests with the already built mixed setup. In case it would
not be sufficient to provide necessary output, the 0.460 mH coils could be exchanged for
1 mH.
37
==PAGE:41==
7.3
First holder for the wheel
7.3.1
Prototype assembly
The first holder to build was the one presented in Subfigure 6.5a.
The idea was to place the harvesters close to each other on both
sides of the axis as can be seen in Figure 7.4a. They would
all be parallel and as close to the axis of rotation as possible in
order to mitigate the impact of centrifugal force on the ”dogbone”
movement. Figure 7.4a presents the holder with two harvesters
attached on one side. During the tests the distance turned out to
be too small.
The levitating magnets on the same side of the axis were attracting each other too strongly,
causing the static friction to be too high to allow any useful displacement due to gravitation.
Because of the high magnet attraction in the first design, I designed two other holders,
where two energy harvesters would be close to the rotation axis and two of them farther
away. Those are presented in Sections 7.4 and 7.5.
(a) Setup for four harvesters that didn’t work due
to magnetic attraction
(b) Two harvesters attached on the opposite
sides of the axis
Figure 7.4: First holder prototype
For further tests of the first holder design, the two­harvester setup from Subfigure 7.4b
was selected. The higher RMS of voltage at the input of the rectifier would have a positive
impact on its overall performance, so on the basis of results from Section 7.2 the devices
with 1 mH coils were chosen.
7.3.2
Measurements
Figure 7.5 shows the voltage output of the two 1 mH harvesters in a series attached to
the bike wheel, using the first holder design.
Aforementioned harvester holder was presented in the Subfigure 6.5a in the previous
chapter. No external load was added in this experiment so the results show the voltage
induced in an open circuit.
The output voltage amplitude in none of the tests reached 1 V. That was below the required
1.5 V that was concluded to be necessary in Section 7.1 for perpetually powering the
system. The amplitudes were too low, even for a potential case of using DC­DC booster
to charge the ultracapacitor without any external load. According to the producer of the
TLV61220DBVR step­up converter, the minimum input voltage for the module to start
38
==PAGE:42==
working is 0.7 V. Considering the voltage drop of around 250 mV on the Shottky diodes,
and the fact that in practice the maximum amplitude is present for only a small fraction of
the process cycle, reaching 0.7 V on booster input turned out to be unattainable for this
design.
Figure 7.5: Comparison of the voltage output of two harvesters in series with 1 mH coils
on the bicycle wheel at different rotation frequencies
39
==PAGE:43==
7.4
Second holder for the wheel
Figure 6.5b is the realisation of the second design from Subfigure
7.6 where the smallest space between tube axes is equal to 51
mm. But, the distance between energy harvesters on the same
side of the axis was still too small for a smooth movement of the
levitating magnets. The dogbone was barely being displaced dur­
ing the wheel rotation as could be seen from motion recordings.
The distance of the protruded energy harvesters from the axis of
rotation was already 83 mm which could result in increased static
friction acting on the dogbone. Despite that, the third holder was
designed and it is presented in Section 7.5.
Voltage measurements were not conducted because collecting the data would be point­
less when nearly no relative movement to the coils was happening.
Figure 7.6: Second holder prototype
40
==PAGE:44==
7.5
Third holder for the wheel
7.5.1
Prototype assembly
After the failure of the second holder design, I displaced the ex­
ternal energy harvesters even farther. The resulting prototype is
shown in Subfigure 7.7. The distance between axes of the tubes
was then equal to 76 mm and the external energy harvesters
were 101 mm away from the axis of rotation.
At this distance the attraction force between levitating magnets
was neglectable. However, with increasing rotation speed the
dogbones in external harvesters were stopping to move. That
caused doubts whether additional energy harvesters will provide
any additional voltage output or just increase the internal resistance of the energy source
and decrease the output voltage. The measurement results are in the next subsection.
Figure 7.7: Third holder prototype
41
==PAGE:45==
7.5.2
Measurements
Having realised that the first holder design would not be sufficient for powering the system,
I proceeded with testing the third holder design from Subfigure 6.5c. This time I added an
external resistor of 4k Ωin order to mitigate an impact of floating measurement values due
to high impedance of the microcontroller input pins. Resistance of 4k Ωwas high enough
to consider the tested system nearly an open circuit.
Figure 7.8 shows the results of this experiment for rotation frequencies of 1 Hz, 2 Hz
and 3 Hz. The voltage output in those was reaching amplitudes no higher than 300 mV.
Moreover, ESP32 microcontroller is unable to measure voltages below 0.14 V, so the
accuracy of this test was low.
I recorded the setup operation with a slow­motion camera. The recording showed that
”dogbones” in energy harvesters situated farther from the wheel hub didn’t move during
rotation. My hypothesis is that due to centrifugal force, the force acting against harvester’s
tube rised to the level at which friction effectively blocked ”dogbone” from moving. An
additional resistance and impedance of those passive coils lowered the voltage output of
the whole circuit. Hence, the low amplitude results in the Figure 7.8.
The final outcome was that neither of the tested wheel setups would provide sufficient
voltage for the TPMS system. The most likely to succeed was the first holder design with
four harvesters attached at the distance of 32 mm from rotation axis but the limitation
of space between the spikes means that the harvesters would need to be too close to
each other for the levitating magnets to move freely. Thus, I performed the next tests in
the vertical setup and at resonance vibration frequency. By this, the separation could be
provided and measurements would be performed at the frequency of maximal possible
output. If this test failed, that would mean the selected series of energy harvesters could
not provide sufficient power output in any conditions.
42
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7.8: Voltage output of four harvesters in series with 1 mH coils and with 4k Ω
external load at different rotation frequency
43
==PAGE:47==
7.6
Four harvesters shaker tests
In this experiment the setup from Figure 4.1 was used. In order to
minimise the energy losses in the joints between harvester’s coils, I
soldered the cables together. The experiments were conducted with
the 1 cm amplitude of shaker movement.
By performing tests with 0.5 Hz increments, I found the maximal dis­
placements of levitating magnets to be present at 4.5 Hz frequency. I
concluded it to be approximately the resonance frequency and chose
it for further testes. The decision to validate design only at resonance
frequency was based on the fact that coils were placed symmetri­
cally around the middle point of the harvester tube. This was on the
grounds of the initial plan of using it in a rotating setup on the wheel
and not vertically where gravitational force causes a significant offset
of the equilibrium point from the middle point. While in resonance the
levitating magnet was reaching distances lower than 1 cm from both top and bottom fixed
magnets. The major factor in its movement was becoming the repelling magnetic force,
not gravitational one. Due to asymmetry of the movement was becoming negligent.
The Table 7.1 is a summary of results of the tests conducted on a shaker with four har­
vester setup. The data was gathered while shaking the energy harvester for the time
sufficient to reach approximately constant state at a frequency of 4.5 Hz. Afterwards, the
RMS of the output voltage was calculated to estimate the effective DC output of the sys­
tem. Tests were both conducted with the rectifier powering the external load directly and
with DC­DC converter attached to it and then powering the external load.
No
Voltage source
External load
V RMS
1
Rectifier
100k Ωresistor
1.9201
2
Rectifier
100 Ωresistor
0.7008
3
Rectifier and DC­DC
100k Ωresistor
1.2928
4
Rectifier
LED with 330 Ωresistor
1.9694
5
Rectifier
RN4871
1.1785
6
Rectifier and DC­DC
LED with 330 Ωresistor
1.1959
7
Rectifier and DC­DC
RN4871
1.6018
Table 7.1: Four harvester shaker RMS of voltage output at frequency of 4.5 Hz
Description of each measurement from the experiment:
1. The 100k Ωresistor was connected to the rectifier. The resistance was large enough
for the system to effectively work as an open circuit, but its presence can limit
the noise in the DAC measurements[19], which can be significant when the high­
impedance terminals of the DAC are the only load present in the measured system.
The ultracapacitor was charged to around 1.901 V in the time of around 5 minutes.
2. The smaller resistor of 100 Ωwas attached to the rectifier because it should be in
similar value range to the actual pressure sensor and RN4871 BLE module attached
in parallel to the output of the system. The rectifier had the same structure as in the
first experiment, but the higher current flowing through the external load stopped
ultracapacitor from reaching a voltage of a similar range as in the first attempt and
it settled at around 0.7 V.
3. The full electrical circuit, including the rectifier and the Step­Up was tested. A re­
44
==PAGE:48==
sistor of 100k Ωwas chosen to easily compare with the first measurement. The
baseline voltage of the output was around 1.2 V while spikes due to step­up con­
verter operation were reaching 5 V, altogether resulting in RMS of 1.29 V.
4. The LED diode with 330 Ωresistor were attached to the output of rectifier. In the
time span of 5 minutes the 0.22 F ultracapacitor was charged up to approximately 2
V. The diode started shining after approximately 100 seconds when output voltage
reached around 1.6 V.
5. The RN4871 Bluetooth module was attached directly to the output of the rectifier.
The ultracapacitor got charged up to around 1.2 V. That result implies that even
when RN4871 is turned off, a relatively high current is flowing through it. Therefore,
the ultracapacitor asymptotically reaches a steady state at around 1.2 V which is
not enough to wake up the device.
6. The measurements were taken for the full circuit from the Figure 6.2 including the
rectifier and Step­Up converter. The external load was an LED with 330 Ωresistor.
The voltage reached around 1.2 V in this time span and was not sufficient to light
LED. The overall result was worse than with direct connection between rectifier and
LED as in Test No.4. That could be related to energy losses owing to using a DC­DC
step­up converter.
7. The last measurement was taken with RN4871 BLE module connected to the rec­
tifier and Step­Up converter as in the Figure 6.2. The output reached around 1.5 V
and DC­DC converter was inducing spikes of over 5 V to the system and RMS of
around 1.6 V. The device didn’t wake up. This might be caused by uneven charac­
teristics of the voltage. I tried adding additional 0.22 F ultracapacitor at the output
of the converter. But this also didn’t result in waking up the Bluetooth module.
The voltage output from experiments presented in this section was not sufficient for the
purpose of the project. Additionally, the DC­DC Step­Up converter turned out to be effec­
tively causing drops in voltage output. That could be owing to the fact that those kind of
components are built for use with a battery power source. So an unstable input that the
harvester provides, might affect it poorly [32].
I replaced the 0.460 mH coils in two energy harvesters with larger coils and repeat the
tests. The results are shown in Section 7.7.
45
==PAGE:49==
7.7
Four harvesters shaker with bigger coils
Earlier analyses from Section 7.2 showed that individual energy harvesters with coils of a
larger inductance were giving an AC output with higher voltage RMS. I replaced the 0.460
mH coils in two energy harvesters with larger coils and repeated the tests presented in
previous section.
I didn’t have any more coils with 1,000mH inductance and 2,240Ωresistance available,
therefore I decided to find a substitute within available components. Three 0.460 mH
coils were replaced with ”Air Core Coil 1,150mH +/­3% 2,390Ωwire 0,40mm=26AWG
OD­29 / 10mm”. Hence, the summarised inductance in alternated harvesters was 3.91
mH and summarised internal resistance 8.64 Ω. That was relatively close to the other two
harvesters with summarised inductance of 4 mH internal resistance of 8.96 Ω.
7.7.1
Tests with external resistors
Figure 7.9 shows the comparison of steady state voltage output of the system with 100 Ω,
100k Ωresistors connected directly to the rectifier from Figure 6.1 and 100k Ωattached
to the output of the whole circuit consisting of rectifier and DC­DC converter as in Figure
6.2. Reaching this state from completely empty ultracapacitor took over 5 minutes.
The RMS for rectifier with 100k Ωresistor was 2.20762 V which is around 0.3 V more
than in analogical experiment in previous section. When changed to 100 Ωthe RMS was
0.82055 V, slightly more than in previous section. The test with DC­DC converter and 100k
Ωresistor resulted in RMS of 1.82013 V which was around 0.5 V more than in Section
7.6. The summary of all RMS results is given in Table 7.2 at the end of this section.
Figure 7.9: Four harvesters at 4.5 Hz with different external loads. Two powered directly
from rectifier and one rectifier with Step­Up converter
46
==PAGE:50==
7.7.2
Tests with external devices connected to the rectifier
Figure 7.10 presents 5 minutes of voltage measurements during the process of charging
the ultracapacitor. For this test only the rectifier from Figure 6.1 was used and Step­Up
converter was detached.
The fFirst measurement was conducted with RN4871 attached to the output. After around
3 minutes the power status LED in the device lighted up indicating that the device woke
up. Presumably, the wake up moment was recorded in the period between 150 and 200
sec, when some sudden drops of voltage are visible in the figure. The voltage RMS in
the final seconds of measurements stabilised at around 1.94 V which according to the
datasheet [23] is enough for the device to begin working.
The second measurement was conducted with LED and 330 Ωresistor connected to the
output. LED started lighted up after around 45 seconds of the experiment and in the final
stage of the measurement the voltage RMS was equal to around 2.04 V.
Figure 7.10: Powering appliances directly from the rectifier at 4.5 Hz
47
==PAGE:51==
7.7.3
Tests with external devices connected to the DC­DC booster
Figure 7.11 shows the results of tests with a full rectifying and Step­Up circuit from Figure
6.2. The measurements were also performed for 5 minutes starting with an empty ultra­
capacitor. Soon after 20 seconds, the voltage reached its steady state. Thus the figure
shows only the time period of 1 minute.
In this measurement the voltage did not suffice the minimal need for supporting the oper­
ation of RN4871 module. After around 15 seconds it reached 1.5717 V and maintained
this value. Compared to the direct connection from with the rectifier it was nearly 0.4 V
less, which indicates voltage drop due to Step­Up presence. The other difference is that
the steady state was reached in less than 15 seconds while with direct rectifier connection
it was taking nearly 5 minutes.
When tested with LED and 330 Ωresistor the system reached a steady state voltage RMS
of 1.8922 V. Around 0.1 V less than when powered directly from the rectifier. On the other
hand, it took less than 10 seconds to reach a steady state voltage. The LED lighted after
around 4 seconds since the beginning of the test.
Figure 7.11: Powering appliances from DC­DC converter at 4.5 Hz
48
==PAGE:52==
7.7.4
Summary
Table 7.2 summarises the voltages RMS reached at steady state in all the experiments
mentioned before.
No.
Source
External load
V RMS
1
Rectifier
100k Ωresistor
2.2076
2
Rectifier
100 Ωresistor
0.82055
3
Rectifier and DC­DC
100k Ωresistor
1.8201
4
Rectifier
LED with 330 Ωresistor
2.0354
5
Rectifier
RN4871
1.9388
6
Rectifier and DC­DC
LED with 330 Ωresistor
1.8922
7
Rectifier and DC­DC
RN4871
1.5717
Table 7.2: Voltage RMS of four harvesters with bigger coils on the shaker at frequency of
4.5 Hz
The results showed that in favorable conditions the system is able to output necessary
voltage for external appliances. The DC­DC converter showed up an unexpected result
of lowering the output when compared with using the rectifier directly. It might be due
to unstable input or maybe that is related to the way connections were soldered to the
device. Possibly, more research into the literature covering DC voltage boosting would
be needed and some additional tests with other components of the same type would
be useful. On the other hand, the Step­Up converter caused a quicker rise of voltage
output, while charging an ultracapacitor can take up to a few minutes. It might be worth
trying to combine a harvester setup of larger output with a booster. Presumably, then the
advantages of both solutions could be combined and sufficient voltage could be reached
in shorter time then when using only the rectifier circuit.
49
==PAGE:53==
50
==PAGE:54==
8
Discussion
The results presented in Chapter 7 showed that the designed circuit is able to harvest
ambient energy of vibrations or rotations, then rectify and utilise it for powering an external
appliance. The major issue turned out to be the actual output of it, that was smaller than
required for a tire monitoring system. Moreover, some initial assumptions were faced with
technical difficulties during the assembly of the prototypes.
8.1
Measurements on the bicycle wheel
The initial assumptions while selecting components and designing the holder for the bicy­
cle wheel could not be fulfilled. First of all, the calculations done at the early stage were
based on the idea of using four harvesters and attaching them as close to the rotation axis
as possible. Unfortunately, the limited space available at this location required attaching
energy harvesters at the distance where space in between them is less than 3 cm. With
such placement the force of mutual attraction of the magnets was superior over the force
applied by the fixed magnets at the ends of the tubes. Then levitating magnets sponta­
neously moved to the position that maximizes mutual attraction. The additional friction
caused by this phenomenon damps the movement so much that actual voltage output of
the device is so insignificant that can’t be distinguished from the noise.
To resolve the problem of mutual attraction of levitating magnets, I tried to protrude two
energy harvesters in the direction perpendicular to their working direction. That was sup­
posed to mitigate attraction force without creating additional component of gravitational
force vector along the direction of dogbone movement. In the end, the force perpendicular
to the tube walls resulted in generation of static friction force larger than the gravitational
force component along tube axis. This could be possibly resolved by installing some kind
of bearing on the dogbone. However, that could drastically increase the complexity and
cost of the final device, therefore limiting its attractiveness to the potential customer.
One more solution considered was to rotate some of the energy harvesters by 90o to
form a rectangular shape. Unfortunately, with this setup the attraction between levitating
magnets and the fixed magnets from perpendicular harvesters was turning out to be to
strong enough to stop it from returning to the middle point. The solution to this issue could
be shortening the tubes to the length at which they would touch each other only with their
ends. Though this would result in increase of the resonance frequency and as follows
increasing operating frequency. Higher operating frequency would require the bicycle to
ride at higher velocity that could never be obtained in normal use conditions of this vehicle.
A way to make this system work on the bicycle wheel could be to scale it up significantly
or to place larger inductance coils on it. However, scaling up the device would negative
affect its usability and attractiveness for potential end user. Especially, since a small
battery could easily perform the same task.
Another idea would be to try different combinations of components or change the way they
are placed in the setup. One of the discussed ideas was to place more levitating magnets
withing the tube and separate them with more dogbones. That could theoretically result in
faster changes of the magnetic flux within the coils, since the lines of magnetic field would
be making more turns along the length of this new extended dogbone. On the other hand,
more magnets mean greater weight that could also worsen the performance. To conclude
on that a dedicated research would be needed.
51
==PAGE:55==
8.2
Rectifier performance
The tests on the vertical shaker were performed at a resonance frequency that provided
the conditions for maximal possible output of the energy harvesters. When using mixed 1
mH and 0.46 mH coils in series, voltage reached at the output of an open circuit rectifier
turned out to be sufficient to power the Bluetooth module. The initial concept for having
the functional system was to charge the ultracapacitor for some time using energy har­
vester output and then when it reaches sufficient level of around 1.9 V, the BLE module
should wake up and start broadcasting until the voltage drops below operational level.
That should be possible because according to the manufacturer’s documentation [23] the
voltage necessary to wake up the device is higher then the one needed for maintaining the
operation. The current flowing through switched off device was hard to estimate, therefore
the empirical approach was taken. The tests showed that the actual output of the rectifier
was just 25% lower then required voltage for starting up the device.
This was resolved by replacing 0.460 mH coils in the system with 1.15 mH. Larger induc­
tance coils were providing higher RMS of the output voltage in individual tests and when
combined in series they satisfied the minimal voltage for awaking the RN4871 device.
The natural next step would be to test if it is sufficient to power both BLE module and
pressure sensor simultaneously, but due to time limitations it was not possible to test it.
The surprising result of shaker tests was the voltage drop on the DC­DC booster. This is a
subject that would require more research to conclude whether it is an issue of the specific
device used in the experiments or a problem of the currently used electrical circuit. The
additional element that could potentially resolve issues with a booster and increase the
overall efficiency of the circuit would be to add a switch to the circuit that would separate
the external appliances from the voltage source until the sufficient voltage is reached. That
could potentially be done using transistors and a voltage divider with properly selected
parameters. With that in place the ultracapacitor could charge to over 2 V and then use
this energy to supply more power to the booster and external devices for a limited time.
The rectifier together with the energy harvesters were functional. Probably the output
voltage could be smoothed by further improving the selection of components. For example
different selection of capacitors could result in lower fluctuation of the output voltage. But
in the end, the significant advantage of the current rectifying circuit is its simplicity and
the fact that it is passive. That is in contrast with some other designs that were discussed
by Wardlaw and Karsilayan [15] where a battery had to by included in the system to start
and sustain rectifying process. For the chosen application, which is on a bicycle, the
simplicity is important due to high cost sensitivity and often harsh conditions the device
would operate in.
52
==PAGE:56==
9
Final conclusion and possibilities for
the future research
I consider the overall result of the project as a success. Its outcomes were unsure from
the very beginning, since the project was based on theoretical model and some scarce
laboratory tests. My goal was to take those concepts and build an actual prototype with a
specific application in mind. Building bicycle tire monitoring system was a tangible way of
showing the possibilities hidden within the energy harvesting and where this technology
could be possibly applied in the future.
The energy harvesting components together with the rectifying circuit were working. They
were generating the DC voltage that could be utilised for specific tasks. The resulting per­
formance was lower than initially planned and was the output voltage was sufficient only
in specific conditions. However, the principles for building such a system were learned.
Moreover, the project required integration of knowledge and skills from multiple fields of
science and engineering. From electronics, physics, and programming to CAD design,
additive manufacturing and mechanics, those were competences needed on different
stages of the project. The topic that wasn’t covered too thoroughly in this thesis is the
development of the brand new Bluetooth driver using a state­of­the­art language that is
still in its childhood stage. Hopefully, the code that will be released from a public repos­
itory will be used in other innovative projects in the future by people from all around the
world.
Regarding possible further research, it would definitely be worth a try to assemble the pro­
totype described in this thesis using different combinations of components. Maybe scaling
some elements up or down would allow for increasing output amplitudes and therefore
providing sufficient voltage for the TPMS application also in non­optimal conditions. If
I had more time I would have definitely tried to perform tests with the actual pressure
sensor and not only a LED imitating it, but since the component was a small SMD de­
vice, connecting to it without having to design a whole PCB would be quite a complex
task. That is why it was eventually not done during the project. Also, as mentioned in the
Chapter 7 it would be valuable to perform some more tests of the DC­DC booster to de­
termine the reason for the voltage drop on the device. Having this done, further research
on implementation of the switch within electrical circuit would be valuable. Separating the
ultracapacitor from an external load when the voltage is below operational could increase
the overall performance drastically.
Taking a step back and looking at the question of energy harvesting, I recon that 1D
device could be better utilised in the applications were ambient vibrations are already
one­dimensional. For the purpose of bicycle power supply, the rotational power generator
would most likely perform much better. It could also allow for more compact use of space,
but implementing it might require some intervention into the structure of bike frame and
wheel or some high mechanical ingenuity to place the coils of the generator onto already
present structural elements of the vehicle.
Finally, energy harvesting is an open field of research where new breakthroughs appear
on the daily basis. Maybe a new harvester design is just around the corner. With bet­
ter performance and smaller size the self­powered smart tire system could be built and
foremost realised as a product with significant value for the target customer.
53
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Wikipedia contributors. Internet of things — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [On­
line; accessed 7­May­2021]. 2021. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Internet_of_things&oldid=1021235733.
[2]
Matt Hatton. The IoT in 2030: 24 billion connected things generating $1.5 trillion.
url: https://iotbusinessnews.com/2020/05/20/03177-the-iot-in-2030-24-billion-
connected-things-generating-1-5-trillion/. (accessed: 06.05.2021).
[3]
Brad Jolly. “The Last Thing IoT Device Engineers Think About: End of Battery Life
Behavior for IoT Devices”. In: 2019 IEEE 62nd International Midwest Sympos ium
on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS). 2019, pp. 837–840. doi: 10.1109/MWSCAS.
2019.8885125.
[4]
Hassan Elahi, Khushboo Munir, Marco Eugeni, Sofiane Atek, and Paolo Gaudenzi.
“Energy Harvesting towards Self­Powered IoT Devices”. In: Energies 13.21 (2020).
issn: 1996­1073. doi: 10 . 3390 / en13215528. url: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1996 -
1073/13/21/5528.
[5]
Wikipedia contributors. Energy harvesting — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 7­May­2021]. 2021. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Energy_harvesting&oldid=1021705454.
[6]
In Lee and Kyoochun Lee. “The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, investments,
and challenges for enterprises”. In: Business Horizons 58.4 (2015), pp. 431–440.
issn: 0007­6813. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2015.03.008. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007681315000373.
[7]
Bluetooth Core Specification. Specification. 220 Kirkland Ave, Kirkland, WA 98033,
USA, Dec. 2019. url: https://www.bluetooth.org/en- us/specification/adopted-
specification.
[8]
Tobias Willemoes Jensen, Andrea R. Insinga, Johan Christian Ehlers, and Rasmus
Bjørk. “The full phase space dynamics of a magnetically levitated electromagnetic
vibration harvester”. In: Preprint submitted to Elsevier (2021). Not yet published at
the time of writing this paper.
[9]
Toit ApS. Toit product description. July 2021. url: https://toit.io/product/device.
[10]
Carlos Enrique Imbaquingo Muñoz, Marco Beleggia, Andrea Roberto Insinga, Chris­
tian Bahl, Brian Mann, and Rasmus Bjørk. “Analytical Force and Flux for a One­
Dimensional Electromagnetic Vibration Energy Harvester”. English. In: I E E E Trans­
actions on Magnetics 56.11 (2020). issn: 0018­9464. doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2020.
3024734.
[11]
Lewi Tonks. “Note on Earnshaw’s theorem”. In: Electrical Engineering 59.3 (1940),
pp. 118–119. doi: 10.1109/EE.1940.6434810.
[12]
B. G. Korenev. Bessel Functions and their Applications. CRC Press LLC, 2002.
[13]
Jiaming Zhang, Quan Liu, and Yi Zhong. “A Tire Pressure Monitoring System Based
on Wireless Sensor Networks Technology”. In: 2008 International Conference on
MultiMedia and Information Technology. 2008, pp. 602–605. doi: 10.1109/MMIT.
2008.177.
[14]
Jongho Seo, Kyung­Young Jhang, Hanmin Lee, and Young­Cheol Kim. “Vibration
energy harvesting technology for smart tire monitoring”. In: Journal of Mechanical
Science and Technology 33.8 (Aug. 2019), pp. 3725–3732. issn: 1976­3824. doi:
10.1007/s12206-019-0714-2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12206-019-0714-2.
54
==PAGE:58==
[15]
Jason Wardlaw and A.I. Karsilayan. “Self­Powered Rectifier for Energy Harvest­
ing Applications”. In: Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, IEEE
Journal on 1 (Sept. 2011), pp. 308–320. doi: 10.1109/JETCAS.2011.2164975.
[16]
Nhan Tran, Bomson Lee, and Jong­Wook Lee. “Development of Long­Range UHF­
band RFID Tag chip Using Schottky Diodes in Standard CMOS Technology”. In:
2007 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits (RFIC) Symposium. 2007, pp. 281–
284. doi: 10.1109/RFIC.2007.380883.
[17]
Soumyajit Mandal and Rahul Sarpeshkar. “Low­Power CMOS Rectifier Design for
RFID Applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Pa­
pers 54.6 (2007), pp. 1177–1188. doi: 10.1109/TCSI.2007.895229.
[18]
Espressif Systems. ESP32 Datasheet. [Online; accessed 19th­June­2021]. url: https:
//www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-wroom-32_datasheet_
en.pdf.
[19]
National Instruments. NI USB­6351 Specifications. [Online; accessed 23rd­June­
2021]. url: https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/multifunction-io-device/latest/
usb-6351/specs/.
[20]
Jentzen Audio. Jentzen Air Core Wire Coils Catalogue. [Online; accessed 23rd­
June­2021]. url: http://www.jantzen-audio.com/air-cored-coil/.
[21]
supermagnete.dk Webcraft GmbH. Supermagnete Catalogue. [Online; accessed
23rd­June­2021]. url: https://www.supermagnete.dk/downloads.
[22]
Wikipedia contributors. Fused filament fabrication — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo­
pedia. [Online; accessed 25­May­2021]. 2021. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Fused_filament_fabrication&oldid=1022777083.
[23]
Microchip Technology Inc. RN4871 Datasheet. [Online; accessed 9th­June­2021].
url: https://www.microchip.com/wwwproducts/en/RN4871.
[24]
Honeywell International Inc. Honeywell MPR series Catalogue. [Online; accessed
23rd­June­2021]. url: https://sps.honeywell.com/us/en/products/sensing- and-
iot/sensors/pressure-sensors/board-mount-pressure-sensors/micropressure-mpr-series.
[25]
Texas Instruments Incorporated. TLV61220 Low­Input Voltage Step­Up Converter
in Thin SOT­23 Package datasheet. [Online; accessed 23rd­June­2021]. 2020. url:
https://www.ti.com/product/TLV61220.
[26]
LLC dba ON Semiconductor Semiconductor Components Industries. 1N914: High
Conductance Fast Diode datasheet. [Online; accessed 23rd­June­2021]. 2017. url:
https://www.onsemi.com/products/discretes-drivers/diodes-rectifiers/small-signal-
switching-diodes/1n914.
[27]
Cooper Bussmann. Supercapacitors B Series datasheet. [Online; accessed 23rd­
June­2021]. url: https://dk.rs-online.com/web/p/elektriske-dobbeltlags-kondensatorer/
7637867.
[28]
Elbert Hendricks, Ole Jannerup, and Paul Haase Sørensen. Linear Systems Con­
trol. Springer­Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. isbn: 978­3­540­78485­2. doi: 10 .
1007/978-3-540-78486-9.
[29]
Root­Mean­Square Voltage. 2005. url: https://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/
Root-Mean-Square%20Voltage.
[30]
Wikipedia contributors. Supercapacitor — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [On­
line; accessed 20­June­2021]. 2021. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Supercapacitor&oldid=1029430885.
[31]
Microchip Technology Inc. and its subsidiaries. Microchip_RN487x. https://github.
com/SodaqMoja/Microchip_RN487x. 2019.
[32]
Pradeep Shenoy and Anthony Fagnani. “Common Mistakes in DC/DC Converters
and How to Fix Them”. In: 2018 Texas Instruments Power Supply Design Seminar
55
==PAGE:59==
SEM2300, Topic 5 TI Literature Number: SLUP384 (2018). url: http://www.ti.com/
psds.
I
