==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
Division for management science
Applying machine learning to improve the
performance of metaheuristics
Master Thesis
Eythor Ingi Juliusson
s192290
June 4, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Eythor Ingi Juliusson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Division for management science, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Division for Management Science,
DTU Management, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning and
metaheuristics.
Eythor Ingi Juliusson ­ s192290
Signature
Date
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Machine learning and metaheuristics are subjects that both have been successful but in
different areas. Machine learning can be used to predict an outcome and identify patterns,
while metaheuristics are used to solve complex problems to find a good solution in a
reasonable amount of time. Number of attempts have been presented in recent years
where machine learning is used to improve the performance of metaheuristics.
In this report, an attempt to use a neural network to guide a metaheuristic is presented.
A local search heuristic with multiple search operators is used on the Traveling salesman
problem. The local search algorithm is executed multiple times on 20 different benchmark
instances and the results are used to form a dataset. High quality solutions are extracted
from the dataset and used to train the Neural network. Different versions of the Neural
network are created and implemented into the heuristic to guide the search. The best
performing Neural network is then used to compare the performance to the two baseline
models.
The results show that the heuristic, guided by the Neural network does not perform as well
as the baseline algorithms. The main reason for the poor performance is that the Neural
network can easily get stuck using the same search operator for all the running time. By
analysing the high quality solutions for the proposed algorithm, it is clear that the algorithm
was able to perform well but is not consistent, resulting in poor average performance.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisor Dario Pacino, for valuable assistance and giving me the
opportunity to work with subjects that I am interested in and developing the idea with me.
I also want to thank Filipe Rodrigues for beneficial discussion about the topic. At last I
want to thank my girlfriend Ingibjörg Edda Snorradóttir for the incredible support.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Hypothesis
4
3
Introduction to metaheuristics and machine learning
5
3.1
Metaheuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
State of the art literature
9
4.1
Supervised learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Unsupervised learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Reinforcement learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Method
13
5.1
The Traveling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2
Baseline models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3
Metaheuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.4
Neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6
Results
26
6.1
Baseline models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3
Comparison to the baseline models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.4
Further performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
50
7.1
Main reasons for the poor performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
54
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Routing problems like the Traveling salesman problem (TSP) and the Vehicle routing prob­
lem (VRP) are among the most studied classes of combinatorial optimization problems
(COPs). Metaheuristics have proved to be very successful in this field. However, these
problems are usually solved with problem specific methods and in recent years, new ap­
proaches have been developed to solve the problems using machine learning. The highly
variable size of the problem representations have however made application of machine
learning based methods challenging. [1]
Instead of directly using machine learning to solve the problems, another approach has
attracted the attention of researchers, that is to use machine learning to improve meta­
heuristics. When combining these 2 methods, the possibilities of focus areas are various.
To give some examples the focus can be on the initial solution, evaluating the objective
function, heuristic selection, tuning of parameters, search operator selection, acceptance
criteria etc. What all these methods have in common, is that the purpose is to make an
informed decision based on knowledge of what has proved to be successful. In many well
performing metaheuristics, randomness plays a vital part in the success of the algorithm.
However, randomness can be hard to explain and rely on, so using machine learning is
often an attempt to replace the randomness. [2]
An attempt to combine these two fields will be performed in this project. The goal is to
train a neural network that can be used to guide a metaheuristic. The purpose of the
training of a neural network is therefore to identify patterns in good solutions and use that
knowledge to guide the search towards better solutions. If it will be successful, then the
guided algorithm will find better solutions and find them faster compared to the baseline.
The idea of guiding a search and adapting it to the problem being solved is not new and
has attracted a lot of attention. A great example is the Adaptive large neighborhood search
[3], where destroy and repair methods are assigned weights that are adapted during the
search based on their performance. [4]
The motivation for this idea is that if there is a way to train a neural network that only sees
high quality solutions, it could be used both to improve the performance of the algorithm
on the problem that was used for training, but also other similar optimization problems.
Furthermore, if the idea works and is useful, it could be used to replace random elements
of algorithms. It is important that the overhead of such a training process will not make
it unattractive so that needs to be kept in mind. Similarly, when a trained neural network
is implemented into a heuristic, the computational time of the features extraction can not
eat up the benefits of using it so this is clearly a huge but interesting challenge.
The report is constructed in the following way: First the hypothesis is introduced. The
2 main fields used in the project, that is machine learning and metaheuristics are then
introduced. Only the most important metaheuristics for this project are introduced so the
list is far from being complete. In the machine learning section, the 3 types of learning
are explained shortly, before neural networks get special attention since that is the chosen
method in this project. The literature review comes next. Even though supervised learning
is used in this project, both unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning get a section
just to demonstrate how many possibilities are in this field. In the following chapter, the
method is explained. First the optimization problem is presented as well as the baseline
models that will be used for comparison to the proposed method. Next is the metaheuristic
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
2
==PAGE:8==
and different components of it. Generation of the dataset is explained before the Neural
network is introduced and 3 different versions of it are proposed. When the method has
been introduced, the results are presented. First the performance of the heuristic, guided
by different versions of the Neural network, are presented and discussed. Finally the
main results are presented, that is the performance of the guided heuristic compared to
the baseline models. The report ends with a conclusion and discussion about the results
and the challenges of this topic in general.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Hypothesis
The goal of this project is to improve a metaheuristic with a machine learning algorithm.
That is a very open idea that can be implemented in various ways. It is therefore important
to explain how the success or performance of the experiment will be evaluated. The
hypothesis is the following:
By training a neural network, the search process of a chosen metaheuristic can be boosted.
The Neural network is used to guide the search and make a decision of which step the
search should take in every iteration. By doing that, better solutions will be found and
they will also be found earlier in the search process compared to the baseline models.
The first baseline model that will be used is based on a random selection of operators.
This model is also used to generate the dataset which is then used to train the Neural
network. Therefore the goal is to identify patterns that are more likely to lead to better
solutions. The term patterns, are in this context simply what operators perform well at the
different stages of the search in high quality solutions.
In the metaheuristic Adaptive large neighborhood search, an adaptive mechanism is used
to encourage destroy and repair methods that perform well. Even though the implemen­
tation is not the same in this project, the purpose is exactly the same, that is to use the
operators that are more likely to perform well [3]. It is therefore interesting to use the
adaptive mechanism as another baseline.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
4
==PAGE:10==
3
Introduction to metaheuristics and
machine learning
In the coming chapters, many different methods are discussed both in the field of meta­
heuristics and machine learning. To prepare for that, this chapter will introduce both fields
in general and also some of the methods. The focus will be on methods that play a part
in this project so it is far from being a complete list of methods used in these fields.
3.1
Metaheuristics
The definition of metaheuristics is the following: ”Metaheuristics are solution methods
that orchestrate an interaction between local improvement procedures and higher level
strategies to create a process capable of escaping local optima and performing a robust
search of a solution space.” [5].
Over time, these methods have developed and come to include procedures that are used
to overcome getting trapped in local optima in complex solution spaces. Many of the
procedures utilize one or more neighborhood structures to define admissible moves to
go from one solution to another. Many algorithms and tools that have emerged from the
creation of metaheuristics methods have proven to be very successful. These methods
are used to solve complex problems and particularly those of a combinatoral nature. There
is no guarantee that a metaheuristic will find the optimal solution. However, these methods
can be used for complex problems to find a solution that is considered good enough in a
reasonable amount of time. [6]
3.1.1
Local search
The method starts with an initial solution which is then improved by moving to a neigh­
bor solution. The definition of a neighbor solution can be seen as all possible solutions
that can be reached in a single step by applying so­called move operator. The neigh­
borhood does not need be be defined explicitly by enumerating the neighbors but just
implicitly, by referring to potential transitions attainable upon application of the operator.
These moves can be seen as ”local” if they are under an appropriate distance measure
between solutions. However, the notation of closeness between neighboring solutions is
not straightforward.
The simplest way to apply local search is by using a method called Hill Climbing. If a
candidate solution outperforms a current solution, then the current one is replaced by the
candidate solution. The algorithm can explore the full neighborhood of a solution and pick
the best neighbor, or pick a random neighbor and use the same acceptance criteria as
mentioned before, that is accepting if it is better than the current one. [7]
3.1.2
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing (SA) is a method inspired from the physical process of metallurgy
and uses terminology from that field. SA is used to search for the minimum of a given
objective function, often called energy as a reference to the physical origins of the method.
The method starts with an initial solution and an initial temperature. Next, a random move
is selected and if that results in a better solution (lower energy value), then the new solution
is accepted and becomes the current solution. The algorithm can also accept a solution
that leads to increase of energy, with a certain probability. To compute this probability, the
energy variation needs to be computed first:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
5
==PAGE:11==
∆E = Enew −Ecurrent
(3.1)
and the probability p of accepting worse solutions is:
p = min(1, e∆E/T )
(3.2)
For ∆E ≤0, a solution is always accepted but when ∆E >0 which is a better solution,
the solution will be accepted nonetheless with probability p computed according to Equa­
tion 3.2. From the equation, it can be seen that with larger ∆E, p will be smaller and that
p becomes larger with increasing temperature T. The temperature is decreased in every
iteration of the search according to a predefined cooling rate. That leads to worsening
moves becoming more likely to be accepted in the beginning of the search when T is
large and therefore making it possible to overcome fitness barriers and preventing the
search being stuck at a local minima. [8]
3.1.3
LNS and ALNS
Before going into details in Adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS), it is necessary
to understand the metaheuristic that the method is based on. Large neighborhood search
(LNS) is a method that defines the neighborhood implicitly by a destroy and a repair
method. The destroy method destructs a part of the current solution and usually contains
some stochastic element to make sure that a different part of the solution gets destroyed
in every iteration. The repair method rebuilds the destroyed solution by inserting the re­
moved customers. This repair process if often done using a greedy heuristic where all
possibilities are checked before the best one is chosen. As the name of the heuristic in­
dicates, the neighborhood contains a large amount of solutions since the destroy method
can destruct a large part of the solution. That gives the heuristic the chance to navigate
easily in the solution space, even if the instance is tightly constrained.
Adaptive large neighborhood search extends the LNS heuristic by using multiple destroy
and repair methods in the same search. The performance of these methods are evalu­
ated by assigning weights to all of them and dynamically adjusting the weights during the
search. By doing so, the heuristic adapts to the instance at hand as well as the state of the
search. The weights determine the probability that a certain destroy and repair method is
chosen and used. In every iteration both the destroy and repair methods that were used
are assigned a score Ψ according to the following criteria:
Ψ = max







ω1
if the new solution is a new global best
ω2
if the new solution is better than the current one
ω3
if the new solution is accepted
ω4
if the new solution is rejected
(3.3)
Two vectors, ρ−and ρ+ contain the weights of the destroy and repair methods and they
are updated using the following equations:
ρ−= λρ−+ (1 −λ)Ψ
(3.4)
ρ+ = λρ+ + (1 −λ)Ψ
(3.5)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
6
==PAGE:12==
λ ∈[0,1] is a parameter to control how sensitive the weights are to changes in the per­
formance. To calculate the probability of choosing the jth destroy method, the following
equation is used (and the same way for the repair methods):
ϕ−
j =
ρ−
j
∑|Ω−|
k=1 ρ−
k
(3.6)
Where Ω−denotes the set of destroy methods. By using this adaptive mechanism, well
performing methods are encouraged while methods that lead to many rejected solutions
are discouraged. [3]
3.2
Machine learning
Machine learning algorithms are predictive models that are created to make decisions on
their own. The models learn from training datasets to make the decision or prediction.
Machine learning models can be built for regression problems where the predicted values
are continuous variables, or for classification problems where the predicted values are a
class or a label. A training set contains examples or observations and each example is
represented by features. A feature, also known as an attribute, is an input variable that
characterizes the example. A feature can be a continuous numeric value but it can also be
a categorical variable like gender or color. Machine learning has been applied in all kinds
of sectors and purposes, for example image recognition, natural language processing,
cyber security and search engines. [9] [10]
Machine learning methods can be divided into many categories but a common approach is
to use three categories: Supervised learning, Unsupervised learning and Reinforcement
learning. All 3 categories are introduced briefly below, followed by an introduction to neural
networks, since it plays a vital part in this project.
Supervised learning is a technique to learn mapping between the input data and the output
or the target variable. The training data consists of the input objects and the desired
outputs. When the output is a continuous value, it is called regression and when the
output is a class, it is called classification. The models are first trained by using pairs
of inputs and outputs and then the model should be able to predict the output based on
any valid input. The input can be new or unseen to the model so it has to generalize in
a reasonable way. Supervised learning is the most common method for training neural
networks. Predetermined classifications are used to determine the error of the network.
The error is then adjusted in order to minimize it. [11]
The second category, Unsupervised learning, is different from the first category since there
is not a matching output to the corresponding input. In other words, the model is provided
with a set of data without any correct answers. The task is therefore not to predict a certain
output but instead, identify trends in the data. Similar items will be grouped together that
are also known as clusters.
Reinforcement learning is the third category and is considered as one of the most excit­
ing areas in the field of machine learning. This method is different from the other two
categories as it is based on how agents take action in an environment with the objective
of maximizing (or minimizing) the reward. The agent is the program that is learning by
observing and interacting in its environment over time. As an example, an agent can
be learning to drive an autonomous car by observing the physical surroundings such as
roads and traffic. The agent needs to have an objective so all actions are taken with that
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
7
==PAGE:13==
in mind. In the beginning, the agent has no knowledge of how to achieve the desired
objective. If that is compared to the other two categories explained above, there are no
training examples to learn from. Instead the agent gets feedback or reward based on past
actions. [12]
3.2.1
Neural networks
The history of neural networks can be traced all the way back to the 1940s when models
of individual neurons and their learning rules were proposed. The development of neural
network models was driven by two objectives. For better understanding of the nervous
system and secondly to try to build information processing systems that are inspired by
natural, biological functions. Neural network is often said to be a ”black box” as it emulates
some behaviour rather than a structure and can reproduce any function. One advantage
of neural networks is that it can model and describe any non­linear dynamics. More gener­
ally, they are very useful to infer underlying knowledge in observations or when traditional
methods can´t handle the complex tasks within reasonable time. Neural networks have
been used in all kinds of areas spanning physics, arts, finances, robotics etc. [13]
A Neural network or an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) like it is also called, consists of
neurons that are connected. The connections have associated coefficients or weights.
What happens in a neuron can be explained by a few parameters. The input connections
is a connection to a neuron from all the neurons in the previous layer. Additionally, there is
an input connection called the bias. The input function is used to calculate the aggregated
net input signal to the neuron and is usually the sum of input values multiplied by the
weights of the corresponding connection and finally the bias value is added. The activation
level of a neuron is calculated by the chosen activation function and at last, an output
function calculates the output signal of the neuron that is usually the same as the activation
level.
The neurons form layers that are grouped into 3 groups. The input layer which consists
of the same number of neurons as the input data (features). The output layer is the final
output of the network. Therefore the number of neurons in the output layer depends on the
desired output value. If it is a binary class problem, then there is only one output neuron
but if the problem is multi­classification, then the neurons are more than one. Between
the input and output layers are the intermediate layers called the hidden layers. [14]
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
8
==PAGE:14==
4
State of the art literature
Like mentioned earlier, combining machine learning and metaheuristics can be approached
in many different ways. This section tries to introduce some of the most interesting liter­
ature in this field. Even though supervised learning will be used in this project, other ma­
chine learning methods also get mentioned to demonstrate the possibilities and to show
that there is not just one way to combine these fields. However, supervised learning gets
most of the attention. In most of the literature below, routing problems are used to test the
methods. Other optimization problems are also mentioned which also shows the diversity
in this field.
Before going into detail of the chosen literature, it is worth mentioning some pioneer work
where the TSP has been solved with different machine learning methods. The first appli­
cation of neural networks to combinatorial optimization was introduced all the way back in
1985 where a Hopfield network is used to compute solutions for small TSP instances [15].
In [16], the TSP is solved with up to 50 customers using supervised learning. Pointer net­
works are introduced and used to encode the cities and an attention mechanism is used
to decode the sequence of nodes in the tour. At last, in [17] a graph embedding network
is created using reinforcement learning. The method behaves like a heuristic and it can
learn a greedy heuristic and incrementally construct a solution.
4.1
Supervised learning
In [4], the authors argue that knowledge about the structural characteristics can distinguish
good from not­so­good solutions and that this knowledge can be instrumental in design­
ing efficient heuristics. By using these characteristics, only the solutions themselves are
analysed but not the objective function values. When the information is available, it can be
used to guide the search by removing parts of the solution that do not frequently appear in
good or close­to­optimal solutions and replace them with parts that do. The Capacitated
vehicle routing problem is used to perform the experiment. 18 features that describe both
the structural characteristics of the instance and solution are used. As an example, the
number of customers, average distance from customer to depot, standard deviation of
the distance from customer to the depot are all instance features. Solutions features are
for example average number of intersections per customers, longest distance between
two connected customers per route and average width per route. To generate the train­
ing set, 5000 small (20­50 customers) and 1000 larger (70­100 customers) instances are
used with different capacity and depot positions that are split into 8 classes. For a given
instance, a good solution is generated as well as two less good solutions within 2% and
4% from the good solution. In total, 192,000 solutions are generated and labeled either
near optimal or non optimal. The classification model is built using decision trees, random
forests and support vector machines.
The results showed that the prediction accuracy was between 60­90%, depending on
the class. Furthermore, the compactness, the width and the span of routes in radians
as well as the number of intersecting edges and the distances of connecting edges to
the depot, are features that distinguish between near­optimal and non­optimal solutions.
The findings also hold for a variety of instance classes which suggests that structural
differences in near optimal solutions and non­optimal solutions are similar across a wide
range of instances.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
9
==PAGE:15==
In [18], the authors use the findings of [4] explained above in a different approach though.
The metaheuristic used in the experiment is Variable Neighborhood Descent (VND). The
goal is to identify the most promising neighborhood by using machine learning techniques
and enable computational savings. In VND, the ranking of neighborhoods plays a big
part in the search and the question is weather ML can predict for a given solution, what
is the best ranking of neighborhoods. The optimization problem used is the CVRP and
to implement machine learning, a neural network is created. To generate the dataset,
60 different instances were used and 12 search operators. The dataset created contains
around 22,000,000 solutions. An iterated local search framework is used on a solution.
First the best improving operator is found and then iterated to a local optimum. This way,
a set of around 22,000,000 solutions are gathered with the best improving operator. The
same 18 features are chosen as in [4] and used to create a neural network with 4 layers.
The input is the 18 features and the output value can take 13 values, 1 for each of the
12 search operators and additionally there is one value used to represent local optimum.
The training lasted for 10 epochs and the accuracy achieved was around 40%.
After the Neural network had been trained, it is implemented into the VND algorithm so that
for a given solution, the probability of each operator to be the most improving one on that
solution. To evaluate the results of the ML­based version, two other versions are used.
The first one is statistic­based where the operators are sorted according to their success in
the training set and the second version was random. The different methods were tried and
the evaluation method was to count how many neighborhoods were explored to reach a
local optimum. By using the Neural network, 32% savings were reached compared to the
statistic­based version (the statistic­based performed much better than the random one)
and if the the threshold was set to 0.001, the savings were 59%. The Neural network
was next implemented into a high­quality iterated local search algorithm. The overhead
of the Neural network or in fact the feature extractions, were eating up the potential time
saving of the Neural network based VND. The results were therefore considered rather
disappointing.
In [19], another attempt to study the characteristics of high­quality solutions is performed.
The feature selection approach is different than in [4] and [18] since the focus is now
on routes but not the whole solution. By doing that, the feature extraction can be done
faster but the aggregate values can also be more descriptive. As an example, aggregate
features like average, does not change significantly when 2 different solutions of 100
routes only have one or two different routes. First, 10 million high quality and 10 million
low quality solutions were generated. Next, about 600 million routes were classified as
shared, high or low quality. Shared means that the route occurs in both the high and low
quality solutions. High quality route is when the route only occurs in high quality solutions
and similarly, low quality route only occurs in low quality solutions. When the low quality
solutions were analysed using this method, it turned out that 94% of low quality solutions
contained at least one low quality route. With that in mind, an idea came up to get rid of
low quality routes. 2 million routes were used to train a binary classifier to classify routes
either as interesting or not interesting. The model achieved accuracy of 77% and the idea
was to implement this into state of the art algorithm as it offers fast feature extraction from
a given solution. To try that, a new algorithm called Fast iterated local search or FILO was
used (will appear in Transportation Science later this year). In FILO, shaking is performed
by selecting a ”seed customer” and then set of customers belonging to routes ”close” to
the seed. This process is done by randomly selecting customers but this time it was tried
to bias the seed selection towards customers belonging to low quality routes. The results
showed that having this guided selection of seed, improved the algorithm. The standard
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
10
==PAGE:16==
version had 0.36% gap while the guided version had 0.34% gap which maybe sounds little
but is impressive for an algorithm that is performing very well already. The authors could
also conclude that route feature analysis has a better explanatory power than aggregate
solution features when trying to separate good solutions from bad solutions.
4.2
Unsupervised learning
In [20], a method is introduced that combines unsupervised learning with genetic algo­
rithms (GE). This method is different from other articles discussed in this chapter as it
uses clustering­based approach to predict what operators will perform well for the given
instance. Furthermore, the goal is to study whether information theoretic landscape mea­
sures can be used to predict the problem instance difficulty. The optimization problems
that the method is evaluated on are the Capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) and
the Vehicle routing problem with time windows (VRPTW). 4 mutation and 3 crossover
operators are used on 66 benchmarks instances.
The clusters are based on the fitness landscape of the given instance. A fitness landscape
is defined by using the neighborhood, that is the set of solutions reachable by a single
application of the search operator that is being considered. If a high number of local optima
is presented in the landscape, it is said to be rugged. When a few local optima exists, the
landscape is said to be either smooth or flat depending on the existence of large attractive
basins. Local optima with rather small attractive basins is considered isolated or flat while
larger basins of attraction usually imply a smoother landscape. When landscapes have
few local optima, they generally contain a large amount of neutrality which means that the
fitness of neighbouring solutions remains rather equal. These characteristics can indicate
the problem difficulty, for example a landscape with few isolated optima and a high degree
of neutrality is likely harder than a smooth landscape with only a global optima (large hill).
To gather the required information about the landscape of the instances, 2000 random
walks were performed using 10,000 steps. The results show that most of the clusters
contained only a single type of search operator, indicating similar landscape structure for
the problem instance.
The authors also explore if the clusters can be used to predict outcomes of a genetic
algorithm. So called performance profiles were created. All operators were executed for
5000 generations with a population size of 200. As in the first part, clusters are created
based on how the operators performed. Significant overlap between the landscape and
performance cluster was found in the comparison of the two cluster types.
4.3
Reinforcement learning
In [1], a method called Neural Large Neighborhood Search (NLNS) is introduced to solve
the Vehicle routing problem (VRP).This method uses the destroy and repair mechanism
known from the metaheuristic Large Neighborhood Search (LNS), but with a twist where
neural network and reinforcement learning is involved. Two destroy procedures are used
and they both start at a randomly selected point. One removes customers closest to the
chosen point but the other one removes all customers in the corresponding tour. In LNS,
the repair procedures are previously defined (for example Greedy method) but here, the
repair procedure is formulated as a reinforcement learning problem. In each iteration
when a solution has been destroyed, the model receives all open tour ends of the so­
lution and the depot as inputs. Each input consists of the coordinates of the node, the
category describing if it is a tour with a single or many customers in that tour and if it
is connected to the depot, and the last feature in the input is the combined demand of
the tour. The model is also given an unconnected tour end that is randomly chosen and
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
11
==PAGE:17==
then the model outputs a probability distribution over all nodes that the chosen tour end
can be connected to. The randomly selected tour end is connected to the tour end with
the highest assigned probability value and the process is repeated until the solution has
been fully repaired. The training of the model is made via reinforcement learning and in
the training process, the models repairs 64 million solutions that have been destroyed. In
the first steps of the training, the model starts with random guesses but at the end of the
training, the model is confident in its actions.
As the model only uses information about the destroyed tours as inputs, the size of the
model only depends on the degree of destruction but not the size of the instance. That
makes it possible to apply the method to large instances with up to 300 customers. The
results show that NLNS outperforms a handcrafted heuristic from the literature. Further­
more, the results show that combining learned models with a high­level search guidance,
can outperform models that are lacking search capabilities. [1] [21]
In [2] a new learning method is introduced which is a combination of an acceptance mech­
anism called Iteration Limited threshold acceptance (ILTA) and reinforcement learning.
ILTA can be used with meta­ and hyper­heuristics and was introduced by [22]. The method
only accepts non­worsening moves but with few exceptions. After k consecutive moves
without improvement, the solution is accepted and also if the fitness value is within a cer­
tain range R of the best known solution at that time. The proposed method is a hybrid
between ILTA and reinforcement learning, called LA­ILTA. The parameters k and R are
fixed in ILTA but the new method adaptively changes the parameters using reinforcement
learning and more specifically, Learning Automata (LA). LA is an algorithm that is suitable
for problems with a large amount of uncertainty or when information about the environ­
ment is deficient [23]. Here the focus is on the parameter R and finding the appropriate
value depending on the place in the search (e.g. beginning, middle, end). The optimiza­
tion problem used for testing the proposed method is the Patient Admission Scheduling
problem or PAS. In PAS, patients in a hospital need to be assigned to beds where both
hard and soft constraints are met and objective function based on the constraints must
be minimized.
The search is divided into 10 equal periods and in each of them, R takes one value. 1000
learning runs are performed, starting from different starting solutions and after that 1000
validation runs are performed. To compare the results to the static method (ILTA), 1000
validation runs are performed as well for each value of R that the parameter can take.
The best value of R found in this validation phase is then used when comparing to the
proposed algorithm LA­ILTA. The other parameter k is fixed in both cases. The results
show that the LA­ILTA method which learns a parameter setting depending on the current
search progress, performs better than the static method where the parameter is tuned
to one specific value. Like expected, the performance improves with more learning runs
resulting in better objective values. [2]
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
12
==PAGE:18==
5
Method
In this section, each and every part of the experiment will be explained. Before going into
the details of every part, it is important to get a summary of the whole process.
The goal is to use a neural network to improve a local search metaheuristic with various
search operators. The optimization problem used is the Traveling salesman problem.
The first stage of the process is to run the metaheuristic multiple times on the TSP and
store the results. In this case the results are not just the tour and the total distance like
usually when the TSP is concerned. In every iteration, various attributes are stored such
as current distance, if the solution is accepted, the number of the iteration etc. All the
information is gathered and that forms a dataset. The dataset is used to analyze the result
but furthermore, used to train a neural network. Finally the Neural network is implemented
in the heuristic to guide the search instead of choosing a search operator randomly. To
implement the Neural network, the weights and biases are extracted from the model and
then it is programmed as a function in the heuristic. Finally, the metaheuristic is executed
again, guided by the Neural network.
All implementation of the metaheuristic was done in Julia. As the running time of the
programs were too long for a normal laptop, all runs were made in DTU’s HPC cluster.
Python was used to analyse the results while the software library Keras was used to create
and train a neural network. [24]
5.1
The Traveling Salesman Problem
The Traveling Salesman Problem or TSP, is perhaps the most studied NP­hard combina­
torial optimization problem. Problems are said to be NP if they are solvable in polynomial
time by a non­deterministic machine and NP­hard problems are at least as hard as any
NP­problem but might be harder [25]. The task of the TSP is to find the least costs Hamil­
tonian path that visits all cities once (and only once) and ends in the same city as the tour
started. The formal definition of the problem is the following: [26]
Instance: A complete graph Kn (n ≥3 ) and weights c : E(Kn) →R+
(5.1)
Task: To find a Hamiltonian path whose weight
∑
e∈E(T)
c(e) is minimum
(5.2)
5.1.1
Problem instances
In total, 20 different benchmark instances are used in this project. The number of cities (or
nodes) varies from 52 to 1060. All datasets are retrieved from Gerhard Reinelt’s TSPLIB,
a library of sample instances for the TSP. [27]
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
13
==PAGE:19==
Instance
Number of cities
Best known distance
berlin52
52
7,542
lin105
105
14,379
ch150
150
6,528
pr152
152
73,682
rat195
195
2,323
kroA200
200
29,368
kroB200
200
29,437
ts225
225
126,643
pr226
226
80,369
lin318
318
42,029
fl417
417
11,861
pr439
439
107,217
d493
493
35,002
u574
574
36,905
rat575
575
6,773
p654
654
34,643
d657
657
48,912
u724
724
41,910
rat783
783
8,806
u1060
1060
224,094
Table 5.1: TSP instances that are used in this project
5.2
Baseline models
As the goal of this project is to determine whether a neural network implemented into a
metaheuristic will improve the algorithm then some kind of baseline is needed. Having a
random selection of operators in the search is an obvious baseline as that method is used
to generate the dataset that is then used to train the Neural network. It is also suitable due
to the fact that many of the state of the art algorithms do have some random element. The
other baseline model that will be used is to select operators with adaptive mechanism, the
same as in ALNS [3]. The idea of encouraging well performing operators that is used in
ALNS, is exactly what the goal is of using the Neural network to guide the search. It will
therefore be interesting to compare the two different methods and the guided algorithm.
5.3
Metaheuristic
The search method used in this project is a local search with multiple search operators.
In total there are 5 search operators that are randomly selected in every iteration so at
the end of the search, all operators should have been used roughly the same amount
of times. To start the search, a random city is chosen as the initial city and to construct
the initial solution, the Nearest neighbor method is used. In every step, the city which is
closest to the current one is chosen until all cities have been visited.
5.3.1
Search operators
Random swap: 2 cities are randomly chosen from the current solution. The 2 cities are
then swapped. This operator does not perform any iterations so the first random swap
will always be returned, even though it will result in a higher objective value.
2­opt: The idea with the 2­opt method is to reorder a route that is crossing over itself.
A neighboring solution to the current one is found by deleting two edges, than reverse
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
14
==PAGE:20==
one of the resulting paths and finally reconnecting the tour [5]. This operator will try every
possibility and return the one whose objective value is the lowest.
Greedy insert: A city from the current solution is randomly chosen and removed. Next,
all possible insertions are tried and the one where the objective value is the smallest, is
chosen. Here it can happen that the position of the city before it is removed, is the best
possible position. In those cases the operator returns the same solution as before and
therefore there will be no change in the objective value.
Best swap: This operator swaps 2 cities by checking every possible swap and uses the
best swap that was found. The best swap is the swap where the distance is the lowest. In
cases where no improving swap is found, the operator returns the same solution without
any swap.
Most expensive city: This operator can be seen as an extension of the Greedy insert
operator. Instead of randomly choosing a city, now the focus is on the longest part of
the current tour. The operator finds the longest sub­tour of the current tour, from city a­b
and removes city b from the tour. The city is then inserted into the tour again by applying
the greedy method, that is finding the best possible insertion. As with the Greedy insert
operator, the city can end up being in the same position as before if no better position is
found.
5.3.2
Acceptance criteria
The acceptance criteria is a simulated annealing approach meaning that all improving
solutions are accepted. Solutions that are worse than the current one are accepted with
probability e∆E/T where ∆E is the change of objective value in the two solutions and T
is the temperature. Both the temperature and the cooling rate, which is used to decrease
the temperature gradually, needs to be initialized. The initial values are the following:
T0 = 500
(5.3)
Rate of cooling = 0.01
(5.4)
The temperature is updated in every iteration according to:
Tnew = Told · (1 −Rate of cooling)
(5.5)
The initial temperature is chosen with that in mind that the number of iterations is rather
low. By using an initial temperature which is also rather low, there is not much tolerance
for a worse solution, even in the beginning of the search. In other words, when ∆E returns
a high value, the chance of accepting that solution is low. Having said that, the purpose
of the simulated annealing approach is to escape local minima by also accepting worse
solutions and that is still the case, even though the initial temperature value is low.
5.3.3
Execution of the algorithm
As mentioned in subsection 5.1.1, there are in total 20 different instances of the TSP
used. In every execution of the algorithm, the number of iterations is fixed to 500. For
every instance, the algorithm is executed 30 times meaning that after 500 iterations, the
solution is stored before the search process is restarted. A summary of all parameters
can be seen below:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
15
==PAGE:21==
Parameter
Value
Instances
20
Executions for each instance
30
Iterations
500
T0
500
Rate of cooling
0.01
Table 5.2: Parameters and their values
5.3.4
Pseudo­code
Now when all main parts of the heuristic have been introduced, lets look at the pseudo­
code:
Algorithm 1: Local search with multiple search operators
Input: Initial solution x
xb = x
while 500 iterations are not exceeded do
Randomly choose search operator s
xt = s(x)
if accept(xt, x) then
x = xt
end
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
xb = xt
end
end
return xb
The initial solution x is found by applying the Nearest neighbor method. The best solution
found during the search is stored in the variable xb so before the search process starts,
the variable is initialized. xt stores the new solution found by applying search operator
s. The new solution is evaluated and if accepted, the current solution x is updated. Next
the new solution xt is evaluated and compared to the best known solution, where c(x)
denotes the objective value of solution x. If the objective value is better than the best
known value, xb is updated.
Pseudo­code: Adaptive mechanism
As previously mentioned, two baseline algorithms will be used. A random selection of
search operators is the first baseline and it is also used to generate the dataset. In the
other baseline algorithm, the random selection is replaced with the adaptive mechanism,
known from the metaheuristic ALNS [3]. The pseudo code is very similar for this version:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
16
==PAGE:22==
Algorithm 2: Local search with multiple search operators and adaptive mechanism
Input: Initial solution x
xb = x; ρ = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1);
while 500 iterations are not exceeded do
Randomly choose search operator s using ρ
xt = s(x)
if accept(xt, x) then
x = xt
end
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
xb = xt
end
update ρ
end
return xb
The vector ρ is used to store the weights for all search operators. In the beginning, all
5 operators have the same weight but after every iteration, the weight of the operator
used in that iteration is updated. The selection of operators is made by a roulette wheel
principle. To update the weights, the following scoring scheme is used:
Ψ = max







5
if the new solution is a new global best
3
if the new solution is better than the current one
2
if the new solution is accepted
1
if the new solution is rejected
(5.6)
Finally the parameter λ is set to 0.5.
5.3.5
Generating the dataset
When the algorithm is being executed, information about each and every iteration is
stored. The number of observations (rows) in the dataset is therefore:
Instances · Executions of each instance · Iterations ⇔20 · 30 · 500 = 300, 000
(5.7)
It is important to keep in mind that the attributes of the dataset are not necessarily selected
as features in the training of the Neural network. The selection of features is explained
later in this section. All attributes are explained in Table 5.3:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
17
==PAGE:23==
Attribute
Type
Possible
values
Explanation
Instance
Integer
[1,20]
The number of the TSP instance (ID)
Execution number
Integer
[1,30]
The number of the execution
Iteration
Integer
[1,500]
The number of the iteration
Interval
Integer
[1,10]
The iterations are grouped into 10 intervals.
The attribute represent which interval the
iteration belongs to
Operator
Integer
[1,5]
Operator used in the iteration:
1: Random swap
2: 2­opt
3: Greedy insert
4: Best swap
5: Most expensive city
Accepted
Binary
[0,1]
1, if solution is accepted
0, otherwise
New best solution
Binary
[0,1]
1, if solution is a new best solution
0, otherwise
Since last improved
Integer
[0,500]
Number of iterations since a new
best solution was found
Current distance
Continuous
R+
The distance of the current
solution
Best distance
Continuous
R+
The distance of the best solution, found
in the current execution of the algorithm
Operator 1 counter
Integer
[1,500]
Counter for operator 1 in the current
execution of the algorithm
Operator 2 counter
Integer
[1,500]
Counter for operator 2 in the current
execution of the algorithm
Operator 3 counter
Integer
[1,500]
Counter for operator 3 in the current
execution of the algorithm
Operator 4 counter
Integer
[1,500]
Counter for operator 4 in the current
execution of the algorithm
Operator 5 counter
Integer
[1,500]
Counter for operator 5 in the current
execution of the algorithm
Table 5.3: Attributes of the dataset explained
5.4
Neural network
The making of the Neural network will be explained in this section. First the dataset
mentioned above, is imported and loaded as a Pandas dataframe. Before the training
of the model starts, only high quality solutions are extracted into a new dataframe. This
new dataframe is used to train the model. The first step of the process is to prepare
the features and convert them to the desired form. The modelling part is divided into 3
subsections, one for each version of the model that is used. The training process will also
be described with appropriate tables and figures.
5.4.1
High quality solutions
The first part of the data preparation is to create a new dataframe that includes only high
quality solutions. The idea is to train the model only with runs of the algorithm that resulted
with a good solution. By doing that, the Neural network will hopefully identify patterns that
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
18
==PAGE:24==
are present in these solutions. A high quality solution can be defined in many ways but
here the focus is on the top 5 solutions for each instance. That means out of the 30
executions for each instance, the best 5 for each are used in the new dataframe. The
number of observations (rows) in the dataframe that only includes high quality solutions
is:
Instances · Executions for each instance · Iterations ⇔20 · 5 · 500 = 50, 000
(5.8)
5.4.2
Data preparation & features selection
The features, also called variables, need to be chosen and prepared before the training
of the model starts. The main part of the feature preparation is to create dummy variables
for the categorical features. Dummy variables only take the values 0 or 1 [28]. As an
example, a variable that can take 3 integer values that represent some class or a category,
is converted to 3 different features. For each observation, only 1 of the 3 new features
can therefore take the value 1 and the other two will take the value 0.
Another step of the data preparation is to normalize the data. It is necessary to normalize
the data so that the features contribute equally when the model is trained. The categorical
variables are not a part of this step. Here the task is to rescale the features so that they
have a common scale, in this case in the range from 0 to 1. [29]
A key factor in the construction of a neural network is the feature selection. In Table 5.3,
all the attributes of the dataset are listed. Now 8 features are selected and can be seen
in the table below:
Feature
Type
Interval
Categorical
Intance
Categorical
Current distance
Numeric
Best distance
Numeric
Accepted
Binary
NewBestSolution
Binary
SinceLastImproved
Numeric
OperatorLastIteration
Categorical
Table 5.4: Chosen features
The process of selecting features is an iterated procedure where different combinations of
the attributes in the dataset are tried. The goal is to maximize a known machine learning
metric, that is accuracy. The optimal feature selection is also evaluated by plotting the
learning curves of the model. It is worth mentioning that adding more history about the
iterations before, that is which operators where used before, did not improve the model.
Before the training of the model starts, the dataset is split into training data, validation
data and test data. The data is shuffled before the split, so that all sets include different
parts of the data. The number of observations in each set is the following:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
19
==PAGE:25==
Dataset
Number of observations
Training
40,000
Validation
9,500
Test
500
Total
50,000
Table 5.5: Number of observations in each dataset
The size of the test set may seem odd compared to the validation set. Since the purpose of
the Neural network in this project is not to predict an output for the test set, it is considered
more useful to use almost all the data in either training or validation. However, a small
sample is left out so that the implementation of the Neural network as a function in the
metaheuristic, can be validated.
5.4.3
Modelling
The modelling section is split into 3 parts as different models were made and implemented
into the heuristic. The first Neural network is the most complex version with 3 hidden
layers. Version number two is much more simple with only one hidden layer and relatively
few neurons. The third version uses weights to make certain observations more important
than others, according to a given criteria.
The Neural network model that all 3 version are based on, is a multi­class classification
problem where the target variable is the search operator. That means that the target
variable can take 5 different values, one for each operator. The model is sequential,
which simply means that it is built upon sequence of layers. The layers are dense or fully
connected. Every neuron is connected to all neurons in the next layer. The optimizer
used is called Adam. It is a popular optimizer that uses an adaptive step size and usually
performs very well [30]. 300 epochs are used for the training and a batch size of 128.
Version 1: The Complex model
An overview of the layers in the model can be seen in the table below:
Layer
Neurons / rate
Activation function
Input
40
Hidden layer 1
200
ReLU
Dropout
0.5
Hidden layer 2
120
ReLU
Dropout
0.5
Hidden layer 3
50
ReLU
Dropout
0.5
Output
5
Softmax
Table 5.6: Layers of the Neural network, including dropout
Between the hidden layers of the network, dropout is added with the rate of 0.5. Dropout
layers help prevent overfitting, by randomly setting input units to 0 with the chosen fre­
quency at each step during training [31]. All 3 hidden layers have the same activation
function. Rectified linear activation function or ReLU is a function that returns the maxi­
mum of 0 and the input. If a neuron value is negative, the activation function makes sure
that the neuron gets the value 0. The output layer uses the activation function softmax.
Softmax converts a vector of values to a probability distribution where the elements of
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
20
==PAGE:26==
the vector are in the range (0,1) and together sum to 1. The formula used to convert the
vector to a probability distribution is: [32]
σ(z)j =
ezj
∑K
i=1 ezi
(5.9)
The exponential of every element of the input vector z is divided by the sum of exponentials
of all the elements. The highest value of the new vector is always chosen, or in fact the
corresponding search operator.
To analyze the results of the training process, two learning curves are plotted. The first
one shows the loss over time, in other words the loss function value as number of epochs
increases.
Figure 5.1: Training and validation loss
When looking at the loss plot, the desired result for a good fit is when both curves decrease
to a point of stability with a minimal gap between them. It can be seen in Figure 5.1
that both the training and validation losses are decreasing but there is a bit of a noise,
especially in the validation loss. This can be a sign of an unrepresentative validation
dataset. That can occur if it contains too few examples but after increasing the size and
still getting similar results, it is decided to accept the noise in the validation loss. [33] [34]
The other learning curve that can be useful to analyze is the accuracy. In Figure 5.2 the
training and validation accuracy can be seen:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.2: Training and validation accuracy
Both curves follow a similar path and after the 300 epochs, they both end with approxi­
mately 0.42 accuracy. In general, 0.42 accuracy is considered low, especially when the
output classes are not so many. However, low accuracy is in some sense expected in this
case. The goal of the model is to guide the search by choosing an operator in every step
of the metaheuristic. The model is trained with high quality solutions so that it will learn a
pattern in those high quality solutions. The problem which the Neural network is dealing
with can be considered hard. Many observations in the training set are very similar even
though the operator used in that iteration is different. As an example, a solution that is not
accepted and a little higher than the best known solution is very similar in regards of fea­
ture values. Even though it seems odd when working with a neural network, low accuracy
is not necessarily an indicator that the experiment will fail. The evaluation has to be made
after the implementation of the Neural network in the metaheuristic, but the accuracy can
however be used for comparison of the different versions of the models [35]. After these
discussions about the accuracy, it is worth mentioning that it can be misleading to focus
on the accuracy in some cases even though that is not the case here. When trying to
predict something that is very rare compared to the size of the dataset, it can be easy to
get really high accuracy even though the model is not performing well at all. In cases of
imbalanced datasets, other metrics are much more useful. [30]
Version 2: Simple model
The next version of the model is a more simple approach. An overview of the layers is
the following:
Layer
Neurons
Activation function
Input
40
Hidden layer 1
20
ReLU
Output
5
Softmax
Table 5.7: Layers of the Neural network
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
22
==PAGE:28==
The input and output layers are the same as before. Now there is only one hidden layer
between the input and the output with 20 neurons. The two learning curves for this version
of the model can be seen below:
Figure 5.3: Training and validation loss
Figure 5.4: Training and validation accuracy
When looking at Figure 5.3, it can easily be seen that the two curves follow a very similar
path even though there is still just a little noise in the validation loss. A minimal gap
between the two curves is a quality of a good fit. [34]
In Figure 5.4 the accuracy for both the training and validation is plotted. Very soon in the
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
23
==PAGE:29==
process, a gap starts to be visible and keeps similar over the whole period. The training
accuracy after 300 epochs is approximately 0.46, which is a little higher than in the more
complex model. Just like with the complex model, it is hard to make assumptions by
looking at the accuracy.
Version 3: Simple model with sample weights
In this version, the simple model is used and extended by adding sample weights to the
loss function according to a specific criteria. By using sample weights as a parameter in
the model, some samples are considered more important than others during training of
the model [36]. The chosen criteria is to increase the weight when the solution is a new
best solution, and when the solution is accepted.
Sample
Weights
New best solution
1.5
Accepted solution
1.2
Other
1
Table 5.8: Weighting scheme used as sample weights in the model
Like with the other two versions, the learning curves are plotted:
Figure 5.5: Training and validation loss
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.6: Training and validation accuracy
The two plots are similar to the ones for the model without the weights. The main differ­
ence is that now there is a small gap between the training and validation loss which from
a machine learning point of view, is not a good sign. However the accuracy is a little bit
higher now, 0.47 after the 300 epochs.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
25
==PAGE:31==
6
Results
In this section, the results will be analysed and discussed. To start the analysis, the
convergence of the two baseline models will be plotted so that it is easy to see how the
search develops during the 500 iterations. Next, the implementation of different versions
of the Neural network will be analysed. The best performing model will be used for the
next part where it is compared to the baseline models. Finally the results are discussed
and the performance of the heuristic guided by the Neural network, analysed further.
6.1
Baseline models
The first thing to present is the convergence and how it develops for both of the baseline
models. The instances are ordered by the number of cities, so the first figure is the in­
stance with the fewest cities and the last one with the most cities. In the figures below, the
average gap for each instance is plotted over the fixed 500 iterations. The black curve
represents the random selection of search operators and the red curve is the adaptive
method. The number of cities in each instance can be seen in the title of each figure. The
gap that is represented on the y­axis is with respect to the best known solution for the
corresponding instance.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.1: The convergence of the baseline algorithms (first 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.2: The convergence of the baseline algorithms (last 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
28
==PAGE:34==
The first thing to mention is that there does not seem to be much difference in the distance
after 500 iterations for the two methods. Just by looking at the figures, a difference can
be spotted in some of the instances but many of them have very similar distance (or gap)
at the end of the running time.
Another thing that can clearly be seen from the figures is that the convergence is very
steep in the beginning, especially for the first 10 instances. It then reaches a steady state
and the curve seems to be flat, indicating that the distance is not being improved for many
of the iterations. When looking at the last 10 instances, a similar trend can be identified.
However, the slope of the curves gets more smooth as the number of cities increases.
This is expected as every move by a search operator has less impact as the number of
cities gets bigger. The search operators only handles 1 or 2 cities in each move so it is
normal that the first figure with 52 cities has a steeper convergence than the last figure
with 1060 cities.
The main difference of the two baseline models can easily be seen just by looking at the
convergence. Even though both curves end with very similar distance at the end of the
running period, there is a difference in how fast a steady state is reached. In the first few
instances it is not very clear but as the number of cites increases, a gap between the two
curves starts to appear. The adaptive method is faster to reach a better solution than the
random method. The red curve is steeper for more iterations compared to the black curve,
but that does not necessarily mean that the adaptive method reaches better solutions in
the end.
6.2
Neural networks
Now when the convergence of the baseline models has been analysed, it is time to see
how the heuristic performs when the search is guided by a neural network. As introduced
earlier, 3 versions of neural networks were made. If the purpose of the Neural networks
would be to predict an outcome, it would be easy to evaluate the models and simply
choosing the best performing model by using metrics like accuracy. However, that is
maybe not a good metric in this experiment. There is no guarantee that the model with the
highest accuracy will lead to the best performing algorithm when it has been implemented
into the metaheuristic. Having said that, a logical start is to evaluate the performance of all
3 versions of the Neural network, by plotting the convergence. Just like with the baseline
models, all 30 executions for each instance are used in the figures below.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.3: The convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to guide
the search (first 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
30
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.4: The convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to guide
the search (last 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
31
==PAGE:37==
There are a number of interesting assumptions that can be drawn by looking at the figures.
First of all, there is clearly a lack of consistency, especially for version 2 and 3. For some
of the instances, all 3 versions perform similarly in regards of distance at the end of the
running time, even though the curves do not follow the same path to get there. For other
instances, the difference is significant. For example for instance 2, the best performing
version has around 3% gap at the end but the worst performing version has around 23%
gap which is very little improvement from the 30% gap in the initial solution.
For almost all the instances, the first version performs the best when looking at the gap
at the end of the running period. It is interesting to see that even when the other 2 curves
reach a better solution faster than the first version, it usually results in similar end results
or even that the first version still ends with the smallest gap. An example is instance 3
and instance 18 where the first version only reaches the other 2 curves around iteration
350.
Now that the convergence has been analysed visually, it is time to look at the results in
a more structured way. In the table below, a summary of the results can be seen. All
executions are used in this summary, that is all 30 executions for all instances. The gap
at the end of the running time for all 3 versions of the Neural network is displayed and the
best performing version is marked in bold. In the last 2 columns, the best solution found
for each instance can be seen and which version of the Neural network was used in that
solution.
Instance
Version 1
Gap (%)
Version 2
Gap (%)
Version 3
Gap (%)
Best solution
Gap (%)
Best solution
Version
1
5.162
3.846
8.8
0.031
2
2
4.029
8.188
23.767
0.027
3
3
5.569
6.194
6.54
0.428
3
4
6.119
6.945
11.302
0.779
1
5
3.47
3.235
3.241
1.319
3
6
5.523
17.128
9.204
1.016
1
7
7.319
6.907
14.544
3.949
2
8
7.685
10.062
9.628
0.465
2
9
6.438
9.928
9.58
2.125
2
10
6.359
14.791
13.772
2.06
2
11
5.819
10.649
18.521
2.113
2
12
10.504
17.323
13.397
3.904
1
13
5.241
12.19
16.408
1.81
1
14
11.464
13.184
19.193
4.68
2
15
5.272
6.982
6.861
3.894
3
16
8.063
18.707
21.245
2.28
3
17
7.975
25.249
19.515
4.128
1
18
13.023
13.162
12.999
2.995
1
19
8.419
8.478
14.94
4.523
2
20
20.469
26.183
24.783
4.887
1
Table 6.1: Summary of the results from all runs. Best performing version for every instance
is in bold
The first version performs best in 17 out of the 20 instances. In those few cases when the
first version does not perform the best, the difference from the best performing version
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
32
==PAGE:38==
is not very big. It was very noticeable from the convergence that the difference between
version 1 and the other 2 can be quite big in the cases when version 1 is performing the
best.
The inconsistency in versions 2 and 3 is clearly reflected when the best performing version
is analysed. The best solution found for each instance is divided almost equally between
the 3 versions. As an example, version 2 found the best solution to instance 8 with a
gap of 0.465%. The same version has an average gap of 10.062%. From that it can be
concluded that the algorithm can return very good solutions but also solutions that are
really bad.
As the instances are ordered in ascending order, one would expect that the average gap
would somehow reflect that. If version 1 is analysed, the trend is not as clear as expected.
There are clearly higher numbers for the largest instances, but the large gap for some of
the smaller instances is surprising. If the focus is set to the column with the best solution
found for each instance, the expected trend can be identified. There are some exceptions,
but overall the gap is smaller in the smaller instances and gets larger as the instance size
gets bigger.
At last, the average gap over all instances is computed for all versions as well as the
overall convergence:
NN version
Avg. gap(%)
Version 1
7.696
Version 2
11.967
Version 3
13.912
Table 6.2: Average gap (%) overall
Figure 6.5: The overall convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to
guide the search
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
33
==PAGE:39==
After analysing the performance using the whole dataset, the obvious conclusion is that
the first version of the Neural network outperforms the other two significantly. However,
it could also be useful to look at the high quality solutions for all 3 versions. The average
gap for version 2 and 3 was clearly higher than for version 1 for most of the instances but
it is still possible that if the high quality solutions are analysed, the difference will not be
as big.
6.2.1
High quality solutions
Now the same analysis will be made but instead of using all solutions from the dataset,
only high quality solutions will be analysed. From Table 6.1 it was clear that all versions
were able to find good solutions but overall, the performance seemed to be very inconsis­
tent. The same definition of high quality solutions is used as before, that is only the 5 best
solutions for each instance. The same form is used for this analysis, first the convergence
is plotted and then the results are set up in a more structured way.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.6: The convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to guide
the search (first 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.7: The convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to guide
the search (last 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
36
==PAGE:42==
The main difference is that now all 3 versions end at a similar value more often than
before. However, there are still instances where the difference is significant, especially
in the larger instances. In instances 17 and 20, about 15% separate the best and worst
performing solution. Since this is high quality solutions only, it is fair to conclude that using
version 2 and 3 can give decent results, but there is a high chance that the algorithm will
perform badly. Below are the results for all instances. The best solution displayed in the
table is obviously the same as before but it is still interesting to compare the average gap
to the best solution gap.
Instance
Version 1
Gap (%)
Version 2
Gap (%)
Version 3
Gap (%)
Best solution
Gap (%)
Best solution
Version
1
1.989
1.252
1.891
0.031
2
2
1.56
1.684
2.975
0.027
3
3
1.376
1.006
0.666
0.428
3
4
1.529
1.239
1.853
0.779
1
5
1.806
2.07
1.713
1.319
3
6
1.659
2.049
1.874
1.016
1
7
4.917
4.106
5.774
3.949
2
8
0.829
0.83
1.067
0.465
2
9
3.285
2.442
3.155
2.125
2
10
3.152
3.511
3.274
2.06
2
11
2.487
3.34
4.156
2.113
2
12
4.37
5.913
4.738
3.904
1
13
2.724
3.276
9.892
1.81
1
14
5.76
5.276
5.514
4.68
2
15
4.794
4.385
4.305
3.894
3
16
2.936
3.451
7.816
2.28
3
17
4.439
20.364
5.049
4.128
1
18
3.549
3.568
3.853
2.995
1
19
5.012
4.683
5.092
4.523
2
20
5.382
20.624
17.208
4.887
1
Table 6.3: Summary of the results when only high quality solutions are used
Version 1 is still performing better than the other versions. In 11 out of the 20 instances,
Version 1 has the best average gap which is not as dominant as before when all the
dataset was used, but it is still more than 50% of the instances.
Even though this summary only includes high quality solutions or the best 5 solutions for
each instance, there are still high numbers for some of the instances. The lowest gap for
version 1 is 0.829% and the largest gap is 5.75%. The difference between the 2 numbers
is much higher for the other versions. The best performance of version 2 is 0.83% gap
and the largest gap is 20.62%. It is similar for version 3 or 0.666% and 17.208%.
When the results are gathered into one number for each version it can be seen that the last
2 versions are performing similarly. Just like when the whole dataset was used, version
1 outperforms the other 2 significantly.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
37
==PAGE:43==
NN version
Avg. gap (%)
Version 1
3.178
Version 2
4.753
Version 3
4.593
Table 6.4: Average gap (%) overall when only high quality solutions are used
Figure 6.8: The convergence of the search with 3 different versions of the NN to guide
the search. Only high quality solutions are used
6.2.2
Discussion
Now the different versions of the Neural network have been analysed by implementing all 3
versions into the metaheuristic to guide the search. The dataset used to train the models,
was generated by randomly selecting the search operators in every iteration. The Neural
network that performed significantly best of the 3 versions was version 1. Version 1 or the
Complex model like it was introduced earlier, had 3 hidden layers where the first hidden
layer had 200 neurons. It was clear in both the analysis of the whole dataset but also
when only high quality solutions were used, that the first version outperformed the other
2 versions of the Neural network.
What is interesting to see is that if the performance of the different Neural networks had
to be predicted without actually implementing the Neural networks into the metaheuristic,
Version 1 would not be on top of that list. In fact, Version 1 had the lowest accuracy of the
3 versions. The learning curves can also be very useful when evaluating the performance
of a neural network. In Figure 5.1 the training and validation loss were plotted. There was
a small gap between the 2 curves and the validation curve clearly had some noise. The
loss curve for Version 2 (Figure 5.3) was almost exactly like it should look for a good fit.
So again just like with the accuracy, the learning curves of Version 1 did not indicate that
it would be the best performing version.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
38
==PAGE:44==
6.3
Comparison to the baseline models
In section 6.1, the convergence for the 2 baseline models was analysed. The main find­
ings were that the adaptive method usually found a better solution quicker than the random
selection. However, the end results seemed to be very similar in most of the cases. To
evaluate the performance of the heuristic when it is guided by the Neural network, it needs
to be compared to the baseline models. Since the first version performed the best, that
version will be used for this section while the other 2 versions will not be a part of this
analysis. To start, the convergence of the 3 different methods is plotted for each instance:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.9: The convergence of the baseline models and when the Neural network is used
to guide the search (first 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.10: The convergence of the baseline models and when the Neural network is
used to guide the search (last 10 instances)
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
41
==PAGE:47==
It can easily be seen from the plots that the Neural network is performing worse than both
of the baseline models. If the first 10 instances are analysed, the gap at the end is in most
of the cases higher for the Neural network than the baseline. What is also interesting is
that sometimes the Neural network has a promising start but very quickly starts to flatten
out while the baseline models are more consistent. That is for example instance 5 and 6.
For the larger instances, the results are very similar as with the smaller instances. The
Neural network is more often competitive to the baselines without outperforming them. In
instance 15 and 16, the Neural network starts well and outperforms one of the baselines
until around iteration 200 where the baseline catches up with it. The performance of the
Neural network is clearly not as consistent as the baseline models. As an example, the
difference in instance 20 is about 15%.
Instance
Random
Gap (%)
Adaptive
Gap (%)
NN
Gap (%)
Best solution
Gap(%)
Best solution
Method
1
3.711
4.019
5.162
0.031
3
2
3.084
3.33
4.029
0.976
2
3
2.372
2.551
5.569
0.576
1
4
2.513
2.514
6.119
0.743
2
5
3.273
3.459
3.47
1.604
3
6
2.892
2.873
5.523
0.735
1
7
5.938
5.88
7.319
3.22
2
8
2.237
2.313
7.685
0.112
2
9
3.06
3.218
6.438
1.231
2
10
5.032
5.026
6.359
1.926
1
11
4.507
4.874
5.819
2.346
3
12
5.451
5.549
10.504
3.562
2
13
3.931
4.169
5.241
1.81
3
14
6.305
6.459
11.464
4.907
1
15
4.968
4.805
5.272
3.594
2
16
2.934
3.123
8.063
1.737
2
17
5.907
6.121
7.975
4.128
3
18
4.803
4.716
13.023
2.856
2
19
5.847
5.864
8.419
4.776
1
20
6.109
5.922
20.469
4.502
1
Table 6.5: Summary of the results. The last 2 columns represent the best solution found
for that instance and which method was used
The results for all instances can be seen in Table 6.5. It is clear that the Neural network
does not perform as good as the 2 baseline models. The random selection gives the
best results in 14 out of the 20 instances. The adaptive method is often very close to the
random method and in 6 instances, it outperforms the random method. That means that
there are no instances where the Neural network gives the best results.
When the best solutions found for each instance are analysed, it can be seen that in 5
instances, the Neural network finds the best solutions. In these cases, the gap is not
necessarily close to the other 2 methods so it is clear that the Neural network can find
good solutions compared to the baseline models, but the overall performance is not as
good. To analyse the overall performance even further, the average gap for all 3 methods
is computed and the convergence plotted:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
42
==PAGE:48==
NN version
Avg. gap (%)
Random
4.244
Adaptive
4.339
Neural network
7.696
Table 6.6: Average gap (%) overall for the 3 different methods
Figure 6.11: The convergence of the search with 3 different methods to guide the search.
The overall gap when the Neural network is used is 7.696%. As mentioned before, the
2 baseline models perform similarly with a gap of 4.244% and 4.339% respectively. In
Figure 6.11 it can be seen that the Neural network has a promising start but after about
40 iterations the baseline models are in front.
6.3.1
High quality solutions
Now it is clear that on average, using the Neural network to guide the search, does not
perform well compared to the baseline models. However, the Neural network clearly found
good solutions to some of the instances so it could be interesting to look at the high quality
solutions only. The convergence is plotted again:
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.12: The convergence of the baseline models and when the Neural network is
used to guide the search. Only high quality solutions are used (first 10 instances).
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
44
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.13: The convergence of the baseline models and when the Neural network is
used to guide the search. Only high quality solutions are used (last 10 instances).
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
45
==PAGE:51==
The Neural network is now more compatible with the baseline models. For the smaller
instances, it is only in instance 5 where the Neural network outperforms the other two,
both by a better solution at the end, but it is also faster to find better solutions than the
other 2 methods. For the larger instances, there are more cases where the Neural network
performs well. In instance 11, 12, 17 and 20 it is faster to find better solutions and ends
up with either better or very similar solutions as the baseline models. However, there are
still instances where it performs way worse than the baselines, like instance 15 and 16.
Instance
Random
Gap (%)
Adaptive
Gap (%)
NN
Gap (%)
Best solutions
Gap (%)
Best solution
Method
1
0.93
0.631
1.989
0.031
3
2
1.464
1.341
1.56
0.976
2
3
1.073
1.214
1.376
0.576
1
4
1.079
1.065
1.529
0.743
2
5
1.955
2.011
1.806
1.604
3
6
1.107
1.196
1.659
0.735
1
7
4.108
3.971
4.917
3.22
2
8
0.477
0.445
0.829
0.112
2
9
1.713
1.806
3.285
1.231
2
10
2.747
2.718
3.152
1.926
1
11
2.888
2.845
2.487
2.346
3
12
4.162
4.262
4.37
3.562
2
13
2.649
2.861
2.724
1.81
3
14
5.361
5.402
5.76
4.907
1
15
4.013
4.195
4.794
3.594
2
16
2.136
2.146
2.936
1.737
2
17
4.648
5.176
4.439
4.128
3
18
3.659
3.559
3.549
2.856
2
19
4.953
5.289
5.012
4.776
1
20
5.083
5.056
5.382
4.502
1
Table 6.7: Summary of the results when only high quality solutions are used
By looking at the summary, it can be seen that the Neural network has the smallest gap
for 4 instances. The random method is still performing the best, with the smallest gap in
9 out of all the instances. From the convergence plots it can be seen that the adaptive
method usually finds better solutions faster than the random method but at the end, the
random method performs the best. The overall gap and convergence can be seen below.
Method
Avg. gap (%)
Random
2.810
Adaptive
2.859
Neural network
3.178
Table 6.8: Average gap (%) overall for the 3 different methods
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.14: The convergence of the search with 3 different methods to guide the search.
Only high quality solutions are used
From Figure 6.14, a similar trend can be seen as in Figure 6.11 where all the dataset
was used, that is the Neural network has a promising start. Now it outperforms both of
the baseline models for the first 50 iterations and the random method for around 200
iterations. However the average gap of the Neural network ends up being higher, with an
average gap of 3.178% while the random and the adaptive methods have 2.810% and
2.859% gap respectively.
6.3.2
Discussion
The performance of the metaheuristic when the search is guided by the Neural network
was a bit disappointing. The average performance was significantly worse than the 2
baseline models. There were clearly some good solutions found by the Neural network
method since in 5 out of the 20 instances, the best solution to that instance was found by
that method. This indicates, similarly to what was concluded when the 3 different versions
of the Neural networks were analysed, that the method can generate very good solutions
but can also generate very poor solutions which is not desirable for a metaheuristic. This
problem was highlighted when only the high quality solutions were analysed. For some
instances, good solutions were found and some of them even outperformed the baseline
models. However when the overall performance was evaluated, the Neural network was
still a little bit behind the baseline models.
6.4
Further performance analysis
It has been shown that the metaheuristic does not perform well when the Neural network
is used to guide the search. The results are in some ways surprising since it was clear that
this method is capable of finding quality solutions. Having said that, it is also surprising
how badly it performed in some cases and it could easily be seen when the convergence
was analysed.
4 out of the 5 search operators that were used in the search should all be performing
similarly. It could be a bit of a simplification to put it that way, but all 4 search opera­
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
47
==PAGE:53==
tors try to improve some part of the solution. The search operator which only relies on
randomness is the Random swap operator. It was considered important to have some
stochastic element in the metaheuristic but it is also expected that random swap will most
often generate a solution that is worse than the current one. Therefore it is very likely that
the operator could be the reason for the bad performance, especially if it is used too often.
To analyse this possibility, the distribution of search operators needs to be observed. In
the figure below, the distribution of how the operators were used for each instance can be
seen:
Figure 6.15: The distribution of how the operators were used for each instance
The first thing to mention is that the distribution is very different for each instance. Random
swap, 2­opt and Most expensive city are clearly dominant while Greedy insert and Best
swap are not used as much, in fact for some of the instances they are not used at all. The
main purpose of this figure is to see if there is a connection between bad performance and
too much use of the Random swap operator. In instance 5, the operator is very dominant
and used for almost 75% of all iterations combined. When the performance of the Neural
network is observed for that same instance, the performance is actually very similar to
the baseline models (Figure 6.9 and Table 6.5). So in that case, the dominance of the
operator does not seem to affect the performance. In instance 8, the operator is used
for around 40% of all iterations. In this case, the performance of the Neural network is
remarkably worse than the baseline models with a gap of 7.7% compared to 2.3%. For
the larger instances, it is in instance 18 and 20 where the random operator is used the
most. For both these cases, the performance is much worse than the baselines so it can
definitely be the reason for the poor performance.
To understand this inconsistency better, a few examples are chosen from instance 20 as
the metaheuristic was performing poorly in that instance.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
48
==PAGE:54==
Execution
Number
Random swap
Counter
2­opt
Counter
Greedy insert
Counter
Best swap
Counter
Most exp. city
Counter
Gap (%)
1
320
153
0
0
27
6.392
2
499
0
1
0
0
31.698
3
0
166
0
62
272
5.696
8
289
204
1
4
2
6.054
11
0
174
0
60
266
5.288
20
499
0
1
0
0
34.554
21
377
1
0
122
0
26.731
22
15
189
0
16
280
5.760
23
0
187
0
47
266
4.887
24
381
1
0
118
0
26.029
Table 6.9: Examples of final solutions for instance 20
In Table 6.9, 10 different executions are shown with a counter for each operator and the
final solution (gap%). The first thing to mention is that the Greedy insert operator is only
used 3 times over the 10 different executions and from Figure 6.14 it was clear that it was
the least chosen operator for most of the instances. There are usually 2 operators that
are dominant in every execution. It was execution number 23 that was the best solution
to this instance. In that case the 2­opt and Most expensive city are dominant but the Best
swap operator is also used. In other good solutions like execution number 11, very similar
distribution of operators are used. Even though this is just one instance, it looks like using
multiple operators will lead to better solutions.
By analysing the distribution for these few executions, the main problem of this method is
exposed. In execution number 2 and 20, the Random swap operator is used in 499 out
of the 500 iterations. It is therefore obvious that the solution is really poor in these cases.
As the acceptance criteria of the algorithm is simulated annealing based, it can happen
that random moves are accepted even though they are worse than the current solution.
It can therefore happen that after 500 iterations, the solution is even worse than the initial
solution. That is of course a huge drawback of the method. If the Neural network ”gets
stuck” and always chooses the same operator, it can still end with a decent solution if that
operator is good, but when that operator is to randomly change part of the solution, it is
not likely to perform well.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
49
==PAGE:55==
7
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to train a neural network, then implement it into a metaheuristic
to speed up the search process. By using a neural network, the search should find better
solutions faster than before. To evaluate the results, two baseline models were defined
that either chose the search operators randomly or by using an adaptive mechanism. The
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) was used to perform the experiment. 20 benchmark
instances of different sizes were used to assess if the performance was somehow related
to the instance size. The metaheuristic used was a local search with 5 search operators
and a simulated annealing based acceptance criteria. One of the baseline models, that is
random selection of search operators, was used to generate a dataset. For each instance,
30 executions were performed with 500 iterations fixed for all cases, regardless of the
instance size. To train the Neural network, only high quality solutions were used. Since
the metrics that are usually used to evaluate neural networks will not necessarily indicate
if the metaheuristic will perform well after implementing the neural network, 3 different
versions were made. Next the performance of the heuristic using the best performing
Neural network was compared to the baseline models.
The first version of the Neural network referred as the Complex model had 3 hidden lay­
ers and a droupout between the layers. The second version, the Simple model, had only
1 hidden layer and relatively few neurons. In the third version, the second version was
extended by using sample weights to increase the weight of accepted and new best solu­
tions. From a machine learning point of view, the best model was version 2 as it had the
highest accuracy and the best looking learning curves. All 3 versions were implemented
into the heuristic (separately) and 3 new datasets generated. The results showed that the
first version, that is the Complex model, outperformed the other 2 versions. It was sur­
prising as that version had the lowest accuracy of the 3 models. The results also showed
that all 3 versions were not very stable since they were able to find very good solutions
but also very poor solutions. As the first version was the best performing one, only that
version was used in the main results part of the experiment, that is to compare it to the
baseline models.
The comparison to the baseline models showed clearly that the heuristic was performing
worse than the baseline models when the search was guided by the Neural network.
The average gap of 7.969% was way higher than the 2 baseline models had, 4.244% for
the random selection of operators and 4.339% when an adaptive mechanism was used.
When the convergence was plotted, it showed that the Neural network had a promising
start but is very quickly outperformed by the baseline models. The inconsistency of the
Neural network method was highlighted when only high quality solutions were analysed.
The average gap of the baseline models and the Neural network was 2.81%, 2.859% and
3.178% respectively. For 4 instances, the Neural network had the lowest average gap and
in general, was comparable with the baseline models. The convergence showed that the
Neural network again had a promising start but after around 200 iterations, the baseline
models have both outperformed the Neural network.
From this analysis, it was clear that the Neural network guided heuristic was performing
fine when only the high quality solutions were analysed but overall, the performance was
poor. To understand why, the search operator distribution was analysed. The results
showed that 2 search operators were rarely used. The Random swap operator was used
more than expected, as it is known that in most of the cases, random change to the
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
50
==PAGE:56==
solution will not improve it. When the instances that performed the worst were compared
to the operator distribution, there was a connection there. When the different runs for
one specific instance was analysed further, a drawback of the method was exposed. For
some runs, the Neural network only chose 1 or 2 search operators. If that operator was
the Random swap, the solution would never be good, and in fact possibly even worse
than the initial solution.
It was known beforehand that the goal of improving the heuristic would be challenging.
However, it has to be said that the results are disappointing and especially how big the
difference was of the performance of the Neural network guided heuristic, compared to
the baseline models. The main problem with the method was that it could easily get stuck
with the same search operator for the entire running time. It would have been possible
to improve the results simply by removing the Random swap operator and replace it with
another operator that uses a more sophisticated procedure. However, it was considered
important to have a stochastic element like many of the state of the art metaheuristics.
It is of course hard to understand the affect of such an element but it would have been
interesting to see that in the high quality solutions, the random operator was used more
often at a specific stage of the search.
7.1
Main reasons for the poor performance
Now that the results have been discussed, it is time to speculate what could have been
done differently and which parts of the experiment are more likely to be the reason for the
results not meeting expectations.
Feature selection
The most challenging part of this experiment was to select the features that were used to
train the Neural networks. The approach that was chosen was to store objective values
and counters for each of the operators. Binary variables indicating if the solution was
accepted, or if it was a new best and then categorical variables like the instance number
and the interval that represents which stage the search process was at. Different combi­
nations of these features were tried and some were not used in the training of the models.
In retrospect, these features are clearly too simple. In other words, these features are not
sufficiently descriptive. To elaborate more on this, an example from the dataset can be
seen below:
Interval
Instance
Current
distance
Best
distance
Accepted
New best
solution
Operator last
iteration
6
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
5
6
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
3
6
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
4
6
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
2
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
10
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
5
10
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
2
10
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
3
10
3
6573.028
6573.028
0
0
5
Table 7.1: Examples from training set
In Table 7.1, 8 observations (rows) from the dataset are displayed. They are taken from 2
different intervals but even though that they represent different stages of the search, the
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
51
==PAGE:57==
features are very similar. In this case, the solution is not improved for a large part of the
running time and therefore the features Best distance, Accepted and New best solution
are unchanged for most of the iterations. This can be the reason why the search often
uses only a few search operators and sometimes just one. Even though the observations
that are presented above are handpicked, it shows clearly how similar the observations
can be during the search.
Machine learning metrics not entirely relevant
One of the biggest challenges in this project was the evaluation of the Neural networks
before they were implemented into the heuristic. Since the purpose was to train a model
by using high quality solutions, the model was supposed to make a decision based on what
happened in similar circumstances during the training. Therefore the traditional evaluation
methods like accuracy and learning curves, were not necessarily the best indicators of
how the heuristic would perform, after the model had been implemented. However, in
the process of selecting features by trying different combinations, these traditional neural
network evaluation methods had to be used. If the accuracy increased or the curves on
the loss plots were more similar, it was considered as a better fit as usual when a neural
network is evaluated. It can therefore be said that these methods were an important part
of the process but at the same time, it was hard to completely rely on them to decide what
would lead to the best performing heuristic. It turned out that the worst neural network
out of the 3 version, in terms of accuracy, performed the best when implemented into the
heuristic. That fact sums up the challenge quite well.
TSP too simple for the experiment
In chapter 4, the state of the art literature was reviewed. The methods that were using
supervised learning and a neural network, were in most cases focusing on the VRP (or a
variation of the problem) instead of the TSP. The approached presented there were how­
ever different. Some are focusing on the whole solution while others focus on the routes
instead. In the literature, when the TSP was involved, the focus was more on methods
that directly solved the problem. The possibilities of choosing features are possibly to few
in the TSP since the problem is ”too simple” compared to the VRP.
Size of the training set
The training set in this experiment was generated by extracting high quality solutions from
the dataset. There were in total 50,000 observations in the training set. That size was
considered sufficient for the training and even if more executions had been performed,
the plan was always to use only high quality solutions. So even if the whole dataset
would have been expanded, the training set would not necessarily have been much big­
ger. The running time it took to generate each dataset was around 20­24 hours. That
also played a part as many attempts had to be repeated as expected in experiment like
this. Nonetheless, it is interesting to compare the size to some of the state of the art ex­
periments introduced in chapter 4. In [18], around 22,000,000 solutions were generated.
In [4] 5000 small and 1000 larger instances were used to generate 192,000 solutions and
finally, even though reinforcement learning is a little different from supervised learning,
the training in [21] takes up to 4 days to repair 64 million solutions. It can therefore be
argued if the training set is simply big enough for this particular purpose.
7.2
Challenges
Some of the challenges in this project have been explained and discussed above. The
challenges faced here are not new or surprising. In fact, there are many challenges that
need to be faced when experimenting with machine learning and metaheuristics.
When new methods are developed that use machine learning, the true test or evaluation
of the method is, when it is implemented into a state of the art algorithm. It is simply
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
52
==PAGE:58==
not desirable to develop a method that can only improve an average algorithm. By that
means, the baseline is very high. It is not an easy task to take an algorithm that has been
used and developed for years and improve it.
Another challenge is the overhead of the machine learning part. When the plan is to boost
a search by using machine learning, the running time can not eat up the improvements
that are gained by using this method. As an example, that can be features extraction that
require additional computation.
The power of randomization is another challenge. When randomness is included in algo­
rithms, it usually is an excellent choice that makes the algorithms robust. For scientists
that want to seek for intelligence or some deterministic choice, this is obviously not easy
to accept.
The biggest challenge in combining machine learning and metaheuristics is that the ma­
chine learning task is not just a standard task. This has been discussed before, like the
fact that the goal is not necessarily to maximize a metric like accuracy but instead to guide
the algorithm. If a model does not have a high accuracy, it can still be useful if the effec­
tiveness of using it in an algorithm is high. After the challenges have been enumerated,
it is probably not a major surprise that negative results are very common in this field. [18]
7.3
Discussion
When the hypothesis is reviewed, it is fair to say that the results did not meet expecta­
tions. The search process was not boosted by guiding it with the Neural network and the
solutions were not better than the ones found by the baseline models.
Even though the results were disappointing and the experiment did not go as planned, the
process was very instructive. I got to work with subjects that I am very interested in and
managed to significantly expand my knowledge. At least that can be said to be successful
even though the formal results were not.
If the results had been better, it would have been very interesting to try the method on a
new optimization problem. That also requires time and just like when a metaheuristic is
used for another optimization problem, some modifications are needed. Additionally the
machine learning part will need to be modified so it is not just plug and play for another
optimization problem. The proposed method did rely on using it on previously seen in­
stances and used the instance as a feature. So if the method would have been successful
and the idea was to use it on unseen instances, modifications would be needed.
It can be argued that the idea presented in this project was too simple and optimistic.
However the possibilities are numerous and using machine learning has a great potential
in the field of metaheuristics like was seen in the literature review. It will be interesting to
see how the future work will look like and which direction it is going to take, that is if the
focus will be more on using machine learning to solve the problems directly with methods
like reinforcement learning, or if it will be more on improving metaheuristics that already
perform well. It can also be discussed if the best combination of the two methods is maybe
to include machine learning in a heuristic, but not in every iteration of it. By doing that,
the overhead is not as big but it could still be used to make clever decisions. Another
concept that has been mentioned is to focus more on visual representation of solutions or
the problems as machine learning has been very successfully used in image recognition
[19]. How that will turn out is hard to predict but there are opportunities in this field and
new methods and ideas will certainly keep emerging.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
53
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Hottung and K. Tierney, “Neural large neighborhood search for the capacitated
vehicle routing problem,” in Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 325,
2020. DOI: 10.3233/FAIA200124.
[2]
T. Wauters, K. Verbeeck, P. De Causmaecker, and G. Vanden Berghe, “Boosting
metaheuristic search using reinforcement learning,” Studies in Computational Intel­
ligence, vol. 434, 2013, ISSN: 1860949X. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30671-6_17.
[3]
D. Pisinger and S. Ropke, “Large Neighborhood Search,” in International Series
in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 272, Springer New York
LLC, 2019, pp. 99–127. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-91086-4_4. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-91086-4_4.
[4]
F. Arnold and K. Sörensen, “What makes a VRP solution good? The generation of
problem­specific knowledge for heuristics,” Computers and Operations Research,
vol. 106, 2019, ISSN: 03050548. DOI: 10.1016/j.cor.2018.02.007.
[5]
F. Glover and G. a. Kochenberger, Handbook of Metaheuristics International Series
in Operations Research Management Science, 1st ed. Kluwer Acad. Publ., 2003.
[6]
M. Gendreau and J.­Y. Potvin, Handbook of metaheuristics, 3rd ed. Springer Inter­
national Publishing, 2019.
[7]
M. A. M. de Oca, C. Cotta, and F. Neri, “Local search,” in Handbook of Memetic
Algorithms, F. Neri, C. Cotta, and P. Moscato, Eds., Springer, 2012, ch. 3, pp. 29–
35.
[8]
B. Chopard and M. Tomassini, “An introduction to metaheuristics for optimization,”
in Natural Computing Series, Springer Verlag, 2018, pp. 59–79.
[9]
R. F. de Mello and M. A. Ponti, Machine learning: A practical approach on the sta­
tistical learning theory, 13. 2018, vol. 45.
[10]
T. Thomas, A. P. Vijayaraghavan, and S. Emmanuel, Machine learning approaches
in cyber security analytics. 2019, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-15-1706-8.
[11]
Y. Zhang, Ed., New Advances in Machine Learning. InTech, Feb. 2010, ISBN: 978­
953­307­034­6. DOI: 10.5772/225. [Online]. Available: http://www.intechopen.
com/books/new-advances-in-machine-learning.
[12]
G. Rebala, A. Ravi, and S. Churiwala, Machine Learning Definition and Basics BT
­ An Introduction to Machine Learning. 2019.
[13]
A. Prieto, B. Prieto, E. M. Ortigosa, E. Ros, F. Pelayo, J. Ortega, and I. Rojas,
“Neural networks: An overview of early research, current frameworks and new chal­
lenges,” Neurocomputing, vol. 214, 2016, ISSN: 18728286. DOI: 10.1016/j.neucom.
2016.06.014.
[14]
S. Shanmuganathan and S. Samarasinghe, Artificial Neural Network Modelling,
ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer International Publishing, 2016,
ISBN: 978­3­319­28493­4.
[15]
J. J. Hopfield and D. W. Tank, “”Neural” computation of decisions in optimization
problems,” Biological Cybernetics, vol. 52, no. 3, 1985, ISSN: 03401200. DOI: 10.
1007/BF00339943.
[16]
O. Vinyals, M. Fortunato, and N. Jaitly, “Pointer networks,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 2015­January, 2015.
[17]
H. Dai, E. B. Khalil, Y. Zhang, B. Dilkina, and L. Song, “Learning combinatorial op­
timization algorithms over graphs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 2017­December, 2017.
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
54
==PAGE:60==
[18]
D. Vigo, L. Accorsi, M. Lombardi, and M. Milano, Neighborhood ranking in vnd,
VeRoLog Webinar ­ Integrating Machine Learning into state­of­the­art Vehicle Rout­
ing Heuristics, Apr. 2021.
[19]
D. Vigo and L. Accorsi, Data­based Guided Optimization for the CVRP, VeRoLog
Webinar ­ Integrating Machine Learning into state­of­the­art Vehicle Routing Heuris­
tics, Apr. 2021.
[20]
M. Ventresca, B. Ombuki­Berman, and A. Runka, “Predicting genetic algorithm
performance on the vehicle routing problem using information theoretic landscape
measures,” in Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimization, 13th Euro­
pean Conference, EvoCOP, 2013.
[21]
A. Hottung and K. Tierney, Learning improvement heuristics for vehicle routing
problems with neural large neighborhood search, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//dot-bielefeld.medium.com/learning-improvement-heuristics-for-vehicle-routing-
problems-with-neural-large-neighborhood-search-6e19252e85f4 (visited on 04/22/2021).
[22]
M. Mısır, T. Wauters, K. Verbeeck, and G. V. Berghe, “A new learning hyper­heuristic
for the traveling tournament problem,” in Metaheuristic International Conference,
2009.
[23]
A. Rezvanian, A. M. Saghiri, S. M. Vahidipour, M. Esnaashari, and M. R. Meybodi,
Recent advances in learning automata, 2018. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-72428-7.
[24]
About Keras. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io/about/ (visited on 05/04/2021).
[25]
E. W. Weisstein, NP­Hard Problem.
[26]
B. Korte and J. Vygen, Combinatorial Optimization : Theory and Algorithms, 6th ed.
Springer, 2018, ISBN: 978­3­662­56038­9.
[27]
R.­K.­U. Heidelberg, TSPLIB. [Online]. Available: http://comopt.ifi.uni-heidelberg.
de/software/TSPLIB95/index.html (visited on 02/02/2021).
[28]
Pandas.get dummies — pandas 1.2.4 documentation. [Online]. Available: https:
//pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.get_dummies.html (visited on
05/03/2021).
[29]
F. Firouzi, B. Farahani, F. Ye, and M. Barzegari, “Machine learning for iot,” in Intel­
ligent Internet of Things, F. Firouzi, K. Chakrabarty, and S. Nassif, Eds., Springer
International Publishing, 2020, ch. 5, pp. 243–313.
[30]
F. Rodrigues, Neural networks, Lecture notes in Introduction to business analytics,
Nov. 2020.
[31]
Dropout layer. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io/api/layers/regularization_
layers/dropout/ (visited on 06/02/2021).
[32]
Keras, Layer activation functions, https://keras.io/api/layers/activations.
[33]
F. Rodrigues, Nuts and bolts of ml, Lecture notes in Introduction to business ana­
lytics, Nov. 2020.
[34]
J. Brownlee, How to use learning curves to diagnose machine learning model per­
formance, Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://machinelearningmastery.com/
learning-curves-for-diagnosing-machine-learning-model-performance/ (visited on
05/19/2021).
[35]
F. Rodrigues, Meeting notes, Apr. 2021.
[36]
Model training APIs. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io/api/models/model_
training_apis/ (visited on 05/19/2021).
Applying machine learning to improve the performance of metaheuristics
55
