==PAGE:1==
Illustration of Structural Health
Monitoring on a Small Test
Specimen
Mazlum Komurcu
Master of Science
25-06-2021
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Rune Brincker
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
i
Lyngby, 25-06-2021
Mazlum Komurcu
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Foremost, I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisor, Professor
Rune Brincker, for giving me the exclusive opportunity to be his Master of
Science student.
His extraordinary expertise and knowledge within the ﬁeld
of structural dynamics and his desire to share this knowledge has been very
helpful in the completion of my thesis. I appreciate the patience he has shown
and for constantly providing the necessary motivation throughout the project
even when it seems most unmanageable. I would also like to thank him for
the various notes, Matlab scripts and lectures he has provided during the last
months. Furthermore, it must be mentioned that Brincker’s ability to clear the
way and constantly keeping the orientation of the project is valued.
Besides my supervisor, I am very grateful for the contribution by Sandro Diord
Rescinho Amador who always is available to discuss crucial topics related to the
project. Speciﬁcally, I would like to thank him for providing useful tools and his
knowledge about Finite Element modelling. In this context, I would also like to
thank my fellow student Hussain Nawar Ajina for helping with the construction
of the Finitie Element Model where his knowledge of the FE software has been
helpful.
Moreover, I would like to thank him for the initial contribution of
the project. I would also like to thank Adam Forsting and Jonas Abildgaard
Jacobsen for the introduction of the Dynamic Lab and the introduction of how
to use the software, Signal Express, which have been used for the experimental
tests.
I appreciate the administrative work which has been done by Evangelos Kat-
sanos.
He has always been available to help and I would like to thank him
for always ensuring that the tools and necessary apparatus are available in the
Dynamic Lab. I will also thank him for informing me about this interesting
project and for a good cooperation. Lastly, I would like to thank The Technical
University of Denmark for giving me the opportunity to utilize the Dynamic
Lab in building 118.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
When a structure is exposed to damages, its response in the form of dynamic
properties will be aﬀected.
It is of interest to mention frequency and mode
shape changes when dealing with damages in a dynamic damage detection con-
text. When damages occur, the largest changes in the modal parameters will be
the frequency changes. Based on this, the project investigates how the frequency
changes can be used in order to localize damages. More generally, the focus of
the thesis is on illustrating how Structural Health Monitoring is used to localize
structural modiﬁcations on a small test specimen. In order to reach this goal
a Scenario-Based Damage Assessment technique is used where several damage
scenarios are predeﬁned. The method is used for both a parametric and an ex-
perimental model. For the parametric model, it is straightforward to obtain the
modal parameters from the reference and damaged states. For the experimental
test cases, the modal parameters are identiﬁed by Operational Modal Analysis
where, more speciﬁcally, the Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition tech-
nique is utilized. The road to localize structural degradation is illustrated and
it is seen that the described method can be used to detect damages on a small
specimen in a numerical analysis. Based on the experimental results, some cases
fail to detect the correct damage, which may be explained by the discrepancy
between the numerical and experimental model.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Resumé
Når en konstruktion er udsat for skader, vil dette påvirke konstruktionens dy-
namiske egenskaber. I en dynamisk skadelokaliserings kontekst er det relevant at
sætte fokus på ændringer i frekvens og svingningsformer. De største ændringer
i modal parametrene vil typisk ske for frekvenserne. På baggrund af dette, har
projektet haft til fokus at undersøge, hvordan frekvensændringer kan bruges til
at detektere og lokalisere skader. Mere generelt, kan det siges, at denne tese
fokuserer på at illustrere, hvordan Structural Healh Monitoring kan bruges til
at lokalisere skader på et mindre testelement. For at kunne opnå dette, er en
allerede udviklet metode, kaldet Scenario-Based Damange Assessment, brugt.
Denne metode er baseret på en tilgang, hvor ﬂere forskellige skadescenarier er
prædeﬁnerede.
Denne metode er brugt på både en parametrisk og eksperi-
mentel model. For den parametriske model har det været mere ligetil at kunne
bestemme modal parametrene. På den anden side, har det krævet at gøre brug af
Operational Modal Analysis for at kunne bestemme modal parametrene. Mere
speciﬁkt kan det nævnes, at der er blevet brugt en identiﬁkationsmetode kaldet
Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition for at bestemme modal parame-
trene. Tilgangen til at kunne detektere forskellige konstruktionsmæssige skader
er blevet illustreret, og det er blevet vist, at de diverse skader er blevet detek-
teret korrekt for den numeriske model. På den anden side har det ikke været
ligeså gnidningsfrit at kunne detektere skader på den eksperimentelle model. Her
er nogle scenarier blevet fejldetekteret, hvilket kan skyldes uoverensstemmelsen
mellem den numeriske og eksperimentelle model.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Resumé
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Sensitivity Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Modiﬁed Sensitivity Equations by Bernal
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Identiﬁcation by Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Modal Parameter Estimation by Experimental Test
13
3.1
Modal Parameter Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Standard Deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
FE Model Considerations
17
4.1
FE Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Modelling of Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.2
Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.3
FE Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
23
5.1
Scenario Deﬁnitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Normalized Frequency Approximations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Inﬂuence of Missing Modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Selection Vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4.1
Error Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Damage Detection of Experimental Tests
33
6.1
Experimental Damage Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Damage Detection of Predeﬁned Scenarios . . . . . . . . .
34
6.1.2
Damage of Single Bolts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.3
Error Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
41
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A Dimensions of The Experimental Model
43
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
B Normalized Frequency Approximations by Bernal’s Formula-
tion
45
C Robustness Check of Damage Detection Technique - Numerical 47
D Damage Detection of Experimental Test Cases
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Large civil and mechanical structures are some of the most important elements
in a well developed society. Structures critical for infrastructure such as build-
ings, bridges, oﬀshore platforms and airports can be mentioned. Even though,
the purpose diﬀers from structure to structure, the service life is limited and all
structures will at some point in time reach its ﬁnal state. A high cost is asso-
ciated with replacing these structures and therefore the interest in prolonging
the design life is increasing. The desire of extending the service life of struc-
tures requires a non-destructive assessment in order to maintain capacity of the
structural components and to avoid impacting the safety of the existing struc-
tures. Another mention worthy motivation for investigating structures with a
non-destructive set of tools, is to assess the conditions of structures after seismic
events. The current inspection of structures is typically based on visual inspec-
tion which may include some uncertainties. Therefore, it is of great interest to
develop a method which is capable of detecting damage in time [9]. The eco-
nomical and safety aspects which are mentioned may be some of the reasons to
further develop the ﬁeld of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM).
The methods used in a damage identiﬁcation process can be segregated into
local or global. The former is typically visual inspections where local tests are
performed, such as ultrasonic testing and magnet particle methods. This typi-
cally requires a thorough knowledge of where the damage is localized. Whereas,
the global damage detection methods inspects changes in the vibration proper-
ties of the examined structure [6], which means that the location of the damage
is a more independent parameter. In this report, it will be illustrated how a
global approach in the ﬁeld of SHM can be utilized to localize damages on a
small specimen.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.1
Problem Deﬁnition
In this thesis, the purpose is to study and illustrate the application of Structural
Health Monitoring (SHM) techniques on a small aluminum specimen subjected
to random vibrations. In this way it will be analyzed if the structural condition
can be assessed, and subsequently if potential damage can be detected. The tests
have been performed in the structural dynamic Lab situated at the Technical
University of Denmark, building 118. The small laboratory prototype which has
been analyzed numerically and experimentally is constructed by three aluminum
plates which are connected by bolts. The specimen can be seen in Figure 1.1.1
Figure 1.1.1: Picture of test specimen
To illustrate the application of SHM on this specimen, following points will be
studied:
• A Finite Element Model of the specimen
– Simulation of random vibrations to estimate modal properties (fre-
quencies and mode shapes)
• Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) on the specimen
– Performance of random vibrations to estimate modal properties
• Stiﬀness changes due to loss of stiﬀness in joints
• Stiﬀness changes due to reduction of E-modulus at joints
• Validation and updating of FE-models for the specimen
• Damage detection of the specimens and understanding of the obtained
results
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Project Scope
3
An FE model of the test specimen has been constructed and subsequently mod-
elled in the 3D design software, Ansys APDL. By introducing random vibrations
in the software, a free-free analysis has been performed, which will provide the
necessary modal parameters of the parametric model. Simultaneously, perform-
ing random vibration tests by scratching the specimens randomly in time and
space will accelerate the structure. The obtained accelerations which are col-
lected will be used to estimate the modal properties by means of OMA. Here, the
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and Enhanced Frequency Domain Decom-
position have paved the way to determine the modal parameters. The numerical
model is then validated by comparing the obtained results with the experimen-
tal results as this is an important aspect in the damage identiﬁcation process.
The validation is used to update the FE-model to ﬁt better with reality.
When the initial work is done and the models are created, the damage detection
process will be executed. Firstly, a preliminary investigation of the numerical
model will be performed to obtain a better understanding of the sensitivity
of the specimen. Here, several elements will be exposed to a stiﬀness changes
corresponding to the reduction of the E-modulus. For the experimental model,
the procedure is to reduce the torque of the bolts and detect the changes in the
properties. When the modal parameters are obtained from the experimental test
case and the numerical model, a Scenario-Based Damage Assessment (SBDA)
technique will utilized to illustrate how damages can be detected.
1.2
Project Scope
Modal parameters such as natural frequencies and mode shapes are classiﬁed as
global features which depend on a combination of boundary conditions, geom-
etry, joint connections and material properties. A small-scaled change of one
of the aforementioned physical properties will result in a unique change of the
vibration properties. When dealing with damage identiﬁcation techniques, it
is relevant to mention Rytter’s four levels [9], which can be seen in the ﬁgure
below.
Figure 1.2.1: Rytter’s four levels of damage identiﬁcation
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
The idea of Rytter’s four levels can be described as ﬁrstly to identify if damage
is present for the examined structure. When this is clariﬁed, the 2nd level will
focus on localizing the damage, and the 3rd level will deal with quantifying the
magnitude of the damage. The last level is the prognosis, which deals with the
determination of the remaining service life of the structure. This project mainly
focuses on level 2 and it will in some extent deal with level 1 and 3. In order
to analyze level 1, the undamaged structure will be used to deﬁne statistical
parameters for an undamaged state. The questions regarding level 2 will be
answered by utilizing knowledge about a FE-model and some experimental tests.
The thesis will to a lesser extent try to understand the obtained results, which
will provide an idea of the quantiﬁcation of the damages. The theory behind
will be based on the formulation of sensitivity equations founded by Hansen
[4] and a projection technique developed by Bernal [7]. In this thesis, the two
methods will be compared on an ongoing basis.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Scenario Based Damage Assessment
5
1.3
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
The approach which has been used in this project will be based on a SBDA
technique provided by Hansen.
The idea of this approach is to identify the
possible damage mechanisms of the speciﬁc structure which is examined. The
obtained damage mechanisms will be deﬁned as damage scenarios which is based
on the idea of a prior knowledge of how the considered structure will fail. It
is crucial to select the most potentially dangerous scenarios, since the scenarios
which are not included can not be detected [3]. By this, a reference state will
be deﬁned where the initial model is considered and a number of predeﬁned
damage scenarios. The approach of the SBDA technique used in this thesis can
be summarized by the illustration given in Figure 1.3.1.
Figure 1.3.1: SBDA approach used in this thesis
The steps seen in the dashed box are the preliminary steps to determine the
correct damage scenario. Here, the FE model is ﬁrstly used to detect damages
whereafter the experimental results will be used. More speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst step
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
in the SBDA framework is to create an FE model of the examined structure
where the modal parameters are determined. Secondly, the experimental model
is analyzed by OMA, where the element is excited randomly in time and space
to estimate the modal parameters. In the ﬁgure, the mode shapes are denoted
A and B, where the ﬁrst designation refers to damaged states and the other
to the reference state. When the initial numerical and experimental tests have
been performed, the results will be evaluated and eventually the model will be
updated. The next step is to deﬁne various damage scenarios in the numerical
model, where the modal parameters will be extracted from the FE model for
each deﬁned scenario. Simultaneously, the mass and stiﬀness matrices will be
extracted, which will be used to construct the sensitivity matrix. In this report,
the purpose will be to localize damages based on stiﬀness changes, but it must
be mentioned that this method likewise can be used for mass changes or both
acting simultaneously. When numerous test cases have been analyzed and it is
shown that the algorithm works, the next step is the crucial part, which is to
use the same algorithm on the experimental model. The frequency and mode
shape changes will be estimated by experimental test cases, where the damage
will be localized.
In the SBDA approach, the FE model is used to extract the mass and stiﬀ-
ness matrices and the resulting mass normalized mode shapes. The scenario
based damage identiﬁcation technique can either be used to detect damages due
to mass and stiﬀness changes, which then will aﬀect the respective matrices.
In this thesis, the focus is to localize and quantify damages due to structural
modiﬁcations by stiﬀness changes.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter, the general theory which has been used will be presented. This
will contain two diﬀerent ways to express the sensitivity equations and frequency
changes. Furthermore, it will introduce another approach to detect damages,
which is based on the idea of determining the angle between vectors.
The
modal parameters can be utilized in order to localize and quantify structural
perturbations. The idea is that each structural perturbation will result in unique
changes of the modal parameters. In order to localize these perturbations, a
fundamental mathematical expression will be used, which is given as:
∆c = S∆u
(2.0.1)
Where ∆c is a vector holding the measured frequency changes for each consid-
ered mode and S is the sensitivity matrix which contains the predicted frequency
changes. The sensitivity matrix is constructed such that each column represents
the frequency changes from each structural perturbation. The last parameter,
∆u, is a column vector which entries describe the relation between the measured
and predicted frequency changes.
2.1
Sensitivity Equations
The modal parameters are obtained by solving the eigenvalue problem which
considers the mass and stiﬀness matrices of a given structure or test specimen.
Therefore, a simple modiﬁcation of these matrices will result in a unique change
in the modal parameters. The idea of the sensitivity equations is then to pre-
dict how a speciﬁc modiﬁcation of the structural properties will aﬀect the modal
parameters. Since, this report only evaluates the frequency changes, the sensi-
tivity equations of the mode shapes are not included. The sensitivity equations
can be described as the ﬁrst order derivative of the angular frequency of mode,
i, caused by a local change parameter, u, expressed as [4]:
∂ωi
∂u =
1
2mi
bT
i

−ωbi
∂M
∂u + 1
ωbi
∂K
∂u

bi
(2.1.1)
Where b is a vector containing the mode shape of the reference system, m is
the modal scaling factor, M is the mass matrix, K is the stiﬀness matrix, ωb
is the angular frequency where the subscript, b, refers to the system before
modiﬁcation. If a small ﬁnite change is considered for the damage scenario, j, in
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
the mass and stiﬀness matrix, the sensitivity equation of the angular frequency
can be expressed by following approximation:
∆ωij ≈
1
2mi
bT
i (−ωbi∆Mj + 1
ωbi
∆Kj)bi
(2.1.2)
When the system is exposed to small perturbations, the measured frequency
changes of mode, i, can be expressed as:
∆ωi = ωai −ωbi
(2.1.3)
Where ωa is the frequency changes of the perturbed system. The mode shapes
will be mass normalized which will result in a modal scaling factor equal to
unity. It has been of interest to deﬁne the predicted dimensionless frequency
changes. By utilizing the expression of the measured frequency changes given
above and the predicted frequency changes given in equation (2.1.2), following
dimensionless frequency change can be formulated:
2(ωai −ωbi)
ωbi
≈bT
i (−∆Mj + 1
ω2
bi
∆Kj)bi
(2.1.4)
This will likewise result in a reformulation of the measured frequency changes,
expressed as:
∆ωi = 2(ωai −ωbi)
ωbi
(2.1.5)
The idea of the scenario based damage assessment is then to deﬁne several dam-
age scenarios based on typical failure mechanisms. For each scenario where a
structural modiﬁcation of either mass or stiﬀness is present, the approximated
frequency changes in Equation (2.1.4) will be stacked in columns for each sce-
nario, thus:
s∆ωi = [∆ωi1 ∆ωi2 ... ∆ωiNsc]
(2.1.6)
The frequency sensitivity vector, s∆ωi, has the dimensions (1 × Nsc), where
Nsc is the number of predeﬁned damage scenarios. Since, several modes will be
considered, the predicted frequency change vector given in equation (2.1.6) and
the measured frequencies can be expanded to include the necessary number of
modes, resulting in:
S∆ω =


S∆ω1
S∆ω2
...
S∆ωNm

,
∆ω =


∆ω1
∆ω2
...
∆ωNm


(2.1.7)
When the sensitivity approximations of the modal parameters are determined
and the frequency changes are calculated, the ﬁnal set of equations will be:
∆c = S∆u
where
S = S∆ω
and
∆c = ∆ω
(2.1.8)
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Modiﬁed Sensitivity Equations by Bernal
9
The dimensions of the sensitivity matrix, S, will be (Nm×Nsc) and the measured
frequency changes, ∆c will have the dimensions (Nm × 1). Since, the mathe-
matical framework will be an over determined equation system, the solution of
equation (2.0.1) can be solved by following estimate:
∆ˆu = S+∆c
(2.1.9)
The + sign indicates that the pseudo-inverse of the sensitivity matrix is used.
The selection will attain the greatest value in that entity that corresponds to
where the damage occurs. A secondary consideration which should be made is
that if proportionality between the predicted frequency changes given in equa-
tion (2.1.4) and the change in mass and stiﬀness matrices ∆M or ∆K, the
selection vector will also represent an estimate of the damage relative to the ref-
erence damages deﬁned in the damage parametrization. It must be mentioned
that the sensitivity equation is based on a ﬁrst order approximation and there-
fore it will only be accurate for small perturbations and structures with limited
damping. Therefore, it is of interest to implement a secondary approach, which
will be described in the next section.
2.2
Modiﬁed Sensitivity Equations by Bernal
Since the parameter changes described in Section 2.1 are ﬁrst order derivatives,
one can argue that these approximations only will be valid for small structural
perturbations. Therefore, a modiﬁed equation system will be presented, which
has been formulated by Bernal [8]. The idea here is that the natural frequency
appears in the equation of motion by its squared value and therefore an alter-
native representation of the frequency changes are needed. A reformulation of
the Bernal projection equation can be written as:
tii(ω2
ai −ω2
bi)
ω2
ai
= bT
i (−∆Mj + ∆Kj
1
ω2
ai
)ai
(2.2.1)
Where a and subscript a refer to the modal parameters from the perturbed
system while b and subscript b refer to the unperturbed state.
It must be
mentioned that the mode shapes are mass normalized and the frequency changes
are normalized. The parameter tii is the diagonal entries of the transformation
matrix, which for a non-complete set of modes can be determined as:
ˆT = B+A
(2.2.2)
Conclusively, it is seen that the sensitivity matrix will be deﬁned by utilizing
both the mass normalized mode shapes before and after damage has been intro-
duced in the FE-model. Subsequently, the frequency changes will be calculated
by the frequencies squared and multiplied with a projection matrix.
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
2.3
Identiﬁcation by Error
A third approach in the localization process of damages is to determine the error
between the measured frequency changes and the estimated frequency changes.
The idea is to utilize the gathered frequency changes as described in equation
(2.1.8) and to use following linear relation:
∆c = S∆u
(2.3.1)
The least square estimate for the damage will then be:
∆ˆu = S+∆c
(2.3.2)
Utilizing the least square estimate of the selection vector will lead to following
frequency change estimation:
∆ˆc = S∆ˆu
(2.3.3)
Here, it is assumed that the frequency change estimate, ∆ˆc, with the smallest
amount of noise will be the correct damage identiﬁed. In Figure 2.3.1, the angle
between two vectors are shown.
Figure 2.3.1: Graphical representation between the estimated and measured
frequency changes
From the ﬁgure, the angle, φ, is introduced, which is the angle between the
estimated frequency changes, ∆ˆc, and the measured frequency changes, ∆c. In
[2], Brincker has utilized the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) to describe the
relation between the angle, φ, and a noise vector. By considering the ﬁrst order
Taylor expansion of the inner product between two unit vectors, he obtains
following relation:
φ = |ε|
(2.3.4)
It is known that the relation between the measured and estimated frequency
changes can be described as:
∆c = ∆ˆc + ε
(2.3.5)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Identiﬁcation by Error
11
Where, ε, is the noise vector. By utilizing this, and the results given in equation
(2.3.4), the noise vector can be determined as:
|ε| =
p
∆c2 −∆ˆc2
(2.3.6)
It is known from the Modal Assurance Criterion that it is equal to cosine2,
which means higher MAC values, indicates a better ﬁt between two vectors.
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Modal Parameter
Estimation by Experimental
Test
In this chapter, the test element and the test setup will be presented. Here, the
process of estimating the modal parameters will be described which afterwards
are used as target responses in the FE model.
3.1
Modal Parameter Estimation
A U-shaped specimen composed of three aluminum plates is used in the experi-
mental analysis with a total weight of m = 2703 kg. Each plate is connected by
4 bolts meaning a total of 8 bolts are used. Two of the plates have a width of
100 mm and a height of 200 mm, where one of these plates has a reduced cross
section. The last plate connects the two plates and is square with a width of 100
mm. The dimensions can be seen in Figure A.0.1, which is given in Appendix
A. The experimental test setup of the specimen can be seen in Figure 3.1.1 in-
clusive of a principle sketch of the location and direction of the accelerometers.
A total of 17 uni-axial accelerometers are used to record the motion of the test
specimen.
Figure 3.1.1: Sensor positions and orientations of the test specimen
Operational Modal Analysis has been used to identify the vibrational proper-
ties, which requires that the excitation has to be random in time and space.
==PAGE:26==
14
Modal Parameter Estimation by Experimental Test
The motion of the specimen has been excited by scratching the corners of the
element with an allen key, since this will excite the specimen in all directions.
The modal parameters are extracted by means of Enhanced Frequency Domain
Decomposition (EFDD), which has resulted in the plot of the singular values of
the power spectral density function seen in Figure 3.1.2.
Figure 3.1.2: Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD) plot
The experimental results of the reference state has been determined by perform-
ing 5 diﬀerent tests. The frequencies and mode shapes have been averaged over
these 5 test cases in order to get an idea of the noise included in experimental
tests. It would be obvious to increase the number of tests to minimize the noise.
Due to lack of time, this has not been possible and a number of 5 tests have
been used. The averaged mode shapes can be seen in Figure 3.1.3.
Figure 3.1.3: The ﬁrst eight mode shapes of the U-specimen
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Standard Deviation
15
Simultaneously, the averaged natural frequencies can be seen in Table 3.1.1.
Table 3.1.1: First eight natural frequencies from the initial experimental tests
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
f7
f8
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
116.4
273.4
375.7
540.4
957.8
1218.9
1606.4
2296.1
As seen in Figure 3.1.1, the test element has been positioned on a sponge. It
has of interest to perform a free experimental analysis, since this will result in a
more correct estimation of the modal parameters. By constraining the element,
it may add some stiﬀness to the system and result in wrong estimations. In this
way, it may also be more straightforward to compare with an FE-model, since
complex modelling of the constraints are avoided.
3.2
Standard Deviation
The ﬁve tests described in the previous section have likewise been used to de-
termine the standard deviation. This parameter may be relevant in order to
determine whether damage is present. One can argue that before a damage
has occurred, the frequency change between the reference and damage scenarios
may be larger than the standard deviation. It may be diﬃcult to assess the
standard deviations, and therefore it is of interest to calculate the relative stan-
dard deviation, which means the ratio between the standard deviation and the
corresponding frequency. This relation can be expressed as:
σf = σn
fn
(3.2.1)
Where σn is the standard deviation and fn is the mean value of the natural
frequency for mode number n. In order to say that a damage is present, following
relation may be satisﬁed:
∆c > σf
(3.2.2)
The expression indicates that the frequency changes from the damaged scenario
may be greater than the uncertainty from the experimental test. The relative
standard deviation is calculated by using the mean values of the frequencies
given in Table 3.1.1. The relative standard deviations are given in Table 3.2.1.
==PAGE:28==
16
Modal Parameter Estimation by Experimental Test
Table 3.2.1: Relative standard deviations of the ﬁrst 8 modes
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Mode 6
Mode 7
Mode 8
σ [Hz]
0.1712
0.2676
0.2579
0.8547
0.8429
1.6529
0.6221
2.3658
σf [-]
0.0015
0.0010
0.0007
0.0016
0.0009
0.0014
0.0004
0.0010
It is seen that the standard deviation increases when higher modes are consid-
ered, except for mode 7. Though, it may be observed that the relative standard
deviation does not follow same pattern. The relative standard can also be in-
terpreted as a parameter of the noise in the tests. It is seen that the values are
in the interval between 0.04-0.16 %, which means that the estimated frequen-
cies will deviate with a maximum of 0.16 %. Therefore, it may be concluded
that before a damage is present, the frequency changes due to damages may be
greater than 0.16 %.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
FE Model Considerations
In this chapter, a Finite Element model of the test specimen will be presented.
Here, the assumptions and considerations made through the modelling process
of the structure will be discussed. Lastly, the obtained modal parameters will
be compared with the experimental obtained parameters, which are used to
validate the FE model. The construction of the FE model have been performed
in collaboration with a fellow student [1].
4.1
FE Model
The parametrization of the test specimen has been constructed by means of the
simulation and 3D design software, Ansys. The FE-model of the U-specimen has
been constructed by SHELL181 elements which is a four-node element with six
degrees of freedom for each node. In order to construct an FE model representing
the experimental case, the sponge seen in Figure 3.1.1 has been constructed
by six springs with a longitudinal stiﬀness constant, k = 100 N
m. The initial
magnitude of Young’s modulus has been set to, E = 6.7GPa with a Poisson’s
ratio of, ν = 0.34. The model is composed of 122 nodal points and 92 shell
elements and can be seen in Figure 4.1.1.
Figure 4.1.1: FE-model of the specimen and spring supports
The ﬁrst consideration which has been made in the numerical analysis is to di-
vide the width of the element into 4 pieces, since this will represent each bolt of
==PAGE:30==
18
FE Model Considerations
the specimen. Additionally, the element could be divided into smaller elements,
but this would likewise require more computational power, and therefore a min-
imum of 4 elements are chosen. The ﬁrst step in the numerical analysis is to
perform a free-free modal analysis of the specimen. Since, a 3-dimensional FE-
model is considered, it will have six rigid body motions. In order to avoid the
stiﬀness matrix to be singular, six springs are placed as seen in the ﬁgure. This
way of deﬁning the boundary conditions will prevent the three translational and
three rotational body motions.
4.1.1
Modelling of Joints
The most crucial part of modelling the U-specimen is to construct the joint
elements. The most obvious solution would be to model bolt connections but
this would require a thorough knowledge of FE-modelling and is more time
consuming. Therefore, the bolts have been modelled by reducing the E-modulus
to Ered = 4.1GPa at the highlighted elements seen in Figure 4.1.2.
Figure 4.1.2: Deﬁnition of bolt joints
A secondary approach has been used where the elements at the connecting
corners were modelled as springs. Since, the best correlation between the ex-
perimental results and the FE-model were obtained by reducing the stiﬀness of
the elements, the thesis will consider the case, where the E-modulus has been
reduced.
4.1.2
Modal Analysis
A free-free analysis has been performed in Ansys and has resulted in the natural
frequencies given in Table 4.1.1. Moreover, the percentage deviation between
==PAGE:31==
4.1 FE Model
19
the natural frequencies from the experimental and numerical tests are presented
in the table.
Table 4.1.1: First eight natural frequencies from the initial FE-model
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
f7
f8
FE model [Hz]
112.29
271.19
354.33
591.99
994.97
1211.5
1597.1
2072.0
Deviation [%]
3.63
0.82
6.02
-8.71
-3.74
0.61
0.59
10.82
Simultaneously, the mode shapes can be determined by utilizing the provided
software. The eight modes corresponding to the eight natural frequencies can
be seen in Figure 4.1.3.
Figure 4.1.3: The ﬁrst eight mode shapes of the U-specimen
The natural frequencies and a more descriptive formulation of the mode shapes
are provided in Table 4.1.2.
==PAGE:32==
20
FE Model Considerations
Table 4.1.2: Frequency and mode shape description of the numerical model
Mode number
Frequency [Hz]
Mode shape description
1
112.29
1st bending mode of top plate
2
271.19
1st torsion mode of top plate
3
354.33
2nd bending mode of top plate
4
591.99
2nd torsion mode of top plate
5
994.97
3rd bending mode of top plate
6
1211.5
1st torsion mode of bottom plate
7
1597.1
2nd bending mode of top plate
8
2072.0
1st torsion mode of mid plate
4.1.3
FE Model Validation
Generally, the FE models can be used in several analysis depending on the pur-
pose of the investigation. From a structural damage identiﬁcation perspective, it
is important to deﬁne the correct damage mechanisms and to create the correct
parametrization of these damage scenarios. FE models are based on idealised
engineering design and construction which in some extent will deviate from real
life structures. This discrepancy may result in a low correlation between the
actual and the parametrized structure [5]. As seen in the previous section, the
natural frequencies are easily compared as these are single values. In order to
compare mode shapes, the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) is a helpful tool,
which mathematically can be formulated as:
MAC(a, b) =
|aHb|2
(aHa)(bHb)
(4.1.1)
If two mode shape vectors, a and b, are similar the MAC value will be close
to unity. The MAC values of the mode shapes obtained by experimental and
numerical tests can be seen in Figure 4.1.4.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 FE Model
21
Figure 4.1.4: MAC values between the experimental and simulated mode
shapes and linear ﬁt between the experimental and numerical
natural frequencies
In the ﬁgure, the mode shape coordinates of the experiment and the FE model
simulation is compared by calculating the MAC-value.
In other words, the
MAC value can be deﬁned as cos2(θ), where θ represents the angle between two
vectors. From the MAC matrix, a high correlation in terms of mode shape 1 to
7 is obtained consistently. Some of the experimental test cases has shown that
mode 8 is not correctly excited, while other test cases has been able to excite
mode 8. In the following sections, it will be presented whether if 7 or 8 modes are
used. Generally, it has been observed that the MAC value for mode 9 has been
too low to include in the further analysis. Furthermore, the experimental and
numerical obtained natural frequencies are plotted against each other, which
has resulted in the scatter plot seen in Figure 4.1.4. A linear regression line
has been determined and based on this, it can be seen that the frequencies of
the FE model is coinciding with the experimental test. Though, it is seen that
8th natural frequencies deviates most, which also can be supported by the lower
MAC-value.
==PAGE:34==
22
FE Model Considerations
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Damage Detection of
Numerical Model
In this chapter, the main focus will be to describe how the individual damage
scenarios are deﬁned and the reasoning behind. Secondly, the preliminary analy-
ses which have been performed will be presented. The preliminary investigation
will provide a better understanding of the sensitivity matrix content and the
solution of the overall equation system in form of the selection vector.
5.1
Scenario Deﬁnitions
The SBDA technique is based on the idea of deﬁning various damage scenarios
which varies from each considered structure. Since, the purpose is to analyze
stiﬀness perturbations, it is obvious that the most severe damage scenarios will
occur at the bolts. Therefor, it has been decided to parameterize these damages
by reducing the E-modulus of the elements seen in Figure 5.1.1. The damage
applied in the FE-model is consistent for all four deﬁned damage scenarios.
Figure 5.1.1: Scenario 1 to 4 from left to right
The idea is that each scenario represents the physical structure where two bolts
are damaged at the same time. The reasoning behind this choice of damage
scenarios is that the mathematical framework, given in equation (2.1.9), provides
better results, the more over-determined the system is. It would be obvious to
deﬁne 8 diﬀerent damage scenarios, since 8 bolts are considered. In contrast, this
would require a suﬃcient large number of modes to be excited, which has not
been possible. The idea behind this deﬁnition was to maintain the possibility to
detect damages, when a single bolt is damaged. In a practical content this would
make it possible to separate the localized damage into smaller segments. Based
==PAGE:36==
24
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
on these considerations, a total number of 4 scenarios are deﬁned. Generally, in a
numerical analysis, an inﬁnite number of modes can be determined, oppositely to
experimental tests. Therefore, the number of damage scenarios has to be chosen
wisely. It must be mentioned that at each damage scenario, the E-modulus of
the outlined elements has been reduced by 10 %, resulting in a E-modulus of
EDMG = 3.69GPa.
5.2
Normalized Frequency Approximations
The sensitivity matrix, S∆ωb, deﬁned in Equation (2.1.4) and (2.2.1) describes
the predicted frequency changes. The sensitivity matrix will be a tall (8 × 4)
matrix where each column represents the frequency changes of a given scenario,
while the predicted changes of the modes. These results can be used to obtain
a graphical examination of the deﬁned scenarios. Since, the methods provided
by Bernal and Hansen almost produces identical results, the results obtained by
utilizing Hansen’s formulation is shown in Figure 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. The absolute
frequency changes relative to the mode obtained by Bernal’s formulation can be
seen in Appendix B.
Figure 5.2.1: Ratio between actual and measured damage
Figure 5.2.2: Ratio between actual and measured damage
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Normalized Frequency Approximations
25
Observing the ﬁgures, it can be seen that the magnitude of the frequency changes
of scenario 2 diﬀers from the other three scenarios. This indicates that scenario
1,3 and 4 are more sensitive to changes than scenario 2. This can be explained by
the fact that this scenario represents the bolts at the plate with a reduced cross
section, indicating a lower stiﬀness. Secondly, it can be observed that scenario
3 and 4 are are identical until mode 7 is included. This may be explained by
the symmetry of the solid lower plate of the test specimen. This means that the
entries in the 3rd and 4th columns in the sensitivity are almost identical from
mode 1 to 6. This signify that a suﬃcient number of modes are necessary to
perform a correct damage identiﬁcation. In relation to the magnitude of the
relative frequency changes, it may be relevant to mention that since scenario
2 attains the lowest values, a suﬃciently greater damage may be introduced
before the damage can be detected. Therefore, it may be of interest to analyze
the frequency changes in order to obtain the same magnitude of the damages.
==PAGE:38==
26
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
5.3
Inﬂuence of Missing Modes
In the previous section, the inﬂuence and sensitivity of the frequency changes
have been described. Another interesting aspect in the preliminary investigation
is to determine the extent of available modes which will be suﬃcient to solve
the equation system. This approach will also highlight the inﬂuence of missing
modes and the complications which may arise by having an insuﬃcient number
of modes. The selection vector, ∆ˆu has been computed repeatedly where the
number of modes is increased. In Figure 5.3.1, the estimate of the selection
vectors are given, where only the contribution from the frequencies are included.
(a) Selection vectors for scenario 1
(b) Selection vectors for scenario 2
(c) Selection vectors for scenario 3
(d) Selection vectors for scenario 4
Figure 5.3.1: 3D bar plot showing the needed number of modes to detect the
correct damage scenario - utilizing Hansen’s formulation
It is seen from the ﬁgure that 7 number of modes are necessary to show a correct
indication of the predeﬁned stiﬀness perturbations. Furthermore, it is seen that
the magnitude of the selection vector varies a lot when an insuﬃcient number of
modes are used. This means that a suﬃcient number of modes is necessary to
localize and quantify damages. Simultaneously, the inﬂuence of missing modes
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Inﬂuence of Missing Modes
27
can be investigated for the formulation provided by Bernal:
(a) Selection vectors for scenario 1
(b) Selection vectors for scenario 2
(c) Selection vectors for scenario 3
(d) Selection vectors for scenario 4
Figure 5.3.2: 3D bar plot showing the needed number of modes to detect the
correct damage scenario - utilizing Bernal’s formulation
From the plots, it is seen that by utilizing the ﬁrst 4 natural frequencies, the
correct damage scenario can be computed.
Furthermore, it is seen that the
selection vector reaches a constant magnitude of unity when the ﬁrst 4 modes
are used.
By comparing the results obained from the formulations provided
by Bernal and Hansen, it is clear that the equation system provided by Bernal
results in more accurate results by fewer resources. These considerations can
be used in deﬁning the number of modes necessary to localise damages in an
experimental perspective. Though, it must be mentioned that these calculations
are noise-free and corresponds to a perfect ﬁt of the FE model. Therefore, it
may be expected that the number of modes to a correct indication of the deﬁned
damage scenarios will require more modes when the experimental test cases are
introduced.
==PAGE:40==
28
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
5.4
Selection Vector
The selection vector is the solution to the mathematical framework of this
project which has been presented in Equation (2.1.9). When the equation sys-
tem is solved, the output will be a selection vector, which entries will peak
at the entry corresponding to the considered damage scenario. Since, the pre-
dicted frequency changes are proportional to the changed matrices, ∆M and
∆K, the selection vector also describes the magnitude of the damage exposed
to the structure. This can be exempliﬁed by considering the damage deﬁned
in the FE model by a 10 % reduction of Young’s modulus in scenario 1, the
resulting selection vector will then output unity at its ﬁrst entry. It is known
that the sensitivity equations provided by Hansen are only suitable for small fre-
quency changes. Therefore, it has been of interest to analyse the output of the
selection vector when the perturbation magnitude increases. Furthermore, the
formulation provided by Bernal and Hansen will be compared to see how they
will be aﬀected when the magnitude of the damages increases. This will likewise
demonstrate the stability of the techniques and the proportionality between the
structural damage and the quantiﬁcation estimate. The demonstration will be
performed by reducing the FE elements corresponding to the ﬁrst predeﬁned
damage scenario within the interval 5-25 %. It has been shown in Figure 5.2.1
and 5.2.2, that scenario 1 is most sensitive in terms of frequency changes and
therefore, this scenario has been analyzed. This has resulted in a total of seven
scenarios which will be analysed, given in the order seen in Table 5.4.1
Table 5.4.1: Deﬁnition of the numerical test cases
Test case
E-modul Reduction
Location
1
5.00%
1
2
10.0%
1
3
12.5%
1
4
15.0%
1
5
17.5%
1
6
20.0%
1
7
22.5%
1
8
25.0%
1
In order to perform this analysis, the ﬁrst step is to extract the mass normalized
mode shapes and natural frequencies from the FE model at the reference state
and the eight perturbed states. Secondly, the change matrices (∆M and ∆K)
are extracted, where it has to be mentioned that in this case the contribution
from the mass matrix will be zero, since only stiﬀness changes are considered.
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Selection Vector
29
Following these steps for all seven test case scenarios, the two plots seen in
Figure 5.4.1 have been created.
(a) Selection vector by simulation cases
(b) Percentage damage by simulation
cases
Figure 5.4.1: Selection vectors when damage occurs in scenario 1
In the ﬁgure, two diﬀerent visual representations of the selection vectors are
obtained by utilizing the sensitivity equations provided by Hansen. Figure (a)
is a plot of the selection vector entries, which describes the relative damage
between the actual and the reference damage. In ﬁgure (b), the selection vector
has been recalculated to contain the percentage deviations at each test case. It
is observed by the plots that the selection vector entries increase for scenario
1, which is expected since the damage increases. Secondly, the accuracy and
the diﬀerence between Bernal’s and Hansen’s formulation can be investigated.
By this, the ratio between the predicted damages obtained by the sensitivity
equations and the actual damages provided in the FE model are determined,
see Figure 5.4.2.
Figure 5.4.2: Ratio between actual and predicted damage. Left plot is deter-
mined by Hansen’s formulation and right plot is results obtained
by Bernal’s formulation
==PAGE:42==
30
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
Here, Ep is the predicted changes which is determined by utilizing the selection
vector. The other parameter, Ea, is the actual changes which are equal to the
actual perturbation size implemented in Ansys. It is known that test case num-
ber 2 refers to the reference perturbation state. This means that the selection
vector entries, (y-axis in this case) should attain the value 1 at this stage. It
is seen by the ﬁgures that utilizing Hansen’s formulation, the ratio between the
actual and predicted damage becomes closer to 1 when the test case number de-
creases. This means that the ratio will reach unity when the frequency changes
becomes small enough, while for Bernal’s formulation an overestimation will be
obtained when the frequency changes becomes smaller than those included in
the reference state. When the size of the damage increases, it is seen that the
deviations between the actual damages and the predicted damages increase. It
can also be seen that the ratio in some extent is linear in the beginning and
begins acting non-linearly when the damage becomes greater. This is obvious
as the sensitivity equations are suitable for linear analysis with small parame-
ter changes. Subsequently, it may be mentioned that the failure estimation for
test case 8 where the E-modulus is reduced by 25 %, is approximately 6 % for
Hansen’s formulation and 4% for Bernal. This pattern is seen for all the test
cases, and therefore it can be concluded that Bernal’s formulation provides bet-
ter estimation of the failures compared with Hansen’s formulation in a numerical
test study.
5.4.1
Error Calculations
In this section, the angle or the error between the estimated and the measured
frequency changes can be determined.
In this case, the measured frequency
changes will be equal to the changes determined by utilizing the stiﬀness and
mass matrices, while the estimated changes are determined in accordance with
the equations provided in Section 2.3. The MAC value between the obtained
vectors will be determined and can be seen in Figure 5.4.3.
(a) Damage in sce-
nario 1
(b) Damage in sce-
nario 2
(c) Damage in sce-
nario 3
(d) Damage in sce-
nario 4
Figure 5.4.3: MAC values of the estimated and measured frequency changes
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Selection Vector
31
In the ﬁgures, the MAC value between the estimated and measured frequency
changes are shown. It is seen that the MAC value attains unity at the scenarios
where damage has been introduced. Another observation which has been seen
is that for damage in scenario 1, the second scenario has a high MAC-value.
Similar, damage in scenario 3 also predicts that damage is seen in scenario
4. Though, this approach can be used to detect damages by considering the
scenario which provides the greatest MAC value. The ﬁgures are based on the
formulation provided by Hansen for the case with 10 % damage of the Young’s
modulus.
==PAGE:44==
32
Damage Detection of Numerical Model
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 6
Damage Detection of
Experimental Tests
In this chapter, the focus will be on presenting the experimental test cases and
how these have been used to detect damages. Diﬀerent perturbation cases have
been performed in order to localize damages. Firstly, the bolts corresponding to
the 4 damage scenarios deﬁned in Figure 5.1.1 will be investigated where after
a robustness check of the method will be done by detecting damages where a
single bolt is damaged.
6.1
Experimental Damage Detection
In the same manner as described in the numerical test study, several experi-
mental tests have been performed to see if damages can be localized. For all
experimental tests, the approach has been to tighten each bolt to M = 2 Nm,
where the specimen then is excited and the obtained modal parameters will be
used as reference state. The stiﬀness perturbations have been introduced by
reducing the torque of the bolts by a torque wrench. When the damage is intro-
duced, the test specimen has been excited and the modal parameters are used as
damage states. The frequencies determined by the reference and damage states
will then be used to deﬁne the frequency change vector, ∆c. In the numerical
test case study, scenario 1 has been analysed where an increasing stiﬀness per-
turbation was performed. In the same way, an experimental test case study has
been executed, where the moment of the bolts corresponding to scenario 1 has
been loosened. The experimental test cases are listed in Table 6.1.1, where the
perturbation size and location are given.
Table 6.1.1: Deﬁnition of the experimental test cases
Test case
MInitial
MReduced
Location
1
2 Nm
1.6 Nm
1
2
2 Nm
1.2 Nm
1
3
2 Nm
0.8 Nm
1
4
2 Nm
0.5 Nm
1
5
2 Nm
0.0 Nm
1
==PAGE:46==
34
Damage Detection of Experimental Tests
The data processing of the obtained experimental test cases has been performed
by the formulations provided by both Bernal and Hansen. For the ﬁve diﬀerent
test cases, the results can be seen in the 3D bar plot given in Figure 6.1.1. It
should be mentioned that the absolute value of the selection vectors are used in
the ﬁgures of this Chapter.
(a) Hansen’s formulation
(b) Bernal’s formulation
Figure 6.1.1: Selection vectors when damage occurs in scenario 1 determined
by Hansen’s and Bernal’s formulations
In Figure 6.1.1, some general information is provided. Firstly, the plot informa-
tion describes in which scenario, damage has been introduced and how many
modes that are used to solve the equation system. Simultaneously, the length of
the frequency vectors are included for each case, which indicates that for even
high frequency changes, the damages has still been localized correctly. By the
results, it can be seen that the perturbation size and the selection vector grow
proportional. Simultaneously, it is seen for high frequency changes the uncer-
tainty increases as the magnitude for the other scenarios grows. By comparing
the results from the two provided methods, it can be seen that they provide
identical results.
6.1.1
Damage Detection of Predeﬁned Scenarios
The scenarios deﬁned in Figure 5.1.1 will be analysed by investigating the exper-
imental model. This means that the bolts corresponding to the predeﬁned sce-
narios will be damaged. Each damage scenario will be investigated by perform-
ing a reference test where the modal parameters are estimated. Each scenario
is then damaged in three steps, where the moment is reduced to M = 1.5 Nm,
M = 1.0 Nm and M = 0.5 Nm.
Only the results from the latter case,
M = 0 Nm, will be discussed in the report, while the remaining results can
be seen in Appendix D. The results obtained by damage scenario 1 and 2 can
be seen in Figure 6.1.2.
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Experimental Damage Detection
35
Figure 6.1.2: Damage identiﬁcation of experimental test cases - Scenario 1
and 2
Figure 6.1.2, clearly illustrates that the damage is present in scenario 1. Contrar-
ily, it is seen that damage scenario 2 is not correctly determined, as it indicates
that damage is in scenario 1. This may be explained by the parametrization
of the second damage scenario which is not correctly modelled. By a mathe-
matical perspective, this indicates that the frequency changes obtained by the
experimental tests do not ﬁt with the predicted changes given in the sensitivity
matrix.
Figure 6.1.3: Damage identiﬁcation of experimental test cases - Scenario 3
and 4
In Figure 6.1.3, it is seen that the damages are detected correctly as the 3D
bar plots peak at scenario 3 and 4. An interesting observation which has been
seen in the data processing is that in the preliminary investigation it was shown
that a suﬃcient number of modes is necessary to distinguish between damage
scenario 3 and 4. The same pattern was identiﬁed by the experimental results as
==PAGE:48==
36
Damage Detection of Experimental Tests
a minimum number of 8 modes were necessary to distinguish between scenario
3 and 4.
As seen in the ﬁgures, scenario 1, 3 and 4 can be detected.
On
the other hand, it has not been possible to localize the damages of scenario
2, which corresponds to the part of the plate with a reduced cross section.
Simultaneously, it is seen that the diﬀerence between the methods provided by
Bernal and Hansen does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly and almost provide identical
results for all test cases.
6.1.2
Damage of Single Bolts
In a real structure, the damages may occur diﬀerently from the predeﬁned dam-
age scenarios. Therefore, various perturbation cases will be analyzed to validate
and check the robustness of the SBDA method and the parametization of the
damages. The bolts have been damaged individually to check the capability
of the method and because of this, a numbering system of the bolts have been
deﬁned, see Figure 6.1.4.
(a) Bolt 1
(b) Bolt 2
(c) Bolt 3
(d) Bolt 4
(e) Bolt 5
(f) Bolt 6
(g) Bolt 7
(h) Bolt 8
Figure 6.1.4: Illustration of bolt numbering
Firstly, bolt 1 and 2 have been damaged individually and the obtained results
can be seen in Figure 6.1.5. For both cases, the perturbation size is equal to a
reduction of the moment to M = 0.5 Nm.
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Experimental Damage Detection
37
Figure 6.1.5: 3D bar plot of damage in bolt 1 and 2
From the plots above, it can be seen that the damage in bolt 1 shows a clear
indication of damage in the ﬁrst deﬁned scenario with some noise in scenario
3 and 4. Simultaneously, damage in bolt 2 shows that damage has occurred
in scenario 1 and in some extent in scenario 2. This may be explained by the
fact that in the FE model, some nodes will be shared between damage scenario
1 and 2, and hence the change in frequency will aﬀect both scenarios. At the
same time, the case where bolt 3 and 4 is damaged has been analysed and the
results can be seen in Figure 6.1.6. It should be observed that the rest of the
perturbation cases are executed with a moment reduced to M = 0 Nm.
Figure 6.1.6: 3D bar plot of damage in bolt 3 and 4
Comparing the results from Figure 6.1.6 with Figure 6.1.2, it is interesting to
observe that both ﬁgures indicate that damage is present in scenario 1, while
damage actually is present in scenario 2 and the bolts corresponding to scenario
2. This further supports that the parametrization of the second damage scenario
==PAGE:50==
38
Damage Detection of Experimental Tests
is not correct and a redeﬁnition has to be done. In Figure 6.1.7, the results from
the experimental test case where bolt 5 and 6 have been damaged individually,
can be seen.
Figure 6.1.7: 3D bar plot of damage in bolt 5 and 6
It can be seen when bolt 5 is damaged, the correct damage scenario has been
determined. Contrarily, the damage in bolt 6 is not detected clearly. The great-
est magnitude of the selection vector indicates that the damage is in scenario 3,
though it also indicates that scenario 2 is damaged. It would be expected that
the magnitude would be greatest for scenario 3 and next in scenario 4, since
these scenarios share nodes in the FE model. Lastly, the results from bolt 7 and
8 can be seen in Figure 6.1.8.
Figure 6.1.8: 3D bar plot of damage in bolt 7 and 8
It can be seen from the plots that in both cases, the correct damage scenario is
identiﬁed, as the bars peak in scenario 3 and 4.
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Experimental Damage Detection
39
6.1.3
Error Calculation
In the same manner as described in the numerical test case, the error between
the estimated and measured frequency changes can be determined by calculating
the MAC value between these vectors. The results obtained by the experimental
tests can be seen in Figure 6.1.9 and 6.1.10.
Figure 6.1.9: Bar plot of MAC value between predicted and estimated fre-
quency change - Scenario 1 and 2
Figure 6.1.10: Bar plot of MAC value between predicted and estimated fre-
quency change - Scenario 3 and 4
It is seen by the plots that the same pattern as in the numerical test study is
observed, where high MAC values are seen between damages in scenario 1 and 2,
and likewise between scenario 3 and 4. It is seen from the plots, when damage
is present in scenario 1, 3 and 4, the MAC values peak at the corresponding
predeﬁned damage scenarios. Though, for scenario 2, the greatest MAC value
==PAGE:52==
40
Damage Detection of Experimental Tests
is obtained in scenario 1, which also was seen in the previous section.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this project, it is illustrated how Structural Health Monitoring can be used to
localize damages on a small test specimen. More speciﬁcally, a scenario-based
damage assessment technique has been used to detect damages on a U-shaped
aluminum specimen.
The idea behind the method was to utilize sensitivity
equations to determine the predicted frequency changes of a speciﬁc damage
scenario. These sensitivity equations are based on two diﬀerent expressions pro-
vided by Bernal and Hansen which have been compared through the report.
By a numerical perspective, it has been seen that the formulation of the sen-
sitivity equations provided by Bernal requires fewer modes to localize damages
compared to Hansen’s formulation. Bernal’s formulation demonstrates that the
magnitude of the damage will have a smaller error than Hansen’s formulation. In
the numerical test case it has been proven that the SBDA method is applicable
and capable to localize various damages on the FE model. In an experimental
test case study it has been observed that the same number of modes are nec-
essary for the two methods, oppositely to the results obtained in the numerical
analysis. This may be explained by a discrepancy between the FE model and
the test element. The modal parameters have been estimated from the experi-
mental model by OMA, which required random excitation forces. Hereby, it was
seen that a maximum of 8 modes could be excited, though in some experimental
test cases only 7 modes have been excited. It has been shown that by a number
of 4 scenarios, it has been possible to localize 3 scenarios, where the case of
a reduced cross section could not be localized. Furthermore, some additional
perturbation cases have been performed where single bolts have been damaged.
By these results, the same pattern is seen where the bolts placed at scenario 2
could not be detect and indicated that the damage was in scenario 1, which was
the same case for the other damage scenarios. Conclusively, it can be said that
a discrepancy may be present between the FE model and the physical model,
which has resulted in some of the wrong estimations of damage localization,
speciﬁcally the parametrization of damage scenario 2.
7.1
Future Work
Several suggestions and improvements can be done. Firstly, it is seen that the
parametrization of the specimen is not correct, which could be redeﬁned to ﬁt
better with the real structure. Other than that, following improvements can be
made:
==PAGE:54==
42
Conclusion
• The number of FE elements can be increased by reducing the mesh size.
Another element type may be proven to be useful such as SHELL 281
which has 8 nodes with 6 degrees of freedom at each node. Hereby, it
could also be of interest to compare the results obtained by shell elements
with 4 and 8 nodes.
• Focus on parametrizing the damage mechanisms to ﬁt better with real-
ity. In this thesis, it has been shown that a high number of modes are
necessary to detect the correct damage scenario. It may be possible to
parametrize the damages in a way, which would require fewer modes. By
this, the equation system would be more overdetermined and therefore
better approximations of the damage localization would be obtained.
• It is known that the selection vector may tell something about the mag-
nitude of the damage, which has been proven in the numerical test case
study. In the experimental test cases, it has been more diﬃcult to quantify
the damages. Therefore, it could be of interest to analyze if the magnitude
of the damages can be determined by utilizing the selection vector.
• Based on the experimental results, few tests have been performed. Typ-
ically, one test has been performed as the reference test and one test for
the damage. It would undoubtedly provide more accurate results if more
tests were performed for each reference and damage case. It would also
be convenient to automate the tests which may be more eﬃcient.
• When a more accurate FE model has been created where better results are
obtained, it is obvious to do more perturbation cases to verify the method
and check the robustness of the method.
• In this thesis, the damage scenarios are determined by utilizing the fre-
quency changes. In the preliminary investigation, it was proven that a
suﬃcient number of modes are necessary to detect damages between sce-
nario 3 and 4. Therefore, it would be ideal to add the mode shapes in the
algorithm and observe if this would produce better results.
• It is known that the provided sensitivity equations are valid for structures
with low damping and a linear behaviour.
It would be obvious to try
this method on a full-scale structure with high damping. In this way, the
assumptions of the sensitivity equations to be valid for low damping will
be discussed and likewise the limitations of the method would be obtained.
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A
Dimensions of The
Experimental Model
The dimensions of the experimental model has been measured and can be seen
in Figure A.0.1.
Figure A.0.1: Dimensions of test element in cm
==PAGE:56==
44
Dimensions of The Experimental Model
==PAGE:57==
Appendix B
Normalized Frequency
Approximations by Bernal’s
Formulation
This appendix includes the relative frequency approximations determined by
Bernal’s formulation will be provided.
Figure B.0.1: Ratio between actual and measured damage
Figure B.0.2: Ratio between actual and measured damage
==PAGE:58==
46
Normalized Frequency Approximations by Bernal’s Formulation
==PAGE:59==
Appendix C
Robustness Check of
Damage Detection
Technique - Numerical
In this appendix, the numerical model will be considered where several damage
scenarios will be identiﬁed. In this way, the robustness of the damage iden-
tiﬁcation approaches will be considered. For all the test cases, which will be
mentioned, will be exposed to a reduction of the Young’s modulus of 15 %. The
white color highlights the damage scenario. In the middle, the results obtained
by Hansen is seen, and in the outermost right plot, the results obtained by
Bernal are given.
Figure C.0.1: Numerical test case 1
Figure C.0.2: Numerical test case 2
==PAGE:60==
48
Robustness Check of Damage Detection Technique - Numerical
Figure C.0.3: Numerical test case 3
Figure C.0.4: Numerical test case 4
Figure C.0.5: Numerical test case 5
==PAGE:61==
49
Figure C.0.6: Numerical test case 6
Figure C.0.7: Numerical test case 7
Figure C.0.8: Numerical test case 8
==PAGE:62==
50
Robustness Check of Damage Detection Technique - Numerical
Figure C.0.9: Numerical test case 9
Figure C.0.10: Numerical test case 10
Figure C.0.11: Numerical test case 11
==PAGE:63==
51
Figure C.0.12: Numerical test case 12
Figure C.0.13: Numerical test case 13
Figure C.0.14: Numerical test case 14
==PAGE:64==
52
Robustness Check of Damage Detection Technique - Numerical
Figure C.0.15: Numerical test case 15
Figure C.0.16: Numerical test case 16
Figure C.0.17: Numerical test case 19
==PAGE:65==
53
Figure C.0.18: Numerical test case 20
Figure C.0.19: Numerical test case 21
==PAGE:66==
54
Robustness Check of Damage Detection Technique - Numerical
==PAGE:67==
Appendix D
Damage Detection of
Experimental Test Cases
Figure D.0.1: Numerical test case 1
Figure D.0.2: Numerical test case 2
==PAGE:68==
56
Damage Detection of Experimental Test Cases
Figure D.0.3: Numerical test case 3
Figure D.0.4: Numerical test case 4
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] H. N. Ajina.
Experimental and numerical analysis to demonstrate SHM.
Internal, 2021.
[2] R. Brincker.
Note on MAC between measured and estimated frequency
changes. Internal, 2021.
[3] T. L. . E. Dascotte. A Scenario-Based Damage Identiﬁcation Framework.
2013.
[4] J. B. Hansen. Scenario-based structural damage localization and quantiﬁca-
tion using operational modal analysis.
[5] M. I. F. . J. MOTTERSHEAH. Finite Element Model Updating in Structural
Dynamics. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995.
[6] S. W. D. . C. R. F. . M. B. P. . D. W. Shevitz. Damage Identiﬁcation and
Health Monitoring of Structural and Mechanical Systems from Changes in
Their Vibration Characteristics. 2013.
[7] R. B. . C. E. Ventura. INTRODUCTION TO OPERATIONAL MODAL
ANALYSIS. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. ISBN 9781119963158.
[8] R. B. . C. E. Ventura. Principles of Model Checking. John Wiley & Sons,
2015. ISBN 9781119963158.
[9] C. R. F. . K. Worden. Structural Health Monitoring; A Machine Learning
Perspective. 2013.
