==PAGE:1==
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Performance and perception of SDG implementation 
into corporate strategy, with a focus on SDG 3 & 8 
 
Casper Scheel (s193273) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright© Technical University of Denmark 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Abstract 
This thesis aims to assess the performance and perception of SDG implementation into corporate 
strategy, with a focus on SDG 3 & 8, by assessing 4 selected expert interviewees and 3 companies 
operating within the 2 SDGs in question. Such is achieved by reviewing existing literature and 
theories on related topics and using qualitative content analysis to draw an understanding of 
perceptions of the context. The study is structured around two research questions, namely: 
1. What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
& 
2. How do companies relate to the SDGs/position their activities with the SDGs, with a 
specific focus on the implementation of SDG 3 & 8 into corporate strategy? 
Using developed categories based on contextual analysis of conducted interviews, each research 
questions was answered, resulting in key take-aways in the following areas: 
● Importance of the specific SDGs. 
● The specific SDGs in a corporate setting. 
● Opportunities from engaging with specific goals. 
● Maturity process of companies moving from internal to external focus. 
● The importance of leaders in the context. 
● The importance of engaging employees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Executive Summary 
Sustainability is a hot topic on the global scene, in every sense of its definition. With the aim of 
enhancing the global sustainable movement, the 2030 agenda for sustainable development (DeLoyde, 
2020) was developed and catered towards all UN member states. The agenda was created to 
emphasize peace and prosperity across all member states and to monitor such, the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) surfaced (UN, 2020). The goals were to be seen as interconnected entities 
all contributing towards making the world a better place. 
For the purpose of this thesis, two SDGs were singled out. The two SDGs include SDG 3 (Good 
Health and Well-being) (UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 2020a) and SDG 8 
(Decent Work & Economic Growth) (UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 2020b). The 
two goals were picked out of personal interest in their relation to a main focus-point of the thesis, 
namely their connection to corporate strategy and how they are implemented in companies. Such was 
the overall purpose of this study defined, and upon a preliminary background study of the specific 
goals, the problem statement for this thesis was constructed, containing two research questions, as 
follows: 
● RQ1: What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
● RQ2: How do companies relate to the SDGs/position their activities with the SDGs, with a 
specific focus on the implementation of SDG 3 & 8 into corporate strategy? 
Prior to any analysis, relevant literature and theories were studied, such included the study of Well-
being and Performance at work including the relevance of the Hawthorne studies (Kompier, 2006; 
Mayo, 1933), in the context. Furthermore, different takes on the theoretical performance and well-
being were examined including the likes of Sonnen and Frese’s three general perspectives for 
studying individual performance  (Sonnentag, S. & Frese, 2002). In the context of corporate strategy, 
literature regarding organizational structure was studied, including Mintzberg’s structure in fives 
(Mintzberg, 1992), and in relation to that the model by Cooper & Marshall on work stress was studied 
in terms of its contributions to the ASSET model (Cooper & Marshall, 1976). Lastly the element of 
“lack of transparency” was assessed according to the work by KPMG (Impact, 2020). To answer said 
research questions, data collected from semi-structured interviews were to be analyzed. Such was 
achieved by utilizing the methodology of qualitative content analysis (Mayring, 2000). The initial 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
stages of the analysis surrounded the structuring of the data through the following stepwise approach 
(Attia, 2020). 
 
1. Familiarization. 
2. Match with RQs. 
3. Identify patterns. 
4. Development Framework. 
During the familiarization stage, the data was labelled using preliminary categories/notations. 
Matching the data to RQs was predetermined due to the nature of which the data was gathered. Data 
gathered from 4 expert interviewees was matched to the answering of RQ1, whereas data gathered 
from company interviewees was matched with RQ2. The reasoning behind this approach was to 
emphasize the gathering of data as seen from outside the companies (experts with outside-knowledge) 
and data from inside the companies (company representatives). The overall purpose for the approach 
was to identify any discrepancies between the parties. Through the identifying of patterns and 
ultimately the development of a framework for the data, the data was ready to be analyzed according 
to the categories defined in the framework, with a total of 8 main categories defined for RQ1 and 4 
main categories defined for RQ2. The split of defined categories relates to the difference in interview 
guides, due to the company interview guide needing to be more concise. Through analysis of 
statements connected to the defined categories, claims were constructed for each assessment, with 
the aim of building enough arguments to answer both RQs and propose recommendations. The claims 
were then collected and discusses in terms of relevant literature and theory, 
1. Both SDG 3 & 8 are relevant for all companies internally and to some extent also externally. 
If more emphasis is put on the societal elements in sustainability, more companies will 
associate themselves with the goals. 
2. Security can be found for companies, by emphasizing SDG 3 & 8 as a process of maturity, 
starting internally, getting the initiatives under control, and moving the focus externally. 
3. Engaging with SDG 3 & 8 should be aligned with company values and corporate strategy. If 
the goals are seen as something on the side used to please an agenda, the goals will not be 
embedded in organization. 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
4. Leaders have a substantial part in a change environment, whether it is making a drastic shift or 
adapting to an unknown input. Alignment of values and incentives between company and 
leaders are paramount in the execution of a successful change. 
5. The biggest barrier for employees in a change environment is not participating. 
6. Engaging with SDG 3 & 8 does not necessarily result in major organizational changes. It is a 
matter of the specific company and its approach to the matter. Defining the approach and focus 
of a given initiative is the most important aspect in the engagement and such can benefit from 
the setting up of a designated department tasked with controlling the initiative. As mentioned, 
it is a matter of the characteristics of the company, the scale, and disposable resources. 
Furthermore, the contributions derived from conclusions and key take-aways were found related to 
the state of where companies are in the process of implementing SDG 3 & 8. In that regard, it was 
discovered that the findings of this thesis can support companies at various levels, whether or not 
they are engaged with the goals in their current state. Contributions were outlined in terms of the 
importance of supporting leaders in the transformation, engaging employees and emphasizing 
elements found largely important to the process of implementing SDG 3 & 8, namely transparency 
and maturity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
Attia, S. (2020). Content Analysis. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sOt1FOWKGKA 
Cooper, C. L., & Marshall, J. (1976). Occupational sources of stress: A review of the literature 
relating to coronary heart disease and mental ill health. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 49(1), 
11–28. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1976.tb00325.x 
DeLoyde, WarrenE. MabeeM. J. BlairJordanT. CarlsonCarolynN. M. (2020). Department of 
Geography and Planning, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 2020. Sustainability. 11. 
https://www-sciencedirect-
com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/science/article/pii/B9780081022955100149?via%5C%3Dihub 
Impact, K. (2020). The time has come. December, 0–62. 
Kompier, M. A. (2006). The “Hawthorne effect” is a myth, but what keeps the story going? 
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 32(5), 402–412. 
Mayo, E. (1933). The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization. In The Human Problems of an 
Industrial Civilization (1st ed.). https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203487273 
Mayring, P. (2000). Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative Content Analysis, 1(June), 851–855. 
Mintzberg, H. (1992). Structure in fives: Designing effective organizations. Prentice Hall. 
Sonnentag, S. & Frese, M. (2002). Performance concepts and performance theory. In In S. Sonnentag 
(Ed.), Psychological management of individual performance (pp. 3–26). Wiley. 
UN. (2020). THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. 2020. https://sdgs.un.org/goals 
UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs. (2020a). Goal 3. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal3 
UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs. (2020b). Goal 8. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction & Background 
1 
1.1 SDG 3: Good Health and Well-being 
2 
1.2 SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth 
2 
1.2 How to implement the SDGs 
3 
1.3 What does good SDG reporting look like? 
4 
1.3.1 Investor's POV 
4 
1.3.2 SDG's from a corporate perspective 
5 
Phase 1: Exploration 
6 
Phase 2: Exposures, Risks and Opportunity 
6 
Phase 3: Goal setting and integration 
6 
Phase 4: Measurement and Reporting 
7 
1.4 Problem Statement 
7 
1.4.1 Problem Formulation 
8 
2. Literature Review 
9 
2.1 Well-being and Performance at work 
9 
2.2 Theoretical Performance and Well-being 
10 
2.3 Organizational Structure 
13 
2.3.1 Organizational Structure and Well-being 
14 
2.4 Understanding A Change 
15 
2.4.1 Leaders in change 
16 
2.5 KPMG 
16 
2.5.1 Lack of transparency 
17 
3. Methodology 
18 
3.1 Research Method 
18 
3.1.1 Qualitative or Quantitative 
18 
3.1.2 Designing the study 
19 
3.1.3 Credibility 
19 
3.2 Data Gathering 
20 
3.2.1 The Interview 
21 
3.2.2 Interviewee Characteristics 
22 
3.3 Analysis: Qualitative Data Analysis 
23 
3.3.1 Qualitative content analysis 
24 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
3.3.2 Structuring the data. 
24 
4. Analysis 
26 
4.3 RQ1 
26 
4.3.1 General Perception 
26 
4.3.1.1 Claim 1 
28 
4.3.2 Corporate Strategy 
28 
4.3.2.1 Claim 2 
30 
4.3.3 Internal vs. External 
31 
4.3.3.1 Claim 3 
32 
4.3.4 KPI 
32 
4.3.4.1 Claim 4 
34 
4.3.5 Transparency 
34 
4.3.5.1 Claim 5 
35 
4.3.6 Maturity 
35 
4.3.6.1 Claim 6 
36 
4.3.7 Leaders 
37 
4.3.7.1 Claim 7 
37 
4.3.8 Employees participation 
38 
4.3.8.1 Claim 8 
38 
4.4 RQ2 
39 
4.4.1 General Perception 
40 
4.4.1.1 Claim 9 
41 
4.4.2 Corporate Strategy 
41 
4.4.2.1 Claim 10 
42 
4.4.3 Internal vs. External 
43 
4.4.3.1 Claim 11 
44 
4.4.4 Organizational structure 
44 
4.4.4.1 Claim 12 
45 
5. Discussion 
47 
5.1 RQ1: What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
49 
5.3 RQ2: How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with SDGs, with a specific 
focus on the implementation of SDG 3 \& 8 into corporate strategy? 
53 
6. Conclusion 
56 
6.2 Contribution 
61 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
6.1 Limitations 
61 
6.3 Future Research 
62 
References 
63 
Appendix 
66 
Appendix A 
66 
Appendix B 
68 
Appendix C 
70 
Appendix D 
73 
Appendix E 
74 
Appendix F 
75 
Appendix G 
76 
Appendix H 
77 
Appendix I 
78 
Appendix J 
79 
Appendix K 
80 
==PAGE:10==
Page 1 of 80 
 
1. Introduction & Background 
 
Sustainability is something we face every day, in many forms, whether it is in the workspace or in 
our personal life. To push the sustainable movement across all UN member states the 2030 agenda 
for Sustainable Development (DeLoyde, 2020) was developed. The agenda was developed to share a 
blueprint for peace and prosperity for the people and the planet and as a centerpiece of the agenda is 
the 17 sustainable development goals (SDG's). The 17 SDGs provide a structured plan of how to 
handle various aspects of sustainable goals and the ambitions related to the development of the entire 
world until 2030 (UN, 2020).  
 
 
Figure 1: UN SDGs (UN, 2020) 
 
The goals as seen in the illustration above are interconnected, meaning that goals contribute to each 
other. For instance, an increase in the quality of education will impact the development of sustainable 
cities and communities, or working towards zero hunger in the world, greatly contributes to good-
health and well-being. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
Page 2 of 80 
 
1.1 SDG 3: Good Health and Well-being 
 
SDG 3 covers an essential part of the 2030 agenda as it reflects on the good health and well-being 
and on the impact these aspects have on the agenda. Main points of this SDG are the targeting of 
widening economic and social inequalities, rapid urbanization, threats to environment and climate, 
the burden related to infectious diseases and new emerging challenges such as noncommunicable 
diseases. The UN deems universal health coverage an integral part to achieving SDG 3 (UN 
Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 2020a). The full list of the sub-targets for SDG 3 are 
found in Appendix A. 
Not all sub-targets are correlating with the main purpose of this study, whereas most of the targets 
within SDG 3 are related to the structuring of the society and offers to citizens. Only sub-target 3.9: 
By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, 
water and soil pollution and contamination. (UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 
2020a) and 3.a: Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework 
Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries has a direct link to corporate sustainability (UN 
Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 2020a). 
1.2 SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth 
Sustained and inclusive economic growth can drive progress, create decent jobs for all and improve 
living standards. The full list of the sub-target for SDG 8 are found in Appendix B. 
The same with SDG 3 not all sub-targets of SDG 8 refer to corporate sustainability. Therefore, the 
main focus in relation to SDG 8 will be put on the following sub-targets(UN, 2020): 
● 8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological 
upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high value added and labor-intensive 
sectors(UN, n.d.). 
● 8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job 
creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and 
growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial 
services(UN, n.d.). 
==PAGE:12==
Page 3 of 80 
 
● 8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and 
production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in 
accordance with the 10-year framework of programs on sustainable consumption and 
production, with developed countries taking the lead(UN, n.d.). 
● 8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and 
men, including for young people and persons human trafficking and secure the prohibition 
and elimination of the worst forms of child labor, including recruitment and use of child 
soldiers, and by 2025 end child labor in all its forms(UN, n.d.). 
● 8.8 Protect labor rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, 
including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious 
employment(UN, n.d.). 
 
1.2 How to implement the SDGs 
 
With the initiatives comes both risks and opportunities for companies and stakeholders and with the 
goals becoming more and more of a regularity everywhere, not only in the professional scene, but the 
companies must also pursue the initiatives and be prepared for change. For the companies, the 
following 4 steps can be seen as a sufficient approach to engage themselves with the SDG's 
(Schramade, 2017): 
1. Understand the SDGs. 
2. Identify risk and opportunities. 
3. Develop internal goals complying with the SDGs. 
4. Measuring performance and reporting results and/or ambitions (Schramade, 2017). 
SDGs are more and more commonly seen in the communication by corporate people, and it can be 
seen as trending to always refer to the goals in branding. Although KPI's on SDGs are less common, 
they are needed to properly report progress by the companies. With pioneering companies leading 
the front in reporting SDG performance and incorporating them into corporate strategy, transparency 
in these, as well as in smaller enterprises, can still be improved in the reporting (Schramade, 2017). 
==PAGE:13==
Page 4 of 80 
 
1.3 What does good SDG reporting look like? 
In 2018 KPMG identified that many of their clients struggle to report on the SDGs, where to start and 
what good reporting looks like (KPMG, 2018). With the aim of assisting its own clients, as well as 
trying to promote the global approach to SDG reporting, KPMG published their paper on what good 
SDG reporting looks like. Laying the foundation for the content of this paper is their Nine assessment 
criterias for reporting maturity (KPMG, 2018). The criterias are based on the key elements of the 
SDG Compass and guidance from the IIRC (KPMG, 2018) (GRI/UN Global Compact/WBCSD, 
2015) which can be comprised into three main themes, 
1. Understanding 
2. Prioritization 
3. Measurement 
These areas can be further extending to the following sub-themes, 
Understanding 
Prioritization 
Measurement 
Does the reporting 
demonstrate the business case 
for acting on the SDGs? 
Does the reporting identify 
priority SDGs for the 
company? 
Does the reporting disclose 
SDG performance goals for 
the company? 
Does the CEO and/or Chair’s 
message talk about the SDGs? 
Does the reporting explain the 
methodology the company 
used to prioritize the SDGs? 
Does the reporting set SDG 
performance goals that are 
SMART? 
Does the reporting assess the 
business’s impact on the 
SDGs? 
Does the reporting identify 
specific SDG targets that are 
relevant to the business? 
Does the reporting detail the 
indicators the company is 
using to measure the progress 
of its SDG activities? 
Table 1: How to report on the SDGs (KPMG, 2018) 
 
1.3.1 Investor's POV 
 
Some SDGs are deemed more viable for investing than others. The highest ranked SDGs opportunity-
wise are number 3, 7, 8, 9 and 12. As the focus for this thesis surrounds SDG 3 and 8, the focus will 
be on those two. SDG number 3 applies to several industries, such as healthcare and the materials 
==PAGE:14==
Page 5 of 80 
 
sector and in these areas there are almost unlimited opportunities for an investor to pursue. SDG 8 
applies to any viable business, as it concerns the well-being of workers in "Decent work" as well as 
what any investor would identify as a key parameter, economic growth (Schramade, 2017). 
 
 
Figure 2: Sketching the investment opportunity set of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (Schramade, 2017) 
 
 
1.3.2 SDG's from a corporate perspective 
As covered in the beginning of the section, SDG implementation can be outlined in the 4-step 
approach, Understand, Identify, Develop and Measure. From a corporate perspective it can be 
assumed that companies follow a similar stepwise approach to the implementation and adaptation in 
corporate thinking and ultimately strategy. Analysis made by Willem Schramade up until 2017 
showed most companies operating within the first two steps (Schramade, 2017). 
==PAGE:15==
Page 6 of 80 
 
 
Table 2: SDG's from a corporate perspective (Schramade, 2017) 
With the vast increase in focus on the SDG and sub-goals in recent years, the distribution ideally 
should have moved to the other end of the scale. While some are further in the process than others, 
due to prioritization as well as general resources to pursue the actions needed.  
Phase 1: Exploration 
As mentioned above plenty of companies are past this phase, initially. While this framework should 
not be seen as a linear method, used simply to get from a to b, but rather a continuous loop, i.e., agile 
method, to work towards the better. Exploration can be seen as a stage of exploring the SDGs in an 
organizational context and finding aspects within the SDGs fitting to a current corporate strategy or 
a product already in existence. Additionally, and possibly more value-adding for the company, the 
exploration phase can be used to discover new possibilities to pursue. The latter has, as mentioned, 
been achieved by a lot of companies (Schramade, 2017). 
Phase 2: Exposures, Risks and Opportunity 
As the framework suggests, this phase builds upon what was discovered in the initial phase and should 
be seen as a deeper assessment. While exploration mainly assesses the core aspects of the company, 
i.e. the product they sell or the service they provide, this phase digs deeper, all the way down the 
value chain. This includes the production and use stage of the product or service (Schramade, 2017). 
Phase 3: Goal setting and integration 
Phase 3 is about which SDGs and SDG subgoals the company want to emphasize the most and even 
which ones to exclude. This stage concerns the identification of which goals the company can 
contribute to, while remaining competitive in their respective market. How it relates to company 
strategy and which KPIs are associated with it, can be used to create a feedback loop with corporate 
strategy (Schramade, 2017). 
==PAGE:16==
Page 7 of 80 
 
Phase 4: Measurement and Reporting 
The last phase concerns the actual documentation of the progress and work made to contribute to 
the individual SDG's, by the means of reporting. (Schramade, 2017) 
 
Table 3: Measurement and Reporting (Schramade, 2017) 
 
1.4 Problem Statement 
 
As a part of the corporate responsibility of companies nowadays these goals have become 
significantly more common and ideal when assessing the overall performance of a company. 
Specifically, the SDGs have become a centerpiece for evaluating general- and sustainable 
performance of companies. But what are the motivational factors driving the companies to pursue the 
monitoring and reporting of performance within the SDG's? The following research questions comes 
from a general perception that the actions within companies in terms of assessing and reporting their 
initiatives in these areas, could benefit from being more transparent. Furthermore, the focus will be 
on SDG 3 and 8 as these relate to any work environment and are specific goals all SDG responsible’ 
within companies, leaders etc., should be able to relate to.  
Dansk Industri, leading employer- and business organization in Denmark, defines SDG's and 
corresponding sub-goals as a must when forming corporate strategy (Dansk Industri, 2020). While 
this can result in drastic strategic changes to some, it can also give rise to opportunities for companies 
in terms of accessing new commercial markets. This relates specifically to the first research questions 
presented in this proposal, namely what the motivational factors are for the companies - do they see 
it as an opportunity for new explorations to be made or an opportunity to part-take in the global 
movement?  
==PAGE:17==
Page 8 of 80 
 
1.4.1 Problem Formulation 
This thesis will concern the efforts of Danish-based companies to accommodate and document their 
ways of implementing SDGs, more specifically SDG 3 and 8.  
● SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages(UN Department Of 
Economic And Social Affairs., 2020a). 
● SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all (UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs., 
2020b). 
In relation to the aforementioned, this thesis will aim to assess the motivation of companies to 
implement the SDG subgoals into their respective strategies. Building upon that the following 
questions were formed covering the main focus-points of this thesis: 
● What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
● How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with SDGs, with a specific focus 
on the implementation of SDG 3 & 8 into corporate strategy? 
In total this thesis will involve the assessment of data gathered through semi-structured interviews 
with experts in the field as well as companies working with either or both SDGs in question.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
Page 9 of 80 
 
2. Literature Review 
 
The following section aims to assess existing literature on subjects related to this study. The 
subjects as identified w.r.t the purpose of this study and specifically research questions are: 
1. Well-being and Performance at work 
a. Theoretical Performance and Well-being 
2. Organizational Context 
a. Organizational Structure & Well-being 
b. Organizational Structure & Performance 
3. Understanding a Change 
4. KPMG: Lack of Transparency 
 
2.1 Well-being and Performance at work 
 
One of the main foundations for this study concerns the relationship between well-being of a 
workforce and the performance output they achieve. The historic perspective related to this is rather 
one-sided, as the main concern in the early twentieth century was worker performance in the sense of 
selection of personnel, training and an overall reduction in absence. As was demonstrated by Koppes 
and Pickren not much attention was put on the relationship between work characteristic and well-
being or well-being and productivity (Koppes & Pickren, 2007). The focus changed in the 1930 as a 
product of the Hawthorne studies where working conditions on productivity were examined 
(Kompier, 2006; Mayo, 1933). In the study relevant factors were discovered, such as human 
motivation, "emotional well-being" and job satisfaction. Furthermore, in this period, industrial and 
organizational psychology devoted assessments to subjects such as fitness at work and several other 
factors in increasing worker satisfaction(Veldhoven & Peccei, n.d.). In the present, the well-being of 
workers are at the center of employers and the topics of emotions and well-being are studied 
independently and the perception of such topics is now a more normal inclusion in the discussion of 
how to improve productivity.(Veldhoven & Peccei, n.d.). One reason for this is the general perception 
that a happy worker will be more productive than one that is not. Related to this is the hypothesis 
"happy-productive worker" by Lucas & Diener (Lucas, R. E., & Diener, 2002). Secondly, many 
==PAGE:19==
Page 10 of 80 
 
psychologists in this area believe that a well-performing workforce should not come at the expense 
of the individual employee’s well-being, a believe forming the foundation of the field occupational 
health psychology (OHP), focusing on employee well-being and sustainable performance (Veldhoven 
& Peccei, n.d.).  
2.2 Theoretical Performance and Well-being 
 
From a corporate standpoint the effort in ensuring well-being among employees will always be in 
relation to the improvement of performance. But was the actual relationship between performance 
and well-being? Sonnentag and Frese describe three general perspectives for studying individual 
performance (Sonnentag, S. & Frese, 2002). Firstly, the individual perspective emphasizes the impact 
of general differences in personality or work abilities to form differences in performance. Secondly, 
the situational perspective looks at differences in performance as a function of situational and 
environmental factors, such as organizational and work characteristics. Third and final perspective, 
the performance regulation perspective examines performance as a process that can be improved by 
breaking it down. While links between personality traits and well-being have been documented 
(Hallberg, U. E., Johansson, G. & Schaufeli, 2007), the two latter perspectives are more correlating 
with the purpose of this study. The situational perspective very much relates to the workspace and 
the environmental factors at a workplace impacting the performance of individuals, while the 
performance regulation perspective relates to the corporate side, namely the structuring of internal 
processes to improve performance. What has a special interest in this regard to this study are the 
underlying aspects of each perspective are as follows: 
Situational perspective 
● Ergonomics 
● General work-space facilities (fitness etc.) 
● Company culture* 
● Performance regulation perspective 
*Values characterizing a company. 
Performance regulation perspective 
● Team building 
● Upskilling 
==PAGE:20==
Page 11 of 80 
 
● Corporate initiatives on employee health 
 
It should be noted that these two perspectives define both ends of what this study aims to cover, 
namely the employee-side and the corporate-side. In relation to situational perspective several studies 
have been conducted sparking various theories, which will be covered in the following. The theories 
include: 
● The happy-productive worker hypothesis 
● Effort-recovery theory 
● Self-determination theory 
● Job characteristics, well-being, and performance 
● Broaden-and-build theory. 
The relationship between the mood and productivity has been studied for decades and still is at the 
present (Veldhoven & Peccei, n.d.). What is most interesting for corporations is the effect of 
employee mood, more specifically happiness, on productivity. This thinking stems from the 
Hawthorne studies in the 1930s, where the first annotation of "the happy-productive worker 
hypothesis" is found. While the evidence backing up this hypothesis might be on the less conclusive 
side (Veldhoven & Peccei, n.d.), they showed a connection between well-being and performance. 
The effort-recovery theory has a different take on the assessment of well-being and performance. 
Here the focus is on the effects of effort on fatigue (well-being factor) and performance (Meijman, T. 
F. & Mulder, 1998). Specific emphasis is put on recovery from a certain effort and how that aspect 
affects the health and performance of the employee. The theory builds on the assumption that excess 
effort causes short-term implications, such as stress. These implications can only be terminated by a 
full recovery from the individual, and if not managed properly, the employee will build up load effects 
from day to day which can lead to health problems. This theory very much relates to the distribution 
by workload and general managing of employees, as seen from the corporate side. While the 
individual employee is not the main factor in the management of such implications, it has to be noted 
that certain stress-inducers can arise outside the workspace and affect the recovery phase, as 
described. Deci and Ryan’s Self-determination Theory SDT looks at the degree of which work can 
fulfill basic psychological needs (Deci, E. L. & Ryan, 2000). According to Deci and Ryan’s human-
beings possess three basic needs,  
==PAGE:21==
Page 12 of 80 
 
 
● Need for relatedness - referring to experience of positive relations with others. 
● Need for competence - referring to the completion of tasks successfully. 
● Need for autonomy - referring to the experiencing of freedom of choice and ability to behave 
as one chooses. 
Related to these basic needs are the two rewards systems, intrinsically or extrinsically motivation. 
Intrinsically motivated individuals work from their own interest and satisfaction, which will sustain 
for as long as it contributes to those specific needs(Gagné, M. & Deci, 2005). Extrinsically motivated 
employees carry out workloads based on instrumental values, such as monetary rewards, and as this 
does not satisfy any of the basic needs the individual will proceed to act with as little effort as possible 
(Taris, T. W., Van Beek, I. & Schaufeli, 2014). So, the SDT emphasizes that well-being (satisfaction 
of needs) relates to an increase in performance as it affects the individual’s motivation. Karasek’s Job 
Demands-Control model (JDC) takes a different stance on the effect of jobs in terms of motivation, 
well-being, and performance (Karasek, 1979). As SDT argues that jobs affect motivation, the JDC 
looks at high demand and low control leads to high levels of strain. Furthermore it states that high 
demand and high control leads to employees upskilling themselves, leading to an increase in 
performance (Taris, T. W. & Kompier, 2004). In such an environment demands turn into challenges 
allowing employees to tailor their own work. This has a positive impact on the motivational factors 
of employees and has close relation to the aspects of the SDT as it directly correlates with the basic 
needs for satisfaction as covered above.  
Wright, Cropanzano and Bonett conducted a study on the relationship between job satisfaction (well-
being) and performance, and proposed that the moderation between the two would be by positive 
well-being (Wright, T. A., Cropanzano, R. & Bonett, 2007). Furthermore, the relation between the 
two would be stronger for employees with high levels of psychological well-being. This study was 
grounded in the assessment by Fredrickson and Branigan (Fredrickson, B. L. & Branigan, 2005) 
arguing that individuals encountering positive emotions (positive well-being) would be more inclined 
to broaden their thoughts behind certain actions, thereby considering alternatives in each situation.  
This would make employees more flexible in given situations, which could become beneficial to the 
individual in terms of upskilling. Wright et al. argue that this broadening of employees minds would 
make them less inclined to experience mental illness, such as stress, directly influencing their work 
==PAGE:22==
Page 13 of 80 
 
performance, but also indirectly in the sense that it would stimulate other factors of well-being, such 
as motivation (Wright, T. A., Cropanzano, R. & Bonett, 2007b). 
 
2.3 Organizational Structure 
 
An organization cannot exist without the existence of a structure. The purpose of an organizational 
structure is to divide workload and authority to carry out the operations of the specific organization. 
Henry Mintzberg argues that an organization can be defined using the following three dimensions 
(Mintzberg, 1992, 2009). 
● The key parts of an organization. 
● Its prime coordinating mechanism. 
● The type of decentralization it employs. 
The key part of an organization relates to the structural setup of authority and can be divided into 5 
parts; the strategic apex (top management), Operative core (workforce), Middle-line (lower-level 
managers), The technostructure (analysts, engineer etc.) and lastly the support staff (service 
providers, such as maintenance). The prime coordinating mechanism relates the main method of 
choice to carry out activities inside the organization. Such include Direct supervision (one individual 
responsible for another), Standardization of work process (specified work), Standardization of skills 
(specified work), Standardization of output (output specified) and Mutual Adjustment (work is 
coordinated through informal communication)(Lunenburg, 2012). Third dimension, as the definition 
suggests, relates to the distribution of power and more so the decentralization of that. This dimension 
includes Vertical decentralization (distribution of power down the chain of command), Horizontal 
decentralization (shared power across strategic apex) and Selective decentralization (strategic apex 
and technostructure share authority). Mintzberg argues that the strategy an organization chooses and 
practices result in five structural layouts.  
● Simple Structure 
● Machine Bureaucracy 
● Professional Bureaucracy 
● Divisionalized Form 
● and Adhocrazy(Lunenburg, 2012). 
==PAGE:23==
Page 14 of 80 
 
 
Figure 3: Five organizational structures (Lunenburg, 2012) 
From studying the five structures found above, it is clear that certain elements can be derived and 
used in this context.  
2.3.1 Organizational Structure and Well-being 
 
When talking about organizational structure and well-being an immediate connection can be made 
between the two, in the sense of organizational control. The level of control has a direct impact on 
the individuals inside the organization and the extent of which organizations practice control is 
dictated by the type of organizational structure. Mintzberg’s 5 structures indicate that some 
organizational structures have a higher level of control, but how does this affect the employees? 
Cooper & Marshall's  model on work stress was one of the main contributors to the ASSET model 
(Cooper & Marshall, 1976). Their work incorporated 5 sources of stress at work, 
1. Intrinsic to the job 
2. Role in the organization 
3. Career Development 
4. Relationships at work 
5. Organizational structure and climate 
The five above listed sources are all present in the ASSET model and furthermore, which has been 
shown in more recent research(S. Cartwright & Cooper, 2008), the ASSET model includes additional 
factors of work stress, such as the work-life-balance, job satisfaction and levels of organizational 
commitment. Organizational commitment goes both ways, meaning from employee to organization 
as well as organization to employee. While job satisfaction and organizational commitment is often 
seen as outcomes of stress, the ASSET model argues that these factors might be sources as well. 
==PAGE:24==
Page 15 of 80 
 
2.4 Understanding A Change 
 
When engaging the SDGs in general, certain changes could occur in a company, as a product a certain 
change initiative by the company themselves. A key part in succeeding is to understand the change 
the company is undergoing. As stated by Kreye (Kreye, 2020) the key to sustained survival of an 
organization is the fit of its internal components, for instance a sustainability agenda, and the 
overarching strategy of the organization as well as opportunities and threats seen in a given external 
environment. Schneider et al. argues that a fit between the internal and the external is essential with 
regards to organizational effectiveness, as the alignment supplement each other (Schneider, B., 
Hayes, S. C., Lim, 2003). A central theory that enables the assessment of a given change initiative in 
a wider context, is the open systems theory (Kreye, 2020). The open systems theory (displayed below) 
is a framework for assessing organizations as a system of interrelated components affected by a larger 
system (Kreye, 2020). Generally, an organization can be seen as an open system that directly relates 
to its environment, receiving inputs from that and reacting to it. 
 
Figure 4: Open Systems Theory(Kreye, 2020) 
According to the theory of open systems, the main characterizing elements of organizations are the 
following(Kreye, 2020): 
 
● Embedded within a larger system: Organizations depend on the larger system, the 
environment, and its underlying aspects to survive. 
● Organizations must emphasize beneficial linkage between input and output with the 
environment. 
● The organization relies on feedback on output, to adjust. 
● Similar outputs can be produced from different inputs. 
● The system functions cyclically as output can support new input and create more output. 
==PAGE:25==
Page 16 of 80 
 
● Organizations seek balance in components of the system. If change happens, the balance is 
disturbed. Such is in line with Lewin’s Field Theory (Lewin, 1951). 
● Organizations are defined by their boundaries. External boundaries regulate the interaction 
between the system and its environment. Internal boundaries define internal components and 
regulate inputs and outputs (Kreye, 2020). 
 
2.4.1 Leaders in change 
 
The operators of change are very much the leaders involved with it. Being an effective leader directly 
relates to and influences the system alignment. Miles and Snow state that the process of pursuing 
system balance could be more efficient if it instead emphasized continuous improvement by way of 
working towards the best possible fit (Miles & Snow, 1984). Barnett and Carroll emphasize the 
distinction of states and processes (Barnett, W.P. and Carroll, 1995). The state relates to ‘what’ is 
changed and the process focuses on the actual procedure involved with making the change. The 
argument by Barnett and Carroll draws attention to implications such as the pace of the change, the 
activities involved, the decision making in the process of the change, and the way the recipients react 
to the actions of others (Kreye, 2020). All of the above points towards the rather substantial 
responsibility a change manager (or managers in general tasked with operating the change) has in a 
change environment. 
 
2.5 KPMG 
 
KPMG, a network of firms in 147 countries operating within 3 lines of services; financial audit, tax 
and advisory, has sustainability high on their agenda when it comes to the many leaders they advise. 
In KPMG's Survey of Sustainability Reporting 2020 corporate trends within every aspect of 
sustainability is assessed. Related to UN's SDG's the study shows that the influence of the goals on 
corporate reporting has increased significantly from 2017 to 2020. The assessment includes the study 
of 3,983 N100 companies as well as 239 G250 companies, each showing a growth in region of 30 
percent in terms of involving SDGs in their business activities(Impact, 2020). 
 
==PAGE:26==
Page 17 of 80 
 
2.5.1 Lack of transparency 
 
While the increase in interest in SDG within the big companies around the companies are and have 
been increasing since the launch, KPMG's research also highlights negativities related to this. Namely 
that SDG reporting in its current state around the world is unbalanced and is often disconnected from 
business goals(Impact, 2020). 
A study of 2,745 N100 companies and 172 G250 companies showed that the vast majority report in 
a one-sided manner. 86 and 90 percent, respectively, only report on positive impacts of their SDG 
implementation, whereas the rest have approached the reporting more balanced, focusing on both 
positive and negative impacts. As stated by the Global Head of KPMG IMPACT and Global Head of 
Infrastructure, Richard Threlfall, balancing the reporting is important for companies, as it shows their 
awareness of the impact on global problems and how they contribute in solving these. Balancing 
between both positive and negative impacts improves transparency and builds trust between the 
company and its stakeholders, as well as the public(Impact, 2020). Focusing only on the positive also 
invites accusations of so-called "SDG washing", a term used for the practice of using SDGs to create 
positive PR over engaging in actual change. As a part of this engagement companies need to deliver 
clear SDG-related KPIs and monitor progress made on these, both positive and negative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
Page 18 of 80 
 
3. Methodology 
 
The aim of this study is to assess and analyze the effort of danish-based companies to accommodate 
and document their ways of implementing SDGs, more specifically SDG 3 and 8, into their corporate 
strategy. The following sections concern the approach chosen to research this topic. Firstly, how the 
choice of qualitative research will be outlined, followed by the methods used to gather and analyze 
the data. 
3.1 
Research 
Method 
 
In social sciences the two main methods of research are qualitative and quantitative. To outline the 
thought-process of choosing a research method both methods will be briefly discussed in the 
following section. 
3.1.1 Qualitative or Quantitative 
Each method investigates and explores a research question differently. While quantitative methods 
provide an objective measure of reality, the qualitative method allows (Williams, 2007). Qualitative 
research focuses on "what" and "why" of a social phenomenon and relies on direct experiences with 
individuals to make sense of the subject happening in their everyday lives. In qualitative research one 
makes use of various approaches such as biography, case study, historical analysis, discourse analysis, 
ethnography, grounded theory and phenomenology (Ahmad et al., 2019). Quantitative research, on 
the other hand, is based on numeric values and studies psychological social and economic aspects 
through assessing patterns in numbers (Ahmad et al., 2019). Quantitative methods include the 
gathering of a range of numeric data, which enables the researcher to conduct statistical analysis to 
obtain a precise understanding of the phenomenon. All in all, qualitative research provides insights 
and understanding of a problematic setting, while quantitative research quantifies the problem by the 
means of natural sciences, producing numerical data. The choice of research methodology mainly 
depends on the research question at hand. As the nature of this study concerns the exploration of a 
topic and related aspects rather than the assessment of the phenomenon using numerical values, the 
most suitable option is leaning towards the qualitative method.  
 
==PAGE:28==
Page 19 of 80 
 
3.1.2 Designing the study 
In order to properly set up the study the model proposed by Joseph A. Maxwell, the Interactive Model 
of Research Design, was used as the structural backbone (Maxwell, 2016). The model itself covers 5 
important aspects related to realization and execution of a qualitative study. 
 
Figure 5: Interactive Model of Research Design (Maxwell, 2016) 
 
The 5 aspects are presented with underlying questions with the aim of guiding the design phase of 
developing a qualitative, such are listed in Appendix E. 
 
3.1.3 Credibility 
No matter the choice of research method, it should always be accompanied by considerations 
regarding reliability and validity of the data. As covered above, the research method most suitable for 
this study is qualitative, whereas the focus will be put solely on the credibility of that. As mentioned, 
the two main concepts in the discussion of credibility of any study are reliability and validity (also 
part of the Interactive Model of Research Design, is described above). As stated by Hammersley, 
reliability "refers to the degree of consistency with which instances are assigned to the same category 
by different observers or by the same observer on different occasions.”(Silverman, 2014). This relates 
to aspects of the replicability of the study, should it be researched by others. The reliability of this 
study had great priority due to its very nature and need of transparency for later use. Moisander and 
Valtonen (2006)(Silverman, 2014) suggest two approaches to meet criteria of reliability: 
==PAGE:29==
Page 20 of 80 
 
1. By making the research process transparent through describing out research strategy and 
data analysis methods in a sufficient detailed manner in the research report(Silverman, 2014) 
2. Paying attention to "theoretical transparency" by making explicit the theoretical stance from 
which the interpretation takes place and showing how this produces interpretations and 
excludes others(Silverman, 2014) 
An effort was made throughout this qualitative research to meet the criteria of reliability using these 
two approaches, making the study as a whole as transparent as possible. Validity, which is also a key 
aspect of Figure 5: Interactive Model of Research Design (Maxwell, 2016) refers directly to how 
valid the data collected is. Furthermore, it relates the accuracy of the method in terms of how it 
measures its intended purpose. Achieving validity therefore comes in the choice and use of methods, 
which will be described in the following sections. 
3.2 Data Gathering 
 
In order to obtain the data needed to answer the research questions as presented earlier, a suitable 
method has to be chosen. The following subsection addresses the reason behind choosing personal 
and semi-structured interviews and how they were executed.  
The reasoning behind the choice of method for the data collection lies in the nature of the research 
question and the study. As mentioned before, the topic at hand is relatively undiscovered, and it seems 
that the flexibility aspect found in the semi-structure approach, as opposed to the structured approach, 
could be beneficial as it allows for a more free-flowing interview with possible unpredictable findings 
occurring (Jong & Jung, 2015). 
To cover what was deemed necessary to answer the research questions in full, two interview layouts 
were created, where one was targeted at experts (i.e people with expert knowledge in the field) and 
another was targeted at specific companies associated with SDG 3 and/or 8. RQ1 focusses on a more 
general understanding of why companies operate within SDG 3 & 8, whereby expert knowledge was 
needed. RQ2 aims to dive deeper into companies using the goals and how individuals inside 
companies view the goals and how the specific company assesses them. All in all, the approach can 
be described as an external (RQ1), looking at views from outside the companies, and internal (RQ1) 
assessing the initiatives of the specific companies.  
==PAGE:30==
Page 21 of 80 
 
3.2.1 The Interview 
Ahead of structuring the interview extensive research had to take place to create an understanding of 
what was already out there. Theories and developed methods in incorporating SDGs into strategies 
and reporting on them were studied thoroughly. This background study laid the foundation for the 
interview as a whole and the structure of the questions. The process of the interview conducted with 
either experts or a company is outlined in the following table. 
 
 
Expert Interview 
Company interview 
Established 
Both expert and company interviews were established through 
email request with the specific individual 
Preparation 
Each interviewee was 
researched, whereby a basic 
understanding of what to 
emphasize upon was 
established 
The interview-company was 
researched to develop an 
understanding of how  
Interview guide 
Semi-structured approach with 
open-ended questions 
Semi-structured approach with 
open-ended questions (altered 
from the expert-guide) 
Setting 
Online Meeting 
Language 
English (danish only used in explanatory circumstances) 
Recording/Transcript 
All interviews were recorded, with consent from the 
interviewee. Recording was used to create a transcript for 
further analysis. To transcript the interview, the software from 
otter.ai was utilized. 
Interview Opening 
The study was introduced with the purpose of the interview, 
followed by an introduction made by the interviewee 
Table 4: Interview information 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Page 22 of 80 
 
3.2.2 Interviewee Characteristics 
 
In the following, the characteristics of the interviewed will be outlined to get an understanding of 
why these individuals were chosen. The initial data collected was obtained through the semi-
structured interview guide as described in previous section, but to grasp the knowledge of the 
individuals most sufficiently the layout was altered slightly, to accommodate for prior information 
on background of the individuals as well as general perception of what kind of information they could 
provide. Firstly, the expert interviewees will be covered, followed by the company interviewees 
chosen.  
Interviewee 
Representing 
Position 
Expertise 
Date & Location 
Signe Tønnesen 
Interviewee no. 1 
Danish 
Association of 
Managers and 
Executives 
(DAME) 
Chief consultant 
Extensive 
experience in the 
field and general 
knowledge of the 
aspects of the 
leader-side 
03-03-2021  
MS Teams 
Camilla 
Engelshardt 
Interviewee no. 2 
Danish 
Association of 
Manager and 
Executives 
(DAME) 
Executive 
Director for 
Leadership 
Different aspects 
of sustainable 
leadership and 
the 
communication 
of that. 
19-03-2021 
MS Teams 
Thomas Ravn-
Pedersen 
Interviewee no. 3 
World's best 
news 
CEO and editor 
in chief 
Independent 
media producing 
constructive 
journalism. 
Danish platform 
for 
communicating 
the SDGs 
 
19-03-2021 
MS Teams 
==PAGE:32==
Page 23 of 80 
 
Nina Hedegaard 
Interviewee no. 4 
Danish Trade 
Union 
Confederation 
Senior policy 
advisor of 
occupational 
health and safety 
Extensive 
experience in the 
field and general 
knowledge of the 
aspects of the 
employee-side 
13-04-2021 
MS Teams 
Table 5: Expert Interviewees 
 
Interviewee 
Representing 
Position 
Date & Location 
Trine Nørgaard 
Interviewee no. 5 
 
Jyske Bank 
Chief consultant 
03-03-2021  
MS Teams 
Helle Søholt 
Interviewee no. 6 
Gehl 
CEO and founding 
partner 
05-05-2021 
MS Teams 
Christina Bastius 
Thomsen 
Interviewee no. 7 
Better Collective 
Head of Investor 
Relations & CSR 
14-05-2021 
Email 
Table 6: Company Interviewees 
The interview guides for each interview type are showcased in Appendix C and Appendix D. The 
following section outlines the method used in analysis of collected data. 
 
3.3 Analysis: Qualitative Data Analysis 
 
After conducting a series of interviews, they were transcribed in order to be used for subsequent 
analysis. Mayring (2000) suggests a suitable method to be used for the analysis-portion of this study, 
namely the qualitative content analysis. The following sections describe the method and the use of it 
to analyze collected data (Mayring, 2000). 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
Page 24 of 80 
 
3.3.1 Qualitative content analysis 
 
QCA is a method used with either qualitative or quantitative data and in an inductive or deductive 
way. The choice of inductive or deductive approach should be determined by the nature of the study. 
If information on the topic is generally lacking, the inductive approach is recommended (Elo & 
Kyngäs, 2008). If the structure of analysis is based on previous knowledge and the purpose of the 
study is to test theory, the deductive approach is recommended (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008). Reflecting on 
the nature of this study and the general lack of availability of justified theories and methods on 
performance and perception of SDG implementation into corporate strategy, the most suitable 
approach seems to be the inductive approach. The approach, derived from Elo & Kyngas (2008) work 
can be seen highlighted on the left side in Appendix F. While the underlying information of the 
concepts in question are provided through the work done by ex. the UN, the very specifics that is this 
study has limited availability when it comes to material, even more so with a specific focus on SDG 
3 and 8. The following graphic presents both described approaches. Following will outline the steps 
of the analysis following the designation of suitable approach.  
 
3.3.2 Structuring the data. 
 
To structure the data most efficiently the process was mapped into several stages. The stage of the 
procedure is showcased below.  
Figure 6: Data Structuring (Attia, 2020) 
 
==PAGE:34==
Page 25 of 80 
 
The steps as presented will be used as the structure of both parts of the analysis and coupled in the 
end of the analysis with the aim of answering the overall purpose of this study. 
Following the methodology of Inductive Content Analysis, as covered in the Methodology chapter  
(3.3.1 Qualitative content analysis) and the data structuring process as presented before, the data was 
assessed and fragmented based on the topic of the content. From initially assessing the four expert 
interviews, using open coding, a large number of topics were discovered, where some topics naturally 
overlapped across the interviews due to the choice of interview structure, semi-structured. After this 
the topics were grouped according to similarities in the content of the topic and lastly formulated into 
a general description of the assessed. An illustration of the procedure can be found in Appendix G. 
The topics on the left in the illustration are purely inductive and derived from the transcripts upon 
first readthrough and understanding of the context of certain areas within the interviewee answers. 
The initial topics were then grouped (second box) based on contextual meaning and relating back to 
the overall research question for this phase of the analysis. 
● What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
Following this initial familiarization procedure, the interview transcripts were uploaded to ATLAS.ti 
for the second grouping phase, based on the initial grouping. As this process was still part of the 
familiarization step, new codes were found due to more familiarization with the text at hand. The 
following table showcases the 14 codes found when assessing the interviews again, number of notes 
in each interview (column total) as well as overall number of note appearances across all interviews 
(row totals). The table can be found in Appendix H. Following the same procedure as of RQ1, the 
company interviews were analyzed in terms of the topics found prior to that whereas a similar table 
was constructed Appendix I. To best compare the generated tables and its contents, they were 
recompiled into tables containing the occurrences of each identified topic across each of the two 
interview types (i.e expert & company) representing the two research questions accordingly. The 
result of doing so can be seen in Appendix J and Appendix K. The numeric distributions as seen on 
the tables presented, gives an indication of where the focus lies both with experts in the field and 
companies associating themselves with the goals. The distributions will be used in the actual content 
analysis in the following chapter. 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page 26 of 80 
 
4. Analysis 
In the following sections the findings from the conducted interviews will be presented and analyzed. 
The aim of the analysis is based on the overall purpose of this study, i.e the research questions. This 
means that the analysis will try to identify the performance and perception of SDG implementation 
into corporate strategy, with a focus on SDG 3 & 8. The analysis is structured to identify patterns in 
the collected data from each of the 4 expert interviews. The analysis will go through each identified 
code, with the purpose building arguments through claims to answer to RQ1, 
● What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
Subsequently, a similar procedure will be done with the data collected from the 3 company interviews. 
The purpose of the procedure is to build arguments through claims to answer to RQ2, 
● How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with SDGs, with a specific focus 
on the implementation of SDG 3 \& 8 into corporate strategy? 
 
4.3 RQ1 
 
4.3.1 General Perception 
 
Throughout the conducted interviews the interviewees had different perceptions on how to define 
SDG 3 & 8 stemming from their professional background and personal opinions on the subject at 
hand. In the structuring of the data, these perceptions were marked with the “General Perception”-
code, to mark out a certain viewpoint on the two goals. All interviewees were asked in the beginning 
of each interview what their professional opinion was on each of the goals and what the important 
aspects were in their opinion. 
I think that the SDGs three and eight are relevant for every company, because it refers 
to their existence as organizations, their employers, their employees, and so on. So, three and eight 
are relevant for all businesses  (1, 2021). 
==PAGE:36==
Page 27 of 80 
 
From assessing the gathered answers on how the specific SDGs are perceived amongst the 
represented experts, all four seem to agree that SDG 3 & 8 are both important and relevant for all 
businesses, regardless of industry or incentives in general. 
…everything that has to do with health and well-being is something that you leave up 
to the HR department, right? Yes. And some of the biggest corporations, you know, are better at 
incorporating HR into business strategy… But it is still by some companies perceived as something 
that HR is handling and thereby it is not perceived as hardcore business. And if you want to be in 
hardcore business, then you stay out of HR. That is one of the misperceptions that are there  (2, 2021). 
Furthermore, as stated by expert 2, a rather reoccurring aspect of how the goal is perceived in the 
companies as seen from the expert’s point of view and not so much how the experts perceive the 
goals themselves, was the aspect of how the companies chose to prioritize the focus internally. 
Whereas some companies might incline to communicate their internal focus as highly prioritized, the 
general perception of the SDG prioritization inside companies, as seen from a majority of the experts 
are that corporates tend to “put it to the side”, and that is what expert 2 indicates by stating “…it's still 
by some companies perceived as something that HR is handling and thereby it's not perceived as 
hardcore business”.  
I think generally those are two goals with good health and well-being and decent work and economic 
growth. Some could call them some superior strategic goals, which are pointing out a direction of 
how to do business in a good way. So, there are two goals, which reinform and reemphasize for 
business owners or boards that to have a business is not just about making profit, but that you as a 
business is part of a society, that you have a responsibility towards your employees  (3, 2021). 
Here, expert interviewee 3 argues that SDG 3 & 8 are overarching goals that are a necessity for 
companies to operate as a good business. The statement “there are two goals, which reinform and 
reemphasize for business owners or boards that to have a business is not just about making profit.” 
relates directly to how many companies developed value propositions, namely, to generate monetary 
value. This is not to be seen as a bad approach by companies, but as expert 3 argues, if the focus 
within the organization is solely on creating monetary values and delivering such numbers, there is a 
tendency that the corporate responsibility a company has towards its employees might be of lower 
prioritization.  
==PAGE:37==
Page 28 of 80 
 
Another and very important perception of the goals, as seen from expert 3, is the fact that these two 
goals can be defined as superior strategic goals. The interviewee hereby indicates that, on one hand, 
the goals are a pathway for companies to achieve what can be perceived as “good business” and on 
the other hand, this statement also indicates that in order for the companies to achieve the label of 
“good business” some might need to shift the focus from making numbers to caring about employees 
and being responsible for part the business might have in a given societal setting. 
Well, if you look at occupational health and safety, no company can say that it is not 
relevant for their business. So, I think it's a matter of what  (4, 2021). 
Expert interviewee 4, who primarily focuses on the occupational health and safety of employees in 
danish companies, naturally has a different take on some aspects of this study. In terms of how expert 
interviewee 4 perceives the two goals, it is very aligning with what was argued by expert interviewee 
1. Expert interviewee 4 argues that the two goals are relevant for all companies, and that no company 
can distance themselves from work with the focus-points of the two goals. And in relation to that, the 
question is not so much if the companies can relate to the goals, but more so how they can: “So I think 
it's a matter of what.” 
4.3.1.1 Claim 1 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived amongst the expert interviewees the following 
perceptions can be derived: 
1. Relevant for all companies 
2. Still perceived as “something HR handles” 
3. Can be seen as superior strategic goals to point towards how to do “good business”. 
4. A way for companies to emphasize societal responsibilities instead of only focusing on profit. 
 
4.3.2 Corporate Strategy 
 
Following my interview guide the focus was then put on how the interviewees saw the connection 
between corporate strategy and SDG 3 & 8. 
 
…And furthermore, we also stress that it's important, if you want to work with three and eight, 
you need to think of it as a part of your business strategy as well. You can't just  say, "Well, I'm 
==PAGE:38==
Page 29 of 80 
 
working with stress because it's a good thing to work with stress", you  need to say we're working 
with stress, because it's good for the employees, and it's good  for business (1, 2021). 
Here expert Interviewee states that if you, as a company, want to associate yourselves with the goals 
and be successful in doing so, the goals must be embedded in core business strategy of the company 
and the communication of whatever initiative you are making to emphasize the goals has to express 
how the work with the goals impacts business and the employees of the given company. 
… But there are other tasks, and there's priorities in the organization. And there’s also 
a perception in the organization about what is important for you, as a manager to deal with. If the 
incentive in the organization points another direction, than well-being, you will focus on the direction 
the incentives are pointing. So, if you as a manager need to target performance, you need to target 
some specific need to meet some specific goals. You cannot focus that much on well-being. So, it is a 
question of the incentives in the company  (1, 2021). 
The statement above carries on from what was stated by expert interviewee 1 in terms of the 
implementation of the goals into corporate strategy. Here expert interviewee 1 argues that certain 
corporate incentives can have an impact on how well the goals are implemented into a business 
strategy of a given company. The argument is that if the incentive of a company only caters towards 
bringing in monetary value, the managers of the company will follow these incentives and focus less 
on how to incorporate and work with the goals to improve on areas such as employee well-being. 
I believe and “Lederne” as an organization believes that leaders are the main source 
of providing health and well-being in jobs. We are the ones heading up the cultural work, and 
basically a lot of stuff that is related to health and the well-being in your work has roots in the culture, 
cultural part. So, I believe that we are the umami of that work, you could say  (2, 2021). 
Expert interviewee 2 argues similarly to expert interviewee 1 just covered, which can be seen in the 
above statement arguing that leaders/managers are the “unami” of health and well-being in 
organization. Expert Interviewee 2 thereby means that the leaders themselves are the advocates of the 
actual implementation of initiatives to target employee health and well-being and are thereby the ones 
responsible for ensuring employee participation in initiative targeting the SDGs. 
I think generally those two goals with good health and well-being and decent work and 
economic growth. Some could call them some superior strategic goals, which are pointing out a 
direction of how to do business in a good way. So, they are two goals, which reinform and 
==PAGE:39==
Page 30 of 80 
 
reemphasize for business owners or boards that to have a business is not just about making profit, 
but that you as a business are part of a society  (3, 2021). 
Here Expert Interviewee 3 states the perception that SDG 3 & 8 are superior goals “which reinform 
and reemphasize for business owners or boards that to have a business is not just about making profit, 
but that you as a business are part of a society” With this statement expert interviewee 3 views 
sustainability in its 3 defining elements; environment, economic and social, and more specifically 
emphasizes the social aspect. 
But what I can say is that we work with a we have been working with for, for decades, 
when we talk about occupational health and safety, that's to get the work that companies do on 
occupational safety, get that out from like, being something, you do on the side. So, if you are here 
you have the main strategy of the company. And here you have occupational health and safety. So 
that is just something you do sort of on the side, that has to be okay. But what we really want to see, 
and we agree with the employers on this, but this is just very difficult, we would like to see that it's 
part of the company's strategy  (4, 2021). 
Interviewee 4 argues similarly to that of interviewee 1, where the main focus of this statement is that 
the SDGs have to be included in the overarching company strategy, and the tendency, as argued by 
interviewee 4, is that this is wanted by the employees as well, as it will become a central part of how 
the business is run and thereby included more on the shop-floor level resulting in an increase in 
participation from the employee-side in a given initiative.  
 
4.3.2.1 Claim 2 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived in relation to corporate strategy amongst the 
expert interviewees the following perceptions can be derived: 
1. Must be integrated in the core business strategy. 
a. If it becomes an integral part of how the business is run (shop-floor level), employees 
will most likely be more engaged. 
2. Communication must be transparent. 
3. The corporate incentives must align and point towards sustainability. 
4. Leaders are the catalysts in sustainable transformation. 
==PAGE:40==
Page 31 of 80 
 
5. The work with SDG 3 & 8 must be a main concern of a company and not “on the side”. 
 
4.3.3 Internal vs. External 
 
In the expert interviews there was a large emphasis on obtaining the perception of where to focus in 
with the SDGs lies within the company. As some companies have a broader impact than others and 
rely on external factors, it would be interesting to find out how experts view this sort of thinking. The 
following statements are a product of a question and discussion with the expert interviewees on that 
exact topic. 
So, for all companies, it's internally interesting. And for many, it's also interesting in 
terms of subcontractors and clients as a means of branding themselves as good companies  (1, 2021). 
Interviewee 1 states that all companies can assess SDG 3 & 8 internally, as it concerns their employees 
and workspace etc. And for many, those with a broader spectrum of impact, could also target the 
SDGs externally with vendors, subcontractors, clients etc., as a “means of branding themselves as 
good companies.”  
But I think that's a development in that it's a maturity question, right? You start here, 
you start your journey on this transformation. And you start internally and then you start by what you 
can see just in front of you and then you move on towards your external vendors. And I actually do 
believe that in the coming few years, we will see a massive change towards that. I believe that most 
companies are at that stage now  (2, 2021). 
The answer made by interviewee 2 brought up an interesting aspect, which relates to many parts of 
the work with the SDGs in a corporate setting. Interviewee 2 emphasizes the aspect of maturity, which 
is in this case used as a definition for the “journey” of implementing SDGs into corporate strategy. 
The maturity aspect of this process, as argued by interviewee 2, is that the transformation starts 
internally, with “what you can see just in front of you”, i.e employees or work processes, and as the 
company grows more mature in that work, the focus can then shift to external stakeholders.  
And again, I’m thinking about the SDGs being so broad, if you look at all of them, you 
can always find an SDG you can work with that will fit your company strategy. I really think you can 
because you can work with them internally, you can work with them externally with the  external 
==PAGE:41==
Page 32 of 80 
 
focus with your stakeholders and it can be with your workers it can. So there's a  lot of opportunities  
(4, 2021). 
4.3.3.1 Claim 3 
 
From the assessment of how the internal vs. external focus of companies are perceived amongst the 
expert interviewees the following perceptions can be derived: 
1. Internally interesting for all 
2. A question of maturity – all companies can start internally and move external. 
a. external focus can be used for branding and establishing relations with external 
stakeholders. 
 
 
4.3.4 KPI 
 
A big part in the overall work with the goals consists of reporting on KPIs set by the company 
themselves. The KPIs often relate to a specific sub-goal of an SDG, but the main goal is to set up 
KPIs touching the areas of the specific SDG a company wants to identify themselves with and doing 
so the proper way. The following statements cover the perceptions of the expert interviewee in terms 
of how they see the development of KPIs in corporate settings. 
 
So, the big problem is that the top management needs quantified data. And the way you 
get it is not very good. It's not evidence-based, because there’s so much bias. So it's a big dilemma, I 
think that it would be better if you try to develop some KPIs where you could, for instance, which 
activities have been made in, in this and this and this team, or this area of the business, and so on. 
And how many participated? And what are their view on the quality of this activity, and are the  
activity specifically aimed at solving a specific problem that we as employees experience,  so I think 
that it would be good if you could develop some other ways of measuring  of making KPIs, which is 
more activity based and more quality based  (1, 2021). 
Expert Interviewee 1 outlines a need for a more quality-based way of making KPIs. To achieve such, 
the general approach to how the KPIs are perceived and developed must change, according to Expert 
Interviewee 1. While the traditional way of developing KPIs has been in terms of quantifiable 
==PAGE:42==
Page 33 of 80 
 
measures, the focus should instead be put on the quality of the initiative and how it is perceived by 
its recipient, i.e the employees. 
I think in essence, one of the things providing the biggest barriers is the inability to go 
from one type of KPIs towards another type of KPIs. And that is exactly the quantitative versus the 
qualitative KPIs. I love quantitative KPIs. I love having an Excel sheet and you're not, you know, like 
two plus two equals four. But, having said that, I believe that we still lack the framework, which I call 
This is my own invention, the heart and the brain framework towards  sustainable change. And why 
is that? Why do we still lack that  (2, 2021)? 
Expert Interviewee 2 touches upon a topic as Expert interviewee 1, namely the aspect of quantitative 
vs. qualitative KPIs. According to Expert Interviewee 2, this aspect has proven itself a barrier for 
companies. 
it's good to put up these KPIs, but you need to do it in a public way, transparent and 
honest. Because otherwise, people will not trust you, if you just keep them like that. I think that is, in 
itself, actually a good exercise with the SDGs, where they, where they invite you to think maybe 
differently and more in a societal relation also, when it comes to your KPIs  (3, 2021). 
Expert Interviewee 3 states the importance of being transparent in the reporting of KPIs. According 
to Expert Interviewee 3 this is opportunity for companies to develop trust with their stakeholders. 
Furthermore, Expert Interviewee 3 states that working with the SDGs, companies can restructure and 
re-emphasize their KPIs and possibly put more emphasis on being a provider of “Decent Work”, as 
an example. 
It's a real danger that you don't focus on the most important things because they're 
harder to quantify. Like, for example, you say, what, what do we want to measure, we will measure 
the accidents, because that's easier. You have the numbers every year, and you even have all the 
numbers of the people dying in work, so the fatal accident, so that's easy, but to quantify, whereas as 
stress prevention, or mental health, the work or your  psychosocial risks, that's harder. And it's harder 
to, it's harder to quantify. But it's more qualitative, but it doesn't make it more or less important  (4, 
2021). 
Expert Interviewee 4 highlights the “danger” of not focusing on the “important things” due to 
implications in terms quantifying such. As an example, Expert Interviewee 4 the easily accessible 
==PAGE:43==
Page 34 of 80 
 
numbers in companies by way of accidents but stresses the implications of quantifying stress 
prevention or mental health in general, making the reporting more qualitative. 
 
4.3.4.1 Claim 4 
 
1. The general perception on how to develop KPIs for SDGs must change to accommodate for 
more qualitative aspects of a given initiative. 
2. Reporting on KPIs must be done transparently to strengthen the relationship with 
stakeholders. 
3. Companies must dig deeper and emphasize the development of KPIs on more qualitative 
measures, instead of measuring the “easily” obtained quantitative measures. 
 
4.3.5 Transparency 
 
Transparency is a big factor when working with the SDGs and serves a particular influence when it 
comes to working with SDG 3 & 8. The transparency element when working with these specific goals 
are related to how stakeholders perceive the initiatives by the companies.  
And I think that many companies will not start letting out their KPIs on these SDGs, 
before they have it under control. They will not report major problems. So, I think it's a process where 
the companies start working with the problems and the challenges and try to get hold of it and try to 
make it better. And then when they think we reach a level where we can be transparent about it, then 
they can start using it externally. But I think it's totally fair that in the beginning, they don't, they're 
not transparent, because it could be devastating for the business  (1, 2021). 
A big part of transparency in this context relates to the actual reporting of the work done with the 
SDGs. Transparency, as argued by Interviewee 1, is a matter of maturity. Interviewee 1 states that no 
company reports on negatives related to their work with the SDG, until they get a hold of it. 
I think that is a very fine way, though, it's good to put up these KPIs, but you need to do 
it in a public way, transparent and honest. Because otherwise, people will not trust you, if you just 
keep them like that. I think that is, in itself, actually a good exercise with the SDGs, where they, where 
they invite you to think maybe differently and more in a societal relation also, when it comes to your 
KPIs  (3, 2021). 
==PAGE:44==
Page 35 of 80 
 
The statement above made by interviewee 3 points out the importance of being public about the work 
with the SDGs. Furthermore, it stresses that the SDGs are a great opportunity for the companies to 
assess different aspects then usual and focus more on their impact on a societal level, in the reporting 
of the SDGs. 
Well, I think it's, it's, it's always a problem, if you do something to keep somebody else 
happy. And it does not really change anything. Of course, that is always a problem. But in case it 
does change something, and it does change it for the better. For example, for the workers. That is the 
main thing, does it change something, and then you can also use it, of course as PR. And that is, I 
think that's okay  (4, 2021). 
An essential part of being transparent is of course to emphasize a change for the better. This is exactly 
what interviewee 4 touches upon, arguing that if the change does something, for example, for the 
workers, then it can and should be used as PR. 
4.3.5.1 Claim 5 
 
From the assessment of how the term transparency in this regard is perceived amongst the expert 
interviewees the following can be derived: 
1. Many companies choose to keep information to themselves, until they can control it. 
a. Media-pressure, fear of backlash. 
2. Reporting on KPIs must be done transparently. 
a. If not, no trust will be built between stakeholders. 
3. Working with SDG 3 & 8 is a good tool for companies to focus more on their societal 
responsibility. 
 
4.3.6 Maturity 
 
The maturity question has already been a used aspect in the assessment of various elements of this 
assessment as it is connected to quite a few discussion points regarding working with the SDGs. When 
asking the interviewee about internal vs. external focus, the maturity question came up on several 
occasions.  
==PAGE:45==
Page 36 of 80 
 
But I think that's a development in that it's a maturity question, right? You start here, 
you start your journey on this transformation. And you start internally and then you start by what you 
can see just in front of you and then you move on towards your external vendors. And I do believe 
that in the coming few years, we will see a massive change towards that. I believe that most companies 
are at that stage now  (2, 2021). 
The statement above has been presented before in this analysis, as it covers the connection between 
the aspects of focusing internally or externally in terms of the SDGs and the maturity aspect. To some 
companies the focus is a matter of maturing in terms of working with the goals, as some might not 
have the required resources (expertise, monetary) to reach external stakeholders, whereby it would 
be more reasonable to start with what is closest, i.e., the employees. 
And I think it would be good if we start talking more about sustainability in the context of the three 
elements in sustainability, that is environmental, economic, and social. So especially the social part 
is important here. Because if you do that, no company can say it is not relevant. So, they can just 
focus on eight and three, because it's their own workers and if you have workers then you can work 
on that  (4, 2021). 
A different take on the maturity aspects relates to the overall thought-process going into the work 
with SDGs and general perception of goals. Interviewee 4 argues that sustainability should be seen 
in the context of three elements: environmental, economic, and social. A special focus should be put 
on the social aspect, as this relates to SDG 3 & 8. 
 
4.3.6.1 Claim 6 
 
From the assessment of how the term maturity was used amongst the expert interviewees the 
following can be derived: 
1. Working with the SDGs is a maturity process. 
a. Going from an internal focus to external 
2. Sustainability should be assessed in terms of all its three elements: Environmental, economic, 
and social. 
a. Social responsibility 
 
==PAGE:46==
Page 37 of 80 
 
4.3.7 Leaders  
 
…leaders are the umami of this change in any change. Now, we are talking about a 
sustainable transformation. But any change you have in a company, leaders are the umami, those 
that bring that forward  (2, 2021). 
With the focus of interviewee 2 being on leaders around danish companies, some answers are going 
to bring that aspect. When asked what they (LHO) tell companies they work what is important when 
going through a sustainable transformation, the focus by interviewee naturally gravitated towards 
leaders and their incentives. Interviewee argues that for an organization to undergo a successful 
sustainable transformation, the leaders must be a part of it – or more generally – the change can not 
happen without them.  
And that has not always been cherished on a societal level. So I think that being able to 
provide leaders with the sufficient development and the right tools, and you know, like, and also 
having leaders who have values that correlate with the values that you have in the company is also 
quite essential, I believe. So, I think that is the biggest tool you have as a company in any change-
agenda  (2, 2021). 
Carrying on from the previous statement of interviewee 2, the focus then shifted towards the 
connectivity between organizational values and personal values of leaders, where interviewee 2 
argues that there must be a match between company and personal values. Furthermore, for the leaders 
to initiate themselves with a sustainable transformation, they need backing from top-managers, 
whether it is middle-managers or top-managers responsible for the sustainable transformation, 
enough resources must be present, by way of tools and personal development. 
 
4.3.7.1 Claim 7 
 
From the assessment of what impact leaders of companies are perceived amongst the expert 
interviewees the following can be derived: 
1. Leaders are the centerpiece of any change. 
2. Leaders must have sufficient backing from superiors/boards to have the best prerequisites on 
an environment of sustainable transformation. 
==PAGE:47==
Page 38 of 80 
 
3. Values of company and leaders should correlate. 
 
4.3.8 Employees participation 
 
Yeah, well, I think a barrier would always be whether you are involved or not, if this 
happens in the main top management, that is something top management deals with  (4, 2021). 
With the focus of interviewee 2 being on leaders in companies, it was necessary to get the different 
side of the story as well. Interviewee 4 focuses on Occupational Health & Safety of employees in 
danish companies, which naturally impacted the answers. The questions were slightly altered to 
emphasize the collection of data of this narrative and when interviewee 4 was asked of barriers 
occurring in sustainable transformation such as the implementation of SDG 3 & 8, the focus naturally 
came to the employees. Interviewee 4 argues that the main barriers for employees in a setting of a 
sustainable transformation, is engagement. The argument is that the focus in the SDGs should be 
decentralized and in general be addressed more horizontally. 
That is always a huge barrier for workers, meaning participation. So, if you want to, 
involve workers also involve workers on where workers can be involved, like, if you're not part of 
work councils, if you're not part of the health and safety organization, it is difficult to contribute  (4, 
2021). 
Building upon previous statements the barriers a way of engaging employees is to involve where they 
can be involved, so this being the workflows, work environments, social activities etc.  
 
 
4.3.8.1 Claim 8 
 
From the assessment of how the employees within companies working with the SDGs are perceived 
amongst the expert interviewees the following can be derived: 
1. A barrier for employees is not participating. 
2. If the focus on the SDGs is solely at top management, the employees will not feel engaged. 
==PAGE:48==
Page 39 of 80 
 
3. If companies want to involve employees in a sustainable change, it must happen on the shop-
floor level. 
 
4.4 RQ2 
 
With the expert interviews done, and a basic understanding of the topic at hand was established, for 
the next step of the analysis, to answer different parts of the research questions, a number of 
companies who associate themselves with SDG 3 and/or 8 were contacted. As described in the 
methodology section, the approach was slightly different when targeting the companies as opposed 
to the experts as covered above. Here the focus was to get an understanding of views/perceptions of 
the goals inside the companies and the initiatives by the companies in meeting the goals. 
The companies contacted have, as mentioned above, a variation of association to SDG 3 and/or 8 and 
have different approaches between them. The companies to be assessed in the following are: 
● Company 1: SDG 3 & 8 
● Company 2: SDG 3 
● Company 3: SDG 8 
As can be seen by the distribution of how the SDGs are present in the chosen companies, one has 
identified themselves with both, whereas the two others have identified with one of the others. This 
approach was emphasized in the sourcing of companies to contact. Furthermore, an effort was also 
made to source companies of different industries. Within this sample the following industries are 
represented: 
● Banking 
● Urban Design 
● Gambling 
As mentioned, the approach by each company is slightly different as some focus on a more broad 
perspective of engaging in the goals, whereas others focus on the impact they can make internally. 
There will be extra focus on this aspect as this is a focus point in the assessment of the companies at 
hand.  
==PAGE:49==
Page 40 of 80 
 
The analysis will cover similar topics as found in the analysis on the expert interviews but with a 
more concise approach to target the specific areas of interest for this study. The questions were the 
same for all companies and can be seen below in Appendix D.  
 
4.4.1 General Perception 
 
Like the approach of the expert interviews, the company interviews were initiated by getting a know-
how of how the companies view the SDGs. To do so, the interviewees were asked what the most 
important aspects of the SDGs are as seen from the company: 
From an overall perspective, we have a vision that tells us that we want to act 
responsibly, and we want to promote sustainability…So the way we work with the SDGs, including 
three and eight, I would say is more as it's more of an indirect approach. Because we actually have 
our perspective starting point, if you may say that is that we want to be responsible, and we want to 
promote sustainability  (5, 2021). 
During the interview with Company 1, the interviewee was asked about their general perception of 
SDG 3 & 8 and was kind enough to share the illustration above. The illustration showcases the 
approach of Company 1 in terms of sustainable business. The lower portion highlights their target 
concerning responsible banking and what is most related to this study is the “responsible employer”. 
In the answer to the question the interviewee stated that Company 1 has chosen a slightly indirect 
approach, as they want to maintain the values of the organization and structure their initiatives 
according to their own values. 
It's a quite long process of engaging and as you say, it needs to be incorporated in both 
the company’s purpose and strategy at a very sort of overarching level, it also has to be incorporated 
in the way that the organization is organized. And, then it needs to be incorporated into the service 
and the delivery of how we work. And then finally, into sort of monitoring our own impact  (6, 2021). 
Company 2 interviewee argues that the work with SDG 3 & 8 is a “long process of engaging” and 
for it to succeed it must be present at a variety of levels within the organization. It must be present in 
the overarching organizational level, i.e., the strategic apex (top management, employing the overall 
strategy of the organization), the middle-line (middle managers communicating the strategy of the 
organization), and lastly in the operating core (workforce delivering the service or product). 
==PAGE:50==
Page 41 of 80 
 
Our starting point in 2019 was to identify the SDGs where we can make an impact, 
either through current activities or indirectly  (7, 2021). 
Company 3 interviewee states that their approach was to identify SDGs where they could make an 
impact, either from existing activities present within the organization or indirectly similarly to that of 
Company 1.  
4.4.1.1 Claim 9 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived amongst the company interviewees the 
following perceptions can be derived: 
Company 1: Want to be responsible (societal), had an indirect approach as company 
values aligned with the goals. 
Company 2: Believes that the goals should be present at the strategic apex going all 
the way from the organization to the operating core and support staff. 
Company 3: Similar approach to company 1, their starting was to assess which SDG 
they could impact, either through existing activities in the organization or indirectly 
 
4.4.2 Corporate Strategy 
 
From here the interviewees were asked how the company had managed the integration/incorporation 
of the SDGs into corporate strategy: 
…it's about making sure that you don't, that you don't create, you could say, a parallel 
organization, that sustainability should be part  of your base organization, not something you have, 
you can say on the side, but it has to  be part of (5, 2021). 
Interviewee 5 makes it clear that it is important when undergoing a sustainable transformation, to 
incorporate the sustainable, i.e., the SDGs, within the “base organization”, i.e., the company strategy. 
It is important not to create a parallel organization, in the sense of having the work with sustainability 
on the side, as it tends to get sidelined in terms of company values. 
It's a quite long process of engaging and as you say, it needs to be incorporated in both 
the company's purpose and strategy at a very sort of overarching level, it also has to be incorporated 
==PAGE:51==
Page 42 of 80 
 
in the way that the organization is organized. And, then it needs to be incorporated into the service 
and the delivery of how we work. And then finally, into sort of monitoring our own impact  (6, 2021). 
Company 2 agrees with the statement made by company 1 and takes it a step further, by stating that 
it should be embedded in several levels of the organization, all the way from corporate management 
to the delivery of products or services. 
SDG 8 is incorporated into our sustainability strategy which is rolled out through two 
comprehensive sustainability programs. Our “Better for Bettors” program is built to support our 
vision to empower gamers, while the “Better Community” program focuses on our surrounding 
communities, the environment, and our employees  (7, 2021). 
Company 3 has handled the incorporation of SDG 8 using two internal programs. “Better for Bettors” 
was created to support iGamers and “Better Community” to focus on surrounding communities, the 
environment, and their employees. Furthermore Company 3 states as part of their answer, that they 
have singled out 2 goals where they feel they can make the most impact.  
● 8.3: Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job 
creation, entrepreneurship, creativity, and innovation   
● 8.8: Protect labor rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers. 
Both goals relate directly to the initiatives within the two internal programs as described above. 
 
 
4.4.2.1 Claim 10 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived amongst the company interviewees the 
following perceptions can be derived: 
Company 1: Sees parallel organizations as the main threat and believes the SDGs must 
be incorporated in the “base” organization. 
Company 2: Like company 1, company 2 believes the SDGs should be present 
throughout the organization. 
Company 3: Developed two sustainability programs to target their initiatives. 
==PAGE:52==
Page 43 of 80 
 
4.4.3 Internal vs. External 
 
As covered in the analysis-part concerning the expert interviewees the internal vs. external focus is 
of utmost interest for this study. The aim of assessing this in relation to the three companies is to 
identify tendencies related to the actual employment in danish companies.  
“We also wish to increase our business volume within business. It could be loans or 
investments, but within areas where we are promoting sustainability, and we want to engage with our 
clients, for example, our corporate clients, because it is part of risk assessment as well. I mean, we 
also have to look at sustainability from the client perspective, are our clients going to have a viable 
business model going forward  (5, 2021)?” 
Company 1 has a clear plan when it comes to their targeting of external stakeholders. They have 
identified that their clients are a part of their risk assessment, meaning they will have promoted 
sustainability externally and ensure that their clients have a viable and sustainable business model 
going forwards.  
But I think we have a huge challenge in terms of measuring the impact we can have in 
the projects, and that is where we have a much greater opportunity to make the world a better place 
if you can say so. Because we are working with top municipalities, foundations, developers, 
corporations globally. And if we can get more people cycling, more people walking, more people 
using public transportation. If we can get more people engaged in public processes, If we can get 
more women and children access to play areas, and so forth, just to mention a few of the topics that 
we are working with, that's where we can have a huge impact. And we cannot measure that ourselves, 
we have to rely on our clients wanting to measure that, and actually wanting to go the extra mile to 
monitor that impact. And we have a few clients that are now engaging with us in those types of 
processes  (6, 2021). 
Company 2 has identified a big challenge in terms of their external stakeholders, and that if they can 
measure on those, they will be able to have a much bigger impact. Furthermore, they have identified 
that there must be a certain level of transparency between them and their stakeholder to achieve that. 
Cross functional CSR/sustainability task force setting KPIs and implementing initiatives… SDG 8 is 
incorporated into our sustainability strategy which is rolled out through two comprehensive 
sustainability programs. Our “Better for Bettors” program is built to  support our vision to empower 
==PAGE:53==
Page 44 of 80 
 
iGamers, while the “Better Community” program focuses  on our surrounding communities, the 
environment, and our employees  (7, 2021). 
Company 3 has what they call a “Cross functional CSR/sustainability task force” responsible for 
setting KPIs and implementing initiatives. Within this they have initiatives both internally and 
externally.  
4.4.3.1 Claim 11 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived amongst the company interviewees the 
following perceptions can be derived: 
Company 1: Are targeting clients in their work with SDG 3 & 8 as a product of their 
risk assessment. They engage their clients with the SDGs, as well as working with them 
internally. 
Company 2: Has identified the big impact they can possibly have externally and wish 
to broaden their engagement with external stakeholders in terms of monitoring that 
impact. 
Company 3: Has their focus both internally and externally as a product of the SDG 8 
sub-goals they are targeting. 
 
4.4.4 Organizational structure 
 
…we have a team now that is responsible for the overall agenda, we have a governance structure. 
So we report to a sustainability committee, where the CEO and the COO are both in the committee. 
And then subsequently we report to the supervisory board. And then we have some, you could say 
internal stakeholder groups, where we coordinate the work. So that structure is in place. And that 
has had an impact on the organization because we started out having sort of a more loosely defined 
program, but a program or project kind of signals that it is a time limited effort. And we do believe 
that sustainability is not time limited. It is just as important part of our base organization going 
forward as any other area, and it is going to stay, it's going to be about the way we do our business 
==PAGE:54==
Page 45 of 80 
 
going forward. It is not something extra and not time limited. So, in that sense, it has already had an 
impact on the organization  (5, 2021). 
The organizational structure of Company 1 has clearly been impacted in the work with the SDGs and 
they have identified a need to create an internal team tasked with the responsibility of their overall 
agenda.  
Yes, we have, as I mentioned, we set up the innovation team, which is basically a team  that is 
both a support team to the rest of the organization, supporting the organization  with different types 
of, of skill sets, but it's also an innovation team that drives new  types of projects set up to sort of be 
able to run a bit faster than then you could say the  traditional part of the organization where we are 
delivering more sort of traditional  services that we have developed over time  (6, 2021). 
Similarly, to Company 1, Company 2 has undergone a shift in their organizational structure in the 
work with the SDGs, sparking a new “innovation team”. 
And then after that, I quickly saw that we basically needed new competences and we needed to 
have a new set up to drive some of the innovation needed in these areas. So, we set up a cross 
organizational, what we called innovation team, for, for lack of a better word, but we basically made 
a new team and we also made a new management role. Chief Innovation Officer who became Part of 
our executive management team. And now this team is charged with sort of, I would say, uniquely 
catered innovation projects and exploring new partnerships and so forth in areas that are directly 
connected to some of the indicators within the SDGs that we are focusing on  (6, 2021). 
The innovation team is set up cross organizational tasked with the “uniquely catered innovation 
projects and exploring new partnerships and so forth in areas that are directly connected to some of 
the indicators within the SDGs that we are focusing on”, i.e., SDG 3 & 8. 
4.4.4.1 Claim 12 
 
From the assessment of how SDG 3 & 8 are perceived amongst the company interviewees the 
following perceptions can be derived: 
Company 1: Has gone from a more loosely defined sustainability program, to a more 
fixed one with internal stakeholder groups. 
==PAGE:55==
Page 46 of 80 
 
Company 2: Set up a separate “innovation team” tasked with innovation and the 
establishing of relations with external stakeholders. 
Company 3: Has not experienced a shift in the organizational structure of the company. 
==PAGE:56==
Page 47 of 80 
 
5. Discussion 
 
The purpose of this discussion is to carry on from the analysis presented above with the aim of 
assessing various aspects related to the answering of both research questions. The research questions 
are as follows: 
RQ1: What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus SDG 3 and 8? 
RQ2: How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with SDGs, with a specific focus 
on the implementation of SDG 3 \& 8 into corporate strategy? 
With the topic of SDG 3 & 8 in a corporate sense being a newer relation, the literature and generally 
theory surrounding it, is lacking. Due to that an attempt was made to focus the literature review on 
topics and theories related to what the goals stand for, related to corporate strategy. Looking at the 
two goals, Good Health & Well-being and Decent Work & Economic Growth, some aspects are more 
related to the business-side than others. Economic Growth is something every company emphasizes, 
and even more so these days, in a sustainable way. Accompanying Economic Growth and Decent 
Work is a different way of looking at business than what has been done previously and speaking to 
expert in this field, it becomes clear that more and more company are looking at sustainable business 
as a product of sustaining employees by way of ensuring Decent Work internally and thereby 
sustaining Economic Growth. Looking at Good Health and Well-being (SDG 3) on the other hand, 
corporate initiatives must go deeper than what was discussed regarding SDG 8. Here the main 
corporate concern is to secure the well-being of employees internally (and to some extent externally) 
and secure health and well-being in areas of which are impacted by their business.  
In relation to this, literature, and theories on well-being in a corporate setting was studied, targeting 
various relationships aspects of the setting might have to well-being at a workplace. A theoretical 
take on the relationship between performance and well-being suggest Sonnentag and Frese (2006) 
(Veldhoven & Peccei, n.d.) three perspectives, Individual, Situational and Performance Regulation. 
The three perspectives each highlight elements that should be emphasized by companies wanting to 
associate themselves with SDG 3, as it relates to general differences in personality or work abilities 
to form differences in performance (individual), which could either be emphasized in terms of the 
operating core (workforce) or the strategic apex (leaders). As stated by expert interviewee 2 “…any 
change you have in a company, leaders are the umami, those that bring that forward'' (2, 2021) relates 
==PAGE:57==
Page 48 of 80 
 
to the importance of leaders in a change situation, i.e sustainable transformation, and how the 
performance of such change is. Therefore, it is of great importance for companies to sustain the well-
being of their leaders (in all levels) as they are paramount in change. The situational looks at 
differences in performance as a function of situational and environmental factors, which relates to 
ensuring a proper workplace for employees to be able to perform. This applies to both SDG 3 & 8, as 
it targets economic growth in the sense of increasing performance by way of improving the work 
environment, which also elevates the decency of the work of employees, and the general well-being 
of the employees as a product of better ergonomics etc. Lastly, the third perspective, the performance 
regulation perspective, examines performance as a process that can be improved by breaking it down. 
This relates to corporate initiatives both internally and externally and is a necessity in the work with 
any SDG.  
As the organizational structure of a company is a main factor when it comes to how well it can operate 
in a change environment and adapt to the changes, literature and theories on related topics related to 
the organizational structure were studied. Upon studying such, a clear indication of what types of 
organizational structures that are most suited for undergoing a sustainable transformation. As was 
found during the analysis of the 7 interviews, there was a clear indication that organizations must 
adopt the SDGs in order to succeed. Furthermore, the SDGs have to hit the employees as well, and 
not be left at corporate or in another designated department. As emphasized several times by the 
interviewee, the SDGs must be a part of the organization as a whole and run from the strategic apex 
to the operating core. With that in mind, it can be argued that leaning towards horizontal 
decentralization can have its benefits in this regard and even more so the structure of Adhocracy as it 
emphasizes communication internally. 
In relation to well-being, a connection was made to organizational structure by way of organizational 
control. With the level of control having a direct impact on the employee internally, the type of 
organizational structure, which varies in terms of level of control, will have an impact on the well-
being of the employees. Such was argued in the ASSET model by Cooper & Marshall's (1976) (S. 
Cartwright & Cooper, 2008) where organizational structure was one of five main contributors to stress 
within employees.  
 
 
==PAGE:58==
Page 49 of 80 
 
5.1 RQ1: What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus 
on SDG 3 and 8? 
 
Regarding the general uptake of companies wrt. the SDGs in focus, the interest of the specific goals 
was discovered very early in this assessment. The section Investor's POV outlines this, as SDG 3 & 
8 are both valued the highest as seen by the investors point of view. This gives an indication of how 
valuable these specific areas of interest could become for companies, in fact all companies. As can 
be seen on the table Figure 1: Sketching the investment opportunity set of the 17 UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (Schramade, 2017), the argument for investment opportunities are as follows: 
● SDG 3: Many in the healthcare, staples and materials sectors 
● SDG 8: This applies to almost any viable business. 
Looking at the claims collected from assessing the general perception of SDG 3 & 8 as seen from the 
expert interviewees point of view, the statement made on SDG 8 by Schramade (2017) is agreed upon 
across all experts. Interesting w.r.t to the aspect of assessing the goals from an investor’s POV as 
claim 1.4:  
“A way for companies to emphasize societal responsibilities instead of only focusing on profit.”9 
While profit is almost always the main focus-point of an investor, an argument can be made that an 
investment purpose could undergo a shift towards emphasizing societal gains or at least balancing the 
focus of monetary gain with societal gains. Such progress would be visible inside companies as well, 
as to focus on “achieving numbers” for investors might be less of a concern, whereby the focus could 
and would, as a product of the shift, be more on societal responsibilities, both with internal and 
external initiatives. It must be noted that this must spark from change in core interest from most 
corporate minds. 
Claim 1.2, “Still perceived as “something HR handles” refers to a number of different aspects inside 
of a company. It can refer to the general perception by the company that it should be handled by HR. 
Alternatively it can relate to the organizational structure of the company, where some do not have the 
structure in place whereby it “lands” at HR. And lastly it can relate to the resources at a company’s 
disposal simply not being sufficient to allocate to workload relates to the handling of SDGs, whereby 
it surfaces at HR. 
==PAGE:59==
Page 50 of 80 
 
With regards to how the SDGs are seen in the context of corporate strategy according to the Expert 
Interviewees, it was clear that most interviewees agreed up-front with each other, meaning some 
interviewee did not touch the same subjects in their statements, but a connection can be across all 
claims made from the assessment of the statements. First, the consensus between all expert 
interviewees was that the SDGs have to embedded in the core business strategy and some of the 
expert interviewee argue (those who are more employee-centric in their line of work) that the 
incorporation of the SDGs must stretch throughout the organization, from the strategic apex, where 
the initiatives are most likely formed, to the operating core and the middle managers. Implementing 
SDGs, especially 3 and 8, call for a change environment. And for such an environment to be 
successful certain factors must align. Such is the one of focus points of the study by Miles and Snow 
(1984), and one of the characterizing factors of Open System Theory arguing that organizations must 
seek a balance between internal and external components (stakeholders) for the change to succeed. 
Success comes in many variations, and such is emphasized in Lewin’s Field Theory (Lewin, 1951) 
highlighting a different take on the pursuit for success. Lewin argues that it should be viewed as a 
process of continuous improvement and at the heart of that, one could argue is the leaders within the 
organization and as the work by Barnett and Carroll (1995) highlighting distinction of states and 
processes implies, the leaders have a great responsibility in this regard. 
 
Falling in line with what was discussed above, the interest in terms of where the companies put or 
should put their focus with regards to their stakeholders seemed interesting across all expert 
interviewees. The topic does in fact touch upon similar theories as covered in previous section, 
namely the Open System Theory and more specifically the aspect outlined the sought-after element 
of balancing internal and external components of a given system. This applies for this as well. As 
several expert interviewees agreed upon, SDG 3 & 8 are both internally interesting for all companies 
as it relates directly to how the business is run. A very interesting aspect in the relation was the 
question of maturity, corresponding to the process of a company moving from an internal focus to an 
external focus, as a means of getting more comfortable with the goals. The argument was that most 
companies can target SDG 3 & 8 internally without much complication, as it is easy to get data on 
what is “right in front of you”. What gets tricky is when companies must rely on external stakeholders 
to align themselves with the goals, whereby it becomes difficult for the companies to obtain as much 
area of impact as possible. This is where the aspect of balancing the internal and external focus comes 
in, as the importance of ensuring positive relation with both internal stakeholder and external 
==PAGE:60==
Page 51 of 80 
 
stakeholders is paramount to operate most efficiently within the goals, especially SDG 3 & 8. Adding 
to that, a statement was made by Expert Interviewee 2, believing that a lot of company are at that 
stage in the current, which relates back to the aspect of where companies find themselves in their 
engagements with the SDG, as described in the Background-section and outline on how to implement 
the SDGs (How to implement the SDGs, SDG's from a corporate perspective). 
When interviewing the expert with regards to KPIs, the main aspect attempted to capture was how 
the expert looked at quantitative and qualitative KPIs in terms of SDG 3 & 8. What was discovered 
in this context, was that the consensus leaned towards the need for a shift in how the goals and KPIs 
related to the goals are perceived in and around companies. The change should be to accommodate 
for a more qualitative aspect when developing KPIs. In relation to this, it was stated that in the process 
of emphasizing the incorporation of qualitative aspects into the KPIs, the companies must attempt to 
dig deeper and obtain data on the actual quality of a given initiative, instead of the more easily 
accessible quantitative data. Doing so also improves on the transparency on the reporting aspect, as 
it enables external stakeholders’ further insight into what is targeted with a given initiative inside a 
company and what the qualitative product of it is. The relationship between a company and its 
stakeholders was also a topic involved in this assessment, as it was stated during an interview that 
companies must emphasize on being transparent to strengthen the relations with stakeholders. 
Transparency has already been mentioned as a key element of this discussion, as it is a grey zone in 
the engagement with SDGs. The aspect, as covered in the previous discussion part on KPIs, of 
reporting transparently to enhance stakeholder relations can be difficult to some companies. Such is 
a product of two main things, the pressure from the media and the fear of backlash, where companies 
fail to be transparent, as argued by Expert Interviewee 1, is when work on SDGs are being kept behind 
closed doors until they are under control and ready to be showcased to the public. Showcasing 
immature performance within the goals can be devastating to companies, due to the pressure of the 
media (especially on companies in the spotlight). Alternatively, if the KPIs are anything but 
controlled, the reporting on them can give a major backlash and be devastating for the companies.  
Another interesting aspect when assessing the topic of transparency was the element of companies 
using the SDGs as a tool to focus more on their societal responsibility. Such is directly related to SDG 
3 & 8. Focusing more on societal responsibility can be a major opportunity for companies, as they 
will most likely become more likeable as a company and adding to that the companies also improve 
==PAGE:61==
Page 52 of 80 
 
on the transparency by way of assessing a broad way of thinking of their responsibility in their 
existence.  
Maturity has been covered in one regard in this discussion, in the context of companies moving from 
internal to external focus when working with SDGs. A different perspective to the question of 
maturity regarding SDG 3 & 8 relates to over assessment of sustainability. As argued by Expert 
Interviewee 4 sustainability, in the context of the SDGs, should be assessed in terms of its three 
defining elements: Environmental, economic and social. Whereas the environmental aspect has been 
covered for many years and many companies assess sustainability as a means of making the business 
more profitable, but what is perhaps missing and less talked about, to some extent, is the social aspect 
of sustainability, which directly correlates with SDG 3 & 8 (although economic growth is a main part 
of the economic aspects as well). If the media and the general vision of sustainability becomes more 
balanced and assessed in terms of its defining elements, then more companies will become aware and 
associate themselves with the SDG 3 & 8, as well as other SDGs in the People and Prosperity 
category.  
As previously discussed, leaders have an integral part in a change environment, but in order to become 
such, other aspects must align with it. First, as stated by Expert Interviewee 4, leaders must have the 
sufficient backing from the company board or superiors, to have the best prerequisites in a change 
environment. This relates to the overall incentives of the company and its strategy, because if the 
incentives point in the direction of something not related to sustainability and SDG-related, the 
leaders will not get enough support to operate most efficiently.  
Secondly, as also stated by Expert Interviewee 4, the values of a company and its leaders must 
correlate. If not the case, the incentives of both parties might end up pointing in different directions, 
sparking friction, and thereby affecting performance negatively. 
From the assessment of how the employees within companies working with the SDGs are perceived 
amongst the expert interviewees, the statement gravitated towards a barrier for employees being lack 
of participation. Another take derived from the assessment of this context, is the aspect of where the 
SDG-focus lies internally and whether it emphasizes the engagement of employees. These two 
aspects relate to the organizational structure of a given company, whereas companies emphasizing 
direct supervision (Lunenburg, 2012) with the key part of the organization being the strategic apex 
might show tendencies towards not including employees in a change initiative as much as other 
organizational configurations. 
==PAGE:62==
Page 53 of 80 
 
5.3 RQ2: How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with 
SDGs, with a specific focus on the implementation of SDG 3 \& 8 into 
corporate strategy? 
 
The approach chosen to discuss the findings regarding the company interviews somewhat differ from 
that of the expert interviews presented in the previous section. Such is a result of a different interview 
guide (Appendix D) and a found need to differentiate between the companies due to the purpose of 
the company and general approaches to strategy. The topics discussed in this part of the discussion 
chapter will also differ from the approach in the expert interview-discussion, as the main purpose of 
contacting companies in this regard was to get an understanding of how the companies have adopted 
to the work with SDG 3 & 8, and not so much how they define certain terms (maturity, transparency 
etc.). Naturally, the terms will occur in this part of the section, as the aim is to discuss across both 
RQs, which will come after the discussion of each category and each company interviewed, in the 
following subsections. 
The general perception of the companies interviewed appeared somewhat more differentiating than 
that of the experts interviewed. Company 1, a company associating themselves with both SDG 3 & 
8, see them as a part of their already existing approach to acting responsible as a company. From that 
it can be derived that the company is attempting to be socially responsible, relating to the 3 defining 
elements of sustainability as described earlier. With their approach of “indirectly” engaging with SDG 
3 & 8, they ensure that their values as a company are sustained and still emphasized. With such an 
approach there are two sides to the story, as it does in fact ensure a safety for the company, because 
the work they do with SDG 3 & 8 are already embedded in their company culture. The other side of 
it concerns the company being too safe in their approach, as they will, most likely, be more reluctant 
to pursue the development of KPIs lying outside of their comfort zone. Seen from the aspect of a 
maturity process as covered earlier, the approach taken does fall inside of what was discussed earlier, 
namely that they initiate themselves in familiar territories first, and from what was indicated by the 
company interviewee 1, the company will be looking to demand engagement with SDG 3 & 8 from 
their external stakeholder in the future. The above applies for both company 2 & 3 as well, as they 
showcased a similar approach to the engagement. 
Company 2 has a different look at SDGs in general. Being associated with only SDG 3, company 2 
believes in the importance of having the SDGs present throughout the organization, from strategic 
==PAGE:63==
Page 54 of 80 
 
apex to the operating core. Such approach does emphasize the engaging of employees in each 
initiative, which was argued by several of the expert interviewees to be important.  
In terms of the perception of the process of incorporating SDG 3 & 8 into corporate strategy all three 
companies agree on the fact that when engaging in the SDGs, they should be visible throughout the 
organization. Such is even more applicable in the context of SDG 3 & 8 in a corporate setting, as 
these not only apply to how the business is run at the strategic apex, but also within the operation core 
and elsewhere in the organization. This only further emphasizes the importance of incorporating the 
SDGs throughout the organization.   
An interesting point was made by company 1 with regards to parallel organization being a main threat 
for the company as it separates the “problem-solving” from the core strategy of a company and takes 
on the responsibility itself. Whether it is a threat or not is very much dependent on the organization 
in question and company 3 is a great example of that and succeeding with it. Company 3 has set up a 
cross-functional CSR/sustainability task force setting KPIs and implementing initiatives. The task 
force has full responsibility when it comes to setting KPIs and implementing initiatives to achieve 
them. The KPIs developed work towards sub-goal 8.3: Promote development-oriented policies that 
support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity, and innovation and 
8.8: Protect labor rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers  (7, 
2021). In terms of the operations, the strategy is rolled out in two sustainability programs focusing 
both internally and externally. 
 
Some differentiations were found in the assessment of the companies regarding internal vs. external 
focus. With both or either of the SDGs present internally in all 3 companies, how far they have come 
in terms of impacting external stakeholder is different. Such is question of maturity, as covered 
earlier, and matter of the extend of which the company is reliant on the engagement of their external 
stakeholders. Company 1 & 3 have clear visions when it comes to working internally as well as 
externally. Company 3 are possibly the most mature in this sense as they have actively defined and 
distinguished their effort in terms of internal and external initiatives. Such is achieved through defined 
two sustainability programs where one emphasizes the internal focus and the other aims to target their 
external impact. Company 1 are also active externally with their clients by away of sustainable 
investments and general guidance in the field of SDGs. Furthermore, they aim to act more responsible 
in the future by demanding engagement with the SDGs, which would strengthen the company’s 
==PAGE:64==
Page 55 of 80 
 
position in terms of their external impact and make their partnerships more transparent. Company 2 
have managed to monitor their impact on SDG 3 internally and have identified the magnitude of 
impact they can possibly have on external stakeholder in terms of monitoring their impact on their 
project portfolio. The possible impact is perhaps the biggest of the three companies assessed, as they 
work with top municipalities, foundations, developers, corporations globally. This is most likely also 
the reasoning behind the stage the company is in as compared with company 1 & 3 with regards to 
targeting their external stakeholders. 
As organizational structure is a major part of how companies act in a given change initiative, the 
interest was extended to the interview with the represented companies, as covered in the analysis-part 
(Research Question 2). The aim was, as stressed in the respective section, to assess if the companies 
have experienced any organizational changes as a product of engaging with SDG 3 and/or 8. As was 
uncovered in the analysis, none of the three companies have seen any drastic changes to their overall 
organizational structure, which could be the result of the general approach the companies have had, 
by emphasizing company values and culture in the context and making sure that the company is not 
defined by the SDGs. Company 1 & 2 did experience a necessity to structure their efforts more than 
previously. Company 1 went away from a loose sustainability program, to a fixed one with internal 
stakeholder groups. Company 2 has perhaps seen the biggest change structurally by way of setting 
up an ‘innovation team’, tasked with innovation and the establishing of future relations with external 
stakeholders. Company 3 did set up a cross-functional CSR/sustainability task force, but not as a 
product of engaging with SDG 8 specifically. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
Page 56 of 80 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
Throughout this assessment the aim has been to contribute to the corporate work with the SDGs and 
specifically SDG 3 & 8. The entirety of the thesis has been structured around assessing the 
‘Performance and perception of SDG implementation into corporate strategy, with a focus on SDG 
3 & 8’ by answering the two research questions: 
1. What is the uptake of companies regarding SDGs, with a focus on SDG 3 and 8? 
2. How do companies relate to SDGs/position their activities with SDGs, with a specific 
focus on the implementation of SDG 3 \& 8 into corporate strategy? 
The approach to answer each research question separately, drawing from different sources of data 
and then combining the two to identify discrepancies. The thought-process behind this approach is 
visualized below. 
 
Figure 7: Solution space 
 
To answer RQ 1 experts in line of work related to the field of the SDGs were approached. Professions 
of the experts were different with the aim of saturating the sample size, with the leader-side, the 
employee-side and general expert in the field present. RQ 2 called for the establishing of contact with 
companies engaged with the specific SDGs in question. Communications were established with 3 
companies, Company 1 engaged with both SDG 3 & 8, Company 2 with SDG 3 and Company 3 SDG 
==PAGE:66==
Page 57 of 80 
 
8. The representation and split in SDGs across the 3 companies was actively pursued to potentially 
spot any differences/aspects of interest. Furthermore, the companies presented in this assessment 
represent different industries in order to pick up on any different approaches due to their industrial 
background. 
In the analysis a total of 12 claims were made, summing up the assessed of each category, with the 
aim of easing the process of discussion and concluding on what was said. Each claim was 
accompanied by sub-claim stating discrepancies within the given category. More claims were made 
in relation to the expert interview, as more topics were talked about, bringing in a total of 8 claims. 4 
claims were made for the company interviews, due to a more precise and concise approach taken in 
the company interviews, as opposed to the expert interviews. The claims laid the foundation for what 
was discussed leading up to this conclusive section. As described in The Analysis structure some 
categories were overlapping between both research questions to make direct comparisons between 
statements of each interview-type, with the aim of finding similarities and discrepancies.  
In terms of how all interview participants view SDG 3 & 8, both in terms of general perceptions and 
related to a corporate setting, no real discrepancies were found, as all agreed that the SDGs must be 
a part of the core business strategy and that the goals are relevant for all companies. Whether it is 
from the ground up or in alignment with already established company values, the ability to identify 
with the goals as a company is paramount in the process of implementing. This very aspect is key in 
getting more companies engaged with SDG 3 & 8, as these specific goals can be seen as “superior 
strategic goals to point towards how to do “good business” (3, 2021). Promoting exactly this more 
in the media and general mediation of sustainability and the SDGs, would spark more interest from 
companies, resulting in a larger movement towards promoting decent work, economic growth, good 
health, and well-being in the corporate environment (both internally and externally). As was argued 
by expert interviewee 4, the focus in the media is more on promoting the environmental & economic 
aspect of sustainability whereas the third element, social, lacks in terms of general advocacy. 
In the assessment of internal vs. external focus on the SDG in a corporate setting, many important 
aspects were discovered across both expert and company interview and the discussion thereof. This 
is also where one of the key take-aways from the assessment was found. The internal/external 
discussion is very much a question and a process of maturity, which relates directly to the perception 
of the goals as covered above. SDG 3 & 8 are both goals every company should be able to identify 
themselves with internally, at least to some extent of the goals. As the goals act as superior strategic 
==PAGE:67==
Page 58 of 80 
 
goals towards how to do good business, the goals are relevant for all companies wanting to emphasize 
the well-being, health of their internal stakeholder and generally be providers of decent work. As was 
discussed, the financial opportunities related to the engagement with these specific SDGs are amongst 
the highest ranked (Figure 1: Sketching the investment opportunity set of the 17 UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (Schramade, 2017)). With that in mind it is hard to find a reason for companies 
to engage themselves with SDG 3 & 8 internally. The maturity question related to the internal focus 
on the SDGs is perhaps not related much to the companies themselves, but more so how SDG 3 & 8 
are perceived elsewhere and how predominant these SDGs are in the context of the current 
sustainability discussions. So, with that said, the maturity with regards to the internal focus of 
companies on SDG 3 & 8 relates to the frequency of how often companies choose to adopt these 
specific goals, which is a product of the focus being less on the societal element of sustainability and 
more on the environmental and to some extend economical. The maturity questions in relation to the 
external focus of companies on SDG 3 & 8, shares some elements with that of the internal focus, but 
what was found in the assessment of statements from both expert and companies, the external focus 
is where companies can make contribution in the bigger picture and the procedure of getting to a 
point of being able to target (or confident in targeting) external stakeholders can be argued as a 
process of maturity. From what was established from the expert interviews in this regard the process 
can be reduced to a matter of the following: 
1. Get comfortable with assessing the goals in terms of internal stakeholders.  
2. Get the reporting aspect under control to the extent of which no harm can come from moving 
the focus to external stakeholders. 
3. Demand engagement from external stakeholder 
4. Stress the balancing of internal and external focus (Lewin’s Field Theory (Lewin, 1951)). 
5. Emphasize continuous improvement with the aim of finding the best fit in terms of focus 
(Miles, Raymond E. Snow, 1984). 
Within the companies present for this assessment, the maturity question was also a dominant element 
with variation regarding the general approach to the matter. With Company 1 and 3 showing 
awareness of external focus, but with a way to go to achieve satisfaction. Company 1 & 3 very much 
emphasized their internal focus by way of acting as a responsible employer and from the statements 
made by the companies, it became apparent that the next step was to emphasize their external focus 
by demanding engagement with the SDGs from their external stakeholders. Company 2 was perhaps 
the most defined in this regard, with defined sustainability programs each tasked with either internal 
==PAGE:68==
Page 59 of 80 
 
or external focus of engaging in SDG 8. All three companies fall within stepwise process derived 
from the expert interviews, as described above, as they will (or are active) in the engaging of their 
external stakeholders and company 2 have achieved what they feel is a feasible balance between the 
focus with internal and external stakeholders.  
Engaging with external stakeholders will in all likelihood result in an improvement in the relationship 
between the company and its external stakeholders. Such will improve the transparency between the 
two parties contributing to the general performance of the collaboration. 
Leaders have the utmost importance in a change environment as they are the mediators throughout 
the organization, along with middle managers. The backing of leaders from corporate is key in giving 
leaders the right prerequisites in such an environment. Backing relates to the overall incentives of the 
company, which must align with that of the leaders in the company. If incentives point more towards 
making changes to improve the economic viability of the company, than aspects such as employee 
well-being, being responsible employers or promoting gender diversity, the initiatives will not get the 
required support from the board or superiors, resulting in leaders not feeling engaged in the agenda 
of the company, possibly resulting in a decrease in motivation. 
A clear approach for companies to emphasize change by way of implementing initiatives according 
to SDG 3 & 8, is to engage employees. Catering towards well-being amongst employees by way of 
emphasizing job satisfaction would not only improve productivity of the employee, but job 
satisfaction also spawns positive emotions argued to be a contributor to employees broadening their 
mindset, considering alternatives in different scenarios, and thereby improving the flexibility of 
employers. Flexibility not only relates to upskilling, as argued by Fredrickson & Branigan (2005), 
but also the employee’s ability to adapt to changes, making them more compliant to initiatives related 
to the engagement with SDGs. Furthermore, an increase in flexibility of employees could prove 
beneficial for the company, as they might consider ways to contribute to the initiative themselves. 
From the above, and the discussion, the following list can be constructed as a way of summing up 
key take-aways from this study. 
1. Both SDG 3 & 8 are relevant for all internally and to some extent also externally. If more 
emphasis is put on the societal elements in sustainability, more companies will associate 
themselves with the goals. 
2. Security can be found for companies, by emphasizing SDG 3 & 8 as a process of maturity, 
starting internally, getting the initiatives under control, and moving the focus externally. 
==PAGE:69==
Page 60 of 80 
 
3. Engaging with SDG 3 & 8 should be aligned with company values and corporate strategy. If 
the goals are seen as something on the side used to please an agenda, the goals will not be 
embedded in organization.  
4. Leaders have a substantial part in a change environment, whether it is making a drastic shift 
and adapting to an unknown input. Alignment of values and incentives between company and 
leaders is paramount in the execution of a successful change. 
5. The biggest barrier for employees in a change environment is not participating. 
6. Engaging with SDG 3 & 8 does not necessarily result in major organizational changes, it is a 
matter of the specific company and its approach to the matter. Defining the approach and 
focus of a given initiative is the most important in the engagement and such can benefit from 
the setting up of a designated department tasked with controlling the initiative. As mentioned, 
it is a matter of the characteristics of the company, the scale, and disposable resources.  
Based on the key take-aways to following recommendations can be made towards companies wanting 
to engage themselves with SDG 3 & 8, and to some extent other SDGs as well, or companies 
experiencing friction because of already engaging with the goals. 
1. Engaging with SDG 3 & 8 can contribute to the running of a sustainable business, as it invites 
companies to rethink their social responsibility (3 elements of sustainability), such improves 
the transparency of the company and overall image. Being transparent attracts possibilities for 
collaboration and investors further strengthening the stance of the company.  
2. Target specific elements of the SDGs that either go in line with an already established 
company culture or a desired state. 
3. Working with SDG 3 & 8 can be overwhelming and so, by starting the engagement internally, 
with a target aligning with company values, the company can grow more mature and pursue 
external stakeholders. 
4. Leaders and middle managers are drivers of change in organizations, it is important for the 
managers (at every level) are backed by the board in any change environment. Such is even 
more applicable in the context of SDG 3 & 8, as they rely on managers to moderate the internal 
initiative towards a state of where all components of the organization feel engaged. 
5. The employees of a company face certain barriers, such lack of knowledge and engagement, 
when it comes to a change environment. This is the case for corporate environments 
undergoing changes because of working with SDG 3 & 8. As the employees are often the 
==PAGE:70==
Page 61 of 80 
 
recipients of an initiative in this context, they must be engaged in and enlightened in terms of 
the initiative. Catering towards motivating employee in a change. 
6.2 Contribution 
 
Contributions from this thesis very much relate to the state of which companies are in terms of their 
engagement with SDG 3 & 8 and to some extent prior to deciding to pursue those specific goals. 
Initially what this thesis highlights, is that SDG 3 & 8 are relevant for all companies and are 
economically viable as well. To companies not yet engaged with the specific SDGs or SDGs in 
general, this thesis provided an insight as to what can be achieved from engaging with SDG 3 & 8 
specifically. On one hand companies can choose to engage with the goals due to possibilities 
associated with them in terms of creating awareness of the companies’ social responsibilities. Maybe 
companies want to engage more positively with their stakeholders, both internally and externally (the 
external focus, as argued throughout this thesis, might be a focus-point for companies already 
engaged with the goals). For companies already engaged with the goals, a process of maturing as a 
company has been described, during this assessment. The process includes moving from early-stage 
engagement, by way of understanding and getting comfortable with the goals, to the engagement of 
external stakeholders, ultimately strengthening the stakeholder relations. Furthermore, this thesis 
stresses the importance of various elements in changing the environment, all of which are to be 
concerned with obtaining desirable performance in a given initiative. Such elements include the 
support of leaders for them to get the best prerequisites to drive the change. The engagement of 
employees in a given initiative, thereby breaking down arguably the most challenging barrier for 
employees, namely the lack of engagement. In the reporting phase of the work with the SDGs, the 
most predominant element, defined as an enabler for Lastly, this thesis highlights examples of the 
implementation of SDG 3 & 8 at different stages, which can be used by other companies in terms of 
relating to certain scenarios. 
6.1 Limitations 
 
A limitation in terms of how expansive this study should be considered is the sample size of 
interviews (both expert and company) represented in this study. Although attempts were made to 
expand the number of representatives for the analysis, such was not achieved. For future studies on 
this matter, what has been found in this study can be used as a foundation to target a more varying 
==PAGE:71==
Page 62 of 80 
 
personnel/company representative, whereby the finding will become more saturated. The global 
pandemic that is COVID-19 present throughout this thesis also came with some implications in terms 
of willingness to participate by respondents, due to limited time and/or simply other tasks at hand. In 
close relation to the global situation, that has been at its peak (at least in Denmark) during this study 
and the sample size as presented above, is the availability of experts and companies up for interviews. 
As mentioned above, efforts were made to secure a larger sample size, but in the light of what the 
world has undergone, the time of both experts and company representatives have been even more 
sparse and the general inclination to attend an interview can easily be affected by that. An element 
that is almost impossible to occur during qualitative studies is the bias in coding. Prior research of 
literature laid the foundation for some categories made and other very established due to previous 
educational studies where knowledge was carried over. 
6.3 Future Research 
 
As identified above, the limitations of the thesis call for future research. Based on the presented 
limitations and personal standpoint on different aspects of the thesis, the following topics could be 
assessed, 
● Sample Size: As mentioned the analysis could benefit from a saturation in terms of data. Data 
could be collected from companies of other industries and other areas of expertise than what 
is presented in this assessment.  
● Bias: As stressed in the section regarding limitation, the work with the interview of this thesis 
could have been impacted by some degree of bias. The coding of interviews was partly done 
with a personal perception of the meaning of the content. Such can be avoided using review 
cycles, more emphasis on verification of sources and having multiple people supervising the 
coding of the content. 
● Testing of proposed process of stakeholder engagement: As most of the key take-aways and 
contributions are derived from perceptions of expert- and company interviewees, the aspect 
of implementing such in a real-life sense lacks in this study.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
Page 63 of 80 
 
References 
 
Ahmad, S., Wasim, S., Irfan, S., Gogoi, S., Srivastava, A., & Farheen, Z. (2019). Qualitative v/s. 
Quantitative Research- A Summarized Review. Journal of Evidence Based Medicine and 
Healthcare, 6(43), 2828–2832. https://doi.org/10.18410/jebmh/2019/587 
Attia, S. (2020). Content Analysis. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sOt1FOWKGKA 
Barnett, W.P. and Carroll, G. R. (1995). Annual Review of Sociology. Modeling Internal Organizational 
Change, 21, 217–236. 
Cartwright, S., & Cooper, C. L. (2008). The Oxford Handbook of Organizational Well-being. 
Cooper, C. L., & Marshall, J. (1976). Occupational sources of stress: A review of the literature relating 
to coronary heart disease and mental ill health. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 49(1), 11–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8325.1976.tb00325.x 
Dansk Industri. (2020). Forstå FN Verdensmålene Og Sæt Fokus På Bæredygtig Udvikling - Dansk 
Industri - DI. https://www.danskindustri.dk/SDG-verdensmal/forsta-verdensmalene/ 
Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-
determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227–268. 
DeLoyde, WarrenE. MabeeM. J. BlairJordanT. CarlsonCarolynN. M. (2020). Department of Geography 
and Planning, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 2020. Sustainability. 11. https://www-
sciencedirect-
com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/science/article/pii/B9780081022955100149?via%5C%3Dihub 
Elo, S., & Kyngäs, H. (2008). The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 
62(1), 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.04569.x 
Fredrickson, B. L. & Branigan, C. A. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and 
thought-action repertoires. Cognition and Emotion, 19, 313–332. 
Gagné, M. & Deci, E. (2005). Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 26, 331–362. 
GRI/UN Global Compact/WBCSD. (2015). SDG Compass EXECUTIVE SUMMARY - UN Sustainable 
Development Goals Compass (www.sdgcompass.org). www.sdgcompass.org 
Hallberg, U. E., Johansson, G. & Schaufeli, W. B. (2007). Type-A behavior and work situation: 
Associations with burnout and work engagement. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 48, 135–
142. 
Impact, K. (2020). The time has come. December, 0–62. 
Jong, Y. O., & Jung, C. K. (2015). The development of interview techniques in language studies: 
Facilitating the researchers’ views on interactive encounters. English Language Teaching, 8(7), 30–
39. https://doi.org/10.5539/elt.v8n7p30 
==PAGE:73==
Page 64 of 80 
 
Karasek, R. A. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude and mental strain: Implications for job 
redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285–308. 
Kompier, M. A. (2006). The “Hawthorne effect” is a myth, but what keeps the story going? 
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 32(5), 402–412. 
Koppes, L. L., & Pickren, W. (2007). Industrial and Organizational Psychology: An Evolving Science 
and Practice. In Historical perspectives in industrial and organizational psychology. (pp. 3–35). 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
KPMG. (2018). How to report on the SDGs What good looks like and why it matters. In Kpmg (Issue 
February). 
Kreye, M. E. (2020). Reading material for course on 42543 Management of Change in Engineering 
Systems F20. 
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: selected theoretical papers (E. by D. Cartwright., Ed.). 
https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1951-06769-000 
Lucas, R. E., & Diener, E. (2002). The happy worker: Hypotheses about the role of positive affect in 
worker productivity. In In M. R. Barrick & A. M. Ryan (Eds.), Personality and work: Reconsidering 
the role of personality in organizations (pp. 30–59). 
Lunenburg, F. C. (2012). Organizational Structure_ Mintzberg s Framework - PDF Free Download.pdf. 
14(1), 1–8. 
Maxwell, J. A. (2016). Qualitative Study. June. 
Mayo, E. (1933). The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization. In The Human Problems of an 
Industrial Civilization (1st ed.). https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203487273 
Mayring, P. (2000). Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative Content Analysis, 1(June), 851–855. 
Meijman, T. F. & Mulder, G. (1998). Psychological aspects of workload. In In P. J. D. Drenth & H. K. 
Thierry (Eds.), Handbook of work and organizational psychology. Vol. 2: Work psychology (pp. 5–
33). Psychology Press. 
Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. (1984). Designing strategic human resources systems. Organizational 
Dynamics, 13(1), 36–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/0090-2616(84)90030-5 
Miles, Raymond E. Snow, C. C. (1984). Organizational Dynamics. Designing Strategic Human 
Resources Systems, 13(1), 36–52. 
Mintzberg, H. (1992). Structure in fives: Designing effective organizations. Prentice Hall. 
Mintzberg, H. (2009). Tracking strategies: Toward a general theory of strategy formation. Oxford 
University Press. 
Schneider, B., Hayes, S. C., Lim, B. (2003). The Human Side of Strategy: Employee Experiences of 
Strategic Alignment in a Service Organisation. Organizational Dynamics, 32(2), 122–141. 
==PAGE:74==
Page 65 of 80 
 
Schramade, W. (2017). Investing in the UN Sustainable Development Goals: Opportunities for 
Companies and Investors. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 29(2). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jacf.12236 
Silverman, D. (2014). Interpreting qualitative data. 
Sonnentag, S. & Frese, M. (2002). Performance concepts and performance theory. In In S. Sonnentag 
(Ed.), Psychological management of individual performance (pp. 3–26). Wiley. 
Taris, T. W. & Kompier, M. A. J. (2004). Job characteristics and learning behavior: Review and 
psychological mechanism. In Emerald (Ed.), In P. L. Perrewe & D. C. Ganster (Eds.), Research in 
occupational stress and well-being, Vol. 4: Exploring interpersonal dynamics (pp. 127–166). 
Taris, T. W., Van Beek, I. & Schaufeli, W. B. (2014). The beauty versus the beast: On the motives of 
workaholic and engaged employees. In In I. Harpaz & R. Snir (Eds.), Heavy work investment: Its 
nature, sources, outcomes, and future directions (pp. 121–139). Routledge. 
UN. (n.d.). SDG 8 Target & Indicators. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal8 
UN. (2020). THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. 2020. https://sdgs.un.org/goals 
UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs. (2020a). Goal 3. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal3 
UN Department Of Economic And Social Affairs. (2020b). Goal 8. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal8 
Veldhoven, M. van, & Peccei, R. (n.d.). WELL-BEING AND PERFORMANCE. 
Williams, C. (2007). Research Methods. 5(3), 65–72. 
Wright, T. A., Cropanzano, R. & Bonett, D. G. (2007). The moderating role of employee positive well-
being on the relation between job satisfaction and job performance. Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology, 12, 93–104. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
Page 66 of 80 
 
Appendix 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
1. By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births 
2. By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all 
countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births 
and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births 
3. By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases 
and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases 
4. By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through 
prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being 
5. Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse 
and harmful use of alcohol 
6. By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents 
7. By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including 
for family planning, information and education , and the integration of reproductive health 
into national strategies and programmes 
8. Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality 
essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential 
medicines and vaccines for all 
9. By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals 
and air, water and soil pollution and contamination 
10. Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on 
Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate 
11. Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and 
non-communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to 
affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the 
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use 
to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
==PAGE:76==
Page 67 of 80 
 
Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to 
medicines for all 
12. Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and 
retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed 
countries and small island developing States 
13. Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early 
warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks(UN, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Page 68 of 80 
 
Appendix B 
 
Sub-goals consists of 12 areas of improvement, listed below: 
1. Sustain per capita economic growth in accordance with national circumstances and, in 
particular, at least 7 per cent gross domestic product growth per annum in the least 
developed countries 
2. Achieve higher levels of economic productivity through diversification, technological 
upgrading and innovation, including through a focus on high-value added and labour-
intensive sectors 
3. Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job 
creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and 
growth of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to 
financial services 
4. Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and 
production and endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, in 
accordance with the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and 
production, with developed countries taking the lead 
5. By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, 
including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal 
value 
6. By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or 
training 
7. Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and 
human trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child 
labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all 
its forms 
8. Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, 
including migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious 
employment 
9. By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates jobs and 
promotes local culture and products 
==PAGE:78==
Page 69 of 80 
 
10. Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to 
banking, insurance and financial services for all 
11. Increase Aid for Trade support for developing countries, in particular least developed 
countries, including through the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related 
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries 
12. By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and implement 
the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization(UN, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Page 70 of 80 
 
Appendix C 
 
1. First of all, how do you see future of companies working with SDG’s? 
 
2. What do you think is the most important aspect for the companies you work with wrt. The 
two SDGs I work with. Starting with SDG 3 (Good health and well-being) SDG 8 (Decent 
Work and economic growth) 
 
 
3. Corporate Strategy is one of my main focus-points. You define strategy as the cornerstone 
for changing direction in an organization. What tools do you suggest for companies to 
change their direction towards a more sustainable managed company? 
 
4. How do you influence the reporting of progress on a given initiative in the companies? Do 
you provide the leaders you work with tools to do so? 
 
5. In your whitepaper on how to prevent stress as an element in sustainable management, you 
present 10 cases of companies in Denmark with that In common that they have made great 
and successful efforts in creating high performance and well-being. Have you looked at 
danish companies that might not have this in common, if so, what did you learn from them? 
 
6. Stated in your analysis on UN’s SDGs towards sustainable development you have received 
feedback from leaders all over the country.  Based on this I have some questions: 
 
a. What’s your general perception of how leaders, that operate within SDG 3 & 8, 
handle the barriers of implementing the goals into corporate strategy? 
 
b. Your analysis shows that 51% leaders see the SDGs as a part of their strategy and 
54% of these have developed specific goals for their work with the SDGs.  
 
==PAGE:80==
Page 71 of 80 
 
i. How important are these goals?  
ii. Do you have an example on the top of your head? 
 
c. 3 of 10 companies have employees designated to work with the SDG internally. 
What’s your take on that, should that number be higher, if so, do you aim to  
influence that and how?  
 
d. You talk about barriers the companies face when working with SDG, such as lack of 
knowledge, lack of focus and the goals not being relevant for a company's core 
business. How do you overcome this sort of thinking? Are there other barriers? 
 
7. What is the biggest driver for successful structuring of a sustainable strategy? 
 
8. The interest and partaking in the SDGs have been growing since launch in 2015, from the 
leaders you work with what are your key take-aways from this development? 
 
9. Have you identified any tendencies when it comes to the reporting of SDG 3 & 8? KPIs etc. 
 
10. In SDG reporting some talk about the term “SDG washing” and a tendency to company 
reporting in a rather unbalanced fashion, focusing only on positives. This impacts the 
relationship between the company and the stakeholders. How do you see the companies 
improving on transparency in reporting, ex. through CSR?  
 
11. Do you see “SDG washing” as a problem? And is it something you consider? 
 
12. Based on experience, where do the leaders typically put their focus in the development of a 
more sustainable strategy (externally (vendors etc) or internally (workspace etc)?  
 
13. What’s your take on the aspect of using the SDG for branding?  
 
==PAGE:81==
Page 72 of 80 
 
14. There’s a tendency to the size of the company being a deciding factor in terms of the efforts 
they make. What is your take on that, and why are smaller companies not as active? 
 
15. In some cases leaders see a potential risk involved with the restructuring of strategy to fit 
SDGs. In some cases this creates a barrier for leaders, which in some cases lead to missed 
opportunities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Page 73 of 80 
 
Appendix D 
 
1. How does X view SDG 8, what are the most important aspects? 
2. How has X handled SDG 8 wrt. the incorporating of it into corporate strategy? 
a. What tools, if any, has X used in that regard? 
3. How has X developed KPI internally (maybe also externally) wrt. SDG 8? 
4. Has the incorporating of SDG 8 impacted the organizational structure of X in any way? 
5. How does the future look for X wrt. the work with SDG 8? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
Page 74 of 80 
 
Appendix E 
 
● Goals: Why is your study worth doing? What issues do you want it to clarify, 
and what practices and policies do you want it to influence? Why do you want to 
conduct this study, and why should we care about the results? 
● Conceptual framework: What do you think is going on with the issues, settings, 
or people you plan to study? What theories, beliefs, and prior research findings 
will guide or inform your research, and what literature, preliminary studies, 
and personal experiences will you draw on for understanding the people or issues 
you are studying? 
● Research questions: What, specifically, do you want to learn or understand by 
doing this study? What do you not know about the things you are studying that you 
want to learn? What questions will your research attempt to answer, and how are 
these questions related to one another? 
● Methods: What will you actually do in conducting this study? What 
approaches and techniques will you use to collect and analyze your data, and how 
do these constitute an integrated strategy? 
● Validity: How might your results and conclusions be wrong? What are the 
plausible alternative interpretations and validity threats to these, and how will you 
deal with these? How can the data that you have, or that you could potentially collect, 
support or challenge your ideas about what’s going on? Why should we believe your 
results?(Maxwell, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Page 75 of 80 
 
Appendix F 
 
 
 
(Elo & Kyngäs, 2008) 
==PAGE:85==
Page 76 of 80 
 
Appendix G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
Page 77 of 80 
 
Appendix H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Page 78 of 80 
 
Appendix I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
Page 79 of 80 
 
 
Appendix J 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Page 80 of 80 
 
 
 
Appendix K 
 
 
 
 
 
