==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Audiovisual speech separation with deep
neural networks
AUTHOR: Chuan Wen (s192241)
SUPERVISOR: Jens Hjortkjær
CO-SUPERVISOR: Nicolai Pedersen
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents an audio-visual deep-learning-based model that uses visual cues to
isolate a target speech source from a mixture of speech or background noise sources.
Automatic acoustic separation of constituent speech streams from multi-talker mixtures
is a challenging task. Recent studies have shown that visual information of the speaker’s
face can aid the separation process.
Audio-visual separation systems based on deep
neural networks have recently achieved high performance with only a single micro-
phone channel. However, large-scale datasets are required to obtain satisfactory results,
which introduces a heavy computation overhead. To address this problem, we propose
an audio-visual deep-learning-based speech separation framework which decouples the
audio-visual fusion process from the separation model. To eﬀiciently correlate audio and
visual features, we investigate two fusion strategies, linear regularized canonical corre-
lation analysis(rCAA) and Correlational Neural Networks(CorrNet). Visual hints from
the fusion stage were then used for speech separation in a separation network based on
2D convolutions. Compared to rCCA, fusion with CorrNet achieved higher correlation
between the audio and video features. More correlated features translated into better
speech separation performance. For two-talker mixtures from the LRS3 dataset, our
audiovisual separation framework based on CorrNet achieves an average performance
of 8.09dB scale-invariant source-to-distortion ratio (SI-SDR) improvement with speak-
ers not included in model training. Next, it was tested how well the network trained
for speech separation generalized to a speech-in-noise enhancement task. With speech
in real-world background noise, the separation network achieved an SI-SDR separation
performance of 10.07 dB for rCCA and 10.81 dB for CorrNet. The performance rivals
current state-of-the-art separation systems relying on substantially bigger networks and
more training data. This makes our system attractive to real-time applications.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree
in 2021.
The thesis contains work done for period from January 2021 to June 2021. The work
described herein was conducted solely by the author under supervision of Jens Hjortkjær
and Nicolai Pedersen. The background knowledge is the result of the research of others
and was referenced to the sources.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Author: Chuan Wen (s192241)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jens Hjortkjær and Nicolai Pedersen for sharing
ideas and last news in deep learning and audio signal processing field, for lots of inspira-
tion, comments and technical discussions that we had. I would also like to thank Enea
Ceolini for his inspiration and supports.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents for their selfless love. I would also like to
thank my friends who assisted me during this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Audio Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Visual Features: Landmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Audio-visual Fusion Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Dilated Convolution Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
SDR and SI-SDR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Optimization of Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods
12
3.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Audio and Visual Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
AV Fusion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Speech Separation Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Training Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
19
4.1
Evaluation Based on Two AV Fusion Models: CorrNet vs. rCCA . . . . .
19
4.2
Real-World and Real-Time Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Comparison to Other Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.4
Discussion and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Conclusion
28
Bibliography
29
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
An example of facial landmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Schematic of CorrNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Example of 2D dilated CNN for different dilation factors from [1]. (a)1-dilated
CNN has the receptive filed 3×3 (b)2-dilated CNN has the receptive filed 7×7.
(c) 4-dilated CNN has the receptive filed 15 × 15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
The figure of sigmoid function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
The figure of Tanh function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
The figure of ReLu function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
The architecture of audio-visual separation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
The rCCA-based AV fusion model. The rCCA takes audio and visual fea-
tures as input and perform linear transformation to maximize the correlation
between two views. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
The architecture of CorrNet-based AV fusion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Architecture of separation Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Architecture of dilated CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1
Separation performance as a function of training noise level using the CorrNet
fusion method for two-speaker scenarios. The horizontal dot line indicates
no noise training where the model was trained with visual hints, shown as
baseline. The blue solid line depicts effect of different noise level on SI-SDR
of separated speech.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Separation results for causal and non-causal settings in the real-world scenarios(SI-
SDR improvement in dB). For each scenario, we tested the model on 3000
mixtures from the test set that does not overlap with the training set. . . . .
22
4.3
An example of the inputs and outputs using the model based on CorrNet
fusion method in the speech-in-noise scenario. The top row shows input spec-
trograms, including mixture of a clean speech and background noise(a) and
target speech(b). The bottom row shows the output spectrograms, including
estimated mask(c) and enhanced speech(d) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
An example of the inputs and outputs using the model based on CorrNet fusion
method in the 2-speaker scenario. The top row shows input spectrograms,
including mixture of 2 clean speech (a) and target speech(b). The bottom
row shows output spectrograms, including estimated mask(c) and estimated
target speech(d) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
The table of optimal hyperparameters for CorrNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Comparison between rCCA and CorrNet(SI-SDR improvement in dB) . . . .
20
4.2
Analysis of curriculum training effect in the two-talker separation scenario
(SI-SDR improvement in dB)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
The averaged SI-SDR improvement of CorrNet-based model in real-time and
real-world settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Comparison with other models(SDR improvement in dB) . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
With normal hearing, human beings possess the incredible ability to focus on a specific
sound source, despite the surrounding noise, such as speech from other speakers and
environmental noise, which is known as the “cocktail party effect”[2]. Nevertheless, peo-
ple with hearing impairments who are sensitive to loud noises or competing speakers
are often confronted with greater challenges. Advances in automatic speech recognition
(ASR) or speech enhancement that can be implemented on hearing aids are therefore
likely greatly benefit the hearing-impaired. The computational capability of focusing
on target sounds has been extensively studied in terms of signal processing and deep
learning approaches. It is generally known as “Speech Enhancement” (SE) to extract
clean speech from a noisy environment, and “Speech Separation” (SS) is to isolate the
target speech from a multitude of other speakers.
Classical speech separation methods attempt to achieve the task based on only audio sig-
nals inputs. The label permutation problem is one of the greatest challenges associated
with audio-only speech separation: audio-only approaches present a challenge to identify
the speaker for a corresponding speech stream[3][4]. Recent studies have addressed this
problem. Hershey et al.[3] suggested a permutation-free or permutation-invariant loss
function. Yu et al. [4] trained a DNN-based model using permutation invariant training
(PIT) and achieved the state-of-the-art performance with an improvement of 10.9 dB in
the signal-to-distortion ratio (SDR) in two-speaker separation task.
Multi-modal fusion of audiovisual signals using data-driven paradigms has gained in-
creasing interest for solving speech enhancement(SE) and separation (SS) problems.
Studies in neuroscience[5] and speech perception[6] have suggested that human hearing is
greatly assisted by visual cues. Automatic speech separation[7] and speech enhancement[8]
have also been shown to benefit from visual information to improve performance. Early
statistical approaches were based on Wiener-filtering in combination with visual hints
[7] [8] [9] [10]. Recently, deep-learning based methods have outperformed those filtering-
based approaches. Hou et al.[11] presented a model for speech enhancement based on
convolutional neural networks. However, audiovisual SS and SE have been limited by
the fact that each speaker needs a specific model to be trained. In this case, it would be
diﬀicult to use the separation on different target speakers, greatly limiting applications.
This is partly because there are not enough large and diverse data sets to train the model
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Objectives
2
and some models are speaker-dependent. The [12] introduced a CNN-BLSTM-based
speaker-independent speech separation model which outperforms audio-only methods.
In the task of separating the target speech from a mixture of two speakers, [12] achieved
an improved SDR of 11.8 dB, which is higher than for the audio-only model of [4] with
an SDR of 10.9 dB.
However, current audio-visual separation models[12][13][14] achieve good performance
relying on large-scale datasets.
These models are computationally expensive, result-
ing in the limitation of applicability in low-resource devices, such as hearing assistive
devices and smart phones. To alleviate this issues, we aim to propose a audio-visual
speech separation model which achieves comparable performance with smaller model
size which requires less training resources. The other issue is that the aforementioned
models [12][13][14] cannot work in real-time. We also explore the possibility of real-time
operation without a decrease in performance by decoupling the AV fusion stage where
we optimize AV feature correlation. The AV fusion model outputs ‘lightweight’ features
which speed up computational speed, resulting in satisfactory performance achieved by
smaller network.
1.2
Objectives
In this project, we propose an audio-visual deep-learning-based speech separation frame-
work with the ability to enhance the target speech when it is mixed with other talkers
by using the visual face of the target talker. This thesis proposes a scheme that decou-
ples audio-visual fusion from speech separation model. Firstly we train the AV fusion
model, in which the visual features are correlated with the audio features; after which,
the audio-visual features from the fusion model are used to aid speech separation. Two
fusion strategies are investigated: one is based on regularized canonical correlation anal-
ysis (rCCA), and the other involves a correlational neural network (CorrNet) model.
1.3
Structure
Chapters remaining in this thesis are arranged in the following order: Chapter 2 discusses
the theories employed in this project; Chapter 3 describes the framework for both the
rCCA and CorrNet versions; Chapter 4 provides the results obtained from implementing
aforementioned approaches and compares the separation performance of models based
on the rCCA and the CorrNet AV fusion methods, as well as presents potential directions
for future research; Chapter 5 presents a conclusion for the project.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
The thesis presents a framework for audio-visual speech separation, in which audio-visual
features are optimized independently and subsequently applied to the separation network
as hints. This chapter starts with an description of the audio and visual features used
in the proposed AV fusion models. The following sections present the audio-visual hint
fusion strategies, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) and CorrNet. Then the chapter
discusses the main components of the acoustic speech separation network, including
the 2D dilated CNN and the associated activation functions, loss functions, and the
scale-invariant signal-to-distortion ratio (SI-SDR) measure used to evaluate separation
performance.
Finally, we discuss network optimization techniques, including how to
avoid gradient explosion or vanishing, and overfitting.
2.1
Audio Features
2.1.1
Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coeﬀicients
Mel-frequency cepstral coeﬀicients (MFCCs) were proposed by Davis and Mermelstein[15]
and widely used as features in automatic speech and speaker recognition. The Mel fre-
quency scale is determined by the characteristics of the human hearing system, and it
has a non-linear relationship with the linear frequency. The main components of extrac-
tion of MFCCs include pre-emphasis, short-time Fourier transform (STFT), calculation
of Mel spectrum and Discrete cosine transform (DCT).
In pre-emphasizing, higher-frequency components of the speech signal are enhanced
since low frequencies tend to have a greater amplitude than higher frequencies. The
process can be described as a high-pass filter:
y(t) = x(t) −αx(t −1)
(2.1)
where α is the coeﬀicient of the filter and is commonly 0.95 or 0.97. The pre-emphasized
signal is then transformed to spectrum using short-time Fourier transform (STFT).
The Mel spectrum is obtained by passing the spectrum to a mel-filter bank. As the
pitch perceived by the hearing system does not appear linear to the frequency of the
physical signal, it is non-linear to the frequency of the physical signal. The relationship
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Visual Features: Landmarks
4
between linear frequency and mel frequency is expressed as
fmel = 2595log10(1 + f
700)
(2.2)
The Mel spectrum in adjacent bands is highly correlated, which may cause issues when
applied to machine learning algorithms. Therefore, Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT)
is used to decorrelate the filter bank coeﬀicients and derive a compressed representation
of the filter bank. MFCCs are computed as
C(n) =
N−1
∑
m=0
s(m)cos(πn(m −0.5)
M
), n = 1, 2, ..., L
(2.3)
Where L is the number of MFCCs.
2.2
Visual Features: Landmarks
We use landmarks as the visual features instead of the original video pixels, which greatly
reduces the computational cost. An estimation of 3d-face landmarks is performed on
a frame-by-frame basis. The extraction of landmarks is achieved through the use of a
data-driven facial alignment network[16]. Following the identification of a face within a
frame, the network estimates the locations of 68 facial landmarks as shown Figure 2.1.
Every landmark has three coordinates: X, Y, Z. Each landmark’s x and y coordinates
indicate its position in the frame, while its z coordinate specifies its depth relative to
the landmark.
The average of an estimated landmark is normalized across frames in an individual
video. A zero-mean landmark can be calculated by subtracting the mean video coor-
dinates from the video. A mean video coordinate is derived from the average of 68
landmarks and all frames of the video. Similarly, to scale all landmarks over all frames,
the standard deviation is calculated. Thus, the normalized landmarks are centered and
scaled, while maintaining the face’s movement.
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Audio-visual Fusion Strategies
5
Figure 2.1: An example of facial landmarks.
2.3
Audio-visual Fusion Strategies
To correlate audio and visual features and optimize the audio-visual features, regularized
Canonical Correlation Analysis(rCCA) and Correlational Neural Networks(CorrNet) are
employed. The rCAA model learns a linear relationship between audio and visual fea-
tures while CorrNet learns a non-linear mappings.
2.3.1
Canonical Correlation Analysis
Canonical Correlation Analysis is a technique for dimension reduction in which two
multi-dimensional variables are projected into one-dimensional variables with the highest
correlation in the projected space. Given two datasets X ∈Rn1∗m and Y ∈Rn2∗m, where
m denotes the sample size of variables while n1 and n2 represent the feature numbers of
X and Y, respectively. The target of CCA is to learn the projection weights WX ∈Rn1∗k
and WY ∈Rn2∗k, where k ∈min{n1, n2} is the index of CCA components, and the
Pearson correlation between two projections are maximized
X′ = W T
XX, Y ′ = W T
Y X
(2.4)
Correlations are highest between the first two canonical components, X′
1 and Y ′
1. As the
index k increases, the correlation of the component k decreases.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Audio-visual Fusion Strategies
6
The CCA aims to maximize the Pearson correlation coeﬀicients and the objective func-
tion in terms of sample covariance SXY of varibles X and Y and the autocovariances
SXX and SY Y can be expressed as:
ρ = maxcov(X′, Y ′)
√
X′Y ′
= max
W T
XSXY WY
√
∥W T
XSXXWX∥∥W T
Y SY Y WY ∥
(2.5)
The CCA is, however, prone to overfitting to irrelevant noise in data.
To alleviate
this problem, L2 regularization term is added to the objective function.
Thus, the
regularization CCA(rCCA) base on Eq.2.5 can be calculated as:
ρ = max
W T
XSXY WY
√
(W T
XSXXWX + αX ∥wX∥2)(W T
Y SY Y WY + αY ∥wY ∥2)
(2.6)
Where αX and αY are the weights of the regularization terms for X and Y, respectively.
2.3.2
Correlational Neural Networks
[17] proposed the correlational neural network (CorrNet) based on multimodal Autoen-
coders. As with CCA, the model aims to maximize the correlation between modalities
projected into their common subspaces. The model is a nonlinear neural network com-
posed of three main components: input layer, hidden layer, and output layer. As shown
in Figure 2.2, dataset X and Y are fed into the encoder layer, which is followed by the
hidden layer. The output of the hidden layer is the common representation of two views.
The reconstructed modalities X′ and Y ′ are calculated from hidden representations in
the output layer.
The model is trained in terms of following criteria:
• Minimize the self-reconstruction loss, such as minimizing the loss in reconstruction
of X with X input
• Minimize the cross-reconstruction loss, such as minimizing the loss in reconstruc-
tion of X with Y input
• Maximize the correlation between the common representation of two modalities
These metrics mentioned above are achieved by minimizing the loss function expressed
as:
C(θ) =
M
∑
m=1
(C(Z′
m, Zm) + C(Z′
m, Xm) + C(Z′
m, Ym) −λcorr(h(X), h(Y )))
(2.7)
corr(h(X), h(Y ) =
∑M
m=1(h(Xm) −h(X)(h(Ym) −h(Y ))
√∑M
m=1(h(Xm) −h(X)))2 ∑M
m=1(h(Ym) −h(Y )))2
(2.8)
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Dilated Convolution Neural Network
7
Figure 2.2: Schematic of CorrNet.
Where the first term ∑M
m=1(C(Z′
m, Zm) denote the reconstruction loss of X and Y given
input both views Z=(X,Y). The second and third term denote self reconstruction error
from X and Y, respectively;hyperparameter λ regularizes the correlation metric; h(Y )
and h(X) are mean vectors for common representations of view X and Y, respectively.
2.4
Dilated Convolution Neural Network
The dilated convolutional neural network(Dilated CNN) is used in the acoustic speech
separation model since it contains fewer parameters compared to Long short-term mem-
ory (LSTM) and is capable of increasing receptive field in time domain exponentially
without much increase in computation cost. The Dilated CNN was proposed by [1]. The
kernel is introduced holes, resulting in wider space between kernel elements. Figure 2.3
gives examples of 2-D dilated CNN with dilation factor 1, 2 and 4, which indicates that
the receptive filed increases exponentially as the dilation factor increase linearly. The
receptive filed with respect to dilation factor is:
R(d) = K + (K −1) ∗2d−1, d > 1
(2.9)
where K is the kernel size and d is the dilation. When the dilation is 1, the model is the
normal CNN.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Activation Functions
8
Figure 2.3: Example of 2D dilated CNN for different dilation factors from [1]. (a)1-
dilated CNN has the receptive filed 3×3 (b)2-dilated CNN has the receptive
filed 7 × 7. (c) 4-dilated CNN has the receptive filed 15 × 15 .
2.5
Activation Functions
The activation function is the primary component of the neural network. Specifically,
the non-linear activation functions introduce non-linearity to the artificial neural net-
works(ANN). They enable artificial neural networks to learn and estimate very complex
nonlinear functions. The non-linear functions used in our model are described.
2.5.1
Sigmoid
The sigmoid function is expressed in equation 2.10 and the plot is shown in Figure 2.4. It
compress the values to range [0,1]. However, the sigmoid function is rarely used recently.
The main reason is the gradient vanish: The gradient tends to be zero when the neuronal
output is close to 0 or 1. These neurons are known as saturated neurons. Therefore,
these neurons will not have their weights updated. Moreover, the weights of the neurons
connected to them are also updated very slowly.
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.10)
==PAGE:18==
2.5 Activation Functions
9
Figure 2.4:
The figure of sigmoid function.
2.5.2
Tanh
Tanh Function maps the input values into range [-1,1] as described in Figure 2.5. In
practice, Tanh offers better performance than sigmoid functions since its outputs are
centered at zeros and have both positive and negative ranges. Also, there is the vanishing
gradient issue, which occurs when a neuron becomes saturated.
Figure 2.5: The figure of Tanh function .
==PAGE:19==
2.6 SDR and SI-SDR
10
2.5.3
ReLU
ReLu function has no limitation in positive range as presented in Figure 2.6.
This
method has a higher convergence rate than sigmoid or Tanh, as the vanishing gradient
issue can be overcome in a positive range. However, the weight cannot be updated in
the negative range and the output is not centered at zero.
Figure 2.6:
The figure of ReLu function.
2.6
SDR and SI-SDR
The signal-to-distortion ratio(SDR) is a commonly used measurement to evaluate the
performance of the speech separation model, which is calculated as::
SDR = 10log10(
∥Starget∥2
∥einterf + enoise + eartif∥2)
(2.11)
where einterf,enoise and eartif are errros corresponding to interference, noise, and artifacts,
respectively. However, the values are exaggerated unnaturally due to the manner of
estimating einterf,enoise and eartif terms. Scale-Invariant Source-to-Distortion Ratio (SI-
SDR) overcomes this problem by eliminating SDR’s amplitude scaling dependence[18].
Furthermore, SI-SDR optimization has shown outstanding performance in speech separation[19].
Thus, our speech separation model employs SI-SDR as the cost function. The SI-SDR
can be derived in terms of enhanced speech in time domain:
SI −SDR = 10log10
∥Starget∥
∥enoise∥
(2.12)
==PAGE:20==
2.7 Optimization of Neural Network
11
Starget = < S′
d, Sd >
∥Sd∥2
(2.13)
enoise = S′
d −Starget
(2.14)
Where Sd denotes the target speaker speech and S′
d denotes the enhanced speech from
the separation model.
2.7
Optimization of Neural Network
When training model, common issues include overfitting and gradients vanishing or
exploding. Approaches to solving these problems are presented.
2.7.1
Methods to prevent over-fitting
In our model, L2 regularization and early stop are used to address overfitting problem.
The L2 regularization term is added to the loss function:
Lnew = L + λ
2 ∗∥W∥2
(2.15)
Where λ is the hyperparamter and is the weight of regularization term ∥W∥2. The target
of model will not only minimize the the loss but also optimize the regularization term
to increase generalization ability of model.
The other method we used is early stopping. The model will stop training if the valida-
tion set obtains worse performance.
2.7.2
Prevention of Gradient Vanishing or Exploding
The gradient vanishing or exploding can results that the weight cannot be updated.
clip_grad_norm_ is used to solve these problems. It clips the norm of the overall gradient
by concatenating all parameters passed to the function. Using appropriate activation
functions can also address the issue, e.g. ReLu which has constant gradient in positive
range. Another method to prevent the issue is Batch Normalization (BN) which can
make networks faster and more robust against gradient vanishing or exploding. BN has
main two steps: first, the data is normalized, and then scaling and offsetting are applied.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
A schematic of our audio-visual speech separation framework consists of an independent
AV fusion model and speech separation network,as shown in Figure 3.1. Our model takes
the landmarks extracted from raw video pixels and audio mixtures as input and outputs
the separated speech for the target speaker. The outputs of a separate AV fusion model
are used to generate the visual hint that is then used by the speech separation network.
The details with respect to each module are presented in the following sections.
3.1
Dataset
In this project, we trained our model based on LRS3-TED dataset (LRS3 dataset)
[20]. The LRS3 dataset consists of approximately 400 hours or 5594 talkers from video
recordings of TED talks in English. The video clips range in length from one to twenty
seconds, with a frame rate of 25 frames per second. The sample rate of audio is 16 kHz.
The dataset has 3 independent sets: Pre-train, Trainval and Test. The Trainval and Test are
used as train set while Test is used as test set. As the TED dataset contains a wide
variety of videos, it is both a better representation of natural-like speech as well as a
broader sample of English-speaking individuals.
Figure 3.1: The architecture of audio-visual separation framework.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Audio and Visual Features
13
3.2
Audio and Visual Features
The dataset is first prepossessed prior to feature extraction. The audio is converted to
monaural sound with a sampling rate of 8kHz, and the videos are split into 3-second
segments. The 3-d landmarks are extracted from raw videos in order to reduce the di-
mensions of visual information. We only extracted landmarks from around 75,000 videos
due to time constraints. We filtered out videos that failed to estimate landmarks and
do not exceed 3 seconds in length. A total of 74,511 videos, which represent 62.5 hours,
were used to train the model. The audio mixtures are generated on-the-fly to augment
training data.
Audio and visual features are both considered as inputs for our model. The 3-second clips
with frames-per-second(fps) 25 are taken as inputs. The facial landmarks are derived
from the raw pixels of each image implemented by a neural network based approach[21].
For each frame, the face extraction model estimates 68 facial landmarks, each of which
has X, Y, and Z coordinates, producing the visual feature for each frame with the shape
of 68 × 3. Given the 3-second clips at 25FPS, the visual feature for each video of shape
75 × 68 × 3 is flattened on second and third axis, resulting in the input visual feature of
size 75 × 204. We employ a low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 8Hz since many
studies show that the fundamental frequency of facial movement is generally lower than
10Hz[22].
The input audio features of our model are calculated by means of a short-time Fourier
transform (STFT) with window size 512. The sampling rate of audio is 8k Hz and the
visual feature is 25 Hz. To align the output rates of two features, the hop size of STFT
was set as 320 in order. The positive part of spectrum were kept due to Hermitian prop-
erty of real signals. The transformed signal is complex, resulting in input size 2×75×257
where the first dimension indicates real and image part of the spectrogram, the second
dimension notes 75 frames for each video and the third dimension notes 257 frequency
bins. In order to narrow the difference between loud and soft sound, we compress the
complex spectrogram of the noise mixture using a power law of factor 0.3[12].
The framework outputs the complex spectrogram mask which maps the interfered spec-
trogram to the enhanced spectrogram. The isolated speech time-frequency representa-
tions are obtained by point-wise multiplication of estimated mask and mixture spectro-
gram in corresponding real and imaginary parts. The estimated clean audios are yield
by decompressing and inverse STFT.
3.3
AV Fusion Model
To optimize features for the separation network, we investigate two audio-visual combi-
nation strategies including regularized Canonical Correlation Analysis(rCCA) and Cor-
==PAGE:23==
3.3 AV Fusion Model
14
relational Neural Networks(CorrNet).
The rCCA is employed to discover the linear
relationship between audio and visual features, since this model is linear and therefore
really eﬀicient, which makes it suitable for real-time use. However, the Correlational
Neural Networks(CorrNet) may perform better as it correlates two views in a non-linear
manner. These two models were both trained on Trainval set of LRS3 dataset.
3.3.1
The rCCA-based Fusion
A common method used to explore the relationship between different views of time-
series is canonical correlation analysis (CCA). Syncing audio and facial features has
been achieved with this method[23][24]. Figure 3.2 shows the AV fusion model based on
rCCA. The MFCC and modulation bands are considered as audio features while three-
dimension landmarks of the face are regarded as visual representation. The outputs
are the projections of two views that have the maximum correlation between pairs of
canonical components.
Figure 3.2: The rCCA-based AV fusion model.
The rCCA takes audio and visual
features as input and perform linear transformation to maximize the cor-
relation between two views..
3.3.2
The CorrNet-based Fusion
The CorrNet is used to learn a non-linear relationship between two views. The model
architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.3. The inputs of the model are audio and feature
features and the outputs are reconstructed views. The encoder parts for both views
consist of three fully-connected layers. The outputs of encoders for two modalities are
concatenate and then applied to the common layer which is a fully connected layer with
size 40. The decoder blocks contains three condense layers and output reconstructed
audio and visual features, respectively. The model is optimized by minimizing the ob-
jective function Eq. 2.7.
==PAGE:24==
3.3 AV Fusion Model
15
We employed Bayesian optimization using Gaussian Processes to find the optimal hyper-
parameters for λ, learning rate, activation functions, batch size and batch norm. The
λ was chosen between [0.5,1] and learning rate was between [10−6, 0.1] with log-uniform
distributions. The search space of activation functions were Tanh and ReLu. The batch
size is selected between [32,64,128]. We implemented the optimization method by using
scikit-optimize.gp_minimize in Python. The optimization method started with randomly
searching parameters followed by evaluating ten random searches. A Gaussian process
estimator based on a Matern kernel was then used to estimate the next ten randomly
selected parameters. The optimized hyperparameters are shown in Table 3.1.
The outputs of the common layer are the visual or audio cues which are used for speech
separation. The visual hints are determined using landmarks for visual inputs and zero
vectors for audio inputs. In the same way, audio hints are computed using zero vectors
for visual inputs and audio features for audio inputs.
Figure 3.3: The architecture of CorrNet-based AV fusion model.
λ
0.975
Learning rate
6.4 × 10−5
Activation functions
Tanh
Batch norm
False
Batch size
128
Table 3.1: The table of optimal hyperparameters for CorrNet.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Speech Separation Network
16
3.4
Speech Separation Network
The speech separation network has three parts: hint combination, 2-D stacked dilated
CNN and reconstruction as shown in . The 2-D stacked dilated CNN is inspired by
inspired by [19] and [25]. The dilated CNNs are effective in handling long signals with a
wide receptive field, as well as the parameters for CNNs are significantly lower compared
to RNNs. The details of the model for each module are described below.
The hint combination block integrates the speech mixture and the visual hint from
AV fusion model. The mixed waveform is transformed to spectrogram using STFT. The
concatenated 3-D tensor of the real and imaginary components is fed into a 2-D convo-
lution layer with channel number K and kernel size 1, resulting in a 3D tensor of size
K ×F ×L where F indicates frequency bin numbers and L denotes time frame numbers.
The hint of shape C × L is applied to 1-D convolution layer and extent to 3-D tensor
1 × F × L. Lastly, we concatenated them along the channel axis to the combination
tensor of size (K + 1) × F × L.
Followed by the hint fusion part is the stacked dilated CNN part. There are M stacks of
multi-layer dilated CNN. The use of residual and skip connections is employed through-
out all layers in order to accelerate convergence. The residual for each layer is the sum
of the input and output of Dilated CNN block. The residual is taken as input to the
next layer. The skip connection for each layer is obtained by summing up output of
Dilated CNN block and the input of current layer. The output of the stacked dilated
CNN part is the sum of skip connection for each layer.
Architectures of the dilated CNN block are the same, but the dilation factors of the
2-D convolution are determined by layer index n. The dilated CNN block has three
convolution layers as shown in Figure 3.5. The 2-D convolution layer with kernel size
1 × 1 is followed by non-linear activate function ReLu. The next is a 2-D convolution
with kernel size 3×3 and dilation factor 2n−1 followed by ReLu activation function. The
last is 1 × 1 2-D convolution and outputs the tensor with the same shape as the input
in order to match the shapes of skip connection and residual. The batch normalization
layer is used at the end of the convolution layer.
The last is the reconstruction part. The output of the stacked CNN is reshaped by
a 2-D convolution from (K + 1) × F × L to 2 × F × L. Then the values are compressed
between [-1,1] by applying hyperbolic tangent function to produce the complex mask.
Finally the enhanced waveform is obtained by complex multiplication of the estimated
mask and the mixture spectrogram and iSTFT subsequently.
==PAGE:26==
3.5 Training Scheme
17
Figure 3.4: Architecture of separation Network.
Figure 3.5: Architecture of dilated CNN.
3.5
Training Scheme
The AV fusion model is firstly trained, then the separation network is trained with the
aid of the hints from AV fusion model. We found that it was challenging for the network
to separate the mixture when we trained separation model directly using visual hints.
However, since the audio hints and the visual hints are correlated, the visual hints could
be regarded as a noisy audio hints. Therefore, we employed curriculum training strategy
to train the model with increasingly noisy hints generated from the audio signal. The
model is optimized with the assistance of audio cues initially, and it is then trained
with increasing amounts of noise. The model can then eventually be tested with visual
hints. Many studies have shown that this training technique is beneficial to performance
increase.
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Training Scheme
18
For rCCA-based AV fusion model, the noise has Gaussian distribution with µ = 0
and σ ∈[0.2, 0.4]. The separation network is trained using the scheme in which the
variance of injected noise ranges [0.05,0.55] in steps of 0.1. As for the CorrNet-based AV
fusion model, the noise does not follow the Gaussian distribution. We propose a random
phase noise of the visual hint which has the same spectrum magnitude as the original
visual hint but the phase is the random value. The noisy audio hint is expressed as:
An = A + σVrd
(3.1)
where An denotes the noisy audio hint; A is the clean audio hint; Vrd is the random
phase noise of the corresponding visual hint; σ represents the amount of the noise with
range [0.25,1] in step of 0.25.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4
Results
We evaluated our model based on the different fusion strategies and different training
methods considered. Afterwards, we investigated the perspectives for application in real-
world and real-time scenarios. Finally, our model was compared to other state-of-the-art
audiovisual separation models.
4.1
Evaluation Based on Two AV Fusion
Models: CorrNet vs. rCCA
The AV fusion model, rCCA and CorrNet, were first trained to maximize the correlation
between audio features and visual features. The rCCA model learns a linear relationship
between the two modalities while the CorrNet neural network model learns non-linear
relationships. For both fusion models, MFCCs were used as input audio features and
the 3D-landmarks were used as the visual input. The performance of the fusion model
can be evaluated via the averaged Pearson’s correlation r between the audio and video
features learned by each model. Both models were tested on the same dataset, which
contained 1000 3-second clips. The average correlation was 0.39 for rCCA and 0.57 for
CorrNet. This indicates that a non-linear projection of audio and visual inputs yields
higher correlation between the learned features.
The fusion model was used to generate visual hints for the speech separation network.
The separation network was first trained with the aid of the audio hints from the AV
fusion model. The separation model was then tested using the visual hints. For each
test, we used 3000 two-talker or speech-in-noise mixtures generated from the indepen-
dent test set. In the two-talker separation task, the overlapping speech was generated
by mixing two clean speech samples on-the-fly from LRS3.
4.1.1
Two Speaker Separation
For two-talker speech separation, the model based on CorrNet features achieves a good
separation with an SI-SDR of 8.09 dB, whereas the model based on rCCA fusion method
performs less well with an SI-SDR of 5.58 dB (see Table 4.1). This suggests that the sep-
aration performance depends on the correlation between audio and visual hints. When
using hints with higher correlations, the separation model achieves higher performance.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Evaluation Based on Two AV Fusion Models: CorrNet vs. rCCA
20
4.1.2
Influence of Curriculum Training
In this section, we studied the effects of curriculum training on the quality of separa-
tion in two-speaker mixture scenarios. Curriculum learning is a training process that
gradually increases the diﬀiculty of a task, which has been shown to be beneficial to the
model’s performance[26]. The model was trained with the aid of audio hints from fusion
model with increasing levels of random noise added to the hint feature. This helps the
model to learn to separate speech with suboptimal visual hints (because the correlation
between audio and video features is less than 1). The separation results of models with
different training schedules are shown in Table 4.2. For both AV fusion methods, the
models trained with a curriculum give improvement of around 1.6 dB over the model
with no curriculum training.
Figure 4.1 shows the effects of different noise levels on the separation performance dur-
ing curriculum training. We tested the model based on CorrNet fusion method in the
2-talker separation task. The blue dotted line indicates that the model is directly trained
using visual hints while others show the influence of increasing noise level. The separa-
tion performance increases gradually as the noise level increases. This indicates that the
noise training scheme is beneficial to the model performance.
4.1.3
Speech-in-noise Enhancement
We tested how well the separation network trained for speech separation would perform
on a speech enhancement task. For this task, the speech-in-noise mixture was composed
of one clean speech from LRS3 and one noise from an in-house dataset of real-world
recordings of diverse background noises (e.g. amusement park noise, traﬀic noise, etc.).
The noise and clean speech were both normalized so that the speech and noise have equal
Root-Mean-Square (RMS), indicating that the signal-to-noise ratio(SNR) of the mixture
is 0 dB. As shown in Table 4.1, the separation models based on rCCA and CorrNet show
similar performance and overall good separation performance with an SI-SDR of 10.07
dB and 10.81 dB, respectively. Superior performance on the speech enhancement task
may be because the background noise has different characteristic frequencies from speech
signals, as shown in Figure 4.3, and further discussed below.
CorrNet
rCCA
1spk+noise
10.81
10.07
2spk
8.09
5.58
Table 4.1: Comparison between rCCA and CorrNet(SI-SDR improvement in dB).
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Real-World and Real-Time Application
21
CorrNet
rCCA
Curriculum training
8.09
5.58
No curriculum training
6.47
3.97
Table 4.2: Analysis of curriculum training effect in the two-talker separation scenario
(SI-SDR improvement in dB).
4.2
Real-World and Real-Time Application
In this section, we evaluated the separation performance of our model in real-world sce-
narios and perspectives for real-time applications. The models used in this section are
all based on the CorrNet fusion method. We trained the model in a causal setting to test
the performance in a system that could operate in real-time. The causal CNN ensures
that the outputs at time step t only depend on the previous time steps, expressed as
P(yt|x1, x2, ...x(t−1)). To simulate the real-world scenarios, we tested both casual and
non-causal models on mixtures of two speakers and a background noise containing vari-
ous real-world scenes (e.g. aircraft, kindergarten, etc.). For each scenario, we tested the
model on 3000 randomly generated mixtures from the LRS3 test set. Two speech signals
and a background noise signal each with equal RMS were mixed together, which results
in the target speech SNR of -4.8 dB for the target speech stream. Table 4.3 shows the
averaged SI-SDR gain of models in different scenarios. In the 2 clean speaker separation
task, the SI-SDR gain decreases by 0.5 dB from non causal to causal settings. In the
real-world settings, the SI-SDR of the causal model is 7.18 dB, which is 0.5 less than
that the non-causal model.
Figure 4.2 presents the distribution of results for causal and non causal settings in the
real-world scenes. The 95% confidence interval is [7.06,7.29] for non-causal settings and
[7.53,7.76] for non-causal scenes, which indicates that results for real-time operation are
comparable with results for non-causal scenes. This demonstrate that, despite a small
decrease in performance, our model is capable of isolating the target speech in real-
world scenarios involving two-speaker and background noise mixtures. Separation of the
target speech remains high with a causal model, suggesting perspectives for real-time
implementation.
2spk
2spk+noise
Causal
7.52
7.18
Non causal
8.09
7.64
Table 4.3: The averaged SI-SDR improvement of CorrNet-based model in real-time
and real-world settings.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Real-World and Real-Time Application
22
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Noise level
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
SI-SDR(dB)
Results of curriculum training
Curriculum training
Baseline
Figure 4.1: Separation performance as a function of training noise level using the Cor-
rNet fusion method for two-speaker scenarios.
The horizontal dot line
indicates no noise training where the model was trained with visual hints,
shown as baseline. The blue solid line depicts effect of different noise level
on SI-SDR of separated speech. .
Figure 4.2: Separation results for causal and non-causal settings in the real-world
scenarios(SI-SDR improvement in dB). For each scenario, we tested the
model on 3000 mixtures from the test set that does not overlap with the
training set..
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Comparison to Other Models
23
4.3
Comparison to Other Models
We also compared performance of our model to other previous AV speech separation
models on the same dataset LRS3 for the two-speaker separation task. Table 4.4 gives
comparisons using the same signal-to-distortion ratio(SDR) evaluation metric. In [27],
the training speech mixtures are generated from 200k 3-second utterances in train-val and
pre-train set and the training set in [14] is from the whole crops of train-val and pre-train set.
Our training set contains only 74k 3-second samples which is a third of that used in [27].
Despite significantly less training data, our model shows a similar good performance
with a difference in SDR of only 0.28 dB and 0.95 dB, respectively. We should be aware
that the two previous models are both speaker-specific, which requires training a specific
model for the target speaker and cannot operate in real-time. In contrast, our model is
speaker-independent (i.e. generalizes to speech signals not used for model training) and
can operate in real-time at the expense of slight performance degradation.
To the best of our knowledge, the state-of-the-art speaker-independent AV separation
model is the one presented by Ephrat et al. [12] which achieves an SDR of 11.8 dB
in two-speaker separation on the AVSpeech dataset[12]. The model[12] mainly consists
of dilated CNNs for extracting audio and visual features as well as the bidirectional
Long Short-Term Memory (BLSTM) for processing the joint audio-visual representa-
tions. However, this model cannot be applied in real-time due to the long latency of
BLSTM and the extremely complex network that requires large-scale dataset to achieve
good generalization abilities. The fusion approach of our model produces ‘lightweight’
features that are fast to compute and whereby a much smaller network can achieve good
performance. Although our model has about 3 dB SDR lower performance, the causal
settings and small model size make our model suitable for real-time applications.
Our model
Qu et al.[2020]
Ochiai et al.[2019]
Causal
8.56
-
-
Non causal
8.95
9.23
9.9
Table 4.4: Comparison with other models(SDR improvement in dB).
4.4
Discussion and Future Work
We evaluated our model based on rCCA and CorrNet for speech-in-noise enhancement
and two-speaker separation tasks. For speech-in-noise enhancement, the model based
on rCCA fusion method achieves similar performance as the model based on CorrNet.
However, the model based on CorrNet fusion approach performs much better (2.51 dB)
than that based on rCCA for two-speaker speech separation.
The rational of the performance difference mentioned above is that there is a signifi-
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Discussion and Future Work
24
cant difference between the frequency contents of background noise and that of speech.
Figure 4.3 shows an example of input and output spectrograms in the speech-in-noise
enhancement task (input mixtures, ground truth target speech, learned mask, enhanced
speech). As can be seen, the noise spectrum is evenly distributed across all frequencies
while speech spectrum is enriched in specific areas. Figure 4.4 shows an example of the
input and output spectrograms in the 2-speaker separation task. Here, the spectra of the
2 speech mixture are highly overlapping,unlike the speech-in-noise where the frequency
contents of speech are well separated from the noise spectrum. The model may benefit
from the non-overlapping areas. Thus, the separation model can benefit when isolating
the target speech from the mixture with less overlapping frequency contents. We call
this phenomenon ‘masking release’, in which the model gains some benefits from the dis-
tinct components between the masker and target speech. Many studies have shown that
the separation performance decreases when isolating same-gender speeches compared
to speakers of different gender [3][12]. This can be explained by the masking release
effect. The male and female speeches have separated frequency contents, resulting in
higher separation performance than same-gender scenes. The estimated mask is much
closer to the target speech when the background noise is stationary and is more complex
when the masker is speech. In light of the possibility that model performance might be
improved by masking release, it is a promising direction for future research to find a new
representation of mixture in which the target speech can be well distinguished from the
masker.
With the real-time capability, speaker independence, and small model size, our model
is suitable for low-power applications such as hearing aids.
However, several limita-
tions, including the long delay of short-time Fourier transform (STFT) calculation and
potentially time-consuming 3D landmarks extraction, needs to be addressed prior to re-
alization. The STFT representations could be replaced by time-domain representations
in order to alleviate the long latency issue as in [28]. In [28], the new representation
of the mixture waveform from a linear encoder is fed into the separation network. The
separation is performed by multiplying the mask from the separation module and the
encoder representation.
The decoder reconstructs the target speech signal from the
masked encoder representation. Time-domain methods, however, have diﬀiculty sepa-
rating performance in reverberation environments. Many studies [29][30][31] have shown
that multi-channel inputs improve separation performance, particularly in adverse condi-
tions. The temporal representation that incorporates multi-channel inputs could prove
particularly valuable.
As an alternative to the high latency method of landmarks extraction used in the current
study [16], real-time methods similar to MediaPipe Face Mesh [32] should be exploited.
Moreover, the landmarks used in our model only consists of 68 points for each face,
which yields a somewhat crude representation of facial movement. Performance may be
limited due to this factor. The landmarks extracted from MediaPipe Face Mesh include
468 3D face landmarks which contains much more information than 68 points landmarks.
Therefore, MediaPipe Face Mesh can not only decrease latency significantly but also ex-
==PAGE:34==
4.4 Discussion and Future Work
25
tract visual features with more detailed information.
Additionally, it was found that the separation model achieves higher performance when
using cues with higher correlation between audio and video features. The correlation
of hints is an important factor that influences the separation quality of our model. In
order to increase separation performance, it is essential to improve the fusion model to
achieve even higher correlation.
In conclusion, we are considering the following three directions for our future work
in order to improve model performance and decrease latency:
• Investigate a computationally eﬀicient representation of mixture waveform that
can provide a good separation between target and masker speech.
• Investigate alternative visual feature extraction models such as MediaPipe Face
Mesh, which are able to extract more detailed visual information at faster comput-
ing speed.
• Optimize the fusion model to achieve higher AV correlation.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Discussion and Future Work
26
Figure 4.3: An example of the inputs and outputs using the model based on CorrNet
fusion method in the speech-in-noise scenario. The top row shows input
spectrograms, including mixture of a clean speech and background noise(a)
and target speech(b). The bottom row shows the output spectrograms,
including estimated mask(c) and enhanced speech(d).
==PAGE:36==
4.4 Discussion and Future Work
27
Figure 4.4: An example of the inputs and outputs using the model based on CorrNet
fusion method in the 2-speaker scenario. The top row shows input spectro-
grams, including mixture of 2 clean speech (a) and target speech(b). The
bottom row shows output spectrograms, including estimated mask(c) and
estimated target speech(d).
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis proposes an audio-visual deep-learning-based speech separation framework
which decouples the audio-visual fusion process from the separation model. The joint
audio-visual hints from AV fusion models are used to aid the separation. We studied
two fusion strategies, linear regularized canonical correlation analysis(rCAA) and Corre-
lational Neural Networks(CorrNet) in order to maximize the correlation between audio
and visual features. The model based on CorrNet fusion shows much better performance
than the one based on rCCA on a two-speaker separation task. This indicates that sep-
aration model achieves higher separation quality with the aid of hints with higher AV
correlation.
The performance of our model on a small dataset is comparable to that of the state-
of-the-art models based on large-scale datasets.
Furthermore, our model is speaker-
independent and allows working in real-time, making it suitable for wearable devices
such as visually guided hearing aids.
Future work may focus on optimizing the AV fusion model as well as audio and visual
representation in order to achieve higher performance and lower latency.
==PAGE:38==
Bibliography
[1]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolu-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122, 2015.
[2]
E Colin Cherry. Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and with
two ears. The Journal of the acoustical society of America, 25(5):975–979, 1953.
[3]
John R Hershey, Zhuo Chen, Jonathan Le Roux, and Shinji Watanabe. Deep clus-
tering: Discriminative embeddings for segmentation and separation. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
pages 31–35. IEEE, 2016.
[4]
Dong Yu, Morten Kolbæk, Zheng-Hua Tan, and Jesper Jensen. Permutation invari-
ant training of deep models for speaker-independent multi-talker speech separation.
In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 241–245. IEEE, 2017.
[5]
Elana Zion Golumbic, Gregory B Cogan, Charles E Schroeder, and David Poeppel.
Visual input enhances selective speech envelope tracking in auditory cortex at a
“cocktail party”. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(4):1417–1426, 2013.
[6]
Daniel Michelsanti and Zheng-Hua Tan.
Conditional generative adversarial net-
works for speech enhancement and noise-robust speaker verification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.01703, 2017.
[7]
Trevor Darrell, John W Fisher, and Paul Viola. Audio-visual segmentation and
“the cocktail party effect”. In International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces,
pages 32–40. Springer, 2000.
[8]
Laurent Girin, Jean-Luc Schwartz, and Gang Feng. Audio-visual enhancement of
speech in noise. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109(6):3007–3020,
2001.
[9]
Andrew Abel and Amir Hussain. Novel two-stage audiovisual speech filtering in
noisy environments. Cognitive Computation, 6(2):200–217, 2014.
[10] Ibrahim Almajai and Ben Milner. Visually derived wiener filters for speech enhance-
ment. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 19(6):1642–
1651, 2010.
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
30
[11] Jen-Cheng Hou, Syu-Siang Wang, Ying-Hui Lai, Yu Tsao, Hsiu-Wen Chang, and
Hsin-Min Wang. Audio-visual speech enhancement based on multimodal deep con-
volutional neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.00944, 2017.
[12] Ariel Ephrat, Inbar Mosseri, Oran Lang, Tali Dekel, Kevin Wilson, Avinatan Has-
sidim, William T Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein. Looking to listen at the cock-
tail party: A speaker-independent audio-visual model for speech separation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03619, 2018.
[13] Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. The conversation:
Deep audio-visual speech enhancement. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04121, 2018.
[14] Tsubasa Ochiai, Marc Delcroix, Keisuke Kinoshita, Atsunori Ogawa, and Tomohiro
Nakatani. Multimodal speakerbeam: Single channel target speech extraction with
audio-visual speaker clues. In INTERSPEECH, pages 2718–2722, 2019.
[15] S. Davis and P. Mermelstein. Comparison of parametric representations for mono-
syllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 28(4):357–366, 1980.
[16] Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. How far are we from solving the 2d
& 3d face alignment problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks). In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1021–
1030, 2017.
[17] Sarath Chandar, Mitesh M Khapra, Hugo Larochelle, and Balaraman Ravindran.
Correlational neural networks. Neural computation, 28(2):257–285, 2016.
[18] Jonathan Le Roux, Scott Wisdom, Hakan Erdogan, and John R Hershey. Sdr–
half-baked or well done? In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 626–630. IEEE, 2019.
[19] Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. Tasnet: time-domain audio separation network for
real-time, single-channel speech separation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 696–700. IEEE, 2018.
[20] Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. Lrs3-ted: a large-
scale dataset for visual speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496, 2018.
[21] Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. How far are we from solving the 2d
& 3d face alignment problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks). In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1021–
1030, 2017.
[22] Chandramouli Chandrasekaran, Andrea Trubanova, Sébastien Stillittano, Alice
Caplier, and Asif A Ghazanfar. The natural statistics of audiovisual speech. PLoS
Comput Biol, 5(7):e1000436, 2009.
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
31
[23] Mehmet Emre Sargin, Yücel Yemez, Engin Erzin, and A Murat Tekalp. Audiovisual
synchronization and fusion using canonical correlation analysis. IEEE transactions
on Multimedia, 9(7):1396–1403, 2007.
[24] Malcolm Slaney and Michele Covell. Facesync: A linear operator for measuring
synchronization of video facial images and audio tracks. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 13:814–820, 2000.
[25] Enea Ceolini, Jens Hjortkjær, Daniel DE Wong, James O’Sullivan, Vinay S Ragha-
van, Jose Herrero, Ashesh D Mehta, Shih-Chii Liu, and Nima Mesgarani. Brain-
informed speech separation (biss) for enhancement of target speaker in multitalker
speech perception. NeuroImage, 223:117282, 2020.
[26] Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curricu-
lum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine
learning, pages 41–48, 2009.
[27] Leyuan Qu, Cornelius Weber, and Stefan Wermter. Multimodal target speech sep-
aration with voice and face references. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08335, 2020.
[28] Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. Conv-tasnet: Surpassing ideal time–frequency mag-
nitude masking for speech separation. IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech,
and language processing, 27(8):1256–1266, 2019.
[29] Sharon Gannot, Emmanuel Vincent, Shmulik Markovich-Golan, and Alexey Ozerov.
A consolidated perspective on multimicrophone speech enhancement and source
separation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
25(4):692–730, 2017.
[30] Zhong-Qiu Wang, Jonathan Le Roux, and John R Hershey. Multi-channel deep
clustering: Discriminative spectral and spatial embeddings for speaker-independent
speech separation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2018.
[31] Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Xiong Xiao, Takuya Yoshioka, Huaming Wang, Zhenghao
Wang, and Yifan Gong. Cracking the cocktail party problem by multi-beam deep
attractor network. In 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
Workshop (ASRU), pages 437–444. IEEE, 2017.
[32] Yury Kartynnik, Artsiom Ablavatski, Ivan Grishchenko, and Matthias Grundmann.
Real-time facial surface geometry from monocular video on mobile gpus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.06724, 2019.
