==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Predicting turbulent fields using neural nets for wind turbine 
validation 
 
 
Oscar Briz López 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0442 
June 2021 
1
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Oscar Briz López 
Title: Predicting turbulent fields using neural nets for wind turbine 
validation 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0442 
June 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January – June 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Jennifer Rinker 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen 
DTU Compute 
 
Maxence Josso 
Norbert Warncke 
Siemens-Gamesa Renewable Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
2
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Table of Contents
i
List of ﬁgures
ii
0
Introduction
1
1
State of the art
2
1.1
ROM in ﬂuid mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks in ﬂuid mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
LiDAR technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Mann box
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
14
3.1
Mann box modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Conclusions and further work
25
i
==PAGE:4==
List of Figures
2.1
Simpliﬁed representation of a LiDAR ﬁring two beams (red).
The real wind speed (blue) is
projected onto each beam to get the line-of-sight speed (black). By combining the measurements
from both beams and knowing the angle between them it is possible to reconstruct the correct
wind speed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Lorentzian function for two beams with diﬀerent radius focused at 60, 80 and 100 meters. . . . .
4
2.3
Simpliﬁed representation of a LiDAR with a circular scanning pattern. The dashed red line is
the circle where measurements are taken, and θ is the half-cone angle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Synthetic measurements from a LiDAR compared to the real wind speed at the center of the
rotor plane. The yellow dots are one continuous time series that alternates between the diﬀerent
lasers (6 in this case), and it’s what is used as input for the ANN.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Hub coordinate system (red) and wind speed coordinate system (blue) as deﬁned in HAWC2.
While the hub coordinate system can actually be changed, this is the suggested conﬁguration in
the manual, as it aligns best with the global (ﬁxed) reference system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
A single ”slice” of wind turbulence, with 32x32 grid points, showing the three velocity components.
6
2.7
Simple representation of a Mann box with the rotor plane as used in HAWC2. While the box itself
has all three dimensions in units of length, the mean wind speed causes a steady advance through
the ”slices”, so it is possible to interpret it as a set of rotor plane turbulent ﬁelds separated in time.
7
2.8
Dimensions of the diﬀerent matrices deﬁned for the POD method, both in their full representation
(black) and reduced order model (red). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.9
Simple scheme of a neural network with an input layer (blue), one hidden layer(orange) and an
output layer (green). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.10 Some of the most common activation functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.11 From left to right, examples of underﬁtting, overﬁtting and proper ﬁtting of a dataset. Underﬁt-
ting can appear when a model hasn’t been trained for enough epochs or the model is too simple
for the task at hand. The opposite holds for overﬁtting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Evolution of turbulence in the u direction over approximately 160 m of the Mann box. . . . . . .
14
3.2
Explained variance in the training set based on the number of modes for one component and
three components turbulence reconstructions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Explained variance in the training set based on the number of modes for one component and
three components turbulence reconstructions using the chosen number of modes. . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Explained variance in a POD with 80 modes used only to reconstruct the v component in the
turbulence.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Turbulent u component of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the single component and three components
reconstruction. Notice how mode 2 is almost the same for both, just inverted. The same applies
to mode 3 in the single component compared to mode 4 in the three components POD. These
similarities can be attributed to the fact that u carries the most energy out of the three turbulent
components, and is therefore more represented than v and w. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Turbulent v and w components of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the three components reconstruction.
.
16
3.7
POD reconstruction of the u component with the single component model. The resulting tur-
bulence appears smoother, as the lowest scale variations are not present in the modes.
The
maximum and minimum wind speeds are also smaller, as they likely correspond to some con-
structive interference between low and high frequency turbulence, the latter not being present in
the POD model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
POD reconstruction of the u component with the three components model. While also blurrier
than the original Mann box, here ﬁner details are present. This is thanks to the additional modes
in this model. The improvement, however, is marginal, and doesn’t justify the use of three times
as many modes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
ii
==PAGE:5==
3.9
POD reconstruction of the v component with the three components model. Besides showing the
same blurriness of the u reconstructions, it is worth noting that the turbulent structures show a
faster change, and it is harder to identify large turbulent bodies because of the smaller scale of
the perpendicular components.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.10 Sparse coding reconstruction compared to the original values and the POD single component
reconstruction. Both reconstructions look very similar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.11 Turbulent u component of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the single component POD and sparse coding
models. The modes appear noticeably diﬀerent, with a heavier presence of small scale structures
in the sparse coding modes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.12 Single component POD reconstruction mean absolute error over one full dataset. . . . . . . . . .
18
3.13 Sparse coding reconstruction mean absolute error over one full dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.14 Three components POD reconstruction mean absolute error in the u component over one full
dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.15 Three components POD reconstruction mean absolute error in the v and w components over one
full dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.16 Correlation coeﬃcient in the u component over the entire dataset for 10 distinct sets. . . . . . . .
20
3.17 LSTM outputs (blue) for a network with 4 layers of 100 neurons compared to the real mode
amplitudes (red). After 200 epochs, the ANN starts to overﬁt its training set and the error for
the validation set increases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.18 Evolution of the training and testing error for an ANN with three layers of 80 neurons.
L2
regularization was used on all three layers with a regularization factor of 0.002. . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.19 Outputs from the regularized ANN (blue) compared to the real values (red).
. . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.20 Synthetic measurements from a six beam LiDAR plotted over the timestamps corresponding to
individual Mann box slices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.21 Results from training the same regularized ANN from Figure 3.18 on every 50th Mann slice from
the training set. The ANN can now train for over 100 epochs before the test set error begins
to increase. The predicted modes (blue) still don´t match the real ones (red), but some closer
similarities for example in mode 5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.22 Synthetic measurements from a six beam LiDAR compared to the amplitudes of 5 POD modes.
Modes 1, 16, 31, 46 and 61 are shown so that the time evolution of the higher modes, which
change more rapidly in time, is also seen.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.23 Results from training the same regularized ANN from Figure 3.18 on every 50th Mann slice for
diﬀerent input features. The regularization factor was increased to 0.01 for the 12 beam version.
24
iii
==PAGE:6==
0
Introduction
Turbulence is a chaotic ﬂow with changes in pressure and velocity. It is something one can easily see in rivers
when they are fast enough. It is also present in the wind, and we can sometimes feel it in the form of gusts. For
a wind turbine, turbulence introduces some randomness in the loading of the blades, which results in fatigue
damage. Larger blades also sweep a larger cross section of the wind, which makes them more vulnerable to
spatial variations in wind speed. It is therefore of great interest to correctly assess the turbulence that a turbine
will face to ensure its safe operation. If we know the wind ﬁeld in front of a turbine, we can use it to validate
simulations based on load measurements. We can also control the wind turbine in a more predictive rather than
reactive way, or even pitch the blades based on what gusts of wind they are going to go through.
Traditionally, wind speed and turbulence are measured with an anemometer placed at hub height. This gives
point measurements, which are typically summarized in a 10 minute average and a 10 minute standard deviation
divided by said average. This second value is called turbulence intensity (TI), and serves as a metric of how
turbulent the wind is. While TI has proven to be a reliable metric for wind turbine design, it’s still based on
point measurements. With the largest turbines having 100 meter blades, assuming this value is valid for the
entire rotor area is quite a simpliﬁcation. Moreover, as these turbines are much more expensive, there is more
to gain from properly understanding the inﬂow conditions in order to reduce manufacturing costs or enhance
the control strategy, and investing in additional measurement equipment is more aﬀordable.
Nacelle mounted LiDARs are one of the ways to gather more information from the wind to achieve this. They
consist on a laser mounted on top of the turbine and pointed in its same direction. The laser is ﬁred in a pattern
(depends on the model) around the rotor plane some distance upwind, and the backscatter from particles in
the air is measured to determine the velocity in the laser direction. These velocities are usually projected and
averaged to determine a hub height wind speed and (less accurately) TI. While LiDARs are mostly used to
obtain the same information as an anemometer, the additional raw measurements from the lasers can potentially
be used for a better representation of the turbulence in a volume of air.
The goal of this project is therefore to start from these measurements, and use reduced order modeling (ROM)
and machine learning techniques applied in other ﬁelds of ﬂuid mechanics to reconstruct the turbulent ﬂow.
While the original scope included the use of real data, this could not be done, as Siemens Gamesa could not
provide the necessary measurements to achieve meaningful results.
1
==PAGE:7==
1
State of the art
In this project there are two distinct sections. First, the reduced order modelling (ROM) of turbulence, where the
goal is to ﬁnd an accurate representation of turbulence with a simpliﬁed model. Theoretically, any relationship
between the ROM and the complete turbulent ﬁeld could be implicitly included in a complex enough Artiﬁcial
Neural Network (ANN) that is trained using the turbulence itself as a target. However, by using ROM we
reduce the number of outputs the ANN needs to predict, thus making it easier to train. This reduction is also
done in a ”controlled” way, using a well understood numerical method rather than the black box statistical
model that an ANN is.
1.1
ROM in ﬂuid mechanics
Turbulence is a complex phenomenon that takes place on a wide range of scales and frequencies. Fully resolving
a turbulent ﬁeld requires extensive computer simulations, and it’s not of great interest in many cases, as the
smallest turbulence scales carry little energy. Reduced Order Modeling (ROM) is therefore commonly used in
the ﬁeld of ﬂuid mechanics. One of the most common approaches is Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD),
which was ﬁrst proposed for use in turbulent ﬂows in 1993[1] and is considered one of the main ROM strategies
in this ﬁeld. It has already been employed in the ﬁeld of wind energy, both to analyze ﬂows[2][3][4] and to
simulate them[5][6]. It has proven capable of representing the kind of turbulent ﬁelds that modern software uses
for wind turbine aeroelastic simulations. Therefore POD has been identiﬁed as the ROM strategy with most
potential for this project.
Additionally, a modiﬁed version of POD called sparse coding[7] has also been studied. This has also been
employed for turbulence modeling, but not yet in the context of wind energy. The diﬀerences between both
methods, as well as their implementation, are explained in section 2.
1.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks in ﬂuid mechanics
The use of machine learning in conjunction with POD to reconstruct a ﬂow has already been studied[8], and
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) have proven to be successful at this. In particular, a Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) framework has been used in ﬂow reconstruction from discrete point measurements using POD[9]. While
LiDAR measurements aren’t exactly point measurements, this approach has good potential for this project.
2
==PAGE:8==
2
Methodology
2.1
LiDAR technology
A LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) is a remote sensing device that emits a laser and measures the reﬂected
light. While originally used to measure distances based on travel time, in the ﬁeld of wind energy they are used
to measure wind speeds based on the scattered light from particles suspended in the air (backscatter). This can
be done thanks to the Doppler eﬀect, which is the change in frequency of a wave when it bounces oﬀa moving
object. The change in frequency for a laser beam can be calculated as follows:
∆f = 2V
λ
(1)
Where f is the wave frequency, V is the velocity of the object relative to the source in the direction of the beam
(positive if it approaches the source) and λ is the wavelength. When an object is approaching the LiDAR, the
reﬂected light will have higher frequency, and objects moving away will reﬂect light with a lower frequency. By
measuring these shifts and knowing the original wavelength of the laser it is possible to determine the speed of
the object.
One of the limitations of LiDARs is that they can only measure velocity in the beam direction, called line-of-
sight, as any velocity components perpendicular to the beam will not cause any shift in frequency. This is why
most LiDAR systems ﬁre lasers in several directions, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Simpliﬁed representation of a LiDAR ﬁring two beams (red). The real wind speed (blue) is projected
onto each beam to get the line-of-sight speed (black). By combining the measurements from both beams and
knowing the angle between them it is possible to reconstruct the correct wind speed.
Another limitation is that measuring particles in the air is not as exact as measuring a large solid object.
LiDARs are adjusted to measure at a given distance, that can range from just a few meters to more than
200. To do so, they must somehow measure the reﬂections from particles at that distance, while ignoring those
coming from the rest of the beam trajectory. There’s two solutions to this, that lead to two diﬀerent kinds of
LiDAR systems: pulsed LiDARs and Continuous Wave (CW) LiDARs. Pulsed LiDARs emit a short pulse of
light, and then measure the backscatter for a small window of time. By controlling the beginning and end of
that window it is possible to measure at a given distance (or rather a range around it) based on time of ﬂight.
For this project, however, we will focus on CW LiDARs, as this is the one that could more easily be modeled
for synthetic data generation. This kind of LiDAR sends a continuous beam which is focused at the desired
distance. By focusing the beam, its intensity is increased around the target distance, getting more backscatter
from particles around that area. The amount of backscatter from a given distance can be modelled with a
Lorentzian function[10]:
F =
Γ/π
∆2 + Γ2
(2)
Where ∆is the distance from the focus position along the beam direction and Γ is the half-width of the weighting
3
==PAGE:9==
function to the -3 dB point. In other words, Γ is the distance from the focus length in the beam direction at
which the weighting function takes half the value of its peak, and it therefore gives an idea of how focused the
measurements are (a small Γ is better). It can be estimated with the following equation:
Γ = λR2
πA2
(3)
Where λ is the laser wavelength (usually around 1.55µm), R is the focus length and A is the beam radius at
the output lens. Combining both equations, Figure 2.2 shows the Lorentzian function for diﬀerent beam radii
and focus lengths:
Figure 2.2: Lorentzian function for two beams with diﬀerent radius focused at 60, 80 and 100 meters.
HAWC2 was used for synthetic measurements generation. This is a widely used program for the aeroelastic
simulation of wind turbines. For turbulence simulation it uses Mann boxes, which are explained in the next
subsection. Based on these boxes and the mean wind speed, it is possible to generate artiﬁcial LiDAR mea-
surements as output. It is worth noting that a more realistic representation of wind would include a shear
proﬁle, this is, the change (usually increase) in wind speed with height. However, for the shake of simplifying
the modeling, no shear was included in the simulations. When applying the model to real measurements it
would be possible to either re-train it with synthetic measurements that include shear, or estimate the shear in
the real wind and subtract its eﬀect from the LiDAR measurements.
The virtual LiDAR was placed right on the rotor nose. While most LiDARs are mounted on the nacelle, this
introduces some misalignment between their measurements and the wind turbine inﬂow, and there is the issue
of blades crossing through the line of sight and thus stopping measurements. Centering the LiDAR in the
rotor solves both of these problems, and has therefore better potential as input for the ANN. HAWC2 LiDAR
measurements must have a ﬁxed direction. To simulate a rotating scan, 12 LiDAR beams were set on regular
intervals of 30 degrees with a half-cone angle of 15 degrees.
4
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.3: Simpliﬁed representation of a LiDAR with a circular scanning pattern. The dashed red line is the
circle where measurements are taken, and θ is the half-cone angle.
Since measurements are available from each of the beams at all time steps of the simulation, a code was develop
to cycle through each of the beams at a chosen frequency. This allows the recreation of the circular sweeping in
a single time series, and it is also possible to use less beams and see the eﬀects of e.g. using a 6 beam LiDAR.
An example of the resulting measurements is shown in Figure 2.4 below:
Figure 2.4: Synthetic measurements from a LiDAR compared to the real wind speed at the center of the rotor
plane. The yellow dots are one continuous time series that alternates between the diﬀerent lasers (6 in this
case), and it’s what is used as input for the ANN.
A focus length of 100 m and a Rayleigh length of 8.5 m were used for the LiDAR.These values were based on
those of a CW ZephIR LiDAR[11]. While the LiDAR in the cited report is ground-based, the same manufacturer
produces a nacelle-mounted version, and so the parameters of the optics are expected to be similar.
2.2
The Mann box
A Mann box is a representation of wind turbulence that is used in HAWC2 for aeroelastic calculations. It
consists of a three dimensional grid, where each point has three wind velocity components. The coordinate
system used in HAWC2 is presented in Figure 2.5. For this project, the box had 32 6.5 m cells in the x and z
direction, with a spacing of 0.5 m in the y direction (diﬀerent numbers of cells were used for this component,
starting at 8192). Each dataset was created with a distinct, manually selected seed to avoid any chance of
repetition in the random number generation.
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.5: Hub coordinate system (red) and wind speed coordinate system (blue) as deﬁned in HAWC2. While
the hub coordinate system can actually be changed, this is the suggested conﬁguration in the manual, as it
aligns best with the global (ﬁxed) reference system.
The wind velocity components only represent turbulence, while the mean wind speed and shear are added
afterwards. This turbulence is created using the Mann model[12], following the IEC 61400-1 standard[13]. The
standard parameters for normal atmospheric conditions above 60 meters high were used (length scale L = 29.4m
and shear blocking factor Γ = 3.9). The αϵ2/3 parameter, which governs the amplitude of the ﬂuctuations in
the turbulence, was set to 1. This is done because the relationship between this parameter and the turbulence
intensity (TI, standard deviation divided by mean for the u component of the wind speed) is not straightforward.
Since turbine classes are deﬁned based on the TI they can withstand, it is easier to generate a Mann box with
a ”random” scale, then scale it to ﬁt the desired TI. While arguably not as accurate, this was approach is
commonly used. For this project a TI of 12% was used, corresponding to a class C (low turbulence) wind
turbine in the IEC 61400-1 standard[13]. The grid cells were set to contain cell average values rather than point
values.
Figure 2.6: A single ”slice” of wind turbulence, with 32x32 grid points, showing the three velocity components.
6
==PAGE:12==
During simulations, HAWC2 interpolates turbulence values from this grid for each of the blade sections. The
grid needs to therefore be large enough to encompass the rotor plane, and long enough in the Y direction to last
for the entire simulation (although HAWC2 can loop through it if this condition is not met). Since the Mann
box advances in the Y direction at the pace of the average wind speed, this axis can also be considered a time
axis. This property will later be used in the POD reconstruction.
Figure 2.7: Simple representation of a Mann box with the rotor plane as used in HAWC2. While the box itself
has all three dimensions in units of length, the mean wind speed causes a steady advance through the ”slices”,
so it is possible to interpret it as a set of rotor plane turbulent ﬁelds separated in time.
2.3
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition, also called Principal Component Analysis and Singular Value Decompo-
sition, is a numerical method used to reduce the complexity of a system. In simple terms, it starts with a
system that can be represented as a set of values that evolve in time. In this project, these values are the wind
speed components in each of the cells of the 2D ” from the Mann box, which evolve through time as illustrated
in Figure 2.7. Given the slices are 32 cells high and wide, this results in 3072 values, or 1024 if only the u
component of the turbulence is included. The goal is then to ﬁnd modes in these values, so that the each time
step can be reconstructed by combining these modes with the correct amplitudes, similarly to a Fourier series.
By using less modes than values in the original signal, it is possible to reduce the complexity of the system, at
the cost of losing accuracy.
The modes resulting from POD are useful because they are the best at representing the variance in the system.
This will now be shown in a more mathematical way. In the case of turbulence, which in itself is responsible for
the variance in the wind, this is of particular interest. This way, the resulting reconstruction will have a similar
TI to the original series. This means similar fatigue damage on the turbine, or in, other applications, similar
wake decay. Because of this, POD is widely used in ﬂuid mechanics as a good method to preserve most of the
variation in a ﬂow while reducing the complexity of the system.
Mathematically, if a system A has n measurements sampled over m time steps, then it is represented as follows:
A =





a(x1, t1)
· · ·
a(xn, t1)
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
a(x1, tm)
· · ·
a(xn, tm)





(4)
Our goal is then to ﬁnd a decomposition of the form:
A = UΣV T
(5)
Where U is a matrix whose columns represent the POD modes, Σ is a diagonal matrix of positive, monotonically
decreasing coeﬃcients called singular values, and V is a matrix whose rows represent the amplitudes of the POD
7
==PAGE:13==
modes for each time step. Both U and V are orthogonal, and therefore U ∗U = UU ∗= I, V ∗V = V V ∗= I,
where I is the identity matrix. This leads to the following derivation:
AT A = V ΣT U T UΣV T
(6)
Introducing the fact that UU ∗= UU T = I, and omitting the identity matrix:
AT A = V ΣT ΣV T
(7)
Since AT A is necessarily positive semi-deﬁnite, Equation 7 is the very deﬁnition of the eigenvalue problem for
AT A, where V are the eigenvectors and ΣT Σ are the eigenvalues. Solving this problem yields the desired V
directly, and the resulting eigenvalues are just the squares of the singular values in Σ. These results can be
substituted in Equation 5 to obtain U. A similar derivation can also be done for AAT , obtaining in this case U
from the eigenvalue problem, and V from substituting:
AAT = UΣV T V ΣT U T
(8)
AAT = UΣΣT U T
(9)
All of these operations, however, are purely algebraic and don’t introduce any loss of information. We still have
a perfect representation of the original system, except in more complicated way. To simplify the problem we
need to delete some of the modes in U, and the corresponding singular values in Σ and columns in V . Since
the singular values are monotonically decreasing, the importance of the modes also decreases monotonically.
Therefore, the best rank r approximation of A can be obtained by using the ﬁrst r POD modes. To be more
precise:
Y ≈Yr = UrΣrV T
r
(10)
Where Yr is the rank r matrix that minimises ∥Y −Yr∥F , with ∥·∥F being the Frobenius norm. A visualization
of the diﬀerent matrices and dimensions is shown in Figure 2.8:
Figure 2.8: Dimensions of the diﬀerent matrices deﬁned for the POD method, both in their full representation
(black) and reduced order model (red).
If the Mann box used to create the POD is large enough, then the modes in U will be representative of turbulence
in general, and not just for that particular box. It is then possible to model any other Mann box (with same
dimensions in x and z) by ﬁnding its corresponding amplitudes. The issue with this approach is that, if a large
number of modes is used for a high ﬁdelity reconstruction, the last ones will tend to overﬁt the initial Mann
box rather than represent a general turbulent ﬁeld. An attempt to correct this was done by employing sparse
coding. This method aims to solve the following minimization problem:
min
U,W
1
2∥Y −UW∥2
F + β∥W∥1
s.t.
∥Ui∥F ≤1
for all i
(11)
8
==PAGE:14==
Where W is equivalent to ΣV T from the POD reconstruction, and β is the regularization parameter. If β = 0,
then this equation reduces to the POD problem. If positive, it ads a cost to having many non-zero entries in
the coeﬃcients matrix. In other words, it penalizes the use of all modes to reconstruct every time step. In
the original algorithm, the L0 norm is used (β∥W∥0) to force the coeﬃcients to become 0. This, however, is
troublesome for the optimization problem, and the L1 norm is commonly used to avoid this.
To produce this ROM, a starting set of modes is needed. For a rank r approximation a good method is to
compute the ﬁrst r POD modes uP OD, then combine them into the sparse modes u as follows:
ui = 0.6uP OD
i
+ 0.4uP OD
r−i
(12)
Using the POD modes directly as initial guesses would introduce a strong bias in the optimization algorithm.
This method reduces that bias, while still keeping the initial guess relevant to the problem. The optimization
is then solved iteratively, starting by updating the sparse coeﬃcients by solving the following problem:
min
wk
1
2∥yk −Uwk∥2
F + β∥wk∥1
(13)
Where k = 1, 2, ..., m are the time steps in the system, and yk and wk are the columns in Y and W respectively.
After this, the sparse modes are updated by solving the following problem:
min
U
p
X
k=1
1
2∥yk −Uwk∥2
F
s.t.
∥Ui∥F ≤1
for all i
(14)
The objective function can then be evaluated for iteration i:
Γ(i) =
m
X
k=1
1
2∥yk −Uwk∥2
F + β∥wk∥1
(15)
We can now check for convergence based on the diﬀerence between Γ(i) and Γ(i −1), and run the loop again if
needed. After convergence is reached, the sparsity of the model can be evaluated as follows:
Sparsity = 100number of zero elements in W
mr
%
(16)
One ﬁnal thing worth noting about POD is that, since it captures the most amount of variance, if one of the
measurements has a larger variance from the beginning it will be over-represented in the modes. This can
happen if a Mann box happens to have a strong gust of wind in one corner, which can then make the POD
modes less general. To avoid this, the data is scaled to have zero mean and unit variance before performing any
of the ROM techniques. This normalization is done together for the three components, so that the u component,
which is the most important one, retains its higher variance.
2.4
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
ANNs are a powerful tool in machine learning for modeling complex relationships. The consist of layers of
neurons connected to one another. The ﬁrst layer is the input layer, and it consists of as many neurons as
inputs has the model.
Then there is a number of hidden layers, which can have any number of neurons.
Finally there is an output layer, which has as many neurons as outputs the model has. Each neuron receives
information from all neurons in the previous layer, and sends information to all neurons in the next layer, as
shown in Figure 2.9:
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.9: Simple scheme of a neural network with an input layer (blue), one hidden layer(orange) and an
output layer (green).
In this case there are two inputs, two outputs, and one hidden layer with four neurons. The values that the
neurons send forward depend on two things: the activation functions and the weights. An activation function
is simply a function that converts the value in a neuron into the value that is fed to the next layer. Some
common functions include the rectiﬁed linear activation function (ReLu(x) = max(0, x)), the sigmoid function
(σ(x) =
1
1+e−x ) or the hyperbolic tangent (tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x . The best activation function will depend on the
speciﬁc problem, and it is common practice to simply try several ones and choose the one with the best results.
Figure 2.10: Some of the most common activation functions.
The weights in a neural network determine how important the output of one neuron is for the input of the
neurons in the next layer. Let us consider the jth neuron in the lth layer of the ANN, and how to compute its
output al
j. If we deﬁne wl
j,k as the weight from the kth neuron in the previous layer to this neuron, then we can
calculate al
j as follows:
al
j = σ
 X
k
wl
j,kal−1
k
+ bl
j
!
(17)
Where σ can be any activation function and bl
j is a bias added to the neuron (which is also tuned during
10
==PAGE:16==
training). If we consider σ to be the element-wise version of the activation function (σ(x)j = σ(xj), then the
previous equation can be rewritten in vectorized form:
al = σ(wlal−1 + bl)
(18)
When an ANN is created, the weights and biases are random. It is necessary to adjust them by training the
network, and the ﬁrst step for this is deﬁning a cost function. The cost function must represent how well the
ANN is performing, with lower values being better. An example of a commonly used one is the quadratic cost
function:
C = 1
2n
X
x
∥y(x) −aL(x)∥2
(19)
Where n is the number of training samples, y is the correct output corresponding to sample x and aL(x) is
the vector of outputs from the last layer for sample x. In order to minimize this function, backpropagation
is used. It consists of calculating the partial derivatives of the cost function with respect to the weights and
biases of each of the layers, starting from the last one and moving towards the input one[14]. After this, the
weights and biases are updated using gradient methods. Because of this, whenever a neural network is trained
on a dataset, it ﬁrst does a forward pass computing the outputs for all samples, and then a backwards pass
computing the gradients, followed by an update in parameters. This entire process is called an epoch, and is
repeated iteratively until an acceptable value in the cost function is reached (or a limit in the number of epochs).
Mathematically, we can deﬁne zl = wlal−1 + bl as the weighted input to the neurons in layer l. Then, for the
ﬁnal layer L in the ANN we can deﬁne:
δL = ∇aC  σ′(zL)
(20)
Where δL is the error in the layer, ∇aC is the gradient of the cost function for the activation output,  is the
element-wise product and σ′ is the derivative of the activation function. For all previous layers, the error can
be calculated as follows:
δL = ((wl+1)T δl+1)  σ′(zL)
(21)
And from here, the gradients for the weights and biases can be found:
∂C
∂bl
j
= δl
j
(22)
∂C
∂wl
j,k
= al−1
k
δl
j
(23)
This shows one of the shortcomings of this method. In Equation 21, the error in one layer depends on the
error, weights and derivative of the activation in the next layer. This means that, if one of those values starts
being systematically large or small through several layers, the gradients in the previous layers will become
exponentially larger or smaller respectively. This is particularly an issue in deep networks (ones with many
hidden layers). For example, the sigmoid function has a derivative with values 0 < y ≤1
4. Using this in a deep
neural network is likely to lead to vanishing gradients, which means that the ﬁrst layers will hardly change if
at all.
There are several variations on this basic ANN structure, and the one that has been identiﬁed as most suitable for
this project is the long short-term memory neural network (LSTM). The idea is that cells have a memory where
they store information from previous time steps (previous samples). Their output depends on this information
and the usual inputs to a cell, and is governed by a forget gate, input gate and output gate. Each gate has
values between 0 (closed) and 1 (open), and multiply the corresponding values in the cell. The forget gate
determines how much of the previous information is retained, the input get determines how much of the new
input reaches the cell, and the output gate governs how much of the cell information is sent out. LSTM is more
complex than a simple ANN, and an in-depth explanation can be found in [15].
11
==PAGE:17==
Once an ANN architecture has been selected, it is necessary to train it. This is done by feeding the model with
a set of inputs and their correct outputs. When doing this, it is important to split all the available data into
a training set, a testing set, and a validation set. The training set is used by the ANN to learn. After every
epoch, its performance is also evaluated in the testing set. Finally, once the results are satisfactory, the ANN is
evaluated on the validation set. This is done to avoid overﬁtting: if we were to only use a single set for training
and validation, and there is not much data, the model could actually be memorizing the dataset rather than
predicting it. This can also happen if the model is too complex for the problem at hand, but a model too simple
can also cause issues, as illustrated in Figure 2.11. By using the validation set only after training we make sure
that there are no hidden similarities between the training and testing set that can still lead to overﬁtting. A
typical division would be 80% of the data for training, 10% for testing and 10% for validation, although this
can vary depending on the amount of data available.
Figure 2.11: From left to right, examples of underﬁtting, overﬁtting and proper ﬁtting of a dataset. Underﬁtting
can appear when a model hasn’t been trained for enough epochs or the model is too simple for the task at hand.
The opposite holds for overﬁtting.
The most simple way to avoid overﬁtting is to use more data. If its possible to use larger datasets, the model
will be able to train for a longer time (more epochs) without risking it memorizing the data. Often times,
however, the data is limited. In these cases regularization is one way to deal with this problem. Before we have
deﬁned a cost function for an ANN. Regularization consists of adding a term to this cost function that increases
with the weights in the network, much like the method presented for sparse coding. Including this in the cost
function presented in Equation 19 yields the following:
C = 1
2n
X
x
∥y(x) −aL(x)∥2 + λ
2n
X
l
X
k
X
j
|wl
k,j|
(24)
Where λ controls the importance of regularization in the same way β did it in sparse coding. Here L1 regular-
ization is shown (absolute value of the weights), but there are other variations.
One ﬁnal aspect worth discussing of ANNs is data pre-processing.
A neural network tries to model some
relationship between an input and an output. It is therefore important to understand both, and modify them in
a way that facilitates training. A simple example of this is scaling. If we were to predict the weight of a person
based on their height and age, we could create an ANN with two inputs and one output. If we use kilograms
and years for the weight and age respectively, but µm for the height, this will cause issues. A regular person
might be 30 years old, measure 1900000 µm and weight 90 kg. Because of the vast diﬀerence in scale, the ANN
is more likely to try and predict the weight based on the age alone, and ignore the height. If the height was
deﬁned as 1.9 m, then it would be much closer to the scale of the weight, and the ANN would have a better time
ﬁnding a relationship between the two. Even better, we can normalize all three variables, so that the ranges [0
kg, 100 kg], [0 m, 2 m] and [0 y, 100 y] are each mapped to a [0, 1] range. This way the ANN will use the more
relevant features, rather than the ones closest to the output in value.
In the case of this project, we have some LiDAR measurements and some POD reconstructions. Each sample
consists of one of the 2D slices from the Mann box, in the form of its POD amplitudes. Since these values
already correspond to normalized data, no further action was deemed necessary. In the case of the LiDAR
measurements, some further work was required. It was necessary to choose n measurements (depending on the
desired number of features) centered around the slice. These measurements should ideally always lay exactly in
the same position respective to the slice, but this is not possible in the general case as it depends on the spacing
between slices and the mean wind speed. It is also necessary that the measurements from the diﬀerent angled
beams are always arranged in the same order, e.g. that the ﬁrst measurement in any sample is the one from the
beam facing upwards. To achieve this, for each slice the closest measurement from the top beam was found, and
used as starting point to get the other measurements. Since there are a maximum of 12 lasers, measurements
are taken at 100 Hz and the wind speed was 10 m/s for the simulations, the maximum drift between diﬀerent
samples is 12
1
100Hz10m/s = 1.2m.
The measurements were then scaled to a 0 mean 1 standard deviation
12
==PAGE:18==
distribution for each of the samples, as to represent the change in wind speed from diﬀerent sections rather than
the absolute values.
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Results
3.1
Mann box modeling
Figure 3.1 shows the u component of the turbulent ﬁeld from one of the generated Mann boxes evolving through
time. It is noticeable how there are small scale ﬂuctuations from one image to the next, but the larger turbulent
bodies evolve more slowly. Since these larger bodies also show larger variations in wind speed, they will be more
prominent in the POD representations.
Figure 3.1: Evolution of turbulence in the u direction over approximately 160 m of the Mann box.
Figure 3.2 shows the quality of the POD reconstructions in the form of explained variance as a function of number
of modes. Both a single (u) component turbulence reconstruction and a three components reconstruction are
compared. Both show similar trends, with the ﬁrst modes being responsible for most of the variance, and the
later ones contributing less to the quality of the reconstruction. These POD modes were obtained from a Mann
box with 32768 ”slices”, which was found to be large enough to yield generally applicable ROMs.
(a) One component turbulence.
(b) Three components turbulence.
Figure 3.2: Explained variance in the training set based on the number of modes for one component and three
components turbulence reconstructions.
Based on these ﬁgures, it was decided to use 80 modes for the single component POD and 266 modes for the
three components POD. It is around this mark that both PODs start having little additional accuracy from
additional modes. The explained variance for the resulting models is shown in Figure 3.3 below:
14
==PAGE:20==
(a) One component turbulence.
(b) Three components turbulence.
Figure 3.3: Explained variance in the training set based on the number of modes for one component and three
components turbulence reconstructions using the chosen number of modes.
Both models show similar explained variance, above 85%, which was deemed high enough to provide a good
reconstruction. however, the three component model requires more than three times as many modes as the single
component one. Given the coherence between turbulence components, one could expect to need less modes.
The reason for this can be found in Figure 3.4. When reconstructing just the v component in the turbulence,
using 80 modes yields an explained variance of just below 80%, something that the POD reconstruction for
u could achieve with just 40 modes. These lateral components are simply harder to represent with a POD
decomposition.
The reason the three component POD doesn’t need even more modes is that most of the
variance in the wind speed is contained in the u component.
Figure 3.4: Explained variance in a POD with 80 modes used only to reconstruct the v component in the
turbulence.
The following ﬁgures show the ﬁrst modes for these POD models. While there is a scale for wind speed, this
is no real meaning, as the components have simply been given a random (large) amplitude to appear clearly
visible, otherwise re-scaling the POD output for display (namely adding the mean for each point back in) would
distort their appearance.
15
==PAGE:21==
(a) Single component POD.
(b) Three components POD.
Figure 3.5: Turbulent u component of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the single component and three components
reconstruction. Notice how mode 2 is almost the same for both, just inverted. The same applies to mode 3 in
the single component compared to mode 4 in the three components POD. These similarities can be attributed to
the fact that u carries the most energy out of the three turbulent components, and is therefore more represented
than v and w.
(a) v component
(b) w component.
Figure 3.6: Turbulent v and w components of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the three components reconstruction.
Using these modes to reconstruct the Mann box slices presented in Figure 3.1 results in the following ﬁgures:
16
==PAGE:22==
(a) Original Mann box.
(b) POD reconstruction.
Figure 3.7: POD reconstruction of the u component with the single component model. The resulting turbulence
appears smoother, as the lowest scale variations are not present in the modes. The maximum and minimum
wind speeds are also smaller, as they likely correspond to some constructive interference between low and high
frequency turbulence, the latter not being present in the POD model.
(a) Original Mann box.
(b) POD reconstruction.
Figure 3.8: POD reconstruction of the u component with the three components model. While also blurrier than
the original Mann box, here ﬁner details are present. This is thanks to the additional modes in this model. The
improvement, however, is marginal, and doesn’t justify the use of three times as many modes.
(a) Original Mann box.
(b) POD reconstruction.
Figure 3.9: POD reconstruction of the v component with the three components model. Besides showing the
same blurriness of the u reconstructions, it is worth noting that the turbulent structures show a faster change,
and it is harder to identify large turbulent bodies because of the smaller scale of the perpendicular components.
17
==PAGE:23==
The sparse coding algorithm was implemented using MiniBatchSparsePCA from Sklearn. A model with 80
modes was trained to reconstruct the u turbulence component with a regularization parameter of 1.
The
resulting modes and reconstructions are shown in the following ﬁgures. The model has a sparsity of 14.3%.
(a) Original Mann box.
(b) POD reconstruction.
(c) Sparse coding reconstruction.
Figure 3.10: Sparse coding reconstruction compared to the original values and the POD single component
reconstruction. Both reconstructions look very similar.
(a) Single component POD.
(b) Sparse coding.
Figure 3.11: Turbulent u component of the ﬁrst 12 modes for the single component POD and sparse coding
models. The modes appear noticeably diﬀerent, with a heavier presence of small scale structures in the sparse
coding modes.
To better assess the quality of the reconstructions, the following ﬁgures show the mean absolute errors in each
of the grid cells over a full dataset of 8192 samples.
Figure 3.12: Single component POD reconstruction mean absolute error over one full dataset.
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.13: Sparse coding reconstruction mean absolute error over one full dataset.
Figure 3.14: Three components POD reconstruction mean absolute error in the u component over one full
dataset.
(a) v component.
(b) w component.
Figure 3.15: Three components POD reconstruction mean absolute error in the v and w components over one
full dataset.
19
==PAGE:25==
The reconstructions appear to struggle in the edges of the grid, particularly in the lower left corner. This is
possibly an issue with how these edge cells are simulated in HAWC2’s turbulence generator. Since they lay
outside of the rotor plane, this is not considered an issue. The single component POD and sparse coding show
similar results, while the former has a slightly lower minimum error. The three components POD has slightly
worse errors in the u component. The v and w component each show lower errors than the previous, but this
can be attributed to the fact that oscillations in u are larger than in v, and these are larger than in w. To
account for variations between datasets, 10 sets of 8192 samples were tested for each model, yielding the results
in Figure 3.16:
Figure 3.16: Correlation coeﬃcient in the u component over the entire dataset for 10 distinct sets.
Here the correlation is calculated for all cells in each dataset (Mann box) using the following equation:
c =
P uur
P u2
(25)
Where ur is the reconstructed value. The results show some change between datasets, but for each Mann box
the three models always rank the same. The single component POD is best, never going below 80% correlation.
The sparse coding is a close second, and the three components POD is the worst of the three as expected. The
use of a large training set for deﬁning the models solved the potential issue of overﬁtting in the single component
POD model, hence the reason why the sparse coding approach couldn’t outperform it.
Based on this, it is decided to move forward with the single component POD reconstruction. While it sacriﬁces
two of the components in the turbulence, it does a better job at representing the main one, and it is a signiﬁcantly
simpler model, which will simplify the work on the neural network side.
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
For the ANN implementation Keras was used.
All the ANNs presented use the ReLu activation function,
since it overcomes the vanishing gradient problem from other functions. The last layer used a linear activation
(y(x) = x) since POD amplitudes can be positive or negative. Unfortunately, it was not possible to obtain
satisfactory results. An example of the results is shown in Figure 3.17.
20
==PAGE:26==
(a) 100 epochs.
(b) 200 epochs.
Figure 3.17: LSTM outputs (blue) for a network with 4 layers of 100 neurons compared to the real mode
amplitudes (red). After 200 epochs, the ANN starts to overﬁt its training set and the error for the validation
set increases.
The main issue encountered with the neural networks was overﬁtting. After just a few epochs, the ANN still
improved in its cost function with the training set, but the validation set started getting worse. The ﬁrst step
to correct this was to obtain more data. Rather than creating a single large Mann box, it was decided to create
several shorter ones (8192 samples, about 4200m long). Because the LiDAR measured 100 meters upwind and
it had a probe length to account for, it was not possible to use the entire Mann box. Focusing the LiDAR at
a shorter range would have meant either a larger half-cone angle or a smaller separation between measuring
points, both of which would have a negative impact on the input for the ANN. By using the shorter Mann
boxes it was also easier to expand the dataset as needed. For each Mann box, the LiDAR measurements - Mann
slice pairs were obtained, and these were collected into training, testing and validation sets. It is worth noting
that this approach causes a ”jump” between samples every time a new Mann box begins, which can harm the
performance of an LSTM network. However, this was considered not to be a problem, as there would only be
one jump roughly every 7500 samples. The results presented here were obtained with nearly 300000 training
samples and 8000 testing samples. Since the ANNs never reached a good level of performance, no validation
set was used.
However, increasing the training set size was not enough. Because of this, regularization was introduced. While
this partially alleviated the problem, it was not enough to get good results. Figure 3.18 shows the results of
adding regularization to a simple ANN with three layers of 80 neurons.
(a) Without regularization.
(b) With regularization.
Figure 3.18: Evolution of the training and testing error for an ANN with three layers of 80 neurons.
L2
regularization was used on all three layers with a regularization factor of 0.002.
21
==PAGE:27==
Regularization causes the error to be higher, as it somewhat impedes the learning of the ANN. In the case
without regularization, the test set starts showing an increase in the error after 10 epochs, while regularization
delays this to around epoch 60. At this point the regularized ANN is not good enough at predicting the POD
modes, as shown in Figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19: Outputs from the regularized ANN (blue) compared to the real values (red).
One of the issues causing this behavior is the spacing between Mann slices, shown in Figure 3.20. At a wind
speed of 10 m/s the Mann slices ﬂow through the rotor plane at a rate of 19.5 Hz, a frequency comparable to
the 100 Hz at which the LiDAR measurements are taken. This means that the inputs for consecutive slices are
almost the same.
Figure 3.20: Synthetic measurements from a six beam LiDAR plotted over the timestamps corresponding to
individual Mann box slices.
Sampling the LiDAR at a higher frequency wouldn’t help due to its volume averaging. As can be seen in
Figure 3.20, the values from each beam simply don´t change fast enough for there to be a beneﬁt in getting
more intermediate measurements. The LiDAR measurements are based on the Mann box, so spacing the slices
further apart would make them unrealistic. The only option is to drop some slices out of the training, to ensure
22
==PAGE:28==
the remaining ones are distinct enough. Figure 3.21 shows the result of only using every 50th Mann slice for
training, reducing the training set to about 6000 samples.
(a) Training and testing error.
(b) Mode prediction.
Figure 3.21: Results from training the same regularized ANN from Figure 3.18 on every 50th Mann slice from
the training set. The ANN can now train for over 100 epochs before the test set error begins to increase. The
predicted modes (blue) still don´t match the real ones (red), but some closer similarities for example in mode
5.
So far the mode predictions shown corresponded to the validation set. In this case they are from the test set
to show the ANN ”at its best”. Despite this, the results are not good enough to be useful. Simulating enough
Mann boxes to have a large enough training set after discarding 1/50 of the data in them was simply outside of
the time scope of this project by the time this issue was identiﬁed. However, a potential issue with the LiDAR
approach as a whole is shown in Figure 3.22.
Figure 3.22: Synthetic measurements from a six beam LiDAR compared to the amplitudes of 5 POD modes.
Modes 1, 16, 31, 46 and 61 are shown so that the time evolution of the higher modes, which change more rapidly
in time, is also seen.
Here the evolution in time of 5 modes is compared to 6 LiDAR beams. The beams show similar, if not lower
frequency in their change than the modes. This is problematic, as there are 80 modes and only 12 LiDAR
beams. Using more than one measurement from each beam was tested, but didn’t result in any improvements.
The reason for this is again the slow change of LiDAR measurements. If only a few measurements are taken
23
==PAGE:29==
from each beam, they won’t diﬀer by much. If more measurements are taken, they will start to lay too far from
the Mann slice. Increasing the number of beams puts the measuring points closer together in space, and reduces
the independence between them. The results shown so far come from ANNs with an input of 6 beams and 8
measurements per beam (48 features). Figure 3.23 shows the result from changing to an input of 12 beams and
5 measurements per beam (60 features).
(a) 6 beams, 8 measurements per beam.
(b) 12 beams, 5 measurements per beam.
Figure 3.23: Results from training the same regularized ANN from Figure 3.18 on every 50th Mann slice for
diﬀerent input features. The regularization factor was increased to 0.01 for the 12 beam version.
While ﬁner tuning of the regularization could help, and using a larger training set would also be beneﬁcial,
the underlying problem is still the same. Mode amplitudes are largely independent: if any two amplitudes
had a strong correlation, their two corresponding modes would have been combined in one. From the available
results it appears that LiDAR measurements simply don’t have enough information to reconstruct these many
variables. Reducing the number of modes would also reduce the quality of the ROM. Moreover, it would make
the model even more prone to overﬁtting. Overall, the approach followed in this project is not suitable for
turbulence reconstruction.
24
==PAGE:30==
4
Conclusions and further work
POD has been proven to result in good reconstructions of wind turbulence. With just 80 parameters it was
possible to reconstruct the 1024 u components in a Mann box slice. With 266 modes it was possible to represent
all three components, for a total of 3072 values. As a more practical way of evaluating these reconstructions,
it is considered an interesting future work to run a HAWC2 simulation of a wind turbine with the original and
reconstructed Mann boxes. This allows to compare power production and loads on the turbine, and assess their
similarity. The code developed for this project is already capable of storing the reconstructed Mann boxes in a
HAWC2-readable format, so the work would lay on the simulation and post-processing side. This would allow
to determine, for example, how many modes are needed to realistically model fatigue damage, or what is the
exact impact of omitting the v and w components in the wind.
The ANN model was unfortunately not successful. The volume averaging present in LiDAR measurements
proved detrimental, as it makes it harder to obtain distinct measurements around the Mann box slices. A
potential way to overcome this is to combine the input with the LiDAR with some other measurement equipment
better at capturing turbulence, such as a spinner anemometer (three sonic anemometers mounted on the rotor
nose). Another solution is to use a more complex scanning pattern that can give more distinct measuring points
across the rotor plane, such as DTU’s spinner LiDAR[16].
Another alternative that would require no additional equipment is using the LiDAR’s raw measurements.
As explained before, LiDARs measure a shift in frequency in backscattered light. These raw measurements
are usually processed in a black box model designed by the manufacturer, and the LiDAR output are the
wind speeds.
Since these frequency shifts are not single values, but rather a distribution based on all the
particles that reﬂected the laser back, there is potentially additional information about the turbulence in the
raw measurements. This data could be very useful as input for an ANN if properly treated. To do this it would
be necessary to use a much more realistic model to simulate LiDAR measurements, and probably more complex
turbulence simulations to measure from.
Finally, there is also the option to continue the work from this project by generating additional data that skips
Mann slices. As was shown, using only every 50th slice helped the model, but resulted in very little training
data. With additional time and computing resources, it would be possible to generate a larger dataset. Because
of the issues the LiDAR faces in creating many signiﬁcant and independent input features with the approach
followed in this project, this alone is not expected to yield a good model. It could, however, begin to show
better trends in the mode prediction. This is by far the simplest next step of all the suggested, and it could
serve as a way of evaluating the potential of turbulence reconstruction from LiDAR measurements, and whether
the eﬀort of following any of the other suggestions is worth it.
Overall, despite the bad results on the ANN side, several next steps have been suggested that could overcome
the issues found in this project. Advances in LiDAR technology that reduce the probe length could also make
the turbulence reconstruction possible. So while this project didn’t reach its goal, this is not considered to be
the end of LiDAR based turbulence reconstruction.
25
==PAGE:31==
References
[1] G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley, “The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition in the analysis of
turbulent ﬂows,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 25, pp. 539–575, 1993.
[2] A. Nybø, F. G. Nielsen, J. Reuder, M. J. Churchﬁeld, and M. Godvik, “Evaluation of diﬀerent wind ﬁelds
for the investigation of the dynamic response of oﬀshore wind turbines,” Wind Energy, vol. 23, no. 9, pp.
1810–1830, 2020.
[3] L. Eliassen and S. J. Andersen, “Investigating coherent structures in the standard turbulence models using
proper orthogonal decomposition,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series (online), vol. 753, no. 3, p.
032040, 2016.
[4] E. E. Bachynski and L. Eliassen, “The eﬀects of coherent structures on the global response of ﬂoating
oﬀshore wind turbines,” Wind Energy, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 219–238, 2019.
[5] S. J. Andersen, J. N. Sørensen, and R. F. Mikkelsen, “Reduced order model of the inherent turbulence
of wind turbine wakes inside an inﬁnitely long row of turbines,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series
(online), vol. 555, no. 1, p. 012005, 2014.
[6] F. Tubino and G. Solari, “Double proper orthogonal decomposition for representing and simulating turbu-
lence ﬁelds,” Journal of Engineering Mechanics, vol. 131, no. 12, pp. 1302–1312, 2005.
[7] R. Deshmukh, Z. Liang, and J. J. McNamara, “Reduced order modeling of turbulent ﬂows using sparse
coding,” 57th Aiaa/asce/ahs/asc Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, p. 24 pp.,
2015.
[8] R. Swischuk, L. Mainini, B. Peherstorfer, and K. Willcox, “Projection-based model reduction: Formulations
for physics-based machine learning,” Computers and Fluids, vol. 179, pp. 704–717, 2019.
[9] Z. Deng, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, and K. C. Kim, “Time-resolved turbulent velocity ﬁeld reconstruction using a
long short-term memory (lstm)-based artiﬁcial intelligence framework,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 31, no. 7,
p. 075108, 2019.
[10] A. Pe˜na, C. Hasager, J. Lange, J. Anger, M. Badger, F. Bing¨ol, O. Bischoﬀ, J.-P. Cariou, F. Dunne,
S. Emeis, M. Harris, M. Hofs¨ass, I. Karagali, J. Laks, S. Larsen, J. Mann, T. Mikkelsen, L. Pao, M. Pitter,
A. Rettenmeier, A. Sathe, F. Scanzani, D. Schlipf, E. Simley, C. Slinger, R. Wagner, and I. W¨urth, Remote
Sensing for Wind Energy, ser. DTU Wind Energy E.
Denmark: DTU Wind Energy, 2013, no. 0029(EN).
[11] T. Mikkelsen, “On mean wind and turbulence proﬁle measurements from ground-based wind lidars:
limitations in time and space resolution with continuous wave and pulsed lidar systems,” in European
Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition 2009, EWEC 2009, vol. 6.
EWEC, 2009, pp. 4123–4132, 2009
European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition, EWEC 2009 ; Conference date: 16-03-2009 Through
19-03-2009. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.ewea.org/ewec2009/proceedings/
[12] J. Mann, “The spatial structure of neutral atmospheric surface-layer turbulence,” Journal of Fluid Me-
chanics, vol. 273, pp. 141–168, 1994.
[13] IEC 61400-1:2019, “Wind energy generation systems - Part 1: Design requirements,” International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, Geneva, Standard, Apr. 2019.
[14] M. A. Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning.
Determination Press, 2015.
[15] A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” Supervised Sequence Labelling With Recurrent Neural Networks,
vol. 385, pp. 37–45, 2012.
[16] E. Simon, A. Bowie, G. Thorsen, K. Enevoldsen, A. Boateng, C. Stout, and J. Richards, “Wind ﬁeld
measurements using lidar,” 2020.
26
