==PAGE:1==
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving
surface roughness during plastic deformation
of metals
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Materials and Surface Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plas­
tic deformation of metals
Master Thesis
June 4, 2021
By:
Bjarke Juul Georgi Østergaard
With supervisors:
Grethe Winther
Chris Valentin Nielsen
Brian Nyvang Legarth
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Section of Materials and Surface Engineering, Produktion­
storvet 425, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, at the Materials and Surface Engineering section, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Bjarke Juul Georgi Østergaard ­ s144070
Signature
Date
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Including granular properties into metal forming is a difficult task. One aspect of
such is the evolution of surface roughness during deformation. Surface rough­
ness changes as a result of polycrystal properties. Being able to simulate and
predict the evolution is important in terms of aesthetic and functionality of metal
parts.
This study demonstrates a developed software pipeline for connecting four com­
ponents: Neper, Abaqus, DAMASK and SPIP. This pipeline can generate a poly­
crystal with adherent properties in Neper, simulate polycrystal deformation with
Abaqus and DAMASK and lastly apply surface metrology on the results with SPIP.
The software pipeline is designed such that the user assign the geometry and
boundary conditions to give as much freedom and flexability. The methodology
of Elongation a thin steel sheet and compression of an aluminium toroidal polyhe­
dron with the pipeline is explored. They illustrate how the program can work with
different material properties and levels of geometrical complexity.
The software pipeline proved to be computational power intensive, where getting
accurate simulations was not within the scope of the project. Optimisation and
fitting of the material properties was left to be desired. The software pipeline ver­
ified to work as a proof of concept.
The source code can be found at:
https://gitlab.com/Bjaa/pipeline-for-connecting-neper-with-abaqus-with-damask-subrutine
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Grethe
Winther, Chris Valentin Nielsen and Brian Nyvang Legarth. Who have supported,
motivated and guided me daily in these online times.
I would also like to thank my friends, family and girlfriend who have made it tol­
erable to work all these months at home in a dormitory. Without the continuous
support i have been given, this would not have been possible.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Behavior of crystalline structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Surface roughness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Scope of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Simulation strategy
8
2.1
Functionality of Neper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Numerical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Simplified pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Automating the pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Uniaxial elongation of a thin sheet
18
3.1
Initial tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Dogbone section simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Bulk compression
24
4.1
Determination of mechanical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Aluminium geoemtry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Upscaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Multiscale simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6
Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Outlook
41
6
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
45
A.1 Generating donut shape in Neper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.2 Guide on how to use the automated scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3 Technical drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.4 Material files for DAMASK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The purpose of the present thesis is to build a software pipeline to efficiently con­
duct numerical simulations of the development of surface roughness during plastic
deformation. The software pipeline is based on existing components, which must
be put together in an automated process. It is a specific aim that the simulations
can be applied to complex geometries resembling real metal forming operations
and not just idealised geometries, such as uniaxial tension.
Understanding the mechanical behaviour of materials is important to be able to
design increasingly sophisticated products. One important aspect of it is to have
the tools and be able to predict how the material behaves.
The material properties of components can be devised into different length scales
to describe them: macro­, micro­ and nanoscale. All the way down at nanoscale
with crystal structures and dislocations all the way up to stresses and strains at
the macro scale. Being able to translate the properties from the lowest regimes
to the higher order is still challenging.
Smooth surfaces is important in terms of reduced friction, facilitate cleaning and
aesthetics. This is done by including the properties of grains within the metal.
Grains have properties withing the micro­ and nanoscale such as slip directions
and slipping. These properties have an impact of how the surface changes as
deformation takes place.
The first part of the thesis describes the components of the pipeline, how they
can be combined and the scripts written to automate the process. The second
part demonstrates the pipeline on simulations for a stainless steel subjected to
tensile testing. The third part aims at a generalisation to complex geometries,
which proved a major challenge. The example employed is compression of an
aluminium toroidal polyhedron. Several routes were pursued before a successful
approach was established. The focus has been on establishing the pipeline and
demonstrating the feasibility. Actual application of the pipeline to predict the ef­
fects of various microstructures or deformation conditions on surface roughness
and comparison with experiments is left for future studies.
Often when simulating metals they are assumed to have isotropic properties. In
reality metals are anisotropic. These properties are important to include in simula­
tions at micro scale for a better understanding of how a material reacts for instance
to metal forming.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Behavior of crystalline structures
To get an understanding of materials and how metals function, it is necessary to
go down to the atomic scale to understand the mechanics of solids.
Atoms bind together in different ways, most metals bind in crystalline structures.
A crystalline structure is when atoms is arranged in a repeatable pattern. This is
done in a long range order, meaning this pattern is repeated many times com­
pared to the size of the pattern.
The pattern can be expressed in a condensed form, called a lattice. The most
common lattice structures is the body centered cubic (BCC), face centred cubic
(FCC) and hexagonal centered cubic (HCP) as seen in figures 1.1. How the lat­
tices forms depends on how the different lays of atoms stack on each other and
the interactions of the atoms. Aluminium and the stainless steel used in this thesis
both have the crystal structure of FCC [1, Chapter 3].
Figure 1.1: The crystal lattice for BCC, FCC and HCP [2]
To identify directions within a crystal lattice, crystallographic directions is used to
describe it. The approach uses the smallest lattice, called the unit cell. The nota­
tion is defined from a x,y,z vector based coordinate system, they are normalised
in terms of the size of the cubic unit cell, a, and by, n, which is used to reduce the
equation to integers:
u = n
x2 −x1
a

,
v = n
y2 −y1
a

,
w = n
z2 −z1
a

(1.1)
the vectors u,v,w is written as [uvw], where a value of 0 is at the initial point, and
a value of 1 is the other end of the lattice for their respective axis[1, Chapter 3].
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
2
==PAGE:9==
Directions [100], [110] and [111] is shown in figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Figure showing different lattice directions [1, Chapter 3]
Planes also has a convention. It is written in paranthesis instead of square brack­
ets as (hkl). They are defined as:
h = na
A ,
k = nb
B ,
l = nc
C
(1.2)
A is defined by the intersection of the plane and x­axis, likewise B for the y­axis
and C for z­axis. n is again the factor needed to reduce it to integers. Some
examples of the planes is shown in figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Figure shows exampels of planes [1, Chapter 3].
The repeating pattern of the lattice has some boundaries. The boundaries form
when the material solidifies. This can be seen in figure 1.4. This happens as the
liquid cools and transitions from liquid to solid state. Where the different structures
form at the beginning in part a. These structures will the grow with their desired
orientation of the lattices in part b. These will fully grow until everything has so­
lidified in part c, as fully grown grains. In reality this is seen more clearly with the
edges between the grains, called the grain boundaries, as seen in part d.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.4: Solidifacation of crystalline structures, with a) Initial nuclei. b) Growth
of nuclei. c) Final growth of nuclei. d) How the grain boundaries form [1, Chapter 4]
1.1.1
Slip
The physical material properties is depending on the orientation of the crystallo­
graphic lattice with respect to the deformation axes. As plastic deformation takes
place, the deformation happens as such to minimize the lattice friction stress. Slip
is the movement of dislocations along the close packed planes and movement of
dislocations lead to plastic deformations.
The stress needed for to move dislocations within a unitcell at a nanoscale is
described from the Peierls stress:
τPN ∝Ge−2πW/b
(1.3)
This describes the proportionality of force needed to move a dislocation in a unit­
cell. Where W is the dislocation width W = a/(1−ν). With a being the unit length,
ν the Poissons ration, G is the shear modulus and b is the burgers vector. The
burgers vector describes the direction and size of lattice distortion.
At a microscale, slip initialises when the critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) is
reached. The CRSS is related to the macroscopic stress by the Schmid factor,
which gives the fraction of the applied stress transmitted to the slip system:
τRSS = σAPPm = σAPP (cos Φ cos α)
(1.4)
σAPP is the applied tensile stress and m is the Schmid factor. With Φ being the
angle between the applied force and normal of the slip plane. The other angle, α
is between the slip direction and force.
The Schmid factor is the best approximation for FCC for single crystal metals. For
polycrystal metal the taylor model has shown to be more accurate and is com­
monly more used. As each grain will have different Schmid factors depending on
their grain orientation [3, Chapter 7].
Crystal plasticity models
Different polycrystal models have evolved from over the last century to be more
refined and specific for their usage. They can determine the taylor factor of a ma­
terial each for their respective area of usefullness.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
4
==PAGE:11==
The first model was the Sachs [4] model, which assumes the single slip system
with the highest Schmid factor is active.
Then came the Taylor[5] and Bishop ­ Hill[6] models. These models consider
only the crystallographic orientation of each grain, and not the interaction between
them. They are simple models bound by simplifying the stress and strain as ho­
mogeneous and having multislip through the sample. These models define the
taylor factor, which relates the flow stress and crital resolved stress [7]:
M =
σf
τCRSS
(1.5)
The models is expanded by including interaction of neighbouring grains, called the
cluster models. An example of the cluster is the ALamel which is the advanced
Lamel models, which has a wider range of applicability [8, 9].
Lastly the Visco­plastic self­consistent method uses interactions between a grain
and matrix, which containing the average of the other grains. This is used to
evaluate how much plastic deformation is due to the grains own properties, or its
surroundings [10].
The crystal plasticity finite­element method (CPFEM) adds mechanical interac­
tions of the grains as they sit among their neighbours in the polycrystal and in­
cludes complex boundary conditions [11]. This is the model DAMASK uses.
The models with uniaxial testing of a material and their Taylor factor is shown in
table 1.1.
Crystal plasticity Models
Taylor factor
Sachs
2.24
Taylor (Full Constraint)
3.067
ALamel (Advanved Lamel)
2.826
VPSC (Visco­plastic self­consistent)
2.80
CPFEM (Crystal plasticity finite­element method)
2.684
Table 1.1: Table showing the different models and their Taylor factors [7].
The newer and more advanced models have different areas where they are more
applicable than others. Some within rolling, sheet forming etc.
Commonly the taylorfactor is used at a value of 3.0, which is the value used for
this thesis.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
5
==PAGE:12==
Another aspect of grains is the texture. The texture of a material is distribution of
the grains orientation within a sample. A metals texture is rarely truly random, as
it often will have some preferred directions. The anisotropic properties of a metal
depends highly on the texture. See figure 1.5 for different textures.
Figure 1.5: Illustration of how the texture can be. A) An almost random texture
and B) Sharp texture with many grains of similar orientation [12]
The texture, size and grain shapes are important for the mechanical properties.
Generation of synthetic grain structures used as representative volume element
(RVE) is therefore a prerequisite for successful modelling of metallic properties.
1.2
Surface roughness
Research is being done towards a better understanding of microforming of metals.
As the the material properties is not the same for macroforming or most other types
of forming.
Experimental studies has evaluated the roughness change for micro upsetting
process, it showed roughness is dependent on many properties and it is very
complicated to fully understand the mechanics of individual cases. At first the pre­
process has an effect, if it is cold­drawn or annealed between 500­750C. Higher
temperature increases the roughness after processing. It is known that surface
roughness is proportional to the plastic deformation, which is accommodated by
slip bands due to surface grains having lower constraints and can deform freely
out of the surface plane during deformation. This is further enveloped for systems
with fewer available slip systems [13, 14].
Simulating mechanical responses of metal is going in different direction with dif­
ferent constitutive models. There are many available, all with their own pros and
cons. Over time they have evolved more and more delicate features. The main
focus for modelling in this thesis is on microstructure­sensitivity for polycrystal de­
formation on nonhomogenius materials. The different models can be split into
sub­categories, with standard models such as the self­consistent and taylor­type
models. Where advances with more advanced models has been done for the
crystal plasticity finite element and Green’s function­based models [15].
The surface roughness has been worked with in regards to being able to predict it
for micro forging with respect to deep drawing. A new model has been proposed
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
6
==PAGE:13==
where it takes statistical variation of the grains flowstress into account. The com­
plexity lies in the change of contact surface as a punch is used to deep drawn a
thin copper sheet [16].
1.3
Scope of thesis
To be able to simulate the grains and how they affect the macroscale, four differ­
ent pieces of software is employed in this study.
Neper is the software first of all used to generate the geometry with the grains
structures. Neper generates a polycrystal structure which constitutes the RVE.
The structure is then imported into SIMULIA Abaqus FEA (Abaqus), which is a
finite element (FE) analysis software. Which is used to deform the component.
This is the combined with the third software, the Düsseldorf Advanced Material
Simulation Kit (DAMASK). It is an user subrutine which adds calculations tools
to be able to simulate grain properties. It gives it the ability to have isotropic and
anisotropic elastoplastic properties. Lastly, the final results is exportet into an STL
file, where the roughness can be analysed by Mountain SPIP software.
These four programs have the ability to share data with each other. Neper is at its
infancy and does not directly connect with the other programs. So a pipeline was
made to translate the information between the software. Streamlining the process
is important to be able to work with more than a few grains manually and be able
to have hundreds and thousands of grains.
Two different materials and geometries have been worked on. This is since they
have different areas of interest and has different challenges associated with them.
The first is an Aluminium 1050 alloy. The geometry is a cylinder with a chamfered
edge. The roughness of the chamfered edge was of interest during upsetting.
A hole in the centre with an inner chamfering changed the shape further into an
toroidal polyhedron. The geometrical complexity of the part with a curved round
surface was the challenge. Which is highly relevant for metal forming.
The other part was a dogbone of steel EN 1.4369. The advantage is it was 80µm
thin, where having only a few grains across the thickness opens up for highly
heterogeneous deformation, including surface roughness variations.
With no prior experience with Abaqus and DAMASK, and a background in physics
and nanotechnology, this thesis presents my effort of trying to understand and
simulate the formation of surface roughness by combining different programs to
be able to have nanoscale properties included in macroscale forming for simple
and complex geometries.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
7
==PAGE:14==
2
Simulation strategy
Simulating polycrystal models require different components to communicate with
each other. A rough overview of the process is shown as a diagram of how the
different software interconnect in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of the pipeline and what dependencies the different software
have on each other.
The order of the diagram is as such. It starts with Neper where the model with
grains is defined. The material properties of the grain orientation is converted into
the material.config file DAMASK uses. The geometry is then put into Abaqus with
an input file. In Abaqus the polycrystal made in Neper can be used in different
ways:
• The file from Neper is used without addition modelling and applied boundary
conditions to it. This is the most simple approach. The thin steel sheet is
applied with this. More on this in section 3.2.
• The file from Neper is used as a submodel connected to a main model. Hav­
ing multiscale modelling is more complex while allowing for higher flexibility,
the toroidal polyhedron of aluminium was applied with this method. It is fur­
ther explained in section 4.5.
• The last method is by meshing an isotropic model from Abaqus together
with the Neper output.
As DAMASK supports having both isotropic and
anisotropic properties in one model. This has the benefit of simulating the
entire part while lowering the simulation time needed. This method was tri­
aled in section 4.4. It proved not applicable with the geometry used.
As the input file has finalised for Abaqus, the inp file connects to DAMASK. The
connecting between them is the inp file references the material properties from
the material.config file through the Abaqus UMAT subrutine.
As Abaqus tries to solve the analysis it communicates with DAMASK for each
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
8
==PAGE:15==
step. After the simulation is done, a database file (.ODB) is generated with all
the results. This file can then be exported into an STL file and read by surface
morphology software such as SPIP.
The programs used is further explained in the next sections.
2.1
Functionality of Neper
Neper is used to generate the RVE. It can generate different synthetic kinds of
grain structures. With the most simple being the Poisson­Voronoi tesselation.
To simplify the methodology, it is shown in 2 dimensions. The fundamentals does
not change when working in 3 dimensions.
A set number of grains, n, is assigned positions within a finite area, see figure
2.2A. Midway between the nearest neighbouring grains, each pair is drawn a per­
pendicular line, see figure 2.2B. These lines are extended until they collide with
other lines. This defines the grains with their respective grain boundaries, see
figure 2.2C [17].
Figure 2.2: Figure showing how the RVE is build for the grains, where figure C is
generated in Neper
The grains can have different shapes and sizes depending on how they are de­
fined. For the case in figure 2.2 no grains are larger than others, and has no
preferred orientation.
For both the steel and aluminium in the thesis, the grain where elongated in one
direction. The steel is cold formed, which generates flat elongated grains. The
aluminium is extruded, resulting in elongated rod­shaped grains.
To include this for the tesselation, the positions is scaled in different axes, see fig­
ure 2.3A. For some metals, some phases can form and grow before other phases,
this generates size differences for the grains, see figure 2.3B. As a last example,
it is useful to have grains that have the same size as seen in figure 2.3C.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Figure of grains generated in Neper. Elongated grains in shown in A),
different grain growth in figure B) and same size grains in C). The illustrations is
generated in Neper
As the grains can be defined, such can the orientation of the grains also be defined
in Neper. The methodology can be done similarly for 3D for different geometries.
See figure 2.4 for some examples of the range of geometries it can generate.
Figure 2.4: Figure showcasing the different possibilities of Neper with 3D.
2.2
Numerical methods
Comparing how Abaqus and DAMASK functions is important, as initial verification
and testing is done with Abaqus, and then in depth simulations afterwards with
DAMASK.
2.2.1
Abaqus
Abaqus is the overlaying simulation software for all simulations. Either simulations
can be executed in an Abaqus only environment, or run with DAMASK under
Abaqus with an UMAT subroutine.
Abaqus is a Finite element analysis (FEA) solver. FEA is used to solve physical
problems. It solves problems which is time dependent. The method is it splits the
geometry into smaller segments called a mesh.
Abaqus has three segments, which is all used [18].
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
10
==PAGE:17==
1. Pre­processing. First is the modelling and meshing of the part. Material
properties for elastic and plastic parts is included. Contact areas, boundary
conditions and time dependent steps is included.
2. Evaluation. The simulation is run for FEA with large geometry theory used.
It can use a subrutine to have more intricate material properties included.
3. Post­processing. The simulation results can be plottet and evaluated. Out­
puts such as stress and strain can be shown for the geometry.
UMAT subroutine
Abaqus calls the UMAT routine while solving the FEA. One element of the UMAT
subroutine is the NLgeom (Non Linear geometry) feature from Abaqus, it has to
be used, since larger deformation takes place for the kind of simulations used.
The feature is used under the UMAT subroutine with DAMASK. The feature takes
into consideration the usage of true stress and strain instead of nominal stresses
and strain, which is mostly used in linear simulations [19, 20].
2.2.2
DAMASK
DAMASK is a subrutine, which can be called through Abaqus UMAT rutine from
the previous section. The fundamental functionality of DAMASK is split into an
isotropic and anisotropic model, further divided into elastic and plastic responses.
For the isotropic plastic model of DAMASK, the first variable it solves for is the
strain rate ˙γ:
˙γ = ˙γ0
s
3J2
Mξ
n
(2.1)
It is depending on a reference strain rate,˙γ0. The stress exponent, n. The Taylor
factor, M and the resistance to plastic flow, ξ, which is a scalar indicating the
collected macroscopic stress. For each increment in strain the respective cauchy
stress tensors is defined:
J2 = 1
6

(σ11 −σ22)2 + (σ22 −σ33)2 + (σ33 −σ11)2
+ σ2
12 + σ2
23 + σ2
31
(2.2)
Where for each step the stress tensors is defined as:


σ11
σ12
σ13
σ21
σ22
σ23
σ31
σ32
σ33

=


SM
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


(2.3)
This simplification, with only having the stress in the σ11 is due to the compression
and ignoring the friction.
The other variable change of the plastic flow ˙ξ is:
˙ξ = ˙γh0
1 −ξ
ξ′
∞

a
sgn

1 −ξ
ξ′
∞

(2.4)
Where ξ′
∞is used as a fitting parameter [21].
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
11
==PAGE:18==
The anisotropic response is elastically described with Hook’s law, where the stress,
σ is linearly correlated with the elastic strain, ε
σ = cε
(2.5)
c is the Stiffness tensor of the system. The stiffness tensor is a product of material
properties, and is described in the most simple form for cubic lattices, as:
c =


C11
C12
C12
0
0
0
0
C12
C11
C12
0
0
0
0
C12
C12
C11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44


(2.6)
The variables C11,C12 and C44 and the matrix shape of c, due to geometric prop­
erties. Crystalline materials are inherently anisotropic. The relative simple form
of the stiffness tensor in eq. 2.6 is due to cubic crystal symmetry.
The plastic reaction of the slip dependent system is described via plastic flow and
hardening. This is solved for the evolution of the flow, with kinematic slip of the
system as a standard model, in the form of a power law.
˙γα = ˙γα
0

τ α
ξα

n
sgn (τ α)
(2.7)
With ˙γα, where ˙γ denotes the shear rate, and α denotes the phase. ˙γ0 is the fixed­
rate strain rate scaling coefficient, n is the rate sensitivity exponent, and τ is the
resolved shear stress. The slip system hardness, ξ, has to be defined for each γ.
Initially when γ = 0 starts as ξ = τ0 where the change, ˙ξα is expressed as
˙ξα = hS−S
0
(1 + hα
int) ×
NS
X
α′=1
γα′
1 −ξα′
ξα′
∞
hαα′sgn

1 −ξα′
ξα′
∞

(2.8)
Where h0 is the fixed­state hardening rate scaling coefficient, ξ0 is the initial slip­
system strength, and n is the Voce­hardening exponent. The last variable is the
slip system saturation strength, ξs (˙γ) which is calculated for each step as:
ξs (˙γ) = ξs0


P
α
|˙γα|
˙γs0


m′
(2.9)
With m′ being the saturation strength rate scaling exponent, ξs0 is the initial slip
system saturation strength, and ˙γs0 is the initial saturation slip system shear rate
[21].
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
12
==PAGE:19==
All the variables used has to be defined for each material, where C11,C12 and C44
has to be specified for each material. The rest of the values is more lenient in
terms of the specific material and liberties can be done. The elastic parameters
are often found in literature, whereas plastic parameters is found experimentally
by fitting a stress­strain curve.
With an understanding of the elements of the pipeline. It is introduced how the
pipeline was build up.
2.3
Simplified pipeline
The first part to grasp of the pipeline was how Abaqus and DAMASK worked, as
no prior experience had been within those programs. Many tools from Abaqus
was required to learn, such as complex geometry, multiple materials, tool inter­
action and boundary conditions where needed. It was started by implementing
solutions in 2D with axisymmetric properties and then moving to full 3D. Working
in 2D axisymmetry made it easier to identify problems with the geometry.
Initial tests was developed from python code[22] from another project. It is able
to take a cube made in Neper and converting all grain information into a simple
tension problem for DAMASK to parse. This script was changed to function as
needed.
The interaction between Abaqus and DAMASK was further developed, since be­
ing able to solve most problems within the Abaqus environment is the most de­
sirable way to do it. One of the key takeaways was how to configure the input
file from Abaqus, such that minimal editing was needed. The most important part
of that was setting up the material properties, instead of defining the materials in
Abaqus, there where given two properties instead. The first is ”Depvar”, a solution­
dependable state variables, which is set to 64. The variables function is to instruct
DAMASK to calculate with grain rotation, euler­angles, slip, resolved stress slip
and accumulated shear slip. The other property is ”User Material” which is used
to connect each grain in the geometry in Abaqus with their corresponding material
property in the DAMASK material.config file. By using these commands, the input
file can work in DAMASK.
A simple scenario was setup to test how the simulation performs. This was done
by having a 2x2x2mm3 cube, where the bottom half was isotropically defined in
Abaqus. The top part was made in Neper with 4 grains inside them, as seen in
figure 2.5 and 2.6. This cube was then ran through DAMASK, where material
properties was given to it.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: The generated RVE poly­
crystal in neper, with 4 grains
Figure 2.6:
The assembled part
with Neper genereted mesh at the
top, and bottom part generated in
Abaqus with minor compression
This cube was used to test differences between how Damask and how Abaqus
solves isotropic materials differently. This basic example gave the experience to
be able to manually setup the pipeline
2.4
Automating the pipeline
With understanding of the pipeline, it became clear it was necessary to automate
the process. As increasing the complexity and adding more grain makes it time
consuming. Otherwise information about the grains has to manually be translated
from one file to another.
As seen in the connection of the software in figure 2.1, user inputs is only needed
when setting up the boundary conditions and geometry. The rest of the process
can be automated.
A collection of scripts interacting with each other was created. Bash is the lan­
guage which connects all the components. Neper and Abaqus could be called
trough bash. Parts written in python and matlab could be executed through bash
as well.
A simple overview is it starts by executing Run01.sh, the .inp file generated from
NEPER is imported into Abaqus. The boundary conditions or additional geome­
try is added. The new file is exported as an .inp file, which needs to replace the
original one.
Run02.sh is then executed, when it is done a folder with the job name will have all
needed files, including a .odb file with the simulation results in there. The .odb file
can be openened in Abaqus and converted into an .STL file for processing in SPIP.
A rundown of how the pipeline functions and interacts is introduced below, while
an introduction on how to use the script can be found in appendix A.2.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
14
==PAGE:21==
Run01.sh
This bash script have some initial setup, this is done to setup the number of
threads Neper runs on to generate polycrystals as fast as possible. For some
situations having a complex or unique geometry was needed for the polycrystal,
the process of how to include that is in the appendix, section A.1.
Next, polycrystal generation is done in Neper with input of the desired polycrystal
RVE. The important part was generating an output file for Abaqus. The way to
that is by exporting it as an .inp file, this requires that element type of the mesh is
set as hexagonal cubes, which gives the problem of having an raster tessellation
output. The pipeline can be seen in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Illustration shows the connections between the first parts of the
pipeline for Run01.sh bash script.
read_tess_orientation.m (with courtesy of Grethe Winther) is a matlabscript which
is called afterwards. It extracts the grain orientations from the .tess file from Neper
and puts it into a .oris file for later processing.
Afterwards the .inp file is imported by the user into Abaqus, where extra geometry
and boundary conditions is applied. This is saved as a new .inp file, replacing the
old one. Having the user setup these parts, gives the pipeline flexibility.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
15
==PAGE:22==
Run02.sh
The Run02 is then executed. It is completely automated. It searches for the ma­
terial property file name generated in Run01. This script creates all the needed
files to be able to start the simulation. The pipeline of it is shown in figure 2.8
Figure 2.8: Figure shows the pipeline of how the Run02.sh bash script. The or­
ange areas shows the files the software is connected to. The blue files show the
scripts which takes some input files and generates some new files. The green
area is to show that the .inp file generated at the end is connected to the mate­
rial.config file.
The bash script starts by calling the python script:
AddSection.py, this script inserts material properties into the .inp file and pre­
pares it to be run in DAMASK. It is done by iterating through the .inp file. First it
saves all the element sets with ”POLY” in the name. This is to get the naming of
each grain. This is important since cutting the geometry or having a rough model
which cannot fit all grains in it, will often remove grains.
The code next goes into the ”ASSEMBLY” part of the code, where it links each
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
16
==PAGE:23==
element set of the grains with their corresponding grain with sections. Since this
part is empty from abaqus, this part only inserts strings into the assembly.
After the assembly, the code creates a ”MATERIAL” section, here it gives infor­
mation in the Abqus .inp script which DAMASK needs. It sets 64 dependable vari­
ables to be solved, these can either have no specific input and just be called with
”*Depvar, 64”, or have each of these 64 variables functionality called as needed.
These variables can give grain rotation, euler angles, resistance slip and shear
rate for the slip. All these variables are called from the get_results.txt.
The last part of the script deletes the output from the original .inp file, and replaces
it with the output from the get_output.txt. This change in output is needed to use
the 64 Dependable variables and streamlines the process of getting the output.
oris_pr_elem.py[22] is then called, which takes .oris file and .stelt file and outputs
and generates .meshoris, .grains and a .oris_elem file. Which all are files which
have grain location and orientation in them in different formats for later use.
damask_mat_config.py[22] is used to generate the material.config file that Damask
is dependent on. The file us based on the .material file.
ChangeAngles.py, this script can be called if needed, as its function is to change
the grain rotations in the material.config file. This is included to make it easy to
use externally synthesised grain textures. It is used for the steel, as it had a rolled
FCC texture.
All the necessary files have been generated and transformed at this point. It is
now ready start computation with Abaqus running the Damask UMAT rutine.
One aspect to take notice of is the green area in figure 2.8. The final edit of the
.inp file contains the assemply and material parts, where as the material section
within it does not have any information about the material. It contains information
about where each segment is referenced within the material.config file. As the
two files is generated independently from each other it proved to be a challenge
to finalise.
When the simulation is done, it will generate a folder with the run name, and add
all files simulated into it. This is to make it more accessible, since the process can
generate a lot of files.
The process generates an database file (.ODB). It is updated through the simula­
tion. It can be exported into an .STL file and read by surface metrology tools such
as SPIP.
The source code can be found at:
https://gitlab.com/Bjaa/pipeline-for-connecting-neper-with-abaqus-with-damask-subrutine
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
17
==PAGE:24==
3
Uniaxial elongation of a thin
sheet
Samples of EN 1.436 thin metal steel was worked with tensile tests of a dogbone.
The dogbone is 80µm in depth, making it very thin. This makes it very applicable to
simulate generation of surface roughness, as the geometry is much more simple
and does not need workarounds. There is 8­10 grains in depth. This means the
property of each individual grain has a large impact on the surface roughness.
The elemental composition of En 1.436 steel is shown in table 3.1.
C
Si
Mn
P
S
Cr
Ni
N
Fe
0.11
0.8
6.0
≤0.003
≤0.015
18.5
7.0
0.25
Balance
Table 3.1: Elemental composition of En 1.436 steel
3.1
Initial tests
Initially the part was simulated with anisotropic polycrystal properties, the material
parameters was found from the litterature [23]. The geometry and physical spec­
imen was designed and made by Úlfar Arinbjarnar as shown in figure 3.4. It has
the length of 200mm and being 80µm thin. A detailed technical drawing can be
seen in the appendix, section A.3.2.
Figure 3.1: Figure showing the geometry of the steel dogbone.
A test of the dogbone was done to see how it reacts to having anisotropic proper­
ties. It was generated in Neper, see figure 3.2A and elongated in figure 3.2B.
Figure 3.2: Figure shows A) the dogbone as generated in Neper. B) Shows the
dogbone as it has been elongated at 10% in Abaqus with polycrystal properties
from DAMASK. It is shown without deformation.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
18
==PAGE:25==
It was made to have a realistic grain count with 20.000 grains and 1.952.681 el­
ements. The elements is needed to have a high enough resolution of each in­
dividual grain. The resolution is still not high enough, since the depth at 80µm
is defined by two elements. To illustrate the resolution, random grains from the
sampel is shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Grains taken at random from the dogbone, demonstrating the texture
and number of elements of the grains.
Having almost two million elements is quite a large mesh to simulate. It took four
days to elongate the sample by 1%. Also the resolution of the grains is not enough
to get anisotropic properties through the simulations with respect to the surface
roughness.
Because of the long computation time and not having a high enough resolution of
the grains this approach was abandoned instead to work with a local area of the
sample.
3.2
Dogbone section simulation
Having a part of the dogbone was chosen as the next method, using the red area
from figure 3.1. Due to the fact that it is an idealised geometry with a known
homogenuos macroscopic deformation mode, the model could be reduced to a
part of the gauge.
The lengths of the subsection was chosen in order to have the same number of
grains in each direction and to have a higher surface area. Since the resolution
is much higher compared to the previous model the grains characteristics can be
included. The steel was formed with coldforming, giving the grains elongation
along the length. Úlfar measured the size of the grains at average to be: 17.5µm
for the length, 11µm for the height and 8.5µm for the depth. The grain size was
used to build the RVE with the correct dimensions, as seen in figure 3.4 with
illustration of the part of the gauge.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4:
Figure showing the element of the dogbone simulated with an
anisotropic rectangular shape.
Setting up the simulation took advantage of the pipeline from section 2.4. Initially
the boundary conditions was set up for figure 3.5:1. It was dislocated by U in the
S2 plane by 40% of the original length. It was constrained such that the S1 plane
could not move in the x­plane. Point 1 was completely constrained, while point 2
was limited to move in the z­plane.
The boundary conditions was chosen as such to give the material possibility to
contract.
Precise boundary conditions is enough since the dogbone geometry is well de­
fined and understood.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Figure showing part 1 with the initial setup, with 1a showing the bound­
ary conditions and 1b showing the structure. Part 2 shows the changed boundary
conditions with 2a and 2b shows the structure.
To start with the setup was done with 51.200 elements with 498 grains inside. As
the simulation took place, it became clear that the simulation would take multiple
weeks to finalise. This was not enough time to work within the scope of this thesis.
To cut down the time needed, the setup was changed to figure 3.5:2. This cut down
the number of elements by half, while including a bottom boundary condition (S3).
From a geometrical perspective this should have no effect on the simulation. It
does have an effect on the expected roughness, as there is only 4­5 grains in
depth. The ramifications of removing half the thickness is unknown, and would
need a deeper analysis.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
21
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Results
The dogbone was elongated to a length of 145µm from 127µm, giving it an strain
at 15.7%. It was expected to be at 40%, whereas it took two weeks to get at this
point. This can be seen in figure 3.6.
The stresses and deformation of the model shows clear indications of polycrys­
tal properties and evolution of surface roughness. The values of the Von Misses
Stress clusters together in areas, as seen in figure 3.6C). Some areas with high
values at around 400MPa and other areas with low values at around 200MPa with
no in between values. This is indicative of the grain orientations.
The strains show the same pattern as the stress, with clustering of high and low
values in figure 3.6D), having strains in the low range at 0.05% and higher strain
at 0.1%.
With higher stress values at 400MPa it would be expected to have plastic elonga­
tion for the steel. Whereas figure 3.6E) shows there is no plastic strain in the sam­
ple. The discrepancy is due to the model not being calibrated and using isotropic
material properties. This can be solved by fitting the simulations with real samples
to get the correct values. This was not possible to be tested within the time period
given.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.6: Results of the elongated dogbone, where A) indicates the grains gen­
erated in Neper, B) shows the mesh, C) Shows the Von Mises stress on the elon­
gated sample, D) Shows the Logarithmic Strain (LE) and E) Shows the equivalent
plastic strain.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
23
==PAGE:30==
4
Bulk compression
The other sample shown is the the toroidal polyhedron made of aluminium 1050,
cut from a long rod which had been extruded during the manufacturing. This
served as a complex shape, which proved to be difficult to work with.
At first it was important to identify the mechanical properties of the aluminium,
which is needed to simulate the part as accurately as possible.
4.1
Determination of mechanical properties
To determine the isotropic material properties, an upsetting test of cylinders was
conducted. The dimensions of the cylinders was; Diameter 20mm and height
20mm. The upsetting and dimensions of the cylinder is shown in figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: Upsetting test of AL 1050 cylinders, showing A) the original cylinder
post processed, B) upsetting at 20% and C) upsetting at 30%
The upsetting was done in a servopress. Top and bottom interaction surfaces was
lubricated with Rhenux SF 125A oil to mitigate the friction. As the simulations is
defined as friction less, it is important to mitigate.
The stamps velocity was 0.5mm/s with 150kN force until it reached the desired
possition. The force and distance of the stamp was recorded.
The true stress and strain was needed to be able to fit the material curves to it.
The calculations is based on the engineering stress and strain:
σen = F
A
εen = ∆h
h
(4.1)
This is then converted into the true stress and strain as:
σtrue = σen (1 + εen)
εtrue = log (1 + εen)
(4.2)
The true stress and strain is plotted in figure 4.2 for both cylinders.
Another model which is fitted after uses strain hardening. Strain hardening or work
hardening is the strengthening of a material by plastic deformation at a macro­
scopic scale. The hardening process is complex, with the hardening happening
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
24
==PAGE:31==
due to dislocation generation and movement.
There exists multiple empirical models, to describe how the stress and strain is
related with a hardening curve. The most common equations to describe the re­
lations the Hollomon equation:
σ = Kεn
(4.3)
Where σ is the true stress, ε is true strain, K is strength coefficient and n is the
strain hardening exponent. the value of n, is between 0 and 1. Values at 0 indi­
cates only plastic behaviour, and values at 1 indicates only elastic behaviour. For
Aluminium 1050, these values was fitted to be: K = 126 MPa and n = 0.23. The
fitted function can be seen in figure 4.2.
Another strain hardening model is the the Voce equation:
σ = B −(B −A) exp (−n0ε)
(4.4)
Both models is empirically defined and based on the assumption of having an
isotropic homogenius material. The constants K,A,B and n0 being material pa­
rameters found experimentally. B is the yield stress and B −A is the negative
saturation stress. Hollomon is mostly used for steels, where the equivalent stress
is depending only on effective strain increments. The Voce is more suitable for
models where the hardening is stress­state dependant [24].
Both models is implemented for the experimental part. The macroscopic tensile
curves of the two materials of this thesis follow one of the expressions as demon­
strated later on.
Figure 4.2: Figure showing the true stress­strain for the two cylinders, with Hol­
lomon and Voce fit
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
25
==PAGE:32==
Combining the two fits and the theory from from section 2.2.2. The isotropic crystal
plasticity for DAMASK is used and shown in table 4.1. With these models, it takes
into consideration the kinetics of the deformation and strain.
Symbol
Value used
Explanation
M
3
Taylor factor
˙γ0
0.001 s−1
Reference shear rate
g0
12.66 MPa
Initial flow stress
g∞
43.4 MPa
Saturation of flow stress
h0
416
Hardening coefficient
n
20 MPa
Stress exponent
a
2.25
Free parameters
C11
110.9 GPa
Elastic constant
C12
58.3 GPa
Elastic constant
Table 4.1: Table showing the isotropic material properties for DAMASK
4.1.1
Determining the crystal plasticity
The most important properties is shown in table 4.1. The rest of the parameters
that DAMASK needs is; hS­S
0 , hα
int, hαα′ from equation 2.8, which all describe the
strength of interactions between dislocations gliding on the 12 slip systems.
The resistance to slip is described by ξ∞, ξ0 and the exponent n must be deter­
mined by letting Damask simulate a tensile stress­strain curve and varying the
parameters until the simulated curve matches the experimental.
At an early stage it became clear that computational resources were an issue and
that the crystal plasticity simulations would have to run for a long time. Even these
calibrations of the material parameters could be demanding.
In order not to let the long duration of this calibration step jeopardise the overar­
ching goal of building the pipeline and demonstrate the feasibility of simulation the
development of surface roughness, it was decided not to include this step. Instead
the resistance parameters and exponents were selected based on the fitting of to
the isotropic material model.
For simplicity, it is custom to set the interaction parameters hS­S
0 , hα
int and hαα′ to 1.
The physical interpretation of this is that all dislocation interactions are considered
to be equally strong. All the values used for the crystal plasticity within DAMASK
can be seen in the appendix, section A.4
4.2
Aluminium geoemtry
At the beginning the first geometry investigated was a cylinder with a conically
shaped top as illustrated in figure 4.3A. The geometry was build in the Abaqus
CAE interface as a 2D model with axial symmetry around the vertical center line.
Compression by a flat tool was simulated while assuming friction less contact
between the tool and sample. At first the simulation used standard aluminium
from the Abaqus documentation [25]. When the best geometry was identified the
simulation was done again with updated values to verify if the simulation remained
coherent as it did. Identifying the most suited geometry was important, identify
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
26
==PAGE:33==
how to generate the highest surface roughness.
The model is assumed to be isotropic. Elastic and plastic deformation properties
has been included in the models. The updated material properties can be seen in
table 4.2.
The elastic properties is assumed linear, while the plastic deformation is non­linear
and needs a stress strain curve to deform, this used the fitted data from section
4.1.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the ge­
ometry, with a) the first tested
configuration and b) the second
configuration.
Elastic properties
Youngs modulus [MPa]
Poisson’s ratio
69000
0.32
Plastic properties
Yield stress [Mpa]
Plastic strain
36.1
0
37.3
0.005
48.0
0.015
54.1
0.025
58.4
0.035
61.9
0.045
64.8
0.055
67.4
0.065
69.6
0.075
71.6
0.085
73.5
0.095
75.2
0.100
83.4
0.166
88.6
0.217
95.4
0.298
100.5
0.373
107.4
0.500
Table 4.2: Table of the elastic and plas­
tic properties from the fitting.
The first tests was done with the configuration as seen in figure 4.3a. These con­
figurations is simulated in 2D as axisymmetric simulations around the centre line.
It has the shape of a cylinder with a truncated cone on top of it. The angle θ is
tested at 30°, 45° and 60°. These samples was compressed with an analytical
tool which pushed from the top, until 2/3 of radius length was in contact with the
tool. This was done to have buildup of stresses and strains, while leaving surface
without tool contact. This is done to verify larger buildups of strains, since defor­
mation is needed to generate surface roughness.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
27
==PAGE:34==
The equivalent plastic strain (PEEQ) can be seen in figure 4.4, as the tool is in
contact with 2/3 length of the radius for 30°, 45° and 60°.
Figure 4.4: Figure shows the Von misses stress of the cylinder with a truncated
cone at different angles, A) is 30°, B) is 45° and C) is 60°
Figure 4.4 shows that along the free surface, the strain decreases with the dis­
tance from the tool. The angle also shows a clear contribution. Where the higher
an angle gives higher strain. This is due to the tool having a longer distance to
compress the sample with more material. Even for strains in the range of 0.1­0.3
along the free surface was less then preferred.
The geometry was changed to have a hole in the middle and an inner rift. The
change is done to give the material more freedom to deform. The shape changed
to have a toroidal polyhedron geometry and is refereed to as such. The change
is shown in figure 4.3B compared to the original in cylinder in 4.3A.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.5: Figure showing how the equivalent strain is distributed through the
different geometries at 60°, with the tool in contact 2/3 of the radius. a) Shows the
strain for the cylinder and b) shows the strain for the toroidal polyhedron
This change gives asymmetry and less strain on the free surface. Under com­
pression the toroidal polyhedron moves slightly inwards towards the centre. This
increases the strain at the circumference compared to the previous model. Sim­
ulations showed same trends for increased stress. With more confidence in the
stresses and strains as seen in figure 4.5, the doughnut geometry was used fur­
ther.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
29
==PAGE:36==
4.3
Experiments
The toroidal polyhedron was machined from an Al 1050 rod. Samples of a width
of 28mm and hole size of 8mm was made with angles at 30°, 45° and 60°.
Three samples of each different angles, and two cylinders was heated for 6 hours
at 450 °C, with ramping of heat from room temperature over 1 hour. The samples
was then cooling in the oven for 16 hours.
Initial testing of the samples was done for compression. Where the focus is on
the angle and identifying the increase in roughness. These tests where done to
find the optimal length of compression, with the most stresses and strains. While
not destroying the surface, by tool interaction.
The order of the initial trials was done at for the 30°, 45° and then lastly 60°.
This order was chosen as the 60° showed the highest level of deformation, and is
assumed to give the most useful results.
Each part was compressed based on the original height of the truncated cone (L).
The height for 30° is 2.31mm, 45° is 4.00mm and 60° is 6.93mm. In table 4.3,
it is shown how long a distance each sample is compressed, and how much in
percentage of the length. This is done to give an indication of how the samples
can be compared since they have different heights.
To go through the samples, the first test was done at for sample 1.30 with com­
pression 86% of the distance as an initial guess. This proved to to give a very
nice result with the edge having a small band at a few millimetres. To further test,
it was extended to 129% for sample 2.30. This proved to be to much, as the band
get to small. The idea was to test in between the others at 2 and 3mm with 2.5mm
at 80%. Due to a mistake, the same compression was done as for sample 2.30.
As seen in figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Figure for Post) Original shape at 30°, 1) sample 1.30, 2) sample 2.30
and 3) sample 3.30
Next, the samples at 45°was compressed, with 105% and 95% as from table 4.3.
Sample 1.45 and 2.45. They are shown in figure 4.7.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: Figure with 1) Sample 1.45, 2) sample 2.45 and Post) the original
shape 45°
With the experience from the other samples, the single experiment was done for
the sample with 60°, as seen in figure 4.8.This was enough, as it gave a well sized
band with very clear surface roughness.
Figure 4.8: Figure with 1) Sample 1.60 and Post) the original shape for 60°
Figure 4.9:
Figure il­
lustrates
the
different
lengths of the geometry
Sample
D
H
Theta
Lcompression
L in %
1.30
28.01
10.04
30±0.5
2mm
86
2.30
28.02
10.01
30±0.5
3mm
129
3.30
27.99
10.02
30±0.5
3mm
129
1.45
27.98
12.50
45±0.5
4.2
105
2.45
27.99
12.50
45±0.5
3.8
95
1.60
27.98
15.04
60±0.5
7
101
Table 4.3: Table of the trial experiments, to achieve sur­
face roughness at the edges of the truncated cones.
The difference in height is due to the samples needing
enough height for the machines to hold on during tooling.
These tests indicated that compressing at 100­110% of the height of the trun­
cated cone gave the best results. Other observations by comparing the samples
is surface roughness increases with the increase of angle, as more material is
deformed, giving higher stresses and strains. Another lesser detail is that the
roughness is higher at the outer surface, compared to the inner surface. This
corresponds with the results from the simulation results in Abaqus.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
31
==PAGE:38==
4.4
Upscaling
With the methodology in place, the complexity could be increased for the geom­
etry simulation. The first part needed was a method to create the top part of the
cylinder in Neper. Neper has limited tools for transforming the mesh which limits
the possible geometry.
This proved to give a number of problems. Neper generates the output as an .inp
file, where the geometry is made up of smaler cubes. This gives the problem of
not yielding a smooth curved surface, as seen in figure 4.10A at the top. The lines
for the boundary will zigzag along the cubes contrary to a straight line. Another
problem it gives is when the toroidal polyhedron geometry is made as seen in
figure 4.10B where meshing them together creates inconsistent meshing at the
boundary between them.
Figure 4.10: a) Showcasing how top part is made in Neper and the bottom part
made in Abaqus. b) Shows the part after merging the two meshes together
To further elaborate on the meshing. In figure 4.11, it can be seen how elements
have irregular shapes which Abaqus is not able to handle. This approach proved
to be futile, and another approach was used.
Figure 4.11: Figure shows part A) with location of improperly meshed elements.
B) shows the geometry of the elements
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
32
==PAGE:39==
Attempts where made to to minimise the mesh differences. One such attempt
where made with only a smaller part of the mesh being replaced by Neper as seen
in figure 4.12A and 4.12B with a strip. The conjecture was that forcing the meshing
around the square elements of the strip, could make a continuous connection. The
advantage for the model in figure 4.12A is that it would allow for a smooth surface,
with downsides of being difficult to integrate and to needing code implementation
for rotating the grain orientations. Figure 4.12B advantage is by being easy to
implement from Neper, but having the downside of having a ragged surface.
Figure 4.12: Figure showing A) with how the mesh could be aligned at an angle,
and B) showing a Neper non­angled, but with direct and easy contact.
In the end, this approach proved to be a fruitless effort, as having a finer mesh
would instigate to improper meshing even further. While a finer mesh is important
to be able to differentiate between the grain. This approach was abandoned for
the toroidal polyhedron while still having potential for other cases.
4.5
Multiscale simulations
As the geometry had given substantial problems with fusing the meshes together
without any major downsides. The final approach used was multiscale modelling.
This takes advantage of splitting the simulations into segments, with a main model
and a sub model. The advantages of multiscale simulations is; the cubic shape
generated from Neper can be rotated instead of being transformed. This removes
the problem of having the ragged edges as in section 4.4. This allows simulations
to work with complex geometries.
Splitting up the properties it faster to work with in practice as well. Where having
both polycrystal and isotropic properties in the same model is time consuming to
set up and difficult to streamline.
The main model is simulated for the entire complex geometry as seen in figure
4.13, with a red square indicating the position of the submodel. The main model
is simulated as isotropic through Abaqus without DAMASK. The model was set
up to move 6mm instead of the previous length, as to shorten the simulation time.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.13: Illustration of how the compression of the main model, from the initial
position on the left to the end position to the right. The red square shows the
position of the submodel.
The movement of the nodalpoints is translated from the main model to the sub­
model. They are used to define the boundary conditions for the submodel. How
the submodel fits into the main model is shown in figure 4.5. In practice the cube
is simulated separately with transferring of the nodal points.
Initially the cube was not positioned in regard to the mesh of the main model, as
seen to the left of figure 4.5. This proved to be problematic when the boundary
conditions where not aligned with the cube, albeit the submodel uses interpolation
to try and fit the boundary conditions. The submodel kept diverging when trying
to solve the simulation.
By aligning the mesh from the main model with the exact dimensions and the
cubes boundaries, as in figure 4.5B, the model started to converge.
Figure 4.14: Figure showing how the submodel fits into the main model, to the left
is shown how the cube initialy fitted into the mesh. To the right is shown how the
mesh was changed to align with the cube
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
34
==PAGE:41==
One problem with having the cube within a cylindrical surface is they can never
have the same free surface. This is illustrated in figure how the free surface for
the submodels is submerged within the main model. To minimise the problem the
cube of the submodel had to be completely submerged in the main model. This
solution was chosen as to make sure no boundary condition for the submodel was
missing any nodal points.
The cube in the submodel is shown in figure 4.15, where it has 21952 elements
with 210 grains. This is done as such to have realistic grain size of the aluminium.
Having around 100 elements per grain gives the minimum amount of elements
which can describe a grain. This keeps the simulation within manageable time.
With the submersion of the cube, it is assumed to have no curvature with the
translation of the notes from the main model to the sub model. It can be seen in
figure 4.15C how five of the six sides is constrained with the nodal points used as
boundary conditions on the surfaces. This allows the model to evolve roughness
at the surface.
Figure 4.15: Figure A) shows how the RVE looks for Neper, B) shows the mesh
as it is imported into Abaqus with coloring of their respective grains. C) Shows
how there is one free surface which can build surface roughness and the other
surfaces has boundary conditions from the main model.
The other problem was the grains of the real material is elongated along the height
of the toroidal polyhedron. This created a problem as output from Neper had to be
rotated 60°to fit with the angle, this meant the elongation within Neper had to be
rotated 30°initially to make the make the elongation go along the height. Neper
does not have to tools as of writing to have elongation at an angle, and only uni­
directional along the axis.
The rotation as it could be is shown in figure 4.16A, and the desired rotation which
is not possible at the moment in figure 4.16B.
To mitigate the problem, it was chosen to have no elongation in the grains. It was
otherwise planed to measure the texture. Due to broken equipment and not being
able to repair it under the pandemic, it was unachievable to perform analysis of
the samples.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.16: Illustration of A) how the grains would be rotated in Neper and B)
The desired rotation of the elongated grains.
4.6
Optimisation
Since the models being simulated have elements in the thousands, effort was
done to try and optimise the speed of the simulations as much as possible without
compromises.
One simple way of doing that is by utilising the power of the machines. The sim­
ulations is done on a Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8160 CPU @ 2.10GHz with 48
cores. Splitting up the workload on multiple cores is favourable, as the limiting fac­
tor is not distributing the work between the cores, but calculating the wast number
of elements.
Including DAMASK in the simulation greatly increases the simulation time. It was
tested to increase in the range of 3­5 times compared to using only Abaqus.
This can be optimised by parallelization. Abaqus does not support paralleliza­
tion, whereas DAMASK supports it internally with OpenMP. This is done with the
environment variable $DAMASK_NUM_THREADS. It was tested from using be­
tween 1 and 40 cores. Doing so proved little change in simulation speed. Though
the results shown in the thesis was run with 20 cores to maximise the number of
cores. This allows having two models running at a time.
Another aspect was the meshing of main models. They where tested with three
different element sizes of the mesh. A rough, middle and fine model was simu­
lated in figure 4.17.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.17: Illustration shows the meshing of the different main models. A) Is the
rough, B) is the middle, C) is the fine and D) is end step of the deformation of the
middle model.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
37
==PAGE:44==
Each models has half the length between each nodal point for the top truncated
part of the model. For a feel of the scale between them, the element increase
made the isotropic simulation take exponentially more time. Comparing this to
how many more nodal points the submodel was in contact with is shown in table
4.4
Model
Simulation time
Estimate of nodal points for submodel
Rough
20min
8
Middle
2 hours
48
Fine
18 hours
256
Table 4.4: Table showing the exponential simulation cost compared to the benefit
of having more nodal points for the submodels boundary conditions
From the table there is little benefit from going from the middle model to the fine
model. The stress for the isotropic compressed main model was then compared,
to investigate the necessity of a finer mesh in figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Figure shows the main model after some compression with a red box
to indicate size and position a cube can have. It shows, A) the rough model, B)
the middle model and C) the fine model
The figure shows how that there is a high buildup of stress in the rough model
over a large area as the mesh is coarse. The stress distribution is similar for the
middle and fine models.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
38
==PAGE:45==
Comparing the results from table 4.4 and figure 4.18 makes it clear that using the
middle model is the best approach.
4.7
Results
The first results of the toroidal polyhedron with minor displacement shows poly­
crystal properties. The tool has compressed the sample by 0.5mm, as seen in
figure 4.19A. The cube is located at the same position within the main model as
in figure 4.13.
The deformation is plotted and compared between the submodel and main model
for 4.19B and 4.19C. It clearly shows that the mainmodel is smooth at the surface,
where some surface roughness has formed for the submodel. To further show the
deformation, figure 4.19B is magnified five times to show the generation of rough­
ness in 4.19D.
This shows having only slight changes causes surface roughness generation.
Figure 4.19: The figure shows a comparison of the displacement for the main and
submodel, where there are minor changes in the location between them, as the
iteration steps of the simulations never aligned perfectly at the beginning. Figure
A) shows the compression of the main model at the point for the submodel. Figure
B) shows the main model displacement with indication of the subfigure location
within it. Figure C shows the displacement magnified 5 times for the submodel,
to clearly show roughness evolution at the free surface.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
39
==PAGE:46==
The two models are not identical. As the submodel needs more iterations to solve
the deformation. This means the time is slightly shifted between them. These dif­
ferences gives the discrepancies between the main and sub model for the contour
plot.
The submodel was then imported into SPIP as an STL in figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20: Illustration of the free surface from the subfigure from figure 4.19
imported into SPIP, with clear indication of surface roughness.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
40
==PAGE:47==
5
Outlook
This thesis leaves elements of the work unresolved. It would be ideal to have done
more precise simulations without having any setbacks. Such as simulating the full
depth of the dogbone and having more deformation for the toroidal polyhedron.
These aspects could be easily solved by having more time, as the time needed
would be in the scale of a few weeks, if not months.
Another aspect is the meshing and it limits the simulation as it is. While Neper
is still early in its development. Hopefully in the future in can directly support
Abaqus, while not limiting the geometry of only having cubic tesselations. Since
using multiscale simulations is needed to circumvent this issue, it would alleviate
a lot of work by solving the issue.
For the multiscale simulation, it was found a deep connection between the mesh
of the main model and the sub model. Investigating the effects the main models
mesh would be recommended. Matching the models might prove to have sub­
stantial impact on simulation speed.
Another aspect to analyse is how many elements is needed to describe a grain.
For this work, it is practically assumed that at least 100 elements is needed to
describe a grain. Where in practicality the number might be higher.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
41
==PAGE:48==
6
Conclusion
Being able to simulate surface roughness for different materials and geometries
proved to be a success.
Through the work of this thesis an understanding of how the different software
functions together has been shown. Which made it possible to build a pipeline
with Neper, Abaqus, DAMASK and SPIP. That is able to be flexible and solve
scenarios with simple to complex geometries including polycrystal material mod­
els. The pipeline showed potential and functions as a proof of concept.
Using multiscale modelling demonstrated to be the most applicable for way to sim­
ulate complex geometries. Where the downside of the multiscale modelling and
using DAMASK has the larger setback of being very resource intensive. It would
require several weeks to simulate a smaller segment of a part to extract use­
ful information out of the simulation. This is further exacerbated that the models
requires to be fitted for the polycrystal models, to identify all the necessary mate­
rial properties of the models. This step was skipped, as it was not possible to do
within the scope of the thesis while not needed to verify the pipelines functionality.
Using complex symmetry proved possible, whereas Neper has limited functional­
ity for metal forming. Neper struggles with convex geometries, contrary it is able
to handle complex shapes, importing the geometry to Abaqus is very limited as it
can only export a cubic mesh. These downsides could in the end be circumvented
by using multiscale modelling.
Surface roughness was shown for both a complex geometry with an aluminium
toroidal polyhedron and thin steel sheet. Verifying both plastic and elastic defor­
mation had not been determined, as the resources needed to finish the simulations
was not able to see if the material had experienced enough strain go from elastic
to plastic deformation.
Simulating polycrystal properties withing metal forming with a pipeline was achiev­
able. The pipeline has potential to give detailed information about each individual
grain properties through the deformation. The pipeline shows feasibility with its
flexability to be used withing other areas of metal forming.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
42
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
W.D. Callister and D.G. Rethwisch. Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, 9th Edition: Ninth Edition. John Wiley and Sons, Incorporated,
2013. ISBN: 9781118476543.
[2]
Charles Burroughs Gill et al. Metallurgy. Encyclopedia Britannica, 2021.
URL: https://www.britannica.com/science/metallurgy.
[3]
Wole Soboyejo. Mechanical Properties Of Engineered Materials. Mechani­
cal engineering 152. Marcel Dekker, 2003.
[4]
G Sachs. “Zur Ableitung einer Fliessbedingung”. In: Dtsch Ing 72 (1928),
pp. 734–736.
[5]
Geoffrey Ingram Taylor. “The mechanism of plastic deformation of crystals.
Part I; Theoretical”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 145.855
(1934), pp. 362–387. DOI: 10.1098/rspa.1934.0106.
[6]
J.F.W. Bishop and R. Hill. “CXXVIII. A theoretical derivation of the plastic
properties of a polycrystalline face­centred metal”. In: The London, Edin­
burgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 42.334
(1951), pp. 1298–1307. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14786444108561385.
[7]
Kai Zhang et al. “Assessment of advanced Taylor models, the Taylor fac­
tor and yieldsurface exponent for FCC metals”. In: International Journal of
Plasticity 114 (Nov. 2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.ijplas.2018.10.015.
[8]
M. Crumbach et al. “A Taylor type deformation texture model considering
grain interaction and material properties. Part i ­ Fundamentals”. In: Re­
crystallization and Grain Growth 1 (Jan. 2001), pp. 1053–1060.
[9]
Paul Van Houtte et al. “Deformation texture prediction: from the Taylor model
to the advanced Lamel model”. In: International Journal of Plasticity 21.3
(2005), pp. 589–624. ISSN: 0749­6419. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0749641904000610.
[10]
R.A. Lebensohn and C.N. Tomé. “A self­consistent anisotropic approach for
the simulation of plastic deformation and texture development of polycrys­
tals: Application to zirconium alloys”. In: Acta Metallurgica et Materialia 41.9
(1993), pp. 2611–2624. ISSN: 0956­7151. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/095671519390130K.
[11]
F. Roters et al. “Overview of constitutive laws, kinematics, homogenization
and multiscale methods in crystal plasticity finite­element modeling: Theory,
experiments, applications”. In: Acta Materialia 58.4 (2010), pp. 1152–1211.
ISSN: 1359­6454. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1359645409007617.
[12]
Bert Verlinden et al. Thermo­Mechanical Processing of Metallic Materials.
Jan. 2007.
[13]
W. L. Chan, M. W. Fu, and B. Yang. “Experimental studies of the size ef­
fect affected microscale plastic deformation in micro upsetting process”.
In: Materials Science and Engineering A 534 (2012), pp. 374–383. ISSN:
09215093. DOI: 10.1016/j.msea.2011.11.083.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
43
==PAGE:50==
[14]
“Analysis of roping in an AA6111 T4P automotive sheet in 3D deformation
states”. In: Acta Materialia 124 (2017), pp. 598–607. ISSN: 13596454. DOI:
10.1016/j.actamat.2016.11.028.
[15]
Irene J. Beyerlein and Marko Knezevic. “Review of microstructure and mi­
cromechanism based constitutive modeling of polycrystals with a low sym­
metry crystal structure”. In: Journal of Materials Research 33.22 (2018),
pp. 3711–3738. ISSN: 20445326. DOI: 10.1557/jmr.2018.333.
[16]
Tsuyoshi Furushima, Tomoko Nakayama, and Kanta Sasaki. “A new theo­
retical model of material inhomogeneity for prediction of surface roughening
in micro metal forming”. In: CIRP Annals 68.1 (2019), pp. 257–260. ISSN:
0007­8506. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2019.04.057. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007850619300861.
[17]
Romain Quey and Loïc Renversade. “Optimal polyhedral description of 3D
polycrystals: Method and application to statistical and synchrotron X­ray
diffraction data”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi­
neering 330 (2018), pp. 308–333. ISSN: 0045­7825. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782517307028.
[18]
Abaqus Manual 6.11. SIMULIA. URL: http://130.149.89.49:2080/v6.11/pdf_
books/ANALYSIS_1.pdf.
[19]
Abaqus subrutine ­ UMAT. https : / / abaqus - docs . mit . edu / 2017 / English /
SIMACAESUBRefMap/simasub-c-umat.htm. Accessed: 2021­13­04.
[20]
Rebecca Brannon. “Kinematics: The mathematics of deformation”. In: (2008),
pp. 10–11.
[21]
F. Roters et al. “DAMASK – The Düsseldorf Advanced Material Simulation
Kit for modeling multi­physics crystal plasticity, thermal, and damage phe­
nomena from the single crystal up to the component scale”. In: Computa­
tional Materials Science 158 (2019), pp. 420–478. ISSN: 0927­0256. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927025618302714.
[22]
Nicolai Ytterdal Juul. “Characterisation and modelling at the grain scale dur­
ing plastic deformation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[23]
Federico Bottoli. “Influence of steel composition and plastic deformation
on the surface properties induced by low­temperature thermochemical pro­
cessing”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, Dec. 2015.
[24]
W.M. Sing and K.P. Rao. “Role of strain­hardening laws in the prediction of
forming limit curves”. In: Journal of Materials Processing Technology 63.1
(1997), pp. 105–110. ISSN: 0924­0136. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-
0136(96)02608-8. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0924013696026088.
[25]
Abaqus standard aluminium values. SIMULIA. URL: https://abaqus-docs.
mit.edu/2017/English/SIMACAEGSARefMap/simagsa-c-appendixlap.htm.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
44
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Generating donut shape in Neper
The method for generating the donut is by generating a cylinder, and cutting parts
away until the desired shape is there. In this section it is explained with commands
with an example. The only way of changing the shape in Neper, is through the
transform command. This command is in the experimental stage as of writing,
with limited functionality.
In this example, a donut shape of radius 28 and a height of 6 is made, notice
Neper is unitless. In this context it is used as mm.
To start with, the cylinder is shaped with ­domain ”cylinder(radius,height,sides)” .
The hole in the center is cut with
­transform ”cut(cylinder(basis_x,basis_y,basis_z,axis_x,axis_y,axis_z,rad))” and
3/4 of it is cut off, leaving a quarter to simplify the simulation with. The cut is
done with ­transform ”planecut(d,a,b,c)”, where it cuts with the equation of a plane.
Cutting the rim at top needs further explanation, as the only way to cut is with the
planecut command. As the equation for a plane is ax + by + cz = d, it gives the
problem with cutting the rim at the inner radius, as the plane will cut through the
donut.
The way to cut the outer radius, is by defining the number of planes that intersect.
In this example number of planes, n = 9, and sums over each uniqe plane as
i = 0 as more precision gets redundant when converting to Abaqus. Finding the
variables for each plane is done. Where a and b is defined as:
a =
a =
a =
n=9
P
i=0
−cos
  π
2 · i
n

b =
b =
b =
n=9
P
i=0
−cos
  π
2 · i
n

It sums from i = 0 to n = 9 for each plane. With their respective −cos and −sin,
since it moves from the intersection at the x­axis to the intersection with the y­axis.
Where π
2 lets the function run for a quarter of a period. Since the donut is cut into
a quarter. The i
n uses the fraction as it changes.
c is depending on the change in the z­axis, which is the ratio between the height
and the width of the rim. For a 60°:
c =
c =
c =
4
6.93 = 1.73
The last variable, d. The variable pushes the interception for xy­plane. This is
used to adjust the height of the cut:
d =
d =
d =
n=9
X
i=0
−sin
i · π
n

·
√
r2 + r2 −r

+ L
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
45
==PAGE:52==
The first part is almost the same as for a and b, but with a different period. The
 √
r2 + r2 −r

comes from geometric properties. And L is shifting, where it is 0,
if only the part rift is needed.
A.1.1
The script
The script is written in bash. What is also included in the script is a looping com­
mand, which tries different seeds (id’s) and grain numbers. This is due to cutting
the geometry. Often when cutting with more than 100 grains, the cuts removes
most of the grains, making them very small, which Neper is not able to handle.
With grain counts over 800, it is often only 1/1000 chance of generating a mesh.
The example, gives the tesselation and mesh from figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Figure showing file:
Donut_Part_grain100_id2_nplanes10_Lcut_0_Thickness_10, whith A) showing
the tesselation, and B) showing the mesh input file for Abaqus. This geometri
is intended to be meshed with an isotropic model from Abaqus.
The script i designed such that changing the inner radius and heigt is easy, giv­
ing flexability in terms of what part of the donut is desired to be used. Another
showcase of how it can look is shown in figure A.2.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
46
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.2: Figure shows another configuration of what tesselation the code can
generate. This is designed as the entire aluminium piece.
Some important notes for the script is how fine the mesh is. It is defined by the
command ­rcl 1. The one tells the characteristic sidelengths of the cubes.
The code is as such:
1
2
NEPER="neper --rcfile none"
3
4
export OMP_NUM_THREADS=48 #Makes Neper run on all threads
5
6
#Noter til koden:
7
#The order which is used for "transform" is very important. Follow the
order in Neper?
8
#THe height (first input) of domain 'cylinder ' is very dependent on
the number of sides. Fiddle with it if it crashes. This code does
not scale with width of the cylinder! But change the ratio it can
take multiple angles
9
10
11
#----------Input--------------
12
13
nplanes=10
14
grains_min=100
15
grains_max=400
16
id=1000
17
sides=110 #Dont change is
18
Theight=6 #Ratio is 4/2.31 for 30deg, 4/4=1 for 45deg, and 4/6.93 for
60deg
19
Lcut_min=0
20
Lcut_max=0
21
ratio=$(awk "BEGIN{print 4/$Theight}")
22
23
24
#Some math to set it up, now it supports 60degree model
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
47
==PAGE:54==
25
#This is based on cutting in the ax+by+cz=d plane, with planecut(d,a,b
,c)
26
#Makes the cut string which has to be used. The math is inversed to
cut the correct side of the plane
27
28
for length in $(seq $Lcut_min $Lcut_max); do
29
30
#------Calculate the cutting planes ----
31
#Empty string which is filled up with commands
32
string=()
33
set -Ee
34
35
for i in $(seq 0 $nplanes); do
36
37
a=$(awk -v aa="$i" -v n="$nplanes" 'BEGIN{printf("%.6f",-cos(aa
*3.14159265/(2*n))) }')
38
b=$(awk -v bb="$i" -v n="$nplanes" 'BEGIN{printf("%.6f",-sin(bb
*3.14159265/(2*n))) }')
39
c=$(awk -v ccc="$ratio" 'BEGIN{printf ccc}')e
40
d=$(awk -v ddd="$i" -v n="$nplanes" -v L="$length" 'BEGIN{printf
("%.6f" ,-sin(ddd*3.14159265/n)*5.79898987 + L) }')
41
new_string="planecut($d,$a,$b,$c),"
42
string="${string}${new_string}"
43
44
done
45
46
thickness=12
47
string="cut(cylinder(14,14,0,0,0,1,${thickness})),planecut(14,0,1,0)
,planecut(14,1,0,0),${string::-1}"
48
49
50
#-------MAKE THE TOP---------
51
52
for m in $(seq $grains_min $grains_max); do
53
54
for n in $(seq 1 $id); do
55
56
name=Donut_Part_grain${m}_id${n}_nplanes${nplanes}_Lcut_${length}
_Thickness_${thickness}
57
58
#creating n grains with euler angles
59
$NEPER -T -n $m -id $n \
60
-domain "cylinder(2,28,$sides)" \
61
-oridescriptor "euler-kocks" \
62
-transform $string \
63
-o ${name}.tess || continue
64
65
#create abaqus input file with hexagonal elements and continuous
grain boundaries
66
$NEPER -M ${name}.tess -statelset vol -rcl 1 -elttype hex -order 1
-interface continuous -format inp,msh -o ${name} || true
67
68
#Prints Tesselation
69
C="-datacelltrs 0.7 -cameraangle 20 -imagesize 1200:1200"
70
$NEPER
-V ${name}.tess \
71
-datacellcol 'id'\
72
-showelt3d "x<0.5||y>0.5||z<0.2"\
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
48
==PAGE:55==
73
$C -print "${name}_tess" \ || true
74
75
#Prints mesh
76
C="-datacelltrs 0.7 -cameraangle 20 -imagesize 1200:1200"
77
$NEPER
-V ${name}.msh \
78
-dataelsetcol id\
79
-showelt3d "x<0.5||y>0.5||z<0.2"\
80
$C -print "${name}_msh" \ || true
81
done
82
83
done
84
85
done
Listing A.1: Bash script for making a donut shape in Neper
A.2
Guide on how to use the automated scripts
This is an introduction on to how to automate the process of DAMASK in an
Abaqus environment using NEPER as a polycrystal geometry generating soft­
ware. In this introduction, a cubic section of the dogbone is used.
The ”Run01.sh” has some initial settings which is not to be changed. Code to gen­
erate strings for either a toroidal polyhedron or dogbone could be included from
section A.1. The settings of the NEPER file can then be changed, where it has
aTesselation (­T), Meshing (­M) and Visualization (­V) module.
The tesselation module is where the geometry, morphology and grain properties
is defined, this section is the one which can be changed, as desired.
For the Meshing module, only ”­rcl” should be tampered with, at it changes the
resolution. As it sets the characteristic length of the raster tesselation.
After this has been changed, bash Run01.sh. An *.inp file will haven been gen­
erated (* is the name of the model), this file is to be imported into Abaqus. When
in abaqus setup the geometri and boundary conditions as needed. After that has
been done, process the run and generate an .inp file. It will give a warning that
”TESS­1” is missing material properties, ignore this error as it will be solved later.
If the geometry or boundary conditions is complex, it is recommended to simulate
the model in an Abaqus only environment to test for potential mistakes and errors.
The .inp file Abaqus has generated now needs to replace the one in the same
folder as the one generated from Neper. When that is done, bash Run02.sh. It
will start the process of starting the simulation, it can take weeks if the model if
complex.
An .dat and .msh file can be opened to check in on the simulation to see any
errors.
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
49
==PAGE:56==
A.3
Technical drawings
A.3.1
Toroidal polyhedron
Figure A.3: Caption
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
50
==PAGE:57==
A.3.2
Meatbone
Author:
Project nr.:
Drawing title:
Drawing nr.:
Description:
Scale:
Material:
ulari
77449
1 : 1
Subsize tensile test specimen according to 
ASTM E8/E8M-16a
13RM19
Date:
03-03-2021
TT_specimen.ipt
200
10
40 [K1]
0,08 [K2]
8,0
R
B0,5 x4
6,0 B0,1
A
0,02 A
H 0,13 B
B
90 B3
Obs! "6.1.3.1: The reduced section including the fillets
of prepared specimens should be free of cold work, 
notches, chatter marks, grooves, gouges, burrs, rough
surfaces or edges, overheating, or any other condition 
which can deleteriously affect the properties to be 
measured." - ASTM E8/E8M-16a
K1: Reduced section
K2: Provided strip thickness
Dimensions in millimetres
General tolerance 0.1mm
Figure A.4: Caption
Courtesy of Úlfar Arinbjarnar
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
51
==PAGE:58==
A.4
Material files for DAMASK
A.4.1
Aluminium 1050
The material.config file DAMASK uses with material properties is shown below.
This is used in the millimetres scale as calculated in section 4.1. It is set up such
that it can work with both isotropic and anisotropic aluminium. The inclusions was
added to be able to handle one model, with a segment from Neper. As done trialed
in section 4.4. It is included here as it might be useful in the future.
1
2
[Polycrystaline_Aluminium]
3
4
elasticity
hooke
5
plasticity
phenopowerlaw
6
7
(output)
resistance_slip
8
(output)
shearrate_slip
9
(output)
resolvedstress_slip
10
(output)
accumulatedshear_slip
11
(output)
totalshear
12
(output)
resistance_twin
13
(output)
shearrate_twin
14
(output)
resolvedstress_twin
15
(output)
accumulatedshear_twin
16
(output)
totalvolfrac
17
(output)
flowstress
18
(output)
strainrate
19
20
lattice_structure
fcc
21
Nslip
12
22
Ntwin
0
23
24
c11
106.75e3
25
c12
60.41e3
26
c44
28.34e3
27
28
gdot0_slip
0.001
29
n_slip
20
30
tau0_slip
31
# per family
31
tausat_slip
63
# per family
32
w0_slip
2.25
33
gdot0_twin
0.001
34
n_twin
20
35
tau0_twin
31
# per family
36
s_pr
0
# push-up factor for slip saturation due
to twinning
37
twin_b
0
38
twin_c
0
39
twin_d
0
40
twin_e
0
41
h0_slipslip
75
42
h0_sliptwin
0
43
h0_twinslip
0
44
h0_twintwin
0
45
interaction_slipslip
1 1 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4
46
interaction_sliptwin
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
52
==PAGE:59==
47
interaction_twinslip
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
48
interaction_twintwin
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
49
atol_resistance
1
50
51
52
[Isotropic_Aluminium]
53
54
lattice_structure isotropic
55
elasticity
hooke
56
plasticity
isotropic
57
58
(output)
resistance_slip
59
(output)
shearrate_slip
60
(output)
resolvedstress_slip
61
(output)
accumulatedshear_slip
62
(output)
totalshear
63
(output)
resistance_twin
64
(output)
shearrate_twin
65
(output)
resolvedstress_twin
66
(output)
accumulatedshear_twin
67
(output)
totalvolfrac
68
(output)
flowstress
69
(output)
strainrate
70
71
c11
110.9e3
72
c12
58.34e3
73
taylorfactor
3
74
tau0
38
75
gdot0
0.001
76
n
20
77
h0
1250
78
tausat
130
79
a
2.25
Listing A.2: Textfile for the material.config for Aluminium 1050 in millimetres
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
53
==PAGE:60==
A.4.2
Steel EN 1.4369
The material.config file was also converted into mm, where the data was from a
previous project.
1
[En 1.4369]
2
3
elasticity
hooke
4
plasticity
phenopowerlaw
5
6
(output)
resistance_slip
7
(output)
shearrate_slip
8
(output)
resolvedstress_slip
9
(output)
accumulatedshear_slip
10
(output)
totalshear
11
(output)
resistance_twin
12
(output)
shearrate_twin
13
(output)
resolvedstress_twin
14
(output)
accumulatedshear_twin
15
(output)
totalvolfrac
16
(output)
flowstress
17
(output)
strainrate
18
19
lattice_structure
fcc
20
Nslip
12
21
Ntwin
0
22
23
c11
206e3
24
c12
133e3
25
c44
119e3
26
27
gdot0_slip
0.001
28
n_slip
20
29
tau0_slip
31
# per family
30
tausat_slip
63
# per family
31
w0_slip
2.25
32
gdot0_twin
0
#Was 0.001
33
n_twin
0
#Was 20
34
tau0_twin
0
#Was 31 per family
35
s_pr
0
# push-up factor for slip saturation
due to twinning
36
twin_b
0
37
twin_c
0
38
twin_d
0
39
twin_e
0
40
h0_slipslip
63.3
41
h0_sliptwin
0
42
h0_twinslip
0
43
h0_twintwin
0
44
interaction_slipslip
1 1 1 1 1 1
45
interaction_sliptwin
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
46
interaction_twinslip
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
47
interaction_twintwin
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
48
atol_resistance
1
Listing A.3: Textfile for the material.config for Steel En 1.4369 in millimetres
Method for multiscale simulation of evolving surface roughness during plastic deformation of
metals
54
==PAGE:61==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet 425
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
