==PAGE:1==
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Rasmus Kragh-Sørensen
Supervisor:
Thomas Bolander
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Matematik-
tovet, Building 303b, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
compute@compute.dtu.dk
+45 4525 3031
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁlment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics and computer
science.
Rasmus Kragh-Sørensen - s164171
Signature
Date
ii
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Multi-agent pathﬁnding(MAPF) is the problem of multiple agents navigating a shared space. The
goal is to ﬁnd a set of conﬂict free paths such that each agents moves from their starting location
to their goal without colliding with any other agent. In this thesis the algorithm conﬂict-based
search(CBS) is examined along with a series of extension to it. Furthermore the MAPF with extra
rules(MAPF+) problem is introduced which has the same premise as MAPF however additional
rules and restrictions are put on the agents. This problem is analysed and a solver called rule-
based search is proposed and proven to be optimal and complete. Additionally the MAPF with
help(MAPF-H) problem is introduced where in some agents need help from others in order to
performed certain tasks. This problem is analysed and it is shown why a CBS-style algorithm is
not suited for solving this problem.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
iii
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Multi-agent stiﬁnding(MAPF) er problemet hvor ﬂere agenter skal navigere i det samme rum.
Målet er at ﬁnde et set af konﬂikt-frie stier sådan at en hver agent bevæger sig fra deres start
position til deres mål uden at støde samme med andre agenter. I det her speciale bliver algoritmen
konﬂict-baseret søgning(CBS) undersøgt sammen med en række af dens udvidelser. Desuden
bliver MAPF med extra regler(MAPF+) problemet introduceret hvilket har det samme præmis som
MAPF men hvor der er yderligere regler der begrænser agenterne. Problemet bliver analyseret
og en løser kaldet regl-baseret søgning bliver forslået og bevist til at være optimal og komplet.
Derudover bliver MAPF med hjælp(MAPF-H) problemet intorduceret hvori nogen agenter har
brug for hjælp fra andre for at fuldføre bestemte opgaver. Dette peroblem er analyseret og det er
vist hvorfor en CBS-stil algoritme ikke er egnet til at løse et problem af denne typpe.
iv
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
MAPF
2
2.1
Conﬂicts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Solver classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Map types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
CBS
6
3.1
High-level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Low-level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Proof of optimality and completeness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Restricting Rules
19
4.1
Action Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Low-level rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
The Simple Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Sub Categories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Well-formed and Unsolvable Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Solving Conﬂicts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.7
New Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.8
Extentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Requesting Rules
35
5.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Sub categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Validating solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
Solving MAPF-H in the CBS framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.6
Mixing problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Implementation
43
6.1
Joint Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
The Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Conclusion
44
8
Future Research
45
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In algorithm and artiﬁcial intelligence research pathﬁnding has been a very studied topic for a very
long time[HNR68]. This have led to a large number of algorithms for general case pathﬁnding as
well as specialised problems. Dijkstra’s algorithm and A∗are among the most famous of these
algorithms both of which have variations that focuses on different aspects of the problem. As the
solutions to single-agent pathﬁnding improved, researchers started to focus on what happens when
more than one agent was involved in the search. This is called Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding(MAPF)
and has many applications. The most immediate application of this is in warehouses with robots
that moves packages around. It is a multi-billion dollar industry where robots move around in
a factory in order to retrieve and deliver packages as efﬁcient as possible. Airports are an other
application of MAPF where the problem is routing of the aircraft on the runways [Mor+16]. MAPF
also has applications in areas of robotics where multiple robots have to traverse and plan routs in
the same space. Autonomous vehicles both in air and on land also have applications for MAPF
[DS08; Ho+19]. Furthermore many video games also use MAPF in senarioes with a multitudinous
of characters moving in the same space. As the gameplay often has to be smooth and in real-time
solvers have to be very fast as the player often inputs new instructions.
In this thesis an overview of the MAPF problem is given and previous state-of-the-art solver called
Conﬂict Based Search(CBS) is examined. This solver has outperformed many of the previous
solvers and shown it’s ability to be adapted to many variations of the MAPF problem. This has
been possible because of the many aspects of CBS that can be changed to ﬁt many different
scenarios. In this thesis I introduce a generalisation of the MAPF problem called MAPF with extra
rules(MAPF+). MAPF+ introduces a new way of modelling the rules that govern how agents are
able to traverse the given space. This enables MAPF+ to model problems that were previously
not possible under the MAPF problem deﬁnition. I then show how to adapt CBS to solve such
problems. The last contribution of this report is the formulation of the MAPF with help(MAPF-
H) problem. This introduces agents that dependent on others, e.g. agents that have to be moved
by others. I examine the problems solvers would have to overcome in order to solve MAPF-H
instances and why CBS is not suited for this task.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
1
==PAGE:9==
2
MAPF
The classical Multi-Agent Path Finding problem, or MAPF, is deﬁned as follows: [Ste+19]. The
tuple ⟨G,s,g⟩deﬁnes a MAPF instance with k agents. G = (V,E) is an undirected unweighted
graph, s : [1,...,k] →V maps each agent to a starting vertex and g : [1,...,k] →V maps every agent
to a goal vertex. Let A = {a1,...,ak} be the set of agents. For simplicity si will denote the vertex
s maps agent ai so si = s(i). The same denoting is made for gi = g(i). Time is discretized into
time steps and at every time step every agent is assigned one vertex and performs one action. An
action is a function α : V →V such that α(v) = v′ means that performing action α at vertex v
results in the agent being in vertex v′ at the next time step. There are two types of actions, wait
and move actions. The wait action allows the agent to stay at the current vertex for another time
step. The move action allows the agent to traverse an edge in the graph from the current vertex v
to a neighbouring vertex v′, i.e. along the edge (v,v′).
A path π = (a1,a2,...,an) is a series of actions and πi is a valid path for ai if it takes ai from si
to gi. πi[t] denotes the location of ai at time step t. Formally πi[t] = αt(αt−1(...(α1(si))...)) so
a path is valid if πi[|πi|] = gi. When writing an explicit path for an agent the actual vertices will
sometimes be used to make the examples easier to follow.
A solution p = {π1,π2,...,πk} to a MAPF problem is a valid path for each agent where no colli-
sions happen between any paths. Conﬂicts are described in detail in section 2.1.
This version of the problem is called non-anonymous, as every agent has a unique goal vertex.
Other variations include anonymous where every agent can fulﬁl every goal and coloured where
agents are grouped into colours and every goal is then assigned a colour so only agents of that
colour can fulﬁl that goal.
If there exists a valid path for ai, then there exists an inﬁnite number of valid paths for ai as the
wait actions can be inserted inﬁnitely many times and the path is still valid. As with the paths if
there is a valid solution to a MAPF problem then there exists inﬁnitely many valid solutions. In
order to compare solutions a metric is used to calculate the cost of a solution. The most common
metrics are sum of individual cost(SIC), which sums the length of the paths and makespan which
is the time step the last agent to arrives at its goal, i.e. the length of the longest path. Let p.cost
be the value of the solution according to the chosen metric. Most algorithms use the SIC metric
however many of them also work with makespan. A solution p is optimal if it is true for every
other valid solution q that p.cost ≤q.cost. Often problems have multiple optimal solutions. In
this report the graphs used can be reduced to a N ×M 4-neighbour grid. This follows a majority of
the literature on the topic. This also means that the move actions are restricted to the four directly
adjacent vertices. Other variations of the MAPF deﬁnitions allow agents to move diagonally or
multiple vertices in one time step [Ste+19]. These variations are out of the scope of this Thesis.
In this thesis the graph of a MAPF problem will also be referred to as a level or a map.
If a vertex is impassable, meaning disconnected from the rest of the graph it is referred to as a
obstacle. Formally an obstacle is deﬁned as a vertex v where there does not exist any edge e ∈E
such that e = (v,v′) for any v′. The functions s and g cannot assign any agent to an obstacle as
there is no way for the agent to leave or enter the obstacle. An obstacle is in the literature also
referred to as a wall.
An example of a MAPF problem can be seen in ﬁg. 2.1. Here the blue agent has sblue = (2,1) and
gblue = (2,3) while the green agent has sgreen = (1,2) and ggreen = (3,2). A valid path for ablue
2
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:10==
1
2
3
1
2
g2
g1
1
2
3
(a) Map
2,1
2,2
3,2
1,2
2,3
1,1
3,1
3,3
1,3
(b) Graph
Figure 2.1: This shows a MAPF problem on the right and the corresponding grid based representa-
tion of the problem on the left. Here sblue = (2,1), sgreen = (1,2), gblue = (2,3) and ggreen = (3,2).
The set of vertices {(1,1),(1,3),(3,1),(3,3)} are obstacles and so agents cannot perform any
move actions in order to reach them.
is πblue = {(2,1),(2,2),(2,3)} and a valid path for agreen is πgreen = {(1,2),(2,2),(3,2)}. Before
ﬁnding a valid solution, the conﬂicts have to be introduced.
2.1
Conﬂicts
In the classical MAPF deﬁnition [Ste+19] there are two major types of conﬂicts, vertex conﬂicts
and swap conﬂicts and three minor conﬂict types, follower conﬂicts, cycle conﬂicts and edge
conﬂict.
In this report only the vertex conﬂict and the swap conﬂict will be used as they are the most
relevant of the ﬁve. In most literature on the topic of MAPF the swap conﬂict is called an edge
conﬂict. What is called an edge conﬂict in [Ste+19] is not used in other papers so I will instead
follow the rest of the litterateur and refer to swap conﬂicts as edge conﬂicts. With this the vertex,
edge, and follow conﬂict will be deﬁned.
• Vertex conﬂict: A vertex conﬂict between the paths of two agents ai and aj happens when
they occupy the same vertex v at the same time step t, i.e. πi[t] = π j[t]. Such a vertex conﬂict
is described by a tuple ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩. More than two agents can be involved in the same vertex
conﬂict. In the case of a vertex conﬂict with n agents it is the case that π1[t] = ... = πn[t]
and the tuple describing the conﬂict is written as ⟨a1,...,an,v,t⟩. I have not found any where
in literature where a vertex conﬂict involving more than two agents have been described
mathematically, however I chose to write it this way as I felt that was a natural extension to
the format.
• Edge conﬂict: Edge conﬂicts happen when agents move in opposite directions along the
same edge at the same time step. Formally there is an edge conﬂict between ai and aj at
time t if πi[t] = πj[t +1] and πi[t +1] = π j[t]. Edge conﬂicts cannot involve more than two
agents as there are only two ways of traversing an edge. They are described by the tuple
⟨ai,aj,v1,v2,t⟩where (v1,v2) is the edge the agents travel along between time t and t + 1.
Agent ai is moving from v1 to v2 while aj is moving from v2 to v1.
• Follow conﬂict: Follow conﬂicts are when one agent moves into a vertex who was occupied
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
3
==PAGE:11==
by another agent at the previous time step. Formally there is a follower conﬂict between ai
and aj at time t if πi[t +1] = πj[t].
Assume for the rest of the report that only the vertex and edge conﬂicts apply to MAPF problems.
With the conﬂicts deﬁned, the map presented in ﬁg. 2.1 can be solved. Using the valid paths
mentioned previously it can be seen that πblue[1] = πgreen[1] = (2,2) which means that there is a
vertex conﬂict, namely ⟨ablue,agreen,(2,2),1⟩. In order to avoid this conﬂict either ablue or agreen
has to perform a wait action at their respective starting locations. Let ablue be the agent performing
a wait action. The new path for ablue is now πblue = {(2,1),(2,1),(2,2),(2,3)}. This path has no
conﬂicts with the path of agreen which means that they together constitute a valid solution. A
similar solution is found if agreen is the agent waiting.
2.2
Solver classiﬁcation
A solver is an algorithm that takes a MAPF problem as input and returns a solution. A solver
is optimal if the solutions it ﬁnds are guaranteed to be optimal and a solver is complete if it is
guaranteed to ﬁnd a solution if one exists. A solver can also be suboptimal of which there are two
types, bounded and unbounded. Bounded solvers are also called ε-optimal which means that the
solutions they ﬁnd are in the worst case ε times worse than the optimal. Unbounded solvers have
no guarantee on the quality of the solutions however they often trade this for quickly ﬁnding a
solution. Because of this diversity in solvers one can choose the one that ﬁts best to the situation.
2.3
Map types
For benchmarking solvers there is a series of map types that simulate different scenarios [Ste+19].
Not all solvers are good at solving all types of maps because the difﬁculties they present are
very different. All these maps can be in MAPF problems that are anonymous, coloured or non-
anonymous. However most research is done on non-anonymous problems so going forward all
problems will be assumed to be so.
• N × N grid: This is one of the two basic benchmarks. An open grid with random initial
positions and goals. This is type of map gives a lot of room for agents to move in between
each other as the only obstacles they face are each other. The search spaces are very large on
this type of map. The state space has space complexity O(
(N2
k
)
) which means that a breath
ﬁrst search will be almost impossible. Ordinary A∗is better however the search space is to
large with even 10 or more agents.
• N × N grid with obstacles: This is the other of the two basic benchmarks. It is similar to
the N ×N grid however there are obstacles placed around the map which can result in many
agents passing through the same part of the map. These maps have a percentage of the map
being walls, in general the higher the percentage the more difﬁcult the map. See ﬁg. 2.2a
for an example of this type of map.
• Warehouse: This map is close to reality as it simulates movement in a warehouse. The
map typically consists of a narrow grid in the middle of the map equivalent to shelves in
a warehouse and an open spaces on either side. The corridors are one to two spaces wide
while the shelves are two spaces wide. The agents are then tasked to move from one side to
the other. The challenges here are mostly conﬂicts in corridors which can be very difﬁcult
to solve [Li+20b]. Some variations will have the agents ﬁrst going to a certain shelve and
then back to the open space simulating retrieving a package this is often called the Multi-
Agent Package and Delivery problem [SS20]. Because this map simulates a warehouse it
is also very relevant for the lifelong MAPF problem [Li+20a] which have agents moving
4
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:12==
continuously to new goals meaning the problem is never fully solved. An example of this
map can be seen in ﬁg. 2.2c.
• Rooms: This map looks a lot like a large grid with small holes. Here each "space" in the
grid is a room that is connected to neighbouring rooms with small holes in the walls. This
can be challenging as individual agents can have very long paths and have to search through
a large portion of the search space before a valid path is found. The small openings create
bottle necks that can be challenging to solve. See ﬁg. 2.2d for a room type map.
• City: This is a type often used when comparing many agents. The maps here are taken from
cities around the world, simulating people walking around between each other in a realistic
environment. The city maps are often very large with open areas but also large obstacles.
ﬁg. 2.2b show such a map.
• DAO: This is a set of maps from the game Dragon Age Origins are used for benchmarking.
Maps in this set are very diverse and therefore have challenges relating to all other map
types. Some of the maps are very open, some have small rooms, and some have long
narrow corridors. These maps are often used because they include all possible challenges
which gives a good idea of how an algorithm fairs in different scenarios. The maps are also
applicable as MAPF is relevant in video games where many characters have to move in the
same space. Two DAO maps can be seen in ﬁg. 2.2e and ﬁg. 2.2f.
(a) Random with obstacles
(b) City
(c) Warehouse
(d) Rooms
(e) DAO map
(f) DAO map
Figure 2.2: Different types of maps. White space is passable while green and black is not.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
5
==PAGE:13==
3
CBS
Conﬂict Based Search(CBS) is an complete and optimal solver that has led to a series of advances
in the ﬁeld of MAPF solvers. CBS is a two level algorithm that takes a bottom op approach to
solving MAPF problems. The low level of the algorithm ﬁnds individual paths for the agents
as a series of single agent searches. The high level then ﬁnds conﬂicts between the paths and
applies constraints to the low level search which then ﬁnds a new set of paths satisfying the new
constraints.
3.1
High-level
The high-level search of CBS is done in a graph tree called the constraint tree, or CT. Each node
N in the constraint tree has three properties that is used during the search.
• N.constraints: A set of constraints for each agent.
• N.cost: The cost of the solution in N. Both SIC and makespan is optimal. Assume for the
rest of the report that the cost is calculated with SIC.
• N.solution: A path for each agent satisfying N.constraints
Let OPEN be the set of unexplored nodes in the high-level search. The search is initialised by
inserting the root R of CT into OPEN. Then the search works in a best ﬁrst manner by extracting
the node N ∈OPEN with the lowest cost. N is a goal state if N.solution is a valid solution to the
problem. In other words if N.solution has no conﬂicts N is a goal and N.solution is returned. If N
is not a goal state it is expanded, and the children of N are inserted into OPEN. This repeats until
a goal node is found.
An example of a CBS search can be seen in ﬁg. 3.1a. This example shows CBS searching to ﬁnd a
solution to the problem from ﬁg. 2.1. First the search only contains the root R. As R.solution has
the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩it is not a valid solution and so R has to be expanded.
3.1.1
Expanding nodes in the constraint tree
When a node N ∈OPEN is expanded the conﬂict that happens at the earliest time step in N.solution
is found. This conﬂict is used to "split" N meaning the conﬂicts is solved. To solve the conﬂict
a set of child nodes S(N) = N1,N2,...,Nd of N are generated. Each child node will have a set
Constraints: {}
Solution:
{
a1:(2,1),(2,2),(2,3)
a2:(1,2),(2,2),(3,2)
}
Cost: 4
Conﬂicts:{⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩}
R
Constraints: {⟨a1,(2,2),2⟩}
Solution:
{
a1:(2,1),(2,1),(2,2),(2,3)
a2:(1,2),(2,2),(3,2)
}
Cost: 5
Conﬂicts:{}
N1(Goal)
Constraints: {⟨a2,(2,2),2⟩}
Solution:
{
a1:(2,1),(2,2),(2,3)
a2:(1,2),(1,2),(2,2),(3,2)
}
Cost: 5
Conﬂicts:{}
N2(Goal)
(a) Constraint tree
Figure 3.1: Caption
6
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:14==
of additional constraints along with all the constraints of the parent node, i.e. N.constraints ⊂
Nc.constraints for each Nc ∈S(N). The number of children will be the number of ways to solve
the conﬂict. This number can vary depending on the branching technique used. For most conﬂicts
there will be two solutions.
In ﬁg. 3.1 this means that the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩is chosen for the split as it is the ﬁrst conﬂict.
This is a vertex conﬂict between two agents so there are two possible ways to solve it. Either a1
or a2 is not a (2,2) at time 1. These two possibilities are represented by the child nodes N1 and N2
respectively. However before examining these two, constraints need to be introduced.
3.2
Low-level
A∗is used in the low-level of search of CBS. Any single agent search algorithm can be used as
long as it is complete and minimise the cost function. This is to guarantee that CBS is optimal and
complete. As the low-level search is performed very often in CBS some precomputations can be
done to speed up the process. A very effective precomputation is to calculate the exact distance for
every node to every goal. This will result in a perfect heuristic which will minimise the number of
states that needs to be examined. For small problems this is not relevant however with problems
containing many agents the overhead of the precalculation is outweighed by the increase in search
time.
3.2.1
Constraints
The different conﬂicts are solved by different constraints. Here only the vertex and edge conﬂicts
will be examined. The constraints needed to solve the minor conﬂict types are very similar.
A vertex constraint is written as ⟨ai,v,t⟩and means that agent ai cannot be at vertex v at time t.
This type of constraint is also referred to as a state constraint as it is limiting the low-level search
from expanding a given state. With a vertex constraint the state that is limited is the state of ai
being at vertex v at time t. If during the low level search such a state is selected for expansion,
the state is discarded and the search continues. A edge constraint is written as ⟨ai,v1,v2,t⟩and
means that agent ai cannot move from vertex v1 to vertex v2 at time t. This type of constraint is an
action constraint as it limits an action during the search. During the low-level search, if a state is
expanded where ai is at v1 at time t then the action of moving to v2 is not available. This does not
mean that ai cannot be at v2 at time t, it means that the action of going from v1 to v2 at time t is
not allowed and so is not considered by the low-level.
For a node N ∈CT where an edge conﬂict ⟨ai,aj,v1,v2,t⟩is used for the split there will be two
children. Each child will either have ⟨ai,v1,v2,t⟩limiting ai or ⟨aj,v2,v1,t⟩limiting aj. Both
constraints ensure that the edge conﬂict will disappear as only one agent is able to traverse between
v1 and v2 at time t and therefore solve the conﬂict.
For a node N ∈CT where a vertex conﬂict ⟨ai,a j,v,t⟩is used for the split there will be two child
nodes. One child will have the constraint ⟨ai,v,t⟩while the other child will have the constraint
⟨aj,v,t⟩. By this only one of the two agents is allowed to be at vertex v at time t in each child node.
The example in ﬁg. 3.1 can now be ﬁnished. When R is chosen for expansion then ⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩
is chosen to split R. This means that one child of R, N1, will have the constraint ⟨a1,(2,2),1⟩while
the other, N2, will have the constraint ⟨a2,(2,2),1⟩. N1 and N2 will then call the low-level to ﬁnd a
new path for a1 and a2 respectively and is then added to OPEN. As both N1 and N2 have the same
cost, namely 5, it is random which one is chosen. No matter which one is chosen a goal is reached
as both nodes are goal states.
If the vertex conﬂict ⟨a1,...,ak,v,t⟩with k > 2 is chosen to split N ∈CT there are two methods to
solve the conﬂict. The ﬁrst method is binary branching where two of the agents in the conﬂict are
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
7
==PAGE:15==
{}
{⟨a1,v,t⟩}
{⟨a2,v,t⟩}
{⟨a1,v,t⟩,⟨a2,v,t⟩}
{⟨a2,v,t⟩,⟨a3,v,t⟩}
{⟨a1,v,t⟩,⟨a3,v,t⟩}
(a) Binary branching
{⟨a1,v,t⟩,⟨a2,v,t⟩}
{⟨a2,v,t⟩,⟨a3,v,t⟩}
{⟨a1,v,t⟩,⟨a3,v,t⟩}
{}
(b) k-way branching
Figure 3.2: The two ﬁgures shows binary and k-way branching. In binary branching the central
leaf has two parents because the two parents generate a child node with the same constraints and
with a duplicate detection system one of the children would be discarded.
chosen and the conﬂict between ⟨a1,a2,v,t⟩them is solved. In each child node of N the original
vertex conﬂict will now contain k−1 agents. When the vertex conﬂict at v is chosen again, another
two agents are chosen and the conﬂict between them is solved. This way the conﬂict is broken
into smaller conﬂicts that are solved one by one.
Another way to solve a conﬂict involving more than two agents is to solve the entire conﬂict
in one split. This is called k-way branching. With this method every possible solution to the
conﬂict needs to get its own child node. With a vertex conﬂict there is one solution for every agent
involved as only one agent can be allowed at v at time t. If k = 3, where a1, a2 and a3 are agents,
then each child node will have two constraints restricting two agents, for example ⟨a1,v,t⟩and
⟨a2,v,t⟩which again means that only one agent, here a3, is allowed at vertex v at time t. When
using k-way branching conﬂicts with up to k agents involved will be solved in one split. If a
conﬂict involves more than k agents a part of the conﬂict involving k agents will be solved directly
and the rest of the conﬂict will be solved in splits further down the constraint tree. In one end of
the spectrum there is 2-way branching which is equivalent to binary branching and in the other
end there is ∞-branching which solves every conﬂict in one split.
To illustrate the two branching techniques, they are both applied to a vertex conﬂict between three
agents. Figure 3.2a show how binary branching generate constraints and ﬁg. 3.2b show the same
for k-way branching. With duplicate detection they are both result in three leafs however binary
branching use an extra layer to reach a solution. As most conﬂicts involve only two agents there
is not a performance difference between the two techniques.
3.3
Pseudocode
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudocode for conﬂict based search [Sha+15]. The code is here written
using only vertex conﬂicts and binary branching, however it generalises to both edge conﬂicts
and k-way branching. In line 1-4 the root node is initialised and inserted into OPEN. Line 5-23
contains the while-loop that is the search. Line 6-7 extracts the best node and validates the solution.
Line 8-9 will then return a solution if it is valid. Given that the solution is not valid line 10 will
ﬁnd the ﬁrst conﬂict and line 18-23 will loop over the agents involved and generate the necessary
child nodes and insert them into OPEN. Line 11-17 is only active if the MA-CBS version of the
8
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:16==
algorithm, see section 3.6.1, is used.
Algorithm 1: High-level CBS
Input: MAPF instance
1 R.constraints = /0
2 R.solution = ﬁnd individual paths using the low-level
3 R.cost = SIC(R.solution)
4 insert R to OPEN
5 while OPEN not empty do
6
P ←best node from OPEN
7
Validate the paths in P until a conﬂict occurs.
8
if P has no conﬂict then
9
return P.solution
10
C ←ﬁrst conﬂict ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩in P
11
if shouldMerge(ai,aj) // optional, MA-CBS only then
12
a{i,j} = merge(ai,aj)
13
Update P.constraints()
14
Update P.solution by invoking low-level(a{i,j})
15
Update P.cost
16
if P.cost < ∞// Solution found then
17
Insert P into OPEN
18
foreach agent ai in C do
19
N ←new node
20
N.constraints ←P.constraints + ⟨ai,v,t⟩
21
N.solution ←P.solution. Update N.solution by invoking low-level(ai)
22
N.cost = SIC(N.solution)
23
Insert N to OPEN
3.4
Proof of optimality and completeness
In this section the optimality and completeness of CBS will be proven. In order to do this a series
of deﬁnitions and lemmas will be introduced. This section closely follows the prove of optimality
and completeness given in [Sha+15].
Deﬁnition 3.1. For a node N ∈CT let CV(N) be the set of solutions that are valid and consistent
with the constraints in N. This means that the solutions in CV(N) have no conﬂicts and do not
violate any constraint from N.constraints. A solution p is permitted in N if p ∈CV(N).
By this every solution is permitted in the root of CT and if N is not a goal node then N.solution /∈
CV(N).
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let minCost(CV(N)) be the lowest cost of a solution in CV(N). If CV(N) = /0
then minCost(CV(N)) = ∞.
Lemma 3.1. N.cost is a lower bound for minCost(CV(N)).
Proof. N.cost is the minimum cost among the solutions consistent with N as CBS low-level
minimises the cost function. minCost(CV(N)) is the minimum cost among the solution per-
mitted in N. As CV(N) is a subset of all solutions consistent with N it is true that N.cost ≤
minCost(CV(N)).
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
9
==PAGE:17==
Lemma 3.2. For every valid solution p there exist a node N ∈OPEN such that p ∈CV(N).
Proof. This is proven by induction on the expansion cycle: The base case is that every valid
solution is permitted in the root of CT as the root has no constraints. Let p be a valid solution.
When a node N ∈OPEN is chosen for expansion either p is permitted by N or not. If p is not
permitted by N then another node in OPEN permits p. Otherwise assume p is permitted in N. To
proof lemma 3.2 it needs to be shown that p is permitted by one of the successors of N. Let the
conﬂict to split N be at location l at time t. The new constraints of the child nodes of N solve the
conﬂict by limiting all but one agent involved in such a way every agent has exactly one child node
where it is not constraint. Let a solution p permitted in N have agent ai at the location l at time t.
As ai cannot be constraint in all the child nodes of N it must be permitted in at least one of them.
In this prove l can be and edge or a vertex. If l is an edge ai is the agent traversing l between time
step t and time step t +1. By this the induction holds.
Theorem 3.1. CBS is optimal.
Proof. Let G be a goal node chosen for expansion. At this point every valid solution is permitted
by at least one node in OPEN, lemma 3.2. Let N(p) be the node permitting a valid solution p,
then N(p).cost ≤p.cost, lemma 3.1. CBS expands nodes in a best ﬁrst manner so that the node in
OPEN with the lowest cost is expanded ﬁrst. Because of this it is true that G.cost ≤N(p).cost ≤
p.cost.
The essence of this proof is that all valid solutions will always be permitted by some node in
OPEN and because the cost of the nodes extracted form OPEN is none decreasing the ﬁrst node
chosen for expansion that is also a goal node will have the lowest cost a goal node can have, i.e.
the solution is optimal.
Theorem 3.2. There is a ﬁnite number of N ∈CT with the cost C for every C.
Proof. To prove this, it needs to be shown that the tree containing all possible nodes with cost C
has a ﬁnite size. This will be shown by ﬁrst showing it has ﬁnite depth and then shown it has a
ﬁnite branching factor.
Let N ∈CT be a node with cost C. This means that all agents have arrived at their goals at time
C. This in turn means that there is no movement after time step C and so there can be no conﬂicts
after C. Because the nodes in CT are monotonically non-decreasing all predecessor nodes of N
will have a cost of C or lower and so they cannot have had any conﬂicts after time step C. Assume
binary branching is used. When a conﬂict is used to split a node M it will never reappear in any
node in the subtree of M as the low-level of CBS always satisfy the constraints. Up until time step
C there can only be a ﬁnite number of conﬂicts, namely
(k
2
)
·|V|·C vertex conﬂicts and
(k
2
)
·|E|·C
edge conﬂicts. Because of this, and the fact that a conﬂict will only be solved once, N has a ﬁnite
number of predecessors. When splitting on a conﬂict only a ﬁnite number of child nodes will be
generated so at each depth of CT there is a ﬁnite number of nodes. The tree containing all nodes of
cost C will therefore be of depth
(k
2
)
·C(|V|+|E|) and with binary branching the tree will contain
2(k
2)·C(|V|+|E|) nodes. As the tree containing all nodes with cost C and the tree has ﬁnite size, the
number of nodes with cost C will also be ﬁnite.
With k-way branching the branching factor is no more than k which is still ﬁnite, and for ∞-way
branching the branching factor will be bounded by the number of agents on the map which is also
ﬁnite. By this the proof holds for all branching methods.
10
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:18==
Theorem 3.3. CBS is complete.
Proof. Because nodes in CT are expanded in a best ﬁrst manner every node with cost X will be
expanded before every node Y for X < Y. As there are a ﬁnite number of nodes for each cost,
theorem 3.2, a ﬁnite number of nodes will be expanded before an optimal solution is found. This
means that given enough time CBS expand every node with a cost less than the optimal and then
reach an optimal solution.
The approach of is a bottom up approach as mentioned before. This means that instead of solving
the complete problem CBS try to solve a relaxed problem and see if the solution to the relaxed
problem is a solution to the original problem as well. If this is the case the search is over. However
if it is not, CBS takes a "step" closer to the original problem and solves that relaxation. This
continues until a solution is found that is also a solution to the original problem. This works
because lemma 3.2 guarantees that no valid solution p is ever overlooked as there will always be
a node in OPEN that permits p. If the split done during the high-level search did not guarantee
that every possible solution to the conﬂict would be considered, lemma 3.2 would not hold and
therefore CBS would not be an optimal solver.
Despite CBS being optimal and complete it cannot determine whether or not a problem is solvable
as CBS will have no way of detecting this. A solver like A∗can exhaust the search space but CBS
cannot.
3.5
Weaknesses
CBS was a groundbreaking algorithm when it was ﬁrst published [Sha+15], however there is still
a lot of situations where CBS does a poor job of reaching a valid solution. A lot of these problems
have been addressed by newer versions of CBS which have improved the size of the problems
which can be solved. In this section these problems will be listed and illustrated and in section 3.6
different improvements to CBS will be introduced that solve these.
3.5.1
Tightly coupled agents
In the overall ﬁeld of distributed problem solving a problem can be loosely coupled or tightly
coupled. A loosely coupled problem means that the problem can largely be solved as independent
subproblems with very little to no interaction between them. Tightly coupled systems are very
hard to solve independently as they interfere so much that the overhead of merging the solutions
to the subproblems becomes a bigger problem than just solving the original problem. This term of
tight and loose coupling is also present in MAPF. If two agents are loosely coupled it means that
their respective paths interfere very little if at all. Tightly coupled agents have all their optimal
paths intersect at some point. This means that solving one conﬂict will just have them collide at
another intersection. Take the example shown in ﬁg. 3.3c where both agents take the fully drawn
paths. They will have a conﬂict in (2,2). In the case of the blue agent being constraint it will ﬁnd
the dotted rout which leads to a conﬂict on (2,3) while if the green agent is constraint it will lead
to another conﬂict at (3,2). In fact the two agents will need to have at least two conﬂict in the grey
squares before a solution is found. These agents are called tightly coupled. For lager maps this
can be very challenging for CBS to solve as it is increasingly many conﬂicts that has to be solved
before a valid solution is found. Let the grey area be of size A × B. Then the high-level search
needs to search to a depth of min(A,B) which means the number of nodes for this search alone is
2min(A,B). All nodes still containing a conﬂict inside the grey squares will have a lower cost which
means that they will all have to be searched through before CBS ﬁnds a valid solution. With many
other conﬂicts also happening it can often lead to CBS not ﬁnishing in the given time. Another
case of tightly coupled agents are the ones where two agents have to go in opposite directions
through a corridor. When one agent is limited, it will often wait in the tunnel leading to another
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
11
==PAGE:19==
conﬂict. As with the other example a longer corridor will give a deeper constraint tree that needs
to be searched through before the conﬂict is solved.
1
g1
1
2
3
4
2
g2
1
2
(a) Cardinal conﬂict at (1,3)
g2
1
2
g1
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
(b) Bad initial paths
g2
1
g1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
(c) Coupled agents
Figure 3.3: Different difﬁcult situations for CBS
3.5.2
Bad initial solution
The low-level search of CBS is A∗which returns an optimal valid solution to the problem, however
there is often more than one of these and picking the wrong one can lead to unnecessary work.
Take the example shown in ﬁg. 3.3b where ablue and agreen have a conﬂict on (2,2) at time t = 1
however if agreen had chosen the path shown by the dotted line then there is no conﬂict. With the
basic CBS there is no way of avoiding this, it is essentially random if it happens or not.
3.5.3
No heuristic
CBS has no guidance in the search at the high-level other than the cost. In relation to single agent
search the cost correspond to the g-value while CBS has no equivalent to the h-value at the high-
level. In other words, there is no heuristic in the high-level which means CBS does not know
how far it is from reaching a solution. Essentially is CBS searching through CT in the same way
breadth ﬁrst search solves a single agent search problem. This means that there is a potential for
improvement if a heuristic is introduced at the high-level.
3.5.4
Choice of conﬂict
Because some conﬂicts are not necessary, as described in section 3.5.2, there are also some con-
ﬂicts that are necessary. CBS does not differentiate between these conﬂicts and has no way of
knowing if a conﬂict is necessary or not. Introducing such a classiﬁcation could mean CBS could
focus on the important conﬂicts and potentially avoid even more conﬂicts.
3.6
Extensions
A variety of algorithms build on CBS have addressed all the problems mentioned above. Some of
these algorithms are discussed in this section along with the techniques used to solve the problems.
3.6.1
MA-CBS
The ﬁrst extension to CBS is Meta-sgent CBS (MA-CBS). This is an optimal and complete exten-
sion that improves handling of tightly coupled agents via Meta-agents. Let a simple agent be a
single agent and a meta-agent be a set of simple agents. If two agents are found to be tightly cou-
pled, they will be merged into a meta-agent which is treated as any other agent by the high-level
of CBS. The low-level is then called to ﬁnd optimal conﬂict-free paths for the simple agents in
the meta-agent. This is an effective way of avoiding many conﬂicts at the high-level and instead
solve them in the low-level. When a node N ∈OPEN is chosen for expansion and two agents
constitute a merge, they will be merged in N, the low-level will be called to ﬁnd a new solution
12
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:20==
and N is reinserted into OPEN. N is reinserted because there is only one way to merge so instead
of creating a single child node the recalculation happens in N.
Therefore the low-level solver now needs to be able to solve MAPF problems and not just single
agent problems. The solver still needs to be optimal, complete and only ﬁnds solutions that satisfy
the constraints. It also needs to be able to return false if a solution is not possible. Because of
this CBS cannot be used as a low-level solver. However other complete and optimal solvers like
A∗+ID [Sta10], M∗[WC11] or EPEA∗[Fel+12] are able to detect if a problem is unsolvable and
are suitable for being low-level solvers for MA-CBS.
Let B be the conﬂict bound parameter controlling how many conﬂicts a pair of agents needs to
have in order to get merged. A simple way of keeping track of this is to have a Conﬂict Matrix
(CM) that stores the number of conﬂicts between agents. Every time two simple agents ai and aj
have a new conﬂict CM[i, j] will be incremented by 1. The shouldMerge(ai,aj) function returns
true if CM[i, j] > B. CM is storing conﬂicts for the entire search and not for individual nodes
N ∈CT. This means that if CM[i, j] > B then if any future node N ∈CT is split on a conﬂict
between ai and aj they will be merged into the meta-agent a{i,j}. In any successor node of N the
two agents will stay merged.
If a conﬂict happens between a simple agent ai and an agent a j ∈am where am is a meta-agent, then
CM[i, j] is increased by one as before however shouldMerge(ai,am) returns true if ∑CM[i, j] > B
for all aj ∈am. Similarly if a conﬂict happens between two meta-agents am and ar because of two
simple agents ai ∈am and aj ∈ar thenCM[i, j] will again be increased by 1 and shouldMerge(am,ar)
is true if ∑CM[i, j] > B for all ai ∈am and aj ∈ar. This is a simple merge policy however more
advanced ones exists as well. In order to reference the conﬂict bound parameter the algorithm is
also referred to as MA-CBS(B).
When merging two agents ai and aj the constraints that have been put on them have to be redeﬁned
in terms of the new meta-agent. For the ai and aj there are two types of conﬂicts before the merge:
• Internal: These are conﬂicts that happen between ai and aj.
• External: These are conﬂicts that involves only one of the two agents.
For internal conﬂicts the constraints are removed as the low-level ﬁnd a solution for where ai and
aj have not conﬂicts. Before handling external conﬂicts the concept of a meta constraint will be
introduced. Let a ¯x be a meta-agent then a meta constraint is deﬁned as ⟨¯x, ˆx,v,t⟩where ˆx ⊆¯x is
the sub set of agents that are constraint not to be at v at time t. With this an external constraint
⟨ai,v,t⟩can be redeﬁned as ⟨¯x,{ai},v,t⟩. The reason that not the entire meta agent is limited is to
preserve optimality as this way will add no additional constraints.
However if a conﬂict ⟨ai, ¯x,v,t⟩happens where ¯x is a meta-agent then the constraint put on the
meta agent will be ⟨¯x, ¯x,v,t⟩as either ai is at v at time t, in which case every agent in ¯x cannot be
there, or an agent in ¯x is at v at time t. Which agent that is is up to the low-level. The same logic
applies to conﬂicts between two meta-agents.
In alg. 1 the MA-CBS extension to the algorithm is shown at line 11-17. When shouldMerge(ai,aj)
returns true the two agents are merged, the constraints are updated, the low-level ﬁnds new paths,
the cost is updated and if such paths can be found P is inserted back into OPEN.
As B is a parameter in MA-CBS(B) it forms a spectrum with MA-CBS(∞) in one end and MA-
CBS(0) in the other. MA-CBS(∞) is equivalent to CBS as no agents will ever be merged while
MA-CBS(0) is equivalent to A∗+ ID as a single conﬂict will merge the two agents and essentially
never split the root node. Evidence have shown that different values of B are optimal for different
types of map layouts [Sha+15]. For larger maps with big open spaces CBS has a difﬁcult time
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
13
==PAGE:21==
as these open areas create larger versions of the problem shown in ﬁg. 3.3c which leads to many
conﬂicts spread out across the level. Because of this a map such as a city type map will beneﬁt from
a lower value of B as this will merge the agents quicker and therefore avoid the many conﬂicts.
For denser maps such as those of the room type or random maps with a high percentage of wall
the conﬂicts will be focused in bottlenecks such that there will be less conﬂicts. Less conﬂicts in
this sense means that there will be fewer conﬂicts resolved before one of the two agents chose a
different path such that they will no longer conﬂict. Maps like this beneﬁt from a higher value of
B because agents in general have fewer conﬂicts between them and so merging them too quickly
will result in a slowdown.
To illustrate how MA-CBS works take the problem in ﬁg. 3.3c. Assume MA-CBS(0) is used and
the agents chose the fully drawn paths. The root R will have the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩which
meansCM[1,2] = 1. As this is higher than 0 a1 and a2 will be merged into a{1,2}. R.solution is then
updated by calling the low-level for a{1,2} to ﬁnd π1 = {(1,2),(1,2),(2,2),(3,2),(4,2),(4,3)} and
π2 = {(2,1),(2,2),(2,3),(2,4),(3,4)}, i.e. a1 waits one time step after which they both follow
the same paths as before. R.cost is then updated to be 9 and because the low-level ﬁnds a solution
R is reinserted into OPEN. R is the only, and therefore best, node in OPEN so R is chosen, and
because R is a goal node a solution is found and R.solution is returned.
3.6.2
ICBS
Improved CBS builds on top of the MA-CBS framework and improves on a series of aspects of the
algorithm [Boy+15]. These improvements regard bypassing unnecessary conﬂicts, a better merge
system and choosing the right conﬂict to solve. ICBS is optimal and complete
The ﬁrst of these improvements is the merge and restart (MR) idea. In MA-CBS agents are merged
when they have more than B conﬂicts between them. When this threshold is met for two agents ai
and aj every node chosen for expansion, which is to be split on a conﬂict between these two agents,
will merge them together into a meta-agent. This means that all these nodes will do the same work.
In order to avoid this ICBS will discard the entire search tree CT and start the search over but with
ai and a j already being merged into a meta-agent. This means that instead of merging ai and aj
many times they will only be merged once. Saying exactly how many merges are avoided is hard,
as it depends heavily on the problem.
MR can avoid a lot of work as meta-agents take more time for the low-level than simple agents.
However it can also throw away information. Take a point in the search where a1 and a3 have had
a series of conﬂicts between them that have been resolved. Then a1 has a conﬂict with a2 such
that they constitute a merge. a1 and a2 will then be merged however as the CT is discarded the
conﬂicts between a1 and a3 will have to be rediscovered as conﬂicts between a{1,2} and a3. In
[Boy+15] they show that the beneﬁt of not redoing a lot of work outweigh the downside of having
to redo other work, i.e. they show merge and restart is beneﬁcial.
The second improvement is prioritising conﬂicts. In order for ICBS to choose between conﬂicts
they are separated into three classes:
• Cardinal: A conﬂict C = ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩is cardinal in N ∈CT if every optimal path for ai and
aj include the agents being in v at time t. This also means that either of the children of N
will have a cost higher than N.
• Semi-cardinal: A conﬂict C = ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩is semi-cardinal in N ∈CT if only one of the two
agents involved have optimal paths going through v at time t but the other agent has optimal
paths not requiring the agent to be at v at time t.
• Non-cardinal: A conﬂict C = ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩is non-cardinal in N ∈CT if both agents involved
have optimal paths that does not require them to be at v at time t.
14
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:22==
Now selecting a conﬂict goes as follows: When N ∈OPEN is chosen all the conﬂicts are examined
one by one, with the earliest ﬁrst, until a cardinal conﬂict is found. N will then be split using this
conﬂict. The reason for this is that if a semi- or non-cardinal conﬂict is chosen then the cardinal
conﬂict will still be present in every child generated and thus propagate the problem further down
the constraint tree. When the cardinal conﬂict is chosen it will not reappear in any part of the
subtree of N and some of the semi- and non-cardinal conﬂicts might even be resolved by in the
process. If no cardinal conﬂicts are found then the semi-cardinal conﬂicts are used, and if none of
those are present then a non-cardinal conﬂict is chosen.
In order to ﬁnd out if a conﬂict is cardinal multi-value decision diagrams (MDD) are used [Sha+13].
A MDDc
i is a DAG which stores every valid path for agent ai of length c. A node in MDDc
i at depth
t represent a possible location for ai on a valid path with cost c. This also means that MDDc
i only
has a single source node at depth 0 which is si and a single node at depth c which is gi.
To detect if a conﬂict ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩is cardinal the width of the two MDDs are checked. Let ci and cj
be the length of the optimal path for ai and aj respectively. If MDDci
i has has only a single node at
depth t that means that every path in MDDci
i goes though v at time t. If the same holds for MDDcj
j
then the conﬂict is cardinal. If only one of the MDDs have a width of one at depth t then the
conﬂict is semi-cardinal and if none of them have a width of one then the conﬂict is non-cardinal.
Examples of MDDs can be seen in ﬁg. 3.4. Here the ﬁrst two MDDs are the initial ones found
in the root node of CT for the problem in ﬁg. 3.3a. As they both have a width of one at depth 2
the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(1,3),2⟩is a cardinal conﬂict while the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(1,2),1⟩is only semi-
cardinal as a2 could have gone to (2,3) instead. ﬁg. 3.4c show the MDD3
2 generated in the node
N ∈CT with the constraint ⟨a2,(1,3),2⟩. The node (1,3) at depth 2 is therefore not included in
the MDD which is why it is shown using a dotted line.
(1,1)
(1,2)
(1,3)
(1,4)
(a) MDD3
1
(2,2)
(1,2)
(2,3)
(1,3)
(b) MDD2
2
(2,2)
(1,2)
(2,3)
(1,3)
(2,2)
(1,2)
(2,3)
(1,3)
(c) MDD3
2
Figure 3.4: MDDs for the agents in ﬁg. 3.3a. ﬁg. 3.4a show the MDD of depth 3 for agent a1 and
ﬁg. 3.4b show the MDD of depth 2 for agent a2. After ⟨a2,(1,3),2⟩ﬁg. 3.4c is generated where
the dotted node and lines show the possibility that are not included because of the constraint.
As MDDs are very expensive to construct for meta-agents ICBS ﬁrst consider all conﬂicts involv-
ing simple agents before examining conﬂicts involving meta-agents.
The third improvement is bypassing conﬂicts but before explaining this the following deﬁnitions
are needed.
• Let N.NC be the number of conﬂicts between paths in N.solution.
• P′
i is a valid bypass to Pi for agent ai with regards to the conﬂict C = ⟨ai,a j,v,t⟩in node
N ∈CT if the following three criteria are meet: 1) P′
i does not include the conﬂict C, 2)
cost(P′
i ) = cost(Pi) and 3) P′
i is consistent with N.constraints.
• Adopting a path P′
i in node N means replacing the path Pi for agent ai with P′
i .
• A helpful bypass in node N ∈CT is a valid bypass P′
i that when adopted by N results in
N.NC being reduced.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
15
==PAGE:23==
With this in place the procedure for bypassing a conﬂict is as follows. Let C = ⟨ai,aj,v,t⟩be the
conﬂict to split node N ∈CT. If C is not a cardinal conﬂict the children of N are generated. In
the solutions of the child nodes each new path is tested to see if one of them is a helpful bypass
to C and if it is the path is adopted in N. N is then inserted back into OPEN however as N will
now have a lower N.NC with the same cost it will be the best node in OPEN and therefore chosen
for expansion again immediately after. This does not change the optimality of the algorithm as no
constraints are put on any agents. It can be seen as getting a better initial solution to the problem.
An example of this can be seen in ﬁg. 3.3b where the root ofCT will have the conﬂict ⟨a1,a2,(2,2),1⟩.
When the root is chosen for expansion, the children are generated, and one of them includes a new
path for a2 which is the dotted line. This new path is a helpful bypass to the conﬂict and is therefore
adopted and a valid solution is found.
All these improvements are shown to improve the algorithm and make it able to solve larger
problems[Boy+15].
3.6.3
CBSH
All the version of CBS up until now have not employed any kind of heuristic. This means that
for a node N ∈OPEN the algorithms do not know how much more the cost will increase before
a valid solution is reached. In order for the heuristic to be admissible it needs to not overestimate
this cost increase. The other variations of CBS have only used the cost of nodes to decide which
one to expand next. This can be seen as the g-value of a node N ∈CT. In [Fel+18] they add a
h-value to each node. They call this variation CBSH and it is an addition to ICBS that keeps the
optimality and completeness however they do not use the meta-agent part of the algorithm. The
idea is that when there is a cardinal conﬂict in the solution of node N then the cost of the optimal
solution has to be at least one more than the cost of N as one of the agents involved in the cardinal
conﬂict will need to ﬁnd a longer path. Two cardinal conﬂict does not necessarily mean that the
optimal solution is two steps longer. Because of this [Fel+18] use a conﬂict graph drawn for a
node N ∈CT which contains a vertex for every agent involved in a cardinal conﬂict and an edge
between the agents representing the conﬂict. By this the graph contains all cardinal conﬂicts in N.
The number of edges in the graph cannot be used as an admissible heuristic because solving one
might solve another. Despite this they develop four different ways of calculating an admissible
heuristic from the conﬂict graph.
Let two conﬂicts be disjoint cardinal conﬂicts if they are cardinal and do not share agents. When
two conﬂicts are disjoint it means that solving one of them cannot result in the other one disap-
pearing. This fact is what makes the four heuristics admissible.
The ﬁrst two heuristics are matchings in the conﬂict graph. The ﬁrst one use a greedy matching
while the second use a perfect matching. This works because all pairs in a matching are disjoint.
The last two heuristics are the size of a minimum vertex covers in the conﬂict graph. Again one
uses a greedy approach to estimate a lower bound and the other one does the complete calculation.
The reason for a greedy and a complete approach to both methods is to test if the increase in
accuracy is worth the increased overhead of calculating it precisely.
In [Fel+18] they show that all these heuristics improve the algorithm however there are still sit-
uations where the conﬂict graph does not capture the problem. For a situation like this look at
ﬁg. 3.3c. Here one of the agents have to wait for one time step, in order to avoid a conﬂict in one
of the grey squares. This means that a heuristic of 1 is admissible. As none of these conﬂicts are
cardinal this problem will not be visible in the conﬂict graph and so the heuristics explained above
cannot account for it.
16
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:24==
In [Li+19a] they develop a more complex heuristic which can capture problems such as the one in
ﬁg. 3.3c. However, explaining this is out of the scope of this thesis.
3.6.4
ECBS
Enhanced CBS(ECBS) is a suboptimal variant of CBS [Bar+14]. The idea of ECBS is to use focal
search in both the high- and low-level with a shared suboptimality parameter. The algorithm builds
on the base line CBS and is ε-optimal and complete.
Focal search is a search method often written as Aε* where ε ≥1. The search works much like
normal A* with the difference that the state to be expanded next is not selected from OPEN but
instead from FOCAL which is deﬁned as
FOCAL = {s|s ∈OPEN, f(s) ≤ε ·s0}
where s0 = min{ f(s)|s ∈OPEN} is the state with the lowest f value among the states in OPEN.
By this FOCAL is the states of OPEN that is no more than ε from the best current one. To pick
which state to expand from FOCAL a heuristic hf is used. There are no requirements for this
heuristic as the fact that every state is expanded form FOCAL guarantees the solution found is no
more than ε from the optimal. hf is often problem speciﬁc. When a state is expanded the children
are added to OPEN and FOCAL is updated. This search will be denoted focal(f1, f2,ε) where
f1 determine the order of states in OPEN, f2 determine the order of states in FOCAL and ε is the
suboptimality parameter. If f1 is optimal then focal(f1, f2,ε) is ε-optimal
As mentioned ECBS employs this focal search at both the high- and low-level with a shared
suboptimality parameter w. At the low-level ECBS apply focal −search(f,hc,w) where f(s) =
g(s) + h(s) is the ordinary A∗search function and hc(s) is the number of collisions with other
agents on the path to s. By this the low-level ﬁnds a path that is no more than w worse than the
optimal while minimising the number of conﬂicts. This results in fewer splits in the high-level
which is the biggest limitation of the basic CBS.
At the high-level focal search is also used, however in order to share w with the low-level, the
low-level search returns extra information to the high-level. Let OPENi be the open set of the
low-level search for agent ai and let fi = min{ f(s)|s ∈OPENi} be the minimum value in OPENi
when the search ends. Then let LB(N) = ∑k
i=1 fi be the sum of fi for node N ∈CT. As fi is the
lower bound for the cost of the optimal path for ai LB(N) is a lower bound on a valid solution
permitted in N. FOCAL at the high-level is deﬁned as
FOCAL = {N|N.cost ≤w·LBmin,N ∈OPEN}
where LBmin = min{LB(N)|N ∈OPEN} is the lowest value of LB in OPEN. As LB is the lower
bound for an optimal solution any state N ∈FOCAL cannot be more than w from the optimal
solution. The heuristic for choosing nodes from FOCAL at the high level is the number of pairs
of agents that have at least one conﬂict. This is not an admissible heuristic but a good indicator of
how much work is left.
Understanding how ECBS works intuitively is difﬁcult but one way to think of is like this. The
focal−search at the low-level ﬁnd a suboptimal path for each agent. The agents can have different
levels of suboptimality however no of them can be more than w worse than the optimal. This means
that the cost of the solution will be no more than w worse than the optimal. More precisely it will
be no more than w worse than LB such that LB(N) ≤N.cost ≤w·LB(N) for any N ∈CT. Because
LB can be calculated, using the fi’s from the low-level, the high-level has a way of knowing how
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
17
==PAGE:25==
good a solution actually is as there otherwise is no value to compare N.cost with in order to ﬁnd
out how far N.solution is from the optimal.
An alternative is to compare N.cost with the lowest N.cost in OPEN, however this would mean
that the high-level would have an aditional suboptimality parameter. As a result the algorithm
would be w2-optimal, given the two levels use the same value. This approach is used in Bounded
CBS which is also introduced in [Bar+14] however ECBS outperforms BCBS in every situation.
Both the heuristic used at the high- and low-level of ECBS to order the states in FOCAL can be
changed without affecting the bound however they found the ones mentioned above to be the best.
ECBS has shown to be a very effective solver. In [Bar+14] they show on a DAO map called
brc202 that CBS can solve problems with no more than 50 agents and ECBS(1.01) can solve some
problems with up to 250 agents. This is almost two times as many agents as the best optimal solver
can do on this map while only being 1% worse than the optimal. This is a remarkable feat and
has lead to ECBS being the state-of-the-art suboptimal solver for more than 7 years and was only
surpassed this year [LRK21].
3.6.5
Others
There exists many other variations of CBS that solve MAPF problems in different ways or solve
variations of MAPF problems. This is a very active ﬁeld of research where improvements are
made every year. The ones chosen here are some of the early variations that have had a big impact
on progression of the ﬁeld.
18
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:26==
4
Restricting Rules
MAPF is a problem that has a very direct implication in many ﬁelds. From warehouse robots to
airports to drone swarms. As long as multiple entities have to move in the same space without
colliding MAPF is applicable. Despite this MAPF does not have a lot of ﬂexibility in terms of
collisions. There are the two major types and the tree minor types as mentioned in section 2.1.
This means that if the application does not ﬁt perfectly it is not possible to extend the problem and
so the application will need to be ﬁtted the problem or an ad-hoc solution has to be found.
To make up for this I will in this chapter introduce Restriction rules which allow the designer of
the algorithm to specify a wide range of collision types allowing more applications for MAPF.
In the next chapter Request rules are introduced in order to specify rules of cooperation between
agents.
The content of this chapter will be as follows. First the two types of constraints are uniﬁed into one
type. Then a simple deﬁnition of a restriction rule is given and different categories of restriction
rules are discussed. A version of CBS is then introduced that is able to solve the extended version
of a MAPF problem and ﬁnally more advanced versions of restriction rules are discussed.
The ﬁrst type of rule is the restricting rule. This type of rule puts restrictions on the agents.
Such a rule can take many forms for example the two rules in the classical MAPF formulation
are restricting rules. Other examples are forcing agents to keep a certain distance at all times, or
disallowing more than one agent in the same set of vertices at the same time. MAPF problems that
contain such extra rules are referred to as MAPF+ problems.
In this chapter a simple deﬁnition of a restriction rules will be presented and analysed, an algorithm
based on CBS will be developed to solve MAPF+ problems with these rules. A further analysis
will be done to ﬁnd out which extensions to CBS can be adapted to solve MAPF+ problems and
ﬁnally more advanced restriction rules will be discussed.
4.1
Action Constraints
In this section the vertex constraint will be reformulated as a set of edge constraints in order to
unify the two types of constraints which will simplify the deﬁnitions of the rules introduced later
in the chapter. This is original work.
As mentioned in section 3.2.1 in the CBS algorithm vertex constraints are state constraints where
as edge constraints are action constraints. This means that if a state is constraint by a vertex
constraint then it is discarded when chosen for expansion, where as if a state is constraint by an
edge constraint it is simply not created.
The goal of a vertex constraint is to limit agent ai from being at vertex v at time t. Another way
to do this is to limit ai’s access to v at time t. To simplify this the deﬁnition of a map will be
reformulated. From now on let a map be deﬁned as a directed graph G = (V,E) where every
edge corresponds to an action. Let an edge e ∈E going from vertex v1 to vertex v2 be deﬁned
as e = (v1,v2) where v1 is referred to as the starting vertex or e.tail and v2 is referred as the
ending vertex or e.head. Because there is an edge corresponding to every action the edge e where
e.tail = e.head = v correspond to the wait action taken at vertex v. The opposite edge of e is
deﬁned as e′ such that e.tail = e′.head and e.head = e′.tail. With this let the new formulation of a
vertex constraint ⟨ai,v,t⟩be the set of edge constraints of the form ⟨ai,e,t⟩for every edge e where
e.head = v. This set will consist of two to ﬁve constraints depending on the number of neighbours
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
19
==PAGE:27==
of v, assuming no vertex in isolated, i.e. has no neighbours, and that the map can be visualised as
a 4-neighbour map.
Reformulating vertex constraints like this does not change the proof of CBS in any way as the set
of edge constraints replacing the vertex constraint will limit exactly the states that would otherwise
be disposed of as a result of the vertex constraint.
Because of the reformulation the edge constraints can now be simpliﬁed. The edge constraints
⟨ai,v1,v2,t⟩can now be written as ⟨ai,e,t⟩where e = (v1,v2).
The reason the two types of constraints are not uniﬁed as vertex constraints is that an edge con-
straint cannot be modelled as a set of vertex constraints.
4.2
Low-level rules
If a rule only involves one agent it is called a low-level rule. This is because rules only governing
the movement of a single agent does not need to be handled at the high-level but can be handled
directly in the low-level. For example a low-level rule could be that movement between two
speciﬁc neighbouring spaces v1 and v2 is prohibited such that no agent is allowed to move from
one to the other. This can easily be model by removing the edges (v1,v2) and (v1,v2) connecting
the two spaces such that the low-level search cannot use it. A series of similar low-level rules can
be deﬁned:
• Flat walls: In MAPF walls are vertices that cannot be reached however if the right edges are
removed a "wall" can be made between two vertices without needing a space for the wall.
For two vertices v1 and v2 if the edges (v1,v2) and (v2,v1) are removed from the level then
there functionally is a wall between v1 and v2. This is the example used above.
• One way road: Let v1 and v2 be vertices in the map. If (v1,v2) ∈E but (v2,v1) /∈E then
there is an one way road between v1 and v2. This could be used in corridors or in conjunction
with ﬂat walls two one way roads could be created going in opposite directions acting like
a "propper" road.
• Limiting some agents: If a certain edge is only removed during the low-level search of
some agents then it is possible to limit some agents from a speciﬁc paths. This could be
useful if some agents are two tall to ﬁt in some spaces.
• No wait: Removing the edges (v,v) correspond to removing the possibility of waiting at
vertex v. Removing this option can be useful if it is desired that agents doe not wait in
certain spaces. This could be because they are transporting some cargo that can be damaged
if keep in some space for to long.
• Forbid combinations of edges: This rule prohibits some movement patterns. For example
an agent is only allowed to be at most x time steps withing a speciﬁc set of vertices. As long
as this does not depend on the movement of other agents is can be handled by the low-level.
However a rule like this can make the low-level search signiﬁcantly solver as it has to check
previous actions to see if an edge can be traversed.
All these are modiﬁcations to the low-level search space which means any number of them can be
included in the problem without interfering with the high-level. MAPF+ problems include these
modiﬁcations as well as the rules introduced in the following chapter.
4.3
The Simple Deﬁnition
In this section I introduce simple restriction rules and show examples of such rules. For the rest
of the report, unless otherwise stated, a rule refers to laws governing the movement patterns of
20
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:28==
vj
vi
(a)
vj
vi
(b)
Figure 4.1: The two ﬁgures illustrate the rule ⟨e,{e′}⟩where e is marked in blue on the left and
e′ is marked in red on the right. The lines are dotted as this rule generalise for every such pair of
edges in the map.
multiple agents. That is rules always govern how multiple agents can move at the same time. Each
rule will be deﬁned as a set of tuples, where each tuple deﬁnes what movement cannot be done
when a certain movement is already done. A tuple in this context is ⟨e,Ee⟩which means that if an
agent traverse the edge e then no other agent can traverse an edge e1 ∈Ee at the same time step.
In this way each tuple applies to an edge e and a rule is then deﬁned as a set such tuples.
Formally a simple restricting rule is deﬁned as
R = ⟨e,Ee⟩for e ∈ˆE
where ˆE ⊆E and Ee ⊂E are sets of edges. With the rule R if an agent traverse the edge e then no
other agent can traverse any edge in Ee. It is said that Ee restricts e. A tuple like this is in place for
every e ∈ˆE. An example of such a rule is the rule restricting edge conﬂicts which is deﬁned as
Redge = ⟨e,{e′}⟩for e ∈E\Ewait
where Ewait is the set of edges that correspond to wait actions and e′ is the opposite of e. With
this Redge restrict every edge conﬂict between pairs of edges e and e′. This rule is illustrated in
ﬁg. 4.1a and ﬁg. 4.1b where e is marked in blue and e′ is marked in red. The edges are dotted as
to represent that this does not only apply to these speciﬁc edges but to all such pairs of edges.
An important thing when deﬁning such rules is that for an edge e1 if e2 ∈Ee1 then e1 ∈Ee2. This
means that when a conﬂict happens it goes both ways such that if agent a1 traverse e1 and agent
a2 traverse e2 at the same time then a2 breaks the rule of e1 if and only if a1 breaks the rule of e2.
If this were not the case it would mean that some type of movement was preferred to others which
does not lead to conﬂicts but to prioritisation which is not the goal of this model. For the example
with the edge rules this means that there is also a rule that is the opposite of what is shown in
ﬁg. 4.1a and ﬁg. 4.1b.
Some rules can "group" the tuples together such that all edges in ei ∈EA have the same set EB
restricting them. An example of this is the rule restricting vertex conﬂicts which is deﬁned as
Rvertex = ⟨e,Ev⟩for e ∈E
where e.head = v and Ev is the set of edges such that for ei ∈Ev it is true that ei.head = v. In this
case EA = EB as every edge going into v is restricted by the set of edges going into v. To avoid
a large amount of very similar illustrations the ﬁgures visualising the rules will be illustrated as
follows: Two ﬁgures together illustrate a rule. Blue edges are in EA, red edges are in EB and black
edges are in neither set. If edges are dotted it means that this rule is not for this speciﬁc set of
edges but for every such set of edges. If the edges are fully drawn the rule governs only those
speciﬁc edges.
With this in mind look at ﬁg. 4.2a and ﬁg. 4.2b which shows such an illustration of the vertex
rule. In ﬁg. 4.2a the blue edges make up a set EA and in ﬁg. 4.2b the red edges make up the
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
21
==PAGE:29==
vi
(a)
vi
(b)
Figure 4.2: This illustrates Rvertex where a blue edge cannot be traversed by one agent if a red
edges is traversed by another. For Rvertex it means that if one agent traverse and edge e1 then no
other agent can traverse an edge e2 for e1.head = e2.head.
corresponding set EB. The edges are dotted as the vertex rule applies to all edges in the map and
so there are similar sets of edges for every vertex.
With this deﬁnition of a restriction rule a series of sub categories emerge.
4.4
Sub Categories
This section will contain explanations of different rules and where they could be useful. This is
not a complete set of sub categories but the ones I found could be useful both in applications and
to illustrate what kinds of rules are possible.
• Distance: The distance rule has all agents keeping a certain distance from each other at all
times. Let dist(v1,v2) be the distance between v1 and v2 according to the distance measure
dist. The distance rule is then deﬁned as
Rd(x) = ⟨e,Ev,x⟩for e ∈E
where e.head = v and Ev,x is every edge such that for ei ∈Ev,x it is true that dist(ei.head,v) ≤
x. By this if an agent traverse e then no other agents are allowed to move into a vertex v1
where the distance between v1 and v is less than x. Different distance functions can be used
to calculate dist. If agents have to be x moves away from v then the Manhattan distance
can be used. Another choice is to use the Euclidean distance if the distance to other agents
should be more like a circle. In the case of the Manhattan distance x ∈N and for the
Euclidean distance x ∈R+. To illustrate this look at ﬁg. 4.3 which show the rule Rd(1). On
the left is the set of edges Ev that end in vi,j and on the right is the set of edges Ev,1 that
end in vi,j or one of the neighbouring vertices. In Rd(1) then Ev,1 restricts Ev. The edges in
ﬁg. 4.3 are dotted as this rule is in place for every edge in the map. Whether the distance
should go through walls or not is up to the designer. The vertex rule is a special case of this
rule equivalent to Rd(0).
A rule very closely linked to this rule is where Ev,x consist of the movement in a "cone" in
front of agent ai. With this no agent is allowed to be in front of ai. The size and angle of the
cone can vary.
This type of rule is useful if agents cannot come to close to each other for other purposes
than colliding. Maybe agents are carrying something that will interfere with the other agents
if they come to close.
• Area: With the area rule, only one agent is allowed in a selected set of vertices. The area
rule is deﬁned as
R ˆV = ⟨e,E ˆV⟩for e ∈E ˆV
22
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:30==
vi+1,j
vi,j-1
vi,j
vi,j+1
vi-1,j
(a)
vi+1,j
vi,j-1
vi,j
vi,j+1
vi-1,j
(b)
Figure 4.3: This illustrates Rd(1) where a the set of red edge restrict the set of blue edges. The
implications of this rule is that agents cannot stand on neighbouring vertices.
for ˆV ⊂V and E ˆV ⊂E such that for every edge ei ∈E ˆV it is true that ei.head ∈ˆV. Figure 4.4
illustrates this rule for ˆV = {v1,v2,v3,v4}. Here the set E ˆV restricts it self which is why the
edges that are coloured blue in ﬁg. 4.4a are exactly the same edges coloured red in ﬁg. 4.4b.
The edges are fully drawn in this illustration because the rule only applies to exactly the
set of edge E ˆV. There is no restriction on ˆV other than it cannot cover every vertex as that
would make the problem a single agent search problem. With this all vertices in ˆV could
be grouped together or spread out across the map. This can be relevant if some parts of the
area are mutually exclusive or if there is a requirement that an agent is alone in some part of
the map. Multiple of such rules can be in place at the same time if multiple areas can only
contain a single agent each.
• Corridors: The corridor rule is restricting movement in a corridor to only be one way at a
time. The corridor rule is deﬁned as pair of rules as
RP = ⟨e,P′⟩for e ∈P
∪
⟨e,P⟩for e ∈P′
where P = {e1,e2,...,en} is the edges going one way through the corridor and P′ = {e′
n,e′
n−1,...e′
1}
such that P and P′ are the two opposite directions through the corridor. For an edge ei ∈P
it has to be true that ei−1.head = ei.tail and ei.head = ei+1.tail such that it is possible
to move through the entire corridor using only the edges in P. As a consequence of this
P′ will also have this property. If an agent is traversing along e1 ∈P at time step t then
no agents can traverse along an edge e2 ∈P′ at time step t. However other agents can
traverse along another edge e3 ∈P at t as this is allowed. Section 4.4 illustrates RP for
P = {(v1,v2),(v2,v3),...,(v5,v6)}. In section 4.4 edges from P and P′ are coloured blue and
red respectively. As the deﬁnition states there can be no movement along ei and ej at the
same time for any pair of edges ei ∈P and ej ∈P′.
This rule can be used to avoid conﬂicts in corridors because they are caught at the entrance
to the corridor instead of at the point of collision.
This rule has a series of special cases that are worth mentioning. Redge is a special case
where there is a corridor for every pair edges e and e′.
Another special case is when
e1.head = en.tail. This creates a roundabout where agents can avoid colliding by mov-
ing the same direction around the roundabout. Having a rule like this might smooth out
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
23
==PAGE:31==
v2
v4
v1
v3
(a)
v2
v4
v1
v3
(b)
Figure 4.4: This illustrates R ˆV for ˆV = {v1,v2,v3,v4}. In this rule the set of edges E ˆV that end in a
vertex in ˆV restrict it self, i.e. only one agent can traverse an edge from E ˆV at any time. The lines
are fully drawn as this rule only applies to the speciﬁc set E ˆV.
v4
v3
v2
v1
v6
v5
Figure 4.5: This illustrates RP for P = {(v1,v2),(v2,v3),...,(v5,v6)}. The edges in P are shown
in blue while the edges in P′ are shown in red. P and P′ restrict each other such that if an agent
traverse an edge from P another agent cannot traverse an edge from P′ and vice versa. The edges
are fully drawn as they only apply speciﬁcally to P and P′.
24
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:32==
movement between different areas of the map that are connected by a small area where a lot
of conﬂicts other wise would occur.
Another case is a highway. As there is no requirement that the edges in P and P′ has to
move through an actual corridor they can also form a "highway" in open space. This can be
useful as agents can move onto the highway without violating the rule, like a slip road, as
only opposite movement is limited. Two of these highways close to each other could act as
a proper highway where agents move one way along one highway and another way along
the other highway. Whether this is useful requires more research.
4.5
Well-formed and Unsolvable Maps
MAPF problems can in some cases be impossible to solve. An example of this is shown in ??
where the map consists of only two spaces each one assigned to an agent in the initial position.
The agents have to swap positions, i.e. s1 = g2 and s2 = g1, however doing this creates an edge
conﬂict and no mater how long they agents wait there will be no way for them to reach their goal.
In order to distinguish between problems that cannot be solved, like ??, and problems that can, the
therm well-formed was introduced by [VK15].
Deﬁnition 4.1. A MAPF problem is well-deﬁned if any agent ai can stay at its starting or goal
vertex indeﬁnitely without blocking the path between sj and gj for any other agent aj.
Any problem that is well-formed is solvable while problems that are not well-formed cannot neces-
sarily be solved. ﬁg. 4.6a is an example of a problem that is not well-formed and cannot be solved,
while the problem shown in ﬁg. 4.6b without the grey squares is also not well-formed however it
can be solved. ﬁg. 4.6b is not well-formed because g1 is blocking the path between s2 and g2. If
the grey squares are included in the problem it becomes well-formed as g1 does not block a2 any
more, however the optimal solution to the problem does not change.
This means that classifying a problem as well-formed guarantees that there exists a solution how-
ever the opposite cannot be said. In order to determine if a MAPF problem is solvable an algorithm
like the on presented in [YR15] can be used.
Extending the classiﬁcation of well-formed problems to MAPF+ is straight forward.
Deﬁnition 4.2. A MAPF+ problem is well-formed if any agent ai can stay at the si or gi indeﬁnitely
without blocking the path between s j and gj for any other agent aj. That is there exist a path for
every agent aj ̸= ai such that they have a conﬂict free path from sj to gj without have a conﬂict
with ai located at either si or gi.
Checking for this can require more checks than checking whether a MAPF problem is well-formed
as MAPF+ problems can have more complex rules. The algorithm presented in [YR15] does not
work for MAPF+ problems. A way to ﬁnd out if a MAPF+ problem is unsolvable is to use an
algorithm like A∗so solve it and if it returns false the problem is unsolvable. This does not make
much sens as the search space for A∗in a MAPF+ problem is exponential in the number of agents
so it will require an unreasonable amount of time for the algorithm to fail. Further more the idea of
ﬁguring out if a problem is unsolvable is to see if it is worth trying to solve to which just solving
it right away defeats the purpose. Determining if a MAPF+ problem is solvable requires more
research.
In general the more rules are included in a MAPF+ problem the more likely it is that the problem
is unsolvable.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
25
==PAGE:33==
1
A
B
2
1
(a) Unsolvable MAPF problem.
1
g1
2
g2
A
B
C
1
2
3
D
(b) With grey well-formed, otherwise not.
Figure 4.6: This shows two MAPF problems. Figure 4.6a is unsolvable. Figure 4.6b is well-
formed with the grey spaces included but it is not well-formed if they are not.
4.6
Solving Conﬂicts
Solving conﬂicts in MAPF+ problems is not as straight forward as solving problems in MAPF
problems. In MAPF problems if a1 has a conﬂict with a2 and a conﬂict with a3 then a2 and a3 also
has a conﬂict. This is not the case for conﬂicts in MAPF+ problems.
Take the case of a problem where Rd(2) applies and three agents ai,aj and ak move into the vertices
v1, v2 and v3 respectively. Let dist(v1,v2) = dist(v3,v2) = 2 but dist(v1,v3) > 2. This means that
the agents at vertex v1 and v3 does not have a conﬂict.
This means that the k-way branching does not work as this could "solve" a conﬂict that does not
occur and there by restrict CBS from ﬁnding the optimal solution. One way of solving MAPF+
problems is to use binary branching however a more complex technique could be used.
In this section I develop terminology around conﬂicts between agents and show how to solve
conﬂicts involving more than two agents in one split.
First a couple of deﬁnitions to formalise the language.
Deﬁnition 4.3. Let C = ⟨ˆA, ˆE,t⟩be a conﬂict in a MAPF+ problem where ˆA = {a1,a2,...,an}
is the set of agents involved and ˆE = {e1,e2,...,en} is the set of edges that the respective agents
traversed at time step t in order to constitute the conﬂict. By this every agent in ˆA is in conﬂict
with every other agent, meaning every subset of agents in ˆA has a conﬂict between them at time
step t. A conﬂict is uniquely deﬁned by its three parameters ˆA, ˆE and t. Let A(C) = ˆA, E(C) = ˆE
and time(C) = t and let Ei(C) be the edge traversed by ai in conﬂict C.
By this a conﬂict does not have to be involving the same vertex or the same edge. This is necessary
as the violation of some rules could otherwise not be expressed as a conﬂict
Deﬁnition 4.4. Let ai and aj traverse ei and ej respectively at time t. Let R be rule that applies to
the problem at hand and let ⟨ei,Eei⟩∈R where ej ∈Eei then there ai and aj constitute the conﬂict
⟨{ai,aj},{ei,e j},t⟩.
This deﬁnes exactly how conﬂicts happen in MAPF+ problems however in order to ﬁnd the proper
constrains for the agents involved more deﬁnitions are needed.
Deﬁnition 4.5. A conﬂict C1 is a subconﬂict of C2 if A(C1) ⊂A(C2), time(C1) = time(C2) and
Ei(C1) = Ei(C2) for every ai ∈A(C1). C1 being a subconﬂict of C2 is written as C1 ⊆C2. A conﬂict
26
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:34==
g1
g2
g3
g4
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
4
Figure 4.7: A MAPF problem where every agent takes the path shown with the arrow of their
colour. No agents wait at any point. There is a vertex conﬂict at C2 at time 1 and a 3-way vertex
conﬂict at C3 at time 2.
is a subconﬂict of it self. Let P(C) be the set of all subconﬂicts of C and for a set of conﬂict C let
P(C) be the set of all subconﬂicts of conﬂicts in C such that P(C) ⊆P(C) for all C ∈C.
handeld
Deﬁnition 4.6. A conﬂict C is minimal if the only subconﬂict of C is C. A conﬂict C is maximal if
C is only a subconﬂict of it self. For conﬂicts of simple restriction rules a minimal conﬂict involves
2 agents. Let C be a set of conﬂicts. C is minimal if every conﬂict C ∈C is minimal and C is
maximal if every conﬂict C ∈C is maximal. This is written as ¯C and ¯C respectively.
Deﬁnition 4.7. For N ∈CT let N.Ct be the set of conﬂicts at time t in N.solution and let N.Ct
i be
the set of conﬂicts at time t in N.solution involving agent ai. By this N.Ct
i ⊆N.Ct. Ei(N.Ct) refers
to the edge traversed by ai at time t.
For an example see ﬁg. 4.7. Here there are ﬁve unique conﬂicts where two of them are maximal
and four of them are minimal. All the conﬂicts are:
• C1 = ⟨{a1,a4},{(C1,C2),(B2,C2)},1⟩
• C2 = ⟨{a1,a2,a3},{(C2,C3),(B3,C3),(D3,C3)},2⟩
• C3 = ⟨{a1,a2},{(C2,C3),(B3,C3)},2⟩
• C4 = ⟨{a1,a3},{(C2,C3),(D3,C3)},2⟩
• C5 = ⟨{a2,a3},{(B3,C3),(D3,C3)},2⟩
The minimal conﬂicts are C1, C3, C4 and C5 while the maximal conﬂicts are C1 and C2. The last
three conﬂicts are subconﬂicts of C2 as they include only part of C2, i.e. C3,C4,C5 ⊂C2. C1 is an
example of a conﬂict that is both maximal and minimal. Let N be the node containing the solution
shown in ﬁg. 4.7 then N.¯C2
1 = {C3,C4}.
Deﬁnition 4.8. Let C be a set of conﬂicts. C is simultaneous if the following properties hold
for pair set of conﬂicts C1,C2 ∈C: 1) time(C1) = time(C2) 2) if ai ∈A(C1) and ai ∈A(C2) then
Ei(C1) = Ei(C2). If C is simultaneous then it is possible for a solution to contain every conﬂict in
C. Every conﬂict reached during a CBS search is simultaneous as it is derived from the solution
of a node in CT, i.e. N.Ct is simultaneous for any N ∈CT.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
27
==PAGE:35==
a1
a3
a2
(a) g(N.¯C2
1) for N being ﬁg. 4.7
a1
a3
a2
(b) g(N.C2
1) for N being ﬁg. 4.7
Figure 4.8: On the left is shown g(N.¯C2
1) and on the right is shown g(N.C2
1) and in this case
g(N.C2
1) = g(N.C2)
Deﬁnition 4.9. Let C be a set of simultaneous conﬂicts. A conﬂict involvement graph g(C) is
a undirected unweighted graph showing how the agents are involved in all conﬂicts in C. g(C)
contains a vertex for every agent in A(C) for every C ∈C and an edge for every pair of agents ai
and aj such that ai,aj ∈A(C) for a C ∈C. In other words there is an edge connecting two agents
that have a conﬂict between them. This is in fact an edge for every conﬂict in ¯C. g(C) contains no
more than one vertex for every agent and no more than one edge for every pair of agents meaning
if a pair of agents both are involved in two different conﬂicts there is only one edge, i.e. g(C) is a
simple graph.
To illustrate this concept ﬁg. 4.8 show g(N.¯C2
1) and g(N.C2
1) for N being the solution shown in
ﬁg. 4.7. As g(N.¯C2
1) only contains minimal conﬂicts involving a1 the conﬂict C5 between a2 and
a3 is no included. This conﬂict is however included in g(N.C2
1) because a1 ∈A(C2) and C5 ⊂C2.
The goal of a conﬂict involvement graph is to form a structure describing a set of simultaneous
conﬂicts. When a set of conﬂicts is model as a graph several truths about graphs can be utilised in
order to ﬁnd sets of constraints to put on the agents involved.
Deﬁnition 4.10. Let S = {c1,...,cn} be a set of constraints and let S(S) be the set of solutions
satisfying S. S removes a conﬂict C if no p ∈S(S) contains C and S completely removes C if no
p ∈S(S) contains conﬂict in P(C). Similarly S removes a set of conﬂicts C if no p ∈S(S) contains
any conﬂict C ∈C and S completely removes C if no p ∈S(S) contains any conﬂict in P(C) for
any C ∈C. Let A(S) refer to the set of agents that are constraint in S.
All constraints are of the form descried in section 4.1. To illustrate deﬁnition 4.10 take ﬁg. 4.7
as an example. By this deﬁnition the set S1 = {⟨a1,(C2,C3),2⟩} completely removes the set of
constraints N.C2
1 but it only removes N.C2 as the subconﬂict C2 ∈N.C2 and the conﬂict C5 ⊂C2
is not solved. However the set S2 = {⟨a1,(C2,C3),2⟩,⟨a2,(B3,C3),2⟩} does completely remove
N.C2.
Lemma 4.1. Let V be vertex cover in g(C) where C is a set of simultaneous conﬂicts. Then let
S(V) be the set of constraints constraining every agent ai ∈V from traversing Ei(C), i.e. doing
what they did to be involved in a conﬂict in C. S(V) completely removes C.
Proof. This will be a proof by contradiction. Let V be a vertex cover in g(C) and let S(V) be the
corresponding set of constraints. Let p be a solution in S(S(V) that contains a minimal conﬂict
in C ∈P(N.Ct). If p contains C then none of the agents in A(C) have been constraint. As S(V)
28
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:36==
constraints every agent in V then none of the agents in A(C) are in V. This means that V is not a
vertex cover which is a contradiction.
This means that ﬁnding a vertex cover to g(C) is equivalent to ﬁnding a solution to C. This is
useful as this also means that ﬁnding a vertex cover in g(N.Ct) is equivalent to ﬁnding a solution
to N.Ct which is the goal of the high-level search in a CBS style algorithm. The goal is to to make
sure that every valid solution p in N is permitted in at least one of the child nodes of N. This will
be done by ﬁnding the right set of S’s. Before this can be proven another lemma is needed.
Deﬁnition 4.11. Let p be a solution and letC be a conﬂict. Then p(C) denotes the set of agents that
does the same action in p as they do in C. That is agent ai ∈p(C) is involved in C by traversing ei
between time(C)−1 and time(C) and for πi being the path of ai in p then πi[time(C)−1] = ei.tail
and πi[time(C)] = ei.head. This also holds for a set of simultaneous conﬂicts C such that p(C) are
the set of agents that does the same in any conﬂict in C as they do in p.
Lemma 4.2. Let p be a valid solution in N ∈CT and let C be a set of simultaneous conﬂict in N.
p(C) either spans an independent or empty set in g(C).
Proof. This will be proven by contradiction. Let the situation be as in the lemma but p(C) span
a none-independent set in g(C). Let a1,a2 ∈p(C) and let a1 and a2 be connected in g(C). This
means that there exist a conﬂict C1 ⊆C such that A(C1) = {a1,a2} meaning there is a conﬂict
between them. This is a contradiction as the edges a1 and a2 traverse in p at the time of C can no
lead to a conﬂict as p is valid.
Now the theorem can be stated.
Theorem 4.1. Let N ∈OPEN be the node chosen for expansion and let C be a set of simultaneous
conﬂict in N. Let S(C) be the set of sets of constrains such that every set S ∈S(C) completely
removes C. Every valid solution permitted in N is permitted by at least one of the sets in S.
Proof. Every S ∈S(C) spans a vertex cover in g(C) lemma 4.1. Let p be a valid solution permitted
in N then p(C) either spans an independent or empty set in g(C) lemma 4.2. If p(C) spans an empty
set in g(C) then it is permitted by every S ∈S(C) as no agent in A(C) performs their corresponding
action in E(C) in p. If p(C) spans an independent set in g(C) then the complementary set of
agents, A(C)\p(C) form a vertex cover in g(C). If this vertex cover is minimal then p is permitted
in exactly the set S ∈S(C) that correspond to A(C)\p(C). If A(C)\p(C) is not a minimal vertex
cover then there exist a S ∈S(C) such that the vertex cover corresponding to S is a subset of
A(C)\p(C). p is therefore permitted in S as S does not constrain any agent in p(C).
theorem 4.1 means that during the high-level search of a CBS-style algorithm splitting N ∈OPEN
can be done on any set of simultaneous conﬂicts C as long as child node is made for every set in
S(C). In classic CBS this is also what happens however there will always only be one conﬂict
in C and therefore g(C) will always be fully connected. In a fully connected graph a minimal
vertex cover will always contain all but one of the nodes in the graph. This means that for a
fully connected graph with n vertices there exists n different minimal vertex covers. This is what
is utilised in classical CBS as this is exactly the different sets of constraints given to the child
nodes generated. Take a 3-way vertex conﬂict as an example. In this case there are three ways to
solve the conﬂict, namely constraining two out of three of the agents involved, which is exactly all
possible minimal vertex covers in the corresponding conﬂict involvement graph.
As MAPF+ problems can contain more complex conﬂict involvement graphs I suggest two new
branching techniques for solving MAPF+ problems using a CBS-style algorithm. The ﬁrst one is
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
29
==PAGE:37==
called k-complete branching. When splitting N ∈OPEN this type of branching chooses a set of
simultaneous conﬂicts C involving up to k agents and creates a child node of N for every set in
S(C). This allows the algorithm to solve multiple conﬂicts at once. The number of child nodes
generated using the branching technique can be much larger. For example if every agent has a
conﬂict involving exactly one other agent at the same time step then for n agents there will be 2n
minimal vertex covers as one from each pair has to be constraint. Because rules can limit many
different possible movement patterns an estimate for the size of S(C) found during k-complete
branching cannot be given.
The second technique is k-simple branching where C is chosen to be every minimal conﬂict in-
volving an agent ac such that for every C ∈C then ai ∈A(C). By this g(C) has a "star" shape
because every agent in A(C) is connected only to ac. This means that when ﬁnding minimal vertex
covers in g(C) there will be only two, namely ac and A(C)\{ai}. This technique falls in between
binary branching and k-complete branching as it solves more than one minimal conﬂict per split
but it does not necessarily solve at time t in one split. k-simple branching can be seen as the k-way
branching alternative in MAPF+ problems.
This kind of conﬂict graph is not to be confused with the conﬂict graph deﬁned in [Fel+18] how-
ever they are similar in some sense.
4.7
New Algorithm
In this section I develop a new algorithm called Rule-based search (RBS) which is build on the
CBS framework. The main difference is the check for if a rule is broken. Algorithm 2 shows the
pseudo code for RBS where the places RBS and CBS differ are marked in blue.
In line 10 RBS differs by ﬁnding a set of simultaneous conﬂicts C at the earliest possible time.
Strictly speaking CBS also ﬁnd such a set, however in CBS it has to contain only one conﬂict
where as in RBS it can be any set of simultaneous conﬂicts. How to choose the set depends on
the branching technique used. There are three options in the basic version of RBS: 1) binary
branching, 2) k-simple branching and 3) k-complete branching. Once a set C is found then the set
S(C) is found by constructing g(C) and ﬁnding every minimal vertex cover. A child node of P is
then generated for each set S in S(C). As more than one agent is constraint at the same time line
15 is changed such that the low-level search is called for every agent with a new constraint, i.e.
30
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:38==
A(S).
Algorithm 2: High-level RBS
Input: MAPF+ instance
1 R.constraints = /0
2 R.solution = ﬁnd individual paths using the low-level
3 R.cost = SIC(R.solution)
4 insert R to OPEN
5 while OPEN not empty do
6
P ←best node from OPEN
7
Validate the paths in P until a conﬂict occurs.
8
if P has no conﬂict then
9
return P.solution
10
C ←earliest possible set of simultaneous conﬂicts in P
11
foreach S in S(C) do
12
N ←new node
13
N.constraints ←P.constraints + S
14
N.solution ←P.solution.
15
Update N.solution by invoking low-level(A(S))
16
N.cost = SIC(N.solution)
17
Insert N to OPEN
Theorem 4.2. RBS is optimal.
Proof. The optimality proof for CBS holds for RBS if it can be shown that every valid solution p
is permitted by at least one node in OPEN. This is guaranteed by theorem 4.1 which means RBS
is optimal.
Theorem 4.3. RBS is complete.
Proof. The completeness proof of CBS holds for RBS if it can be shown that there is a ﬁnite
number of nodes N ∈CT with cost C. Let N ∈CT be a node with cost C. N cannot have a conﬂict
after C and cannot have any constraints applying on a time step after C. When splitting a node N
each child of N will have at least one additional constraint. As RBS only use action constraints a
node N can have up to k ·C · |E| constraints for a problem with k agents. This means that N can
have at most k ·C ·|E| predecessors. There by the tree containing every node with cost C or lower
will have a maximum depth of k ·C ·|E|. The number of nodes generated when splitting is equal
to |S(C)| which is the number of minimal vertex covers in g(C). g(C) has at most k vertices and
a vertex cover has to be a subset of these. Of k vertices there is 2k different subsets which is ﬁnite
so the number of minimal vertex covers is ﬁnite which means the CT of RBS has ﬁnite branching
factor. This proofs the theorem.
The proofs are largely the same as the proofs for CBS with theorem 4.1 replacing lemma 3.2 and
the argument for completeness relying on the size of the CT containing all nodes with cost C.
4.8
Extentions
The deﬁnition of a simple restriction rule found in the beginning of the chapter allows for a diverse
set of rules, however some rules are still not possible under this deﬁnition. This section will contain
rules that are not possible under this deﬁnition and what it would take to ﬁt these into the RBS
framework.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
31
==PAGE:39==
4.8.1
Size of minimal conﬂict
A set of rules that are not allowed is rules where the size of the minimal conﬂict is larger than two.
Let SM(R) be the size of a minimal conﬂict C that occurs when R is violated, i.e. SM(R) = |A(C)|.
For a simple restriction rule SM(R) = 2. This means that any conﬂict either involved exactly two
agents or there exist a subconﬂict of it that has exactly two agents involved. An example of a rules
where SM is larger than two could be a variation of the area rule. In this variation Rx two agents
are allowed in the area. This will result in SM(Rx) = 3 because if only two agents are involved
there is no conﬂict. If there is a conﬂict where three agents are inside the area at the same time
then one of the three will have to be constraint. This means if a node N ∈CT was split on such a
conﬂict three child nodes would be generated. However if four agents are involved in the conﬂict
and only two would need to be constraint N will need six child nodes as four choose two is six. In
the general case with m agents allowed and n agents involved there will be
( n
n−m
)
different ways
to solve the conﬂict as n−m of the n agents have to be constraint.
This kind of conﬂict is a challenge to model in the conﬂict involvement graph, as this contains an
edge connecting the pairs of agents that have a conﬂict. However if no pair has a conﬂict because
a conﬂict requires more than a pair of agents the graphs need to be extended. For each edge in
a conﬂict involvement graph one of the agents have to be constraint otherwise the conﬂict will
occur again. This fact can be used to model conﬂict involvement graphs for conﬂicts of rules with
SM(R) > 2 as a hypergraph.
Deﬁnition 4.12. Let C be a set of simultaneous conﬂicts of rule R where SM(R) = x for x ≥2.
Let a conﬂict involvement graph g(C) be deﬁned by a vertex for every agent in A(C) and an edge
for every conﬂict in ¯C, that is an edge for every minimal conﬂict in P(C). An edge ei ∈g(C)
representing the conﬂict Ci ∈P(C) is deﬁned by the subset of agents involved in Ci. By this
ei = A(Ci). By this g(C) is a hypergraph.
For a set of constraints S to remove a conﬂict C then A(S) needs to span a vertex cover in g(C)
lemma 4.1. This still holds true for SM(R) > 2 because and edge in g(C) represents a minimal
conﬂict which means every agent in the edge is needed for the conﬂict to be present. This means
that if just one of them is removed then the conﬂict is also removed. As S spans a minimal vertex
cover in g(C) at least one agent involved in each conﬂict is constraints by S and C is removed. By
this the algorithm is still optimal however the branching techniques work differently when g(C)
is a hypergraph. To illustrate how each technique works look at the example shown in ﬁg. 4.9.
This example shows the case from above where two agents are allowed in the grey area but four
agents enter at the same time. This means that two of the four will have to be constraint for the
conﬂict to disappear. ﬁg. 4.9b shows how the conﬂict involvement graph is drawn for this type of
conﬂict. As SM(R) = 3 each edge needs to connect exactly three agents. And because every agent
is in conﬂict with every combination of two of the three other agents there are four edges in the
hypergraph. The edges are
• e1 = {a1,a2,a4}
• e2 = {a1,a2,a4}
• e3 = {a2,a3,a4}
• e4 = {a1,a2,a3}
Each branching technique act differently on such a hypergraph. They change in the following way:
• binary branching: The idea in binary branching is to solve the problem one minimal con-
ﬂict at a time. For problems with SM(R) = 2 where minimal conﬂict always involved two
agents it means that each split will create two child nodes, hence binary. For SM(R) = x
for x > 2 the same idea can still be used however each split will create x child nodes as
32
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:40==
each minimal conﬂict of size x needs only one of the x agents two be constraint. If binary
branching is used in the problem shown in ﬁg. 4.9 then e2 might be chosen and the conﬂict
involvement graph would only consists of e2 and the three agents involved.
• k-simple branching: The idea in k-simple branching is to choose one agent ac and ﬁnd
every minimal conﬂict involving that agent. For SM(R) = 2 this results in a star shape with
ac in the centre and every other agent connected only ac. This is simple because multiple
minimal conﬂicts can be solved at once, however there will always only be two minimal
vertex covers in the conﬂict involvement graph. For SM(R) = x for x > 2 the same approach
results in graph that has more than two minimal vertex covers. In ﬁg. 4.9 let a2 be chosen
as the central agent then k-simple branching will use every conﬂict represented by a fully
drawn edge. That is C = {e1,e3,e4}. The problem here is that g(C) has more then two
minimal vertex covers, it has four. The central agent, here a2, still spans a minimal vertex
cover, however {a1,a3,a4} is not minimal as one of them can be removed and it would still
be a vertex cover. This shows that when SM(R) > 2 k-simple branching can result in more
than two child nodes however k-simple branching still lands between binary branching and
k-complete branching in terms of how big a problem is solved each split.
• k-complete branching: This technique does not change much as it still needs to ﬁnd every
minimal vertex cover of g(C) for the split done on C. How to ﬁnding these change as the
g(C) is now a hypergraph however this does not change the technique.
This means that no matter which branching technique used to split a node N ∈CT at least SM(R)
child nodes will be generated which means RBS works with SM(R) > 2. Despite this the search
might take a long time as CT will have more nodes on each level and therefore potentially generate
many nodes that are never explored. Determining how good RBS is at solving these kinds of
problems require more research.
3
1
4
2
(a) A area conﬂict with four agents
a1
a3
a4
a2
e4
e2
e1
e3
(b) Hyper Conﬂict involvement graph of
ﬁg. 4.9a
Figure 4.9: An area conﬂict involving four agents with two agents allowed in the grey area. Be-
cause of the rule the conﬂict involvement graph has to be a hypergraph. This visualisation method
comes from [PT11].
4.8.2
Restricting some agents
Having only a subset of the agents obey a rule can be useful in some cases. For example only
one agent from ˆA ⊂A is allowed in an area while agents from A\ ˆA can freely traverse the area
without conﬂicts. This extension is easy to implement with the form ⟨e,Ee, ˆA⟩which means that
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
33
==PAGE:41==
the rule only applies to the subset ˆA ⊆A. Here an agent ai ∈ˆA that traverse edge e will only be at
conﬂict with another agent aj ∈ˆA if aj traverse e1 ∈Ee at the same time. This is omitted from the
deﬁnition for simplicity as all other aspects of the rules are the same, the only change is the check
for ﬁnding conﬂicts.
A different kind of rule is where an agent ai ∈A1 can be in conﬂict with aj ∈A2 without aj being
in conﬂict with ai. Here A1,A2 ⊆A. The difﬁculty here is that if the conﬂict only go one way
then it cannot be solved with a split but has to be solved with constraining the agent that has the
conﬂict. This is possible however is does not ﬁt well with the idea of CBS because there is only
one way to solve the conﬂict. A better way to solve this would be to have all agents from A1 ﬁnd
paths after all agents from A2 such that ai ∈A1 will not ﬁnd a path that violates a path for any agent
aj ∈A2. This is a prioritised search. A unbound supoptimal variation of CBS called PBS use this
however the priority of agents is not ﬁxed in PBS so the idea is not entirely the same [Ma+18].
Another way to include two subsets of agents in a rule would be where a1 ∈A1 and a2 ∈A2 can
have a conﬂict between them, but a1 cannot have a conﬂict with a3 ∈A1. In other words the
rule applies to interactions between the two subsets of agents. It could for example be where the
Rd(2) rule applies to interactions between A1 and A2, but do not applies internally to the subsets.
To incorporate this into the algorithm is also just a matter of checking the right agents when
computing if a rule is broken or not. A way to write it could be ⟨e,Ee,A1,A2⟩where the rule is
broken if e is traversed by an agent ai ∈A1 while an agent aj ∈A2 traverse e1 ∈Ee. For this rule to
make sense no agent can be a part of both subset, i.e. A1 ∩A2 = /0. If an agent is part of both subset
it would mean that functionally the agent is in its own set A3 where the rule again will apply to the
intersection between A3 and A1 ∪A2.
4.8.3
Time dependant rules
Using rules at some time steps and not at others can be incorporated into RBS in some cases. If
the rule only applies at some time steps it is again only a matter of check if the rule is violated at
those time steps. It is more difﬁcult if the rule has to work across multiple time steps. For example
if an agent is not allowed to enter a vertex if an other agent has occupied it at some point in the
last three time steps. This would require that the time interval was included in the rule. While this
is also possible with a more complex rule violation check it is less relevant.
In this chapter I have deﬁned the MAPF+ problem. This includes deﬁning how rules apply and
how to design them. I have also analysed conﬂicts that arise from violating these rules and I have
introduced two methods for solving such conﬂicts while without sacriﬁcing optimality. I have
then introduced an optimal and complete solver RBS which solves MAPF+ problems. Lastly the
deﬁnition of a rule has been extended and the implications of this have been analysed as well.
34
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:42==
5
Requesting Rules
The other overarching type of rule is request rules. Where restrict rules limit the movement of
agents, request rules expand on the tasks of agents. The general idea is that some agents will need
help in some way and will ask other agents for it. An example of this could be one agent only
being able to move if pushed, or an agent that can only move if an other agent is close by. Call
this generalisation MAPF-H. MAPF-H contains only rules of classical MAPF and request rules
deﬁned below. Under this generalisation the game sokuban can be model as a MAPF-H problem,
where each stone is an agent.
The major motivation for this type of modelling comes from the course 02285 Multi-Agent Systems
at DTU. In this course the main task is to make a solver for the hospital domain. This domain
consists of agents and boxes each with a number and colour. A box can only move if it is pushed
or drag by an agent of the same colour. This cannot be modelled as a classical MAPF problem
because it lacks the modelling of agents that cannot move without help.
5.1
Deﬁnition
The reformulation of the MAPF map presented in section 4.1 is also used in MAPF-H. A request
rule will be modelled in much the same ways as a restrict rule. A tuple ⟨e,Te,Al,Ah⟩means that if
an agent ai from the set of agents Al can only traverse the edge e if another agent aj from the set
of agents Ah traverse an edge e1 from the set of edges Te. As with the restrict rules a request rule
is deﬁned as a set of such tuples. Formally a request rule is deﬁned as
R = ⟨e,Te,Al,Ah⟩for e ∈ˆE
where Al is the set of agents limited by the rule and Ah is the set of agents able to help. ˆE ⊂E
is the set of edges for which the rule applies. In this context Te is the helping set for e and e is
requesting Te.
The rule describing the movement of stones in Sokuban can be modelled in the following way. Let
Te = {(v,e.tail)} such that traversing (v,e.tail) correspond to the same action as e, as a stone can
only move if an agent move into the vertex of the stone in the same direction as the stone has to
move. For an example see ﬁg. 5.1a where e = (v2,v3) and Te = {(v1,v2)}. Let this rule be referred
to as Rsokuban.
v3
v2
v1
(a) Rsokuban
v3
v2
v1
(b) Rhospital
v3
v6
v2
v5
v1
v4
(c) Example of Rlocation
Figure 5.1: Here are shown there request rules. For each rule the blue arrow requests the set of
green arrows. For the ﬁrst two ﬁgures the edges are dotted representing this rule generalise to
other such edge pairings. On the right ﬁgure this is not the case as this rule only apply to the exact
blue edge shown.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
35
==PAGE:43==
5.2
Sub categories
In this section different types of request rules will be discussed. !!!!
• Movement: With the movement rule agents Al need help with every moving action. This
means that for a movement rule ˆE = E\Ewait where Ewait is the set of edges corresponding
to wait actions. Te can be a unique set of edges for every e ∈ˆE or multiple edges can have
the same helping set. Rsokuban is a rule of this type. If Al ∩Ah = /0 it means that agents form
Al cannot help each other. However if Al ⊂Ah then it is possible for an agent a1 ∈Ah to
help multiple agents simultaneously, by helping a2 which helps a3 and so on. In fact this
can create a ring of agents pushing each other without assistance from an agent not in Al.
There is also the case in between the two where Al ∩Ah = Ai for |Ai| > 0 and Ai ̸= Al. How
agents are included in the two sets is up to the designer.
Another example of a movement rule is the movement of boxes from the hospital domain.
With this rule an agent has to move into the vertex of the box or move out of the vertex that
is the new location of the box. This means that a box can be pushed or dragged by an other
agent. For an edge e let Ee.tail be the set of edges such that for ei ∈Ee.tail then ei.head = e.tail
and let Ee.head be the set of edges such that for ej ∈Ee.head then ej.tail = e.head. Then Te
can be deﬁned as Te = (Ee.tail ∪Ee.head)\{e,e′,(e.tail,e.tail),(e.head,e.head)}. By this Te
is every edge ending in e.tail and every edge starting in e.head except e and e′ and the wait
action in e.tail and e.head. Let this rule be referred to as Rhospital. A visualisation of Rhospital
can be seen in ﬁg. 5.1b.
• Proximity: The proximity type is closely related to the movement type. In this rule type a
set of agents Al need an agent from Ah to be no more than x away. Let dist(v1,v2) be the
distance between vertices v1 and v2 where different distance measures can be used. Formally
let a proximity rule be deﬁned as
Rprox(x) = ⟨e,Tv,x,Al,Ah⟩fore ∈E
where e.tail = v and Tv,x is the set of edges such that for ei ∈Tv,x then dist(e.tail,v) ≤x . The
major difference between this rule and the movement rule is that with the proximity rule the
wait actions also require help. If Al ∩Ah = /0 then every agent from Al needs an agent from
Ah within the a distance of x at all times. However if Al = Ah then no agent can be more
than x away from another agent forcing them to move in groups of at least two. Different
intersections of Al and Ah result in slightly different behaviour however the result will still
be agents moving in groups.
• Location: The location rule is for modelling help for speciﬁc edges. An example of this
could be opening a door. In this rule the set ˆE will be small, possibly down to a single edge.
An example of a location rule is where an agent from Al can only be in a certain area if an
agent from Ah does a speciﬁc task for the entire time. This could be standing in the same
location or moving in a circle. Figure 5.1c show an example of this rule where the edge
(v4,v1) can only be traversed if an agent traverse the edge (v6,v6), i.e. wait at v6. Here
(v6,v6) resembles pushing the button that opens the door between v4 and v1.
This type of rule is most relevant for creating puzzles that require multiple agents to work
together. For example the famous puzzle game Portal 2 has a series of multiplayer maps
that require two agents to work together.
5.3
Validating solutions
For a solution p to be a valid solution to a MAPF-H problem it needs to contain a valid path πi
for each agent ai ∈A and there 1) needs to be no conﬂict between any two paths and 2) if an
36
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:44==
v3
v2
v1
v4
Figure 5.2: Here the rule Rhospital applies. The agent traversing the green edge is helping both of
the agents traversing the red edges at the same time.
agent needs help traversing an edge then such help is supplied. Checking for help this is straight
forward. For every agent ai ∈Al needing help with traversing e there needs to be an agent aj ∈Ah
traversing an edge in Te for e ∈πi. If this holds for every rule then the solution is valid.
5.4
Limitations
In MAPF-H agents can help each other, however there is no limit to the number of agents that can
be help by the same agent at the same time. Take the example shown in ﬁg. 5.2 where an agent
a1 traverse (v1,v2), agent a2 traverse (v3,v4) and a2 traverse (v2,v3). The rule Rhospital apply with
Al = {a1,a2} being the agents traversing the red edges and Ah = {a3} being the agent traversing
the green edge. Both agent a1 and a2 need help traversing their respective edges and both can get
help from a3. In fact a3 can help both a1 and a2 at the same time. The problem is that with the
request rules in MAPF-H there is no way of restricting an agent from only helping one other agent
at a time. This means that the movement shown in ﬁg. 5.2 is legal and does not break any rules. In
order to limit the number of agents one agent can help at the same time resource management needs
to be introduced in some extend. This is out of the scope of this report however it is interesting to
see if this can be Incorporated into MAPF-H.
5.5
Solving MAPF-H in the CBS framework
In this section I will explain the idea behind how a CBS based algorithm can solve a MAPF-H
problem.
The algorithm will function much like CBS does with a high-level solving conﬂicts and a low-
level ﬁnding individual paths. In addition to solving conﬂicts the high-level is also tasked with
coordinating help to the agents that need it. This can be split into three problems that needs to be
solved
• Detect which agents need help.
• Give agents the ability to help
• Assigning agents to help others.
• Aline the path of the agent who needs help with the agent that gives help.
The ﬁrst problem is straight forward. Let A be that set of agents and R be the set of request rules.
For each edge e traversed by ai ∈A each rule has to be check such that if ai ∈Al and e ∈ˆE then
there needs to be an agent traversing an edge in Te other wise help is needed.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
37
==PAGE:45==
The next problem is to make agents able to help others.
5.5.1
Completing tasks
For an agent to be able to help others the low-level needs to be able to ﬁnd paths for an agent ai
that go thought certain edges will still starting at si and ending gi.
In order for the low-level search to ﬁnd such a path the Multi-Goal A∗algorithm introduced in
[lifelong] will be modiﬁed. The pseudo code for the algorithm can be seen in alg. 3.
Let gi be a list of vertices that agent ai has to go through. The goal of Multi-Goal A∗is to ﬁnd
a path that visits all the vertices in gi in order. To do this each state P has a value P.label which
is the number of the current goal go be reach from this state. This label incremented once the
goal is reach so that the child states will point to for the next goal. In order to have an admissible
heuristic the function ComputeHValue calculates the distance to the current goal plus the sum
of distances between consecutive future goals in gi.
Algorithm 3: Multi-goal A∗
Input: Start location si, goal location sequence gi
1 R.location ←si,R.time ←0,R.label ←0,R.g ←0
2 R.h ←ComputeHValue(R.location,R.label)
3 open.push(R)
4 while open not empty do
5
P ←open.pop()
6
if P.location = gi[P.label] then
7
P.label ←P.label +1
8
if P.label = |gi| then
9
return the path retrieved from P
10
foreach child node Q of P do
11
open.push(Q)
12 return "No Solution";
13 Function ComputeHValue(Location x, Label l) is
14
return dist(x,gi[l]) + ∑
|gi|−1
j=l+1 dist(gi[j −1],gi[j])
Using this algorithm agents can have a series of goals that are all guaranteed to be on the path.
Adapting this algorithm to ﬁnd paths through a series of edges requires two changes. The ﬁrst
problem is that the goals in alg. 3 are nodes but help in MAPF-H comes in the form of sets of
edges. The second problem is that the distance between two sets of edges is not deﬁned.
Let Te be referred to as a task and from now on let gi be a series of such tasks. Initially gi will only
contain the set of edges Tgi where for e ∈Tgi then e.head = gi. When an agent is assigned a new
task T1 this task is inserted into gi right before Tgi such that for ai being assigned n tasks the list
will be of the form gi = {T1,T2,...,Tn,Tgi}. With this the last task to be completed will be Tgi such
that ai ends the search at gi.
As gi is now a list of sets of edges and not a list of vertices, the check at line 6 has to be changed.
The label needs to be incremented if the edge ai just traversed to get to state P is contained in the
task gi[P.label]. Let P.e be the edge that was traversed by ai in order to reach state P. Line 6-7 can
now be rewritten as
if P.e ∈gi[P.label] then
P.label ←P.label +1
38
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:46==
The second problem is that the distance between a vertex v and a task T is not deﬁned. The number
of ways every task in gi can be completed is ∏
|gi|−1
l=0
|gi[l]| where |gi[l]| is the number of edges
in task number l. Checking all these possibilities and ﬁnding the shortest one is an admissible
heuristic, however with n tasks and |gi[l]| ≥m for each task the number of possibilities is O(nm)
which makes this unfeasible. To avoid this a greedy approach will be used to compute the heuristic
in ComputeHValue. Let eb be the edge in the current task closest to x such that dist(x,eb.tail)
is the smallest for any edge in the current task. The new ComputeHValue now computes the
dist(x,eb.tail) and adds to that the distance from eb.head to the best edge in the next task, and so
on ontil the distance to the ﬁnal task is added. Formally eb is deﬁned as
eb = min{dist(x,e.tail)|e ∈T}
where T is a task and x is a vertex.
When the heuristic is calculated in this way it is not admissible unless dist underestimates the
distance so much that it looses its value as a heuristic. Does this need an example?.
The rewritten algorithm can be seen in alg. 4 with the changes made in blue. The additional one
added to the distance in line 17 is due to traversing the edge takes a time step.
Algorithm 4: Multi-goal A∗using tasks
Input: Start location si, goal location sequence gi
1 R.location ←si,R.time ←0,R.label ←0,R.g ←0
2 R.h ←ComputeHValue(R.location,R.label)
3 open.push(R)
4 while open not empty do
5
P ←open.pop()
6
if P.e ∈gi[P.label] then
7
P.label ←P.label +1
8
if P.label = |gi| then
9
return the path retrieved from P
10
foreach child node Q of P do
11
open.push(Q)
12 return "No Solution";
13 Function ComputeHValue(Location x, Label l) is
14
d ←0
15
while l < |gi| do
16
eb ←mine∈gi[l] dist(x,e.tail)
17
d = d +dist(x,eb.tail)+1
18
x ←eb
19
l = l +1
20
return d
5.5.2
Assigning helpers
Using alg. 4 at the low-level agents are able to complete multiple tasks. Using this other agents
can ask for help using the request rules deﬁned earlier. Splitting on a request rule is different from
splitting on a restrict rule. Splitting on a restrict rule will create a child node for every possible
solution to the conﬂict while splitting on a request rule creates a child node for every agent that is
able to help. In the case of a request rule R this means for N ∈CT there needs to be a child node
for every agent in Ah. This will be denoted the complete approach. An example will be used to
illustrate how this can result in a very large constraint tree.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
39
==PAGE:47==
2
3
g3
g2
1
2
g1
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
(a) Paths for the three agents
9
8
5 7
6 5
6
3
4 3
4 5
6
1
2 1
2 3
4
7
0
0 1
2
8
0
9
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Locations of agents
1
2
3
g1
g3
g2
Agents
Goals
Paths
Open area
Wall 
(c) Legend
Figure 5.3: An example of a MAPF-H problem with Rsokuban. The cost of the solution is 24.
Let a MAPF-H problem be deﬁned by the map seen on ﬁg. 5.3 with the request rule equivalent to
the movement of stones in the game of Sokuban such that Al = {a1} and Ah = {a2,a3}. Figure 5.3a
show an optimal solution for the problem, however ﬁnding this solution requires a constraint tree
at least as deep as the length of the path of a1. The reason for this is that a1 needs help with every
action and because both a2 and a3 can assist there will be 2|π1| possible ways to get help for π1
being the path of a1. In the general case if an agent ai needs help with all moves on its path there
will be |Ah||πi| ways ai can get help which is also the possible number of nodes this will generate
in the constraint tree. Not all nodes will be generated as some of the possibilities will take a lot of
time steps and so the cost of that node will result in that branch never being explored. However
this will still result in a large tree for just one agent and on top of this there is the conﬂicts there
are created as agents try to help. In the case of |Al| > 1 this will increase exponentially which
quickly results in an unfeasible problem. If one were to design a suboptimal solver the problem
could be bypassed by only generating the subset of the possibilities that at ﬁrst glance seems most
promising. This will shrink the search space but the problem can still be to large to solve.
2
3
g3
g2
1
2
g1
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
(a) Paths when a2 has all tasks
3
15
13 14
15 16
16
2
9
7 8 9
10 14
10 11 12
13 17
18
1 3
1 2 3 
4 8
4 5 6 
7 11
12
19
0 2
0
1 5
6
20
0
21
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Locations of agents
Figure 5.4: This is the same problem as ﬁg. 5.3 however here the list approach is used with a2
being assigned all task for a1. The cost of this solution is 40 which is almost double the cost of the
solution shown in ﬁg. 5.3
Another approach is to get help with all the tasks in one split by having one agent help with all
tasks. When N ∈CT is split using this approach for agent ai every child node will have one
agent aj ∈Ah being assigned all tasks helping ai. This will be denoted the list approach. In this
way each agent in ai ∈Al will only constitute one split creating |Ah| child nodes which is orders
40
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:48==
1
2
A
B
C
g1
2
g2
1
D
Figure 5.5: In this example the Rsokuban rule applies where Al = {a1} and Ah = {a2}. The three
paths for a2 represent different plans found during the search. The fully drawn is the ﬁrst, the one
with large gaps is the second and the one with small gaps is the last.
of magnitude less than the complete approach. This will make the problems much more feasible
however it comes at the cost of optimality and completeness as it is not always optimal to have one
agent complete the entire list of tasks. ﬁg. 5.4 show the consequence of using the list approach.
In this example agent a2 is assigned all task from a1 which results in a much longer solution. To
improve this a1 could use the fact that only one agent would help, in order to make a plan that is
better suited for this kind of movement. The path for a2 shown in ﬁg. 5.4a is almost the worst case
as a2 has to take four actions to complete every task because a2 has to move around a1 between
completing every task. Had the rule Rhospital applied instead of Rsokuban then this would not be
such a big issue as one agent easily can move a1 to g1. This shows that for the low-level to ﬁnd a
solution that when helped by only one agent results in the shortest solution, is very dependent on
the rules that apply to the problem. Designing such a low-level solver requires more research.
5.5.3
Coordinating
Once an agent a2 is assigned to help a1, and has found a path satisfying the help, the paths of the
two agents need to be aligned. Let e1 be the edge a1 needs help with and let e2 ∈Te1 be the edge
a2 traverse to give help. As a1 cannot traverse this edge getting help, it has to wait at its current
vertex until the time step a2 traverse e1 and then traverse e1. To illustrate this look at the example
in ﬁg. 5.5 where Rsokuban applies and Al = {a1} and Ah = {a2}. Initially the paths found are π1.1 =
(B2,C2),(C2,D2) and π2.1 = (A1,B1),(B1,C1),(C1,D1) which are shown as fully drawn arrows.
Assume the complete approach is used such that there is a split for each edge an agent needs help
with. When checking for agents that need help a1 is found to need help with (B2,C2). As there is
only one agent the split only results in one child node where a2 is assigned the task {(A2,B2)} and
ﬁnds the path π2.2 = (A1,A2),(A2,B2),(B2,B1),(B1,C1),(C1,D1). π2.2 is the green path with
large gaps. The path π1.1 now has to be adapted to π2.2. This results in a path where a1 waits
a single time step and then performs the same path as previously planed. The new path for a1 is
therefore π1.2 = (B2,B2),(B2,C2),(C2,D2). The solution is the check again and it is found that a1
needs help with (C2,D2). Again the split result in a single child node where a2 now is assigned the
task {(B2,C2)} such that gi = {{(A2,B2)},{(B2,C2)},Tg2}. The low-level now ﬁnds a new path
completing all the tasks resulting in π2.3 = (A1,A2),(A2,B2),(B2,C2),(C2,C1),(C1,D1) which
is the dotted line with small gaps. The path for a1 again has to be adapted however no wait is need.
When checking to see if any more agents need help nothing is found which means a valid solution
is found.
5.5.4
Replaning
One problem still remains which is: what happens when two agents ai,aj ∈Al have a collision.
Assume here that Al ∩Ah = /0 and the rule applying is a movement rule. Following classical CBS
either ai or aj will be constraint. This can have two outcomes. Either the constraint agent will wait
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
41
==PAGE:49==
one time step and then move on as previously planed, or ﬁnd a completely new path. Both cases
can give problems. Let ai be the agent constraint and let ak be the agent helping ai. If ai takes the
wait action then it is possible that ai and ak will have a conﬂict as ak might not wait. From this
collision either ai or ak will be constraint. If ak gets constraint then it will wait and then complete
the tasks, avoiding the conﬂict with ai. However if ai gets constraint then ai has the same options
as with the collision with aj, which either again push the conﬂict to an earlier time step or ﬁnd a
new path.
If ai ﬁnd a new path, the tasks assigned to agent ak will not be relevant any more, as ai does not
need that help any more. This will result in ak having a longer path than necessary and possibly
create a lot of unnecessary conﬂicts. This will be a problem in both the complete approach and
the list approach. To solve this a new approach is introduced, the linked approach. As the name
suggests the helper ak is linked to the limited agent ai, such that ak will have to complete all the
tasks of ai. This is similar to the list approach however here the tasks assigned to ak will be exactly
the ones issued by ai, so when ai ﬁnd a new path the tasks assigned to ak will change. This also
means that whenever ai ﬁnd a new path ak also has to ﬁnd a new path. As for the list approach the
linked approach comes at the cost of optimality and completeness.
5.6
Mixing problems
The problem with coordinating agents and potentially planing help for paths that get replaned sug-
gests that the CBS frame work is not a good candidate for solving MAPF-H problems. Fundamen-
tally MAPF-H contains three problems: 1) Finding paths for the individual agents, 2) coordinating
these paths such that they do not collide 3) making sure each agent gets the help they need. The
low-level solves the ﬁrst problem however the high-level is tasked with solving both the second
and the third. The approach presented here mix these two problems while trying to solve them
both at the same time. The high-level does not know if the help that is being planed has to be
scraped in the future, resulting in a high-degree of replaning.
42
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:50==
6
Implementation
As part of this thesis the CBS algorithm was implemented and later extended to be the RBS algo-
rithm. The implementation use only action constraints because they can replace vertex constraints,
as described in section 4.1, and all the rules of MAPF+ are build on edges. ∞-simple branching
branching is used to speed up the process of ﬁnding vertex covers in the conﬂict involvement
graph. The implementation is done in C++ as to follow the majority of the literature in the ﬁeld.
The rules are implemented as a lookup table such that implementing additional rules would be
easier. The alternative was to use make
As part of this thesis a version of the RBS algorithm introduced in section 4.7 was implemented.
The implementation is written in C++ as to follow most of the literature in the ﬁeld. The version
that is implemented use ∞-simple branching. Each rule is implemented as a hash table over the
edges involved in the rule. When checking for if ai traversing edge e breaks rule R e is look up in
the hash table of R and the set of edges Ee is returned. The intersection between this set and the set
of edges used by all other agents is found and if the intersection is more than 1 the rule is broken.
To check if a solution is valid each edge in the path of each agent is check in this way for every
rule, and if no rule is broken the solution is valid. This method is slow however it was chosen so
that additional rules could easily be implemented. If only a speciﬁc set of rules were to be used a
lookup table could be avoided.
6.1
Joint Rule
In order to speed up conﬂict detection all rules of a given problem can be joint into one rule. Let
R be the set of all rules in the problem. Let the joint rule R be deﬁned as
R = ⟨e,Ee
Ee
Ee⟩for e ∈E
where Ee
Ee
Ee = ∪
⟨e,Ee⟩∈R Ee such that Ee
Ee
Ee is the union of all edges that lead to a conﬂict with e under
any rule in R. By this the joint rule enforce exactly the same limitations as all rules in R. Further
more information can be reused when checking for conﬂicts. If ai traversing e1 at time t not
resulting in a conﬂict then there is no agent traversing any edge in Ee1
Ee1
Ee1. This means that when
validating agents aj travelling along e2 it only needs to be check if there is any movement along
the edges Ee2
Ee2
Ee2\Ee1
Ee1
Ee1, i.e. there is no need to check for agents on the edges in Ee1
Ee1
Ee1 again.
6.2
The Code
The original plan for the project was to implement a solver that could solve both MAPF+ problems
and MAPF-H problems. While it was possible to implement a solver that solves MAPF+ problems
it was not possible to implement a solver for MAPF-H problems because of the issues mentioned
in chapter 5. These issues let to that part of the project being scraped. The code is available at
https://github.com/Ybionz/RBS.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
43
==PAGE:51==
7
Conclusion
The ﬁrst part of this thesis explores the problem of Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding and how the state-of-
the-art solver Conﬂict-Based Search(CBS) solves this problem. CBS is an optimal and complete
two level algorithm that ﬁnds individual paths at the low-level and coordinate these plans at the
high-level to avoid conﬂict. If conﬂicts are encountered constraints are put on the low-level search
and a new path is found. In this way CBS starts by solving a relaxation and gradually steps closer
to the original problem until a valid solution is found. CBS has several ﬂaws that makes the
algorithm have difﬁculties solving certain kinds of problems. Despite this CBS has worked as a
great framework on top of which more advanced algorithms have been build. Several of these
have been examined. The ﬁrst of which was Meta-Agent CBS(MA-CBS) which is able to merge
agents into meta-agents moving the problem of coordinating tightly coupled agents to the low-
level. The second extension was Improved CBS(ICBS) which solves three different weaknesses
of CBS: 1) bad initial paths, 2) redoing a lot of work at the high-level and 3) choosing the right
conﬂict to solve. Next CBS with Heuristic(CBSH) was examined. CBSH introduce an admissible
heuristic at the high-level enabling the search to be more informed. The last version of CBS
introduced was Enhanced CBS(ECBS). Where all the other version improve on CBS while keeping
the optimality and completeness ECBS sacriﬁces optimality in order to be able to solve larger
problems. ECBS use a search technique called focal search on both the high- and low-level. This
is used to guarantee that ECBS is within w of the optimal.
In the second part of the thesis MAPF with extra rules(MAPF+) was introduced. MAPF+ is a new
problem expanding on MAPF allowing more ﬂexibility in the applications it can model. As the
MAPF problem MAPF+ is the problem of moving a series of agents from their starting locations
to their goal locations within a shared area. In contrast to MAPF MAPF+ is deﬁned on a directed
graph such that each action that can be preformed is represented by a unique edge. This is utilised
by rules restricting movement during the low-level search and rules restricting movement patterns
with multiple agents. Several examples of both types of rules are given. The conﬂicts arising
from violation of the multi-agent rules are analysed. k-simple and k-complete branching was
introduced as two different ways of solving the conﬂicts between agents in a MAPF+ problem. The
optimal and complete algorithm Rule-Based Search(RBS) was then introduced which was able to
solve MAPF+ problems. RBS can use different branching technique without loosing optimality
and completeness. More advanced rules are then analysed and it was shown that RBS can solve
problems including most of them.
Lastly the problem MAPF with Help(MAPF-H) was introduced. This problem is also a generalisa-
tion of the MAPF problem however in this version agents need to assist each other. A set of rules
is given that governing which agents need help with which actions and who can supply this help.
These rules are also ﬂexible allowing for a variety of different scenarios like modelling the game
Sokuban or a problem similar to the hospital domain from the DTU course 02285. It was then
attempted to solve MAPF-H using a CBS style solver however through this multiple problems
were found and it was concluded that this style of algorithm is not suited for solving this kind of
problem.
44
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:52==
8
Future Research
This thesis opens op for many possible research project. Some of them are testing various tech-
niques introduced while others are trying to combine existing algorithms with RBS.
Test usefulness of corridors and roundabouts: In section 4.4 the category of restiction rules
called corridors was introduced. This rule can potentially help with solving maps with narrow
corridors like warehouse maps. An other use for this type of rule is a roundabout where agents can
move in a circle in order to maximise throughput. An interesting project is to see if these scenarios
can beneﬁt from the extra rules or if they just make the problem more difﬁcult to solve.
Comparing branching techniques In section 4.6 it was proven that no matter which set of si-
multaneous conﬂicts C was chosen every valid solution was permitted in at least on of the sets of
constraints in S(C). Based on the k-simple and k-complete branching was introduced. Testing
which one is most effective in different scenarios and which values of k is best is a clear next step,
along with potentially ﬁnding better branching techniques. This also includes MAPF+ problems
where SM(R) > 2 such that g(C) is a hypergraph.
Applying extentions for CBS to RBS: The weaknesses of CBS mentioned in section 3.5 are
inherited by RBS. Many of these problems are more or less solved by the extension to CBS ex-
amined in section 3.6. It is interesting to see if these can be applied to RBS. Some improvements
that would be good are the bypasses and the choice of conﬂicts. Combining both of these with the
conﬂict involvement graph has potential for solving multiple cardinal conﬂicts at once or ﬁnding
multiple bypasses at once.
Solve MAPF-H: In this thesis it was shown that the CBS framework is not well suited for solving
MAPF-H problems. A major reason for this is that the high-level is solving conﬂicts and planing
help. This results in agents having to replan because the help they have planed is not required any
more. A way to solve this could be to use a three-level algorithm like [Gre+21]. In this work they
try to solve the Cooperative MAPF(co-MAPF) problem where two sets of robots have to work
together to accomplish tasks. In order to do this they have to meet at a point on the map which is
planed by the third level of the algorithm. A three-level algorithm could similarly be developed
such that planing the help and resolving the conﬂicts are handled by a different layers.
Multi-Agent Meeting problem: In the multi agent meeting problem the goal is to ﬁnd an optimal
meeting location for a set of agent and ﬁnd paths for each one to the meeting location [Atz+20;
Atz+21]. This problem is related to MAPF because they are both problems with agents moving in
a shared space. Techniques form this ﬁeld might be beneﬁcial in solving MAPF-H.
Additional constraints: Each set of constraints in S(C) only constrain each agent from traversing
a single edge at one time step. An alternative could be to constrain each agent with multiple
constraints. There are two options: 1) add additional constraints for the same time step and 2) add
additional constraints over multiple time steps. The ﬁrst option would make sure the conﬂict does
not "shift" to a neighbouring space, while the second option avoids a similar conﬂict happening at
another time step. For classical MAPF several techniques have been developed to predict future
conﬂicts and avoid them [Li+19b; Li+20b; Zha+20] and adapting these methods to MAPF+ could
lead to signiﬁcantly less conﬂicts and nodes in CT.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
45
==PAGE:53==
46
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[Atz+21]
Dor Atzmon et al. “Conﬂict-Free Multi-Agent Meeting”. In: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling. Vol. 31. 2021, pp. 16–
24.
[Atz+20]
Dor Atzmon et al. “Multi-Directional Heuristic Search”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-
Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-20. Ed. by Chris-
tian Bessiere. Main track. International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Organization, July 2020, pp. 4062–4068. DOI: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/562. URL:
https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2020/562.
[Bar+14]
Max Barer et al. “Suboptimal variants of the conﬂict-based search algorithm for the
multi-agent pathﬁnding problem”. In: Seventh Annual Symposium on Combinatorial
Search. Citeseer. 2014.
[Boy+15]
Eli Boyarski et al. “ICBS: Improved conﬂict-based search algorithm for multi-agent
pathﬁnding”. In: Twenty-fourth international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence.
2015.
[VK15]
Michal áp, Ji Voknek, and Alexander Kleiner. “Complete decentralized method for
on-line multi-robot trajectory planning in well-formed infrastructures”. In: Proceed-
ings of the international conference on automated planning and scheduling. Vol. 25.
1. 2015.
[DS08]
Kurt Dresner and Peter Stone. “A multiagent approach to autonomous intersection
management”. In: Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research 31 (2008), pp. 591–656.
[Fel+18]
Ariel Felner et al. Adding Heuristics to Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Path
Finding. 2018. URL: https://aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICAPS/ICAPS18/
paper/view/17735.
[Fel+12]
Ariel Felner et al. “Partial-expansion A* with selective node generation”. In: Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Vol. 26. 1. 2012.
[Gre+21]
Nir Greshler et al. “Cooperative Multi-Agent Path Finding: Beyond Path Planning and
Collision Avoidance”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10993 (2021).
[HNR68]
Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths”. In: IEEE transactions on Systems Science and
Cybernetics 4.2 (1968), pp. 100–107.
[Ho+19]
Florence Ho et al. “Multi-agent path ﬁnding for UAV trafﬁc management: Robotics
track”. In: (2019).
[LRK21]
Jiaoyang Li, Wheeler Ruml, and Sven Koenig. EECBS: A Bounded-Suboptimal Search
for Multi-Agent Path Finding. 2021. arXiv: 2010.01367 [cs.AI].
[Li+19a]
Jiaoyang Li et al. “Improved Heuristics for Multi-Agent Path Finding with Conﬂict-
Based Search.” In: IJCAI. 2019, pp. 442–449.
[Li+20a]
Jiaoyang Li et al. “Lifelong multi-agent path ﬁnding in large-scale warehouses”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07371 (2020).
[Li+20b]
Jiaoyang Li et al. “New techniques for pairwise symmetry breaking in multi-agent
path ﬁnding”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Plan-
ning and Scheduling. Vol. 30. 2020, pp. 193–201.
[Li+19b]
Jiaoyang Li et al. “Symmetry-breaking constraints for grid-based multi-agent path
ﬁnding”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Vol. 33.
01. 2019, pp. 6087–6095.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
47
==PAGE:55==
[Ma+18]
Hang Ma et al. “Searching with Consistent Prioritization for Multi-Agent Path Find-
ing”. In: CoRR abs/1812.06356 (2018). arXiv: 1812.06356. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1812.06356.
[Mor+16]
R. Morris et al. “Planning, Scheduling and Monitoring for Airport Surface Opera-
tions”. In: AAAI Workshop: Planning for Hybrid Systems. 2016.
[PT11]
Jesse Paquette and Taku Tokuyasu. “Hypergraph visualization and enrichment statis-
tics: how the EGAN paradigm facilitates organic discovery from Big Data”. In: Hu-
man Vision and Electronic Imaging XVI. Vol. 7865. International Society for Optics
and Photonics. 2011, 78650E.
[SS20]
Oren Salzman and Roni Stern. “Research challenges and opportunities in multi-agent
path ﬁnding and multi-agent pickup and delivery problems”. In: Proceedings of the
19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 2020,
pp. 1711–1715.
[Sha+15]
Guni Sharon et al. “Conﬂict-based search for optimal multi-agent pathﬁnding”. In:
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 219 (2015), pp. 40–66. ISSN: 0004-3702. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.artint.2014.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0004370214001386.
[Sha+13]
Guni Sharon et al. “The increasing cost tree search for optimal multi-agent pathﬁnd-
ing”. In: Artiﬁcial Intelligence 195 (2013), pp. 470–495. ISSN: 0004-3702. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0004370212001543.
[Sta10]
Trevor Scott Standley. “Finding Optimal Solutions to Cooperative Pathﬁnding Prob-
lems”. In: AAAI. 2010.
[Ste+19]
Roni Stern et al. Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding: Deﬁnitions, Variants, and Benchmarks.
2019. arXiv: 1906.08291 [cs.AI].
[WC11]
Glenn Wagner and Howie Choset. “M*: A complete multirobot path planning al-
gorithm with performance bounds”. In: 2011 IEEE/RSJ international conference on
intelligent robots and systems. IEEE. 2011, pp. 3260–3267.
[YR15]
Jingjin Yu and Daniela Rus. “Pebble motion on graphs with rotations: Efﬁcient fea-
sibility tests and planning algorithms”. In: Algorithmic foundations of robotics XI.
Springer, 2015, pp. 729–746.
[Zha+20]
Han Zhang et al. “Multi-agent path ﬁnding with mutex propagation”. In: Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling. Vol. 30.
2020, pp. 323–332.
48
Conﬂict-Based Search for Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding
