==PAGE:1==
Blockchain in Remote Self
Attestation for Making Trust
Decisions in IoT Peer-to-Peer
Networks
Sigurd F. J. J. Ankergård, s164443
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In the current state of the Internet-of-Things there is a lack of security. The
number of deployed devices grow rapidly, leaving a lot of open targets for mali-
cious actors. At the same time these IoT devices become smaller, more resource-
constrained and more autonomous. IoT devices have already been the center of
major attacks, such as the Mirai botnet.
As IoT devices become responsible for more safety critical operations and sen-
sitive data, cheap and lightweight methods for protecting these device is an
increasing research area.
The most promising technique for adding security to these devices is remote
attestation. Remote attestation is a method for detecting malware presence on
devices. The advantage of remote attestation is that it is lightweight and have
minimal hardware requirements. Even though a lot of research has been done
within remote attestation, there is still a lack of eﬃcient, publicly veriﬁable and
decentralized protocols.
This thesis proposes a design and implementation of a publicly veriﬁable and
decentralized remote attestation protocol utilizing blockchain technology. Using
the blockchain to store the attestation results allow them to be veriﬁed by
anyone with access to the blockchain. Furthermore, the blockchain provides a
historical ledger of attestation results with a strong guarantee of integrity. The
historical ledger allows the proposed protocol to decide the trustworthiness of
devices based on their entire attestation history. The trust decision is used to
establish a group session key amongst trustworthy devices, allowing them to
work together securely.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
I den nuværende status af Internet-of-Things er der en mangel på sikkerhed.
Antallet af enheder i brug stiger hurtigt, hvilket give mange mulige mål for
ondsindet aktører. Samtidigt bliver disse IoT enheder mindre, mere resurse be-
grænset og mere automatiseret. Der har allerede været store angreb mod IoT
enheder som for eksempel Mirai botnet.
Efterhånden som IoT enheder bliver ansvarlige for sikkerheds kritiske operatio-
ner og følsom data, er billige letvægts metoder til at bestykke disse enheder et
voksende forskningsområde.
Fjernattestering er den mest lovende metode til at tilføje sikkerhed til disse en-
heder. Fjernattestering er en metode til at opdage malware på enheder. Forde-
len ved fjernattestering er at det er en letvægts metode med minimale hardware
krav. Selvom der er blevet lavet meget forskning i fjernattestering, er der stadig-
væk mangel på eﬃktive, oﬀentlig kontrollerbare og decentraliseret protokoller.
Denne kandidat afhandling foreslår et design og en implementering af en of-
fentlig kontrollerbar og decentraliseret fjernattesterings protokol, som bruger
blockchain teknologi. Ved at bruge blockchain til at opbevarer attesterings re-
sultaterne, kan de blive kontrolleret af alle som har adgang til blockchainen.
Desuden bidrager blockchainen med en historik over attesterings resultater med
stærke integritets garantier. Historikken tillader den foreslåede protokol at be-
stemme enheders troværdighed baseret på hele deres attesterings historik. den-
ne troværdighedsbeslutning bliver brugt til at etablere en gruppe sessions nøgle
mellem troværdige enheder, sådan så de kan arbejde sikkert sammen.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, 18-June-2021
Sigurd F. J. J. Ankergård, s164443
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Nicola Dragoni for his guidance throughout
this thesis.
I would also like to give a special thanks to my co-supervisor Edlira Dushku
for her invaluable feedback and discussions.
The amount and quality of the
feedback and discussions have been instrumental for my work.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
ix
List of Abbreviations
RA
Remote Attestation
PRNG
Pseudo Random Number Generator
IoT
Internet of Things
TPM
Trusted Platform Module
TCB
Trusted Computing Base
ROM
Read-Only Memory
MPU
Memory Protection Unit
RTC
Real Time Block
ROP
Return Oriented Programming
DoS
Denial of Service
DDoS
Distributed Denial of Service
pk
Public key
API
Application Programming Interface
cli
Command line interface
PoX
Proof-of-X
PoW
Proof-of-Work
PoA
Proof-of-Authority
PoS
Proof-of-Stake
PoET
Proof-of-Elapsed-Time
PoC
Proof-of-Capacity
PoB
Proof-of-Burn
PoI
Proof-of-Importance
BFT
Byzantine Fault Tolerance
PBFT
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
CFT
Crash Fault Tolerance
EC
Exclusion Criteria
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
7
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Self Triggering Attestation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Distributed Attestation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Swarm Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Remote Attestation using Block Chain . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Consensus Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Protocol Proposal
27
3.1
Idea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Decentralized Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
History Based Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
3.1.3
Self-Triggering Attestation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.4
Self-Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.5
Group Session Key . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.6
Hardware Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.7
The Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.1
Remote Attestation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2
Blockchain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.3
History Based Trust Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2.4
Establishing Session Key
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.5
Block Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Implementation
47
4.1
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.1
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.2
Diﬃe-Hellman Key Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Transaction Processor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.1
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.2
Diﬃe-Hellman Group Key Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Discussion
53
5.1
Security Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.1.1
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.1.2
Group Session Key . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Performance Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Comparative Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Conclusion and Future Work
67
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:15==
List of Figures
1.1
Drone Peer System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Merkle Tree structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Remote Attestation Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Remote Attestation State Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
State Machine - Block Veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Trust Score Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Block format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:16==
List of Tables
2.1
Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Consensus Algorithms type & requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Consensus Algorithms eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain Comparison . . . .
61
5.2
Remote Attestation schemes summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With the rapid evolution of the Internet-of-Things (IoT), many devices get con-
nected to the internet. These devices are continuously becoming smaller, more
resource-constrained and more autonomous. The resource-constrained nature
of IoT devices has caused security issues, enabling malicious actors to take con-
trol over devices easily. The malicious actors use the devices to perform other
malicious attacks like Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, as was the
case of the Mirai botnet.
As IoT devices become more and more autonomous, like drones, they start
performing many tasks without human intervention and working together as
groups in remote locations. Furthermore, IoT devices are becoming responsible
for more safety critical operations and sensitive information which is crucial to
protect against malicious actors. While the security of IoT devices are becoming
increasingly important, both the industry and the consumers are unwilling to
pay the increased cost of expensive security solutions. Thus, lightweight and
cheaper security measures are required.
Due to their resource-constraints, these devices cannot be protected by conven-
tional means, which is where remote attestation becomes an option. Remote
attestation is a lightweight security method that guarantees the integrity of
resource-constrained IoT devices. Remote attestation does not prevent attacks
from occurring or malicious actors from taking over the devices, but aims to
detect malware presence when a device is compromised. Remote attestation
is usually classiﬁed into three categories software-based, hardware-based and
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
hybrid, based on hardware requirements. The main beneﬁt of software-based
remote attestations, is that they do not require any special hardware. However,
they require strong adversarial assumptions and do not provide secure storage
for keys or code. Hardware-based attestation schemes are secure, but require
expensive special hardware to provide a root of trust for the device and the
attestation, e.g., Trusted Platform Module (TPM). Since the special hardware
is expensive, deploying it on a large number of IoT devices is very expensive.
To tackle this drawback, hybrid attestations has the advantage. Hybrid attes-
tation schemes work with minimal hardware components and assumptions, e.g.,
Read-Only Memory (ROM) and Memory Protection Unit (MPU). These mini-
mal hardware components are much cheaper than the specialized hardware like
TPM, thus not increasing the cost of adding security to devices. State-of-the-art
RA schemes rely mostly on hybrid architectures.
Even hybrid remote attestation can be put in diﬀerent categories static or con-
trol ﬂow, distributed, self-triggering and swarm to mention a few.
In static attestation a hash of the memory content and conﬁgurations of the
devices is made, which can then be checked by anyone who knows the cor-
rect content and conﬁgurations. Control ﬂow attestation uses program graphs
or control ﬂow graphs to trace the execution ﬂow of the running devices. By
tracing the execution ﬂow, the attestation can detect if the device does any un-
intended operations and dynamic memory, e.g., RAM, which cannot be attested
by static methods.
Distributed remote attestation schemes is a category of schemes which does not
require a more powerful trusted Veriﬁer to check the attestation results. Nor-
mally devices produce some integrity proof (attestation result) which is then
veriﬁed by a trusted Veriﬁer who has the expected results. In distributed at-
testation the devices attest each other. In the context of this thesis project,
distributed attestations is when devices attest each other, while decentralized
attestation is used as a broader term for attestations which does not use a
trusted Veriﬁer.
In a typical attestation paradigm, devices are attested when they are challenged
by the Veriﬁer or another device. Instead of following this challenge-response
protocol, self-triggering attestations devices automatically trigger the attesta-
tion based on a timer, produce the evidence and then send it to the Veriﬁer.
Swarm attestation is a subcategory of remote attestation that aims to attest
several devices at the same time. It is concerned with swarms of devices in a
network, which are all attested during the same attestation, aggregating the re-
sults to send back to the Veriﬁer. The goal of swarm attestations is to increase
eﬃciency by attesting all devices and collecting the results into one result, rather
than attesting and checking one device at a time.
Another technology making its way into the world of IoT is blockchain. Blockchain
was ﬁrst introduced with Bitcoin [Nak12] as a immutable distributed ledger
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Problem Statement Research Objectives
3
for transactions of a crypto currency.
Since its introduction blockchain has
grown to be used in many other applications and is now ﬁnding its way into
IoT. The problem with using blockchain in IoT has been that the early public
blockchain architectures have been very ineﬃcient which is not a good ﬁt with
the resource-constrained devices. However, as researched in [MT20a] the new
private blockchain architectures are much more eﬃcient and new and improved
consensus protocols make them even more eﬃcient. This has lead to research
start being done on using blockchain in IoT, since it starts being eﬃcient enough
to use in the resource-constrained devices.
1.1
Problem Statement Research Objectives
In a resource-constrained IoT environment, security has been lacking behind.
To improve the security of IoT devices, remote attestation has been a promising
research area. It provides a simple way of verifying the devices behave as in-
tended. Another important part of the IoT environment is eﬃciency. Eﬃcient
protocols and algorithms are crucial for the lifetime extension of IoT devices,
which typically are resource constrained and run on batteries. Attesting devices
on every data request or interaction is ineﬃcient, since it often has to run the
attestation code and expensive cryptographic operations often.
Furthermore, IoT devices may be part of a swarm working together to complete
a task. This swarm may not be connected to a base station or trusted Veriﬁer.
However, IoT devices still have to be able to make trust decisions during their
interactions, to be able to verify the trustworthiness of the data received from
other devices. The trust decision could be based on a new remote attestation
result, which is ineﬃcient, or a stored result that must have a proof of integrity.
Making a trust decision based on one attestation result does not guarantee on
the device’s trustworthiness. It only provides evidence that the device was not
compromised at the time of attestation, but not how likely it is to be compro-
mised right after the attestation.
The state-of-the-art remote attestation schemes do not include an eﬃcient, pub-
licly veriﬁable, and distributed/decentralized scheme. The problem missing in
current state-of-the-art remote attestation is the combination of
• Publicly veriﬁable
• Decentralized, i.e., not needing a trusted Veriﬁer
• Making trust decision based on more than one remote attestation result
• Eﬃcient, e.g., not running attestation on every interaction with peers
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
For example, let us consider a system of drones working together to perform
a task, as shown in Figure 1.1. When the drones are working in some remote
locations, they might not have access to a trusted Veriﬁer or database. The
drones still need to communicate and trust the received location data to avoid
crashing into each other. If a malicious actor got some malicious code into one
of the drones, it could send false data to the surrounding drones and make them
crash into each other. Even within one of the drones, several components need
to trust the data collected from sensors elsewhere in the drone. For example,
the speed controller needs to trust the range sensor’s data. If the range sensor
sends false data saying the drone or object in front is much further away, then
the drone will not slow down and hit the drone or object in front, much closer
than the data indicated.
Figure 1.1: Drone Peer System
These peer devices need to trust the data they receive from each other, which
means it needs to be attested. However, not having a trusted Veriﬁer means
they have to attest themselves and share the result. The result should not be
changeable, since this would invalidate the result and make it untrustworthy
and useless. At the same time, the drones cannot stop all the time to respond
to attestation requests from nearby drones, and it is also a waste of resources
to perform attestation every few seconds on every data request.
This research problem has been addresses in a variety of ways in state-of-the-art
remote attestation schemes. This thesis project aims to address the following
research objectives.
1. Explore and investigate blockchain technology for a possible integration
with remote attestation in IoT devices.
2. Design and propose a blockchain based remote attestation protocol, that
enables publicly veriﬁability and decentralization of attestation results.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Contributions
5
3. Design of an approach which includes the history of attestations in the
proposed protocol.
4. Investigate the possibility of using the attestation history in enabling
trusted interactions between devices in an IoT network.
5. Demonstrate the feasibility of the solution through a proof-of-concept im-
plementation.
6. Perform a qualitative analysis of the proposed protocol.
1.2
Contributions
This Thesis proposes a novel remote attestation protocol that adopts blockchain
technology to make remote attestation publicly veriﬁable and decentralized. In-
stead of focusing on the actual attestation, its main focus is using the attestation
results for something more. The proposed protocol uses not only the latest at-
testation result(s), but the whole history of attestations to measure the trust of
the devices in the network. Using this history and trust measure, it establishes
a group session key among the trustworthy devices. In the protocol the attes-
tations are stored in such a way that they can keep being used, with a proof
of their integrity being preserved. With the group session key, devices do not
need to attest their peers every time they need to interact with them, rather
they need to establish a new key when the trust of the devices change. This
increases the eﬃciency as fewer attestations are required. The contributions of
this thesis project can be summarized as follows:
• The project provides a comprehensive literature review on the topics of
remote attestation and blockchain technology. Furthermore, it provides an
analysis and comparison of diﬀerent blockchain architectures and consen-
sus protocols, resulting in HyperLedger Sawtooth being selected optimal
choice.
• The project designs and implements a remote attestation protocol which
uses blockchain technology to make the attestation result publicly veriﬁ-
able and decentralized.
• The project enhances the proposed protocol by including the history of
attestations to decide the trustworthiness of devices based on their entire
historical evidence. In addition, this feature allows secure group session
key establishment which allow devices in the network to interact among
themselves.
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
• The project provides a successful implementation of the proposed protocol.
The protocol was implemented and tested with HyperLedger Sawtooth.
• The project provides a qualitative analysis of the proposed protocol with
respect to security, performance and in comparison to existing remote
attestation schemes.
1.3
Outline
The remainder of this thesis project is structured as follows. In Chapter 2 the
methodology for ﬁnding the related work is described in Section 2.1, after which
related work within remote attestation is presented and compared in Section
2.2, and blockchain architectures and consensus protocols are analyzed with
respect to performance and security in Section 2.3. Then the proposed protocol
is described in Chapter 3, starting with the idea in Section 3.1 and the more
detailed design in Section 3.2.
In Chapter 4 the realization of the proof of
concept implementation is described, together with compromises made to the
design. The proposed protocol is then discussed and analyzed with respect to
security, performance and compared to the existing remote attestation schemes
in Chapter 5. Finally the Thesis is concluded in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Related Work
2.1
Methodology
The methodology used to ﬁnd related work was mainly focused on snowballing.
This is due to familiarity with Remote Attestation through previous studies.
During previous studies mainly software-based remote attestation and some
surveys were studied. From the surveys [ACL+20, SL16, GS20] SEED [Ibr] was
identiﬁed as a relevant work. To ﬁnd more relevant remote attestation schemes,
both forward and backwards snowballing was done. This lead to the schemes
identiﬁed and described in Section 2.2. The following exclusion criteria where
used for ﬁltering relevant works.
• EC1: Not a remote attestation scheme.
• EC2: Not Swarm, Distributed or self triggering remote attestation scheme.
After snowballing to ﬁnd relevant remote attestation schemes a query was made
on DTU Findit1 to ﬁnd other schemes concerned with using blockchain in remote
attestation. The query string was (block-chain OR blockchain OR "block chain")
1https://ﬁndit.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:24==
8
Related Work
AND "remote attestation". The results where then selected by exclusion criteria
one, as well as
• EC3:
Not available online through DTU license.
• EC4:
Not in English.
This resulted in the three schemes described in Section 2.2.4.
Backwards snowballing involved checking the references of the articles, mainly
SEED. The references was also excluded based on the exclusion criteria. For
forward snowballing the articles where looked up on Scopus2 to ﬁnd any papers
citing the article, these where then checked based on the exclusion criteria.
To ﬁnd related work about the blockchain technology, the DAN [JS20] remote
attestation scheme using blockchain was used for snowballing. It referenced Hy-
perLedger Fabric [ABB+18], which is a well known blockchain platform. The
HyperLedger Fabric article was then used for further forwards and backwards
snowballing in order to identify more relevant work.
During forwards snow-
balling, using Scopus, 634 documents was found. The articles where selected
based on exclusion criteria three and four, as well as the following
• EC5:
Focused on speciﬁc area, e.g., supply chain or health care.
• EC6:
Not focused on security and/or performance of the technology.
• EC7:
Not concerned with or relevant in an IoT setting.
After reading abstracts, 15 surveys on the security and performance of the
blockchain technology in an IoT setting was selected. The surveys was used
to identify and describe the key relevant parts of the blockchain technology in
Section 2.3. Besides the surveys, 5 other papers about blockchain technologies
was identiﬁed through references and the websites of the diﬀerent platforms.
2.2
Remote Attestation
Remote attestation is a security mechanism that veriﬁes whether devices have
not been compromised or not. This can be done by either verifying the memory
content and conﬁgurations through static attestation, or by run-time attestation
2https://www-scopus-com.proxy.ﬁndit.dtu.dk
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Remote Attestation
9
using control ﬂow graphs to verify the program execution.
In general remote attestation is separated into three categories. These subcat-
egories are software-based, hardware-based and hybrid attestation.
Software
attestation does not rely on any special hardware components but instead uses
timing requirements to ensure the attestation code has not been tampered with.
The timing requirements are needed to detect if an adversary has tampered with
the attestation code. The timing requirements assumes that it adds a detectable
amount of time, when adding even a few lines of code, e.g., an if statement to
redirect the memory access. So if it takes the Prover longer than the expected
time to respond, then the attestation code may have been tampered with and
the attestation result cannot be trusted. Hardware attestation relies on spe-
cialized hardware components like Trusted Platform Moduls (TPM) to provide
a root of trust. However, the special hardware components are expensive and
are not considered feasible for IoT devices. Hybrid attestation only relies on
minimal additional hardware components, such as Read Only Memory (ROM)
and memory protection units (MPU). These hardware components are cheaper,
making them more suitable for an IoT setting.
In classic remote attestation shown in Figure 2.1, a trusted Veriﬁer challenges
an untrusted device, called Prover, which responds with evidence of its current
state. The Veriﬁer computes the possible valid responses, since it has all valid
conﬁgurations stored, it then checks the evidence against the known legitimate
states, to see if the device has been compromised. The evidence is usually a
hash of memory content and conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:26==
10
Related Work
Figure 2.1: Remote Attestation
The state-of-the-art remote attestation has branched out from this classic remote
attestation in a few diﬀerent ways. First, of, research has been done in remote
attestation without the need for the trusted Veriﬁer through distributed and
self attestation schemes. Currently the main direction for remote attestation
research is swarm attestation. It is being researched in order to attest a group
of devices more eﬃciently than one device at a time. Swarm attestation includes
areas such as highly mobile swarm attestation and distributed schemes.
2.2.1
Self Triggering Attestation
Self triggering attestation are attestation schemes which does not follow the
classic challenge-response protocol. Instead of Provers responding to a challenge
from a Veriﬁer, be it a trusted base station or another device, it triggers based
on a timer. When the timer triggers, then an attestation result is produced,
which is either sent to a Veriﬁer or stored until requested by a Veriﬁer.
SEED [Ibr] is the ﬁrst non-interactive attestation protocol.
Previous attes-
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Remote Attestation
11
tation protocols have involved a trusted Veriﬁer or another device sending a
challenge to a Prover, which then responds with a proof of its state. The tra-
ditional challenge-response protocols are considered ineﬃcient or susceptible to
DoS attacks. In SEED, the Prover makes the proof based on a timer, that is at
a certain predetermined time. The time of attestation should be random and is
therefore determined from a pseudo random number generator, for which both
the Prover and the Veriﬁer have the seed. The Prover uses a key to hash the
proof for authenticity, includes the attestation time for freshness and the proof
for state veriﬁcation, and sends it to the Veriﬁer. The Veriﬁer then decides if
the Prover can be trusted based on the three included pieces of evidence. Since
the number and time of attestation is not determined to challenges, it is resilient
to DoS attacks.
ERASMUS [CIT18] is an attestation protocol that aims to solve the problem
of on-demand attestation requiring a device to stop normal operations at in-
opportune times to perform attestation. This is done by devices using reliable
read-only clocks to schedule the attestation time. The idea is that the attes-
tation can be scheduled at diﬀerent and opportune times for each device. The
devices then store the attestation result to send it when the Veriﬁer requests
the result, without having to stop normal operations to produce the proof.
2.2.2
Distributed Attestation
Distributed attestation schemes tries to overcome the need for a trusted Veriﬁer,
e.g., a base station, to handle the attestation. Instead devices in the network
play either the role of the Prover or the Veriﬁer. As such, devices in the network
attest each other.
SAFEd [VTCZ19] is a distributed remote attestation protocol. Instead of hav-
ing a trusted Veriﬁer challenging one or more devices, a device can assume the
role of Veriﬁer. When a device assumes the Veriﬁer role, it challenges another
device, which is then the Prover. The Prover responds with a hash of its soft-
ware state. Once the Veriﬁer receives the response, it collects a proof from the
network to compare the response with. During deployment when devices join
the network they distribute proofs of their valid state among the other devices
in the network. When the Veriﬁer has collected the proofs, it uses a voting
scheme to decide which proof is valid and uses that to verify the response from
the Prover. The distribution and collection of proofs in the network is done
using a distributed hash table in a ring topology overlay.
DIAT [ABB+] is a remote attestation scheme for autonomous devices. It does
not use a trusted Veriﬁer, instead it allows devices to play the role of either
Veriﬁer or Prover in interactions between devices. The idea is when the au-
tonomous devices work together to perform a task, the exchanged data is at-
==PAGE:28==
12
Related Work
tested. As such it can be trusted by the devices receiving and relying on the
provided data. When a device request data from another device, it also sends a
nonce for freshness. The device receiving the request, responds with the data,
an integrity proof (i.e. the attestation result) and a signature over data, the in-
tegrity proof and the nonce. With the response the requesting device can verify
the received data can be trusted.
US-AID [IT18] is a protocol where devices attest their neighbours. Besides
normal attestation to detect software adversaries, it also includes a heartbeat
attestation to detect if a device has been oﬄine for a non-negligible amount of
time. This is in order to detect hardware based attacks, which is assumed to
take the device oﬄine for a period longer than a threshold allowed. The way it
attest its neighbours, requires the devices to either have the same conﬁguration
and software state or to store locally a list of hashes of valid states of its neigh-
bours.
ESDRA [KFY+19] is a many-to-one swarm attestation protocol. Instead of
having a trusted Veriﬁer, it has the system owner O choose one or more cluster
heads. The cluster heads form a spanning tree from its neighbours. Each device
attest its neighbours and the results are aggregated back to the cluster head.
Furthermore, it assigns a credit value to the devices, which indicated how trust
worthy they are. The higher the credit value a device has, the more value is
given to its reported attestation results. Attestations are initiated either on a
timer or when a devices credit level drops below a set threshold value.
PASTA [KK19] is a distributed remote attestation protocol. Many Provers
come together to attest each other by mean of generated tokens. The tokens
are generated using Schnorr multisignatures. The generated tokens attest all
the devices that have contributed to the generation of the token. The result
of the attestation is publicly veriﬁable. Besides containing proof of the devices
software state, the tokens also include timestamps to detect hardware adver-
saries, which are assumed to take the devices oﬄine for a non-negligible amount
of time. Like SEDA [ABI+15], PASTA uses a spanning tree to propagate the
attestation challenge and aggregate the results. The spanning tree is however,
initiated from an initiator device, rather than a trusted Veriﬁer. During the
attestation, each device attests its immediate neighbours, while the token is
attestation proof for all the participating devices.
2.2.3
Swarm Attestation
Swarm attestation is focused on attesting a group of devices eﬃciently. This
done by aggregating the attestation results of the devices. The aggregation is
done in diﬀerent ways to increase security against hardware attacks or increase
performance.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Remote Attestation
13
SEDA [ABI+15] is the ﬁrst swarm attestation scheme. It has two phases, where
the ﬁrst phase is oﬄine and the second is online. During the oﬄine phase the
devices are initialized with the required information and are registered. The
online phase is where the actual attestation takes place. During the attestation,
each device is attested individually, but the results are aggregated into one report
which is returned to the trusted Veriﬁer. The aggregation of the attestation
results into a single report is what makes SEDA for eﬃcient for attesting swarms,
when compared to protocols where the Veriﬁer attest each device one at a time.
The aggregation is done by making a spanning tree of the swarm, where each
node is a device and it is connected to its neighbours. The attestation request
is sent down through the tree. When a device receives the attestation request
it forwards it to its child nodes. Each device then returns the result of its own
attestation together with its child nodes attestation results to its parent node.
The self attestation is done by each device being initialized with a hash of its
valid conﬁguration.
SANA [ACI+16] improves upon SEDA by using an Multi-signature scheme to
aggregate the results of the attestations. This allows the intermediate nodes to
not be trusted as each individual result is signed by the device it self and the
signatures are aggregated with the result aggregation. Like SEDA it also uses
a spanning tree to pass the attestation request to the children and aggregate
the results back up until it eventually reaches the trusted Veriﬁer. The way
SANA uses the multi-signature scheme also makes it publicly veriﬁable. That
is, anyone with the aggregate public key can verify the attestation result. This
means it is up to the network and attestation conﬁguration to control who may
have access to the public key. The aggregate public key is computed from the
public keys of every device which signed the message with its private key, by a
simple product of the keys. This makes it simple to verify the result, as long as
one has access to all the public keys.
LISA [CERT17] presents two swarm attestation protocols. One protocol runs
synchronously and the other asynchronously. Furthermore, it presents a measure
for Quality of Swarm Attestation (QoSA). The diﬀerent QoSA values depend on
how much information is gained from the attestation result. In the asynchronous
version, when a device receives an attestation request it forwards the message to
its descendants, but does not wait to aggregate the result. Instead it returns the
result of its own attestation right away. When it receives an attestation result
from a descendant, it just forwards the result to its own ancestor. As such,
each result is returned to the Veriﬁer when they are ready. In the synchronous
version, each device wait of the results of its children and aggregates the results
into a single report.
PADS [ACL18] also uses self attestation to attest each device. It then uses a
consensus algorithm so that each device has the same view of the swarms state.
The Veriﬁer can, at anytime, ask any device, in the network, for the state of
the swarm without having to wait for the every device to compute a response.
The time interval between attestations is done on the devices by a scheduler
==PAGE:30==
14
Related Work
with a real time clock. PADS is a protocols that supports highly dynamic and
unstructured networks.
SALAD [Gre22] is also a swarm attestation protocol using self attestation.
But in this protocol the attestation is initiated by the trusted Veriﬁer. The
devices attest themselves and send the result to all neighbours. Every device
then keeps a copy of the attestation result of all the devices in the swarm. This
is done to allow more dynamic swarm topology, where a spanning tree cannot
be used to propagate the result. SALAD includes two ways of aggregating the
attestation results. Where one is focused on reducing the storage consumption
of the reports and the other is focused on reducing the communications overhead
by minimizing the size of the transmitted attestation report.
SARA [DRC+20] uses vector clocks and the asynchronous publish/subscribe
paradigm commonly used in IoT. The trusted Veriﬁer sends the challenge to the
publisher in a distributed IoT service network. The publisher computes its own
attestation evidence and publishes it along with its data. When the subscriber
receives the data and attestation proof, it produces its own attestation proof. It
hashes its own proof with the proof of the publisher and sends it to the Veriﬁer.
The Veriﬁer then checks both proofs. Using the vector clock, the Veriﬁer can
detect if a compromised publisher has aﬀected an uncompromised subscriber,
in which case the result or work of the subscriber cannot be trusted. The idea
is that the whole chain of interactions, in the distributed service, is veriﬁed, not
just the devices individually.
DARPA [IDS+] builds on SEDA with a heartbeat protocol to detect hardware
adversaries. DARPA relies on a now common assumption, that hardware attacks
take the device oﬄine for a non-negligible amount of time.
In DARPA the
devices use a timer to determine when to send the heartbeat message, but also
sends it when it receives a heartbeat from a neighbour. The heartbeats are
collected into a single report which can be collected by the trusted Veriﬁer at
a later time.
SCAPI [KBG+17] improves on DARPA to make it more eﬃcient.
SCAPI
reduces the number of messages required by DARPA by periodically updating
a session key. A leader initiates the update and distributes it to its neighbours,
which then propagate it through the network. For devices to receive the updated
session key, they need to authenticate with the precious session key. The update
is done often enough that devices which have been oﬄine for a non-negligible
amount of time, due to a hardware attack, will miss an update. If a device
misses a session key update, it will be unable to authenticate during the next
update, eﬀectively removing it from the network.
WISE [AWC] aims to improve the eﬃciency of swarm attestations by utilizing
machine learning to select a subset of devices in the network to attest.
It
selects the devices based on their attestation history, from which it decides
which devices are most likely to be compromised. The attestation is initiated
by a trusted Veriﬁer which also runs the machine learning to determine what
devices to attest.
The attestation history kept by WISE is a simple list of
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Remote Attestation
15
boolean values, indicating passed or failed attestations.
2.2.4
Remote Attestation using Block Chain
Using blockchain in remote attestation is a fairly new area of research. Not a
lot of work has been done in this area. The three remote attestation schemes
presented here are the only ones that have been found. Blockchain technology
focuses on decentralization and might prove useful for big IoT networks with
many peer devices working together.
BARRET [BNXT19] aims to mitigate computational denial of service attacks
by utilizing an Ethereum block chain. It works by forcing the Veriﬁer to pay a
computational fee in order to send an attestation request. The fee imposed is
a mining fee, that is mining a block for the block chain. Since Veriﬁers have
to pay this fee, they cannot send thousands of (valid) attestation requests to
a Prover, eﬀectively preventing it from doing normal operations. The protocol
is setup to work with any remote attestation scheme. Furthermore, the IoT
devices do not run any heavy blockchain operations. In the protocol, a Veri-
ﬁer sends and attestation request to the blockchain. The attestation request
if forwarded to the Prover by the blockchain smart contract. Once the Prover
receives the request, it performs its attestation and submit the result to the
blockchain, as well as sending it to the initiating Veriﬁer. The Veriﬁer then
checks the result and submits the result of the veriﬁcation to the blockchain. In
BARRET, there are three types of participants. All of them have an Ethereum
account, but the Prover devices and the light-node Veriﬁers do not keep a copy
of the ledger or do any of the mining. Instead this is only done by full-node
Veriﬁers which are running on more powerful machines. Since the attestation
request, the evidence from the Prover and the result of the attestation is stored
in the blockchain, other Veriﬁers are able to detect if a Veriﬁer is behaving
maliciously and posting false results. BARRET uses the Ethereum blockchain
platform, which is a public blockchain using a proof-of-work consensus algo-
rithm. It also uses trusted Veriﬁers to check the response of the Prover.
TM-COIN [PK17] is a hardware-based remote attestation scheme utilizing
blockchain to store the attestation results. It uses the ARM TrustZone hard-
ware component. Instead of attesting the software state or the data handling of
the devices, it instead attest the Trusted Computing Base (TCB). The TCB is
where the sensed data comes from, so attesting the TCB also veriﬁes the data
can be trusted. In still involves a Veriﬁer challenging a Prover, but instead of
just sending the evidence to the Veriﬁer, it is stored in the blockchain. The
Veriﬁer can then at any point in time check the blockchain to see if a devices is
trustworthy. The scheme requires miners to verify the attestation and produce
the proof of work for the blockchain, to then add the attestation result to the
==PAGE:32==
16
Related Work
blockchain. Instead of using an existing blockchain platform, TM-COIN uses its
own blockchain architecture, which is a public blockchain using proof-of-work
(PoW) as the consensus algorithm. It is not a fully decentralized system, since
the miners are still responsible for both doing the PoW, as well as verifying the
remote attestation response.
DAN [JS20] uses a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) to provide a root of trust.
As such it is also a hardware based attestation scheme. It puts devices into
clusters called organizations. Each organization has a number of peer nodes re-
sponsible for interactions with the blockchain. Several organization may share
a blockchain. It still has a consumer or Veriﬁer challenge a device to trigger
attestation on that device, but mention the possibility of using self triggering
attestation.
The peer node is then responsible for adding the result to the
blockchain. DAN uses the HyperLedger Fabric for the blockchain functional-
ity.
In their proof of concept implementation the blockchain operations are
performed by peer nodes, which are containers running on consumer desktops.
However, they suggest to have the blockchain operations run in the cloud in a
real world scenario. They suggest to not have the blockchain operations run on
the devices due to the resource constraints within IoT. It mentions having sev-
eral Veriﬁers attest devices, for a more advanced trust decision. Furthermore,
in DAN the consumer challenges a producer and then waits for the attestation
result. This means it does not diﬀer from normal attestation, except for how
and where the attestation result is stored.
RA scheme
Public/Private
Consensus
Blockchain
RA
Decentralized
BARRET
Public
PoW
Ethereum
Any
No
TM-COIN
Public
PoW
Own
Hardware
No
DAN
Private
PBFT
HyperLedger
Fabric
Hardware
No
Table 2.1: Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain
Table 2.1 shows an overview of the three remote attestation schemes utilizing
blockchain technology. It shows that two of them, BARRET and TM-COIN,
uses public blockchains with Proof-of-Work as the consensus algorithm. While
DAN uses a private blockchain with Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance as the
consensus algorithm. Furthermore, TM-COIN and DAN uses specialized hard-
ware components in their solutions, to provide a root of trust. While BARRET
abstract away from the remote attestation used and hardware needed. All three
schemes are not truly decentralized. This is due to the fact that they still rely
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Blockchain
17
on trusted Veriﬁers to verify attestation response and/or super nodes to han-
dle blockchain interactions. As such, devices in the system are not truly self
suﬃcient peers.
2.3
Blockchain
Blockchain is a growing and developing technology, which was ﬁrst presented in
the Bitcoin whitepaper [Nak12]. The idea behind blockchain is to make trans-
actions between two parties which do not trust each other. The transactions are
stored in the blockchain, which is an immutable distributed database. Since it
is immutable, neither participating party can change the transaction after it has
been entered into the blockchain. The blockchain is kept secure and immutable
using cryptography. All transactions in a block is hashed into a Merkle Tree.
This is done by hashing each transaction, then hashing their hashes in pairs,
making a tree, where the root is dependent on the hash of every transaction in
the block, as shown in Figure 2.2. Changing just one transaction, changes the
hash for that transaction, which changes the hashes all the way to the root of
the tree. The transactions and the Merkle Tree is gathered together in blocks.
Figure 2.2: Merkle Tree structure
Each block contains the data, the Merkle Tree root hash and a block hash. Each
block also contains the hash of the previous block, thus pointing to it. The chain
starts with a genesis block, which is the initial block. The blockchain structure
is shown in Figure 2.3, which also shows that the genesis block does not contain
a previous hash or any transactions. Instead the genesis block contains some
initial information, deﬁned by the system setup. When blocks are added to
the chain, who blocks might be added at the same time by two diﬀerent par-
ticipants. This will cause the chain to fork. To handle this, blockchains only
consider the longest chain valid. This means the inconsistency will be resolved
when the next block is added after the chain has forked. The shorter invalid
==PAGE:34==
18
Related Work
Figure 2.3: Blockchain
fork will be discarded by all participants. To resolve which chain to continue on,
when the fork occurs, participants continue to add to the chain the ﬁrst chain
they consider valid.
2.3.1
Architectures
Within blockchain there are two main categories of architectures. These are
permissioned (private) and permissionless (public) blockchains.
In the pub-
lic blockchains anyone can join and participate in the chain.
In the private
blockchain, a security conﬁguration controls who can access the blockchain. The
private blockchains rely on public/private key architecture to control access to
the blockchain. While the public blockchains uses currency costs to prevent ma-
licious users from mounting DoS attacks against the blockchain. Besides being
public or private, the diﬀerent architectures mainly diﬀer in which consensus
protocols they use or support.
Many surveys has been done on diﬀerent blockchain architectures. [IM19] is
a comprehensive survey, where the authors categorise a number of blockchain
architectures. It gives an overview of their diﬀerences, as well as their supported
programming languages.
[VFB20] is a survey which takes a deeper look at the blockchain within the area
of IoT. It is focused on where and how the blockchain technology is used in IoT,
as well as the limitations of blockchain in regards to IoT.
Another survey which takes a look at blockchain technologies suitability in an
IoT setting is [BKLS20]. It takes a look at diﬀerent blockchain technologies and
their consensus protocols, considers their performance in order to evaluate their
suitability for use in IoT.
A survey on the performance of diﬀerent blockchains and versions of them is
carried out in [FGKM20]. It shows which consensus protocols are used, and test
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Blockchain
19
the diﬀerent platforms with diﬀerent network conﬁgurations. The bench mark-
ing done on the blockchain platforms is done on their throughput, transactions
per second, and their latency.
[RF20] is a comparative study of a few diﬀerent blockchain platforms. It mainly
compares diﬀerent HyperLedger platform, but compares them to two diﬀerent
database systems. It does not compare them to other prominent blockchain
systems like Ethereum or Bitcoin. It does the comparison with an IoT setting
in mind.
2.3.1.1
Bitcoin
The ﬁrst blockchain architecture was Bitcoin. It was ﬁrst presented in [Nak12].
The consensus algorithm used by Bitcoin is a proof-of-work (PoW) algorithm,
where miners try to solve a cryptographic puzzle. Once the puzzle has been
solved, the miner adds the block to the chain. To keep consistency between the
blockchains of all participants, the new block is transmitted to all participants
using a gossip protocol. The platform was ﬁrst presented as a virtual decentral-
ized currency, but has since evolved to support smart contracts, but still uses
the currency as a basis and as a fee for making transactions.
2.3.1.2
Ethereum
Like Bitcoin, Ethereum [Woo14] is a permissionless (public) blockchain architec-
ture. However, Ethereum has been developed on the basis of being more than
a crypto currency.
Ethereum supports many forms of transactions, but any
transaction costs a fee to submit. The transaction fee is a mitigation strategy
against denial of service (DoS) attacks. By enforcing the fee, an attacker cannot
submit a lot of transactions or transaction which take a long time to process,
since they will run out of currency to pay with. In Ethereum the currency is
called ether (gas). When processing a transaction, it will have a speciﬁc ether
price. If the submitter of the transaction runs out of ether to pay the fee, then
the transaction processing is stopped and the transaction discarded. The sub-
mitter does not get the spent ether returned, instead it goes to the miner, who
spend time and energy on processing the transaction. Like Bitcoin, Ethereum
uses a PoW algorithm to provide integrity to the blockchain.
==PAGE:36==
20
Related Work
2.3.1.3
HyperLedger Fabric
HyperLedger is a family of blockchain architectures, where the most prominent
is the HyperLedger Fabric [ABB+18]. HyperLedger is a project under the Linux
Foundation. HyperLedger Fabric is a permissioned (private) blockchain archi-
tecture, which is focused on enterprise use cases. It uses a Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerant (PBFT) consensus protocol as default, but can be conﬁgured to
use other consensus protocols. The idea behind HyperLedger Fabric is to allow
collaboration between organizations. Multiple organizations can be connected
to the same blockchain and share data through the chain.
Being a permis-
sioned blockchain, organizations or actors not part of the chain, cannot add
blocks to the blockchain. Thus the organizations, or consortium, controlling the
blockchain have to give devices permission to interact with the blockchain. The
permission is handled using public/private key architecture with certiﬁcates.
2.3.1.4
HyperLedger Sawtooth
Sawtooth [OBM+18] is another architecture under the HyperLedger umbrella.
It diﬀers from Fabric by supporting diﬀerent consensus protocols, as well as
supporting parallel transactions which increases its transaction throughput ef-
ﬁciency. The consensus protocols supported by Sawtooth is Proof-of-Elapsed-
Time (PoET), PoET where the secure instructions are simulated, a simpliﬁed
random leader algorithm and currently is developing to support Raft.
Like
HyperLedger Fabric, Sawtooth is also a permissioned (private) blockchain ar-
chitecture. [RF20] shows that Sawtooth clearly outperforms other HyperLedger
blockchains in an IoT setting.
2.3.2
Consensus Protocols
The consensus protocol is a major part of the blockchain technology. It is also
the part that aﬀects performance the most. The consensus protocol is used to
determine who is allowed to add a block to the chain. Furthermore, it is the
part that prevent malicious users from changing a block in the chain, as only the
allowed node can add a block and all peers keep the chain to verify its integrity.
There is a lot of diﬀerent consensus protocols, which are used in blockchains.
They diﬀer in how they work, their requirements and their performance. Gener-
ally they can be separated into two categories, PoX and Voting. The PoX family
of consensus protocols are mainly permissionless protocols and used mostly in
public blockchains. Voting based protocols require the blockchain to be per-
missioned, as they assume the majority of participants are not malicious, which
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Blockchain
21
requires the blockchain to control who has access to it.
Both [LLH+20] and [IM19] describe the diﬀerent consensus protocols and argue
about their performance.
Table 2.2 gives an overview of the most common consensus protocols, their per-
mission requirements and any special requirements or assumptions needed for
them to work.
It shows that the whole PoX family is permissionless, while
the voting based protocols require permissioned blockchain. Some of the pro-
tocols require the system to be setup with diﬀerent deﬁnitions, like currency or
incentive measure. While others have special assumptions, like BFT assumes
less than f malicious participants, and CFT assumes no malicious participants.
PoET is the only protocols requiring special hardware from the participants.
Algorithm
Type
Special
Requirements
PoW
Permissionless
None
PoA
Permissionless
Authority deﬁnition
PoS
Permissionless
Currency
PoET
Permissionless
Trusted Execution Environment
PoC
Permissionless
Free Memory Space
PoB
Permissionless
None Spender Address
PoI
Permissionless
Incentive Measure Deﬁnition
BFT
Permissioned
Malicious nodes < f in 3f + 1 nodes
CFT
Permissioned
No Malicous Participants
Table 2.2: Consensus Algorithms type & requirements
The performance of the consensus protocols is also considered in the surveys.
Table 2.3 shows the identiﬁed throughput, scalability and overheads of the con-
sensus protocols. Throughput is a measure of how many transactions per second
a blockchain or consensus protocol can handle. Scalability is a measure of how
many peers the system can support without adding a too negative latency. The
overhead shows that the PoW consensus algorithm requires a lot of compu-
tational power from the miner, while the voting based protocols require a lot
==PAGE:38==
22
Related Work
of communication between the peers, in order to reach consensus. Both these
overheads require a lot of resources, which is undesirable in an IoT context.
Algorithm
Throughput
Scalability
Overhead
PoW
Low
Low
Computational
PoA
Low
High
None
PoS
Low
Low
None
PoET
Low
High
None
PoC
Low
Low
None
PoB
Low
Low
None
PoI
Low
Low
None
BFT
High
Low
Communications
CFT
High
High
Communications
Table 2.3: Consensus Algorithms eﬃciency
From Table 2.3 it is clear that performance is much better in the private
blockchains using the voting based consensus protocols. They do however intro-
duce a communications overhead, which is costly in an IoT environment. In IoT
there are many peers, which means scalability is very important when choosing
a consensus algorithm. The best performing algorithm would be a CFT algo-
rithm, but it still introduces the communications overhead and does not allow
any malicious participants. The PoX family has two protocols, PoET and PoA,
which both have high scalability, but they have a low throughput, which makes
them poor choices if a lot of transactions should be added to the blockchain.
2.3.2.1
PoX
PoX is a family of consensus algorithms. The name stands for Proof-of-X, where
x can be diﬀerent things. What they have in common is that they are permis-
sionless. However, they can still be used in private blockchains for consensus.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Blockchain
23
Proof-of-Work (PoW) started with the consensus algorithm ﬁrst proposed
in Bitcoin.
The idea is to make adding a block to the chain computational
expensive. In Bitcoin the miner has to solve a diﬃcult cryptographic puzzle.
The miner has to ﬁnd a nonce which when hashed with the block provides a hash
with a speciﬁc amount of leading zeros. Once a nonce has been found by a miner,
it is veriﬁed by the other participants, thus a malicious user cannot just use an
invalid nonce. In Bitcoin the diﬃculty of the puzzle of changed dynamically to
keep the mining time constant at around 10 minutes. If a malicious user wanted
to change a transaction in a block, they would have to redo the puzzle for not
only that block but also all other blocks. It is considered infeasible to redo all
the puzzles unless the malicious user controls the majority of the computing
power in the network. From an IoT perspective this consensus protocol is not
viable, since it will require the resource constrained devices to waste a lot of
computational power on mining the puzzle.
Proof-of-Authority (PoA) is a more eﬃcient consensus protocol from the
PoX family. Instead of requiring resources from the mining participant, it intro-
duces a concept of authority. Only devices with the authority is allowed to add
blocks to the chain. This does not work well in a fully public and decentralized
blockchain, as all nodes should have the authority to add blocks. However, it
is eﬃcient and could work in an IoT setting, where the authority can be con-
trolled, by either having only a few more trusted participants have the authority.
It would also work in a peer-to-peer IoT setting, if the authority can be revoked
if a device is found to be malicious. But the requires other means, like remote
attestation, to detect the malicious devices.
Proof-of-Stake (PoS) selects the leader according to the amount of currency
participants have. The idea is that participants with the greatest amount of
currency is least likely to be malicious, because they have more at stake. Even
though this protocol tries to solve the computational requirements of the PoW,
it requires the blockchain system to have some form of currency incentive. It
also requires participants to trust the richer ones, as well as suﬀering from the
rich getting richer problem.
Proof-of-Elapsed-Time (PoET) randomly selects the leader which is allowed
to add the next block to the chain. The random selection is done based on a
timer on each participant. The participant with the lowest time left to wait is
selected as the leader. The waiting times have to be selected randomly and in
a uniform fashion, to make the leader selection a random uniform distribution.
To prevent malicious users from tampering with the timer, which is the core
of the algorithm, it requires the timer related code to run in a trusted and
tamper-proof environment. In current implementations this algorithm is used
in conjunction with the Intel SGX trusted execution environment. Participants
need to be able to prove that they had the shortest waiting time left, as well as
==PAGE:40==
24
Related Work
the timer not being tampered with. This is a highly eﬃcient algorithm, since it
does not require any expensive resources on the participating devices as well as
not requiring any form of currency. The only downside to the algorithm is the
requirement for the timer functions to be securely executed.
Proof-of-Capacity (PoC) is similar to PoW, but uses the participants free
disk space, rather than their computational power. Each miner stores a number
of solutions for diﬀerent puzzles. If the participant has the fastest solution for
the puzzle of the previous block, then that participant is allowed to add the next
block to the chain. Even though this reduces the computational power required
by participants, it requires a large amount of free memory space, which is not
likely in an IoT setting.
Proof-of-Burn (PoB) requires the miner to spend currency to add a block to
the chain. The spent currency is sent to an address, where it is unrecoverable. As
such the currency has been burned. Since it requires miners to spend currency
instead of computational or memory resources, it is very eﬃcient. It does require
the system to be setup with some sort of currency for the miners to earn and
spend, in order to prove that they burned it.
Proof-of-Importance (PoI) uses an importance measure to determine which
participant is allowed to add the next block to the chain.
The importance
measure can be calculated on any diﬀerent desired ways and can also include
the stake measure from the PoS consensus algorithm.
PoS and PoI is very
similar in the way they work and their performance, the diﬀerence being the
measure for the participant to be allowed to add the block.
PoI adds more
information to determine which participant is the next to add a block.
2.3.2.2
Voting
There is a lot of diﬀerent voting based consensus algorithms, which each fo-
cus on diﬀerent ways to increase performance. Especially the communications
overhead is a downside of the voting based protocols. In general the voting
based protocols can be separated into two diﬀerent categories. The Byzantine
Fault Tolerance which is concerned with handling malicious participants and
still reaching consensus not aﬀected by them.
Crash Fault Tolerance is the
other category, which does not allow malicious participants, but instead allow
a number of crashed participants.
Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) is a family of consensus protocols for
private blockchains. They are all based on being solutions for the Byzantine
Generals problem. They are all voting based, but focus on diﬀerent performance
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Discussion
25
optimizations. One example of a BFT consensus protocol is Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerance (PBFT) which is used by HyperLedger Fabric. PBFT allows
for f faulty participants, when there is 3f + 1 nodes in the system. the BFT
family required 2f + 1 participants to agree on a block in order for it to get
added to the blockchain. It works by a leader being selected, then the leader
veriﬁes the transactions which is being requested to be added to the block.
Once the transaction has been veriﬁed, the leader sends a request to the other
participants to verify it. It 2f + 1 participants respond with the same result
as the leader, then the block gets added to the blockchain by all participants.
Because the participants have to select a leader and agree on the validation of
the transactions, this consensus algorithm comes with a high communications
overhead. The scalability of the algorithm is also in question, as it has very high
throughput with a low number of participants, but performance drops rapidly
as the number of participants grow, due to the communications overhead.
Crash Fault Tolerance (CFT) is another area of voting based consensus al-
gorithms. It does not consider or allow any number of malicious participants.
The main focus of these algorithms is to handle cases where participants, espe-
cially selected leaders, crashes. These algorithms can still reach consensus when
half of the participants crash before or during execution. A widely used example
of a CFT algorithm used in blockchains is the Raft protocol.
2.4
Discussion
Within hybrid remote attestation SEED [Ibr] and ERASMUS [CIT18] has shown
the way for self-triggering attestations, where devices trigger the attestation
themselves to avoid DoS attacks. The distributed attestation schemes show the
possibilities of not relying on a trusted Veriﬁer, allowing remote attestation
to be used in peer to peer networks. The swarm attestations has evolved the
eﬃciency when attesting large networks of devices, by attesting several or all
the devices at the same time and aggregating the results into a single attestation
report.
The blockchain technology provides a decentralized database, where every par-
ticipant in the network keeps the same database. The decentralized database is
useful in peer to peer networks, where there is no base station, trusted Veriﬁer
or other trusted third party to keep and protect the data. Blockchain provides
strong guarantees of integrity to the stored data, but provides no conﬁdentiality.
The blockchain technologies performance relies on the choice of consensus algo-
rithm. Consensus algorithms aﬀect the eﬃciency through computational over-
head, communications overhead and throughput.
==PAGE:42==
26
Related Work
SANA [ACI+16] and PASTA [KK19] are the only remote attestation schemes
claiming to be publicly veriﬁable. However, SANA is not decentralized. It re-
quires a trusted Veriﬁer to check the attestation response and the Provers to
run the attestation code and produce new evidence on every request.
Even
though PASTA is publicly veriﬁable and distributed, it does not consider the
history of attestations and is also a challenge-response protocol, making it sus-
ceptible to DoS attacks.
The existing blockchain RA proposed in literature does not focus on being pub-
licly veriﬁable. In particular, the work [PK17] and [BNXT19] focus on using
the currency and PoW consensus algorithm of the blockchain, to increase the
security of the IoT devices. BARRET [BNXT19] uses the blockchain to prevent
Computational Denial of Service (CDoS) attacks. TM-COIN [PK17] introduces
a fee to add the trusted computing base measurement to the blockchain. These
both use PoW consensus algorithm and public blockchain architecture, which
is highly ineﬃcient.
DAN [JS20] uses a private blockchain, with the practi-
cal byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) consensus algorithm, which improves eﬃ-
ciency over the PoW algorithm in the public blockchains. However, the voting-
based PBFT algorithm introduces a high communications overhead and does
not scale well with many participating devices. Furthermore, DAN uses trusted
Veriﬁers to challenge devices and verify their response, as well as moving the
blockchain interactions, e.g, block creation, away from the IoT devices. Thus,
it is not a fully decentralized peer to peer network.
The problem of publicly verifying attestation results of a group of IoT devices,
in a setting without a trusted Veriﬁer, remains an open research direction. Fur-
thermore, despite the various state-of-the-art remote attestation approaches,
using the history of attestations is also an open research area.
The most promising consensus algorithm for blockchain is PoET. PoET is the
consensus algorithm requiring the least amount of communications and compu-
tations. However, it does have a low throughput compared to other consensus
algorithms. In an IoT setting, the power eﬃciency of low amounts of communi-
cations and computations is crucial for extending the lifetime of the IoT devices.
Throughput is an important measure if a lot of transactions are submitted to
the blockchain on a regular basis. Remote attestation is unlikely to have a high
throughput requirement, since devices should not be attested so often.
The only blockchain platform using the PoET consensus algorithm is Hyper-
Ledger Sawtooth, making it the best possible option for use in remote attesta-
tion in IoT.
The downside of using blockchain technology is the increased memory consump-
tion. The blockchain is an every growing database which every device needs to
keep a copy of. This means the memory requirement of the network increases
linearly with the number of devices. Furthermore, the memory requirement for
every device is also increased, as every device keeps every transaction locally.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Protocol Proposal
In the existing state-of-the-art remote attestation, publicly veriﬁable attesta-
tions remain unsolved in a decentralized setting. In addition, the remote at-
testation schemes using blockchain remain centralized, thus not fully utilizing
the decentralized nature of the blockchain. Furthermore, none of the schemes
use the history of the devices attestation results to evaluate devices’ trustwor-
thiness. In decentralized remote attestation schemes where there is no trusted
Veriﬁer to store the attestation results, the attestation results can only be used
once, as they do not provide a secure way to store the results.
This Thesis aims to provide a decentralized and publicly veriﬁable remote at-
testation solution for a network of devices by leveraging blockchain technology.
In this Chapter, ﬁrst the general idea for the solution is described, before going
into more details on the design of the solution.
3.1
Idea
In this Section the general idea is presented. Each building block is described
separately, before they are put together in the proposed protocol.
The idea
==PAGE:44==
28
Protocol Proposal
consists of ﬁve building blocks decentralized database, history based trust, self-
triggering attestation, self-attestation and group session key establishment.
3.1.1
Decentralized Database
Using blockchain as a decentralized database storing the attestation results
allows the system to be fully decentralized.
This means it does not require
any trusted Veriﬁer or base station to store the results securely, because the
blockchain guarantees integrity. Furthermore, the blockchain allows for the re-
sults to be publicly veriﬁable, without allowing outsiders to modify or create
transactions (attestation results) or blocks. In private blockchain a signature is
required to submit transactions, but not to read the data in the blockchain.
3.1.2
History Based Trust
Since the blockchain provides an immutable database to store the attestation
results, it keeps a historical ledger of transactions (attestation results) to be
used to evaluate devices trustworthiness on its whole history of attestations.
Thus making trustworthiness a spectrum, rather than a yes/no based on the
latest attestation result. If a device has failed every attestation except for the
latest one, it should not be considered trustworthy as it has a long history of
being compromised. If a device has passed every attestation except for the last
one, it is not necessarily compromised. The failed attestation could be due to a
bug or connection failure. If it has not shown any signs of being compromised
previously, it should not be considered compromised from one failed attestation.
3.1.3
Self-Triggering Attestation
The remote attestation needs to be triggered.
Using existing self-triggering
attestation like SEED [Ibr] or ERASMUS [CIT18], the devices do not need a
challenge to trigger the attestation. The devices have a timer which triggers the
attestation. Together with the self-attestation, the need for a Veriﬁer or base
station is eliminated, thus allowing a fully peer-to-peer network.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Idea
29
3.1.4
Self-Attestation
Remote self-attestation scheme does not use a trusted Veriﬁer or base station
to check the hash produced by the attestation. The devices keep a list of valid
hashes and veriﬁes the produced hash themselves. Thus the attestation result
is boolean, which can then be stored securely in the blockchain. The blockchain
provides the integrity, such that other devices can trust the result.
3.1.5
Group Session Key
Using the history based evaluation of devices, a group session key can be estab-
lished only between devices which can be trusted. Based on a device’s history of
attestations, it will either be included or excluded from the group session. This
means only the trusted devices will share the key, allowing them to exchange
messages and work together securely.
3.1.6
Hardware Requirements
To ensure the security of both the attestation- and the blockchain code, a hybrid
solution is adopted. This means the devices need a light version of specialized
hardware. The devices need Read-Only Memory (ROM) to store the code and
keys to protect the integrity. Furthermore, they need a Memory Protection Unit
(MPU) to control access to the keys used by the attestation and blockchain code.
In remote self-attestation schemes like SEED [Ibr], the timer for the triggering
of the attestation needs to be protected by the hybrid hardware, to prevent ad-
versaries from tampering with the timer and predict when the attestation will
occur. The same requirement is needed in the Proof-of-Elapsed-Time (PoET)
consensus algorithm used by HyperLedger Sawtooth [OBM+18], which uses a
timer to determine whose turn it is to add a block to the blockchain. In Saw-
tooth, the hardware requirement is a heavy hardware component, i.e., Intel SGX.
Since the hybrid approach of the self-triggering remote attestation schemes like
SEED is able to protect the timer for the attestation, it is potentially enough
to protect the timer used in PoET.
==PAGE:46==
30
Protocol Proposal
3.1.7
The Protocol
Figure 3.1: Remote Attestation Idea
In this remote attestation scheme shown in Figure 3.1, the same timer will be
used both for triggering the attestation and the blockchain consensus. Thus,
when the timer triggers the attestation, the device performs a self-attestation
and adds the result to the blockchain. When the new block is published to the
blockchain, it is broadcast and propagated throughout the network. When the
peers receive the new block, they verify it by checking the signed timer value
which is included. When a device wants to communicate and work together with
another device, it checks the blockchain for the devices’ attestation results and
decides their trustworthiness based on their attestation history. If the device is
trustworthy enough, then a group session key is established, which devices can
use to share data.
In the drone example in Chapter 1.1, the drones are the devices in Figure 3.1.
The drones run their attestations and store them in the blockchain. The history
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Design
31
of their attestations is then used to establish a key between trusted devices. This
allow them to communicate with the trusted devices securely and lets them trust
the data they receive. The untrusted drones are excluded from the cooperation,
preventing them from sending false location data. Since the attestations are
stored in the blockchain which is broadcast throughout the network, they can
keep updating the attestations and make the trust decisions without the need
for a trusted Veriﬁer or base station. The drones can work together in remote
locations and still ensure data, e.g., location data is coming from trusted peers.
3.2
Design
The system is comprised of two main components, which are the remote attesta-
tion and the blockchain. The two components have a number of sub-components
needed for them to work. The remote attestation requires a timer as well as some
speciﬁc attestation scheme to run. The blockchain consists mainly of the blocks
and the consensus algorithm. When considering the blocks of the blockchain,
then creation, publication, veriﬁcation and the design of the information in the
block is considered.
Using these components, the design of the history based trust decision, using
the history of attestations in the blockchain, is explained. The history based
trust score is then used to establish a group session key amongst trusted devices.
The scheme works in two phases, where the ﬁrst phase is the attestation phase.
This is the phase where the attestation is performed and the result is added to
the blockchain.
The second phase is the key establishment phase, where the attestation results
is used in order to determine which devices should be allowed to participate in
the key generation, thus which devices will share the group session key.
3.2.1
Remote Attestation
The remote attestation starts when a timer triggers. Once the timer has trig-
gered the attestation, the device performs the attestation, which could be any
type of attestation, e.g., control ﬂow attestation, static attestation of the mem-
ory content or both. Since there is no trusted Veriﬁer to check the result against
known correct results, the device needs to store at least one correct result it self.
The device checks the computed attestation result against any stored correct
==PAGE:48==
32
Protocol Proposal
responses. It then updates the timer, to schedule the next attestation. The ﬂow
of the attestation is shown in the state machine of Figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Remote Attestation State Machine
From Figure 3.2 it is clear that the attestation process can be broken down into
two parts. The ﬁrst part is the Timer, which is responsible for scheduling and
triggering the attestation. The second part is the Attestation code, responsi-
ble for measuring the state of the device and verifying the state. These two
components have diﬀerent requirements for being secure.
3.2.1.1
Timer
The timer is the component responsible for scheduling the attestation. As such
it must be unpredictable and tamper-proof. The unpredictability is to ensure
an adversary cannot know in advance when the attestation is going to happen.
If the adversary is able to know when the attestation is scheduled for, they
would be able to clean and hide before the attestation triggers, thus giving a
false result. To enforce the unpredictability a pseudo random number generator
(PRNG) is to be used for the time scheduler.
It takes a range, so that the
average time between attestation can be set, but without being predictable. As
an example, lets say the average time between attestations should be a week,
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Design
33
then the PRNG produced values in the range 6-8 days, allowing randomness
of ± one day in relation to the average. With any time within a three day
interval being possible for attestation, it is still quite unpredictable. So if an
adversary obtains the information about the interval, they have to hide for three
days in order to remain undetected. The interval set for the attestation time
is a balance between the security in unpredictability and how often to spend
resources on performing attestation. The larger the interval is, the more often
it is possible to spend resources on attestation, but it also makes it harder to
adversaries to know when attestation is going to happen. For the most secure
interval, the attestation should be able to happen at any time after the current
attestation has occurred. If the average should still be a week, it could be an
interval of one week plus-minus seven days, which would be a two week interval.
This would mean the adversary could not predict when the attestation occurs
and thus have to remain hidden all the time. The downside is that theoretically
a device could spend resources on an attestation right after one has already
ﬁnished, or it could be two weeks before the next attestation, giving a lot of
time to be compromised without being detected.
Since the scheduling is in real time, it requires the devices to have a Real Time
Clock (RTC). This RTC and the timer functions need to be protected by a
Memory Protection Unit (MPU) and Read-Only Memory (ROM), so that it
cannot be tampered with. If an adversary is able to change the time of the
scheduled attestation, they could prevent it from occurring, or make it occur at
a time were they could clean the device and remain hidden, after which they
could reinfect the device. Even if the adversary is able to just read the time,
they could remove the malicious code just before attestation, and thus remain
undetected. The MPU protects the RTC, so it cannot be read by outsiders,
thus preventing them from predicting when the trigger will happen. The ROM
prevents adversaries from tampering with the timer code.
Even though the
timer triggers the attestation, not even the attestation code needs to access the
timer, as the timer can invoke the attestation instead.
The timer needs two functions, one for scheduling the attestation and one for
triggering the attestation. The following pseudo-code exempliﬁes how the timer
functions works
Private
void
Schedule (){
Random
random = new Random ();
double
waitTimeInHours =
random.next(intervalLowerBound , intervalUpperBound );
DateTime
now = DateTime.Now;
nextAttestation = now.AddHours( waitTimeInHours );
==PAGE:50==
34
Protocol Proposal
}
Listing 3.1: Timer Scheduling pseudo-code
The scheduling function uses a pseudo random number generator (PRNG) to
pick a waiting time within the interval. The entropy1 of the PRNG has to be
strong enough to make it unpredictable. Since PRNGs have been used in remote
attestation schemes such as SWATT [SPVDK04], it is safe to assume it is within
the capability of IoT devices. The interval is conﬁgured with a lower- and an
upper-bound, giving the average as lowerBound+upperBound
2
. It then takes the
current time and adds the calculated wait time to it, which gives the time of
the next attestation. In the pseudo-code the scheduled time of next attestation
is considered a ﬁeld in the timer, which can be set.
Private
void
Trigger (){
while(DateTime.Now < nextAttestation ){
Sleep( sleepTimeInMiliseconds )
}
TriggerAttestation ();
Schedule ();
Trigger ();
}
Listing 3.2: Timer Trigger pseudo-code
The timers trigger function continuously checks the current time against the
scheduled time for the next attestation. However, it should not spend all its
resources on this, so it should check every so often and if it is not time yet, then
it should put the thread to sleep and free up resources for normal operations.
Once the attestation time has been reached or passed, then the function triggers
the attestation, schedules the next attestation with the scheduling function and
starts waiting again.
3.2.1.2
Attestation
The actual attestation part could be either control ﬂow attestation or static
attestation of the memory content. Control ﬂow attestation means to attest the
device behaves as expected with a speciﬁc known input. Static attestation is to
take a hash of the none-dynamic part of the memory content. Both are checked
against known allowed values to detect if the device is not conﬁgured or behaves
1Entropy is a measure of randomness
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Design
35
as it should.
The actual method of attestation is not considered in this protocol, as it will
work with any type of attestation. However, there are a few requirements for
how the attestation should work, as well as requirements to make sure the
attestation is secure.
A hybrid remote attestation approach is adopted. This means the attestation
code requires minimal hardware components, in order to make the code tamper-
proof and secure.
The attestation code needs to be in Read-Only Memory
(ROM). This prevents adversaries from tampering with the code, e.g., redirect
memory access to an address where original correct code is stored rather than
the actual address overwritten with malicious code. The ROM provides a root
of trust for the integrity of the attestation code.
Another hardware requirement could be a Memory Protection Unit, but this
depends on the actual attestation code used. In the protocol presented here,
the attestation code does not need any keys to sign the result, as such no part of
the attestation code needs to be protected from being read by outsiders. Since
the Timer requires the MPU, this needs to be in the devices and as such the
solution supports attestations which requires a MPU.
Since the attestation does not use any trusted Veriﬁer, it needs to be fully
secure and self suﬃcient on the devices. This means the attestation code needs
to be protected by the hardware components, so it may be trusted. In most
attestation schemes, the Prover send evidence of its state, e.g., a hash of memory
content, to a trusted Veriﬁer, who checks the evidence against known allowed
states. Since there is no trusted Veriﬁer, the devices needs to handle this part
themselves. This is done by having one or more allowed states stored on the
device it self. The attestation code then checks the produced evidence against
the stored states, instead of sending it to a trusted Veriﬁer. This adds some
memory requirements to the device, as it possibly needs to store a number of
allowed states, depending on how many conﬁgurations or states the device is
allowed to have. Furthermore, these states must be protected from tampering.
An adversary should not be allowed to change the stored allowed states, as this
would mean an adversary could change an allowed state to a bad state, which
would pass attestation. As such, the allowed conﬁgurations or states needs to
be stored in the ROM, thus increasing the amount of ROM required to be in
the devices. To reduce memory usage on the devices, they only need to store a
hash of the valid states.
When the devices are deployed they should have their valid states stored in the
ROM. Since it is part of the deployment, the devices should not have a lot of
possible valid states, as it is assumed their conﬁguration do not change a lot
after they have been deployed.
==PAGE:52==
36
Protocol Proposal
3.2.2
Blockchain
When it comes to the blockchain used, the most important design choice is
which consensus protocol to use. This is because the consensus protocol has the
largest impact on performance, which is important in a resource-constrained
IoT setting. The best performing consensus protocol is Proof-of-Elapsed-Time
(PoET), since it has both low computational and low communications overhead.
Considering the performance metrics of the consensus protocols, the important
measures are the computational and communications overhead, since this will
aﬀect the resources the IoT devices have for normal operations. The throughput
(Transactions per second) is a low priority metric, when the blockchain is used
for remote attestation. This is due to the fact that remote attestation should
not occur so often, that a high throughput is needed. Furthermore, it ﬁts well
with the timer for the self-triggering attestation. It allows the attestation and
the blockchain to use the same timer. When the timer triggers the attestation
it also permits the device to add the result as a block in the blockchain.
In order for the timer to work with the PoET protocol, the timer must use a
pseudo random number generator (PRNG) for scheduling the next attestation.
This is because the other devices participating in the blockchain need to be able
to verify the triggering. The other devices veriﬁes that the waiting time has run
out, as such they need to be able to reproduce the result of the scheduler. By
using a PRNG the triggered device sends the seed along with the new block.
Using the seed the other devices reproduce the scheduled time in order to verify
that the device was in fact allowed to add a new block to the blockchain. The
MPU must protect the seed until the block is published, due to it being used to
schedule the attestation, which should be unpredictable.
For the participating devices to verify the scheduled time for the block creation,
the time needs to be signed in a secure way, so the devices know the timer
has not been tampered with. This requires a public/private key set, with the
private key stored securely on the devices. The MPU provides this security for
the key, as it controls access to it. The MPU only allows access to the key by the
blockchain code. As long as only the blockchain code has access to the private
key, the other devices can be sure the timer was accessed and signed by it. To
ensure no fake keys can be used, the public/private key pair should be part of a
certiﬁcate. During deployment of the devices, the certiﬁcate needs to be stored
on the device. All devices then need the public key of the certiﬁcate authority
stored securely on the device, so they can check the signature of the certiﬁcate
received from other devices. By using certiﬁcates, stored on the devices during
deployment, the devices do not need to keep track of every public key of every
participating device, since the certiﬁcate will verify the public key is from the
device as expected.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Design
37
If two blocks are created at the same time, then a fork occurs in the blockchain.
To handle forks, the approach of longest chain is adopted. This means devices
will keep the ﬁrst veriﬁed block they receive and continue from that. Once the
next block is added, one of the forks will be longer than the other, in which case
that branch will be used by all participating devices. The shorter fork will be
discarded.
3.2.2.1
Block Creation & Publication
When the remote attestation ﬁnished on a device, the results needs to be pub-
lished in the blockchain. This involves creating the block and publishing it. The
block also needs to be veriﬁed in order to be accepted by the other participants,
but this is explained in Section 3.2.2.2.
When a block is created it needs to contain the attestation result as well as
any information needed to verify the result and identify which device the result
belongs to. Then the Merkle Hash Tree is constructed in order to create the
header for the block.
After the block has been created it is published throughout the network. This is
done using a gossip protocol. When the block is published, the scheduled time
and the seed for the timer is signed and sent along with the block. The extra
information is needed for the block veriﬁcation.
3.2.2.2
Block Veriﬁcation
The veriﬁcation of published blocks is a three step veriﬁcation. Each step is
necessary to ensure any block added to the blockchain is valid. In the PoET
consensus protocol, the wait time or scheduled time has to be veriﬁed before
adding the block to the blockchain. This is to prevent anyone from adding a
block whenever they want. The block is only added when it this the respective
devices turn, preventing bad blocks from being added.
In order to verify the scheduled time, the time and the seed is signed by the
publishing device, using their private key. Since the devices receive the seed
when the block is published, they are able to recreate the scheduled time, in
order to verify it. To ensure the timer has not been tampered with, the time
and seed is signed by the private key which the MPU protects. This means the
signature also has to be veriﬁed. To ensure false key pairs cannot be used and the
block comes from the device it claims, the key pair needs to be certiﬁed. Thus
each device has a certiﬁcate containing its public key and an ID. This certiﬁcate
is stored in the genesis block published by the device during deployment. This
way it cannot be altered and is always available for devices to retrieve. The
==PAGE:54==
38
Protocol Proposal
certiﬁcate is used to verify the signature of the seed and scheduled time. But
ﬁrst the certiﬁcate must be validated.
This requires the devices to securely
store the public key or certiﬁcate of the certiﬁcate authority. When devices are
deployed, they should have the certiﬁcate authorities certiﬁcate stored in their
ROM, so it cannot be tampered with. It does not need to be protected by the
MPU, as it is public information.
Figure 3.3: State Machine - Block Veriﬁcation
Figure 3.3 shows the ﬂow of the block veriﬁcation.
The device receives the
package with the block and the signed scheduled time and seed. The notation
used here is AnB notation, where pk(P) means whatever is inside the curly
brackets is signed with the public key pk(P) of P. The Timer is the scheduled
time. Furthermore, anything inside the square brackets are boolean conditions,
and everything before the slash is a condition for the action happening after
the slash. When the device has received the package, it ﬁrst gets and veriﬁes
the certiﬁcate. If the certiﬁcate is valid, then it veriﬁes the signature of the
scheduled time and seed. If the signature checks out, it continues to check the
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Design
39
scheduled time, to ensure the device was allowed to publish a block at this time.
It shall check the scheduled time against the creation time of the block, thus
the block needs to contain a CreatedOn timestamp. If any of the checks fail,
then the block is rejected and the device returns the Init state, waiting for the
next block to be published.
3.2.3
History Based Trust Decision
When it comes to history based trust scores, similar work has been done in
LRMA [YHY+15]. In LRMA they keep a risk score based on passed attestations
and update the attestation frequency based on the risk score. The worse the
risk score, the more often the device is attested. The risk score also do not
take the age of the attestation into consideration. The risk score is based on a
Bayesian classiﬁer.
The history based trust decision presented here does not increase the frequency
of attestations. Rather, it allows devices to decide whether or not to collaborate
with another device.
When making the decision whether or not to trust another device, the blockchain
provides a historical record of the devices attestations. The history provides a
way to make the trust decision based on more than the most recent attestation.
Furthermore, the blocks in the blockchain has timestamps for when they where
created, as such the attestations can be weighed based on their age, so that
older attestations has a lower impact on the trust score. The timestamps can
be used to give a weight to the attestation result. This is done by taking how
long after the genesis block the attestation result was made and divide it by
how much time has actually passed since the genesis block was created.
Passed attestations are to increase the trustworthiness of the device, while failed
attestations should decrease it.
So when considering the attestation results,
passed attestations have a value of one, while failed attestations have a value
of minus one.
This means failed attestations decrease the score with more
than just not being counted over the average.
These values for passed and
failed attestations, allow for the time based weight to also be counted on failed
attestations. If the failed attestations where to have a value of zero, it would
negate the time based weight, which means an old and a newly failed attestation
would have the same impact. But if a device failed an attestation a long time
ago, and has passed attestations after, then the failed attestation should not
have the same impact as if the device failed more recently. This provides a
better picture of the devices trustworthiness.
The history based trust score is a weighted average, where the weight is cal-
==PAGE:56==
40
Protocol Proposal
culated based on the age of the attestation. The attestation result makes the
weight have either positive or negative impact on the score. Equation 3.1 shows
the calculation of the trust score.
Φ =
Pn
i=1( CreatedOni−CreatedOngenesis
now−CreatedOngenesis
) × αi
n
| αi =
(
1 iﬀAttestation passed
−1 iﬀAttestation failed
(3.1)
In Equation 3.1, Φ is the resulting trust score, CreatedOni is the created on
timestamp of the block for attestation i’th, CreatedOngenesis is the created on
timestamp of the genesis block, now is the timestamp of the current time, αi
is the result of the i’th attestation and n is the number of attestation results
stored in the blockchain. Where α is one if the attestation passed and minus
one if it failed.
Due to the weight, the range of the trust score decreases over time. This means
an older device with more attestations will not be able to get the same trust
score as a new device with fewer attestations over the time is has been deployed.
Figure 3.4 shows the evolution of the range of trust scores based on the number
of attestations evenly distributed over its lifetime. The maximum trust score is
shown with green and is the score if all attestations are passed. While all failed
attestations are shown in red. Any mix of passed and failed attestation will be
within the range between the green and the red graphs.
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Design
41
Figure 3.4: Trust Score Range
From Figure 3.4 it is clear that when time passes the devices cannot obtain the
same score as when they are newly deployed. This causes some challenges when
trying to compare two devices with diﬀerent ages, even if both devices have
passes all attestations.
To mitigate this and make the comparison more clear, the ﬁnal trust score is
divided by the maximum trust score the device in question can obtain, as in
Equation 3.2. As such the ﬁnal trust score shows how close the device is to its
maximum trustworthiness. This also means two devices, who both passed all its
attestations, will have the same ﬁnal trust score and will be considered equally
==PAGE:58==
42
Protocol Proposal
trustworthy.
Ψ =
Φ
Φmax
(3.2)
In Equation 3.2 Ψ is the ﬁnal trust score, Φ is the trust score calculated in
Equation 3.1 and Φmax is the maximum trust score the device can achieve.
The maximum trust score Φmax is calculated as in Equation 3.1, but with α
always equal to one. This means the maximum trust score is determined by the
number of attestations and how long ago they where made. The calculation of
the maximum trust score is done as in Equation 3.3.
Φmax =
Pn
i=1( CreatedOni−CreatedOngenesis
now−CreatedOngenesis
)
n
(3.3)
The ﬁnal trust score can be in the range [−1, 1]. It will be negative if the total
weighed failed attestations have a higher value then the total weighed passed
attestations. This means if a device has a negative ﬁnal trust score, it is highly
untrustworthy. For a device to be trust worthy it must be in the positive range,
where a threshold for needed trustworthiness can be chosen, e.g, a ﬁnal trust
score of Ψ ≥0.5. Furthermore, the ﬁnal trust score allows for comparing devices,
such that Ψ1 = 0.3 > 0.1 = Ψ2 means that device 1 is more trust worthy than
device 2, even though they are both below the threshold.
3.2.4
Establishing Session Key
A group session key shall be established amongst trustworthy devices. As such
it has a conﬁgurable threshold for the trust score, so it can be set based on
deployment and risk.
Since the session key should only be between devices above the conﬁgured
threshold, a new group session key is to be established whenever a device either
falls below or gets above the threshold. If all devices stay on the same side of
the threshold, then there is no need to spend resources on establishing a new
key.
To establish the key the well known Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol is
used. This is a widely used protocol for establishing session keys between de-
vices. For two devices, a generator G and a prime P is chosen. Each device
then compute its own part, A and B respectively, such that
A = Ga mod P
and
B = Gb mod P
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Design
43
where capital letters are publicly available information and lower case letters are
secrets. The devices then send A and B to each other. Combining the public
part of the other device with its own secret part constructs the shared key, such
that the shared key is
k = Ab mod P = Ba mod P = Ga×b mod P
The protocol can be extended with more than two participating devices. If lets
say a third device wants to participate, it will compute
C = Gc mod P
and share C. The key will then be
k = ACb mod P = BCa mod P = ABc mod P = Ga×b×c mod P
this way any number of devices can participate in establishing a shared group
session key.
The secrecy of the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol is well known and
secure.
However, it does require a cryptographically secure random number
generator. Since the attestation and the blockchain also uses random numbers,
it is assumed the devices have a secure random number generator.
The Diﬃe-Hellman protocol is susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks if it is
not protected with a measure for integrity and authenticity. Normally a pri-
vate/public or certiﬁcate scheme is used for this. However, the blockchain pro-
vides the same security guarantees. So the key exchange protocol can be imple-
mented in a smart contract on the blockchain, which will protect it against the
man-in-the-middle attacks. Implementing Diﬃe-Hellman group key exchange
protocol has already been done in SmartDHX [MT20b], showing that it is a
feasible way to do the exchange in a secure way. In [MT20b] they implement
both the two party and multi-party key exchange protocol fully in a smart
contract.
The key exchange protocol provides the conﬁdentiality, which the
blockchain does not, and the blockchain provides integrity. The secret parts of
the key are computed locally and not revealed in the blockchain.
Smart contracts are part of many state-of-the-art blockchain platforms, and pro-
vide a way to run code on the blockchain as transactions, allowing participating
parties to verify the execution of the code. Furthermore, the idea behind the
smart contract is to run the code or fulﬁl the contract when the criteria for the
contract has been met, in this case when a devices trust score changes to the
other side of the threshold from where it was.
The key exchange requires a number of extra blocks in the blockchain. In PoET
this is handled by the device with the shortest wait time is the one who gets
to add a block. Since the same wait time is also when the next attestation is
scheduled, this means the devices used to add the blocks for the key exchange,
will have their attestation time rescheduled.
==PAGE:60==
44
Protocol Proposal
3.2.5
Block Design
The design of the blocks deﬁnes what information could and should be contained
in a block in the chain. The idea is to use the blockchain for both the attestation
results and the group key exchange. Since these require two diﬀerent sets of data,
they require diﬀerent blocks and block design.
Figure 3.5: Block format
Figure 3.5 shows the design of the two diﬀerent types of blocks. Not all blocks
in the blockchain must have the same format or contain the same data. The
ﬁrst block which is added to the blockchain is the genesis block, which contains
the settings for the blockchain.
The block for attestations also deﬁnes the attestation transactions, in that every
attestation transaction must contain the full block data, except for the previous
block hash which is added during block creation. The attestation blocks must
contain an identiﬁer for the device who submitted the attestation result, either
a set id or its public key. The attestation block also has the actual result and
the scheduled time to verify the validity of the attestation and prevent replay
attacks. Finally the attestation block must contain the time it was created to
be used for the history based trust score. Potentially the scheduled time could
be used, as these two timestamps should be very close in time.
The Diﬃe-Hellman blocks contains the data needed for the Diﬃe-Hellman key
exchange, including generating the ﬁnal key, except for the participants private
part of the key. Since the key exchange requires a few extra messages, every
Diﬃe-Hellman transaction does not need to include the full block information.
The block contains the nonce and prime for the key exchange to be used by
==PAGE:61==
3.2 Design
45
the participating devices to generate their public and private key parts. The
participants public part then gets added to the chain by adding new blocks with
the previously obtained information as well as the public part received in the
transaction. The participants in the block should be a dictionary mapping the
identiﬁer of the device to its public part of the key. This is needed to control
which devices are participating and for the devices to ignore their own public
part when generating the ﬁnal key.
==PAGE:62==
46
Protocol Proposal
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
Implementation
To show the idea and design works, a proof-of-concept implementation has been
made. This chapter shows how the idea and design has been realized, as well
as explain diﬀerences and compromises made in order to make the implemen-
tation work. The protocol has been implemented in Python, using Hyperledger
Sawtooth as the underlying blockchain.
Hyperledger Sawtooth supports many programming languages, but Python is
the most well supported and suggested for proof-of-concept implementations,
which is why Python was used for the implementation.
Hyperledger Sawtooth was used for the underlying blockchain because it is a
well supported blockchain platform, which can use the PoET consensus algo-
rithm. It also supports PBFT consensus and has a simple Development mode
consensus algorithm, which can be used for simple blockchain application de-
velopment.
Docker has been used to deploy each component in separate containers, thus
simulating a network of devices. The system consists of six components, which
are Client, Validator, Rest-API, Transaction Processor, Settings Processor and
Consensus Engine. Each of these components are deployed in individual Docker
containers, but an IoT device would include each component, i.e. it is not one de-
vice per component. Of the six components, four of them (Validator Rest-API,
Settings Processor and Consensus Engine) come with the HyperLedger Saw-
tooth platform and requires no changes, while two of the components (Client
and Transaction Processor) are custom and contain the logic of the applica-
==PAGE:64==
48
Implementation
tion. The Client contains the code for interacting with the blockchain and is
where the Attestation result is created and submitted to the blockchain, as well
as where the client side part of the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange is done. The
Transaction processor is where the business rules for the blockchain transaction
is written. The Transaction Processor is where the smart contracts are imple-
mented in HyperLedger Sawtooth, and is where the trust scores are calculated
and the contract part of the Diﬃe-Hellman is performed.
The blockchain has two transaction families, "attestations" and "diﬃe-hellman".
The transaction families are used to distinguish transactions containing attes-
tation results and Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange messages.
4.1
Client
The Client consists of a command line interface (cli), used to start it, and
the Client it self, running the logic. When the Client starts, it ﬁrst sets up
two event subscriptions used for the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange. The event
subscriptions makes the Client listen for and receive events from the Validator.
The two events the Client listens for is one for starting the key exchange and
one for the completion of the key exchange.
Once the Client has set up the event subscriptions it starts an inﬁnite loop,
where it runs the attestation and listens for key exchange events. The ﬁrst time
the Client enters the loop (when it starts), it runs an initial attestation.
The Client then keeps looping, checking if it is scheduled for an attestation or
if it has received a Diﬃe-Hellman event.
4.1.1
Attestation
The attestation of the Client has three steps, Scheduling/Triggering, Computing
attestation result and publishing the result in the blockchain.
In this implementation the computation of the result is simulated using a random
number generator to give a result.
In a real implementation, this would be
replaced with any form of attestation, e.g., control ﬂow attestation or static
attestation of the memory content.
The scheduling is done by keeping the time of the next scheduled attestation.
Once an attestation is performed, the schedule is updated by adding a random
time to the previously scheduled time. To allow others to verify the scheduled
time, the random number generator is given a seed, which is stored and sent
with the attestation.
Thus others can take the last scheduled time and the
seed to compute the scheduled time and verify it. The seed is generated as
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Transaction Processor
49
a random number using the /dev/urandom Linux random number generator.
The random number generators entropy (randomness) has been studied in DTU1
course "02232 Applied Cryptography", which showed the entropy is high enough
to be cryptographically secure.
Any other cryptographically secure random
number generator can be used to generate the seed. The triggering is done by
checking, during the loop, if the scheduled time has passed.
The ﬁnal step of the attestation is to publish the result. After the result has
been computed, the Client wraps the result, device id, created on date, seed and
scheduled time in a transaction with a message identiﬁer, showing it is a publish
attestation transaction. The Client then wraps the transaction in a batch and
sends it to the blockchains rest API.
4.1.2
Diﬃe-Hellman Key Exchange
The Client side of the Diﬃe-Hellman group key exchange starts when the Client
receives a Diﬃe-Hellman create event. The event contains the nonce and prime
for the key generation. When the Client receives the event, it generates a random
number using /dev/urandom number generator. The random number of the
Clients private part of the key. It then generate the public part using its private
part and the nonce and prime from the received event.
The public part is
published to the blockchain as a transaction.
A key exchange ﬁnishes when the Client receives a Diﬃe-Hellman ﬁnished event,
which contains a list of participating devices and their public part of the key. The
Client then constructs the key from the public part of any other participating
devices and its own private part.
4.2
Transaction Processor
The transaction processor is separated into two parts, one responsible for the
"attestations" transaction family and the other responsible for the "diﬃe-hellman"
transaction family. The two parts handle the business logic for their respective
transaction family and both have three parts. The three parts of each trans-
action processor is the Handler, Payload and State. The Handler contains the
business logic for the transaction family and is the smart contract for the family.
The Payload deﬁnes what the transactions for the family must look like. The
State contains the getting and setting of the blockchain state data, as well as
serializing and deserializing the data.
1Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
==PAGE:66==
50
Implementation
4.2.1
Attestation
On the transaction processor side of the attestation transactions there is no
speciﬁc business logic rules which are applied. The only rules for attestations to
be accepted to the blockchain is that they have to follow the speciﬁed format.
This means they need to specify the publish attestation message, construct a
deﬁned attestation payload and the transaction and batch has to be signed by
a key accepted in the blockchain network.
4.2.1.1
Handler
When an attestation is published, the transaction is received by the Attestation-
TransactionHandler. For the "attestations" transaction family only one action
is allowed, which is publishing an attestation result. When the handler receives
the transaction, it ﬁrst checks to see if the action is set correctly on the transac-
tion. If the action is correct, it calls the state to publish the attestation, which
means to update the state with the result and add it to the blockchain. It then
sends a transaction of its own for the "diﬃe-hellman" transaction family. This
transaction contains a nonce and a prime. The "diﬃe-hellman" transaction is a
Create action, which initializes the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange. The creation
and sending of the transaction is done concurrently in a new thread to avoid
timeout issues as the prime number generation is a computational heavy pro-
cess. The current implementation uses a simple prime number generator, where
a new random number is generated and checked until a prime is found. The
prime number checker is also a simple ineﬃcient implementation, checking if the
number n is dividable by a number in the range [2, √n + 1]. A more eﬃcient
prime number generator could be implemented to increase performance.
4.2.1.2
State
The State for the "attestation" transaction family contains two classes, Attesta-
tion and AttestationState. The Attestation class deﬁnes the block for the attes-
tations in the blockchain, that is what information is contained in the blocks.
This is where the attestation block design from Section 3.2.5 is implemented.
The AttestationState class handles the changes to the state, i.e., adding blocks
to the chain. It only allows the adding of an Attestation to the chain. So each
state change is the addition of a new attestation.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Transaction Processor
51
4.2.1.3
Payload
The AttestationPayload contains the format of an attestation transaction in the
blockchain. It deﬁnes that attestations should contain a boolean attestation
result, a device identiﬁer, a created on timestamp, the seed for the scheduling
and the scheduled attestation time as designed in Section 3.2.5. Furthermore,
it deﬁnes that the transaction should have an action deﬁned, where the only
allowed action is publish_attestation, since there is no other transaction types
needed for the attestation side of the protocol.
4.2.2
Diﬃe-Hellman Group Key Exchange
The Diﬃe-Hellman transaction processor implements the smart contract for the
group key exchange. It computes the trust scores for the devices, determines
which devices are allowed to participate in the key exchange, initializes the key
and adds public key parts from participants to the key, as well as informing
devices about new key generation and key completion.
4.2.2.1
Handler
The DHTransactionHandler has the business logic for the Diﬃe-Hellman group
key exchange using the blockchain for integrity and authenticity. It allows for
two types of transactions, create and transmit.
When it receives a create transaction, it will initialize a key if there are any
devices above the conﬁgured trust score threshold, that is if there are any devices
valid to participate in the key exchange. To compute the trust scores of the
devices and ﬁnd devices valid for key exchange participation, the handler queries
the blockchain for all batches. The HyperLedger Sawtooth Rest-API [Saw] does
not support querying for batches only within a speciﬁc transaction family. The
TrustEngine, computing the trust scores, groups the transactions by device and
ﬁlters out transactions not in the "attestations" transaction family, e.g., "diﬃe-
hellman" and "settings" families. After which it computes the trust scores as
designed in Section 3.2.3. If the initialization of the key is successful, it sends
out an event informing all devices that a new key is being established. The
event is asking the devices to send their public parts as transactions with the
transmit action.
On the transmit action, the handler checks if the devices is included in the valid
participants for the key, if it is not the transaction is ignored. Thus no device
without a trust score above the conﬁgured threshold is able to participate in the
key exchange. It also checks if the device has already sent its public part and
==PAGE:68==
52
Implementation
throws an error if it has, preventing replays. Otherwise it adds the public part
to the key in a dictionary mapping devices to their public parts. Once it has
received the public part from all participating devices, it sends out a ﬁnished
event with the (device, public part) dictionary for the key. Since this is all public
parts, it does not cause any security issues that also untrusted devices receive
this event. Since the untrusted devices do not have a private part included in
the shared key, they cannot construct the ﬁnal session key.
4.2.2.2
State
The state for the Diﬃe-Hellman transaction family contains the GroupSession-
Key class and the DHState class.
The GroupSessionKey deﬁnes for format and data contained in the session keys.
The session keys contain a nonce, a prime and a dictionary of participating de-
vices with their public part of the key.
The DHState controls the interaction with the state of the key. It allows for
initializing and getting the key, as well as getting and adding participants to
the key. The handler uses these methods based on the business rules deﬁned in
the smart contract implemented. The state does not contain any business rules
with regards to the key, it is merely a database interface. However, it does raise
an exception if trying to get a participants from a key, where the participant is
not added as a valid participant during the key initialization.
4.2.2.3
Payload
The Diﬃe-Hellman payload is split on two diﬀerent formats depending on the
action of the transaction.
If the transaction is of type create, then the payload must contain a nonce and
a prime.
If the transaction is of type transmit, then the payload must contain the public
part and the nonce. The nonce is used for the addressing, i.e., to identify for
which key the transaction is associated.
In both cases the payload must contain the action name. If the action is wrong
or not given, or if the content of the payload is incorrect for the message, then
the payload creation fails as it raises an exception, making it impossible to get
the transaction processor to handle invalid payloads.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In this chapter the presented solution is analyzed in three diﬀerent ways. First
the solutions security is analyzed, followed by its performance and ﬁnally it is
analyzed in relation to existing remote attestation schemes.
The security analysis is done with regards to security requirements and proper-
ties.
The performance analysis is concerned with memory usage, computational and
communications overhead and extra costs from hardware requirements.
The comparative analysis focus on the similarities and diﬀerences between the
presented solution and the existing remote attestation schemes.
5.1
Security Analysis
The security of the solution is considered from two aspects. The attestation
should be secure and the stored results should be immutable, as well as the
group session key must only be able to be computed by trusted participants
and it should be protected from the classical man-in-the-middle attack against
the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol.
==PAGE:70==
54
Discussion
5.1.1
Attestation
Considering the security of the attestation code it self, it is protected by the
hybrid attestation model. The Hybrid hardware of Read-Only Memory (ROM)
protects the attestation code from being tampered with.
Since it does not
use any keys it self there is no conﬁdentiality requirement for the attestation.
The codes security does not and should not rely on conﬁdentiality of the code.
Furthermore, the attestation result also does not have any conﬁdentiality re-
quirements, since they are publicly veriﬁable. The attestation code and result
only requires integrity guarantees, which comes from the hybrid architecture as
well as the blockchains security attributes.
The attestation results are stored in the blockchain as a signed transaction. The
blockchain provides a distributed immutable database for the results. Since the
blocks in the blockchain are immutable it is impossible to change an attestation
result after it has been committed to the blockchain. This is an attribute of the
blockchain architecture, where the blocks keep hashes of the transactions, so if
a transaction is changed it does not match the hash anymore. Furthermore, the
blocks are linked through hashes of the blocks, so if a block is changed, it will
break the chain as the hashes do not match anymore. Thus the integrity of the
attestation results have been guaranteed.
The blockchain also provides the attestation results with a guarantee of authen-
ticity, as long as a private blockchain is used. The protocol is designed around a
private blockchain using the PoET consensus algorithm. The private blockchain
uses a public/private key pair to access the blockchain. These keys have to be
protected with regards to both integrity and conﬁdentiality. The keys are gen-
erated and stored in the ROM on the devices during deployment, after which
they are protected by the Memory Protection Unit (MPU). The MPU controls
access to the keys, so that only the blockchain code can access the keys. The
ROM provides the keys with integrity and the MPU provides the conﬁdentiality.
Since the transactions with the attestation results are signed using the devices
private key for the blockchain, authenticity and non repudiation is provided.
The devices sign the transaction and cannot dispute that they signed it. Fur-
thermore, the devices can be identiﬁed by their public key.
Since the keys
conﬁdentiality if protected by the MPU, an attacker cannot obtain the private
key and impersonate a devices.
Another security issue with the attestations would be if an attacker was able to
replay a previous passed attestation on an infected device. Replay attacks are
prevented in two ways. First, every transaction has an associated nonce, proving
freshness for every transaction. Furthermore, the attestation results published
to the blockchain include the timestamp for the scheduled attestation time, as
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Security Analysis
55
well as the seed to generate the time. This means other devices and transaction
processors are able to verify the scheduled time. If an attacker replays a previous
transaction, it would collide with the previously published transaction and it
would also fail the scheduled time validation, since the scheduled time would be
too long ago.
The security of the attestation relies on the strength of the hybrid hardware. If
an attacker ﬁnds a way to circumvent the hardware security, then the attestation
is no longer secure. It is assumed that this requires a physical adversary, which
is considered out of scope.
However, existing attestations in the blockchain
is resilient to hard adversaries, as the transactions are stored and veriﬁed by
all devices in the network. As such, even a physical adversary cannot change
existing attestation results. If the adversary get access to the private key for
the blockchain, she would be able to publish fake results, and by controlling
the seed for the schedule it would be possible to publish new attestations often
enough to get above the conﬁgured threshold. Furthermore, if the adversary
is able to circumvent the ROM protection of the attestation code, she would
be able to have it always return true, even if compromised, and then let the
device continue attestation on the normal schedule, without tampering with the
attestation scheduler.
However, verifying the scheduled attestation time has passed and is no longer
than a threshold, e.g., one hour, protects the device against hardware adver-
saries. If the device is oﬄine for the scheduled timer interval, then any attes-
tations after will be rejected. It should be added that the device is invalidated
if its attestation is rejected for this reason. If the adversary is able to control
the seed, then it would be possible to ﬁnd a new seed for which the attestation
time would ﬁt, but this would be a cumbersome trial and error task.
5.1.2
Group Session Key
The group session key requires both integrity and conﬁdentiality to be guaran-
teed in order to be secure to use. If the conﬁdentiality fails, an adversary is
able to obtain the established key and use it to communicate with the other
devices. The other devices will accept and trust the messages because they are
encrypted with the secure key. An adversary would be able to sent false data
to a device, which will trust the data and may make the wrong decision based
on the false data, e.g., a drone could get false location data and crash into an
object.
If the integrity fails, an adversary is able to change the key of a device. If the
adversary is only able to change the key on the compromised device, it would
only cause the compromised device to be unable to exchange secure messages
with other devices. Since the device is compromised, this is desired anyway and
==PAGE:72==
56
Discussion
thus not an issue. If the adversary is able to change the key of an otherwise un-
compromised device, it would cause the device to be unable to exchange secure
messages over the network. If the devices on the network requires the messages
to be secure, it would cause the device to be unable to work together with the
other devices, eﬀectively isolating it as if it was compromised.
The Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol is well know to be secure with re-
spects to conﬁdentiality. However, it is also well known that it is vulnerable
to a man-in-the-middle attack. In order to mitigate the attack, authenticity
and integrity guarantees must be provided to the messages exchanged. In the
protocol presented here, the authenticity and integrity comes from the smart
contract implementation in the blockchain. As long as the smart contract is se-
cure and untamperable, the key exchange is protected. The nonce and prime are
generated by the smart contract and submitted as a signed transaction. Thus,
the authenticity comes from the transaction processor signing the transaction
and the integrity comes from the immutability of the blockchain. The devices
generate their own private part of the key, which must be protected locally, like
any other session key. They submit their public part in a transaction to the
blockchain, which again is signed by the device using their private key for the
blockchain. Since the transaction is signed the authenticity is guaranteed, and
the integrity is again provided by the blockchain immutability. The authenticity
of the public parts of key relies on the protection of the devices private key for
the blockchain, which is protected by the MPU, only allowing the blockchain
code access to it.
No conﬁdentiality is required by the blockchain or transaction processor, since
it only stores the public parts of the key. For the key to be secure, it requires
conﬁdentiality on the devices, when they store it. Thus the group session key
must be stored securely on the devices with respects to conﬁdentiality and in-
tegrity. The storage of the key on the devices is out of scope for the protocol
presented, it only generates the key, but do not consider what happens with it
afterwards.
For the key exchange to be secure the blockchain has to be secure. This means
it should not be possible to tamper with the blocks in the blockchain or the
blockchain code it self.
In the implementation the HyperLedger Sawtooth
blockchain platform was used. This normally requires the Intel SGX to run the
PoET consensus algorithm securely. This is due to the fact that the wait-time
timer has to be untamperable. However, since other hybrid remote attestation
schemes uses a timer to trigger the attestation and the timer is secure from
tampering using hybrid architecture, it is assumes that this also suﬃce for the
timer for the PoET consensus. The blockchain is then protected the same as
the attestation, where the code is protected by being in the ROM. The private
blockchain keys conﬁdentiality is protected by the MPU. The blocks them selves
are protected by the blockchain architecture, where all devices help guarantee
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Performance Analysis
57
the blockchains integrity through the hashes that link the chain.
The smart contract running in the transaction processor is the code which cal-
culates the trust scores for the devices. Thus as long as the blockchain code is
secure, no adversary can tamper with the trust score algorithm to falsify their
results.
This means that no devices can fake their trust scores, it can only
be changed through attestation results. The trust scores control which devices
can participate in the key exchange. Since the trust scores cannot be falsiﬁed,
then no device not above the conﬁgured threshold can participate in the key
exchange, thus no untrusted device is able to compute the group session key.
Because the devices, which can participate in the group key exchange, is based
on the history of attestations and a threshold for the computed trust score, it is
possible for a compromised device to participate in the key exchange. This can
happen if a device has passed all attestations, then gets compromised and then
one failed attestation will not necessarily bring it down below the threshold. It
also depends on what the threshold is set to. However, one attestation might
also not mean that the device is compromised, it could have failed the attestation
if an error occurred during the attestation. The history based trust score moves
away from the black and white thinking, where a device is either compromised
or not. Instead trust is more of a grey zone, where experience is used to consider
how much a device can be trusted. The threshold then adds the condition that
a device has to be able to be trusted a certain amount to participate.
Since compromised devices could participate in the key exchange and as such be
considered trust worthy, it could present a security issue. To improve security
at the cost of device availability, it is possible to exclude devices as soon as they
fail an attestation, and then only add them when they have passed the latest
attestation and worked their way above the threshold. This way it is highly
unlikely that a compromised device would be able to participate. But it also
means devices wont be able to participate for a longer time, as they have to
work their way above the threshold, which potentially could take a long time.
5.2
Performance Analysis
When considering the performance of the system in an IoT setting, the following
IoT performance measures is to be considered, memory usage, computational
and communications overhead (i.e., power usage) and the cost imposed by spe-
cial hardware requirements.
When it comes to the attestation side of the performance, it relies on which
attestation method is selected. This is out of scope of this paper and as such will
==PAGE:74==
58
Discussion
not be considered. Instead the performance impact of the blockchain integration
is where the diﬀerence lies.
With regards to the cost of the solution, it uses a hybrid hardware solution
which requires ROM, a MPU and a RTC. These three extra components does
increase the cost of an IoT device. Even though these components are extra
hardware features with an associated increased cost, they have been used in
many remote attestation schemes because they are relatively cheap compared to
other hardware solutions like Trusted Platform Modules (TPM). Pure software
solutions without any hardware requirements have proven to be insecure against
certain types of attacks, e.g., Return Oriented Programming (ROP) attacks.
The solution does have a computational overhead, by using the blockchain where
the Diﬃe-Hellman smart contract has to be run, transactions and blocks have
to be created, validated and published. The creation and validation of transac-
tions and blocks adds some small computation, while the Diﬃe-Hellman smart
contract adds more heavy computation. The Diﬃe-Hellman group key exchange
requires the trust scores to be computed, which can be a large computation is
the network consists of a lot of devices and the devices have a long history of
attestations. The computation of the trust scores grow with a complexity of
O(n×m), where n is the number of devices in the network and m is the number
of attestation results the devices have. This growth is due to the fact that it for
each device takes each of its attestations results and adds it to the score before
averaging it out in the end. Since the part each attestations adds or subtracts
from the trust score is not dependent of the other attestations, it is possible to
compute them concurrently to increase performance. However, if the IoT device
only has one processor it will not increase the performance, so it requires the
devices to have at least two processors.
The prime number generation of the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol is
also a computational heavy algorithm. In the proof-of-concept implementation,
a simple and ineﬃcient algorithm was used. This could be optimized with a
smarter and better performing algorithm. But prime number generation is still
a cumbersome task.
An alternative solution to using the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange protocol and
avoid the prime number generation, would be to have the smart contract gener-
ate the key and encrypt it with the public blockchain keys of the participating
devices and as such utilize the blockchain keys for other than the blockchain
interactions. However, this would require the transaction processor to ﬁrst gen-
erate a key and then encrypt it separately for each device and send it to them,
which would also be computationally costly from all the encryption. Since the
transaction processor runs on a device, it would mean the computational cost
of establishing the key is placed on a single device. Also public/private key
encryption is known to be more costly than symmetric key encryption, so the
many public/private key encryptions would most likely be more costly than
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Performance Analysis
59
generating the prime for the Diﬃe-Hellman.
The solution does not introduce a high communications overhead. The attes-
tation result is published to the blockchain, which in turn is published to all
devices when accepted. They key generation event is published to all devices,
which then respond to the event with their public part, before ﬁnally receiving
the ﬁnal event to compute the key. All in all this means the attested device
sends two messages and receives two messages, while other participating de-
vices receive three messages and send one.
Some additional communication
does take place behind the scenes, for the blockchain to keep consistency and
for the consensus of the blockchain. However, the PoET consensus algorithm is
both computationally and communications eﬃcient, meaning compared to other
consensus algorithms it is very eﬃcient.
The memory usage is the least eﬃcient part of the solution. Besides attestation
code and whatever code the devices run for normal operations, they need to
also store the blockchain code. This means they need to store the blockchain
validation, consensus, transaction processor, rest-api, settings processor and
client code in ROM. Furthermore, the blockchain database needs to be kept on
every device and continues growing, which could result in very high memory
demands if the devices run on the blockchain for a long time. To increase the
memory eﬃciency, an approach could be adopted to not keep all attestation
results (transactions/blocks), but instead clean and delete them to only keep
the last e.g., ten attestations. This would reduce the required memory, but also
make the trust score less accurate. The downside for the trust score is very
low, as the older the attestations are, the less weight and impact they have on
the ﬁnal score. How it technically works with the blockchain to remove older
blocks is left for future work. Another potentially high memory requirement
is the need to store the valid results on the devices. If the devices has many
possible conﬁgurations it has to store a lot of possible valid attestation results.
However, if there are few possible attestation results, this memory requirement
becomes less of an issue.
When considering the performance of blockchains, a common measure is through-
put in transactions per second. A high throughput for the blockchain is impor-
tant when a lot of transactions are published by many clients all of the time.
However, in this solution only attestations and key exchanges are transactions
in the blockchain. Since attestations and key exchanges should not occur all of
the time and requires quite few transactions, the throughput of the blockchain
is an irrelevant measure. The PoET consensus algorithm does not have the best
throughput, but is instead more eﬃcient with respect to computational and
communications overhead, which makes it ideal in this solution. Furthermore,
the PoET consensus algorithm scales well, meaning even if many devices join
the network it does not negatively aﬀect the performance, thus it can be used
==PAGE:76==
60
Discussion
in large IoT networks.
5.3
Comparative Analysis
When comparing the solution to the other remote attestation schemes using
blockchain, the most obvious diﬀerence is the choice in consensus algorithm.
Both BARRET [BNXT19] and TM-COIN [PK17] uses the PoW algorithm,
which is very computational heavy, while DAN [JS20] uses the PBFT consen-
sus, which has a high communications overhead and does not scale well. In the
solution presented in this thesis, the choice of consensus algorithm is the PoET,
because it has good performance on computational and communications over-
head, which is desirable in and IoT setting. The low throughput of the PoET
algorithm is not an issue since the attestations and key exchanges should not
require a lot of transaction and therefore does not need a high throughput. This
means the solution presented here should have a much increased performance
over the other schemes.
The choice of blockchain for each of the schemes is mostly related to the choice
of consensus algorithm. The Ethereum blockchain used by BARRET is a well
known and supported blockchain platform using the PoW algorithm. Hyper-
Ledger Fabric is a large well known private enterprise blockchain with good
support from Intel Foundation and uses PBFT as its main consensus algorithm.
TM-COIN decided to make their own blockchain, but still use the PoW con-
sensus algorithm. The solution presented here uses the HyperLedger Sawtooth
blockchain platform in the proof-of-concept implementation because it is the
only platform using the PoET algorithm. It would however be ideal make the
blockchain from scratch to be able to use the same timer for the attestation
triggering and the blockchain consensus wait time. The blockchain consensus
wait-time timer cannot be accessed in HyperLedger Sawtooth.
Another diﬀerence in the choice of blockchain is using public or private blockchain.
Where BARRET and TM-COIN uses public blockchains, DAN and the solution
presented here uses a private blockchain. In [MT20a] the authors the diﬀerence
between the public and the private blockchains. It concludes that the public
blockchains are too ineﬃcient and instead the more eﬃcient private blockchains
should be used.
When in comes to the choice of remote attestation method, it does not make
a big diﬀerence. However, TM-COIN and DAN both uses hardware based at-
testation, which does impose extra hardware requirements and as such increase
the cost of the devices. While BARRET and the solution presented here can
use any hybrid or hardware based attestation method.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Comparative Analysis
61
Furthermore, none of BARRET, TM-COIN or DAN is actually decentralized,
which is a main feature of blockchains. They all use a trusted veriﬁer, which
means there has to be a trusted third party. The solution presented here has
no such requirement, it fully utilize the decentralized nature of the blockchain.
Unlike the other schemes, the presented solution works with a group of peers
working together in environments where they do not have any trusted veriﬁer
or base station, due to being decentralized.
Table 5.1 shows a summary of the diﬀerences between the remote attestation
schemes using blockchain and the presented solution.
RA
scheme
Public/
Private
Consensus
Blockchain
RA
Decentralized
BARRET
Public
PoW
Ethereum
Any
No
TM-COIN
Public
PoW
Own
Hardware
No
DAN
Private
PBFT
HyperLedger
Fabric
Hardware
No
Own
Private
PoET
HyperLedger
Sawtooth
Any
Yes
Table 5.1: Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain Comparison
While self-triggering attestation has already been presented in SEED [Ibr] and
ERASMUS [CIT18].
Even though these schemes present the base for self-
triggering attestations, they use it to prevent (D)DoS attacks and to sched-
ule the attestations at more opportune times, but still uses a trusted Veriﬁer
to check the results, thus they are not decentralized. Furthermore, these two
schemes are not publicly veriﬁable, as the trusted Veriﬁer checks the results.
While the presented solution also is a self-triggering attestation, it beneﬁts from
also being decentralized and publicly veriﬁable.
Like the presented solution, the decentralized attestation schemes SAFEd [?],
DIAT [ABB+], US-AID [IT18], ESDRA [KFY+19] and PASTA [KK19] do not
use a trusted Veriﬁer to attest the devices. In the decentralized schemes, de-
vices attest each other. However, these schemes are not self-triggering, meaning
they require a device to send a challenge in order to start the attestation. These
schemes also do not store the attestation results with any proof of integrity,
which means every time a new device wants to talk to the attested device, it
should send a new challenge, resulting in a higher overhead.
==PAGE:78==
62
Discussion
In SAFEd the overhead is even higher, as the device playing the Veriﬁer role
has to collect the proofs from every other device storing a proof for the device
being attested.
DIAT is a simple distributed attestation protocol, where the attestation result
is sent together with the data, whenever data is requested, as such it does not
introduce any extra overhead.
US-AID builds on top of the previous distributed schemes by adding a heart-
beat protocol. The heartbeat protocol involves checking if devices are online, by
sending messages. These extra messages increase the overhead of the protocol
slightly.
ESDRA is a semi distributed swarm attestation protocol, where cluster heads
are selected, devices attest each other and the cluster heads collect the results.
The cluster heads are selected by a system owner, making it not fully distributed.
However, similar to the presented solution, ESDRA assigns a none true/false
trust value to the devices. It uses a credit score to assess the value of trust to
put in each device.
PASTA is a many-to-many distributed attestation scheme. It is the only dis-
tributed attestation scheme which is publicly veriﬁable, through the use of a
multi-signature scheme. It uses a spanning tree to propagate the attestation
challenges, so the same device is not challenged by several devices, allowing for
a low overhead. Even though the attestation result is publicly veriﬁable, does
not store the results in a way allowing for the use of the history of attestations,
unlike the presented solution.
While these distributed attestation schemes also do not require a trusted Veri-
ﬁer, they still require devices to be challenged. Furthermore, SAFEd and US-
AID has an increased overhead, and none of the schemes allow for the use of the
history of attestations. The presented solution is also distributed and publicly
veriﬁable (for anyone connected to the blockchain), but is also self-triggering,
making it the devices job to prove its integrity, rather than other devices asking
for integrity proofs. Self-triggering attestation is slightly more eﬃcient, but the
communication to keep the consistency of the blockchain increases the overhead,
making the overhead no better or worse than the majority of the distributed
schemes. Unlike the distributed schemes, the presented solution uses the history
of the attestations to measure the trustworthiness, making the trust more of a
spectrum instead of trusted or not trusted.
Like the scheme presented here, the swarm attestation schemes SEDA [ABI+15],
SANA [ACI+16], PADS [ACL18] and SALAD [Gre22], make use of self attes-
tation. SEDA, SANA, PADS AND SALAD aim to attest a group of devices at
the same time, where each device store the valid hash(es) for the attestation,
thus the Veriﬁer does not need to compute the valid hash, i.e. self attesta-
tion.
SANA builds on top of this with a multi-signature scheme, making it
publicly veriﬁable. However, these schemes are not decentralized as they still
use a trusted Veriﬁer, which also sends the initial challenge, so they are also not
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Comparative Analysis
63
self-triggering. Furthermore, they do not use the history of attestation like the
presented scheme does. PADS uses a consensus algorithm to ensure every device
has the same view of the trust in the network, but only considering the latest
attestations. PADS uses a voting based consensus algorithm, which increases
the communications overhead more than the PoET consensus algorithm used
in the presented scheme. Like PADS, SALAD keeps the network state on each
device, i.e, every device keeps the attestation result of every device in the net-
work. Keeping the attestation results like PADS and SALAD, is similar to the
presented scheme keeping the results in the blockchain. However, the blockchain
provides extra integrity and allow for the use of the whole history of attestations
to be used. The presented solution uses more memory than PADS and SALAD,
since the attestation results are not aggregated and each attestation is stored in
one block in the blockchain.
LISA [CERT17] and SARA [DRC+20] are two swarm attestation schemes, which
are not decentralized, self-triggering or publicly veriﬁable. LISA focus on the
Quality of the attestations and presents two simple protocols for swarm attes-
tation with result aggregation.
While SARA builds the attestation into the
normal operations, using the publish/subscribe communications paradigm com-
monly used in IoT.
Unlike the presented protocol, none of the existing remote attestation schemes,
researched in relation with this thesis, consider the use of the attestation results
after they have been generated.
The presented protocol uses the history of
attestation results to decide trust and establish a group session key.
==PAGE:80==
64
Discussion
Scheme
Overhead
Decentralized
Self-Triggering
Publicly
Veriﬁable
BARRET
High
No
No
No
TM-COIN
High
No
No
No
DAN
High
No
No
No
SEED
Low
No
Yes
No
ERASMUS
Low
No
Yes
No
SAFEd
High
Yes
No
No
DIAT
Low
Yes
No
No
US-AID
Medium
Yes
No
No
ESDRA
Low
Semi
No
No
PASTA
Low
Yes
No
Yes
SEDA
Low
No
No
No
SANA
Low
No
No
Yes
PADS
High
No
No
No
SALAD
Low
No
No
No
LISA
Low
No
No
No
SARA
Low
No
No
No
Own
Low
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 5.2: Remote Attestation schemes summary
In Table 5.1 we can see the diﬀerences between the remote attestation schemes
using blockchain, with respect to the choice of blockchain architecture. The table
shows that the presented solution uses the most eﬃcient blockchain architecture
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Comparative Analysis
65
with a private blockchain using the PoET consensus protocol. Furthermore, it
is the only decentralized remote attestation scheme using blockchain and one
of two schemes not requiring hardware attestation with specialized hardware,
which increases the cost of devices.
From Table 5.2 we can see the remote attestation schemes compared with regards
to being decentralized, self-triggering and publicly veriﬁable, as well as extra
overhead (computational or communications) imposed by the scheme.
From
this table it is clear to see, that the solution presented in this thesis is the
only scheme with fulﬁll all three properties, without adding a high overhead.
Furthermore, the presented scheme is the only remote attestation scheme using
the history of of attestations.
==PAGE:82==
66
Discussion
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
Security has been an issue within IoT due to the resource constraints of the
devices. The resource constraint means the devices cannot be protected by con-
ventional means.
A major research area for the security of IoT devices is remote attestation as
a way to detect compromised devices. Remote attestation has been researched
in many diﬀerent ways. Research has been done in performing attestation with
diﬀerent hardware requirements, distributed attestation, self-triggering attesta-
tion, publicly veriﬁable attestation, swarm attestation and more.
Blockchain has also been an extensive research area in modern times and has
recently made its way into IoT. Much of the recent research focus on making
blockchain more eﬃcient, which allows for it to be used in IoT. Furthermore,
blockchain has seen use in a few remote attestation schemes.
The problem with the existing remote attestation schemes is the missing com-
bination of being decentralized, publicly veriﬁable, and eﬃcient. The existing
schemes only use the most recent attestation result, and only a few store them
with a proof of integrity.
Attesting devices at the beginning of every com-
munication is very ineﬃcient as it requires the devices to often run expensive
computations in order to produce the attestation result. Furthermore, no ex-
isting attestation scheme uses the history of attestations to decide the trust in
devices as more of a spectrum of trust, rather than just trusting devices if they
==PAGE:84==
68
Conclusion and Future Work
passed their most recent attestation (or not).
This thesis project proposes a new protocol that relies on hybrid remote at-
testation architecture and the blockchain technology to make the attestation
decentralized, publicly veriﬁable and eﬃcient. It does not need to attest the
devices at the beginning of every communication, because it uses the history of
attestations to decide the trust level of the devices as a spectrum. If the devices
are high enough in the spectrum, they participate in a group key exchange,
such that the trustworthy devices share a session key. If two or more devices
communicate using the key, they can be sure that they can trust each other.
A proof of concept implementation of the protocol was made, showing that it is
a working and viable solution. Additionally, the proposed solutions security and
performance have been compared to state-of-the-art remote attestation schemes.
The proposed protocol uses the history of attestations to give a better picture
of how trustworthy devices are, rather than just deciding based on the latest
attestation result. Furthermore, it is the only attestation scheme which actively
use the attestation results in a key exchange protocol.
The strength of the
protocols security, with respect to both attestation and key exchange, lies in the
strong security guarantees of the blockchain. While blockchain historically has
been known to be very ineﬃcient due to the consensus algorithms, the proposed
protocol uses the PoET consensus algorithm which is very eﬃcient when it comes
to computational and communications overhead.
The proposed solution also comes with some downsides. The PoET Consen-
sus algorithm, while having low computational and communications overhead,
has a relatively low throughput compared to other consensus algorithms. This
could present an issue if the solutions is deployed in a very large network or if
attestations run often. However, as long as the attestations are few and spread
enough not to require a high throughput, this is not an issue.
A more inﬂuential weakness is the increased memory requirements. The pro-
posed solution adds the blockchain code that requires extra ROM. Storing all
the attestation results in the blockchain database also requires extra memory.
Since the blockchain is a distributed ledger, it means that every device needs
to store the whole blockchain database with the results of all the devices. If
devices have a long life time and/or run many attestations, this database could
expand rapidly, possibly beyond the available memory of the devices.
Using the blockchain also introduces extra cryptographic operations. Crypto-
graphic operations are known to be resource expensive for IoT devices. So the
extra security of the blockchain comes at the computational cost of the extra
cryptographic operations. However, it may require fewer attestations that also
use cryptographic operations, so the total amount of operations might be the
same or less over a longer period.
==PAGE:85==
69
In continuation with the work on the proposed protocol, some performance op-
timizations should be done in the proof-of-concept implementation. The current
approach establishes a new key on every attestation, which is ineﬃcient, and
instead, it should only start a new key if the participating devices has changed
or the old key has expired. Also more experiments are needed for a more em-
pirical and quantitative analysis of the protocol’s performance. Furthermore, a
more detailed analysis of the protocols memory requirements should be done to
accurately measure this requirement, as it is the protocol’s greatest weakness.
Also, some optimizations on the memory usage could be done, for instance, not
keeping the entire history of attestations, but only a certain amount e.g., the
ten latest attestations.
An interesting open research area, for future work, is investigating and designing
even more eﬃcient blockchain architectures, speciﬁcally for use in IoT devices.
Eﬃciency of remote attestation methods is another research area where im-
provements can be made. Exploring the possibility of attesting devices without
the use of heavy cryptographic operations, but instead use lighter operations or
other methods to produce the attestation result without loosing security guar-
antees.
There are still attacks undetected by state-of-the-art attestation methods, such
as Return Oriented Programming attacks (ROP), which require research to ﬁnd
a solution for detecting them.
Attestation of device’s data memory is also still an open challenge. The data
memory is known to be volatile and change values often, making it diﬃcult to
determine the correct values. Further research into areas such as static pro-
gram analysis to attest the data memory could open the way to attest the data
memory.
==PAGE:86==
70
Conclusion and Future Work
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[ABB+]
Tigist Abera, Raad Bahmani, Ferdinand Brasser, Ahmad Ibrahim,
Ahmad-reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter.
DIAT : Data In-
tegrity Attestation for Resilient Collaboration of Autonomous Sys-
tems.
[ABB+18]
Elli Androulaki, Artem Barger, Vita Bortnikov, Christian Cachin,
Konstantinos Christidis, Angelo De Caro, David Enyeart, Christo-
pher Ferris, Gennady Laventman, Yacov Manevich, Srinivasan Mu-
ralidharan, Chet Murthy, Binh Nguyen, Manish Sethi, Gari Singh,
Keith Smith, Alessandro Sorniotti, Chrysoula Stathakopoulou,
Marko Vukolić, Sharon Weed Cocco, and Jason Yellick. Hyper-
ledger fabric. pages 1–15, 2018.
[ABI+15]
N Asokan,
Ferdinand Brasser,
Ahmad Ibrahim,
Ahmad-reza
Sadeghi, Matthias Schunter, Gene Tsudik, and Christian Wachs-
mann. SEDA : Scalable Embedded Device Attestation. pages 964–
975, 2015.
[ACI+16]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Ahmad Ibrahim, Gregory Neven,
Ahmad Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter. SANA: Secure and
scalable aggregate network attestation. Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 24-28-
Octo:731–742, 2016.
[ACL18]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, and Riccardo Lazzeretti. PADS
: Practical Attestation for Highly. pages 1–20, 2018.
[ACL+20]
M. Ambrosin, M. Conti, R. Lazzeretti, M. Rabbani, and S. Ranise.
Collective Remote Attestation at the Internet of Things Scale:
==PAGE:88==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
State-of-the-art and Future Challenges.
IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, (c):1–1, 2020.
[AWC]
Mahmoud Ammar, Mahdi Washha, and Bruno Crispo.
WISE:
Lightweight Intelligent Swarm Attestation Scheme for IoT (The
Veriﬁer’s Perspective). Technical report.
[BKLS20]
Sotirios Brotsis, Nicholas Kolokotronis, Konstantinos Limniotis,
and Stavros Shiaeles. On the security of permissioned blockchain
solutions for IoT applications. Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Con-
ference on Network Softwarization: Bridging the Gap Between AI
and Network Softwarization, NetSoft 2020, (786698):465–472, 2020.
[BNXT19]
Michail Bampatsikos, Christoforos Ntantogian, Christos Xenakis,
and Stelios C.A. Tomopoulos.
BARRETT blockchain regulated
remote attestation. Proceedings - 2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Web Intelligence Workshops, WI 2019 Com-
panion, pages 256–262, 2019.
[CERT17]
Xavier Carpent, Karim El Defrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon,
and Gene Tsudik. Lightweight swarm attestation: A tale of two
LISA-s.
ASIA CCS 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 86–
100, 2017.
[CIT18]
Xavier Carpent, U C Irvine, and Gene Tsudik. ERASMUS : E ﬃ-
cient R emote A ttestation via S elf- M easurement for U nattended
S ettings. pages 1191–1194, 2018.
[DRC+20]
Edlira Dushku, Masoom Rabbani, Mauro Conti, Luigi V Mancini,
and Silvio Ranise. SARA : Secure Asynchronous Remote Attesta-
tion for IoT Systems. 15:3123–3136, 2020.
[FGKM20]
Caixiang Fan, Sara Ghaemi, Hamzeh Khazaei, and Petr Musilek.
Performance Evaluation of Blockchain Systems: A Systematic Sur-
vey. IEEE Access, 8:126927–126950, 2020.
[Gre22]
Herbert W. Greene. Salad. Notes and Queries, s12-X(214):389,
1922.
[GS20]
Thomas Gross and Ioannis Sfyrakis. A Survey on Hardware Ap-
proaches for Remote Attestation in Network Infrastructures. arXiv,
pages 1–20, 2020.
[Ibr]
Ahmad Ibrahim. SeED : Secure Non-Interactive Attestation for
Embedded Devices.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[IDS+]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad Ibrahim@cased De, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi,
Gene Tsudik, and Shaza Zeitouni.
DARPA: Device Attestation
Resilient to Physical Attacks.
[IM19]
Leila Ismail and Huned Materwala. A review of blockchain architec-
ture and consensus protocols: Use cases, challenges, and solutions.
Symmetry, 11(10), 2019.
[IT18]
Ahmad Ibrahim and Gene Tsudik. US-AID : Unattended Scalable
Attestation of IoT Devices. pages 21–30, 2018.
[JS20]
Ira Ray Jenkins and Sean W. Smith. Distributed IoT Attestation
via Blockchain. Proceedings - 20th IEEE/ACM International Sym-
posium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing, CCGRID 2020,
pages 798–801, 2020.
[KBG+17]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, Sebastian Gabmeyer, Stefan
Katzenbeisser, and Stefan Katzen. SCAPI: A Scalable Attestation
Protocol to Detect Software and Physical Attacks. 12, 2017.
[KFY+19]
Boyu Kuang, Anmin Fu, Shui Yu, Guomin Yang, Mang Su, and
Yuqing Zhang. ESDRA: An Eﬃcient and Secure Distributed Re-
mote Attestation Scheme for IoT Swarms. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 6(5):8372–8383, 2019.
[KK19]
Florian Kohnh and Stefan Katzenbeisser. A Practical Attestation
Protocol for Autonomous Embedded Systems. pages 263–278, 2019.
[LLH+20]
Laphou Lao, Zecheng Li, Songlin Hou, Bin Xiao, Songtao Guo,
and Yuanyuan Yang. A survey of IoT applications in blockchain
systems: Architecture, consensus, and traﬃc modeling. ACM Com-
puting Surveys, 53(1), 2020.
[MT20a]
Robert Muth and Florian Tschorsch. SmartDHX: Diﬃe-Hellman
Key Exchange with Smart Contracts.
Proceedings - 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Decentralized Applications and Infras-
tructures, DAPPS 2020, pages 164–168, 2020.
[MT20b]
Robert Muth and Florian Tschorsch. SmartDHX: Diﬃe-Hellman
Key Exchange with Smart Contracts.
Proceedings - 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Decentralized Applications and Infras-
tructures, DAPPS 2020, pages 164–168, 2020.
[Nak12]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash Sys-
tem. 2012.
[OBM+18]
Kelly Olson, Mic Bowman, James Mitchell, Shawn Amundson, Dan
Middleton, and Cian Montgomery.
Sawtooth: An Introduction.
(January):1–7, 2018.
==PAGE:90==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PK17]
Jaemin Park and Kwangjo Kim. TM-Coin : Trustworthy Manage-
ment of TCB Measurements in IoT. 2017.
[RF20]
Mohammadreza Rasolroveicy and Marios Fokaefs.
Performance
evaluation of distributed ledger technologies for IoT data registry:
A comparative study.
Proceedings of the World Conference on
Smart Trends in Systems, Security and Sustainability, WS4 2020,
pages 137–144, 2020.
[Saw]
Endpoint Speciﬁcations — Sawtooth latest documentation.
[SL16]
Rodrigo Vieira Steiner and Emil Lupu.
Attestation in Wireless
Sensor Networks: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 49(3):1–32,
2016.
[SPVDK04] Arvind Seshadri, Adrian Perrig, Leendert Van Doorn, and Pradeep
Khosla. SWATT: Software-based attestation for embedded devices.
In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium on Security & Privacy
IEEE S&P ’04, pages 272–282, 2004.
[VFB20]
Emanuel Vieira, Joaquim Ferreira, and Paulo C. Bartolomeu.
Blockchain Technologies for IoT Applications: Use-cases and Limi-
tations. IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies
and Factory Automation, ETFA, 2020-September:1560–1567, 2020.
[VTCZ19]
Alessandro
Visintin,
Flavio
Toﬀalini,
Mauro
Conti,
and
Jianying
Zhou.
SAFEd
:
Self
−
AttestationForNetworksofHeterogeneousEmbeddedDevices.2019.
[Woo14]
Gavin Wood. Ethereum: a secure decentralised generalised trans-
action ledger. Ethereum Project Yellow Paper, pages 1–32, 2014.
[YHY+15]
Xinyu Yang, Xiaofei He, Wei Yu, Jie Lin, Rui Li, Qingyu Yang, and
Houbing Song. Towards a low-cost remote memory attestation for
the smart grid. Sensors (Switzerland), 15(8):20799–20824, 2015.
