==PAGE:1==
Distance Work & Well-being
Experiences of Managers and their transition to
Distance Managers in times of COVID-19
Master Thesis
By:
Laurine Keller (s192348)
M.Sc. in Industrial Engineering and Management
Supervised by:
Christine Ipsen
Technical University of Denmark
Innovation Division
June 24, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The world witnessed a global and widespread pandemic in form of the COVID-19 virus,
forcing governments into lock-down and encouraging people to work from home. The
quick and sudden transition could potentially have a signiﬁcant impact on the well-being,
productivity, and general perception of workers. This work focuses on managers as they
hold a central role within the organization and are further responsible to track and sup-
port their subordinates’ well-being. By analyzing responses collected through e-surveys
designed to investigate employees’ experience of working from home during diﬀerent stages
of the pandemic, various trends and phenomena could be identiﬁed. The surveys contain
replies from over 134 through each of the three rounds of surveying. By clustering the
responses it was found, that the majority of managers perceive working from home as
having more advantages than disadvantages throughout the pandemic. The most positive
aspects cover the time-savings resulting from transportation and ﬂexible working hours.
The negative aspects include a decreasing job satisfaction, the lack of interactions with
colleagues and the inability to separate private time from working hours. Additionally,
between 42 % and 53 % of managers were found to be “unhappy” and “unproductive”
while app. 30% could be described as “unhappy” and “productive”. The analysis also
showed that female managers were having more diﬃculties working from home at the
start of the pandemic. Several other trends were also observed and highlighted in the
temporal context of the surveys.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the writing of this thesis, I have received a great deal of support and assis-
tance.
I would ﬁrst like to thank my supervisor, Associate Professor Christine Ipsen, whose ex-
pertise was invaluable for formulating the research questions and who brought me closer to
the core intentions of research in general. Your insightful feedback pushed me to sharpen
my thinking and brought my work to a higher level.
I would like to thank Associate Professor Kathrin Kirchner, who always had an answer
to my questions regarding data analysis and data handling. You provided me with the
necessary tools to choose the right direction in testing and validating my ﬁndings. Your
patient support has helped me to stay comfortable with big amounts of data.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere thanks and eternal gratitude to my late grand-
father, Franz Schwarz. I will forever cherish your love, words of wisdom, and wise counsel
throughout my life. Your belief in me is what got me so far. Although you might not be
with us to see me ﬁnish my degree, I know you will be watching us from heaven above,
as the guardian angel you have always been.
Laurine Keller, Copenhagen, June 2021
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Framework
3
2.1
Workplace Well-being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Workplace Well-being transferred to Managers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Distance Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Distance Work during COVID-19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Literature Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
16
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Data Collection Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Representative Social Distribution in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Measures and Survey Technique
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Data Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Descriptive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Advanced Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results & Discussion
31
4.1
Descriptive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Preliminary Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Demographics and Major Work Responsibilities of Managers work-
ing from Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Perceptions and Experiences of Managers while working from Home
during Covid-19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.4
Perceptions and Experiences of Managers which are NOT working
from Home
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.5
Respondents’ Personal Perceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Advanced Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Statistical Measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.2
Hypotheses Formulation and Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.2.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2.4
Further Insights from Open-ended Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5
Findings
72
6
Limitations
74
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
iv
7
Conclusion
75
8
Future Work
76
Bibliography
76
Appendix A
81
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
At the beginning of 2020, the world was struck by a pandemic caused by the Corona Virus
Disease (COVID-19), an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered form of the coro-
navirus. The majority of people infected with the COVID-19 virus experienced mild to
moderate respiratory illness and recovered without requiring special treatment. However,
older people and those with underlying medical problems like cardiovascular disease, di-
abetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer were more likely to develop serious illness
(WHO, 2021). In consequence, over 10 Million cases have been discovered worldwide and
close to 2 Million lives have been claimed in a matter of few months (Worldometer, 2021).
The best way to prevent and slow down the transmission of the disease is to practice
physical distancing by avoiding unnecessary contact with others and staying away from
large groups of people, which in the most parts also included workplaces, sports clubs,
and leisure activities (WHO, 2021).
This change in the global living circumstances has forced institutions and individuals to
radically adjust their habitual actions. All that was once customary and regarded as an
everyday routine, was abandoned in an eﬀort to contain and limit the spread of the pan-
demic. Besides the drastic changes in the every-day personal lives, our work environments
were largely shaped by a ”new normal”. All social and physical interactions between lead-
ers, colleagues, and peers have been reduced to a more distanced communication. The
normal workplace activities such as face-to-face meetings and brief consultations with
leaders and colleagues have been migrated from the physical realm into the virtual space
using a variety of online communication tools (Zoom, MS Teams, Skype, etc.). Further-
more, the quick feedback loops within the workspace and spontaneous words of motivation
and encouragement have lost their space and are now dictated by pre-arranged meetings.
Especially the relationship between managers and their subordinates had to undergo a
forced changed in terms of communication, as managers had to lead and trust employees
who are out of sight without being able to control and monitor these closely. Managers,
therefore, transitioned into ”distance managers”, however, their lack of knowledge on how
to lead without any face-to-face communication, caused signiﬁcant strains on both sides.
Managers were unable to maintain motivation and support employees in the daily work-
load, while employees were confronted with a lack of social support from colleagues, task
autonomy, and work-to-family conﬂicts (Kawada, 2020).
In consequence, the coronavirus disease is having a profound impact, with far-reaching
implications for the way people live and work across Europe and the globe. The following
report will investigate the impact of COVID-19 on managers with a focus on their tran-
sition to distance workers through analyzing trends in the data from a survey conducted
on people’s reaction to working from home.
1
==PAGE:7==
1.2. OBJECTIVE
2
Already before the crisis a lot of organizations strove to hold some of their meetings on-
line, due to the wish to become more sustainable, provide more ﬂexibility and save travel
expenses. Yet with the outbreak of COVID-19, research indicates that the COVID-19
crisis has promoted working from somewhere else but the physical workplace on-site be-
coming an integral part of working life in the near future and perhaps even the next big
trend in the labor market (Katsabian, 2020). In this study, we understand this way of
working as telework, which can also be described as “work that uses information and
communication technologies to perform work remotely from the main site of operations”
(Armstrong, 2004). The words telework, distance work, working from home, and remote
work will be used interchangeably.
1.2
Objective
In an eﬀort to shed light on experiences, perceptions, and possible advantages and dis-
advantages of working remotely during COVID-19, Ipsen et al. (2020a) conducted an
e-survey to this end. This work aims to analyze the collected data with a special focus
on managers and the development of their survey answers during the ﬁrst year of the
pandemic by working from home. An emphasis lies on how the respondents collaborate
and organize their transition to distance workers and managers. What information does
the survey reveal on the diﬃculties and development opportunities of managers working
from home? By answering this question, the following analysis will look into theories and
concepts on workplace well-being, distance work, and managers conducted before and
after the pandemic. This aims to draw parallels between research on distance work pre-
and post-COVID-19 and identify possible similarities to trends in the survey data.
1.3
Thesis Outline
An overview of the recent and current international events in the form of the COVID-19
pandemic has been given as well as the purpose of the study at hand. The following
chapters will aim to provide the reader with an understanding of the topic of well-being
and distance work as well as presenting the structure of the survey to develop an under-
standing of the perceptions of workers working from home during the pandemic. Chapter
2 will give insights into the concept of well-being in general and speciﬁc to managers.
The chapter will also cover the concept of distance work and some studies conducted
that relate it to the concept of well-being. A description of the surveys and a display of
the various methods used to analyze the collected data are covered in chapter 3. These
methods can broadly be categorized into a descriptive analysis and an advanced analysis.
Chapter 4 will provide the results of both types of analysis. Throughout this chapter,
each result is discussed in the light of the respective national events and concerning the
aspects of the well-being of managers. Chapter 5 will aim to combine the ﬁndings of the
survey with theoretical concepts introduced in chapter 2 while chapter 6 points out the
limitations of this analysis. Finally, chapters 7 and 8 will provide a conclusion to the
study as well as potential paths and directions for future research.
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Framework
With the imposed nationwide lockdown, all employees are instructed to work remotely
from their homes. With such a sudden shift to virtual leadership, managers are facing
new challenges in supervision and leading. In addition to their day-to-day business, man-
agers also remain responsible to track and support their employees’ well-being, maintain
connections between their team members, and ensure productivity in the face of distrac-
tions and discomfort experienced in their home oﬃces. Hence, even in the most uncertain
times like a pandemic, the main role of a manager remains the same: to support their
team members (Greenwood and Krol, 2020). Already before the pandemic, managers
are burdened with extra responsibilities compared to their employees, like the stretch
between their sometimes controversial roles (e.g. leader, mentor, and liaison), which cre-
ate additional pressure on their well-being (Hosie et al., 2012, 2019; Hujala et al., 2013).
Therefore, the following chapter aims to provide the reader with an overview of the previ-
ously conducted research on the general role of the manager, the transition to a distance
manager combined with the development of distance work over the last two decades.
While the literature is rich on studies on the employees’ perspective of distance work with
a high density of recommendations on appropriate leadership for managers, studies on
the actual experiences (perceptions, well-being, productivity, etc.) of managers that are
working from distance are rare. Therefore the following literature study will investigate
the concepts related to distance-workplace well-being. The focus will be on how the man-
agers’ experiences relate to these concepts under normal circumstances as well as during
major changes in working conditions (e.g. COVID-19). These concepts will initially be
described from the perspective of a normal employee (due to the abundance of literature)
and then transferred and applied to the case of managers.
In order to create a better understanding of the managers’ situating, the concepts of
well-being, its impact on an individual’s productivity, and the most common models
to showcase the connection between well-being and work productivity will be described
in the following chapter. Afterwards, the impact of a change to online work (distance
work) on well-being will be showcased while highlighting the challenges, potential, and
application of distance work before the crisis. Another element to highlight is how the
continuous technological development contributed to implementing distance work and
distance management. To conclude, the current research conducted and the ﬁndings over
the last year throughout the corona crisis will be discussed to relate future analysis to
past analysis.
3
==PAGE:9==
2.1. WORKPLACE WELL-BEING
4
2.1
Workplace Well-being
Well-being is a crucial part of the social and entrepreneurial experience of any individual.
Robert Marcus Owen, a Welsh social reformer emphasized back in 1817, that a reduction
of an 8-hour workday is needed to help protect the well-being of the workforce. In this con-
text, Owen introduced the phrase “eight hours labor, eight hours recreation, eight hours
rest”, which was one century later adopted by major industry players such as the Ford
Motor Company. Since then much progress has been made in order to raise awareness
on the well-being of workers, resulting in a general culture shift in companies, illustrated
through promoting the importance of ﬁtness and a healthy lifestyle. This has resulted
in the foundation of workplace health promotion organizations along with establishing
mandatory health and safety regulations to ensure both, mental and physical well-being
in the workplaces (Rucker, 2016; Chalmers, 2013).
Workplace well-being relates to all aspects of work-life, from the quality and safety of
the physical environment, to how workers perceive their work, the working environment,
and the climate at the organizations (International Labour Organization (ILO), 2021).
The eﬀects of balanced well-being are widely being recognized in the scientiﬁc research
community. Over the past ﬁfteen years, many conferences have been convened to discuss
and promote good practices management as well as the impacts of well-being. One of
those is the ”Towards Better Work and Well-being” conference held in Helsinki in 2010.
The conference was arranged by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH)
and supported by the World Health Organization (WHO) to provide an opportunity to
discuss strategies and tools for promoting health and well-being at work and to highlight
its eﬀect on productivity. Together with other scientists in the ﬁeld, Schulte and Vainio
(2010) identiﬁed the concept of well-being as the key to maintain an eﬀective workforce.
The concept covers more than just ones’ state of health but also reﬂections on one’s
satisfaction with work and life (Schulte and Vainio, 2010). The satisfactory perception
is mostly of a subjective nature, as it is evaluated by self-report measurements. These
measurements are deﬁned by the aﬀective (emotional/ non-cognitive) well-being, which
refers to the frequency of feelings like happiness, depression, and sadness. As well as
the cognitive well-being, which refers to one’s evaluation of life overall and speciﬁc life
experiences and the physical well-being. The latter for physical well-being is not just
the absence of disease, but the existence of a balanced state of body and mind, such as
suﬃcient sleep, regular exercise, adequate sunlight and fresh air (American Psychological
Association (APA), 2020).
While the importance of physical well-being is mentioned in this context, it is important to
mention that the research conducted in this analysis mainly focuses on the psychological
(mental) part of well-being, such as positive relationships with others, personal mastery,
autonomy, a feeling of purpose, and meaning in life. However, if the mental well-being
is negatively aﬀected, physical diseases and limitations can possibly follow (Hosie and
Sevastos, 2010). Research shows that individuals that are exposed to work-related stress
factors over long periods, experience a negative impact on their physiological well-being,
likely leading to conditions with a varying range of severity such as tensions, cardiovascular
diseases (stress-related heart attacks), problems with blood sugar control (diabetes), and
immune system malfunctions (Chandola et al., 2008). The three areas of well-being are
summarized in Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:10==
2.1. WORKPLACE WELL-BEING
5
Figure 2.1: Cognitive, aﬀective and physical well-being; deﬁnition & interplay
In addition to the internal self-reported measurements, Schulte and Vainio (2010) also
indicate, that maintaining the productivity of workers is not only dependent on the eﬀort
of their organizations but also the national economic growth. Therefore, any analysis
must necessarily take into account the health and well-being of the entire organization
and the society, as the individual well-being does not exist on its own but rather within
the context of society. More precisely, well-being can be referred to as quality of working
lives, including occupational safety and health (OSH) aspects, which is a major determi-
nant of productivity at the individual, enterprise, and societal levels (Schulte and Vainio,
2010). Hosie and Sevastos (2010) also highlight this and further introduce diﬀerent fac-
tors that inﬂuence mental well-being and categorizes them into facet-speciﬁc, job-related
& context-free factor. The facet-speciﬁc factors include wage, responsibilities, colleagues,
supervisors, working conditions, and security of employment. While the context-free fac-
tors focus more on one´s satisfaction with the self-image, physical health, and social life.
The job-related factors describe one´s job satisfaction, attachment and commitment to
an organization. All three aspects of aﬀective well-being can be experienced as a negative
or positive emotion that can inﬂuence each other (Hosie and Sevastos, 2010).
However, the previously mentioned external factors are not enough to provide a complete
understanding of the way we experience our workplaces. Researchers suggest, that well-
being is also deﬁned by internal factors, which are driven by the concept of hedonic and
eudaimonic well-being (Huta, 2016). Eudaimonia refers to the subjective mindset of living
each moment fully and experiencing a sense of choice in our actions. Psychologists use
a broad range of constructs to assess eudaimonic well-being, including self-actualization
(Maslow, 2005), personal expressiveness (Waterman, 2008), and psychological well-being
(Ryﬀand Singer, 2008). When it comes to a purpose-driven existence, the eudaimonic
perspective on well-being has shown to have of big impact on our health (Niemiec, 2014).
Additionally, when we think about happiness, a set of activities and experiences creating
satisfaction and pleasure, come to our mind. These perceptions are deﬁned as hedonic
well-being, meaning the presence of positive emotions, the absence of negative emotions,
and life satisfaction in general.
It also goes along with a comparison to self-created
standards and the appraisal of life as good or bad (Huta, 2016). A summary of the named
internal and external factors and their relation to the previously introduced concept of
cognitive/ aﬀective/ physical well-being can be seen in Figure 2.2.
==PAGE:11==
2.1. WORKPLACE WELL-BEING
6
Figure 2.2: Internal and external factors impacting mental well-being, inspired by
Hosie and Sevastos (2010); Huta (2016)
Most researchers have approached the concept of well-being from the hedonic perspec-
tive, as the sheer happiness of an individual is less complex to enquire about in surveys
compared to enquiring about the potential meaning and purpose of life (eudaimonic well-
being). The hedonic well-being can also be brought more straightforward into the context
of every-day-life situations such as e.g. work-related stress factors aﬀecting an individ-
ual’s stress level (Peir´o et al., 2019; Hosie and Sevastos, 2010). Jos´e M. Peir´o is among
the researchers, who focused theirs analysis of employee well-being on the comparison
of the hedonic and eudaimonic factors. The psychology professor performed a study on
the applicability of the happy/productive worker thesis i.e. a happy employee is more
productive than an unhappy one. The study explored diﬀerent patterns between per-
formance and well-being, by analysing data collected from 1647 employees. The data
was analysed using clustering to identify correlations between happy/unhappy states and
productive/unproductive performance patterns. The study was motivated by the fact
that Peir´o et al. (2019) have identiﬁed, what seemed for them as a crucial limitation in
previous studies on the Happy Productive Worker Thesis (HPWT). The previous research
focused on “happiness” as an antecedent of “productivity”, and only a few studies have
looked into the inverse relationship.
Also other studies in the same context have identiﬁed, that a positive self-rated perfor-
mance correlates with an increase in dedication and a decrease in emotional exhaustion
over time (Akkermans et al., 2013). This illustrates that although other patterns between
happiness and productiveness may exist, there might also be a negative relationship be-
tween these concepts. Therefore, the aim of Peir´o et al. (2019)’s study was to revisit
the HPWT and not only analyse the synergies, but also the counter relations between
these two constructs. The study revealed, that over half of the participants were either
unhappy and productive or happy and unproductive. The results, therefore, motivate a
new and diﬀerent way to expand on the happy-productive worker model. In essence, this
shows that the relationship between well-being and performance/ productivity is much
more complex. The results also indicate, that employees can be unhappy in a hedonic
way and simultaneously, happy in a eudaimonic way and vice versa (Peir´o et al., 2019). In
other words, employees can indeed feel happy with their overall living standards, however
not be satisﬁed in the current situation and the opposite also holds true.
==PAGE:12==
2.2. WORKPLACE WELL-BEING TRANSFERRED TO MANAGERS
7
While Peir´o et al. (2019) investigated well-being in relation to productivity, Bryson et al.
(2017) looked into well-being and its relation to work performance. While productivity
relates to the measurement of eﬃciency on a given task, performance is deﬁned in terms
of whether employee behaviours contribute to organizational goals. This includes in-role
performance, or the actions necessary from a person to fulﬁl their formal organizational
role, which is usually implied in a job description Daniels and Harris (2000). In this con-
text, Bryson et al. (2017) found a positive statistically signiﬁcant relationship between
mean job satisfaction at the workplace and workplace performance. Their study revealed
that employee job satisfaction is positively associated with workplace ﬁnancial perfor-
mance, labour productivity and the quality of output and service. Their analysis also
showed, that group-level well-being, especially the group aﬀective tone also moderately
aﬀect performance (Warr and Nielsen, 2018).
2.2
Workplace Well-being transferred to Managers
The performance of managers is widely recognised as a critical element in occupational
psychology because it is also considered as one of the key drivers of the organisational
outcome. However, the growing inﬂuence of rapid advances in technology, organisational
changes and restructuring to improve eﬃciencies make managers vulnerable and has a
large impact on their well-being (Hosie et al., 2019). Despite a growing awareness of the
inﬂuence of individual job-related and environmental pressures on managers’ performance,
there is hardly any research on managers’ mental well-being and job satisfaction, and the
performance resulting from it. Among the few researchers dealing with the subject, Hosie
et al. (2012) conducted an empirical study to investigate the dimensions of a managers’
job happiness (described as aﬀective well-being and intrinsic job satisfaction) associated
with contextual and task performance. Intrinsic job satisfaction refers to the internal
state associated with characteristics inherent in a job, such as the utilisation of skills,
extent of job complexity and the share of responsibility and challenges. While extrinsic
job satisfaction describes the work conditions, such as wage, coworkers and supervisor
Key (2021); Hosie et al. (2012). For Hosie et al. (2012) the conceptualisation of aﬀective
well-being logically begins by exploring the nature of ‘happiness’ of managers in their
workplace. However, the bulk of research into the happiness/well-being/performance re-
lation has been focused on employees in general and not speciﬁcally on managers. The
emphasis of their research was, therefore, to investigate the potential impact on manage-
rial performance (Hosie et al., 2012).
Throughout their study, the eﬀorts of Hosie et al. (2012) were aimed towards extending the
Happy Productive Worker Theory to managers in what they called the Happy Productive
Manager Theory. The authors underline the importance of a clear diﬀerentiation between
manager and employee roles and beyond that, the need to distinguish between managers’
contextual and task performance. Both types of performance contribute interdependently
and independently to the organisational goals, although by diﬀerent mechanisms. Task
performance refers to work-related behaviours and actions that service and maintain the
technical core of an organisation (e.g. planning, organization, staﬃng, controlling, etc.)
(Hosie et al., 2012). Contextual performance deﬁnes non-task related behaviours that act
in the context of organizational, social, and psychological context in which the organiza-
tion operates.
==PAGE:13==
2.3. DISTANCE WORK
8
This supports the psychological linkage between people, which create a rather uncertain
or indirect reward compared to task performance (Aquino, 2020). Therefore, when eval-
uating a managers performance, incorporating the contextual behaviour of a manager
shows the contribution to the organisational eﬀectiveness. Soft skills, such as inspiring
employees and generating commitment, are more diﬃcult to master and sustain than the
hard skills (knowledge, skills, abilities and experiences) associated with strategic and op-
erational business planning (Hosie et al., 2012; Aquino, 2020).
Seven years later, Hosie et al. (2019) conducted a study to investigate the managers’
job-related well-being in context of the identiﬁcation of role stressors impacting manage-
rial well-being. Role stressors are factors that strain the behaviors and demands asso-
ciated with a particular job. These stressors include role ambiguity, role conﬂict, and
role overload. Role ambiguity refers to unclear or vague performance expectations. Role
conﬂict refers to simultaneous contradictory expectations from coworkers and employ-
ers. Role overload is when employees feel overloaded with tasks and responsibilities (I/O,
2011). As part of their study, 305 managers from the private, public and third sectors
(non-governmental and non-proﬁt-making organizations) in Western Australia were ques-
tioned on their emotional response towards their work and their extent of volunteering in
organizational improvements, helping others with heavy workloads and their endorsement
towards organizational objectives. This study presented the ﬁrst empirical evidence on
the interrelationships among the three role stressors inﬂuencing managers’ relationship to
their employment. The study also aimed to initiate a debate on how managers’ jobs might
best be designed to improve their performance. A major aspect of this concept outlines
the importance of timely feedback on aﬀective well-being, which might help organizations
develop ways to change managers’ behaviors to sustain and improve their performance
(Hosie et al., 2019).
2.3
Distance Work
Even before the COVID-19 outbreak, remote working had opened up opportunities to re-
think the traditional eight-hour workday. Employees who prefer ﬂexible schedules usually
do not thrive on a ﬁxed schedule and instead prefer to work when they personally feel
most productive (Cheng, 2020). Howington (2020) addresses remote and ﬂexible work
environments as leading the charge in the future of work, also since ﬂexible work is no
longer something for only gig workers or freelancers, also many “traditional” employers
are oﬀering ﬂexible schedules to their employees as well. To date, most studies on telework
focus primarily on the individual teleworker and only occasionally on the surroundings
such as the teleworker’s supervisor, their non-teleworking colleagues, and their families.
As such, only a few studies have examined the impact of telework on managers and the
organization as a whole (Bailey and Kurland, 2002).
Telework or distance work ﬁnds its origins during the oil crisis in the 1970s where the US
government realized that if only one in seven urban commuters would work from home, the
import of oil would be preventable (Tavares, 2017; Bailey and Kurland, 2002). It became
evident, that work ﬂexibility can result in beneﬁts for employees, employers, organizations,
and governments. In this context, Nilles (1975) introduced the term ”telecommuting” in
the mid-70s by referring to the ability of new telecommunications and technologies to
increase productivity, their availability, and the reduction of transportation expenses.
==PAGE:14==
2.3. DISTANCE WORK
9
The concept of telework was deﬁned as the work performed by employees during paid
hours in an alternative ﬁxed worksite. Over the years in the US, the term ”telecommut-
ing remained, while in Europe it became telework; both terms express the same concept
and cover work-at-distance, oﬀ-site work, remote work, home-based work, and distance
work (Tavares, 2017).
Therefore, telework can broadly be deﬁned as work conducted
from a location other than the conventional worksite within the organization, while being
connected to the ﬁrm’s computer systems through information and telecommunications
technology. While telework was originally and primarily deﬁned as home-based or remote
work, for the last twenty years the term has evolved, and now other categories, like no-
madic work (traveling around diﬀerent work locations), mobile telework (working while
on the move), center-based telework (working in a telecentre) and home-based work per-
formed outside working hours. What was initially meant to be simply a shift of workplace
with the same core working hours became the embodiment of ﬂexibility of workplace and
work schedule (Kurland and Bailey, 2000).
Working hours blurred into family time, trains, airport lounges and the premises of cus-
tomers and suppliers became new workspaces. This was further supported by the devel-
opment of portable computers and mobile phones (Aguilera et al., 2016). From surveys
conducted by EU on Working Conditions (Eurofound, 2017a), it can be seen that working
hours have extended into the evening and night and to weekends, creating a 24-hour so-
ciety. Telework is naturally more often found in professions associated with highly skilled
white-collar jobs. In Europe, 7% of telework is done by managers and 13% by profession-
als or technicians (Tavares, 2017). Throughout the process of integrating telework, the
external boundaries of many organizations are being redeﬁned, boundaries between or-
ganizations and their clients, suppliers, and partners; and especially boundaries between
individuals and organizations (Ellison, 2016).
In many respects, telework is emblematic of recent changes in our ideas of work by giving
employees the opportunity to a healthy work-family but also by helping organizations
to decrease real-estate costs. The ability to balance work and family duties was mainly
demanded by women with small children at home. In fact, women are more likely to list
family beneﬁts as a motivation for telework than men. A survey in the 1990s revealed,
that almost 75 percent of all female employees of an IT company stated that being able
to take care of their families is one of the major beneﬁts of telework. However, overall
women are not dominating the telework population, in fact, the population is evenly split
between men and women (Bailey and Kurland, 2002).
Even in 2020, telework is perceived diﬀerently during changing life stages and circum-
stances such as marital status, gender, and parenthood. A study by Zhang et al. (2020)
investigated to which extend the frequency of telework is associated with an employee’s
life stage and to what extent the frequency can be explained based on the work-life con-
ﬂict. Over 180.000 participants were questioned about their frequency of telework (i.e.
never, infrequently, frequently). The results show that parents are less likely to telework
compared to those without children and singles are more likely to telework, than married
ones. However, single parents are less likely to work from home and females are more
likely to than males. A major ﬁnding is that children play a vital role in the telework
behavior of their parents. This could potentially be explained using the conﬂict of the
work-to-family and family-to-work theories (Zhang et al., 2020).
==PAGE:15==
2.3. DISTANCE WORK
10
Those two theories ﬁnd their origin in the (inter)role conﬂict theory, which suggests that
with a role comes a set of duties, obligations, and duties that are related to the individ-
ual´s position and status. Beyond that, an individual can have more than one role (i.e.
in this context: employee; mother/father and wife/husband) that might be incompatible
or compromised by another role which leads to conﬂict in their family-to-work or work-
to-family relation. In order to further explain what is also know as the role stressors,
Zhang et al. (2020) introduced the spillover theory as a way of explaining what kind of
inﬂuencing factors aﬀect teleworkers in their perception of work and family. The eﬀect
of the spillover theory can have a negative and positive impact on an individuals life as
the positive eﬀect leads to the work-family enrichment (Greenhaus and Powell, 2006),
which can be described as the extent to which the experiences in the work role improve
the quality of the family life (McNall and Nicklin, 2014). However, the eﬀect of neg-
ative emotions resulting from family-related incidents in return harms the productivity
of teleworkers/ workers in general. The ﬁnal and most relevant theory, which displays
the most diﬀerences from an on-site worker to a teleworker, is the segmentation theory.
Work and family domains are segmented and independent from each other, and by nature,
employees strive to keep the separation to showcase productivity to their employers and
also the commitment to their family. However, working from home confronts teleworkers,
compared to their colleges on-site, with a higher urge to set boundaries to family issues
during working hours and work-related issues during private life. As a conclusion in the
study, the desire for telework is similar for men and women, however other forces that
are not always related to children lead to females tending towards telework (Zhang et al.,
2020).
Another main ﬁnding by Zhang et al. (2020) was that the general interest among managers
to implement telework is low.
Primarily, managers report, that they see no need for
the change, and coordinating telework is seemingly diﬃcult. Managers from large ﬁrms
express concerns about controlling and monitoring workers, while managers from smaller
ﬁrms are concerned about the costs of implementing and that managing telework programs
are a greater managerial issue, than on-site (Bailey and Kurland, 2002). It is important
to stress the importance of trust in the context of telework, however, the concept of trust
appears as an ill-deﬁned yet critical concept throughout much of the literature that deals
with the virtual organization. It is assumed that trust is an important prerequisite for
allowing people to work oﬀ-site and without direct supervision, but in the majority of the
cases the shift to telework is accompanied by a greater demand for task reporting, the urge
to ”appear busy” and longer working hours (Ellison, 2016). Furthermore, the phenomenon
of being present longer than the regular hours and the urge to appear busy is also known
as presenteeism, where employees feel pressured and obligated to continue working than
required to show e.g. their diligence to their colleagues and leaders. Research found, that
the key underlying causes of presenteeism such as worsening mental health, bad ﬁnancial
well-being, and lack of sleep are likely to be even bigger drivers since the outbreak of
COVID-19. The pandemic has caused multiple factors that could encourage people to
feel the need to be present for work also when ill, such as fears over job security, social
isolation, and easier access to digital presenteeism since laptops are now present at home
(Stolk and Whitmore, 2021). Results from a European survey (Eurofound, 2017a) also
showed that longer working hours are associated with stress, fatigue, sleeping problems,
and anxiety. Moreover, teleworkers do not socialize with colleagues and take fewer breaks,
which are important elements for their mental and physical well-being.
==PAGE:16==
2.3. DISTANCE WORK
11
Moreover, being far from the workplace in combination with long and continuous working
hours can induce feelings of loneliness and isolation. Furthermore, these indicators for
stress, isolation, and overwork are strongly correlating with conditions such as diabetes
and poor mental health (in particular depressions) (Sardeshmukh et al., 2012; Tavares,
2017).
On the other side, several empirical studies have found positive and beneﬁcial eﬀects
of teleworking on teleworkers’ health.
Greater schedule ﬂexibility and a better work-
life balance enhance job satisfaction leading to a reduction of stress which then again
positively aﬀects employees in regards to their general sickness rate. Moreover, work-
ing from home provides an environment that favors better concentration with less noise
and fewer interruptions, which allows the teleworker to work more productive (Tavares,
2017). These, through telework enhanced working conditions, provide employees better
career prospects and more autonomy at work (Eurofound, 2017a). Therefore, an increas-
ing number of individuals are choosing to be teleworkers, these individuals include not
only ﬁrst-line employees but also those with supervisory responsibilities. Given the rise
in managers engaged in telework, it is surprising that the existing research was focused
almost entirely on individuals without managerial or supervisory responsibilities. A study
done by Golden and Fromen (2011) shifted the research lens to managers who telework.
This was done to begin uncovering any potential consequences for subordinates who re-
port to managers that are frequently out of the oﬃce. In traditional working spaces,
subordinates can easily locate their manager and stop by their desk when clariﬁcation
or direction is needed.
By being based close to each other, conversations come more
naturally and opportunities to share information, ideas, and socio-emotional bonding are
facilitated by the nature of the physical presence. These interactions tend to be preferably
carried out face-to-face, which helps to build empathy and connection between the par-
ties and facilitates the exchange of knowledge and experiences (Golden and Fromen, 2011).
Fundamental research on the employee-manager-relationship by Gerstner and Day (1997)
found that managers play a pivotal role in shaping the work experiences and outcomes
of their subordinates.
With greater managerial distance and absence from the oﬃce,
the richness and quality of exchange occurring between the subordinate and manager
degrades. Reports suggest that subordinates who are separated from their manager are
likely to experience less feedback, leading to worse chances of being supported and en-
couraged in their work. Research also suggests, that due to the physical separation and
increased reliance upon electronic communication (i.e.
phone calls, emails, etc.), the
exchanges between the subordinate and their teleworking manager are likely to be less
clear. Additionally, conﬂicts between individuals are more prone to occur and take longer
to resolve when not interacting face to face, which highlights that misunderstandings are
related to the previously named lack of clarity in the exchanges (Golden and Fromen,
2011). In particular, complex or personal and sensitive discussions, which are not easily
carried out over email or other media, are lacking the empowerment the respective subor-
dinate might need. Moreover, confrontations occurring while the parties are interacting
and geographically separate, tend to require greater time to identify and resolve (Dur-
nell Cramton, 2002). As noted earlier, the quality of the information exchange between
manager and employee is highly relevant for the individuals’ work experiences and as a
consequence the individuals’ job satisfaction. In fact evidence suggests subordinates with
managers who telework experiencing a lower job satisfaction than their counterparts who
have managers in traditional work modes (Golden and Fromen, 2011).
==PAGE:17==
2.3. DISTANCE WORK
12
As a consequence, teleworking managers are less likely to be able to create a positive work
climate and their subordinates might experience greater frustration and stress compared
to if their manager worked in a traditional work mode. Further, Golden and Fromen
(2011) raised the question of whether employees with traditional managers working full-
time on-site made diﬀerent experiences compared to those who report to teleworking
managers.
The authors considered cases where subordinates are teleworking as well,
by comparing diﬀerent work mode pairings of their managers (teleworking/ working on
site). In order to draw a better and more detailed conclusion from their study, Golden and
Fromen (2011) questioned over 11.000 participants. The results from the conducted study
diﬀer based on the subordinate’s work mode. In particular, it appears that managers who
have experience with telework have a tremendous positive eﬀect on the well-being of their
teleworking subordinates. This suggests that teleworking employees feel more accepted
when their managers also telework, which shows that organizational decision-makers need
to initiate training programs for managers on diﬀerent work modes. Given the learnings
from the study, it might be possible to manage subordinates properly and nearly eliminate
all negative impacts on the employee-manager relationship with the right approach. In
the same context, the results suggest that pairings of work modes (traditional, telework,
virtual) between a manager and his or her subordinates are likely to change their work
experiences. More precisely, subordinates who worked away from the oﬃce, had a more
positive work experience and outcomes with teleworking managers, than teleworking sub-
ordinates that worked with managers in a traditional work mode.
Those teleworking
subordinates reported to gain a higher feedback frequency and greater professional de-
velopment but no diﬀerence in clarity, empowerment and reported a higher workload
compared to those who were managed from on-site. Considering the insights provided
Golden and Fromen (2011), it appears that the work mode of the manager, whether as
a traditional worker or teleworker, may aﬀect subordinate work experiences and outcomes.
Dambrin (2004) also looked into the manager-employee relationship by investigating the
impacts of telework on such relationship. The author investigated the empirical results of
a case study conducted on a team of home-based teleworkers working in sales. E-mails,
in-depth interviews, and direct observations showed, that telework in this case reduced
formal communication between employees and their direct manager while it enhanced
negative emotions through interpretation (cognitive) bias. However, the implementation
of telework also reduced the importance of the professional and social status of the partic-
ipants. While the employees’ autonomy increased and teleworkers’ accountability shifted
from exhibiting presence to delivering results, managers needed to redeﬁne their role to-
wards teleworking subordinates (Dambrin, 2004).
In the same context as Dambrin (2004), Beno (2018) also discovered the changes of
leadership in telework and reﬀered to it as a new management technique, where the
key to success consists of an eﬀective leader. The author believed that the most eﬀective
principle in managing telework lies in accomplishing the right managerial communication,
which also includes the importance of feedback from both parties. His ﬁndings are based
on interviews, which conﬁrmed, what Dambrin (2004) and Golden and Fromen (2011) also
found: teleworking has had an encouraging impact on job satisfaction for employees and
managers. The ﬂexibility and balance provided have caused managers/teleworkers to feel
more productive, however, the participants also emphasized that feedback was one of the
greatest challenges, and communication between manager and subordinate is important
to reduce the negative impact of collaborating over distance.
==PAGE:18==
2.4. DISTANCE WORK DURING COVID-19
13
Furthermore, miscommunication and unequal access to information were identiﬁed as the
two major culprits in destroying the trust between managers and teleworkers. According
to Beno (2018), remote managers need now more than ever to act on the assumption of
trust, not distrust towards their employees. By providing team members with eﬃcient
communication tools and instructions on their use, the functionality of computer-mediated
communication becomes sustained (Beno, 2018; Baruch, 2000).
All ﬁndings suggest that the eﬀects of telework are highly ambiguous and sometimes even
contradictory. In 2017 the Eurofound published a research report on ”Working anytime,
anywhere: The eﬀects on the world of work” elaborating on the eﬀects of the slow shift
of working circumstances and the attempt to introduce policies to promote and organize
telework.
As part of the study, teleworkers reported a reduction in commuting time,
greater autonomy in working time organization, a better overall work-life balance, and
higher productivity. However, they also referred to a tendency to extend working hours,
an overlap between paid work and that their work-life boundaries became blurred, as well
as an intensiﬁcation of work (Eurofound, 2017b). The European Working Time Directive
provides a regulatory framework in this context. The main goal of the directive is to
protect the health and safety of workers, the duration and organization of working hours,
by introducing a legal framework that sets a maximum working week of 48 hours, includ-
ing overtime. The level of implementation of these guidelines has varied across countries
as the agreement is not legally binding, although most countries used it to frame the
provisions that deﬁne telework either through legislation, collective agreement, or joint
guidelines (Eurofound, 2020b).
2.4
Distance Work during COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic forced governments around the world to enforce nu-
merous lockdowns, encouraging people to work from home, and bringing all business
activity to halt. While lockdown conditions have been relaxed to some extent over the
last year, the freedom of movement continues to be restricted, resulting in people having
a rather limited social interaction. The ﬁnancial impact of the pandemic has been widely
acknowledged, however, the impacts of isolation on the mental and emotional well-being
of the people can not be neglected (Vasudevan et al., 2021). Health organizations are,
unsuccessfully, seeking to draw the government’s attention to a forthcoming mental health
crisis. In fact, Microsoft’s Work Trend Index reports about 41 % of employees working
from home having reported an extremely higher level of stress (Spataro, 2020). Respon-
dents from a another survey conducted in June 2020 (Routley, 2020) reported that the
biggest challenge for employees while working from home lies in not being able to unplug
after working hours and the feeling of loneliness as colleagues and superiors were harder
to reach and collaborate with.
As the majority of those employees were unexpectedly required to work from home and
the sudden change came with the challenge of unidentiﬁed boundaries between job and
retreat. With no time to be prepared for such a change in working environment, employees
were lacking designated home oﬃce spaces forcing them to improvised work setups in
living rooms, kitchens, and bedrooms. In addition, combining work in a non-work-related
environment with childcare, personal relationships, household chores, and family demands
in general forced employees into a stretch between career and private life (Routley, 2020).
==PAGE:19==
2.4. DISTANCE WORK DURING COVID-19
14
In the context of health and work safety, the danish non-proﬁt organisation ”TrygFonden”
recently published a report with the title “trust and well-being”. The report aimed to
measure life satisfaction in Denmark. A similar report was published in the summer of
2019, which makes it possible to directly measure the impact the COVID-19 has had on
the populations’ perception of their well-being. The authors used a scale between 0-10 to
evaluate the satisfaction of well-being. This value decreased from 6.90 to 6.40 for the gen-
eral population between the two reports. However, the satisfaction on well-being has not
decreased evenly for all sections of the population. In fact, it decreased by 0.67 for women
while it was only half of that for men (0.33). Younger people who are more dependent on
being social have also been impacted harder by the COVID-19 than any other section of
the population: for people between 18-19 yo the index fell by 1.33, for people between the
age of 20-24 yo it decreased by 1.11. Meanwhile, for older generation e.g. 30-39 yo and 40-
49 yo it fell by 0.36 and 0.44 respectively. This shows that younger people and women are
potentially impacted more by COVID-19. According to the authors, the absence of social
activities and gatherings is reported as the most impactful element (Andersen et al., 2021).
While Andersen et al. (2021) focused more on the age of the participants, Routley (2020)
also asked speciﬁcally managers on their perception of the situation in regards to their
employees but also on their work.
Managers reported that they were mainly worried
that productivity and focus will decrease people are working in more informal locations.
Furthermore, 70% of them also expressed their concern, that the company work culture
could suﬀer signiﬁcantly (Routley, 2020). In an eﬀort to signal their loyalty, devotion,
and productivity, employees resulted in working around the clock. Blending afternoons
into evenings; weekdays into weekends, resulting in only a little sense of time (Giurge
and Bohns, 2020).
One phenomenon that showcases the gains of work ﬂexibility and
autonomy versus the pains of less restricted working hours, is the Autonomy paradox (see
Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: The autonomy paradox developed by Eurofound (2020b)
==PAGE:20==
2.5. LITERATURE RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
15
The phenomenon describes the fact that telework might oﬀer workers more autonomy on
when to start their working hours, however, this might lead to an intensiﬁcation of work
when combined with heavy workloads and work cultures dominated by competition (Eu-
rofound, 2020b). In order to further investigate how employees experience these paradox
circumstances, Eurofound conducted an e-survey in early 2020 (April) and in the midyear
(July). Their study aimed to compare the status among European respondents at a time
where many countries were in lockdown with the status three months later when many
countries started relaxing the restrictions. A major ﬁnding was that the COVID-19 crisis
has ﬁnally provided an impulsive ad-hoc telework revolution, one that had been antici-
pated for over a generation but had largely failed to materialize. According to the answers
received through the survey, teleworkers are rather privileged in a socioeconomic sense,
thanks to a high degree of educational qualiﬁcations and economic resilience. Addition-
ally, telework also oﬀered them a safe haven of physical security during the crisis. It also
seems very likely that the experience of working from home during the COVID-19 crisis
will lead to a growth in the frequency of teleworking when the crisis abates. Over 13%
of employees questioned in the second e-survey indicated a preference for working from
home daily if there were no COVID-19 restrictions. However, also 78% of employees said
that they would like to work from home only occasionally post-COVID and that their
preferred working arrangement will still involve a signiﬁcant continuous presence at the
workplace site (Eurofound, 2020a).
Among many others, Forbes magazine described the new circumstances as ”the new
normal”. A term that was already used in the context of world war I and the ﬁnancial
crisis 2007-2008, describing the state to which an economy, society, etc. settles following a
crisis when this diﬀers from the situation that prevailed prior to the start of the crisis. In
one of the magazine’s articles, Spiggle (2020) identiﬁes the biggest change of COVID-19
outbreak as the dramatic increase in remote work. The author reports that before the
pandemic, 20% of workers worked from home all or most of the time. As of late 2020,
more than 70% of workers were doing all or most of their job from home. However, this
does not necessarily mean the new normal will include as many people working from
home or that this number will continue to rise. Spiggle (2020) also highlight indicators
for people preferring a hybrid working arrangement where they can work at home and
on-site.
2.5
Literature Research Methodology
For the previously presented study, the articles most relevant to the topic in literature
were classiﬁed, compiled, and analyzed. A thematic approach was adopted in collecting
and analyzing the literature, where this literature is organized around the topic at hand.
The snowball method was then used to search for the necessary literature and thus the
discovery of references around the topic. The snowball method consists of ﬁnding a key
document and then looking at the bibliography present there. With this method, our
search for telework literature yielded more than 60 published academic empirical studies,
chapters of ﬁeld-related books, and relevant discussions in journals, which emerge from
disciplines ranging from role stressors, job satisfaction, and well-being to distance work
and the autonomy paradox. The following study seeks to examine the experiences and
perceptions of managers in organizations located in Denmark towards their adoption of
distance work by exploring the concepts proposed in this chapter, which serve as a basis
for the following exploratory analysis.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The following chapter presents the tools and methodologies used to conduct the empirical
research on managers’ reactions, experiences, and perceptions of working from home dur-
ing the COVID-19 crisis. The chapter will provide details on the data collection phase as
well as the data analysis phase. Although the data collection was not conducted through-
out this project, a brief summary of the temporal circumstance and content of the surveys
used to collect the data will be present since they constitute the cornerstone of the empir-
ical research conducted herein. The data analysis section will showcase the methodology
adopted to analyze the data from data cleaning to the statistical and heuristic techniques
used to highlight some trends present in the data and test the validity of formulated hy-
pothesis relating to the research question on managers perception of teleworking during
the COVID-19 outbreak.
3.1
Data Collection
The data collection phase was conducted through e-surveys deployed throughout the ﬁrst
year of the COVID-19 outbreak in Denmark, more speciﬁcally from the end of March 2020
until February 2021. This section will present the tool used for the data collection namely
the e-surveys in the perspective of the national stage of Denmark during the pandemic.
The national measures implemented for combating the COVID-19 outbreak have been
varying during the data collection phase. The time span of each survey concerning the
state of the nation is showcased in Figure 3.1. The ﬁgure also shows the registered cases
of COVID-19 infections and nationals measures enforced by the government e.g. lock-
downs (Statista, 2021; Clotworthy et al., 2021), to later on relate possible behaviour of
the respondents into the context of the restrictions enforced by the state.
3.1.1
Data Collection Procedure
The e-surveys designed by Ipsen et al. (2020a) was deployed four times in the ﬁrst year
of the pandemic. Their research interest was centered around the digital transformation
of knowledge-intensive work and the management of distance work, while also ensuring
employee well-being and performance management. In order to gain insights into these
topics, the study was designed to investigate the current circumstances of working from
home (WFH), the advantages and disadvantages of the new working environment, and
people’s perception of their current situation (Ipsen et al., 2020b). The target group for
the study conducted was mainly individuals in knowledge-intensive work-ﬁelds such as
employees in development divisions, administration and commercial business as well as
managers, researchers, and university students.
16
==PAGE:22==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
17
Figure 3.1: Timeline of e-surveys in regards to events related to COVID-19 with information from Clotworthy et al. (2021); Statista (2021)
==PAGE:23==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
18
The ﬁrst out of the total four surveys was conducted by Ipsen et al. (2020a) and will be
referred to as the ”DTU-Survey”. This survey was launched in Denmark in late March
2020 and sent out through invitations on social media, university portal (campus-net),
and via professional networks (e.g. LinkedIn). The survey reach was later extended to
seven European countries and two outside of Europe. The data collected herein covered
responses from the release of the survey until mid-May. This time frame coincides with the
ﬁrst national lockdown where all public and governmental workplaces were closed down
and employees asked to work at a distance from home, whereas workers in the private
sector were strongly encouraged to do the same. The survey, therefore, aimed to map
the initial reactions of people on working from home, their perceptions of working during
the ﬁrst national lockdown, and their hastened implementation of digital communication
technologies (Ipsen et al., 2020b).
However, since the survey was mainly distributed to academia, the answers were domi-
nated by students, researchers, professors, and high-inﬂuence industry networks. There-
fore, the ﬁrst round of the survey carried the risk of not being representative for the entire
labor force in the population. To rectify this and to gain an insight that is more represen-
tative of the whole danish population, the consulting ﬁrm Epinion was commissioned to
distribute the survey according to their expertise in market research. The survey designed
by Ipsen et al. (2020a), was distributed three times or as part of three rounds of data
collection over the periods May-June 2020, November 2020, and February 2021 by the
consulting ﬁrm. The data collected by the consultant will be referred to as Epinion I,
Epinion II, and Epinion III. For the purpose of having higher chances to gain insights on
knowledge intense workers in Denmark, only Epinion I-III and not the DTU-Survey will
be analyzed in this report.
The data sample Epinion collected was constructed to be representative of the over 5.8
Million Danes working and living under the circumstances of COVID-19 (Statista, 2021).
In the following, we will compare the demographic distribution of the respondents and
pin it against the actual demographic data of Denmark.
3.1.2
Representative Social Distribution in Denmark
Since it is impractical in terms of time and resources to question the entire knowledge-
intensive workforce in Denmark or any other target group, it is important that the selected
sample of respondents is representative of the target group. However, the characteristics
of this speciﬁc target audience have not been surveyed previously. Therefore, we assume
that the knowledge-intensive workforce in Denmark exhibits similar attributes to that of
the general population of Denmark. As mentioned earlier, the diversity of respondents
must reﬂect to some degree the composition of the general Danish population of 5 Mil-
lion citizens. This is necessary to be able to generalize any takings from the collected
data. This is also done in order to gain general insight into the target audience and avoid
any biases that could be born from an uneven sample size or sample composition. The
representative sample is deﬁned as a small portion or a subset of a larger group of inter-
est, exhibiting the same properties and distributions of the whole population (Solutions,
2021). It is however unlikely that every sample will be perfectly similar in all aspects to
the population of interest and some deviations are to be expected, however, the aim is to
get as close as possible to reﬂecting the original target population.
==PAGE:24==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
19
Part of the aspects that are desired to be reﬂected by the respondents is a similar age
distribution to the target population to come as close as possible to the relevant distri-
bution. Deviations are possible and intended when it serves the matter of the study, one
of those matters is the distribution in age, gender, and nature of employment.
The age distribution of the Danish population, as well as the respondents of the three
surveys conducted by Epinion, can be seen in Figure 3.2. The population seems evenly
distributed into the three age categories (0y-19y,20y-39y, 40y-59y, and 60y and older).
However, the sample of interest is mostly located in the age categories of 20y-39y and
40y-59y, which is in fact reﬂected in the age distribution of the survey respondents shown
in Figure 3.2. It is rather unlikely that people in the age span of 0y-19y are involved
in knowledge-intensive work, whereas the population above 60y contain a large portion
of people not counted as available workforce due to retirement and we can consider the
survey respondents as representative.
Figure 3.2: Age distribution of survey respondents and in the danish population
based on data from Statista (2021)
The gender of the respondents also plays a vital role in reﬂecting the characteristics of
the general target workforce. The distribution of males and females in Denmark is al-
most even, as 2.9 Million (49,7%) Danes are male and 2.93 (50,3%) are female (Statista,
2021). The gender distribution of the survey respondents can be seen in Figure 3.3. The
male/female allocation in Epinion I and Epinion II are very close and thus evenly dis-
tributed. However, in Epinion III, the female portion of the population slightly exceeds
that of the male by 58% versus 52%. Although it is not possible beforehand to know the
potential eﬀects of this fact, however, it does carry the risk of biasing potential conclusions
drawn from the data.
==PAGE:25==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
20
Figure 3.3: Gender distribution over Epinion I-III
Since the target group is the knowledge-intensive related workforce, the survey conducted
by Epinion provided an insight into the general tasks or roles that this population is
associated with.
This is shown in Figure 3.4.
Based on the collected data, it seems
the majority of the target audience have administrative roles, are students, teachers or
supervisors.
Figure 3.4: Distribution of profession throughout Epinion I-III
==PAGE:26==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
21
3.1.3
Measures and Survey Technique
The main objective of the surveys deployed by Epinion was to shed light on various aspects
of the transition to working from home during the COVID-19 outbreak. Some of these
aspects cover the respondents’ current living conditions, the organization of working from
home, collaborations with co-workers, and their general experiences of remote working
in Denmark. Additionally, the survey also probed into the readiness of organizations to
transition into distance work and their implementation of digital technologies to enable
such transition (Ipsen et al., 2020a). In the following section, the survey structure will be
presented alongside the question designed to provide the answers to the research question.
Survey Questions
The survey was organized into seven sections made of 23 structured (close-ended ques-
tions) and unstructured questions (open-ended questions) and was restricted to take ap-
proximately ten minutes to answer to minimize the dropout rate.
The nature of the
questions allowed to some extent the respondents with the freedom to describe their opin-
ion with four open-ended questions such as ”How would you describe the experience of
working from home in your own words?”. Some questions were multiple-choice questions
that allowed only a single answer e.g.”Do you work from home since the outbreak of the
Covid-19 virus?” with the possibility to choose either ”Yes, I only work from home”, ”Yes,
I sometimes work from home” and ”No, I do not work from home” as the answers. Some
other questions allowed the participants to choose multiple items e.g. for the question
”Why do you currently work from home?”, a total of ﬁve possible answers were given and
any number could be selected. Another portion of the structured questions was designed
such that the respondents were given a pre-deﬁned statement that had to be rated on
a 5-point Likert-scale covering the options ”strongly disagree”, ”disagree”, ”undecided”,
”agree” and ”strongly agree”. The intention behind this method is to capture the precise
sentiment of the respondent, as it does not force the participant to take a stand on a
particular topic but allows them to respond in a degree of agreement/disagreement or
show their neutral or undecided feelings (Joshi et al., 2015). An example from the survey
is the statement ”I miss getting out of home” which was to be rated on the Likert-scale.
This not only allows to capture the nature of the respondents’ perception but also the
degree or intensity of it.
To facilitate the navigation through the survey the questions were coded. Coding of data
refers in this context, to the process of transforming collected information or observations
into a set of meaningful, cohesive categories. It is a process of summarizing and represent-
ing data to provide a systematic account of possibly observed phenomenons. Therefore
coding also prepares the data to be linked to concepts occurring in previous research and
theory (Allen, 2017). In order to group relevant questions and provide a better overview,
we classify the items of the questionnaire into the eight following thematic categories:
==PAGE:27==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
22
It is important to note that the newly established categories are not part of the original
survey, which relied on sections. In order to also showcase the original classiﬁcation, the
questions resented in the survey, along with the original and newly established categories
are showcased in addition to the format and research objective behind the statement.
The elements of sections 1-3 are presented in Figure 3.5. These questions were in general
aimed to gain the respondents’ consent to use their replies as well as their current work
situation e.g. if they worked from home, if they had experience in doing so and the extent
of working from home.
Figure 3.5: Sections 1-3 of the survey by Ipsen et al. (2020a), the method per
question and the assigned category for this analysis
Section 4 and 5 were aimed at grouping statements that were deemed to express either the
beneﬁcial aspect of working from home or its downsides. The beneﬁcial aspects mainly
focused on highlighting the ﬂexibility and newly gained freedom in working from home
e.g. ”I can take a break when I like to” and ”I do not have to spend long hours in meet-
ings”. The disadvantages reﬂected either a decrease in productivity or the organizational
readiness in providing their workers with the necessary tools to conduct their work re-
motely such as ”I need physical equipment to do my work which I do not have at home”.
The questions assigned to sections 4 and 5 can be seen in Figure 3.6.
==PAGE:28==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
23
Figure 3.6: Sections 4 & 5 of the survey by Ipsen et al. (2020a), the method per
question and the assigned category for this analysis
==PAGE:29==
3.1. DATA COLLECTION
24
Section 6 and 7 shed light on the demographic information of the respondents such as
age and gender but also on possible interactions and distractions at home e.g. ”How
many young people and adults, including yourself, are present in your home when you
work under COVID-19?”. The survey concludes with general questions on the overall
situation such as ”All in all, considering your current work and life situation, how would
you describe it?” and an open question for additional comments. The questions assigned
to sections 6 and 7 can be seen in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Sections 6 & 7 of the survey by Ipsen et al. (2020a), the method per
question and the assigned category for this analysis
==PAGE:30==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
25
3.2
Data Analysis
The analysis of the large-scale data collected through the previously presented e-survey
will be described in the following section. The analysis was conducted through a system-
atic approach and includes steps such as data pre-processing, data visualization, statistical
inference, and hypothesis formulation and testing. The data visualization is referred to
as descriptive analysis, while statistical inference and hypothesis testing is referred to as
advanced analysis. The workﬂow is illustrated in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Workﬂow of the Data Analysis
The data analysis aims to provide insight into the general experiences and perceptions
of managers when working from home during the COVID-19 outbreak. This is done by
analyzing any existing trends in the data thematically based on the classiﬁcation described
in the previous section (3.1.3). In the following, each step of the data preparation and
analysis will be shown.
3.2.1
Data Pre-processing
The pre-processing aims to clean the data and prepare it for further analysis. In this
context, missing entries are deleted and the replies of respondents are grouped and con-
verted into percentages aiming to reduce the variance in replies as well as establishing a
common scale to compare the replies across surveys. It is unclear whether the missing
entries are a result of dropout or a malfunction during data extraction from the survey
platform. Furthermore, the data was ﬁltered to remove entries where the respondents did
not indicate they had managerial responsibilities, leading to 134 responses in Epinion I,
148 responses in Epinion II and 140 responses in Epinion III. The cleaned data sets are
then subjected to a descriptive analysis.
==PAGE:31==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
26
3.2.2
Descriptive Analysis
The descriptive analysis will be conducted using the categories deﬁned in this work. The
analysis covers a wide range of tools used to crunch the data collected from the survey and
present them in a more convenient manner, which makes it possible to catch any trends
in the data. The questions covered in this section are in essence close ended-questions
and are initially presented in terms of common and general attributes related to the
respondents e.g. their gender, age distribution, and the primary task they occupy within
their organization. This is followed by a visualization of the distribution of each question
organized in categories based on the theme they represent. The distributions are visualized
in terms of histograms, making it easy to compare the answers within the one survey as
well as the development of the answers through time (considering that the surveys were
conducted at diﬀerent times). Ultimately, this section reduces the data dimensionality
through visualization. For every question, the observations made are rationalized and
interpreted concerning the actual stage of the pandemic.
Respondents’ personal perceptions
The open-ended questions (Questions 5-12-14) provided the respondents with an oppor-
tunity to express themselves in their own wording, giving a unique insight into the per-
ceptions and experiences of the individual. These replies could be analyzed individually,
however, this is impractical due to the high turnout of the survey. Therefore, we process
the words used by the respondents, calculate their frequency, and then visualized them as
word-clouds where the intensity of the word reﬂects the frequency of use. However, since
many words are synonymous and the fact that general ideas are expressed diﬀerently, we
manually assigned keywords to various statements. It is then these words that are used
to construct the word-clouds. An example is shown in the following:
After extracting all available keywords we construct a word-cloud to illustrate the most
occurring terms in a visually appealing format. An example of a word-cloud based on the
answers related to negative experiences of Epinion I is shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Word-cloud on negative related experiences in Epinion I
==PAGE:32==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
27
3.2.3
Advanced Analysis
The advanced analysis consists of determining some common statistical metrics that can
provide a low-resolution perspective of the survey replies and the consistency veriﬁcation
of the replies collected in the survey. This section will also introduce the workﬂow of
selecting some hypotheses and testing their consistency.
Statistical Metrics
The statistical metrics depend on the type and nature of the data. Since the relevant parts
of the survey are in the format of Likert-scale, the chosen metrics are based on its items.
The items on the Likert-scale are ordinal data, which can also be described as categorical
data with a set order or scale to it. However, the items can also be considered as interval
data if we assume that the items are equidistant e.i. the diﬀerence between ”agree” and
”strongly agree” is the same as the distance between ”disagree” and ”strongly disagree”.
In order to gain insights on the distributions of the answers, the mean and the standard
deviation were calculated. The mean (µ) is calculated as shown in Equation 3.1, where
N is the total number of respondents in a given survey, while ai is the Likert-scale score
assigned by respondent ”i”.
µ =
PN
i=1 ai
N
(3.1)
The answer mean indicates, where on average the answers lie to conclude on a more pre-
cise way on the perceptions people had when working from home. An example could be,
if a question with a Five-point- Likert-scale as answers had a mean answer of 4, it would
mean that on average replies were centered around ”agree”. As a consequence 50% of the
respondents relied either 4 or 5 on the Likert-scale meaning that people agree with the
statement posed. Additionally, this can be used to compare groups e.g. if group A has
a mean of 3.4 and group B has a mean of 3.8 we can conclude that group B agree more
with the fact than their counterpart of group A.
The standard deviation is another common statistical metric and it reﬂects the variance
in the data. In this context, the standard deviation measures the degree of variability or
diversity among studied elements or variables. A higher standard deviation makes the
distribution of the data not only more spread out, but also more unevenly spread out.
Taking the previous example, the variance will not be large in that case since 50% of
the answers were assigned to 4 (agree) & 5 (strongly agree). If the replies were evenly
distributed between all ﬁve categories of the Likert-scale, the variance would be higher.
The standard deviation σ is calculated as shown in Equation 3.2.
σ =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ai −µ)2
(3.2)
Correlation Analysis
The visualization of categorical answers (strongly agree, agree, undecided, disagree, strongly
disagree), which is done in the descriptive analysis, is not always able to capture the pres-
ence of any inter-correlated answers. Additionally, the high number of questions makes
it impractical to visualize the questions in pairs to capture any tends.
==PAGE:33==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
28
Since the Likert-scale data can be considered interval data, the Pearson (r) correlation
coeﬃcient is capable of capturing the existence of such trends numerically. In fact, the
metric measures the strength and direction of association between two variables. This is
done by inspecting the change in one variable in relation to another in comparison to the
mean of the sample. The Pearson coeﬃcient is calculated as shown in Equation 3.3.
ρ =
P
i (xi −µx) (yi −µy)
qP
i (xi −µx)2 ∗P
i (yi −µy)2
(3.3)
The correlation coeﬃcient varies between -1 and 1, where -1 indicates that if people
answered on one end of the scale with regards to one question, they answer on the opposite
scale in the other question. This procedure is done for each pair of questions.
Consistency Testing
To ensure that the survey is reliable, it is important to assess the internal consistency
(Tavakol and Dennick, 2011b). The internal consistency reﬂects the extent to which all
items in a test measure the same concept. In other words, the internal consistency reﬂects
the inter-relatedness of the items within a test. In order to gain such consistency, it is
evident to test if the data conducted in the three Epinions would produce the same (or
similar) results if the procedure would be repeated. This consistency is highly important,
not only to ensure that method can be used for a similar project but also it tests if the
study fulﬁlls its predicted aims and hypothesis and furthermore, ensures that the results
are due to the study and not any possible insigniﬁcant variables. Only if this consistency
is ensured, the conducted study can be used to develop further research in this ﬁeld,
meaning that consistency also impacts the acceptance of this analysis (Reid, 2013).
An example could be a survey that investigates whether working from home is consid-
ered an advantage or a disadvantage without asking the question directly. By grouping
questions that indicate working from home as an advantage where ”disagreeing” indicates
that the respondent does no think of this as an advantage while agreeing is considering
it an advantage. The extent of the inter-relatedness can be expressed by calculating the
Cronbach´s alpha, which is according to Joshi et al. (2015); Tavakol and Dennick (2011a)
the most appropriate method since the data of the relevant statements are conducted
with a 5-point-Likert-scale. The Cronbach´s alpha measures the internal consistency and
is expressed as a number between 0 and 1. The higher the alpha value, the more the
items are interrelated. If the alpha value is above 0.7, we can assume that the data are
internally consistent and the survey can be considered as “reliable”. The formula for the
Cronbach’s alpha can be seen in Equation 3.4, where N is the number of items, ¯v is the
average variance and ¯c is the average inter-item covariance among the items.
α =
N · ¯c
¯v + (N −1)¯c
(3.4)
==PAGE:34==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
29
Clustering
Clustering consists of grouping statements (objects) in a way that similar objects are
close to each other. This has previously been done in the technical report of Ipsen et al.
(2020b), where the respondents were clustered according to the mean score w.r.t. the
advantages and the mean score w.r.t. the disadvantages deﬁned in the original survey.
Similar to the procedure in the technical report, the survey questions were grouped into
questions for which ”agreeing” indicates that working from home presented and advan-
tage and other questions where ”agreeing” indicates that working from home presented
a disadvantage. The mean score w.r.t. the questions designated as ”advantage” is called
pos-score, whereas the mean score w.r.t. the question designated as ”disadvantage” is
called con-score. For each individual for each survey, a scatter plot is produced with the
con-score on the x-axis and the pos-score on the y-axis.
The plot-space is then split into 4 quadrants where the upper-left space designates indi-
viduals that regard working from home as something with ”many” advantages and only
a ”few” disadvantages, lower left space includes individuals that consider working from
home low on advantages and disadvantages. The upper right corner of the plot space
covers individuals that experience working from home as equally ﬁlled with advantages
and disadvantages, while an individual at the lower right corner space perceives work-
ing from home as low on advantages and high on disadvantages. This is summarised in
Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Clustering categories of negative and positive experiences in all three
Epinions
Hypothesis Formulation and Testing
Based on theory and the outcomes of the descriptive analysis, there are still some remain-
ing questions. In this section, we formulate them as hypotheses and test their validity
according to the following systematic procedure:
Step 1: State the hypotheses.
Step 2: Set a heuristic criteria for the decision.
Step 3: Compute the test statistic.
Step 4: Make a decision based on the outcome of the testing.
==PAGE:35==
3.2. DATA ANALYSIS
30
Based on the hypotheses, a portion of the survey questions that related to it was selected.
The items/options on the Likert-scale are coded as binaries (1 or 0) based on whether they
counted towards prooﬁng the hypotheses (assigned value: 1) or refuting the hypotheses
(assigned value: 0). For each individual respondent, we calculated the total score of the
respondents answers and compared them to the mean of the maximal possible score. If
the score is above the mean, then the respondent contributed towards prooﬁng the hy-
potheses. The following example will showcase the method more in detail:
Figure 3.11: Example of Hypotheses-Testing
Figure 3.11 shows the hypothesis posed ”Managers are happier when working from home”.
The questions selected that relate to the hypothesis are: ”I miss my colleagues when
working from home”, ”I enjoy time with my kids when working from home” and ”I am
concerned that there will be important information that will not reach me”. Those re-
spondents answering ”agree” or ”strongly agree” to the positively formulated statements
(Statement 1) or ”disagree”/ ”strongly disagree” to the negatively formulated statements
(Statement 2&3) were assumed to point in the direction that managers are happier work-
ing from home and are thus assigned the value ”1”. Being ”undecided”, ”disagreeing” or
”strongly disagreeing” to the positive statements/ ”undecided”, ”agreeing” or ”strongly
agreeing” to the negative statements will count towards disproving the hypothesis and
are thus assigned the value ”0”.
The assigned score for each question is then summed up for each participant. In this case,
if the respondent had a score of 2 out of 3, they will be counted as proving the hypothesis.
If the total portion of the respondents proving the hypothesis is larger than those refuting
it, we assume that the hypothesis holds true.
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Descriptive Analysis
In the following chapter, we aim to provide the reader with an overview of the results
from the conducted surveys (Epinion I- Epinion II - Epinion III). Throughout the analysis,
we will also aim to provide a qualitative analysis of the development of the distribution
of survey answers through time and hypothesize what the underlying reason could be
(Descriptive analysis). Finally, these qualitative assessments are pinned against statistical
tests to verify whether the changes are indeed signiﬁcant and if there is any correlation
between answers or not (Advanced analysis). The questions can be broadly divided into
the following categories:
1. Preliminary questions: Questions concerning whether or not the managers work
from home, for how long, and why.
2. Population questions: Questions related to the demographics and main respon-
sibility of the manager
3. Perception and experience questions: Questions related to various aspects of
working from home
4. Overall perception questions: Questions related to the overall experience of
working from home.
5. Comments: Questions where the respondents could use their own wording.
4.1.1
Preliminary Questions
The answers of the questionnaire show that the majority of the respondents (over 60%)
from all three rounds of the survey were working from home during the ﬁrst year of the
pandemic (May 2020 – February 2021), which can be seen in Figure 4.1.
The larger
part of respondents (more than 72%) stated that they had worked less than one day or a
maximum of two days per week before COVID-19 (see in Appendix A: chapter 8), which
suggests that managers had to some extent prior experience working from home. How-
ever, this was not everyday conduct.
The shares of managers that worked from home throughout Epinion I and Epinion III are
similar: 44% and 40% of the managers worked part-time and 30% and 31% full-time from
home respectively. While Epinion I and Epinion III show a clear higher tendency towards
remote work, the picture painted in Epinion II is diﬀerent. This can be explained by the
state of the pandemic in Denmark during the execution of Epinion II. While in Epinion
I and III the respondents had to work under a country-wide lockdown, Epinion II was
conducted in November. Although the infection numbers were indeed slightly increasing,
Denmark was not under lockdown yet and it was up to the individual organization to
decide, whether they wanted their employees on-site or oﬀ-site. This could explain the
decrease in the number of people working from home (from 74% to 61%).
31
==PAGE:37==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
32
It is also noteworthy that the number of managers working part-time from home is higher
than in the other two surveys, which might point towards newfound ﬂexibility or advan-
tage in working from home or the fact that the organization had some sort of measure in
place to reduce the number of on-site workers. Nevertheless, the tendencies in Epinion II
might provide the closes insight into how a post-pandemic might look like.
Figure 4.1: Answer distribution of Question 2 across Epinion I-II-II
The following analysis only focuses on the respondents answering either “Yes, I only work
from home” or “Yes, I sometimes work from home”. The replies of those who indicated
they “do not work from home” during the pandemic are separately described at the end
of the chapter.
4.1.2
Demographics and Major Work Responsibilities of Managers work-
ing from Home
When asked about the reason for working from home, the respondents either reported
that they were ordered to do so (40%-58%), that they preferred to do so (28%-38%),
or that they always worked from home (9%-15%) as seen in Figure 4.2. Only very few
indicated that it was because of an actual illness or the fear of potentially carrying the
disease.
Figure 4.2: Answer distribution of Question 3 across Epinion I-II-II
==PAGE:38==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
33
According to the three surveys, a majority of the managers working from home are doing
either administrative work, communication, or commercial business (see in Figure 4.3)
and their age distribution lies between 30 and 60 years with a majority between 50 and
60 years (see in Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.3: Answer distribution of Question 15 across Epinion I-II-II
Figure 4.4: Answer distribution of Question 16 across Epinion I-II-II
As can be seen in Figure 4.5, the majority of the respondents across all surveys are males
(approx. 70%). In addition, when it comes to the managers’ highest level of education, the
majority of the respondents either had either a Bachelor’s or a Master’s Degree, followed
by a vocational training and an associate degree (see Appendix A: Table 8).
==PAGE:39==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
34
Figure 4.5: Answer distribution of Question 17 across Epinion I-II-II
4.1.3
Perceptions and Experiences of Managers while working from
Home during Covid-19
The descriptive analysis of these questions has been further divided into ﬁve categories
based on the following themes:
1. Workplace: atmosphere & routines
2. Work tasks, productivity, and ﬁnancial beneﬁts
3. Interactions at home
4. Communication & relations in the organization
5. Overall situation of managers working from home
These categories are motivated by the nature of the questions posed in the survey and the
intention behind them. The original format of the survey was divided into disadvantages
and advantages. However, throughout the analysis, it became clear that the respondents
disagreed with parts of the advantages or disagreed with the disadvantages. The new
division aims to provide a more clear picture and a better overview of the diﬀerent aspects
of working from home. The following statements are assigned to their respective new and
old categories, these can be found in Appendix A: Table 8.
Workplace: Atmosphere & Routines
With regards to the general atmosphere at home, large parts of the respondents were
undecided 45-50% while approximately 30% either disagreed or strongly disagreed on
whether the atmosphere was better at home compared to the oﬃcial workplace. This is
further illustrated by the fact a large fraction of the respondents “missed getting out of
their homes”. In fact, over 50% either agreed or strongly agreed across all three surveys
(57%, 56%, and 63% respectively), while only 20% either disagreed or strongly disagreed
to miss leaving their homes. These answers could reﬂect the fact that the lack of a diverse
environment results in a negative attitude towards the environment.
However, when
asked whether the respondents ”feel tied to their computers to a greater extent than their
workplace“ only 40-47% agreed or strongly agreed with the statement, while the portion
disagreeing with the statement was around 30%. Despite this, over 57% indicated across
the three surveys that they can take a break whenever they liked while less than 20%
indicated otherwise. This reﬂects some degree of the ﬂexibility working from home oﬀers
to the individual employee.
==PAGE:40==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
35
When probed into the level of activity in the form of exercise, 40% to 49% agreed or
strongly agreed that they “don’t get enough exercise”. Additionally, we can observe that
the fraction agreeing with the above statement is increasing (from 43%-49%) while the
fraction disagreeing is decreasing (35%-29%). This could reﬂect a tendency towards less
exercise and a less active state. In general, most managers agree with the fact that they
miss going out, that they feel tied to their computer more, that they don’t get enough
exercise.
The majority of respondents were undecided when it comes to whether “working from
home enabling them to break old habits and change their routines”, however looking
past the undecided fraction, over 30% across all surveys agree that working from home
enabled them to break some old habits and change routines. However, this fraction is
steadily decreasing going from 46% to 35% from Epinion I to Epinion III, which could be
explained by new habits and routines that are being established and have not been broken
down yet. Only 25% of the managers miss the food and other beneﬁts from their original
workplace, quite the contrary, around 60% stated that they enjoy being able to eat and
drink their food. Meanwhile, an increasing number of managers disagreed with the fact
that it required more eﬀort than they cannot go about their normal routines (from 43%
to 52%). When it comes to the perceptions towards the physical workspace, the surveys
did not provide a clear tendency. Around 50% of the managers in Epinion I-II and 40% in
Epinion III agree with the statement ”the physical conditions in my home do not aﬀord
a good working environment”. The decrease in respondents experiencing inappropriate
working environments might indicate that their physical workspaces have improved or
they have grown accustomed to the available workspace. All described experiences and
perceptions can be seen in see Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:41==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
36
Workplace: atmosphere and routines  
 
 
4%
4%
3%
14%
12%
10%
48%
41%
42%
20%
30%
33%
15%
14%
13%
I I I
I I
I
"I g e t a chance  to br e ak m y  old  h abits  an d  chang e  r outin e s ."
15%
10%
16%
14%
21%
19%
22%
26%
22%
29%
30%
33%
20%
13%
10%
I I I
I I
I
"I do not g e t e noug h e x e r cis e  w he n I  am  not at m y  w or kplace ."
6%
4%
7%
12%
14%
14%
19%
27%
22%
35%
40%
35%
28%
16%
22%
I I I
I I
I
"I  m is s  g e tting  out of m y  hom e ."
9%
8%
6%
26%
26%
23%
45%
49%
48%
16%
11%
13%
5%
5%
10%
I I I
I I
I
"I  like  the  atm os phe r e  in m y  hom e  be tte r  than at w or k."
17%
9%
14%
23%
19%
18%
20%
23%
24%
27%
36%
34%
13%
13%
10%
I I I
I I
I
"I  fe e l tie d to m y  com pute r  to a g r e ate r  e x te nt than at m y  w or kplace . "
6%
3%
4%
13%
10%
13%
24%
22%
24%
31%
41%
38%
26%
24%
21%
I I I
I I
I
"I  can take  a br e ak w he n I  like  to."
31%
27%
27%
20%
30%
26%
24%
23%
20%
21%
17%
19%
4%
3%
7%
I I I
I I
I
"I  m is s  the  food or  othe r  be ne fits  that w e  hav e  at m y  w or kplace ."
25%
20%
22%
27%
28%
21%
29%
31%
29%
14%
18%
23%
5%
3%
5%
I I I
I I
I
"I t r e quir e s  m or e  e ffor t fr om  m e  that I cannot us e  m y  nor m al r outine s . "
23%
12%
13%
21%
18%
19%
16%
21%
18%
26%
33%
35%
14%
16%
16%
I I I
I I
I
"The  phy s ical conditions  in m y  hom e  do not affor d a g ood w or king  
e nv ir onm e nt."
( e . g .  a d j u s t a b l e  t a b l e  a n d  c h a i r ,  e n o u g h  l i g h t ,  q u i e t n e s s ,  g o o d  m o n i t o r ,  e t c . )
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly agree
3%
3%
2%
6%
9%
8%
28%
24%
22%
42%
42%
46%
21%
22%
21%
I I I
I I
I
"I  c an  e a t a n d  d r in k m y  o w n  fo o d ."
Figure 4.6: Answer distributions on ”Workplace: atmosphere & routines”
==PAGE:42==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
37
Work tasks, Productivity, and Financial Aspects
Considering the tasks and responsibilities of the managers (see Figure 4.7), it seems that
the majority (over 55%) are “not concerned that there are work tasks” they can’t perform
from home. Additionally, they seem to be fully aware of the tasks they are assigned since
over 87% disagreed with the fact that they “don’t know what kind of work they should
do”. The same image is observed when asked if they “are afraid there won’t be enough
work that can be done remotely”. All in all, it seems the managers are aware of their
tasks and that these can be completed remotely.
The surveys also revealed that the respondents had access to the necessary tools (doc-
uments and data) needed to complete their work. Between 66% and 72% disagreed or
strongly disagreed with the fact they “did not have access to data or document necessary
to conduct their work”.
However, when it comes to physical equipment, the respon-
dents’ experiences were diverse. Around 30-35% indicated they either strongly agree or
agree, while 35-40% indicated they strongly disagree or disagree with the need for physi-
cal equipment. Although the distribution is similar, it is noteworthy that almost a third
are experiencing a lack of physical equipment to perform their tasks, which could have
signiﬁcant implications on productivity and achieving the present goals.
A large fraction (44%-55%) of the respondents felt well prepared with the information
given by their organizations, however, around 30% were also undecided if the received
information was insuﬃcient enough for them. Further, the respondents were also unde-
cided whether their “work is more demanding than normally with 34%-40% belonging
to this category while 25%-34% disagreed with the fact that it was more demanding.
This leaves 30%-39% indicating that it is more challenging for them to do about their
responsibilities. Meanwhile, an increasing fraction is indicating that the tasks allocated
when working from home are not as interesting as those done on-site, rising from 13% to
20%. Although the vast majority disagrees with that statement, this fraction is decreasing
across the surveys going from 70% to 53%. Working from home seems to have enabled a
fraction between 25% and 33% of the respondents to focus their attention on some tasks
they normally did not have time for before. However, it must be pointed out that similar
fractions were undecided or disagreed with that fact.
Concerning the productivity (see Figure 4.8), the majority of the managers disagreed that
they get less done than when working from their oﬃces, around 20% strongly agreed or
agreed and 25% are undecided. When questioned about their working hours, no clear
answer could be found as to whether managers worked more hours than normally as
around 40% of the respondents were undecided, the remainder of the answers were evenly
distributed in agree/disagree.
In this context, the same picture is observed when it
comes to the question concerning time spent in a long meeting. The answers are equally
distributed in the respective surveys, however, the portion of people either disagreeing or
strongly disagreeing is steadily increasing from 34% to 45% while the portion agreeing
or strongly agreeing decreased from 44% to 28%. This trend might showcase that the
managers spend more time in long meetings now than at the beginning of the pandemic.
Two positive impacts were identiﬁed with regards to the transportation time and the
ﬁnancial state of the organization.
Around 80% strongly agreed or agreed that they
save the normal transportation time to their workplaces in addition to the absence of
any ﬁnancial impact as less than 10% indicated that working from home had a negative
ﬁnancial impact on them or the organization.
==PAGE:43==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
38
 
 
35%
26%
29%
26%
32%
25%
19%
22%
27%
14%
18%
14%
6%
2%
5%
I I I
I I
I
"I  am  conce r ne d that the r e  ar e  w or k tas ks  I want to do but cannot do fr om  
hom e ."
21%
12%
19%
26%
25%
24%
24%
26%
22%
19%
30%
28%
9%
7%
7%
I I I
I I
I
"I  ne e d phy s ical e quipm e nt to do m y  w or k w hich I  do not hav e  acce s s  to at 
hom e . "
32%
22%
26%
40%
42%
40%
14%
18%
14%
10%
17%
12%
4%
2%
7%
I I I
I I
I
"I ne e d data or docum e nts  to do m y work which I do not hav e  acce s s  to at 
hom e . "
55%
55%
57%
32%
32%
30%
9%
10%
7%
3%
2%
2%
1%
1%
3%
I I I
I I
I
"I  dont know w hat kind of w or k I  s hould do."
43%
45%
41%
33%
30%
29%
15%
14%
20%
7%
10%
7%
2%
1%
2%
I I I
I I
I
"I  am  afr aid that the r e  will not be  e noug h wor k that I can do fr om  hom e ."
7%
5%
7%
21%
29%
18%
34%
36%
40%
31%
24%
28%
8%
6%
7%
I I I
I I
I
"M y  wor k is  m or e  de m anding  than nor m ally . "
16%
9%
7%
22%
27%
31%
35%
35%
28%
21%
21%
23%
6%
7%
11%
I I I
I I
I
"I  g e t a pos s ibility  to do s om e  othe r  wor k that I w ould nor m ally  not hav e  tim e  
to. "
29%
26%
31%
24%
30%
29%
28%
31%
27%
14%
11%
9%
6%
1%
4%
I I I
I I
I
"The  w or k I  do fr om  hom e  is  not as  inte r e s ting  as  the  wor k I  do at m y  
w or kplace ."
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly agree
1%
4%
3%
13%
12%
15%
30%
39%
26%
36%
30%
36%
20%
16%
20%
I I I
I I
I
"The  infor m ation g iv e n by  m y  w or k m ake s  m e  fe e l w e ll pr e par e d. "
Figure 4.7: Answer distributions of managers on ”Work tasks, productivity, and
ﬁnancial aspects - Part 1”
==PAGE:44==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
39
42%
45%
43%
27%
24%
25%
24%
25%
22%
5%
5%
9%
1%
1%
1%
I I I
I I
I
"It is  a financial pr oble m  for  m y  wor k that I cannot be  at the  wor kplace ."
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly agree
2%
3%
4%
1%
3%
3%
14%
13%
13%
34%
35%
29%
48%
45%
51%
I I I
I I
I
"I s av e  the  nor m al tr ans por tation tim e  to m y  wor kplace ."
7%
11%
12%
25%
22%
19%
38%
41%
34%
23%
20%
19%
7%
7%
15%
I I I
I I
I
"I' m  wor king  m or e  hour s  than nor m ally "
14%
7%
6%
31%
22%
28%
27%
33%
22%
17%
30%
26%
11%
8%
18%
I I I
I I
I
"I do not hav e  to s pe nd tim e  on long  m e e ting s ."
26%
25%
31%
31%
39%
29%
24%
21%
25%
14%
13%
13%
6%
2%
2%
I I I
I I
I
"I' m  g e tting  le s s  wor k done  than nor m ally "
Figure 4.8: Answer distributions of managers on ”Work tasks, productivity, and
ﬁnancial aspects - Part 2”
Interactions at Home
The survey revealed that the majority of managers do not ﬁnd it diﬃcult to focus on
their work while working from home; around 70% of the respondents strongly disagree/
disagree that they can’t keep focus at home. Similarly, it was reported that they don’t
get disturbed by others present in their homes. This observation is further reinforced by
the fact that around 50% either strongly agree or agree that they “get time to focus on
their work without interruptions from other people”. This is slightly lower compared to
the question of whether they are distracted by other people in their respective homes,
which could indicate that the distractions are coming from outside the home.
In the same context, around 40% of the respondents strongly agreed or agreed that
through working from home, it is possible to be closer to family and friends. Although
around 30% are undecided and 20% disagree or strongly disagree with the statement.
This could indicate that although being physically present at home, does not equate to
the establishment of closer presence to family and friends or just plain the fact that people
did in fact reduce their contact to “non in house” family members.
==PAGE:45==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
40
9%
10%
9%
14%
19%
14%
26%
32%
33%
34%
30%
30%
17%
9%
14%
I I I
I I
I
"I can be  clos e  to m y  fam ily  and fr ie nds ."
7%
5%
2%
14%
16%
16%
29%
19%
25%
32%
36%
33%
18%
25%
25%
I I I
I I
I
"I g e t tim e  to focus  on m y  w or k w ithout inte r r uptions  fr om  othe r  pe ople . "
31%
40%
43%
29%
30%
26%
23%
15%
15%
11%
11%
14%
6%
3%
1%
I I I
I I
I
"I g e t dis tur be d by  othe r  pe ople  in m y  hom e . "
36%
33%
42%
32%
36%
31%
20%
19%
16%
9%
9%
8%
3%
2%
3%
I I I
I I
I
"I find it difficult to ke e p focus e d on w or k w he n I am  alone ."
Figure 4.9: Answer distributions of managers on ”Interactions at home”
However, these trends might also be related to their family situations in their homes. The
majority (over 80%) of the managers are either alone working from home or are sharing
their working environment with another person (see Appendix A: Table 8). Furthermore,
only a few are sharing their home working environments with their kids as Figure 4.10
shows that most managers do not have children present while working from home.
Figure 4.10: Answer distribution of Question 21 across Epinion I-II-II
Communication & Relation to the Organization
A majority of the questions were allocated into this category. The majority of the man-
agers from the survey reported that they are on average in contact with around ﬁve to nine
people during a day working from home (see Figure 4.11). These numbers are expected
to be much lower in comparison to pre-pandemic circumstances.
==PAGE:46==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
41
Figure 4.11: Question 10 - Contact people during one day
E-mails, phone calls, SMS, and shared online documents are reportedly the communica-
tion channels used daily during the pandemic (see in Appendix A: Figure 8). Meanwhile,
other groupware channels such as Facebook groups, MS Teams, Lotus Notes, Wire, Zoho,
Slack, or Trello to coordinate with their colleagues, subordinates, and superiors are not
as widely used.
As can be seen in Figure 4.12, 70% either agreed or strongly agreed with the fact that
“they don’t see their colleagues or others as much as they would like to”. While only
7-11% indicated otherwise. Adding to this app. 40% indicated that it is harder to get
in contact with people while between 15-18% indicated that it is not harder than usual.
This has resulted in the deterioration of human relationships to some extent.
Across
the three surveys, the portion of people either disagreeing or strongly disagreeing with
the fact that they “can keep a good relationship with colleagues” is steadily increasing
from 25% to 37% while the portion agreeing or strongly agreeing decreased from 51%
to 41%. This could potentially indicate that it is getting harder and harder to maintain
such a relationship without in-person contact. Finally, 43%-51% were undecided as to
whether “they have no one looking over them”, while 30% to 35% agreed with the lack
of a supervisory ﬁgure in their daily work.
==PAGE:47==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
42
 
 
 
 
 
4%
2%
11%
5%
8%
9%
16%
19%
44%
52%
49%
33%
25%
23%
I I I
I I
I
"I  do not g e t to s e e  m y  colle g e s  or  othe r  pe ople  as  m uch as  I  w ould hav e  like d 
to. "
4%
5%
7%
16%
19%
11%
45%
43%
51%
24%
22%
17%
11%
11%
13%
I I I
I I
I
"I hav e  no - one  looking  ov e r  m e ." 
12%
13%
10%
31%
31%
27%
44%
39%
44%
11%
14%
14%
3%
4%
4%
I I I
I I
I
"It is  e as ie r  to g e t in contact w ith pe ople  than nor m al. "
10%
6%
3%
27%
28%
22%
21%
24%
23%
31%
34%
37%
11%
8%
14%
I I I
I I
I
"I  can ke e p a g ood r e lations hip w ith m y  colle ag ue s "
Figure 4.12: Answer distributions of managers on ”Communication & relation to
the organization”
Overall Situation of Managers working from Home
In the last section of the survey, managers were questioned about their overall perception
of the situation, most (between 43%-53%) indicated that the situation is as challenging
as normal, while 10%-15% indicated it is less challenging. This leaves over a third of the
respondents experiencing a more challenging work and life situation (see Figure 4.13).
Noteworthy is also the fact that almost double the amount of respondents in Epinion III
reported experiencing the situation much more challenging than normal compared to the
other two surveys. A general trend is a decrease in the number of respondents indicating it
is less or as challenging as before the pandemic and the increase in respondents indicating
it is getting more challenging. This could indicate some diﬃculties sustaining the change
and could be related to “Corona fatigue”.
Figure 4.13: Answer distribution of Question 22 across Epinion I-II-II
==PAGE:48==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
43
This tendency is further consolidated through observations across Epinion II and Epinion
III. In these two surveys, respondents were asked to compare their current situation to
their previous situation e.i. they were asked in Epinion II on the current perceptions com-
pared to those in Epinion I and in Epinion III to their perception compared to Epinion
II. The ﬁrst comparative perception (Figure 4.14 - green) indicated that 50% experienced
their current situation as challenging as in the spring (Epinion I) while 29% indicated is
either somewhat less challenging or much less challenging and 20% indicated it is more
challenging.
In the second comparative perception between the situation during the conduction of
Epinion I and Epinion III (Figure 4.14 - blue), a shift in answers was observed. The
respondents indicating that their situation ”is as challenging as before” has decreased from
51% to 39%. The fraction indicating ”it is much less challenging” decreased from 7% to
3% while the fraction indicating ”it is somewhat less challenging than normal” increased
from 22% to 27%. Meanwhile, the percentage of respondents indicating ”it is somewhat
more challenging” and ”much more challenging” changed the most and increased by 10%
and 1% respectively. This shift indicates a sort of migration towards experiencing a more
challenging situation.
Figure 4.14: Comparing the overall situation of October 2020 (Epinion II) to May
2020 (Epinion I) and February 2021 (Epinion III) to May 2020 (Epinion I)
Summary
The ﬁndings of the data conducted in three rounds of the survey by Epinion were summa-
rized into four main categories. When questioned about their workplace atmosphere and
routines, the questioned managers revealed that appreciate their self-determined work
schedules and their well-established work routines could be transferred to their home of-
ﬁce workplaces. However, the managers also reported the lack of appropriate physical
conditions for a convenient working environment (e.g. screens and oﬃce chairs) and very
much miss getting out of their homes for a change of scenery.
==PAGE:49==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
44
The data also revealed information regarding the managers’ way of communicating while
working from home and they keep up with the relations in their organizations. In this
context, the survey revealed that their preferred way of communication is via e-mails,
phone calls, and shared documents. Furthermore, the managers also report that meet-
ings are less and shorter. However, one of the strongest majorities of the whole survey
addressed the feeling of isolation at home and are missing contact with others of their
organization. In this context, the managers also reported that the contact to others be-
came of the last months more and more not suﬃcient to keep a good relationship and
preventing them from being a good leader. When it comes to their interactions at home,
most managers work either alone or with their partners and do not experience any dis-
tractions from their family members. Quite the contrary, they enjoy the new proximity to
their families. Regarding their work tasks, productivity and beneﬁts while working from
home, then managers revealed that all tasks are clear, and all necessary data is provided
by their organizations. However, over time the respondents had to spend longer time in
meetings compared to on-site.
Also, one of the beneﬁts that stood out the most for all managers and was recurrently
reported in the free comment sections of the survey, is the time savings generated by the
fact that they do not have to travel to their workplaces on site.
4.1.4
Perceptions and Experiences of Managers which are NOT working
from Home
The survey also contained a few answers where the respondents indicated they have been
working from home throughout the pandemic. In Epinion I 26% of the respondents did
not work from home. Meanwhile, in Epinion II and Epinion III, it was 39% and 29%
respectively.
The age and gender and educational distribution of the managers responding with “No,
I do not work from home”, is the same as those reporting to work from home to some
extent. When comparing the tasks occupied by the managers, it becomes evident that
the majority of the managers who are working in the administrative ﬁeld and those in the
commercial business do not work from home (see Figure 4.15). In contrast, managers who
are monitoring or developing systems and models are working from home. This might be
related to the nature of their activities as developing products and monitoring systems
are easily performed oﬀ-site and from home.
However, it is also evident, that there are big diﬀerences in the ﬁelds of managers not
working from home in the three surveys, therefore, a clear trend could not be identiﬁed.
Also, those not working from home in Epinion I and Epinion II were asked, how they would
describe their overall situation. The same tendency as of those working from home can be
observed in their answers as the majority of the respondents experienced their situation
in Epinion I just as challenging as before, however over time in Epinion II the tendency
of their perceptions changes and the managers experience their situation somewhat more
challenging or even much more challenging than before, which can be seen in Figure 4.16.
==PAGE:50==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
45
Figure 4.15: Answer distribution of Question 15 of the ”NO”-answers
Figure 4.16: Answer distribution of Question 22 of the ”NO”-answers
Summary
All in all, the answers with regards to the overall perceptions of the current situation of
those working from home do not diﬀer compared to those working on site. Both parties
do experience their situation more diﬃcult and challenging the longer the pandemic goes
on. However, since the data of those working from home contains much more information,
the reasons behind their challenges might be diﬀerent from those working on site.
==PAGE:51==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
46
4.1.5
Respondents’ Personal Perceptions
The following section is based on the comments given open-ended-questions section of the
survey (Question 5, 12, and 14), which consist of the following:
• How would you describe the experience of working from home in your own words?
• If you have experienced other advantages to working from home, please comment.
• If you have experienced other disadvantages to working from home, please comment.
We will present examples of associations and contexts in which the words were used in
the free comment questions of the survey. The quantity of the respective words can be
derived by the size of the word in the word-clouds (see Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18). The
analysis will be based on whether the words ﬁnd their intention on positive or negative
experiences. Since all three surveys almost showed the same picture, all Epinions (I-II-III)
were combined into one word-cloud, respective negative and positive experiences.
Positive Associations
When asked about a brief description of their experience by changing on-site workplaces
with a home oﬃce, a big majority of the managers described their new situation as
”ﬁne”, ”okay” and also ”good” (see Figure 4.17). Those going more into detail about
their perceptions in the last months named the calm and peace they experienced at home
as being the main factors for a deep focus and an eﬀective work routine.
”It is much better than being in the workplace. More calm.”
(41 to 50 years, Male, I do administrative work)
”There is more peace to solve diﬃcult tasks.”
(41 to 50 years, Male, I do administration & commercial business)
In the context of higher eﬃciency and calmness, some respondents also call their situation
more ”liberating and easy”, where free planning and ﬂexible working hours give them a
better working atmosphere. The respondents also note, that their work routines have
improved over the last months. Some of the managers reported, that the situation needed
some time to settle, however, they see themselves in a good position regarding their own
tasks while working from home already in Epinion II.
”There are many positive aspects to it now that we’re reorganized.”
(21 to 30 years, Female, I do communication)
In addition to their newly improved working routines, the respondents reported high
beneﬁts in saving their transportation time to their workplaces.
”Less stress, no transportation, can get up later. Worked several hours
because I was not in a hurry to get home before the traﬃc got really bad.”
(31 to 40 years, Male, I develop systems, plans or models)
==PAGE:52==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
47
Figure 4.17: Word-cloud of comments on the advantages of working from home
Negative Associations
However, managers have also experienced some diﬃculties while working from home,
such as facing distractions from their family members, which caused a major loss of
focus. While analyzing the comments, it also became clear, that the majority of those
reporting about distractions are younger managers with either younger kids or smaller
homes with fewer opportunities to create calm workspaces. However, some also experience
distractions by other adults also working from home.
”At ﬁrst, I thought it was cool to work from a new location. But I have since
found that it is harder for me to stay focused at home, especially when there
are others at home at the same time as me. My productivity is higher when I
am outside my home.”
(21 to 30 years, Male, I work in manufacturing and creative production)
In addition to possible distractions at home, the questioned managers also reported, that
their physical workplaces at home do not meet the standards of those at their on-site
workplaces. The respondents, therefore, reported that they had to work under unpleas-
ant circumstances in their homes aﬀecting their well-being as well.
The need for an
appropriate working space, as well as the experiences of impacts of those not disposing of
those, were reported throughout all age classes.
”The biggest challenge at the moment is that I spend 100% of my working
time on my PC, often locked in bad working positions and with headsets on.
Our home is not designed to be a workplace. It wears out physically.”
(51 to 60 years, Female, I do administrative work and I am teaching and
supervising)
==PAGE:53==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
48
”Really nice. Have been provided with a docking station and the possibility of
raising / lowering the table and oﬃce chair. However, can be challenging
with oﬃce space, with two teenagers and a man who also partly works at
home, as we do not have a room for an oﬃce, but also sitting in the dining
room.”
(41 to 50 years, Female, I do administrative work and I am teaching and
supervising)
Also, one of the aspects almost all managers could agree on, was their lack of social
contacts when working from home. Some even described their work as boring based on
the fact, reporting that they feel uninspired, lonely, and socially isolated when working
from home. Furthermore, even those who had worked from home before the outbreak re-
ported that their work became more boring based on the exchange with their demotivated
colleagues.
”[...] I, like many others, lack the sociality of my colleagues and an easy
communication when it comes to work.”
(21 to 30 years, Female, I do communication)
”Hard, as you do not have much social contact, it is positive in some
situations because you can concentrate for a long time and negative as there
is often some information that is missed as you do not hear them in the
’corridors’”
(21 to 30 years, Female, N.A.)
When it comes to their managerial tasks, the managers see some critical aspects such
as their own well-being and the well-being of their employees, virtual leadership in gen-
eral, and ways of communicating with their subordinates. The majority of the managers
reported that their mental and physical health is suﬀering under their current working
situation since their previously well-established working routines have been suspended.
”This is a somewhat diﬀerent experience of being a full-time virtual leader. I
forget to get up from the PC during the day.”
(Above 60 years, Female, N.A.)
”It is diﬃcult to distinguish between work and family life. It’s harder to be a
full-time virtual leader.”
(41 to 50 years, Female, N.A.)
These statements might indicate that managers see their work-life harmony out of bal-
ance by mixing leisure time with work and vice versa, aﬀecting their job satisfaction.
Furthermore, not being able to ”physically” leave their workplaces, some of the managers
experienced working more hours compared to their normal days at the on-site oﬃce.
But I also feel that my desire to work and joy are aﬀected. I love my job, just
not right now. [...] I now experience that I sometimes lose heart and become,
well, a little discouraged. In a broad sense, it aﬀects my well-being in life as
such.”
(51 to 60 years, Female, I am teaching and supervising and I do
administrative work)
==PAGE:54==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
49
”Can be hard to remember ’going home’ from work, but often working longer
than if I were in the oﬃce.”
(41 to 50 years, Female, I do administrative work and I am teaching and
supervising)
In this context, the managers also sense that their employees might experience the same
feelings, however, addressing and handling those felling in distance is more diﬃcult. Fur-
thermore, communication in general from distance is reported as challenging as the nu-
ances of the conversations are hard to sense in virtual meetings.
“Hard to keep your ﬁnger on the pulse in terms of employee well-being.”
(51 to 60 years, Female, I do administrative work)
“Also a diﬃcult form of communication, e.g. that you do not get all the
nuances.”
(41 to 50 years, Female, N.A.)
It became also vital, that in Epinion II, where some of the managers had the opportunity
to return to their oﬃces on-site, their answers changed towards a wish to establish working
from home as a part-time possibility. As the majority saw some a major potential in the
focus and calm environments they could proﬁt from but also do not feel lonely and isolated.
”It’s okay because of the ability to switch between the workplace and
homework. I am not disturbed and can therefore work with longer continuity
in a task. [...]”
(51 to 60 years, Male, I do administrative work and I do creative production)
Figure 4.18: Word-cloud of comments on the disadvantages of working from home
==PAGE:55==
4.1. DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS
50
Summary
When analyzing the comments, it became evident, that the managers enjoyed the calm
environment in their homes, giving them the opportunity to create a good focus and eﬀec-
tive work routines. Tasks and responsibilities could be timed according to their schedules.
According to the comments, this created a liberating working atmosphere with eﬀective
working methods. However, these new routines needed time to be established and were
not as well-functioning at the beginning of their experience. Major time savings were
experienced in the lack of need for transportation to the workplaces and time-consuming
trips in crowded public transport could be avoided.
While the experiences of working from home were described, the majority of the managers
also experienced negative aspects of their new situation. The respondents found it hard
to get used to the new circumstances, as a lack of appropriate equipment (chairs, tables,
screens, etc.) was unable to create a healthy working environment furthermore, the man-
agers were facing unexpected and expected distractions by others also working/ staying at
home. In addition, the lack of social contact with their colleagues gave the respondents a
feeling of loneliness and isolation. However, the managers were not only facing diﬃculties
regarding their own mental health but the lack of contact with their employees turned
out to be raise questions according to their mental health. In this context, managers felt
like they could not maintain their managerial responsibilities and were losing contact to
the well-being of their subordinates.
Throughout the surveys, the comments were mixed, since almost all participants saw
advantages as well as disadvantages in their experience. Some reported, that they would
like to keep working from home as an option after the pandemic, others agreed with this,
however, wished to only work part-time from home during a week, to keep in touch with
their colleagues.
==PAGE:56==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
51
4.2
Advanced Analysis
The results obtained through the advanced analysis are highlighted and discussed in the
following.
The results will be shown in the same order as presented throughout the
method chapter, starting with analyzing possible trends in the mean of the replies. This
is followed by investigating any apparent correlation in replies and discussing potential
reasons behind these. The section is rounded up by showcasing the results of the clustering
method and the hypothesis testing.
4.2.1
Statistical Measures
The statistical measures cover the metrics such as the mean and standard deviation of
the replies as well as the calculation of the correlation matrices and Cronbach’s alpha for
consistency check.
Mean and Standard Deviation
The mean and standard deviation of the replies have been calculated for all questions
and can be seen in Table 4.1. In this section, we will divulge the general tendency across
all Epinion surveys with regards to the statements presented in the surveys. As part of
this, only statements with a clear development across time will be highlighted. The state-
ments and the allocation to their respective number can be found in Appendix A: Table 8.
Based on the mean value of the responses to ”I can keep a good relationship with my
colleagues or co-students when I’m working from home” (S5), it is clear to see that it
has become increasingly harder to maintain good relationships with colleagues with a de-
creasing from 3.37 to 3.07. Further, are the respondents spending on average more time
in long meetings compared to the start of the COVID-19 crisis (Epinion I) as the mean
answer to ”I do not have to spend time on long meetings” (S9) decreased from 3.22 to
2.81. Respondents are also increasingly more and more disagreeing with the fact that it
is easier to get in contact with people than normal (It is easier to get in contact with
people than normal(S9)). The average response to ”I do not get to see my colleges or
other people as much as I would have liked to” (S19) increased from 3.87 to 3.94 which
could indicate that the respondents across the Epinion surveys are increasingly longing
for physical contact with their colleagues. The average reply to ”I need data or documents
to do my work which I do not have access to at home” (S21) decreased from 2.34 to 2.10,
which could indicate that organizations have become better able to provide their worker
with the necessary materials to perform their work from home. The extent of agreement
with ”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep focused on work when I am alone” (S22) have slightly
increased, which could reﬂect that it is getting harder and harder to keep focus while
working from home.
The average reply to ”I do not get enough exercise when I am not at my workplace” (S28)
has increased from 3.02 to 3.25, which indicates that respondents are settling into a less
physically active state. Respondents are also ﬁnding themselves increasingly bored with
the tasks assigned to them when working from home ”The work I do from home is not
as interesting as the work I do at my workplace” (S29). It also seems that people are
getting more and more accustomed to the new ”normal” as the average agreement with
”It requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32) decreased
from 2.69 to 2.49.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
52
Finally, people are less concerned that there are work tasks they want to do but can’t
perform from home (S34) as the average agreement decreased from 2.42 to 2.33, indicating
that people have found new ways to be able to accomplish these tasks.
It is important to note that the analysis conducted here is complementary to the de-
scriptive analysis and many of the observations made there are identical to the ones
highlighted here. The standard deviation has also been reported, however, no signiﬁcant
insights could be provided.
Table 4.1: Mean and Standard Deviation per Statement
Mean
Standard Deviation
Epinion I
Epinion II
Epinion III
Epinion I
Epinion II
Epinion III
My current work situation II
S1
3,06
2,87
3,00
1,21
1,07
1,01
S2
2,25
2,21
2,46
1,10
1,01
1,17
S3
3,10
2,93
3,16
1,00
0,97
1,03
S4
3,55
3,44
3,61
1,07
1,03
1,00
S5
3,37
3,12
3,07
1,07
1,10
1,18
Advantages of working from home
S6
4,10
4,01
4,25
1,01
1,11
0,98
S7
3,62
3,65
3,43
1,09
1,15
1,13
S8
3,01
2,93
2,81
1,12
1,07
1,12
S9
3,22
3,13
2,81
1,21
1,05
1,21
S10
3,59
3,77
3,57
1,08
1,03
1,18
S11
3,26
3,06
3,35
1,14
1,12
1,18
S12
2,99
2,80
2,82
1,01
0,91
0,95
S13
3,75
3,74
3,69
0,95
0,99
0,97
S14
3,19
3,16
3,23
1,03
1,00
0,96
S15
4,20
4,18
4,22
1,03
1,00
0,91
S16
4,07
4,12
4,25
1,02
0,91
0,90
S17
3,43
3,43
3,27
0,94
0,97
0,98
S18
2,75
2,69
2,61
0,98
1,01
0,95
Disadvantages of working from home
S19
3,87
3,93
3,94
0,86
0,91
1,09
S20
2,80
2,90
2,71
1,25
1,13
1,25
S21
2,34
2,31
2,10
1,20
1,06
1,06
S22
1,99
2,10
2,10
1,09
1,06
1,06
S23
1,63
1,63
1,62
0,94
0,87
0,82
S24
2,54
2,39
2,50
1,28
1,16
1,24
S25
2,01
1,90
1,99
1,07
0,98
1,00
S26
2,04
2,01
2,29
1,14
1,12
1,19
S27
3,52
3,46
3,69
1,18
1,03
1,17
S28
3,02
3,19
3,25
1,27
1,20
1,32
S29
2,25
2,31
2,46
1,11
1,04
1,21
S30
2,01
1,93
1,94
1,06
1,06
1,00
S31
3,22
3,20
2,89
1,28
1,28
1,39
S32
2,69
2,53
2,49
1,20
1,08
1,16
S33
3,08
3,22
2,98
1,23
1,17
1,31
S34
2,42
2,36
2,33
1,20
1,11
1,24
==PAGE:58==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
53
Consistency Statistics
The Cronbach’s alpha was used to analyze the internal consistency and showed that 15
advantages (will be referred to later as pro-score) and 19 disadvantages (will be referred
to later as con-score) could be used to make a reliable scale since the Cronbach’s alpha
was above 0.8 in all Epinions.
Disadvantages
Epinion I
Epinion II
Epinion III
Cronbach’s Alpha
0,86
0,83
0,86
Advantages
Epinion I
Epinion II
Epinion III
Cronbach’s Alpha
0,82
0,84
0,78
Correlation Analysis
The correlation coeﬃcient has been calculated for all statements in all three Epinion
surveys. Each survey will be analyzed independently. Only a correlation coeﬃcient above
0.5 will be analyzed in the following, everything below will be considered as non-correlated.
Epinion I
Based on the correlation coeﬃcients seen in Figure 4.19, the highest observed
coeﬃcient (0.69) is between the statements ”I contribute to lowering the risk of spreading
COVID-19” (S6) and ”I do not expose myself to the risk of getting a disease” (S16). These
two statements correlate positively, which is not surprising since not exposing oneself to
COVID-19 is also contributing to decreasing the risk of spreading the virus. The second
largest coeﬃcient is between the statements ”I need physical equipment to do my work
which I do not have access to at home” (S20) and ”I need data or documents to do my
work which I do not have access to at home” (S21) calculated at 0.68. This again is not
surprising since the two statements are both related to the availability of equipment of
diﬀerent kinds to conduct relevant work.
The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient was calculated to 0.65 between ”I need physical equip-
ment to do my work which I do not have access to at home” (S20) and ”I am concerned
that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34). This is quite an
interesting trend since people who tend to agree with the fact that they don’t have access
to the necessary equipment are also concerned with the fact that there are work tasks they
want to do but can’t do from home. This could potentially illustrate a ”causality” relation
that the reason people are concerned they can’t perform their work tasks is related to
the limited access to the needed equipment. The two statements ”It requires more eﬀort
from me that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32) and ”I am concerned that there
are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34) correlate positively with a
Pearson coeﬃcient of 0.63. Why these two statements correlate is not so obvious, which
could be due to the formulation of S32. What is truly meant by daily routines? If this
does refer to activities during a normal workday on-site, then the connection becomes a
bit clearer. The correlation coeﬃcient between ”It requires more eﬀort from me that I
cannot use my normal routines” (S32) and ”I feel tied to my computer to a greater extent
than at my workplace” (S33) was determined to be 0.61. This correlation can be seen in
the light of people who cannot go around their normal routines e.g. chatting at coﬀees
machine, moving between meeting rooms, traveling to customers, etc., and end up being
tied to their computer, as all interactions happen in front of their screens.
==PAGE:59==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
54
”I am afraid that there will not be enough work that I can do from home” (S30) and ”I
am concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34)
have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.59. This is by far not surprising, considering that the
two statements are very similar and highlight the existence of work tasks that cannot be
done from home.
The two statements ”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep focused on work when I am alone” (S22)
and ”I am concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home”
(S34) have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.59. This could be due to the causality relation
between the two statements: not being enabled to focus when being alone at home will
result in some work tasks not being accomplished. ”I need data or documents to do my
work which I do not have access to at home (S21) and ”It requires more eﬀort from me
that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32) have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.57. This
could be due to a cause-consequence relation between the two statements: the absence of
data to accomplish the work tasks results in there being tasks or routines that cannot be
done from home.
A positive correlation with a Pearson coeﬃcient of 0.56 was calculated between ”I don’t
know what kind of work I should do” (S23) and ”I am afraid that there will not be enough
work that I can do from home” (S30). This illustrates that there is a sense of feeling lost
as the work assignment are not clearly deﬁned in addition to a sense of concern that there
are not enough alternative work tasks to be done from home. The correlation coeﬃcient
between ”I get a possibility to do some other work that I would normally not have time
to” (S8) and ”I do not have to spend time on long meetings” (S9) was determined to 0.55.
A hypothesis for the existing relationship between the two statements is that not having
to spend long hours in meetings has freed more time for the manager to do other tasks
they normally don’t have the time to do.
”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep focused on work when I am alone” (S22) and ”The work I do
from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my workplace” (S29) are positively
correlated with a Pearson coeﬃcient of 0.54. An explanation for this is that since the tasks
are not interesting, the manager cannot focus on them due to a lack of interest. Also,
the statements ”The work I do from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my
workplace” (S29) and ”I am afraid that there will not be enough work that I can do from
home” (S30) have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.54. An explanation could be that some
tasks cannot be performed from home and thus the managers have new less interesting
tasks as a substitute and they are concerned there is not enough of these new tasks to be
done from home. A similar explanation forms the basis for the correlation between ”The
work I do from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my workplace” (S29) and
”I am concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34)
where the correlation coeﬃcient was calculated to 0.54.
Another interesting correlation is between ”I am concerned that there are work tasks I
want to do but cannot do from home” (S34) and ”It is a ﬁnancial problem for my work
that I cannot be at the workplace” (S25), which highlights that there is some ﬁnancial
impact from working from home. This could especially be due to not being able to travel
to close deals or work that cannot be done in the ﬁrst place since it is tied to on-site
production line processes.
==PAGE:60==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
55
The statement ”The physical conditions in my home do not aﬀord a good working en-
vironment” (S31) correlates to ”It requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my
normal routines” (S32) (r2=0.52), which is not surprising since the absence of comfort
e.g. well-established oﬃce items such table, chair, and screens makes it harder to do
seemingly easy tasks.
”I need physical equipment to do my work which I do not have access to at home” (S20)
and ”The work I do from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my workplace”
(S29) have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.51.
This could be due to the fact that some
managers have been doing some ”substitute” tasks since they do not have access to the
right equipment (labs, production equipment, etc.) and they are not perceiving these
new tasks as interesting. The lack of physical equipment shown in the statement ”I need
physical equipment to do my work which I do not have access to at home” (S20) is making
it harder for managers to execute their habitual tasks seen in the statement ”It requires
more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32), which could explain
the correlation coeﬃcient of 0.50 between the two statements.
The correlation coeﬃcient between (S33) ”I feel tied to my computer to a greater extent
than at my workplace” (S32) and ”The physical conditions in my home do not aﬀord a
good working environment” (S31) was found to be 0.50. This could be since the usual
activities are not always carried out on the laptop but while working from home everything
is only restricted to the computer. Further, not all managers had the chance to establish
suﬃcient workplaces in their homes and had to work on kitchen tables, in bedrooms, living
rooms, etc., which made their computers enter their private retreats and in consequence
their work laptops became constantly present, giving the impression to be tied to it.
However, the fact that the duration of online meetings seems less ”I do not have to spend
time on long meetings” (S9) have enabled managers to have a more ﬂexible schedule where
they can take breaks whenever they want ”I can take a break when I like to” (S10), which
explains the existence of a correlation between the two statements.
Epinion II
Many statements that were correlated in Epinion I are also correlated in
Epinion II, which counts for: S34 and S29, S21 and S20, S34 and S30, S30 and S29, S6
and S16 as well as S30 and S23. Some new correlated statements have emerged, which will
be highlighted in the following. An overview of all statements can be seen in Figure 4.20.
The statements ”I don’t know what kind of work I should do” (S23) and ”The work I do
from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my workplace” (S29) have a correlation
coeﬃcient of 0.56. This could be explained by the fact that managers are left with fewer
but more ambiguous tasks than those done in the oﬃce. ”I do not expose myself to the risk
of getting a disease” (S16) and ”I save the normal transportation time to my workplace”
(S15) can be viewed as cause and consequence related: by not commuting to work, people
are less exposed to others that might be carriers of the virus. The statements ”I ﬁnd it
diﬃcult to keep focused on work when I am alone” (S22) and ”I don’t know what kind
of work I should do” (S23) have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.54. This correlation might
result from the fact, that the ambiguity surrounding the tasks is causing the respondents
to be less focused.
==PAGE:61==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
56
Another interesting correlation is found between the statements ”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep
focused on work when I am alone” (S22) and ”I get disturbed by other people in my
home” (S26), which illustrates the challenges some managers are experiencing to keep
their focus due to the fact that they have moved their workplace into their homes and are
now disturbed by the people they live with.
Further, a correlation of 0.53 shows, that the lack of a good physical working condition
(”The physical conditions in my home do not aﬀord a good working environment” (S31))
is making it increasingly harder for employees to perform their task and routines (”It
requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32)). The last
two correlated statements are ”I do not expose myself to the risk of getting a disease”
(S16) and ”I can eat and drink my own food” (S13) with a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.51.
The direct relation between these two statements is not so clear, but might be related to
obvious reasons: those who stay at home do not expose themselves to the virus and is
able to eat and drink at home.
Epinion III
Similar to the previous analysis, some correlated statements have already
been dealt with namely: S6 and S16 (EI), S20 and S21 (EI), S22 and S23 (EII), S23
and S29 (EII), S23 and S30 (EI), S29 and S30 (EI) as well as S29 and S34 (EI). Three
additional correlations have been found, which will be illustrated in the following. The
overview of all statements can be seen in Figure 4.21.
The correlation coeﬃcient between ”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep focused on work when I am
alone” (S22) and ”It requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines”
(S32) was found to be 0.59. The increasing amount of eﬀort required to go about normal
routines and tasks has increased and as a consequence, it has become harder to focus.
Also, the lack of tasks that can be performed from home is resulting in respondents being
increasingly worried that it will impact the organization ﬁnancially. This is illustrated
by the correlation coeﬃcient of 0.55 determined between the statements ”It is a ﬁnancial
problem for my work that I cannot be at the workplace ”(S25) and ”I am concerned that
there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34). The respondents
also showed, that the extra eﬀorts which needed to be done to perform some of the ”old”
tasks in the new environments also come with the realization that not all projects can be
realized by working remotely. This is expressed by the correlation between the statements
”It requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines” (S32) and ”I am
concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home” (S34) with
0.60.
==PAGE:62==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
57
Figure 4.19: Correlations between Statements of Epinion I
==PAGE:63==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
58
Figure 4.20: Correlations between Statements of Epinion II
==PAGE:64==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
59
Figure 4.21: Correlations between Statements of Epinion III
==PAGE:65==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
60
4.2.2
Hypotheses Formulation and Testing
In the following chapter, we will formulate ﬁve hypotheses and investigate whether they
hold true. The procedure for selecting the statements which might provide information
that either contributes to proving or refuting the hypothesis will be demonstrated in the
following. Furthermore, this section will also provide insight into the factors tipping the
scale towards proving or disproving the hypothesis.
The following hypotheses will be
looked into:
Figure 4.22: Overview of hypotheses including the relevant statements
==PAGE:66==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
61
The Happy/Productive Worker Theory also applies for Managers
Initial research by Hosie and Sevastos (2010) suggested, that intrinsic job satisfaction (e.g.
recognition, work tasks, and responsibility) has an impact on the happiness of a worker and
this in return has a relevant impact on the productivity of a worker. More recently, Peir´o
et al. (2019) followed up Hosie and Sevastos work by a study aimed to explore the diﬀerent
patterns of happiness and productivity revealing that workers can be unhappy-productive
and happy-unproductive as well. The following section will investigate possible patterns
in Epinion I-III. Since the surveys do not ask for keywords of the concept of happiness
and productivity, we aimed to identify statements that might indicate these concepts.
Happiness
Finding the right questions that determined if a participant is happy or
not is not straightforward, since none of the statements provided in the survey included
whether or not managers were happy. Therefore a subset of statements was selected which
might reﬂect the managers’ state of mind. The choice was conducted subjectively based
on whether the statement would induce a feeling of happiness or unhappiness for the
author. One would not be happy if they were not able to see their colleagues as much as
they wanted. Similarly, being close to family and friends induces a feeling of happiness.
The following statements were chosen:
• I do not get to see my colleagues or other people as much as I would like to.
• I can keep a good relationship with my colleagues.
• I can be closer to my family and friends.
The sentiments towards the manager’s home and the endemic atmosphere could also
provide indicators on whether the respondent is happy or not. The feeling of being stuck
at home and being a prisoner there is assumed to induce a feeling of sadness in the same
manner if the atmosphere at home is disliked by the respondent, considering this is their
”new” working environment. The following statements were chosen:
• I miss getting out of my home.
• I like the atmosphere at home better than at work.
Other sentiments that are assumed to be incompatible with happiness are fear and con-
cern.
In this context, any concerns or fear that are related to ones work situation is
considered to be a sign of not being happy. This is illustrated in the following:
• I am concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but can not do from home.
• I am afraid that there will not be enough work that I can do from home.
Productivity
Statements that provide insight into the managers’ productivity level are
much easier compared to the insight into their emotional state. The statements selected
for this purpose are as follows:
• I do not have to spend time on long meetings.
• I am working more hours than normally.
• I am getting less work done than normally.
==PAGE:67==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
62
Findings
Combining the two states of ”happy” and ”productive”, four categories can
be established as follows:
• happy/productive
• happy/unproductive
• unhappy/productive
• unhappy/unproductive
The distributions of the respondents over the categories can be seen in Figure 4.23. The
majority of the managers can be described as being ”unhappy” and ”unproductive”. This
trend has been increasing throughout the rounds of surveying from 42% to 48% and reach-
ing 53% by Epinion III. The share of managers described as ”unhappy” and ”productive”
increased between Epinion I and Epinion II going from 28% to 37%. However, this was
more than halved by Epinion III where this category only counted 16% of the managers.
A reason for this decrease could be that those being happy/ unhappy might have been
able to be productive in the ﬁrst part of the pandemic but are now ﬁnding it increasingly
diﬃcult to be productive. The share of managers described as ”happy” and ”productive”
or ”happy” and ”unproductive” share similar trends and have been stable between 14% to
17% for the ﬁrst category and between 12% and 17% for the second category. It is however
important to notice that almost 2/3 of the respondents are categorized as being unhappy.
the factors impacting the classiﬁcation into the various categories will be showcased in
the following.
Figure 4.23: Answer distribution of happy/productive, happy/unproductive,
unhappy/productive and unhappy/unproductive managers
==PAGE:68==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
63
Reasons for being Happy & Unhappy
Two statements played a decisive role in
classifying the respondents as being ”unhappy”. These along with the distribution of
answers can be seen in Figure 4.24. More than 70% of the managers could be categorized
as being ”unhappy” due to the fact that they are not in contact with their colleagues as
much as they liked to. Furthermore, the feeling of being imprisoned in the house resulted
in 60% of the managers feeling ”unhappy” with their situation (see Figure 4.24).
Figure 4.24: Answer distribution of managers being ”unhappy”
Considering the ability to maintain a good relationship to their colleagues despite working
from home, the respondents of all three Epinions were ”happy” as they were able to
maintain their relationships (see Figure 4.25).
Figure 4.25: Answer distribution of manager being ”happy”
The statements ”It is easier to get in contact with people than normal” and ”I like the
atmosphere in my home better than at work” did not signiﬁcantly contribute to the
assignment of the categories, since too many of the respondents were undecided.
Reasons for being Productive & Unproductive
The trend of managers being less
”unhappy and productive” might be related to the fact, that over the three rounds of
the survey, the number of respondents being ”productive” steadily decreased. This might
be due to the fact that meetings became longer and longer as the lockdown progressed.
In Epinion III, already 45% could be described as unproductive, on the contrary, at the
beginning of the pandemic, it was 10% less. However, the majority of those described as
”productive” are those disagreeing or strongly disagreeing that they are getting less work
compared to before working from home (see Figure 4.26).
==PAGE:69==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
64
Figure 4.26: Answer distribution of managers being ”productive” and ”unproduc-
tive”
Managers are focused while working from home
The statements were shown to illustrate whether managers are able to focus while working
from home can be seen in Figure 4.22. According to the chosen statements, managers
conﬁrmed in all three Epinions to be able to focus at their homes (Figure 4.27). In the
ﬁrst two Epinions around 70% of the respondents reported that they face no diﬃculties
in focusing while working alone and that they are not being disturbed by other members
of the household. During the last Epinion, the amount of manager indicating they are
having diﬃculties in focusing on their work have increased from 29% in Epinion III to
39%. However, the majority are still indicating that they are able to focus on their work.
This is quite noteworthy as it might indicate that almost a third of managers can’t focus
on work when being home, so almost 30% of managers’ work quality might be aﬀected.
Figure 4.27: Distribution of manager being focused while working from home
The analysis also revealed that the majority of those reporting a good focus relate this
circumstance with their unique opportunity to work alone (see Figure 4.28). The majority
of the respondents reported to (strongly) disagreed to ﬁnd it diﬃcult to work alone.
Also, only a few (strongly) agree that their family members disturbed them during their
working hours. In fact, around 70% in Epinion I and Epinion II reported being able to
focus without interruptions and only 60% reported so in Epinion III, indicating a slight
decrease.
==PAGE:70==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
65
Figure 4.28: Answer distribution of managers being ”focused” and ”not focused”
However, those struggling to stay focused at home or being undecided on their situation
expressed this in the context of experiencing distractions at home. Surprisingly, these
disturbances do only in 41% of the times appear in the context of managers with children
under 15 years. In all other cases, the respondents felt distracted by other adults present
in their homes while working from home. This could indicate that the majority of dis-
tractions at home does not come from kids that seek attention but from interactions with
other adults present at home or older children.
Managers experience ”Presenteeism”
Presenteeism refers to ”the act of staying at work longer than usual or going to work when
you are ill” in order to show dedication to the employer (Cambridge Dictionary (2021)).
This behaviour is not a new phenomenon, however, it has attracted some attention in
the context of working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic (Hughes, 2020). The
statements selected to report this phenomenon can be seen in Figure 4.22. The results
show that more than 80% of the respondents showed no evidence of presenteeism. In
fact, only around 20% could be identiﬁed as being in need to be present to show their
employers their approach to hard work, which can be seen in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29: Answer distribution of managers experiencing ”presenteeism”.
==PAGE:71==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
66
As can be seen in Figure 4.30 the results show that the majority of the respondents
experienced an urge to be longer ”online” than they usually do at their normal physical
workplaces. In the ﬁrst two Epinions, 44% and /49% of the respondents (strongly) agreed,
that the presence of their computer in their homes enticed them to stronger an urge to
stay longer in front of their screens. However, this decreased in Epinion III as only 40%
still agreed with the statement and equally 40% (strongly) disagreed to feel more tied to
their computers. Throughout all three rounds of the survey, the majority of the managers
said that they could take a break when they like to. A slight decrease could however be
observed in Epinion III as around 10% of the respondents changed their mind and did not
indicate that they had the opportunity to have breaks whenever they wanted. When it
comes to the pressure resulting from being monitored by their supervisor(s), the majority
of the managers were undecided if they felt like they were having someone looking over
them. In the three Epinions, 43%-51% of the respondents were undecided, around 20%
felt their supervisors presence, and around 30% felt like working without any pressure
from their supervisors regarding their presence.
Figure 4.30: Answer distribution of managers being ”pressure to be present ” and
”not being pressure to be present”
It can therefore be concluded, that the majority of managers do not experience pre-
senteeism while working from home.
However, it became evident that over time the
respondents showed more and more indicators that taking breaks becomes less easy.
Female Managers are facing more Diﬃculties while working from Home, than
their Male Opponents.
Based on the ﬁndings of a survey conducted by Andersen et al. (2021) in the early stages
of the pandemic, females are experience more diﬃculties when working form home. Mo-
tivated by these ﬁndings, we aimed to search for similarities to these ﬁndings in the data
set conducted by Epinion. According to the statements chosen in this analysis (see Fig-
ure 4.22), female managers were facing more diﬃculties in the ﬁrst part of the pandemic
than their male counterparts.
==PAGE:72==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
67
In Epinion I, 41% of the female respondents could be identiﬁed as facing diﬃculties in
doing their work tasks, having interactions at home, and keeping the relationship with
their organizations. Meanwhile, only 27% of male managers reported the same issues.
However, this picture changed slowly as the pandemic progressed. In Epinion II only 30%
of the female respondents were facing diﬃculties, while 25% of the male managers did,
showing a decrease for both parties. In Epinion III only 27% of the females could be
identiﬁed as facing diﬃculties. This could indicate that women somehow learned to cope
with the current situation as time progressed. While male managers were facing fewer
diﬃculties at the start of the pandemic, however, as time progressed so did the diﬃculties
they are facing. This can be seen in Figure 4.31.
Figure 4.31: Answer distribution of male and female managers in regards to facing
diﬃculties over all chosen statements
When examining the distribution of the individual statements (see Figure 4.32), the data
also revealed that in Epinion I female managers felt more trapped at home, were more
afraid that there will be not enough work that could be done from home, were lacking
physical exercise and felt that the physical conditions in their homes did not aﬀord a good
working environment, compared to the male managers of the survey. Male managers saw
their challenges in the relationship with their colleagues and the concern to not have
enough work that can be done from home.
As time progressed, these perceptions and challenges changed for both genders. While
female managers have in general become more conﬁdent with working from home, 64%
of the male managers of the last Epinion missed getting out of their homes (only 25% of
the females), were worried that they do not have enough exercise compared to being at
their workplaces (females: 22%) and still did not consider their home as a good working
environment. Both genders are identiﬁed as facing diﬃculties to maintain their relation-
ships with others - females (49%) more than males (33%).
Concluding, indicators could be found that female managers did face more diﬃculties by
working from home at the beginning of the pandemic. However, the testing also showed
that women could adjust to the situation over time better than their male components.
In almost all relevant statements the answer distribution of the male manager showed
higher diﬃculties with the situation, in particular the lack of exercise and the appropriate
physical conditions for their working environment.
==PAGE:73==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
68
70%
48%
22%
41%
43%
36%
I
I I
I I I
The  phy s ical conditions  in m y  hom e  do not affor d a g ood wor king  e nv ir onm e nt.
18%
25%
49%
29%
32%
33%
I
I I
I I I
I can ke e p a g ood r e lations hip with m y  colle ag ue s .  
32%
36%
24%
28%
28%
38%
I
I I
I I I
I like  the  atm os phe r e  in m y  hom e  be tte r  than at wor k.
64%
48%
25%
54%
23%
64%
I
I I
I I I
I m is s  g e tting  out of m y  hom e .
50%
30%
22%
40%
33%
47%
I
I I
I I I
I do not g e t e noug h e x e r cis e  whe n I am  not at m y  w or kplace .
23%
18%
14%
16%
16%
15%
I
I I
I I I
I g e t tim e  to focus  on m y  wor k w ithout inte r r uptions  fr om  othe r  pe ople .
5%
14%
3%
25%
10%
10%
I
I I
I I I
I am  afr aid that the r e  will not be  e noug h w or k that I can do fr om  hom e .
Females experiencing difficulties
Males experiencing difficulties
Figure 4.32: Answer distribution of male and female managers facing diﬃculties
in each of the statements
==PAGE:74==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
69
The Productivity of the Managers depends on their Primary Task.
Based on the comment section of the report, it was logical to assume that the productivity
of the managers might be related to their tasks.
Therefore the scale of a manager’s
productivity according to the task categories was determined (see Figure 4.33).
Figure 4.33: Answer distribution of productivity in relation to the managers tasks
However, when looking at the data, no clear trend could be identiﬁed and therefore, no
clear answer could be given on whether the productivity of managers might be related to
their primary tasks.
4.2.3
Clustering
The pro-scores and con-scores have been calculated for the respondents in the three Epin-
ions and can be seen in Figure 4.34, Figure 4.35 and Figure 4.36 for Epinion I, Epinion II
and Epinion II respectively. The majority of the respondents, in general, see working from
home as an experience with many advantages and few disadvantages with approximately
60% throughout all rounds of surveying. The second largest fraction experience working
from home as an experience with many advantages and many disadvantages and cover
between 15% and 22% of the respondents. Only a small fraction of 7% experience more
disadvantages, than advantages by working from home.
Figure 4.34: Clustering of disadvantages and advantages in Epinion I
==PAGE:75==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
70
Figure 4.35: Clustering of disadvantages and advantages in Epinion II
Figure 4.36: Clustering of disadvantages and advantages in Epinion III
4.2.4
Further Insights from Open-ended Questions
The following section will reﬂect on the managers’ experiences with the autonomy para-
dox by taking a closer look into the free comment section of the survey. The phenomenon
refers to an individuals’ ongoing navigation of the tension between their own interests
in personal autonomy (such as ﬂexible working hours and a good work-life balance) on
one hand and their professional commitment to colleagues and subordinates on the other.
This investigation was done based on the author’s interest in whether the managers ex-
perience any form of the autonomy paradox, which was developed by Eurofound (2020b).
In this context, the respondents’ answers given in the free section of the survey will be
examined in the context of the four cornerstones of the autonomy paradox: work-life
balance, ﬂexibility autonomy, work hours, and work intensity.
The respondents’ answers concerning the work-life balance were critical as well as positive.
One of the managers stated, that it is ”diﬃcult to distinguish between work and family
life” (Female, 41 to 50 years), others experience the ﬂuent transition between working
hours and leisure time as positive based on the ”ability to switch between the workplace
and homework” (Male, 51 to 60 years).
==PAGE:76==
4.2. ADVANCED ANALYSIS
71
Furthermore, the advantages of getting housework done during work breaks are highly
appreciated by some of the respondents. Some also ﬁnd it easier to ”shut down work than
if colleagues are physically present” (Female, 41 to 50 years), allowing the respondents to
leave their online workplaces earlier than at their workplaces on-site. However, some do
not only see positive aspects of the work/ leisure time transition, and report to not feel
”away” from work because of the transition, and experience days where ”working hours
and free time ﬂow into each other [...] there are days where I do not get to go outside
(Female, 51 to 60 years). This underlines that there is no clear positive or negative per-
ception of the work-life balance of the respondents, but rather two sides of the same coin.
When it comes to ﬂexibility and the feeling of autonomy when working from home, some
of the managers appreciate the ability to start and end their working hours themselves
to a greater extent than before. The advantage to ”enjoy good weather during the day
and work at late hours” and being able to take care of their children is perceived as a
beneﬁt, ”but it also makes it harder to ensure informal exchange of knowledge and solve
the small problems while they are small” (Female, 41 to 50 years). However, the major-
ity of the respondents named ”monotonous” and ”lonely” in context with their ﬂexible
working schedules. It might therefore indicate, that in general there is higher ﬂexibility
to working from home (considered as a beneﬁt), however, this is potentially deceiving as
all hours of the day could become working hours.
Managers indicated the majority of the time that their work hours have become ﬂexible.
One of the respondents described his experience as ”unlimited working hours, which in
the long run can be stressful, but it also allows for ﬂexibility” (Female, 51 to 60 years).
Others reported, that they work a lot after normal working hours, but are not unhappy to
do so since long transportation time to and from their normal workplaces is avoided. But
not all respondents reported positive experiences, others ﬁnd ”it diﬃcult to stay focused
and some days it just takes over”, so they spend ”too many hours in front of the com-
puter” (Female, 51 to 60 years). this clearly shows that the managers are experiencing
that their working hours are longer than normal, some even regard this as the price for
ﬂexibility, while others found it stressful and thus hard to keep focus.
Due to the answers in the free section, the work intensity has changed for those who al-
ready worked from home before the pandemic as well as for those who had not. One of the
managers with previous experience with working from home reported that her schedule
has become more packed. Some even appreciated the change in environment when having
meetings as one shared a portion of their personal space as the meetings ”in a diﬀerent
way with virtual meetings in each other’s living rooms” (Female, 51 to 60 years). Some
others described their workload as ”very intense” but also described the higher workload
as a ”cozy” experience, where they could sit with their colleagues virtually in their liv-
ing rooms. Therefore, working from home did lead to a higher workload, however, the
respondents experienced facing this as a team with their colleagues.
All four factors of the autonomy paradox could be found in the open-ended questions of
the survey, it can therefore be said, that the phenomenon is present in the way managers
work and live in this data set. Working from home has clear beneﬁts for people’s work-life
balance, enabling them to adapt their working time to their private and family-related
needs. However, these types of work arrangements can also lead to an intensiﬁcation of
work and longer working hours. Thus, having a higher level of autonomy might lead to
paradoxical circumstances.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5
Findings
All the ﬁndings discussed so far are deeply routed in the theoretical concepts related to
distance work and well-being, presented in the theoretical framework. Although the state
of well-being especially the mental well being is diﬃcult to grasp and measure through
a survey, some factors that could potentially inﬂuence the state of well-being have been
observed and identiﬁed through the analysis. As introduced in the theory section, the
mental well-being can be impacted by internal and external factors.
The external factors can be categorized as job-related, facet-speciﬁc and context-free.
The job-related factor inﬂuencing the well-being of the managers can be seen in the fact
that the majority of the respondents feel that the tasks they were given are clear however
less interesting as those on-site. This might indicate that the managers job satisfaction
is decreasing, however due to uncertain economic circumstances caused by pandemic, the
managers see employment security as part of their job satisfaction. In this context, also
the managers role conﬂict can be outlined, since their major distractions, based on the
descriptive analysis, come from their partner or children. This might indicate that the
managers are now in conﬂict with their role as a partner, parent and manager by trans-
ferring their work environment into their homes. However this analysis also found in the
context of the managers focus, that the majority had no major problems to work focused
(based on hypotheses testing).
Positive facet-speciﬁc factors could be identiﬁed by major time savings resulting from not
needing to travel to and from work and the calm working environments leading to eﬀective
work routines. However, their well-being also was negatively impacted by inappropriate
or lacking working equipment, the lack of social contact with their colleagues and the
diﬃculties to maintain the connection to subordinates. When looking at the concept of
presenteeism, no indicators could be found in the datasets.
The context-free factors of the managers well-being can be characterized by the liberating
working schedules leading to more ﬂexible social life. This is also shown in the auton-
omy paradox based on the free comment section of the survey where a majority of the
respondents reported their work-life-balance as paradoxical. However, these new routines
needed time to be established and were not as well-functioning at the beginning of their
experience. In this context, this analysis also showed that females struggled more in the
beginning of the pandemic compared to their males opponents, however, this changed
over time and females adapted to the situation better than the males. This observation
is consistent with the outcome of report by the danish non-proﬁt organisation ”Tryg”.
The internal factors can be described as the hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. The anal-
ysis can not say much about the eudaimonic well-being since that refers to the individuals
self-acceptance and life satisfaction and none of the questions referred to those.
72
==PAGE:78==
73
However, it can be assumed that the eudaimonic well-being is inﬂuenced negatively by the
presence of a worldwide pandemic. The hedonic well-being, which is the non-cognitive
well-being, can be described by the presence of emotions towards an action caused by
the external factors. Therefore the hedonic factors inﬂuencing the managers well-being
could be easier identiﬁed in this analysis. In this context, Peir´o et al. (2019)´s study
on the happy productive worker theory already looked into the hedonic well-being where
over half of the participants were either unhappy & productive or happy & unproductive,
however, based on the heuristic method chosen in this study we found that the majority
of the managers working from home can be described as unhappy & unproductive.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Limitations
The analysis, discussions, and subsequent ﬁndings are all based on the data collected
through three surveys. It is therefore assumed that the respondents replied to each state-
ment in the survey in an independent manner with no regard to the previous statements.
There is no true way to safeguard against this form of bias in answering. Although shuf-
ﬂing the statements randomly might reduce the possibility of introducing any bias.
During the data pre-processing only managers who indicated that they either full-time
work from home or sometimes work from home were considered for this analysis. The
analysis was conducted on the combined population and not individually in order to gain
insights into the perceptions of all managers working from home. However, this might
distort the observations and ﬁndings of the analysis. The answers of those fully working
from home might diﬀer from those partially working from home in regards to a series of
statements such as ”I do not get to see my colleagues or other people as much as I would
like to” (S19) and ”I miss getting out of my home” (S27). This could potentially inﬂuence
the distribution of the answers throughout the trends observed in the descriptive analysis
and the evaluation of the hypothesis in the advanced analysis.
During the analysis, it was not possible to draw any insights relating the experiences
and perceptions of working from home to the type of tasks the managers are performing
(Q15 - ”What kind of work are you doing at the moment”). This is partially due to
some ambiguous options provided in the survey and the fact that multiple options can
be chosen. An example of the ambiguous options are ”I do creative production” or ”I
monitor systems” - what deﬁnes these categories? Which are the main task? What kind
of system is referred to? It might have been more insightful if the question would have
asked for departments (e.g. HR, R&D, production) or primary tasks instead of general
tasks. The possibility to choose multiple answers also brought the risk of not being able
to distinguish any task-speciﬁc trends.
During the hypothesis testing, many of the concepts are inferred indirectly, meaning a
series of assumptions were made in order to relate a speciﬁc statement to a given concept.
An example is the statement ”I have no-one looking over me” (S14) used to detect the
phenomenon of presenteeism. This statement could potentially be seen in the light of
no one is tracking the individual’s work progress, but can also be understood as a lack
of supervision and guidance. Depending on how it is viewed the respondent could have
made diﬀerent implications.
74
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in increased number of individuals working from
home, especially during the nationwide lock-downs. Managers were not excluded from
this radical change.
They were thus forced to exhibit their leadership functions from
distance, transitioning into distance managers. The surveys conducted by Epinion have
provided valuable insights into the experiences and perceptions of managers during the
during the COVID-19 outbreak in Denmark. Using a heuristic approach, it could be con-
cluded that the majority of managers could be described as unhappy and unproductive
or as unhappy and productive. Through a similar analysis, it was concluded that almost
a third of the responding managers had trouble focusing when working at home. This is
mainly attributed to the fact that they get disturbed by others in their household and the
lack of a positive working environment. It was also possible to conclude that females were
ﬁnding it harder to adjust to working from home than male managers during the ﬁrst
parts of the pandemic, later on their male opponents were facing more diﬃculties. Vari-
ous factors that could potentially impact the well-being of managers were also identiﬁed
such as role-conﬂicts and a decreased job-satisfaction. Despite this, most managers did
perceive working from home as more advantageous than disadvantageous, which became
evident through a clustering analysis. The advantages are mostly centered around ﬂexible
working hours and the reduction of time spent on transportation, while the disadvantages
are centered around the lack of social interactions, diﬃculties in separating working hours
from private time and uninteresting work tasks.
75
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Future Work
Based on the analysis, discussions, and conclusions a series of recommendations concern-
ing the direction of future work are proposed in the following.
More clarity could be provided in the statements in the survey. Some statements can
be understood in more than one way. Here namely statements such as ”I have no-one
looking over me” that can reﬂect diﬀerent perceptions: the absence of surveillance or the
absence of guidance. Furthermore, a more clear-cut distinction in the options formulated
to investigate the tasks the managers are performing could provide more opportunities
for more analysis and could provide answers to questions such as whether managers in
diﬀerent ﬁelds have the same perceptions of working from home.
In addition, a further splitting of the respondents could potentially provide further in-
sights. An example is to consider managers that exclusively work from home and those
who only partially work from home as diﬀerent categories and then compare the ﬁndings
and trends observed in the replies of these two segments of managers. Another possi-
bility is to further split the manager section into male and females and see if the trends
observed are diﬀerent from each other. In this work we already identiﬁed the fact that
female managers were having more diﬃculties adapting to working from home than their
male colleagues. An analysis that focuses on the female and male managers as two diﬀer-
ent samples could reveal further insights in the similarity and diﬀerence between the two
experiences.
Another possible direction for future work is to compare the experiences of managers to
those of ”regular” employees. This would provide insight in how the same situation could
potentially be perceived diﬀerently based on the job tasks or hierarchy occupied within
an organization. Raising the questions if the experiences diﬀer or if they are similar for
large parts of the two groups. A further study could maybe identify a set of managers and
their employees and investigate whether the perceptions of the managers inﬂuence their
employees and vice versa and to what extend they might be similar. If their perceptions
diﬀer, it might also be interesting if that can be related to a lack of communication or
ambiguous agreements due to the absence of face-to-face conversations.
An interesting question that could have been asked is whether the respondents would
like to continue working from home once the lock downs are lifted or how many days
they would like to work from home. This way one could have monitored the general ac-
ceptance and indirectly the general and more ”neutral” perception of working from home.
76
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
Anne Aguilera, Virginie Lethiais, Alain Rallet, and Laurent Proulhac. Home-based tele-
work in france: Characteristics, barriers and perspectives.
Transportation Research
Part A: Policy and Practice, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2016.06.021.
Jos Akkermans, Veerle Brenninkmeijer, Seth N.J. van den Bossche, Roland W.B. Blonk,
and Wilmar B. Schaufeli. Young and going strong?: A longitudinal study on occupa-
tional health among young employees of diﬀerent educational levels. Career Develop-
ment International, 18(4):416–435, 2013. doi: 10.1108/CDI-02-2013-0024.
M. Allen. The sage encyclopedia of communication research methods (vols. 1-4). SAGE
Publications, 2017. doi: 10.4135/9781483381411.
Jacob Andersen, Jørgen Goul Andersen, and Anders Hede.
Tillid og trivsel i corona
danmark (danish), 2021.
American Psychological Association (APA).
Subjective well-being, 2020.
URL https:
//dictionary.apa.org/subjective-well-being. Accessed on 25.02.2021.
Perfecto G. Aquino. Employees’ mental health and productivity and its impact on contex-
tual and task performance in organizations. Journal of Advanced Research in Dynamical
and Control Systems, 12(8), 2020. doi: 10.5373/JARDCS/V12SP8/20202573,10.5373/
JARDCS.
Mary A. Armstrong.
The psychological impact of teleworking: Stress, emotions and
health. NWSA Journal, 16(2):240–242, 2004.
Diane E. Bailey and Nancy B. Kurland. A review of telework research: ﬁndings, new di-
rections, and lessons for the study of modern work. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
23:383 – 400, 2002. doi: 10.1002/job.144.
Yehuda Baruch.
Teleworking: beneﬁts and pitfalls as perceived by professionals and
managers. New Technology, Work and Employment, 15(1):34–49, 2000. doi: 10.1111/
1468-005x.00063,10.1111/1468-005X.00063.
Michal Beno. Managing telework from an austrian manager’s perspective. Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing, 745:16–29, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-77703-0
2.
Alex Bryson, John Forth, and Lucy Stokes. Does employees’ subjective well-being aﬀect
workplace performance?
Human Relations, 70(8):1017–1037, 2017.
doi: 10.1177/
0018726717693073.
William D. Chalmers.
America´s vacation deﬁcit disorder: Who stole your vacation.
iUniverse, 2013.
Tarani Chandola, Annie Britton, Eric Brunner, Harry Hemingway, Marek Malik, Meena
Kumari, Ellena Badrick, Mika Kivimaki, and Michael Marmot. Work stress and coro-
nary heart disease: what are the mechanisms? European Heart Journal, 29(5):640–648,
2008. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehm584.
77
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
78
Andy Cheng.
Communication and collaboration - ﬁve ways to create work ﬂexi-
bility in your organization, 2020.
URL https://www.ringcentral.com/us/en/blog/
5-ways-to-create-work-ﬂexibility-in-your-organization. Accessed on 01.06.2021.
Amy Clotworthy, Agnete Skovlund Dissing, and Tri Long Nguyen. Standing together
– at a distance: Documenting changes in mental-health indicators in denmark during
the covid-19 pandemic. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 49(1):79–87, 2021. doi:
10.1177/1403494820956445.
Claire Dambrin. How does telework inﬂuence the manager-employee relationship?
In-
ternational Journal of Human Resources Development and Management, 4(4):358–374,
2004. doi: 10.1504/IJHRDM.2004.005044.
K. Daniels and C. Harris. In-depth review: psychological well-being and performance.
Occupational Medicine, 50(5):304–309, 2000. doi: 10.1093/occmed/50.5.304.
Cambridge Dictionary.
Deﬁnition of ”presenteeism”, 2021.
URL https://dictionary.
cambridge.org/dictionary/english/presenteeism. Accessed on 16.05.2021.
Catherine Durnell Cramton. Finding common ground in dispersed collaboration. Orga-
nizational Dynamics, 30(4):356–367, 2002. doi: 10.1016/S0090-2616(02)00063-3.
Nicole B. Ellison. New perspectives on telework: Social impacts new perspectives on
telework. 2016. doi: 10.1177/089443939901700308.
Eurofound. Sixth european working conditions survey – overview report, 2017a. Publi-
cations Oﬃce of the European Union, Luxembourg.
Eurofound. Working anytime, anywhere: The eﬀects on the world of work, 2017b. Pub-
lications Oﬃce of the European Union, Luxembourg.
Eurofound. Living, working and covid-19, covid-19 series, 2020a. Publications Oﬃce of
the European Union, Luxembourg.
Eurofound. Telework and ict-based mobile work: Flexible working in the digital age,
new forms of employment series, 2020b. Publications Oﬃce of the European Union,
Luxembourg.
Charlotte R. Gerstner and David V. Day. Meta-analytic review of leader-member exchange
theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6):827–844,
1997.
Laura M. Giurge and Vanessa K. Bohns.
Three tips to avoid working from home-
burnout, 2020. URL https://hbr.org/2020/04/3-tips-to-avoid-wfh-burnout. Accessed
on 03.03.2021.
Timothy D. Golden and Allan Fromen.
Does it matter where your manager works?
comparing managerial work mode (traditional, telework, virtual) across subordinate
work experiences and outcomes. Human Relations, 64(11):1451–1475, 2011. doi: 10.
1177/0018726711418387.
Jeﬀrey H. Greenhaus and Gary N. Powell. When work and family are allies: A theory
of work-family enrichment. Academy of Management Review, 31(1):77–92, 2006. doi:
10.5465/amr.2006.19379625.
==PAGE:84==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
Kelly
Greenwood
and
Natasha
Krol.
Eight
ways
managers
can
sup-
port
employees’
mental
health,
2020.
URL
https://hbr.org/2020/08/
8-ways-managers-can-support-employees-mental-health. Accessed on 05.03.2021.
Peter Hosie, Michael Willemyns, and Peter Sevastos. The impact of happiness on man-
agers’ contextual and task performance. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Human Resources, 50
(3):268–287, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-7941.2012.00029.x.
Peter Hosie, Sharma Piyush, and Russel P.J. Kingshott. Happy-performing managers
thesis: Testing the mediating role of job-related aﬀective outcomes on the impact of
role stressors on contextual performance. International Journal of Manpower, 2019.
Peter J. Hosie and Peter P. Sevastos.
A framework for conceiving of job-related
aﬀective wellbeing.
Management Revu,
21(4):406–436,
2010.
doi:
10.5771/
0935-9915-2010-4-406.
Jessica
Howington.
Work
beneﬁts
-
the
beneﬁts
of
allowing
employees
a
ﬂexible
schedule,
2020.
URL
https://www.ﬂexjobs.com/employer-blog/
the-beneﬁts-of-allowing-employees-a-ﬂexible-schedule. Accessed on 01.06.2021.
Helen Hughes.
workplace culture and the coronavirus:
Why employers should
be
tackling
presenteeism,
2020.
URL
https://www.personneltoday.com/hr/
coronavirus-why-employers-should-be-tackling-presenteeism/. Accessed on 15.05.2021.
Anneli Hujala, Sari Rissanen, and Susann Vihma. How are you, manager? - a literature
review of care home managers’ wellbeing. Designing Wellbeing in Elderly Care Homes,
2013.
Veronika Huta. An overview of hedonic and eudaimonic well-being concepts. Routledge
Handbook of Media Use and Well-being: International Perspectives on Theory and
Research on Positive Media Eﬀects, pages 14–33, 2016. doi: 10.4324/9781315714752.
International Labour Organization (ILO).
Workplace health promotion - workplace
well-being, 2021. URL https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/safety-and-health-at-work/
areasofwork/workplace-health-promotion-and-well-being/WCMS 118396/lang--en/
index.htm. Accessed on 26.02.2021.
Industrial/ Organizational Psychology at work I/O.
Stress at work can lead to
less organizational citizenship behavior, 2011.
URL https://www.ioatwork.com/
stress-lead-to-less-organizational-citizenship-behavior. Accessed on 28.02.2021.
Christine Ipsen, Kathrin Kirchner, and John P. Hansen. Survey: Working-from-home
experiences. 2020a.
Christine Ipsen, Kathrin Kirchner, and John P. Hansen. Experiences of working from
home during times of covid-19. 2020b.
Ankur Joshi, Saket Kale, Satish Chandel, and D. Pal. Likert scale: Explored and ex-
plained. British Journal of Applied Science and Technology, 7(4):396–403, 2015. doi:
10.9734/BJAST/2015/14975,10.9734/BJAST.
Tammy Katsabian. The telework virus: How the covid-19 pandemic has aﬀected telework
and exposed its implications for privacy and equality. 2020. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3684702.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
80
Tomoyuki Kawada. Telework and work-related well-being. Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 62(12), 2020. doi: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000002058.
Career Key. Job satisfaction – why it is important, 2021. URL https://www.careerkey.
org/ﬁt/self-assessment/job-satisfaction. Accessed on 02.03.2021.
Nancy B. Kurland and Diane E. Bailey. Telework: The advantages and challenges of
working here, there, anywhere, and anytime. Ieee Engineering Management Review, 28
(2):49–60, 2000.
A.H. Maslow. Toward a Psychology of Being. An Insight book. Van Nostrand, 2005.
Laurel McNall and Jessica Nicklin. Work-Family Enrichment, pages 7215–7218. Springer
Netherlands, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5 4054.
Christopher P. Niemiec. Eudaimonic Well-Being, pages 2004–2005. Springer Netherlands,
2014. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5 929.
Jack M. Nilles. Telecommunications and organizational decentralization. Ieee Transac-
tions on Communications, 23(10):1142–1147, 1975.
Jos´e M. Peir´o, Malgorzataw Kozusznik, Isabel Rodr´ıguez Molina, and N´uria Tordera. The
happy-productive worker model and beyond: Patterns of wellbeing and performance
atwork. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(3):479,
2019. doi: 10.3390/ijerph16030479.
Howard Reid. Introduction to Statistics - Fundamental Concepts and Procedures of Data
Analysis. SAGE Publications Inc, 2013.
Nick Routley.
Future of work: Six charts that show what employers and employees
really think about remote working, 2020.
URL https://www.weforum.org/agenda/
2020/06/coronavirus-covid19-remote-working-oﬃce-employees-employers. Accessed on
03.03.2021.
Michael Rucker.
The
interesting history of workplace wellness,
2016.
URL
https://michaelrucker.com/well-being/the-history-of-workplace-wellness/.
Accessed
on 26.02.2021.
Carol D. Ryﬀand Burton H. Singer. Know thyself and become what you are: A eudai-
monic approach to psychological well-being. Journal of Happiness Studies, 9(1):13–39,
2008. doi: 10.1007/s10902-006-9019-0.
Shruti R. Sardeshmukh, Dheeraj Sharma, and Timothy D. Golden. Impact of telework
on exhaustion and job engagement: A job demands and job resources model. New
Technology, Work and Employment, 27(3):193–207, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-005X.
2012.00284.x.
Paul Schulte and Harri Vainio. Well-being at work - overview and perspective. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health, 36(5):422–429, 2010.
doi:
10.5271/sjweh.3076.
Statistic Solutions.
What is a representative sample?, 2021.
URL https://www.
statisticssolutions.com/what-is-a-representative-sample/. Accessed on 16.04.2021.
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
Jared
Spataro.
A
pulse
on
employees’
wellbeing,
six
months
into
the
pan-
demic, 2020. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/blog/2020/09/22/
pulse-employees-wellbeing-six-months-pandemic/. Accessed on 03.03.2021.
Tom Spiggle.
The post-coronavirus workplace:
What the ‘new normal’ may look
like.
Forbes Magazine, 2020.
URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomspiggle/2021/
02/17/the-post-coronavirus-workplace-what-the-new-normal-may-look-like/?sh=
43ba262638da. Accessed on 03.06.2021.
Statista.
State of health - the number of new coronavirus cases in denmark
since
february
2020,
2021.
URL
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1102237/
coronavirus-cases-development-in-denmark/. Accessed on 18.03.2021.
Christian van Stolk and Michael Whitmore. Managing the challenge of work force pre-
senteeism during the covid-19 crisis, 2021. URL https://www.cipd.co.uk/news-views/
cipd-voice/Issue-25/managing-challenge-workforce-presenteeism-covid-19-crisis#gref.
Accessed on 03.06.2021.
Mohsen Tavakol and Reg Dennick.
Making sense of cronbach’s alpha.
International
Journal of Medical Education, 2:53–55, 2011a. doi: 10.5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd.
Mohsen Tavakol and Reg Dennick.
Making sense of cronbach’s alpha.
International
Journal of Medical Education, 2:53–55, 2011b. ISSN 20426372. doi: 10.5116/ijme.4dfb.
8dfd.
Aida Isabel Tavares. Telework and health eﬀects review. International Journal of Health-
care, 3(2):30, 2017. doi: 10.5430/ijh.v3n2p30.
M. Vasudevan, Sangeeta Mehrolia, Subburaj Alagarsamy, and Athul K. Balachandran.
Work from home in the pandemic era: Loss of mental equilibrium? Asian Journal of
Psychiatry, 55:102490, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102490.
Peter Warr and Karina Nielsen. Handbook of well-being: Well-being and work perfor-
mance. DEF Publishers, 2018.
Alan S. Waterman. Reconsidering happiness: A eudaimonist’s perspective. Journal of
Positive Psychology, 3(4):234–252, 2008. doi: 10.1080/17439760802303002.
World Health Organization WHO. The coronavirus overview, 2021. URL https://www.
who.int/health-topics/coronavirus#tab=tab 1. Accessed on 21.03.2021.
Worldometer. Covid-19 pandemic - weekly trends, 2021. URL https://www.worldometers.
info/coronavirus. Accessed on 15.02.2021.
Shihang Zhang, Rolf Moeckel, Ana Tsui Moreno, Bin Shuai, and Jie Gao. A work-life
conﬂict perspective on telework. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
141:51–68, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2020.09.007.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Descriptive Analysis
My current work situation I
Figure 8.1: Answer distribution of Question 6 across Epinion I-II-II
82
==PAGE:88==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
My current work situation II
Table 8.1: Answer distribution Question 8: ”How much do you use each system
these days?”
E-Mail
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
1%
1%
3%
13%
81%
Epinion II
0%
1%
2%
16%
82%
Epinion III
1%
1%
1%
14%
83%
Shared online documents
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
4%
10%
24%
34%
28%
Epinion II
3%
9%
25%
33%
30%
Epinion III
4%
6%
21%
37%
32%
Conference systems
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
8%
7%
16%
34%
35%
Epinion II
5%
7%
23%
37%
27%
Epinion III
6%
7%
11%
38%
38%
Facebook groups
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
57%
25%
10%
7%
1%
Epinion II
49%
22%
14%
9%
7%
Epinion III
46%
24%
13%
14%
4%
Other groupware programs
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
35%
12%
14%
22%
16%
Epinion II
25%
17%
16%
22%
21%
Epinion III
29%
9%
12%
25%
25%
Telephone calls
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
0%
4%
17%
43%
36%
Epinion II
1%
2%
14%
49%
34%
Epinion III
1%
4%
11%
46%
38%
Communication apps
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
28%
26%
15%
21%
10%
Epinion II
30%
18%
20%
21%
11%
Epinion III
36%
11%
20%
20%
12%
SMS
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Always
Epinion I
1%
18%
43%
29%
9%
Epinion II
5%
20%
36%
24%
15%
Epinion III
10%
17%
33%
23%
17%
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
84
Demographic Information
Figure 8.2: Answer distribution of Question 18 across Epinion I-II-II
Figure 8.3: Answer distribution of Question 20 across Epinion I-II-II
==PAGE:90==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
Newly established categories
Table 8.2
Demographics and major responsibilities of managers working from home
“Why do you currently work from home?”
“What kind of work are you doing at the moment?”
“What is your age?”
“To which gender identity do you most identify?”
“What is the highest level of education you have achieved?”
Table 8.3
Workplace: atmosphere & routines
“I like the atmosphere in my home better than at work”
”I miss getting out of my home.”
”I feel tied to my computer to a greater extent than at my workplace.”
”I can take a break when I like to.”
”I do not get enough exercise when I am not at my workplace.”
”I get a chance to break my old habits and change routines.”
”I miss the food or other beneﬁts that we have at my workplace.”
”I can eat and drink my own food.”
”It requires more eﬀort from me that I cannot use my normal routines.”
“The physical conditions in my home do not aﬀord a good working environment”
Table 8.4
Work tasks, productivity, and other beneﬁts
”I am concerned that there are work tasks I want to do but cannot do from home.”
”I don’t know what kind of work I should do.”
”I am afraid that there will not be enough work that I can do from home.”
”I need data or documents to do my work which I do not have access to at home.”
”I need physical equipment to do my work which I do not have access to at home.”
”My work is more demanding than normally.”
”I get a possibility to do some other work that I would normally not have time to.”
”The work I do from home is not as interesting as the work I do at my workplace.”
”I do not have to spend time on long meetings.”
”I’m getting less work done than normal.”
”I’m working more hours than normal.”
”It is a ﬁnancial problem for my work that I can not be at the workplace.”
”I save the normal transportation time to my workplace.”
Table 8.5
Interactions at home
”I can be close to my family and friends.”
”I get disturbed by other people in my home.”
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
86
Table 8.5
Interactions at home
”I get time to focus on my work without interruptions from other people.”
”I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to keep focused when I am alone”
”How many young people and adults, including yourself, are present in your home
when you work under COVID-19?”
”How many children below 15 years are present in your home when you work under
COVID-19?”
Table 8.6
Communication & relations in the organization
“How many young people and adults, including yourself, are present in your home
when you work under COVID-19?”
“How many people do you estimate being in contact with during a day
while working from home?”
“How much do you use each system these days?”
”I do not get to see my colleges or other people as much as I would have liked to.”
”It is easier to get in contact with people than normal.”
”I can keep a good relationship with my colleagues.”
“I have no one looking over me”
Table 8.7
Overall situation of managers working from home
“How would you describe your current work and life situation?”
“How do you experience working from home now (EII) compared to your situation
in the spring?”
“How do you experience working from home now (EIII) compared to your situation
in the spring?”
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
Advanced Analysis
Figure 8.4: Overview of all statements related to their number
