==PAGE:1==
Quadcopter drone control system design
for picking up objects from water and un-
der water
Electrical Engineering
Elvis Cops (s192320)
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Quadcopter drone control system design for picking up objects from water and under water, Elec-
trical Engineering
Report written by:
Elvis Cops (s192320)
Advisor(s):
Matteo Fumagalli, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
25 January 2021- 25 June 2021
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Elvis Cops, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this project is to design a drone control system and gripper prototype that
will enable the drone to pick up objects from water or under the water surface. The
thesis project mostly focuses on analyzing the effects of the propeller-induced wind on a
floating object as well as on developing the control algorithm that will enable the drone
to track and follow a moving, floating object in the water in order to catch it.
The Physics, such propeller induced wind speed, drag force and buoyancy, and the
drone and the gripper concept simulation were modeled in MATLAB Simulink and
SimScape. The control algorithm was implemented using Simulink and Robot Operating
system (ROS) to control the tracking algorithm and gripper node. The gripper prototype
was modeled using SolidWorks and the parts were 3D-printed using a 3D printer. The
gripper was actuated using Dynamixel AX-18A servo motor, configured as a ROS-node.
The result of the project is working tracking algorithm of a quad-copter, that is able
to track and follow a floating object using object location provided by Optitrack Capture
system. However, the final solution is not capable of picking up objects from water due
to design issues, the thesis suggests various improvements that can be implemented in
the next versions to improve the performance of the system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Topics of the consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Standard drone dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Analysis of the contributing physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Propeller slipstream analysis and slipstream behaviour
. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Hardware analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Choice of the actuator design approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
Concept dynamical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.9
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Simulink implementation of the physics
31
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Verification and Simulation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Simulink and SimScape implementation of the control algorithm and
gripper model
43
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Drone Simulink model implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Tracking and gripping algorithm implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Gripper concept implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Test results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Robot Operating System (ROS) communication with peripherals
53
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
ROS node implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Mechanical design of the actuator
63
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
Module test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
System test
67
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Test result analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.4
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8
Conclusion
73
Appendices
75
A Propeller Streamline Induced velocity and slipstream radius calcula-
tion
77
B Drone 2D analysis for the Pitch
83
C Drone 2D analysis for the Y and Z position controller
91
D Physics implementation in Simulink
101
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and
gripper model
111
F Tracking Algorithm and Full sequence trajectory plots
121
G Gripper ROS node source files
139
H Manual Test Flight and Tracking Test Flight
147
Bibliography
149
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the recent years, development and research of unmanned autonomous vehicles and
drones is experiencing a rapid growth in popularity among the academics, industry
professionals, hobbyists and content creators. The applications where UAV’s can be
used are increasing and drones help the society by solving various tasks.
The thesis project will describe one of the applications where quad-copters drones
can be used - picking up objects from the water surface or slightly under the surface.
However, this project has the potential for many other applications that can make this
solution useful for various tasks.
In this project the quad-copter drone named ”tie-fighter” will be used.
Figure 1.1: The ”tie-fighter” drone
1.1
Objectives
The main objectives of this project are discussed in this section. The project consists of
the 3 main objectives that the author tries to achieve. The main objective is to design
a drone control system that can achieve the goal of the project - picking up an object
from water. However, from that arises few fundamental issues.
The floating objects are subjects of an Archimedes law and viscosity of the water
which makes objects move around due to the wind that is generated by the propellers
of the drone. It is important to understand how the physics affects the object and the
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
drone dynamics and controls overall. The drone has to be able to interact with the
disturbances applied on the object, track and follow the object in order to catch it.
The design of the actuator prototype and software algorithm enables the drone to
achieve the necessary tasks. The list of the main project objectives are listed bellow:
• Picking up objects from the surface of the water and under water.
• Control system design of the drone to interact with freely floating objects in the
water.
• Gripping actuator prototype design and software algorithm.
The overall system is expected to autonomously locate the object using some external
input, perform object tracking, navigate the drone in the field so that the drone is able
to perform the gripping maneuver while all the external disturbances interact with the
floating object.
1.2
Thesis outline
The thesis consists of various parts that cover the mechatronic design, system physics
analysis, drone dynamics analysis and implementation methods, which will be discussed
more in detail following chapters:
• Chapter 2. The analysis of the contributing physics, hardware properties, control
objectives and control problems .
• Chapter 3. Simulink implementation of the contributing physics and test.
• Chapter 4. Simulink and SimScpae implementation of the control algorithm and
gripper model in simulation environment.
• Chapter 5. ROS configuration and control algorithm with the actuator.
• Chapter 6. Mechanical design.
• Chapter 7. Overall system test, analysis of the results, future improvements and
conclusions.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
Introduction
This chapter discusses the problems that can be faced and need to be taken into account
before starting a heavy system analysis and implementation. It will contain analysis of
important properties that affect drone dynamics during the flight, the concept design
that is capable of executing tasks in interaction with water and floating object.
2.2
Topics of the consideration
In this section, some of the main problems and properties will be discussed in detail.
These aspects need to be considered while designing the project.
2.2.1
Important properties of the manipulator that
affect the drone performance
The increased aerodynamic drag, changes of the center of mass and increased mass of
the drone can affect its maneuverability and have a toll on its agility. If the drone is
performing well without any load, then if the thrust of the drone is not powerful enough
to ensure the optimal control with the load that is carried and various other disturbances,
like wind, changes in center of mass (due to unsymmetrical load placement) can result
in unstable behavior and can result in crash. The most crucial factors in this project
will be considered the following:
• Changes center of mass and inertia
• Increased mass of the system
This also is the issue of how well the control system is designed and what are the
limits of the system overall. It is important to know the limits and consider that the
performance can decrease while carrying a load. The questions is, do the performance
stays in it’s optimal expected range.
==PAGE:10==
4
2 Analysis
2.2.2
Protection from water
An important aspect is to keep all the electrical components safe from water, as there
is a high risk of getting components wet. It is also important to keep other electrical
components, like actuators or sensors, safe from water. It means that the gripper itself
should be electronics-free, where it is actuated mechanically only, but all the electrical
components are safe. The design of the mechanical gripper that can have the range that
when the drone hovers above or lands on water, it can reach securely on and under the
water surface without getting the electrical components damaged by the water.
2.2.3
Simulation environment and it’s analysis
In order to have a good performance of the designed control system in real life and in
the test environment, it is crucial that the models and all physical parameters of the
system are as close as possible to the real system. This applies to the simulating drone
and gripper itself, and designing the control system for it. The accurate model of the
whole system will result in a good estimation of the behavior of the system under the
unwanted disturbances.
The closer simulation model will be to the real life system,
the more accurate will be the simulation and the data provided from the simulation
environment.
Nevertheless, it is impossible to model every single physical detail of
physics, therefore it is also important to keep things simple enough to be able to do the
best analysis with the available model and then leave the rest for the testing on the real
life system.
2.3
Standard drone dynamics
The standard quad-copter drone consists of a frame, motors and propellers. The motors
are attached to the frame and by changing the rotational speed of the motor, the drone
is able to achieve motion. The quad-copter as a dynamical system is classified as under-
actuated system, because there are 6 degrees of freedom to control and only 4 actuators.
6 basic motion maneuvers are: linear motion on X, Y, Z axis in the world coordinate
frame and the Euler angles which represent the orientation of the drone - roll (ϕ), pitch
(θ), yaw (ψ). As the center of the mass of the drone usually is placed symmetrically
between the 4 rotors, this places the total thrust vector in the middle.
As mentioned before, by changing the propeller rotational speed for the motors indi-
vidually, the lift of that motor changes which makes the drone tilt in that direction. In
that way the roll and pitch motion is achieved. This makes the thrust vector (sum of all
4 motor thrusts) divide the produced thrust in two components - vertical and horizontal.
The horizontal component of the thrust vector makes the drone achieve linear motion.
For the drone to ascent, hover or descent, it is necessary to change the propeller
speeds equally in all motors. In order to hover, the resulting thrust has to compensate
==PAGE:11==
2.3 Standard drone dynamics
5
Figure 2.1: Quad-copter Motion schematic
Figure 2.2: Quad-copter dynamics
the gravity force. If the vertical thrust will be bigger than the weight of the drone, it
will rise; if it is smaller, it will descent correspondingly as can be seen in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Thrust increase, decrease
When motors are rotating, they produce the counter torque in the opposite direction
of the angular motion of the propeller, therefore, in every drone configuration the rotors
in pairs are rotating in opposite directions to cancel the counter torque and eliminate
the counter torque. For the drone to maintain steady orientation, the overall torque
on the body must be zero. Furthermore, to achieve the yaw motion, it is necessary to
increase the speed of two opposing motors and to achieve torque imbalance as can be
seen in figure 2.4.
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Analysis
Figure 2.4: Yaw motion
Similarly, the roll and pitch motion is achieved. The schematic can be seen in figure
2.5. One of the motors that rotates in the same direction, increases or decreases the
speed to achieve imbalance in total torque on the roll or pitch frame on the body.
Figure 2.5: Roll and Pitch motion
2.3.1
Euler Angles
Euler angles are used to define the orientation the object in space. There are several
Euler angle configurations, but the most common used configurations in aeronautical
field are ZYX angles, also known as Roll-Pitch-Yaw.
These angles denote the most
typical changes in the attitude of the object.[Ori10]
Rz(ϕ) =


1
0
0
0
cϕ
−sϕ
0
sϕ
cϕ


(2.1)
Ry(θ) =


cθ
0
sθ
0
1
0
−sθ
0
cθ


(2.2)
Rx(ψ) =


cψ
−sψ
0
sψ
cψ
0
0
0
1


(2.3)
The resulting frame orientation is obtained as follows:
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Standard drone dynamics
7
R(Φ) = Rz(ϕ)Ry(θ)Rx(ψ) =


cϕcθ
cϕsθsψ −sϕcψ
cϕsθcψ + sϕsψ
sϕcθ
sϕcθsψ + cϕcψ
sϕsθcψ −cϕsψ
−sθ
cθcψ
cθcψ


(2.4)
2.3.2
Forces and Torques
There are 2 main properties acting on the base of the drone that control the linear and
angular motion of the drone - force and torque.
The total torque around z-axis (Yaw torque):
τψ = b(ω2
1 −ω2
2 + ω2
3 −ω2
4)
(2.5)
The total torque around x-axis (Roll torque):
τϕ = Lk(ω2
1 −ω2
3)
(2.6)
The total torque around y-axis (Pitch torque):
τθ = Lk(ω2
2 −ω2
4)
(2.7)
And the total torque τB that is applied on the drone body frame is as follows:
τB =


τϕ
τθ
τψ


(2.8)
The rotational dynamics in the body fixed frame are explained by the following
equations:
τB = I ˙ω + ωM × (IωM),
(2.9)
where
I =


Ixx
0
0
0
Iyy
0
0
0
Izz


(2.10)
is Inertia matrix on each axis and
ωM =


1
0
−sθ
0
cϕ
cθsϕ
0
−sϕ
cθcϕ




˙ϕ
˙θ
˙ψ


(2.11)
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Analysis
by rearranging the elements of the equation we get
˙ω = I−1(τB −ωM × (IωM))
(2.12)
The linear dynamics in the body fixed frame are explained by the following equations.
In general case it could be assumed that the thrust is proportional to square of the
angular velocity of the propeller, and k is a constant that is depended on the properties
of the motor and selected propellers. Therefore,
FB = kω2,
(2.13)
Further, summing all the thrusts of the all the motors the following is obtained:
FB = k


0
0
∑ω2
i

,
(2.14)
In linear dynamics author models viscous damping FD as a force proportional to the
velocity along every axis.
FD =


−kd ˙x
−kd ˙y
−kd ˙z

,
(2.15)
where kd is the damping coeﬀicient.
Combining all of the linear dynamics terms in one equation, the following equation
is obtained:
m¨x =


0
0
−mg

+ RFB + FD,
(2.16)
where R is the rotation matrix from obtained from Euler angles.
To add effects of the gravity in the equation, the gravitational force along the z-axis
is added.
Summarizing the previous equations it can concluded that the dynamical system
has four control inputs that control the 6 basic motions of the drone. The system has
no control inputs that control linear motion along the X and Y directions. In order
for the drone to move laterally, first the drone has to roll or pitch in order to produce
the horizontal thrust component of the vertical thrust, than enables the drone to move
horizontally.[AGi]
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Analysis of the contributing physics
9



FB = ∑ω2
i
τϕ = Lk(ω2
1 −ω2
3)
τθ = Lk(ω2
2 −ω2
4)
τψ = b(ω2
1 −ω2
2 + ω2
3 −ω2
4)
(2.17)
2.4
Analysis of the contributing physics
2.4.1
Floating object dynamics
To test and design the control system in a safe environment, so that system can be
commissioned and tested without brisking with the actual hardware, the initial testing
can be done in a safe simulation environment. However, to provide as close to real life
physical characteristics to the system, it is necessary to replicate the physics acting in
the environment as much as possible. As the control problem revolves around floating
objects and picking them up from the water, the simulation environment should replicate
the dynamics of the floating object. The drone propellers produce enough wind to make
the floating object move around the water, which is one of the main control problems
in this project. A few topics to consider when simulating the physics of hydro-aerial
system are buoyancy and drag resistance due to viscosity.
2.4.1.1
Buoyancy and Archimedes law
The Archimedes principle states that the upward buoyant force that is exerted on a
body fully or partially immersed in a fluid, is equal to the weight of the fluid that the
body displaces. [CPl08] The mathematical formula for the Archimedes principle is the
following:
Fa = ρgV,
(2.18)
where ρ is the density of the fluid, g - gravitational acceleration, V - the volume of the
immersed part of the object.
Figure 2.6: Forces in the Archimedes principle
==PAGE:16==
10
2 Analysis
The Archimedes principle is one of the key physical principles to simulate a system
interaction with fluid. It is because the net weight changes when the object is immersed
in a fluid.
2.4.1.2
Drag force and drag coeﬀicient
When an object is moving through a fluid, the object experiences a resistance force in
fluid dynamics known as the drag force. [Bat67]
FD = 1
2ρu2CDA,
(2.19)
where ρ is the density of the fluid, u – flow velocity relative to the object, A - reference
area, CD – the drag coeﬀicient.
The drag coeﬀicient is possibly the most important variable in the whole drag equa-
tion. The drag coeﬀicient is dimensionless coeﬀicient that directly relates to the objects
geometry shape and the Reynolds number. The smaller the drag coeﬀicient, the less
aerodynamic/hydrodynamic the object will be. During the movement, the drag force is
applied in the opposite direction of the relative movement.
Another important parameter that contributes to the drag coeﬀicient is the Reynolds
number.
The Reynolds number helps to predict flow patterns in different fluid flow
situations.
At low Reynolds numbers, flows tend to be dominated by laminar flow,
while at high Reynolds numbers flows tend to be turbulent. The Reynolds numbers are
important dimensionless quantity in fluid mechanics. The Reynolds number is the ratio
of inertial forces to viscous forces within a fluid which is subjected to relative internal
movement due to different fluid velocities.
The drag coeﬀicient can be found as function of the Reynolds number [Bat67]:
CD = fc(Re),
(2.20)
where Re - Reynolds number
And after this the drag force equation changes its form to :
FD = 1
2ρu2Afc(Re),
(2.21)
where: ρ is the density of the fluid, u – flow velocity relative to the object, A -
reference area.
In the calculations for this project, drag coeﬀicient CD will be used as a constant
value to simplify the calculations of contributing physics on the floating object. However,
this was necessary to mention that drag coeﬀicient is strongly dependent on the Reynolds
number.
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Propeller slipstream analysis and slipstream behaviour
11
Figure 2.7: Drag coeﬀicient function of the Reynolds number [Bat67]
2.5
Propeller slipstream analysis and
slipstream behaviour
In order to properly simulate all the physical effects that affect the floating object,
it is necessary to understand the characteristics of the wind that is generated by the
propellers of the drone and how it may affect the floating object movement in the water.
This challenge is particularly important to understand and work around because the
propeller-generated wind on the object is the biggest external disturbance on this control
system. It that can negatively affect the performance of the overall control system in
terms of successfully catching the floating object. By observing the first manual flights of
the ”tie-fighter” drone, it was clear that the propeller-generated wind will be a challenge,
because the configuration and the power of the drone is significant with relatively high
thrust force. The configuration and the thrust details will be discussed in one of the
next chapters.
The theory of modeling and understanding the characteristics of the propeller-generated
wind slipstream was taken from the paper “Propeller Slipstream Model for Small Un-
manned Aerial Vehicles” [CN13] and gave essential practical dissipation of the model
of the aerial vehicle propeller wind dynamics to understand and analyze the theory
of propeller-induced air velocity to determine the aerodynamic and drag forces on the
floating object. The modeling of the propeller-generated wind from this article played
a significant role in developing simplified wind effects on the floating object in Simulink
simulation, that helped to model the approximate disturbances on the floating object
and test tracking algorithms and gripper.
2.5.1
Propeller slipstream model
Based on the findings in the paper, the basic slipstream shape can be divided into two
regions – near-field region and the far-field region. In the near-field region the velocity
==PAGE:18==
12
2 Analysis
Figure 2.8: Approximate induced wind slipstream region of the propellers [CN]
increases with the increasing distance from the propeller plane until the efflux plane
– the reference plane where the slipstream due to diffusion starts to expand and the
velocity starts to decrease. Therefore, using the mathematical formulas presented in
this paper, an attempt will be made to calculate and simulate the wind speed at the
far-field region as in this case it is more relevant to analyze far-field region because the
drone’s approximate grabbing altitude will be in the far-field region of induced velocity.
[CN13]
In figure 2.9 can be seen the approximate shape of the slipstream and slipstream
division into near-field and a far-field regions for the single propeller.
Figure 2.9: Division of the slipstream regions [CN]
The in-depth analysis of the near-field region will be excluded, however, the equations
for the transition from near-field to far-field region will be used. In this case, wind close
to the propeller plane does not play a significant role in the effects of the floating object.
To continue with the calculations, it is necessary to calculate the induced velocities and
slipstream radius at the efflux plane. An in-depth analysis from the efflux plane towards
the far-field region will be carried as this is the region where the floating object is more
likely to be at. Transition from the near-field region to the far-field region is determined
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Propeller slipstream analysis and slipstream behaviour
13
at the point where the average induced velocity increases and becomes equal to the efflux
velocity Vi,avg(x0) = V0.
Vi,avg(x) = aVx(1 +
x
√
R2
p + x2)
(2.22)
Ri(x) = Rp(1 −
0.5ax
√
R2
p + x2)
(2.23)
As mentioned before, the efflux plane is the distance from the propeller where the
slipstream starts to expand. To determine the location in terms of the distance from
the propeller plane to the efflux plane, the following equation is used:
x0 =
(V0 −aVx)Rp
√
V0(2aVx −V0)
,
(2.24)
where a =
−1+
√
1+ 8Kt
π
2
- coeﬀicient, Kt =
T
4ρR2pV 2
x - thrust coeﬀicient, T - thrust of the
propeller [N], Rp - propeller radius [m], Vx - propeller axial speed [m/s]
To determine the efflux velocity (induced velocity at the efflux plane), it is necessary
to use the following equation:
V0 = 1.33nDp
√
Ct,
(2.25)
where Ct =
T
ρn2D2p- thrust coeﬀicient, T - thrust of the propeller [N], n - propeller rotation
speed [rev/s], Dp - propeller diameter [m]
In further calculations it will be necessary to know the efflux plane flow radius to
calculate the wind speeds at the far-field zone. To calculate slipstream radius as function
of the distance from the propeller plane:
Rs(x) = Rp(1 −
0.5ax
√
R2
p + x2),
(2.26)
By looking at the Rs function, the distance for efflux plane is selected as x0 to find
the flow radius at efflux plane. This radius is used to calculate the maximum induced
velocity of in the desired distance from the propeller plane. The maximum induced
velocity at the certain distance is:
VZFEmax = V0[1.0172 −Kvisc0.1835(x −x0)
D0
],
(2.27)
where Kvisc - viscosity coeﬀicient, D0 - propeller diameter [m], V0 - efflux velocity
[m/s], x0 - efflux plane [m], x - distance from the propeller plane [m].
==PAGE:20==
14
2 Analysis
To find the radial location where the velocity maximum is established at the cross
section of the flow using the equation Rm0 = 0.7(R0 −Rh), where R0 is the flow radius
at efflux plane cross-section and Rh is the hub radius of the propeller. Now all the
necessary variables are known to calculate the induced velocity at each axial and radial
distance point of the flow. The function that calculates the velocity takes two parameters
– distance from the propeller plane x and distance away from the rotational axis r.
Vi(x, r) = VZFEmaxe
−1
2(
r−Rm0
0.5Rm0+ 0.075(x−x0−R0)
Kvisc
)2
,
(2.28)
where Kvisc - viscosity coeﬀicient, R0 - efflux flow diameter [m], Rm0 - maximal flow
location from the axis [m], VZFEmax - maximal induced velocity [m/s], x0 - efflux plane
[m], x - distance from the propeller plane [m].
By implementing the presented equations into MATLAB program, it was possible
to calculate the induced wind speed changes based on the axial and radial distance.
With calculated wind speed at some distance, the induced moving air velocity can be
converted to a drag force using equation 2.19, as the equation stays the same, but the
liquid density ρ (the density of the air) and drag coeﬀicients are different, thus now the
external force that is applied on the object can be found.
For simple initial analysis, MATLAB script was run with constant parameters, in
order to have the first impression of the shape of the propeller slipstream. The results
of this calculation can be seen in the figure 2.10.
Later these equations are implemented in Simulink SimScape model to simulate wind
effects from the drone propellers directly to the floating object. As the drone and the
object moves around, these parameters are changing all the time. Therefore, the drag
force of the wind is changing as the drone approaches the object.
The MATLAB code for the implemented equations and calculations can be seen in
the Appendix A or in the corresponding gitlab folder in the following link.
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Propeller slipstream analysis and slipstream behaviour
15
Figure 2.10: Slipstream induced wind speed in a far-field region. The curves represent
the wind speed at various reference distances from the efflux plane and the slipstream
radius spread from the rotation axis.
2.5.2
Slipstream impact on surface
As the induced slipstream moves downwards from the propellers, unless in a high altitude,
the stream will hit the ground surface, thus changing the shape and path of the fluid
stream.
The fluid streamline falling and hitting the ground, divides in two streams in 2-
dimensional case, where both streams change direction and continue its way parallel to
the surface. The center streamline continues its way until it hits the surface and as
the stream cannot penetrate the surface, the stream comes to rest. This phenomena is
called the ”stagnation point” as described in this Princeton university homepage [pri].
The stream line characteristics can be seen in the figure 2.11 [PCh11]
However, in 3-dimensional case the stream line splits towards all the sides making
circle-like wind field that goes away from the area where the wind stream actually hits
the surface of the water as can be observed in the figure 2.12. Although the propeller
generated wind characteristics from the single propeller have been discussed, there are
still unknown aspects. It should be noted that in this case there are 4 propellers that
generate wind and each of their wind streams interact with each other. When the drone
applies the pitch or roll maneuver, the angle of the stream also changes, therefore, the
stream profile is not as described before but tilted.
To model the ideal simulation of the wind, it would require highly computational
power and modeling skills and knowledge in fluid dynamics to take into account effect
==PAGE:22==
16
2 Analysis
Figure 2.11: Streamline cross-section when hitting the horizontal surface with dividing
streamline in two and the stagnation point [pri]
of any propeller and angle changes. Therefore, for the purposes of having a reasonably
eﬀicient model that replicates the approximate effects of the wind, the simulation of the
wind will be simplified. The Simulink implementation of the physics will be discussed
in the chapter 3.
Figure 2.12: Streamline affecting the surface of the water. The streamline splitting when
hitting the water, creates the waves to any direction.
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Hardware analysis
17
2.6
Hardware analysis
The hardware of the ”tie-fighter” drone will be discussed in this section as well as the
most important characteristics will be discussed and analyzed.
2.6.1
Parts of the ”tie-fighter”
Frame
The current ”tie-fighter” model frame consists of carbon fiber rods making the base of
the frame where the 4 pairs of motors sit with PVC tube between them to store and
protect the flight controller, computer and batteries. As for the landing gear, aluminium
parts are used. These types of materials are most commonly chosen for the drone due
to their light weight and durability.
Propellers and motors
The three most important properties of the propellers are size, pitch, material as well as
the number of blades that the propeller has. Propellers usually are characterized with a
four-digit number, where the first two describe the radius of the propeller and the last
two describe the distance the propeller moves in one revolution.
The current propeller setup for the ”tie-fighter” is APC12x3.8 model propellers.
The most common choice for the motors are brush-less DC motors due to their
relatively low price, small dimensions and eﬀiciency.
One of the most important parameters when choosing the motor for the drone is the
KV value and the thrust that it can produce. From that arises also the third parameter
that needs to be accounted is the thrust-to-weight ratio.
The KV value describes the number of revolutions a motor makes with 1 Volt applied
without any load. The thrust is the value of the pull that the motor is able to provide
with current set of propellers.
All this information is provided in the manufacturer
data-sheet in figure 2.13
Figure 2.13: Propeller and Motor data-sheet
==PAGE:24==
18
2 Analysis
The thrust-to-weight ratio is a metric to describe how much thrust the drone con-
figuration has compared to the weight of the drone. Usually the thrust-to-weight ratio
should be around 2. This metric is important because it is crucial to know how much
thrust the drone has to be able to complete complex maneuvers.
To calculate the ratio for the current setup, the maximum pull of the data-sheet is
selected (figure 2.13) and multiplied with the number of motors the drone has. However,
the ”tie-fighter” configuration is not the standard ”X” configuration, but the ”X8”. In
this setup two identical motors are mounted opposite directions.
This configuration
provides extra thrust for the drone, however the increase of the thrust is not doubled as
one could think. According to the research [PGą16], the average increase for the total
thrust is around 40% depending on the propeller and motor type.
Assuming that the results of this research can be also applicable to the ”tie-fighter”
drone, it suggests that the ”tie-fighter” total thrust with 4 motor pairs with 1.4 thrust
increase is
Ttotal = n·cT·pull = 4 · 1.4 · 1360 = 7161g,
(2.29)
However the thrust-to-weight ratio is only
T2Wratio =
Ttotal
massdrone
= 7161
4650 = 1.638,
(2.30)
Assuming that the critical thrust-to-weight is 1.2, we can calculate the free thrust
that can be utilized to pick up object.
Tfree = Ttotal −(1.2 · massdrone) = 7161 −(1.2 · 4650) = 2036g,
(2.31)
With total free thrust of the drone of roughly 2kg with 100% throttle, there are some
margin for the gripper actuator to be mounted. However, the total mass of the object
that the drone will be able to pick up depends, how heavy the gripper actuator will be
and what the gripper mechanics contribution to the inertia, placement of the center of
mass and the drone dynamics will be. As this value is considering the drone thrust at
100% throttle, this can be a significant limiting factor for the overall design.
Electronic Speed Controller (ESC)
Electronic Speed Controller (ESC) are electrical circuit device that is used to control the
speed of the motor. The DC voltage signal from the flight controller is sent to the ESC.
The DC voltage that was sent to the ESC is converted to the three-phase AC which
makes the motor increase or decrease the rotational speed of the motor.
==PAGE:25==
2.7 Choice of the actuator design approach
19
Flight controller and on-board computer
The ”tie-fighter” drone uses the Pixhawk PX4 flight-controller and Intel Nuc as a on-
board computer with Robot Operating System (ROS). The Pixhawk is widely used
open-source flight controller for drones and other unmanned vehicles.
The Pixhawk
is compatible with ROS and ground-station software Qgroundcontrol, that enables to
configure the various Pixhawk flight controller parameters. [px4] The Pixhawk PX4
flight controller has integrated controller algorithms and estimators to improve the flight
performance without building and developing the control algorithms and state estimators
yourself.
Battery
The most common type of batteries that are used in drones are Lithium-Polymer (Li-Po)
batteries. Varying in capacity and in number of cells, these types of batteries provide
the necessary voltage and Ampere-hours to power the drone.
2.7
Choice of the actuator design approach
Early in the project it was necessary to analyze and evaluate possible gripper design
approaches.
At first, with limited knowledge of how the whole system will react to
different designs, 3 different concepts of how the final prototype could look like were
generated. It was clear that there could be 3 possible design approaches:
1. Landing gear with shorter gripper attached close to the base of the drone,
2. Long gripper without landing gear,
3. Gripper with a net.
Pros-Cons of the option Nr.1
Pros for the landing gear approach would be that while hovering above the floating
object, the object would still float around, but by landing precisely above the object,
it could eliminate the propeller generated wind completely, thus stopping the floating
around.
However, this option provides more threats for the system than there are benefits.
The cons for this option are that the landing gear would add unnecessary weight for the
system, thus minimizing the load that the drone can lift with it’s limited free thrust.
Also the maneuvering while being landed on the water using just 4 propellers does not
seem as a liable solution. Being close to the water and with limited thrust power after
the grip poses threats of damaging the system. The complexity of the concept is also
quite high as the gripper claws require advanced mechanical modeling.
==PAGE:26==
20
2 Analysis
Figure 2.14: Landing gear concept
Pros-Cons of the option Nr.2
Pros for the longer gripper are that the drone will be able to position itself more easily
without having to interact with the water; the drone is able to reach under the water
due to longer gripper actuator; inertia will not be off balance as the center of the mass
will still be bellow the drone.
Cons are that the floating object will be highly influenced by the wind from the
propellers that can be an issue when trying to approach the object for the grab. The
landing after the grab with the rigid structure can be problematic, however with the
flexible structure it can be challenging to aim and position the gripper claw at the
object. The complexity of the concept is also high as the gripper claws need advanced
mechanical modeling.
Figure 2.15: Long gripper concept
Pros-Cons of the option Nr.3
The main idea of the this concept came after the analysis of the propeller slipstream
analysis. As the wind could be a challenging factor in the system design, the intention
was to use wind as a tool to guide the floating object into the gripper net.
After
observing the propeller slipstream wind speed profile in figure 2.10, one can observe that
==PAGE:27==
2.7 Choice of the actuator design approach
21
the highest wind speed is induced right bellow the propellers at every distance bellow the
propeller. By increasing the distance bellow the propeller, the wind speed decreases, but
the induced wind speed is relatively much smaller further from the propeller rotational
axis.
Pros for this concept design are that the propeller induced wind speed can be treated
and used in favor for grabbing the floating object. Using net, the margin for error is
bigger in terms of gripper positioning accuracy as the floating object needs to be in the
range of net spawn. Net can operate also under water and with the same picking concept
grab object on the water and under water.
One of the biggest cons and concerns is that most of the mechanical parts are outside
of the gripper frame, as the gripper design shows. This consequently affects the dynamics
of the drone and due to this factor the drone handling performance can be affected before
and after the grab. Landing can be an issue as well if the whole gripper structure is
rigid and fixed to the drone frame. However, if the structure is flexible and folds, the
landing gear does not affect the landing maneuver.
Figure 2.16: Gripping with the net concept
Figure 2.17: Net concept after the grab
The summary of concept evaluation can be seen in table 2.1. Each concept is given
3 points in each category - 1 the worst - 3 the best. As we can see after the evaluation
==PAGE:28==
22
2 Analysis
the concept Nr.3 has been chosen as the optimal option for this solution.
Table 2.1: Concept evaluation table
Concept
Weight
Controllability
Wind effects
Simplicity
Landing
Safety
SUM
Nr.1
1
1
2
1
3
1
9
Nr.2
2
3
1
2
2
2
12
Nr.3
2
2
3
3
2
2
14
2.8
Concept dynamical analysis
In this section the chosen concept’s dynamical analysis will be done - how the system
equations change when having a gripper ”arm” attached to the drone and while picking
up an object. Furthermore, it will be explained what are the limitations and the stability
of the system and what could be the problems when choosing the current concept.
The closer analysis of the drone will be done by observing the 2-dimensional case,
because that way it will be easier to comprehend the equations and the dynamics that
are affected by the mass picked up. The 2-dimensional case for the pitch will be looked
into, as the dynamics will significantly change especially in this plane.
Figure 2.18: 2D model pitch model analysis for the selected concept design
By observing the figure 2.18 the 2-dimensional case of the selected design concept is
visible with picked up mass in the gripper. The system consists of the drone which has
a mass m1, the object mass with mass m2, gripper arm with the length L. The system
has two inputs - the U1 which provides the thrust force and U2 which provides the torque
==PAGE:29==
2.8 Concept dynamical analysis
23
around the center of the mass of the drone. The U1 and U2 in this case is shorthand for
sum of the forces produced by the both propellers U1 = f1 + f2 and U2 = f1 −f2.
To design a control system for this case it will be necessary to design the cascade of
PID controllers to control the pitch angle and the position of the drone. The current
dynamical case consists of 3 differential equations - for altitude z, position y and pitch
angle ϕ.
The 3 differential equations for this system are the following:
m¨z = −m1g + U1cos(ϕ) −m2g,
(2.32)
m¨y = U1sin(ϕ),
(2.33)
I ¨ϕ = U2 −τ,
(2.34)
where τ = m2gLcos(90−ϕ). Further a closer look of the linear case around the stationary
point for the ϕ = 0 deg will be provided. Additionally, it will be discussed how the adding
mass at the gripper affects the performance of the controller and the overall dynamics
of the system.
By rewriting the equation, the following is obtained:
¨ϕ = U2
I −m2gLcos(90 −ϕ)
I
,
(2.35)
where the I is the total moment of inertia of the system in this plane. And the total
inertia consists of 3 parts - inertia of the drone I1, inertia of the object I2 and the inertia
of the mass m2 object at the distance L - m2L2.
I = I1 + I2 + m2L2,
(2.36)
It is evident in the equation 2.34 that the dynamics are highly influenced by the mass
m2 of the object picked up. Furthermore, the torque it is producing around the center
of the drone and the total moment of inertia of the system are not constant at all times.
As the object is picked up, the inertia I changes. The drone inertia is assumed to be a
solid cuboid with height h, depth d and width w. The moment of inertia of the drone in
2-dimension plane then is I1 =
1
12m1(h2 + w2). The Inertia of a solid sphere I2 = 2
5m2r
and the point mass rotation around the axis is m2L2.
It is also visible how the change of dynamics can influence the total inertia. If the the
object mass m2 is not picked up and not a part of the system, the total inertia I consists
of the I1, but as the objects become part of the system to the total inertia equation the
I2 and m2L2 gets added. [Ser86]
==PAGE:30==
24
2 Analysis
In order for the system to remain stable around the stationary point ϕ = 0 deg,
the system is linearized around that point. After that it can be found that the input
U2 needs to produce the counter torque in the amount of m2gL
I
in order to stay in the
stationary point.
The system state-space matrices and the system transfer-function G(s) was calcu-
lated numerically inserting the numerical values for m1, m2, g, I, L into the equations.
G(s) = 2.632
s2
,
(2.37)
After looking at the system transfer-function G(s) and the eigenvalues, it can be seen
that the system without any external mass m2 has 1 pole at the origin with no zeros.
This is assuming that the system on the pitch has no additional damping - system is
marginally stable. However, after adding the mass to m2, increasing the mass of the m2
gradually from 0 kg -> 0.25kg -> 0.5kg -> 0.75kg, in the figure 2.19 it is visible that
the open-loop system transfer-function G(s) poles stays on the imaginary axis, but tend
to move away from origin, thus increasing the oscillatory behaviour of the open-loop
system. The system still is marginally stable.
Figure 2.19: Pole-zero map of the system G(s) increasing the mass m2 from 0kg ->
0.25kg -> 0.5kg -> 0.75kg
The PD controller K has been designed to control the pitch angle ϕ. To ensure
that the linearized system has suﬀicient reference tracking that can keep the suﬀicient
performance also with external load, the PD controller was implemented and tuned
initially without the external load with gains Kp = 600,Kd = 20, with filtering constant
N = 10000. The controller tuning was done using ”trial and error” method which is a
valid controller tuning method. The Ziegler-Nichols method could have also been used,
==PAGE:31==
2.8 Concept dynamical analysis
25
but after some tries, it did not provide the wanted step-responses. Thus the controller
K transfer function looks like the following:
K = Kp
Kds + 1
Kd
N s + 1 = 21.2s + 601
0.002s + 1 ,
(2.38)
K
PD controller
G(s)
system
U2(s)
ref(s) +
e(s)
ϕ y(s)
−
Figure 2.20: Closed loop system of the pitch controller
The closed loop system as can be seen in the figure 2.20 obtains the following form:
Gcl(s) =
KG(s)
1 + KG(s),
(2.39)
It can be seen in the root-locus plot (figure 2.21) that increasing the mass of the
external load m2, at first the marginally stable system poles are cancelled by the zeros.
However, the poles that are in the left half plane and towards the positive and negative
side of imaginary axis tend to move towards the zeros of the closed loop transfer function.
Evidently, the greater the mass m2, the less damping and more oscillations the
system is expected to experience as the angle of the poles starts to increase and the
position of the poles on the real axis start to move towards imaginary axis. At one point
the pole crosses the imaginary axis, making the system completely unstable. This sets
some limits of the system that it can be capable of before becoming unstable. If it is
necessary to ensure the step response with the specific damping and optimal oscillations,
then conclusion can be made that the system should not try to pick heavier objects
than some specific weight - which will increase the risk of turning the overall system
unstable. Changing controller parameters as the system is running by trying to improve
the performance is considered to be not the best practice for such external disturbed
systems.
At the figure 2.22 can be seen the step responses of the closed-loop system Gcl. By
observing the step responses of the system with the mass m2, it is visible that the data
corresponds what was discussed by observing the root-locus plot. The figure represents
how the step responses change by increasing the mass m2 with the same PD controller
parameters. Furthermore, some plots with the added mass m2 have a good performance
with the same PD controller.
As the mass m2 is increased, the overshoot increases
slightly and there are a few more oscillations with reasonable settling time, it should be
suﬀicient as the controller was tuned for the different dynamics. In order to present how
==PAGE:32==
26
2 Analysis
the step response would look like with the mass m2 so big that the poles of the system
would be very close to the imaginary axis, can be seen by the green line. The overshoot
is high, the oscillations decay, but with much slower rate.
Nevertheless, the question is, what are the limits of the system when the step response
is considered acceptable? If it is necessary for the system to not exceed specific damping
ratio, some of the responses might not be considered good for the system to be within
the margins of acceptable performance.
By analyzing the bode plots for the system in the figure 2.23,it is evident that the
gain margin is infinite for any stable cases and phase margin is optimal, but decreases
from 118 degrees to 51 degrees as the load increases. The Matlab code and calculations
can be seen in the Appendix B or in the corresponding gitlab folder in the following link.
The complete nonlinear Simulink model is made from the equations 2.32, 2.33 and
2.34 and can be seen in figure in the Appendix C. Then the additional PD controllers
are designed and tuned to control the height of the drone on the Z axis and the position
on the Y axis. The nonlinear model is then linearized to obtain the system’s state-space
matrices A,B,C,D that later will be used to obtain the transfer-functions for the system
analysis from specific inputs to outputs. After the tuning of the position controllers,
the following closed loop system is obtained as in the figure 2.25 and the PD gains that
provide optimal step responses can be seen in the table 4.1. The calculations can be
seen in the appendix C or in the link.
Figure 2.21: Root locus plot of the system. The pole movement as the mass m2 is
increased
==PAGE:33==
2.8 Concept dynamical analysis
27
Figure 2.22: Step responses of the system increasing the object mass m2
Figure 2.23: Bode Plot of the system increasing the object mass m2
With the obtained gains, further the closed loop systems poles and zeros from the
reference inputs to the outputs can be analyzed. The results that are gained by analyzing
==PAGE:34==
28
2 Analysis
Table 2.2: Tuned PD gains of the closed loop system
Kp
Kd
ϕ
600
20
Y
7
5
Z
30
10
Figure 2.24: Closed loop system with inner loop and outer loop cascade
the obtained transfer-function from the reference for the Z to the output of the Z are
that most of the poles have been canceled by zeros, thus eliminating the oscillatory
behaviour. However, two poles have not been canceled and remain in the angle with
quite high damping ratio. This suggests that the oscillatory behaviour will be minimal.
The reference commands were given to the system for the position on Z -> refz=1
and for position on Y -> refy =1. Further, several simulations were executed increasing
the picked object’s mass m2. It is visible in the figure 2.26 that increasing objects mass
m2 the performance of the position controller is not affected with smaller changes of the
mass increase, however simulating the extra case with mass m2 = 2kg, the controller
experiences an overshoot.
The Altitude controller in the figure 2.27 is not affected that significantly by the
changes of the mass m2, but does not reach the set-point. This can be solved by adding
Integral part of the controller, but adding integral on the controller can be slightly
dangerous due to integral wind-up. That is the main reason that the PD controller is
used in this kind of systems. However, by observing the figure 2.28 it is evident what
are the pitch angle ϕ during these two step responses with increased mass m2. It can be
observed that the heavier the object, the more angle corrections are required to ensure
that the drone reaches and maintains it’s position reference.
==PAGE:35==
2.9 Summary
29
Figure 2.25: Closed loop system with inner loop and outer loop cascade
Figure 2.26: Unit step response on refy
2.9
Summary
In this chapter the overall aspects of the project were analyzed like basic drone dy-
namical equations, contributing physics and limitations that can affect drone and the
floating object, several gripper design concepts were evaluated and chosen one analysed
analytically.
==PAGE:36==
30
2 Analysis
Figure 2.27: Unit step response on refz
Figure 2.28: Pitch angle as a response to the step inputs on reference refy and refz
This analysis should give the proper base for the designing the simulation environ-
ment and the gripper model to be able to design and test the overall control algorithm
to complete the project objectives.
After the analysis, it can be expected that the selected concept design can affect the
pitch maneuver significantly and play a contributing factor also into position control in
the control system. It will be expected, that the drone carrying the load can experience
some oscillations on the pitch and some overshoot in position control.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Simulink implementation of
the physics
3.1
Introduction
In this chapter the Simulink implementation of the physics such as buoyancy, drag force
and propeller induced wind will be implemented and applied to the floating object. The
detailed Simulink and SimScape implementation will be explained and verified with the
results of the simulation.
3.2
Analysis
The most of the analysis for this chapter was already discussed in previous chapter,
where the Archimedes principle, fluid drag force and propeller induced slipstream was
discussed and analyzed. These physical properties was implemented using MATLAB’s
SimScape plugin, that enables to create physical models within Simulink.
Important to note that the implemented physics are simplified version to represent
the most important characteristics that contribute to the floating object dynamics, as it
would be extremely diﬀicult to model every single contribution to the dynamics.
3.3
Implementation
3.3.1
Modeling buoyancy and drag force
To introduce a solid object with 6 degrees of freedom into SimScape environment, the
SimScape 6-DOF joint is used and connected to the Solid object block (in this case the
sphere is used). Each 6-DOF joint block provides the ”sensing” property to provide the
measurements data as position, velocity, acceleration of the object in the world frame
by each axis (x,y,z) and ”actuation” property to provide the input force on each axis
respectively. The rotational degrees of freedom are neglected in this case as they have
insignificant effect on the dynamics of a sphere in the water.
==PAGE:38==
32
3 Simulink implementation of the physics
The ”sensing” information is used to calculate the floating forces that are applied for
the object and then fed back to the ”actuation” inputs as the external force of buoyancy
or drag as can be seen in the figure 3.1. Later also to the base of this object the external
force from the propeller induced wind to the X and Y degrees of freedom will be applied.
Figure 3.1: Modeling the object dynamics in the water
To model the buoyancy effect in Simulink and SimScape, we calculate the forces for
each axis - x, y, z. As can be seen in the figure 2.6, the Archimedes force (buoyant force)
is placed along the z-axis, thus the buoyancy force will be applied only on the z-axis.
The drag force that is described by the equation (2.19) will be effective on all 3 - x, y,z.
Therefore the total force will have 3 components - total forces on x, total forces on y,
total forces on z. The calculation block can be seen in the figure 3.2 and in Appendix
D and in file ”drone_simulation_WindSimulation.slx”.
To calculate the drag force on x and y axis, from the equation FD = 1
2ρu2CDA, we
see that the moving speed u, the cross-section area A of the object and the drag co-
eﬀicient CD, contributes the most.
The ”DragForceCalc” block calculates the force
that is applied in the opposite direction of the movement speed, however the drag
force is not applied when the object is above water.
The implementation can be
seen in figure 3.3 and the code of the blocks can be seen Appendix D and in file
”drone_simulation_WindSimulation.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in the fol-
lowing link.
To calculate the forces on the z axis, two components are calculated - buoyant force
and drag force. For the buoyant force Fa = ρgV it is necessary to know the amount of
the displaced water by the object. Assuming that the surface of the water is at altitude
z = 0, knowing the depth h and the radius r of the sphere, the displaced volume of the
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Implementation
33
water can be calculated. Similar to the x and y axis, the drag and buoyancy is applied
when the object has contact with the water.
To calculate the the volume of the spherical cap of the sphere that is under water
the following equation is used [Wei]:
Vh = πh2
3 (3r −h),
(3.1)
where h is the height of the cap, r the radius of the sphere.
Figure 3.2: Calculation of the forces for each axis
==PAGE:40==
34
3 Simulink implementation of the physics
Figure 3.3: Drag force calculation block on X and Y axis
Figure 3.4: Drag force calculation block on Z axis
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Implementation
35
3.3.2
Modeling propeller induced wind effects on the
object
The implementation of the wind equations that were discussed in the section 2.5 are
implemented in the Simulink. The equations in the section 2.5 described the propeller
induced wind speed calculations only for one propeller, however, the ”tie-fighter” drone
has 4 pairs of propellers. It is extremely diﬀicult to understand the model and simulate
the wind dynamics of the 4 separate propellers when each of the turbulent flows interact
with each other, therefore, the wind will be simulated as one slipstream flow as can be
seen in the figure 3.5 and 3.6, neglecting the individual propeller effects on the dynamics.
The force on the object will be calculated assuming the maximal induced slipstream
flow bends as discussed in the section 2.5.2 when impacting with the surface and then
continues parallel to the surface towards the object. The induced slipstream speed will be
calculated, assuming that the deceleration amount of the induced wind speed is similar
to the rate that was discussed in the section 2.5, as a sum of the altitude of the drone
and the distance to the object. As mentioned before, the simplification of the wind
effects are made to replicate the approximate effects of the propeller induced wind on
the floating object for simulation purposes.
Figure 3.5: The simplified schematic of the wind force calculation
Another aspect to look into of the drone propeller induced slipstream effects on the
floating object is the effects of the attitude of the drone. The attitude directly affects the
direction of the main slipstream flow, therefore that can also play a contributing factor
on the floating object behaviour in the water. However, if the drone attitude angle is
only a few degrees, the attitude does not play that significant role. the Schematic of the
case can be seen in the figure 3.7 and 3.8.
It is clear that the drone’s attitude directs the direction of the slipstream in the
opposite direction of the attitude angle.
In that way the flow splits more into that
direction and the induced wind speed is expected to be higher, thus additional attitude
compensation will be considered in to calculation for the total wind force, that is exerted
on the floating object.
==PAGE:42==
36
3 Simulink implementation of the physics
Figure 3.6: Wind Force schematic applying from top-down view
Figure 3.7: The simplified schematic of the wind force of the drone with attitude
Now knowing the physics and the simplified concept of how to implement these
physics into Simulink, we can proceed on implementing these equations and concepts
in the model. The whole subsystem that is responsible for calculating the wind force
and outputting the floating objects position can be seen in the figure 3.9. The input
attributes to calculate this are thrust T, propeller rotational speed ω, position of the
drone X, Y, Z and tilt attitude (as roll, pitch and yaw angles) can be seen in the fig-
ure 3.9. The full Simulink implementation can be seen in the Appendix D and in file
”drone_simulation_WindSimulation.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in the fol-
lowing link..
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Implementation
37
Figure 3.8: Wind force schematic for the drone with attitude in top-down view
Figure 3.9: Physics subsystem that calculates the wind force and outputs the objects
position
In the figure 3.10 can be seen a schematic for the all contributing physics calcula-
tion algorithm. The schematic of the floating object dynamics consists of the 4 main
subsystems, that contribute to each other:
1. Floating object 6-DOF subsystem for Buoyant and Drag forces (freely floating
object)
2. Slipstream Wind force calculation to find the wind force
3. In the Wind Zone calculation block for calculating the tilt effects on the object
==PAGE:44==
38
3 Simulink implementation of the physics
4. Wind Force projection and angle to the object calculation
Figure 3.10: Schematic of Simulink implemented calculations of the all contributing
physics. It contains the floating object dynamics, wind force calculations, wind zone
calculations and wind force projection calculations
As mentioned before, the thrust T, propeller rotational speed ω, position of the drone
X, Y, Z and tilt attitude are used as the inputs in the subsystem. First, by knowing the
thrust of the drone, propeller rotational speed and the altitude of the drone and distance
to the object, the induced wind speed is calculated (based on the contents of the section
2.5) and using the equation F = 1
2ρu2CDA, the wind force vector is obtained that will
be applied at the object, but this force vector needs to be split into X and Y components
so it can apply it to the base of the floating object as an external force. Thus, knowing
the distance to the object in X and Y directions the angle is calculated that the main
wind force vector is applied at the object using the equation α = atan( Y
X ), and then
knowing the angle, the X and Y components are found of the wind force vector that is
applied at the object using the equations
Fx = F · cos(α)
(3.2)
Fy = F · sin(α)
(3.3)
However, to take into account the attitude of the drone in the calculations of the wind
force, the principle of the slipstream center flow will be applied from the figure 3.7. In
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Implementation
39
Figure 3.11: Schematic of calculating the Wind force projections on the object
this case, first thing that is necessary to do is to determine the direction of the attitude
to determine the direction of the increased flow, which is done using the rotation matrix
from the equation 2.4. By looking at the resulting rotation matrix R, we can read the
projections on the x,y,z axis, by looking at the last column of the matrix. And again by
using simple arc-tangent function α = atan( Y
X ) we determine the direction of the flow.
Next, is determined whether the floating object is in the zone of the wind. This
is simply assumed that increased wind zone is present between some angle boundaries
around the main flow direction. And If the object is in the zone, the new slipstream
distance is calculated, based on the tilt angle and distance to the object - sum of the
center flow distance to the surface of the water and the distance to the object (as
seen in the figure 3.7). Assuming that the tilt angles are not extremely big, outside
of the wind flow range, the standard wind effects are applied. The full implementa-
tion and Simulink code with Matlab functions can be seen in the Appendix D and in
file ”drone_simulation_WindSimulation.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in the
following link..
Figure 3.12: The Simulink ”In the tilt wind zone” contribution calculation
==PAGE:46==
40
3 Simulink implementation of the physics
3.4
Verification and Simulation Test
To test if the implemented wind effect are somewhat realistic and correct, the test
simulation was done. In simulation the object was placed on the water at the location
[1,5;1,5,0]. The drone executed a hard-coded position controlled trajectory of a square
around the object, therefore, checking if the object floats around the surface due to the
propeller induced wind in different positions of the drone.
The drone initial position of [0;0;0.5], it executed the trajectory of flying to hard-
coded coordinates - [0;0;2] -> [3;0;2] -> [3;3;2] -> [0;3;2] -> [0;0;2]. In the figure 3.13,
both of the drone and the floating object trajectories of the movement can be seen in
the figure 3.13 and conclusion can be made that the calculated wind effects are truly
affecting the object in the water as it can be seen by it’s trajectory - tends to move away
from the drone due to the applied wind force from the propellers.
Figure 3.13: Drone and Object trajectories
To verify that the implementation and the calculations are somewhat realistic, the
figure 3.14 shows the plots of the relative distance to the object and the calculated
applied wind force. We can see that as the relative distance increases, the wind force
decreases and when the relative distance is decreases, therefore, increases also the wind
force applied on the object.
The results of this simulation test run can also be seen in the video in the attachments
for the Appendix D - ”VIDEO_drone_simulation_WindSimulation.mp4” or in the link.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Summary
41
Figure 3.14: Drone distance to the drone and Wind Force
3.5
Summary
In this chapter the implementation of the various contributing physics effects were imple-
mented that affect the floating object due to the drone’s interaction with the environment
- like the propeller generated wind. However, the concept of implementation was simpli-
fied, as true real life affects would be extremely diﬀicult to implement in the Simulink
and SimScape environment. This simplified concept of model is an approximation of
what can be expected in real life and further test how the control algorithm overcomes
the disturbances of the propeller generated wind. Of course, it is not clear how realistic
the current model is comparing the real situation of the object in the water, but the
theory and research that the model was based on supports some of the assumptions and
the results that were obtained.
==PAGE:48==
42
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Simulink and SimScape
implementation of the
control algorithm and
gripper model
4.1
Introduction
This chapter will consist of a brief explanation of the drone Simulink model that was
used to test the algorithms and a detailed explanation of the Tracking algorithm that
is used to locate the object and provide the necessary control inputs to make the drone
approach and grab the object that is floating in the water. Additionally, the SimScape
model concept implementation of gripper model in this simulation environment will be
explained.
4.2
Drone Simulink model implementation
The Simulink model of the drone that was used to test the system was part of the
Simulink code that was provided from the supervisor as an existing code for this project.
The base concept of the Simulink model of the drone was based on the paper ”Min-
imum snap trajectory generation and control for quadrotors” by D. Mellinger and V.
Kumar [MK11]. The model provides standard control and motion types. The model
is capable of developing the control algorithms using pure position control, velocity
command control, as well as control using yaw position and yaw-rate options.
The drone model in Simulink is implemented as follows. Similarly like for the physics
implementation for the floating object, the same 6-DOF joint block is used to give the
mechanical drone model from a file the six degrees of freedom movement. The ”sensing”
feature will be used to measure the position, velocity, acceleration, attitude for this
solid object (drone). This can be seen in the figure 4.1. Together with solid cylinder
blocks the propellers are added to the body. The whole drone body can be seen in
==PAGE:50==
44
4 Simulink and SimScape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
the figure 4.2. To provide the lift force from the propellers, the ”external force-torque”
block was used to add the calculated lift force to the frame of the drone body. The full
implementation of the drone model can be seen in the Appendix E and Simulink file
”RealDroneModel_FINAL.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in the following link..
Figure 4.1: Drone Model in Simulink
Figure 4.2: Drone Model body in Simulink
The internal controller consists of a cascade of controllers - the inner loop is the
attitude control, and the outer loop is the position control. The simplified schematic
can be seen in the figure 4.3 and the full Simulink implementation in the Appendix E
and Simulink file ”RealDroneModel_FINAL.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in
the following link.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Tracking and gripping algorithm implementation
45
Figure 4.3: Schematic of the internal controller cascade of the Simulation drone
4.3
Tracking and gripping algorithm
implementation
The concept of tracking and following the movement of the floating object, at first was
to determine the expected location of where the object needs to be to ensure the that
gripper will have a chance to catch it.
Knowing the drone’s absolute position and current yaw angle in the world coordi-
nates, using Polar to Cartesian conversion to find the coordinates of the position of
the required grabbing set-point. Assuming that the r is the expected distance to the
grabbing reference set-point from the center of the drone and angle θ is the yaw angle,
grabbing set-point (SP) point coordinates in a world frame is obtained.
P(r, θ) = PSP(x, y),
(4.1)
PSP(x) = x0 + r · cos(θ),
(4.2)
PSP(y) = y0 + r · sin(θ),
(4.3)
where x0 and y0 are the position of the drone, θ is the yaw angle and r the desired
distance for set-point position of the grabbing.
Thus, knowing the desired position for the grabbing area and knowing the position
of the floating object Pobj(x, y), to calculating the error ∆error between these two co-
ordinates we simply subtract the reference set-point PSP(x, y) of the gripper from the
position of the object Pobj(x, y). This value shows what is the distance from the object
to the desired gripping area on each of the axis.
∆SPerror(x, y) = Pobj(x, y) −PSP(x, y),
(4.4)
==PAGE:52==
46
4 Simulink and SimScape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
Figure 4.4: Gripping region coordinate transformation schematic and yaw angle calcula-
tion
∆Perror(x, y) = Pobj(x, y) −Pdrone(x, y),
(4.5)
To keep the drone’s gripper always towards the movement of the object when ap-
proaching for the grab, the desired yaw angle θobj between the object and the drone in
a world frame is calculated using the arc-tangent of the ∆Perror’s x and y values.
θobj = arctan∆Perror(y)
∆Perror(x),
(4.6)
Having the position error ∆SPerror(x, y) and the desired yaw angle θobj allows to
generate the reference commands for the drone.
In position control mode the commands would be straight forward - providing new
the position reference for the drone by adding the ∆SPerror value to the drone position
Pdrone(x, y).
refpos(x, y) = Pdrone(x, y) + ∆SPerror(x, y),
(4.7)
However, the actual ”tie-fighter” drone requires to receive the velocity commands on
pitch, roll, altitude and yaw. That is why the error ∆SPerror(x, y) is used as error signal
for controllers that generates appropriate velocity commands to achieve the required
position and error ∆SPerror(x, y) = 0.
Four PD controllers were introduced and tuned to generate corresponding velocity
commands for pitch, roll, altitude and yaw.
To ensure that the controller does not
provide too high velocity command, the PD controller output is limited to [1; −1] m/s
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Tracking and gripping algorithm implementation
47
range for the pitch and roll, but [0.5; −0.5] m/s for the altitude controller and [0.3; −0.3]
rad/s for the yaw controller.
Table 4.1: The PD controller gains for tracking control
P
D
Pitch
0.5
30
Roll
0.5
30
Altitude
3
1.5
Yaw
1
1.5
The Schematic for the Simulink Tracking algorithm can be seen in the figure 4.5.
The tracking algorithm has two position references that can be translated into velocity
commands to control the drone motion.
The first one is ”tracking” that checks the
∆SPerror, thus tries to fly the drone towards the object and grab it as described previ-
ously. The second is ”go home”, which takes the hard-coded home position coordinates
and converts the distance difference of the drone position and the ”home” position into
the appropriate velocity commands to fly the drone to this position. The switch happens
in the ”Reference Selector” block that switches the references for the Tracking controller
based on the state-machine gripper command. If the gripper is 0, then the approach is
still happening, if the gripper is 1, then the ”homing” is activated.
Figure 4.5: Tracking algorithm schematic
The Approach Reference Generation block perhaps is one of the most important
blocks of this algorithm, because it generates the references based on the drones position,
objects position and the gripper state. As discussed in the equations in this section, in
this block are calculated the position of the set-point for the desired gripping area PSP(x)
and PSP(y) as well as generated reference points for the altitude and yaw.
There are 3 type of states that are generated based on the specific condition in the
flight:
==PAGE:54==
48
4 Simulink and SimScape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
1. Approaching object. The error for the xref = ∆SPerror(x) and yref = ∆SPerror(y),
the altitude zref = 2.5m and yaw angle is equal to the angle to the object in the
world frame θobj.
2. Going down for the grab.
The error for the xref = ∆SPerror(x) and yref =
∆SPerror(y), the altitude zref = 0.85m and yaw angle is equal to the angle to
the object θobj to keep the track of the object. And the object is in the acceptable
range to perform a grab - the 2-norm of the |[∆SPerror(x), (∆SPerror(y)]|2 < 0.3m,
and the gripper command is 0 (gripper is open).
3. Back-up and Go Home. The gripper command is 1 (gripper is closed), the the
altitude zref = 1.5m and yaw angle is equal to the angle to the object in the world
frame θobj until the altitude of the drone is above 1.4m, then the yaw reference is
set to 0 degrees.
The velocity commands that are generated, are next sent to the Simulink Chart
state-machine that takes care of the sending the velocity and gripper commands further
to the ROS topics (Robot Operating System). The State-machine constantly sends the
velocity and yaw rate commands to the ROS, however the gripper commands are decided
exactly in this part of the algorithm. The state-machine can be seen in the figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6:
The Simulink State-machine that sends the velocity (ref(i)), yaw rate
(dyn_ref(1)) and gripper g commands to the ROS
The full tracking algorithm implementation in Simulink can be seen in the Appendix
E and Simulink file ”RealDroneModel_FINAL.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in
the following link.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Gripper concept implementation
49
4.4
Gripper concept implementation
The chosen gripper design concept implementation will be discussed in this section. To
test and verify if the designed control algorithm works, it is also necessary to model the
gripper concept in Simulation and test if the chosen mechanical design can achieve its
goal by grabbing the floating object from the water.
The mechanical SimScape model construction was to try to make the model as close
to the real life concept idea as possible, to simulate the tracking, grabbing and also the
dynamical effects on the drone.
The model includes two rods that are attached to the base of the drone. The two rods
hold the net that in the simulation is a thin solid plane. To simulate the net grabbing
motion from the underneath, another solid object as a box-like object is constructed with
enough contact stiffness so that the floating object cannot go through it. The upper net
is attached to the two rods with ”revolute joint” to simulate the swinging. The same
attachment type is used for the box-like object, which is the extension for the net. By
applying the torque on the joint, the extension is able to ”fold in” and close the gripper
from under, thus simulating the motion of the net going under the object and grabbing
it. The open and closed states of the gripper can be seen in the figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: The SimScape model of the gripper concept in two states - open and closed
The full gripper SimScape implementation can be seen in the Appendix E and
Simulink file ”RealDroneModel_FINAL.slx” in the corresponding gitlab folder in the
following link.
4.5
Test results
The several runs of the Simulation with the floating object in different places around
the drone will be shown in this section. The drone initial position is [0;0;0.5]. The
simulation will only show the plots of the presenting the tracking of the floating object.
The tracking algorithm plots and full sequence of the tracking of the object and grabbing
and going to ”home” position can be seen in the plots in the Appendix F and in videos
in the attachment folders ”Tracking Videos” and ”Full Sequence Videos” or in YouTube
==PAGE:56==
50
4 Simulink and SimScape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
links, that can be found in the Appendix F or in the corresponding gitlab folder in the
following link.
(a) Object initial position [0; 0].
Video Link.
(b) Object initial position [2.5; 0].
Video Link.
(c) Object initial position [2.5; -2.5].
Video Link.
(d) Object initial position [0; -2.5].
Video Link.
(e) Object initial position [-2.5; -2.5].
Video Link.
(f) Object initial position [-2.5; 0].
Video Link.
Figure 4.8: Trajectories of the drone, object and setpoint in top-view in 2D
==PAGE:57==
4.6 Summary
51
(a) Object initial position [-2.5; 2.5].
Video Link.
(b) Object initial position [0; 2.5].
Video Link.
(c) Object initial position [2.5; 2.5].
Video Link.
Figure 4.9: Trajectories of the drone, object and setpoint in top-view in 2D
4.6
Summary
This chapter described the Simulink implementation of the tracking and gripping al-
gorithm as well as the SimScape construction of the gripper mechanism model. The
objective of this paragraph was to show that the implemented algorithm works. The
drone is able to track and follow the floating object in different positions around the
drone. The plots of the trajectories of the drone, gripping set-point and the floating
object can be seen in the 4.8 and 4.9. The 3-dimensional tracking plots can be seen
Appendix F. It can be seen in the plots that the drone is able to track and follow
the movement of the object. The full sequence of the algorithm that approaches the
object, follows it, grabs it and goes home can be seen also in the Appendix F in the
corresponding gitlab folder in the following link.
==PAGE:58==
52
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Robot Operating System
(ROS) communication with
peripherals
5.1
Introduction
In this chapter, the Robot Operating system (ROS) communication with the gripper
motor actuator will be discussed. Moreover, configuration of ROS node publishers and
subscriber, and programming of the driving Dynamixel AX-18A servo motor will be
explained.
5.2
Analysis
”The Robot Operating System (ROS) is a flexible framework for writing robot soft-
ware. It is a collection of tools, libraries, and conventions that aim to simplify the task
of creating complex and robust robot behavior across a wide variety of robotic plat-
forms.” [ROSa] ”ROS is an open-source, meta-operating system for your robot. It pro-
vides the services one would expect from an operating the system, including hardware
abstraction, low-level device control, implementation of commonly-used functionality,
message-passing between processes, and package management. ROS currently only runs
on Unix-based platforms. Software for ROS is primarily tested on Ubuntu and Mac OS
X systems.” [ROSc]
”ROS has three levels of concepts - the Filesystem level, the Computation Graph
level, and the Community level.”
Short summary of the conceptual overview that was used in this project can be seen
bellow [ROSb]:
• Packages. Packages are the main form of organizing programms in ROS. A pack-
ages may contain ROS nodes, libraries, datasets, configuration files etc.
==PAGE:60==
54
5 Robot Operating System (ROS) communication with peripherals
• Metapackages. Metapackages are packages that only represent a group of related
other packages.
• Nodes. Nodes are processes that perform computation. Individual processes on
the robot is divided into nodes. The nodes can be written in Python or C++. In
this project the ROS node is used to control the motion of the Dynamixel Servo,
that controls the gripper state.
• Messages. The nodes communicate with each other using messages. Each message
is a simple data structure that commonly are supported by C++.
• Topics. Each message is distributed thought the topics. The messages can be
published and subscribed for other nodes to read them in specific topics as long
as the message type supports the message.
Figure 5.1: The Project concept of the ROS communication
5.3
ROS node implementation
The implementation of the ROS node started with finding a suitable motor for the design
concept. The choice was made towards the Dynamixel AX-18A Servo motor, because it
supported the interfacing with ROS as this was a common solution discussed in forums.
The Dynamixel also has a supported SDK, controller and operator metapackages that
come in handy to build your own node and programms for this solution especially with
ROS.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 ROS node implementation
55
Figure 5.2: The Dynamixel AX-12A Servo motor [Rob]
This motor is able to communicate through RS-232 or TTL serial communication,
which allows to have a simple connection schematic. Thus only a 12V power supply
connection from a battery is supplied and serial connection with the onboard computer
with ROS is necessary to control the motors (The TTL serial converter adapter is nec-
essary to be able to plug the connection into standard USB B port. See figure 5.3 and
5.4).
Figure 5.3: USB2Dynamixel serial adapter. [ROB]
Figure 5.4: Connection schematic with the computer [ROB]
To ensure that the ROS node is able to provide motion for the Dynamixel, the 3
packages are necessary to be downloaded on the machine:
• dynamixel-workbench
• dynamixel-workbench-msgs
• DynamixelSDK
To run a dynamixel it is necessary also to run two other packages - controller and
operator.
==PAGE:62==
56
5 Robot Operating System (ROS) communication with peripherals
To configure the Dynamixel controller, it is necessary to create a .yaml file, which
holds the important configuration parameters for the motor like ID, angle limits, delay
time etc. When the controller is initialized, this information is loaded from the file and
it configures each Control Table Item with the value for each dynamixel based on ID.
The controller is launched, by executing the dynamixel controller launch file. The
launch file also consists of various configuration parameters for the node like usb-port,
baud-rate, wheel-size, wheel separation etc. The .yaml file and controller launch file can
be seen in the Appendix G or in the corresponding gitlab folder in the following link.
The Operators package is designed to make ROS messages and publish them to the
appropriate topics to give commands to the motors. The dynamixel motors have two
modes - joint mode and wheel mode.
The capturing concept idea for this project is to attach the rope to the swinging
end of the net and using the dynamixel motor to roll in or roll out the rope of to the
motor wheel as can be seen in the figure 5.5. This idea would require that the motor is
configured in a wheel mode such that it can roll without limits.
Figure 5.5: Grabbing concept motor control
As the dynamixel motor only provides the raw position data only from 0-300 degrees,
we are left with the 60 degree angle position that the data is not possible to obtain (see
figure 5.6), thus causing problems to keep track of the position in one whole loop and
convert the driven angle to the driven distance.
However, the alternative, bypass solution was implemented. The wheel operator is
able to send precise linear velocity commands to the ROS topic ”twist_msg.linear.x”.
Thus knowing the speed, wheel radius and the distance it is necessary to drive, it is
possible to calculate the time how long time the motor should run with this speed to
reach the position.
t = s
v,
(5.1)
==PAGE:63==
5.3 ROS node implementation
57
Figure 5.6: Goal position angle limits [Rob]
where s [m] is the roll in or roll out distance and v [m/s] is the linear speed command.
The control algorithm schematic can be seen in the figure 5.7.
At first in the control algorithm that the necessary publishers, subscribers and timer
are configured and initialized, thus ensuring that the messages to the ROS topics can be
published and subscribed. In current algorithm, there are configured 2 publishers - one
that publishes ”twist_msg.linear.x” the velocity commands for the dynamixel controller,
and the second one to publish the gripper feedback status. The two subscribers are the
gripper command received from Simulink, and the joint state status to receive the current
dynamixel position in their callback functions. Also the timer is created that executes
callback function every 0.1 seconds and to keep track of time, that is going to be used
to control the motor motion time.
After that, the program loop checks if the gripper command to open or to close
has been published from Simulink and then if so, the program executes the corre-
sponding RollIn() or RollOut() function that sets the specified velocity command to
”twist_msg.linear.x”. And then the message is published to the ROS topic, that makes
the motor run. When the RollIn() or RollOut() function was called the current times-
tamp was set to mark the starting time of the motion. In the TimeControl() function,
the calculation of the total roll time is calculated to know what time the motor should
run to cover the necessary rolling in/out distance. The function also checks if the elapsed
time since the start of the motion has reached the calculated roll time. When the elapsed
time has reached the calculated roll time, the stopMotion() function is executed. In this
function the velocity command is set to 0 and the motor current position data is stored.
The gripper feedback status is published after the motion has stopped. The feedback
status message was implemented to ensure that the tracking algorithm does not proceed
with the next steps until the gripper has finished it’s movement. This delay between
when the command has been received and when the dynamixel motion has finished, en-
ables for the overall tracking algorithm to wait until the system is ready for the next
steps.
==PAGE:64==
58
5 Robot Operating System (ROS) communication with peripherals
Figure 5.7: Dynamixel Control Algorithm
After the motion has been finished, the motor’s position has been recorded as a ref
to keep track if the motor wheel is slipping due to the weight of the object in the net.
The simple P controller was designed to provide proportional counter torque against
the slippage of the motor, by providing the velocity command proportional to the error.
This small simple controller with the gain Kp = 0.25 enabled for the dynamixel motor
to hold it’s position even with heavier objects in its net.
v = error · Kp,
(5.2)
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Test Results
59
where the v is the ”twist_msg.linear.x” velocity command.
Kp
P controller
G(s)
Servo Motor
velocity
ref
+
error
pos y(s)
−
Figure 5.8: Position P controller for the Dynamixel
The full code of the gripper operator node can be seen in the Appendix G or in the
corresponding gitlab folder in the following link in .zip file ”dynamixel-workbench.zip”.
5.4
Test Results
To test the gripper performance, at first is was tested manually by running the ROS
node and controlling it manually or together with MATLAB simulation. The gripper
was tested also with two objects in it’s net. The first object was lighter - a roll of duct
tape, and the other object heavier, a bottle of water weighing around 700 grams (see
figure 5.10).
The test together with MATLAB simulation was done to check whether the gripper
feedback status publisher is sending a status command back and whether the position
reference has been changed after the gripper has been closed to proceed with next
algorithm steps. As can be seen in the figure 5.9, the reference signal only changed
after the gripper feedback signal was received.
5.5
Summary
In this chapter the ROS node implementation, dynamixel servo motor controller, opera-
tor configuration, programming and the methods how to ensure the serial communication
and powering of the motor were described. The issues that raised from using the AX-
18A servo were acknowledged and bypassed by finding alternative solutions to ensure
that the objective for this is met.
The dynamixel motion algorithm implementation overall is successful, because the
motor is able to keep track of the rolled distance is suﬀicient when closing and opening
the net and hold a heavier object in it’s net without motor slippage. However, there are
issues with the method that was used to track the rolled distance. The problem that
the dynamixel servo motor does not provide valid position data in some region of the
angle, thus making it diﬀicult to know precise position when the motor location is in
the invalid angle region. The keeping track of the rolling distance using the time is not
a reliable solution for long term as it is dependent on the lag of the computer and on
==PAGE:66==
60
5 Robot Operating System (ROS) communication with peripherals
Figure 5.9: Reference signal change on gripper feedback signal. The gripper command
(green line), the gripper feedback status (purple line), position errors on X,Y,Z (yellow,
blue, orange)
simple, hard-coded calculation. Generally, the motion of the motor currently is blind
during the movement. The invalid angle region also may cause some problems in the
position controller, if the motion has been stopped and the position of the motor has
been recorded when the motor is in the invalid region, thus it could control the position
with the wrong position reference.
Another issue that was experienced with this way of implementing the gripper al-
gorithm was that the cable that connects the motor wheel and end of the net jumped
out of the groove of the wheel, thus making the cable snag, tangle and thus making it
impossible to recover from this issue without the help of a human. This problem was
partially caused because the cable did not have enough tension in it when gripper was
fully open. However, this issue only appeared when opening the gripper after the it was
closed. This issue most likely can be solved better by improving the mechanical design
of the gripper.
The Gripper manual test videos with load and in water can be found in the attach-
ment folder for Appendix G or in the Youtube links that can be found Appendix G -
”VIDEO_GripperManualLoadTest.mp4” and
”VIDEO_GripperManualWaterTest.mp4” or in the corresponding gitlab folder in the
following link.
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Summary
61
(a) Gripper in open state
(b) Gripper holding duct tape
(c) Gripper holding bottle of water
Figure 5.10: Gripper algorithm and load test
==PAGE:68==
62
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Mechanical design of the
actuator
6.1
Introduction
In this chapter the mechanical design of the chosen concept will be presented and dis-
cussed. Various pros and cons of the gripper design analysed and as well the possible
improvements suggested for the next prototype generation.
6.2
Analysis
The chosen gripper concept was made using a several custom 3-D printed parts and
carbon rods. The carbon rods are quite popular choice of materials due to their light
weight and high durability. The custom 3-D printed parts were designed in Solidworks.
The 3D printed parts are the following:
1. Net holder. In this part he net is attached to be hanging from.
2. Motor Holder and the wheel. The Dynamixel is attached to the part and the part
is attached to the carbon rod. The wheel collects the residual cable when rolling
in or out.
3. Cable guides. These parts are made to make sure that the cable does not jiggle
around and jump out of the groove of the motor wheel.
4. The Gripper support part. This part is not fixed to the drone, but when gravity
pulls the front of the gripper down, this part is in contact with the base of the
drone.
5. The gripper supoort part 2. This part holds together the two carbon rods together
and the carbon rod for the motor holder.
6. The carbon rods.
The gripper is attached in the front of the drone on the frame with a part that is able
to rotate around this frame rod, that way keeping the position of the gripper, meanwhile
==PAGE:70==
64
6 Mechanical design of the actuator
Figure 6.1: Designed gripper prototype. 1. Net Holder, 2. Motor holder and cable wheel,
3. Cable guides, 4. Gripper support part, 5.Gripper support part, 6. Carbon rods
not being rigidly attached to the drone that it would affect the taking off or landing. In
the figure 6.2a and 6.2b it can be seen the full assembly of the drone when it is hovering
whit the gripper that is folded down due to the gravity and when the gripper is folded
in when being on the ground.
(a) Gripper state when hovering
(b) Gripper state when on the ground
Figure 6.2: Full assembly of the gripper and the drone
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Module test
65
6.3
Module test
After printing and assembling the parts of the drone, the gripper was tested manually.
The gripper ROS node was tested with some floating objects in the water without the
external wind effects. Also the manual flight with taking off and landing with the gripper
attached on the drone was tested.
The manual tests for object capturing was successful, however, in these tests wind
effects from the propellers were not existent. The manual gripping test can be seen in the
video in the attachment files in Appendix G - ”VIDEO_GripperManualWaterTest.mp4”.
The gripper design for landing also was successful, as the gripper mechanics did not affect
the safety of landing of the drone.
However, the problems appeared during the taking off and during the flight.
It
seemed that the drone might not have enough thrust to perform smooth taking off and
to perform complex maneuvers during the flight. The drone was able to take off and
have a short flight under the manual piloting at almost 100% throttle, which was not
quite good. The weight of the gripper is 850 grams (including the battery to power the
dynamixel).
(a) Gripper state when hovering
(b) Gripper state when on the ground
Figure 6.3: Full assembly of the gripper and the drone
==PAGE:72==
66
6 Mechanical design of the actuator
As already discussed in the section 2.6, the total free thrust of the drone could be
around 2000 grams. However, as the gripper weight provide external torque on the base
of the drone, the front pair of the propellers might be working more than the rear ones
to make the drone hovering stable, thus meaning that the total free thrust can be even
smaller.
The manual flight test can be seen in the video in the attachment files in Appendix H -
”VIDEO_ManualGripperTestFlight_1.mp4” and ”VIDEO_ManualGripperTestFlight_2.mp4”,
or in the Youtube links that can be found in the Appendix H or in the corresponding
gitlab folder in the following link.
6.4
Summary
The mechanical design of the gripper was built and assembled and described in this
chapter. It was successful with manual testing of the gripper and tested during the
manual flight of the drone. Nevertheless, the gripper might be either too heavy or the
drone might be lacking some thrust.
There are some parts of the system that could be optimised, but not much in the
gripper part. The gripper could be redesigned to reduce some of the gripper’s weight
or the torque on the center of the drone due to it’s length, however, in the drone itself
there could be some parts of improvement, as, for example, choice the propellers that
could increase the total thrust, or reducing the weight of the drone. The idea that the
drone could be powered using the external power using cable would eliminate the need
to carry the heavy batteries on the drone. The two Li-Po batteries that the drone uses,
weigh 1100 grams, and that is the weight that can be reduced if the drone is powered
with a cable.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
System test
7.1
Introduction
In this chapter the overall system tests will be discussed and the collected data analyzed
and compared to the obtained simulation data in the the chapter 4.5.
7.2
Scenario
To proceed real life testing step-by-step in a safe manner, the overall test was divided
into several smaller tests and then assessed the performance of the results. The overall
test of the system was intended to be done in the following order:
1. Test tracking algorithm without the gripper above the ground. This was done to
make sure that the drone object tracking and following algorithm works.
2. Manual flight test with the gripper above the ground. This was done to check how
the drone behaves with the gripper attached.
3. Test tracking algorithm with the gripper algorithm above the ground. This was
done to test the tracking and grabbing above the ground.
4. Test tracking with the gripper algorithm above the water.
7.3
Test result analysis
7.3.1
Tracking algorithm test
The tracking algorithm test on the real system was carried twice with 2 different object
positions. The Optitrack markers were attached to the dummy object as in figure 7.1
(a light box) to ensure the object position detection and position stream to ROS topic,
thus providing the position data for the tracking algorithm.
Similarly like in the chapter 4.5, where the tracking algorithm was tested in Simula-
tion environment, the similar conditions were tested in real life. Due to limited access
on the real drone and test arena field, only two test runs were made.
==PAGE:74==
68
7 System test
Figure 7.1: Test object
Both test runs were only executing the tracking and following, without returning to
home position to better emphasize the tracking performance. The plots in the figure
7.2 and 7.3 show 3 trajectories - the trajectory of a drone (blue), trajectory of a desired
gripping area or gripping set-point (yellow) and the trajectory of an object (orange).
Figure 7.2: Test Run number 1
In these figures, it is clearly visible that the tracking is working as expected, as
the gripping set-point tries to closely align with the trajectory of the object and keeps
following it as the object is being blown away by the wind generated by the propellers.
Comparing the simulation results with the real life results, it seems that the results
obtained by the real life system are much more stable and smoother when approaching
the object. This can be explained with the fact that perhaps the Simulation model was
not complete representation of the actual drone and that the PixHawk flight controller
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Test result analysis
69
Figure 7.3: Test Run number 2
internal control algorithms provide better control over the drone than the parameters in
the simulation.
Of course, effects on the wind on the object on the ground might be a little different
than those in the water due to viscosity of the water. However the shape of the test object
and the friction of surface of the ground where the object was placed might influence
the object trajectory differently than in the water. In conclusion the test results are
satisfactory and even with the different test surface and small issue where in the second
run the object got stuck a little on the surface, the drone still managed to maintain the
tracking of the object.
In the figure 7.4 can be seen both test runs in 3-dimensional plane. We can see
the same trajectories, however from this angle we can see that the drone trajectories
experience some changes of reference, making the drone rise and then go down again.
This can be explained with the fact that the object has moved out of the optimal gripping
range, thus escaping the condition where the altitude reference is low. The rising of the
drone when tracking is not necessarily a bad thing, because by increasing the altitude,
the wind drag force on the object can be decreased thus making the object to move
around slower, so the drone can retry and have the better position on the approach and
hopefully catch it.
The videos of the test runs can be found in the Appendix H attachment folder or in
the Youtube links that can be found in the Appendix H or in the corresponding gitlab
folder in the following link.
==PAGE:76==
70
7 System test
(a) Test Run Nr.1 3D-plot
(b) Test Run Nr.2 3D-plot
Figure 7.4: Test run trajectories in 3D plane
7.3.2
Manual Flight with the gripper
For the next test, the manual flight with the gripper attached was carried out to test
what are the drone behaviour while having external load attached to it.
Attaching
gripper in front of the drone, changes the location of the center mass and adding the
some torque on the center of the drone, thus front propellers of the drone has to provide
more thrust to stabilize the drone in the hovering state.
However, after attempting the test the conclusion was made, that the drone might
lack some thrust to be agile enough to execute completely autonomous flight as the drone
was barely able to take off and only managed to have a short manual flight with 100%
throttle. Even-though, the calculated free thrust that the drone can pick up was around
2kg, and the weight of the gripper was measured to be 850 grams, the unsymmetrical
mechanics that the gripper added to the drone could decrease the total possible amount
of thrust almost to the minimum.
Some quick solutions was attempted. By removing one of the batteries that power the
drone and placing the remaining battery as much to the rear side as possible to balance
the system. One battery that powers the drone weighs 550 grams. These quick solutions
allowed the drone to have a more stable flight with reduced flight time (see figure 6.3a),
however still not suﬀiciently to perform autonomous tasks to pick up objects.
7.3.3
Failed tests and Limitations of the project
Due to the conceptual failure of manual flight test with the gripper and lack of the time,
it was not possible to redesign and implement the necessary changes in the design and
proceed with the testing procedure to complete the full objectives in time.
==PAGE:77==
7.4 Future works
71
As one of the biggest limitation in the development of the project was the limited
ability to test the developed algorithms on the real drone.
This was mostly caused
by the global covid-19 pandemic when most of the work had to be done remotely and
in simulation environment. The limited availability to the test facility and personnel
that has necessary skills and permits to flight the drone, was contributing factor of
delays in the project development, as the outcome of the project highly depended on
the collaboration and availability of the testing equipment.
7.4
Future works
There are many improvements that can be done regarding the simulation, tracking
algorithm, gripper algorithm and control, gripper design and drone design as well.
To make the simulation results more similar to the real life model, it can be beneficial
to have the precise physical parameters for the inertia, motor constants and total thrust,
as at currently is consists of a approximate model of the drone. Perhaps, it could be
beneficial to possibly measure the real wind speed and the produced drag force by the
real drone propellers to better simulate the actual wind effects on the floating object,
because currently the effects on the object were based purely on simplified model of the
wind and calculation of the wind speed.
The tracking algorithm has little to improve, as the performance comparing with
the simulation and real life results were good. The algorithm can be developed further
to enable more stable and precise reference tracking for the object, and also if in the
future it will be necessary on test to track multiple objects and execute programs where
multiple objects are needed to be picked up.
As the gripper algorithm was only tested manually on a workbench, this is the part
of the project where more improvements can be implemented. First of all the choice of
the servo motor might have to be different to ensure full round position tracking of the
servo. This will enable to track the precise movement of the servo and make the gripper
algorithm more robust and tolerant to errors and glitches.
Regarding the failed test with the gripper attached to the drone, there are several
solutions that can be implemented. Either the gripper can be redesigned to such the
weight and torque is minimized on the center of the drone, or improvements can be made
on the drone by mounting better propellers that can produce more thrust with the same
motors, or the mass of the drone can be reduced by removing the batteries and powering
the drone with a cable from external power supply. This solution would make the drone
up to 1kg lighter, thus having a better thrust-to-weight ratio. Some improvements can
be implemented also in the gripper net itself. When flying in low altitude (up to 1m),
the current net was highly affected by the turbulent flow of the wind of the propellers.
Perhaps a rigid frame for the net can be implemented to ensure that the net doesn’t fly
that much around when being affected by the wind.
==PAGE:78==
72
7 System test
7.5
Summary
In this chapter, the the attempt to test the complete system was done. However, some
of the tests were not successful that did not let the project to proceed to the main test to
provide the data for the main objective - pick up object from the water with gripper. The
one of the most important tests - object tracking - was successful and performed very
well. By identifying the flaws and problems is a good start for the future improvements
and a hopefully improved performance of the system in the future.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In conclusion of this project, the objectives of the project has been partially fulfilled.
The analysis of the induced wind from propellers characteristics and simplified imple-
mentation of these effects allowed to more easily develop the algorithm and test different
scenarios in simulation environment, which was a great help and step forward early in the
project to understand what problems needs to be addressed when developing tracking
algorithm.
It was not possible to test if the design actually can pick up objects from water
to the design issues on the drone or gripper. Although it was not possible to test the
design and algorithm on a floating object in the water, the tracking algorithm and
the results on the hard ground gave good results of how the control system deals with
the external disturbances on the object and was able to interact with freely moving
object on the ground and follow it. The successful test of the tracking algorithm is
perhaps the most important part in this project. If the drone is not able to track and
follow the moving object in the water, then the drone won’t be able to complete it’s
main objective. However, as this test was successful, this gives a good foundation and
knowledge to proceed with the development and improvements of the gripper actuator
to eliminate the flaws in the design in the future.
==PAGE:80==
74
==PAGE:81==
Appendices
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Propeller Streamline
Induced velocity and
slipstream radius
calculation
File can also be found in Gitlab folder in the following link.
==PAGE:84==
 	
		
			



 !"!
#$%&&&'!
($)*'(+(,"-.
/0$&1&&&&&)'2034!5-6
7+  
8!$&1)*'+!853"-
89,$&1&:'+!,";53"-
,+$)1:&'235 3<-=>6?*
@$)&'+!!+!+3+ 3<+ A+1BBB.5+;"50!3 <BBB
@9C393$)%1DEF)&?GD'/3+"3<+AA33 3-?:6
@9C39#$)F)&?GD'/3+"3<+AA33 3-?:6
@9C3$@FH@9C39#6@9C393I'/3+3<+  G3++A=3 3C3+331@9C39#6@9C393
7"3+ A+, GA35>3+ 
A+0$)J)&&
/H0-)I$3 5"5/+3<H0F&1&)-(-8!-/0-,+I'
/H0-:I$0F&1&)'
8H0-)I$3!853"H0-(-8!-/0-,+I'
8H0-:I$0F&1&)'
 5
2C> 5"5/+3<A3>"G.A35>3+ 
A3>"HK8 5K-K!3 K-K+33+ K-L%&%&%&&:&&MI
!+H/HJ-:I-/HJ-)II
3HK 5"5/+3<3 .GN35>3+ KI
0;HK53 A+!+!! -KI
<;HK 5"503C+3<-6KI
>35+ 
43!853"A3>"G.A35>3+ 
A3>"HK8 5K-K!3 K-K+33+ K-L%&%&%&&:&&MI
!+H8HJ-:I-8HJ-)II
3HK43!53"3 .GN35>3+ KI
0;HK53 A+!+!! -KI
<;HK43!53"-KI
>35+ 
/9&$AA"0/+3<H(-:F8!-#6D&-,+I 5"5C+3<AA"0! -6
 $E*1****
/9&$)D1E*DE
09&$AA"0 H/9&-(-8!-/0-,+IOAA"0! 53 -
09&$&1))DP
89&$3 !)H8HJ-:IF)&&-8HJ-)I-09&F)&&I6)&&N+#53"OAA"053 -
89&$&1)&E*
==PAGE:85==
 	

																																																																			
	

 !" #
$% &
%'(   &
$%&) 	*(+

	,-
(.+
+%.../..0.1###2&
/%$% ! #&$% ! # &&
%.3
4.&
5%.///.&
5%.6(7.&
+
	8/9
):% 9- &
 !;#
% &
# <%$%   &&
%&) 

 !;#
#% &
# <%$%  &&
#%&) 

 !;
 % &
#"# <%$%"  &"   '(&
 %&) 

 !;
% &
#"# <%$%#  &#   '(&
%&) 

 !;
"% &
#"# <%$%=> &=>  '(&
"%&) 

 !;
?% &
#"# <%$%>@ &>@  '(&
?%&) 

 !;
#% &
#"# <%$%   &    '(&
#%&) 

 !;
 #% &
#"# <%$% # & #  '(&
 #%&) 

	,-
(.+
+%.../..0.1##:"#2&
/%% !#&% !# &&
%.8/9
+.&
5%..&
5%.6(7.&
+
-
/%#% !#&#% !# &&
==PAGE:86==
  


 



 


  





 



 

 !""#$#%&$$&!""#$#%&$$#
  


 



 


  





 



 

 !""&$#%&$$&!""&$#%&$$#
  


 



 


  





 



 

 !""'$#%&$$&!""'$#%&$$#
  


 



 


  





 



 

 !""($#%&$$&!""($#%&$$#
  


 



 


  




 



 

 !"")$#%&$$&!"")$#%&$$#
  


 



 


  





 



 

 !""#)$$#%&$$&!""#)$$#%&$$#
  


 



 


  





 



 

*$+$
#,
*$+$
#-,
. /. 

 
$+)

 
 
#

 
 
&

 
 
'


01234562
89:5254562;
:<6=
4>9
9?1@4562;
:<6=
AB<6C9DD9<
;D5C;4<9@=
=689D
:6<
;=@DD12=@2298
@9<5@D
E9>53D9;A
FGHIJKH
MKNOJPQR
JSNJINSQPOG
TIGJQPOG
OT
QUK
SVPSN
HPWQSGJKX

 
!"
Y

!
 Z[! 




\ 
Y
Z(] ][^&]!^&_
`
Z  
a
 




Y
#bc #bd]\ &_




!"
Y
]!]#bc [^&b^&_
`



!
 

eNPfWQgKSh
iSHPIW
JSNJINSQPOG
TIGQPOG
OT
QUK
SVPSN
HPWQSGJKX

 
["
Y
 [Z[! 




[
Y
[]#$$_
`
j








\ 
Y
Z(] ][^&]!^&_
`
Z  
a
 




Y
#
b
c #
b
d]\ &_
==PAGE:87==
       	 
    !"#

$%%&'( *&+,- .+&.'&+/01, %',./01, 1% /2- +(0+& 304/+,.-5
6"! 
  66 7 8
9:9989;!
    <  :=;!8  :; >!66""
      	    ?<"
    
  8
 	 88
8 	 8
  @66    " 6!A 7!    

$%%&'( B-&1.0/C .+&.'&+/01, %',/01, 1% /2- +(0+& 304/+,.- 0, $%%&'( *&+,-5
6"! 8
  66 8 !"#:9D99;!      :  ;9 D  7!   D"A9   7!   
    
    >  :;!D=  :; >!66""
    8
  EED>  @66  8 !"#

B-&1.0/0-4 0, /2- F+GH%0-&3 G-I01,5
 J  !"# !6 KL@ 	M   N E D
6"! 8O6A  8 !"#KL@A8
9<"99
9D

    8O6A  8

P	<"
?E	
D


 8 !"# " ; QR 
 N  N 
  
D

6"! 8"  8 !"#KL@
DS8O6A9A
9
    8"  8O6A  	  	A

A


 8 !"# " ; QR
6"! 8"  8 !"#KL@
EDS8O6A9A
999
9
9<"
    8"  8O6A  	  	A

A


P	
	
<"

 ==PAGE:88==
82
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
Drone 2D analysis for the
Pitch
File can also be found in Gitlab folder in the following link
==PAGE:90==
 
	

 !"#$! %&% '!'(%  %&) *!+&% !,$"!-"% *% '  &% +!&&!  ! %
 %.
/011234
35
67
3
689:	:: ;89<87
/2=3424222
>6? @2;A35
73
BCAB<
>6
D6? @2;A35
73
BCAB<
D6
E6	;A
C
B<
06=;AC
B<
/F

6GHIJ7/K12
65H57/K1@? 
6
L7/
	6MHN
7/	O
6
7/2	1>

65HPN7/212
68J::5H5JQL:Q7/21	R@? 
6
L7/5H5S7/2
/F 2	22
657/2	
6:	::2;89<87/344 65
/T9 1
>26O;><
D26O;D<
6;>2CD2CEC5<7
/U	2O41
@6	;<V
E6W

5
5

06W
5
5
>26W
5

55
D26W
5
HIP
I
@6
W
55
==PAGE:91==
 
																																																												
				
																						
			
																											 
 						
 					
																																																												
																								 								
																								 							
!" #	$	% &"'"""(	)	 
	*%		
	+					
,	$	"-(
, ,+	$	 ," 	)	 
	*%			+
, ,+	$	
		
		%./%	
			
			0%	
		


	 	 

12	456789:;<	=>7	626=7?	=8@;6A78AB;C=:4;	DE6F	@;G	=>7	7:<7;9@HB76I	J7	C@;	677	=>@=	=>7	626=7?	J:=>4B=	@;2	H4@G	>@6	K	L4H7	@=	=>7	48:<:;	J:=>	;4	
M7846N	O>:6	:6	@66B?:;<	=>@=	=>7	62=7?	4;	=>7	L:=C>	>@6	;4	@GG:=:4;@H	G@?L:;<	P	626=7?	:6	?@8<:;@HH2	6=@5H7N
 
		$	-%Q-
				 RS	
 	+	
 -	R	
				%
					$	/T(	)		
 	+	 

				%	$	%QU%UQ0%		%UV0%(	)		
 	+	 	WXY
					$			%(	)Z(	)	
				
				)	[	+	
	

				+	$	(	)	  		+
				*%	$	%UUVU%+(	)	  	
	*%	+	+	+, 
	$	
				
				)	+		
 	+	
				&	$	\&(
				'	$	\'(
					$	&"'""(
				 
		
				!" #	$	% &"'"""(	)	 
	*%		
	+					
				,	$	"-(
				 R[	  
-	R
				, ,+	$	 ," 	)	 
	*%			+
				%	$	%		%Q(	)	S	
 	+	
XY
				
				 Q
				], ,+
				+
 	

				 	

 S	
 	+	
 -	
%	$	
																																																												
				
																						
			
																											 
 						
 					
																																																												
																								 								
																								 							
[	  
-	
, ,+	$	
		
		%./%	
			
			0%	
		


	 	 

S	
 	+	
 -	
%	$	%Q
																																																																								
										
																												
			
==PAGE:92==
                                       	
      	
                                                                                                        
                                   
        

	
           !"      #$  %"   &	

	 
 
	

' 	  (	 $   !
                                                                                 )	(              *
+       ,-
       &	

                                          	
      	
                                                                                 $%.            $%.           
            $%.            $%.           
        

	
           %.      #$  !!   &	

	 
 
	

' 	  (	 $   !
                                                                                 )	(              *
+       ,-
       &	

                                          	
      	
                                                                                 $!!            $!!           
            $!!            $!!           
        

	
          ""//      #$  .!   &	

	 
 
	

' 	  (	 $   
                                                                                 )	(              *
+       ,-
       &	

                                          	
      	
                                                                                 $.            $.           
            $.            $.           
        

	
          $/      #$  /   &	

	 
 
	

01234356 89 :;;<=> ?@3 A1:; :? ?@3 >5<BB356 23 :AC1 D@:=>3 ?@3 <=35?<: 1E ?@3 C9C?3F :=; ?@GC 6 23 D:= 18C3543 ?@:? ?@3 B1A3C C@<E? :A1=> ?@3 <F:><=:59 :H<C F:I<=> ?@3 C9C?3F 1CD<A:?159 ?@GC 23 D:= D1=DAG;3 ?@:? ?@3 =:?G5:A E53JG3=D9 1E ?@3 C9C?3F <=D53:C3CK
$   L
	 M %
    N (	
 
    O' 	  (	 O     $
       /.!L N ' 	  	

         $L N 	( 
       %"L N 
 	  	

    $   $!P$P!#$  $PQ#$L N 
 	  + RSM
         $L NL N 

==PAGE:93==
         	 
  
    
     	 

      	
       
 
 
!  
         "
  # 
 
    $  %$
    &  %&
      $'&'('
     )	%  # 
 
    *  	+
    
        , '-  #$'&'('.'/  #    
          !/   /'0
    !#!
  # !/'  #   1

         	 1. ( 	
    2  3
    2  
    2  
     & 	 1. ## 
    (  #,2-',/ -
    (  #,2 /-',24/ /-
     "
 (
    2  2 5 ( 5 (
    !  2!#!
  6  27
    !  !/5!  (  8 27/5279/
    :   7 7  1
 1 	0 :     ,7'1';';-  	!
        
 
    #	 /  <    # 
		 =   
 	
    
   !
      	

    4>  ?,@43A3' 4BA/A-C
    4D  ?,/E4FEA' /F4BEA/-C
    
'
    	 
    
 
        #	   (   # 
 1.  
 G   G
  =  5 G
 	 
 
    !'
    	 
    
 
        #	 @  & 	 # 
 (  G
  = 
    *!
    	 
    
 
          54E

H # 
 0   
   7 7  1
 1 	0 7  #
1  //B43@I
==PAGE:94==
 	






 	





 
 	

 



!
"#$	%

%& 	
&
 	

"'
(	$()*(

+"

,--./-0.+"%
1)*(
/+" +"

"#	(2%
%+"

	%
3--0-%,4%,+"

5$3$(%6


"74%(2
89	8+
:9	:+
28;:;<;+
"=9	$2
	)
2>+
"
%2+

?$;
@8;:;<;A;+"34%
$6$;+
266%$6;
+"34
26	B-266%+"1%4	%2B-
26(	26	,/26	+"<	
4	%24CB--/B-.4

%&
&


==PAGE:95==
      	

	
  
  
      !"#$  %&'% %&  ()! '$)* + ","% - &'" "#..)/) !% $ . $ !/  %$'/0)!1 %&'% /'! 0  2 %&  "#..)/) !% 2 $.$-'!/  '(" 3)%&  4% $!'( ('+5 %&  67 /!%$(( $ 3'" )-2( - !% + '!+ %#! + )!)%)'((, 3)%&#% %&   4% $!'( ('+ 3)%& 1')!" 6 8 9::5 '!+ 7 8 ;: 3)%& .)(% $)!1 /!"%'!% <::::= &  67 %#!)!1 3'" +!  #")!1 >%$)'( '!+  $$$> - %&+== ?% /'! @  "  ! )! %&  $%A(/#" 2(% %&'% )!/$ '")!1 %&  -'"" . %&   4% $!'( ('+5 '% .)$"% %&  $ ")+#'( 2( " %&'% '$  ! %&  $ '( '4)" % !+ % -B  %&3'$+" A)!. '"  42 /% +5 '(" "-  . %&  -'$1)!'((, "%'@(  ","% - 2( " '$  /'!/ (( + @, %&  * $"= &3 B $ %&  %&  2( " %&'% '$  )! %&  ( .% &'(. 2('!  '!+ %&3'$+" %&  2")%)B  '!+ ! 1'%)B  )-'1)!'$, '4)"5 % !+ % -B  %3'$+" %&  * $" . %&  /(" + (2 %$'!". $ .#!/%)!= ?% /'! @  "   %&'%5 %&  1$ '% $ %&  -'"" %&  ( "" +'-2)!1 '!+ -$  "/)('%)!" %&  ","% - )"  42 /% + %  42 $) !/  '!+ '% !  2)!% %&  2(  /$" " %&  )-'1)!'$, '4)" -'0)!1 %&  ","% - /-2( % (, #!"%'@( = &)" -'0 " #" %&)!0 %&'% )% " %" "-  ()-)%" . %&  ","% - %&'% )% /'! @  /'2'@(  .= ?. 3  3'!% %  !"#$  %&  "% 2 $ "2!"  3)%& %&  "2 /).)/ +'-2)!1 '!+ 2%)-'( "/)('%)!"5 %& ! 3  /'! /!(#+  %&'% %&  ","% - "&#(+ !% %$, % 2)/0 -$  & 'B) $ @C /%" %&'! "-  "2 /).)/ 3 )1&% A 3&)/& 3)(( )!/$ '"  %&  $)"0 . %#$!)!1 %&  B $'(( ","% - #!"%'@( = &  /&'!1)!1 67 2'$'- % $" +,!'-)/'((, )" 0!3! % @  !% %&  @ "% 2$'/%)/  .$ "#/&  4% $!'( +)"%#$@ + ","% -"5 3&)/& /'! ( '+ % /$'"& ). "- &%)!1 1 " 3$!1=
    D
 E FGGH GD IGH G J	 KH
	 	  HJ 
II
    J  
GDIGHL
    I  HGIHGJL
    IMN  OPQ RL
    ISN  OPT TRL
    HGIHGJIL
    
U G
    JGU G
V, @" $B)!1 %&  "% 2 $ "2!" " . %&  ","% - 3)%& %&  ('+ )!/$ '" 5 3  /'! "   %&'% %&  +'%' /$$ "2!+" 3&'% 3'" +)"/#"" + @, @" $B)!1 %&  $%A(/#" 2(%= W)%& %&  %#! + 67 3)%&#% %&  ('+ %&  "% 2 $ "2!/  )" .)!  3)%& "-  B $"&% @#% X#)%  .'"% " %%()!1 %)- = Y!+ '(" 3  /'! "   %&'% "-  2(%" 3)%& %&  ('+ &'" 1+ 2 $.$-'!/  3)%& %&  "'-  /!%$(( $= &  B $"&% )!/$ '" " "()1&%(, '!+ %& $  '$  ' . 3 -$  "/()'%)!" '!+ 3)%& Z[ " %%()!1 %)- 5 %&'% "&#(+ @  .)!  '" %&  /!%$(( $ 3'" %#! + .$ %&  +).. $ !% +,!'-)/"= &  1+ 2 $.$-'!/  /'! @  '!'(," + .$ %&  ","% - ). %&  +'-2)!1 '!+ "/)('%)!" '$  @ %3  ! $ X#)$ + -'$1)!"5 '!+ %&'% )" 3&'% ()-)%" #$ ","% -=
        D
T E \GUPGGI HI 
IG G HJ ] GH
G
 HJ	H ^	 HDU ^HJGDH KH
	 	 _ ^HJ 	UU HJ 	
    HIT
    
U G
    JGU G
==PAGE:96==
 	
		
		
		
		
	
	
	
	

	

	

	

	
		
	
	
	
			

 !"#$%&'(!() )*'+,!-.'/!(0.''1/2/+!*3+,45 !)/!(!6+! 4)..')(
7'(!"/2/85.$
 ('4
,'.('4

==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX C
Drone 2D analysis for the Y
and Z position controller
Files can also be found in Gitlab folder in the following link
==PAGE:98==
92
C Drone 2D analysis for the Y and Z position controller
Figure C.1
==PAGE:99==
 
	






	 
! "#$
!	$


!"#$
%
%$!	!! "$#$
& '()
*+ ,"-

%%./-.#
*
0+ ,"-

%%./-
.#
0
1-







.
2"-3/.#
&

45367)
567),+ 

 
	859
	(

	)*
5
2	 )

5%9)
$6!!56: !:)	;,+ 

 5<
& 	




	

!	
!	!!"$#$ 
&7=7
5
==PAGE:100==
 	

			



			 

!"#$ !

!%&&'(&'$ !

)
*$
+,--.$ !/	

 

01
/
23
3	
,4-5-6-7.
8*7*0**
8 $
 1
/
	
)/	
8*7*0**
	98-1!*:!;-,.-+ $


/< 
	
)//
-,	
)//	
	 =/	. 





/> 
	
)//
-,	
)//	
	 =/	. 





/# 
	
)//
-,	
)//	
	" =/	. 





	:	/

 
,/*-*.		4-5-6-7- $ ?

/*/*- $
		**/*-*  ?
@

	:	/
00 
,/*0-*0.		4-5-6-7- $ 0?0
/*0/*0"- $
		**0/*0-*0  0?0


/A 
/			** $

	 $
B
C,?#-A##.D$
E
C,?"-""<.D$
	
	- $





/ 
/			**0 $

	 $
B
C,?#-A##.D$
E
C,?"-""<.D$
	
	- $





/ 
		** 





/ 
		**0 





	F
F G	G 
 
,F-G-H-H.

		**  
($

		

==PAGE:101==
 	






                                                                                                       


!
 

	

 	
"
"

"


                                                                                                       


!
 

	

#$#%&'$'%()
#*
'
+
,-	
)

 	






                                                                                                         


!
 

	

 	
"
"

"


                                                                                                         


!
 

	

#$#%&'$'%()
#*
'
+
,-	
)

 	






                                                                                                         


!
 

	

 	
"
"

"


                                                                                                         


!
 

	

#$#%&'$'%()
#*
'
+
,-	
)

 	






                                                                                                         


!
 

	

 	
"
"

"

==PAGE:102==
                	
 	  
   
   
   	
    
       
   
	 	  	
   	
   
   	
 
  
 
 
    !
   "#  $ %
  $ 	
&  !
 '(
#  $ 
)
   *  +!
*,,* $              	
   	
 	  
   
   		
   	
    
       
   
	 	  
   	
   
   
 
  
 
 
)
   -  -
*,,- $                  	
 	  
   
   
   
    
       
   
	 	  
   	
   
   
 
  
 
 
    !
   "#  $ %
  $ 
+.&  !
 '(
# .
&  !
 '(
#  $ 
 $ 
% $ / 0 %
  !
 
% $ 122  23/ 0 %
  !
 "+
 4'(


,* $ /
5 $ 6778/
69:7;:7:7<:8 $ :=&
:,<,-,*,+!=/
4 $ =&
:,<,-,*,+!:>=7?%&,)%&@76875/
"

+:4*
764*":A:
8
:
=   B+!=
>:'
:=
7 =
*:'
:=B+!7 =
" 
!: 
==PAGE:103==
 	



 !" #
$%'$
( )$$
 )$* ($
+
,+
 -


.
 /" #
$%'$
( )$$
 )$0* ($
+
,+
==PAGE:104==
 	

		

	

		

	 	
 !

"
	#	#$ 


	# 	



%&''()*#(+%&%,#(*-+#&)./#*/+#&,'#'*)+.&)'%#'*,+.&-#'*.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
*#+'(((*##+'&(#-(,*#(+#&('/(-*-+#&-''#(*/+'&)#%##*)+&)-'#*,+)&..)#

		"	

		&
 	

		
00
	

		
00
	0 	0
# !

0"0
	0#	0'$ 

0
	0# 	0

0

#(('(*#(+&((-()*-+#&(#/#(*/+#&#-.##*)+&)-'#*,+)&..)#*.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
*#+'(((*##+'&(#-(,*#(+#&('/(-*-+#&-''#(*/+'&)#%##*)+&)-'#*,+)&..)#

		"	

		&
12235267892:;62<3:255=:

>-

 
>	 
&?@A"..&/#.&.-//B 
&C@A"'#&.##''&#,(.B 
	 
> 	
 	
==PAGE:105==
 	
		

 !"#!#$%
 ! !&%
 '()*+,-..'/0.'.1//23%
 '4)*+,-5'.055'67.23%
! !&0 %
8&
8&
9::;<	;=	>
7
?8 !"#!#"
8&
8&
==PAGE:106==
 


 














 















 



!"#!$
%&'(
'*+,-+.
/&-
0
1&2*3*&4
5!
6 7
 

 

 


 









 











7



 



!8"#9:!
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX D
Physics implementation in
Simulink
The wind simulation video can be found in the attachment folder for Ap-
pendix D or in the following YouYube Link:
- ”VIDEO_drone_simulation_WindSimulation.mp4”
Wind simulation Test. - https://youtu.be/XnaSYEf2B8Y- Video Link.
Files can also be found in Gitlab folder in the following link
DragForceCalc(r,rho,v) function for X/Y/Z axis
function F_drag
= DragForceCalc(r,rho,v)
pi = 3.14159;
Cd = 0.47;% Drag coeficient of Reynolds number for Sphere
A = r^2*pi;
F_drag = 0.5 * rho * A * v^2 * Cd;
end
ApplyDrag(Fd,z,r,sign) function for X/Y axis
function y = applyDrag(Fd,z,r,sign)
if z < r % When the altitude is bigger than radius, that means there is no contact with water
y = -sign*Fd;
else
y = 0;
end
end
Buoyant Force calcuation function for Z axis
function y
= buoyantForceCalc(r,z,rho)
pi = 3.14159;
h = 0;
if abs(z) <= r % When altitude is smaller than radius - object in contact with water
h = (r-z);
elseif z <= -r % When object is fully immersed
h = 2*r;
elseif z > r % When object is outside of water
h = 0;
end
==PAGE:108==
102
D Physics implementation in Simulink
V = ((pi*h^2)/3)*(3*r-h); % Volume calculation
Fb = rho*9.81*V;
% Buoyant Force Calculatiion
y = Fb;
end
ApplyDrag(Fd,z,r,sign) function for Z axis
function y = applyDrag(Fb,Fd,v, z, r)
if z < r % When in contact with water
if v < 0 % If velocity is negative
y = abs(Fb + Fd); % Sum of dragforce and buoyant force
elseif v > 0
y = abs(Fb - Fd); % Substraction of dragforce and buoyant force
else
y = Fb; % just the drag force
end
else
y = -0.00001*Fd; % No contact, no drag
end
end
==PAGE:109==
D Physics implementation in Simulink
103
Free floating Object physics calculation blocks
Figure D.1
==PAGE:110==
104
D Physics implementation in Simulink
Wind Drag Force Projections Block
Figure D.2
Force Projections function
function [Fx,Fy] = forceProjections(F,angle)
Fx = F*cosd(angle);
Fy = F*sind(angle);
return
end
Angle calculation from X and Y distance
function a = angleCalc(x,y)
a = atan2d(y,x);
end
==PAGE:111==
D Physics implementation in Simulink
105
Wind Force calculation
Efflux plance Velocity calculation
function V_0 = effluxVelocity(T,Rp,w) % By Hamill
rho = 1.2; % kg/m^3
n = w/60; % rev/s
% T = thrust, Dp = Propeller Diameter, n = Propeller rev/s
Ct = T/(rho*n^2*(2*Rp)^4); % Thrust Coefficient
V_0 = 1.33*n*(2*Rp)*sqrt(Ct); % Efflux Velocity
end
Efflux plance distance calculation
function x_0 = effluxPlane(V_0,T,Rp,Vz)
rho = 1.2;
Kt = T/(4*rho*Rp^2*Vz^2); % Thrust Coefficient
a = (-1 + sqrt(1 + 8*Kt/pi))/2;
x_0 = (V_0 - a*Vz)*Rp/sqrt((V_0*(2*a*Vz - V_0))); % Efflux plane distance from Propeller plane
end
Slipstream radius calculation at efflux plane
function R_s = slipstreamRadiusAtEfflux(x,T,Rp,Vz)
Rp = Rp*100; % Propeller radius in cm
rho = 1.2;
Kt = -T/(4*rho*Rp^2*Vz^2); % Thrust Coefficient
a = real((1 + sqrt(complex(1 + 8*Kt/pi)))/2);
R_s = Rp*(1 - (0.5*a*x)/(sqrt(Rp^2+x^2)));
end
Maximum velocity at far-field region
function V_zfemax = Velocity_ZFEmax(V_0,x ,x_0,R_s)
D_0 = 2*R_s;
K = 10; % Propeller proportionality constat for.
K_visc_air = 15.68*10^-6; % Viscousity coefficient air, m^2/s
K_visc_water = 1*10^-6; % Viscousity coefficient air, m^2/s
K_visc = K*(K_visc_water/K_visc_air); % Viscosity constant - ratio of kinematic viscosities.
V_zfemax = V_0*(1.0172-K_visc*0.1835*(x*100-x_0*100)/D_0);
if V_zfemax > 0
V_zfemax = V_zfemax*1;
return
else
V_zfemax = 0;
return
end
end
Wind Velocity in near-field region
function V_i = VelocityZFE_05_DO(V_zfemax,R_s)
R_h = 0.02;
Rm0 = 0.7*(R_s*100-R_h*100);
r = Rm0;
V_i = V_zfemax * exp(-1/2 * ((r-Rm0)/(0.5*Rm0))^2);
end
==PAGE:112==
106
D Physics implementation in Simulink
Wind Velocity in far-field region
function V_i = VelocityZFE_05_325_DO(V_zfemax,x,x_0,R_s)
R_h = 0.02;
Rm0 = 0.7*(R_s*100-R_h*100);
r = Rm0;
K = 10; % Propeller proportionality constant.
K_visc_air = 15.68*10^-6; % Viscousity coefficient air, m^2/s
K_visc_water = 1*10^-6; % Viscousity coefficient air, m^2/s
K_visc = K*(K_visc_water/K_visc_air); % Viscosity constant - ratio of kinematic viscosities.
V_i = V_zfemax * exp(-1/2 * ((r-Rm0)/(0.5*Rm0+0.075*(x*100-x_0*100-R_s)/K_visc))^2);
end
Wind Force calculation blocks connected can be seen in the next page
==PAGE:113==
D Physics implementation in Simulink
107
Figure D.3
==PAGE:114==
108
D Physics implementation in Simulink
Wind Force tilt zone calculation
Determine Wind direction
function [dir, angle_on_z] = windDirection(angle_x,angle_y,angle_z)
Rx = [1 0 0; 0 cosd(angle_x) -sind(angle_x); 0 sind(angle_x) cosd(angle_x)];
Ry = [cosd(angle_y) 0 sind(angle_y); 0 1 0; -sind(angle_y) 0 cosd(angle_y)];
Rz = [cosd(angle_z) -sind(angle_z) 0; sind(angle_z) cosd(angle_z) 0; 0 0 1];
R = Rz*Ry*Rx;
pr_x = R(1,3);
pr_y = R(2,3);
pr_z = R(3,3);
mag_xy = sqrt(pr_x^2 + pr_y^2);
angle_on_z = atan2d(mag_xy,pr_z);
dir = atan2d(pr_y,pr_x);
return
end
Check if object is in the Wind zone
function in_the_flow = isInWind(dir,angle_obj,margin)
in_the_flow = false;
if dir <= 180 && dir >=0 && angle_obj <= 180 && angle_obj >=0
% Angle and direction +
if dir - margin < angle_obj && dir + margin > angle_obj
in_the_flow = true;
%disp('In the wind');
return
else
in_the_flow = false;
%disp('Out of the wind');
return
end
elseif dir > -180 && dir < 0 && angle_obj > -180 && angle_obj < 0 % Angle and direction -
if dir - margin < angle_obj && dir + margin > angle_obj
in_the_flow = true;
%disp('In the wind');
return
else
in_the_flow = false;
%disp('Out of the wind');
return
end
elseif dir <= 180 && dir >=0 && angle_obj > -180 && angle_obj < 0 % Angle
+
direction -
if 360 - (abs(dir) + abs(angle_obj)) < 2*margin
in_the_flow = true;
%disp('In the wind');
return
else
in_the_flow = false;
%disp('Out of the wind');
return
end
elseif dir > -180 && dir < 0 && angle_obj <= 180 && angle_obj >=0 % Angle
-
direction +
if 360 - (abs(dir) + abs(angle_obj)) < 2*margin
in_the_flow = true;
%disp('In the wind');
return
else
in_the_flow = false;
%disp('Out of the wind');
==PAGE:115==
D Physics implementation in Simulink
109
return
end
end
end
Calculate the airflow distance
function dist_1
= airFlowDist(angle_on_z,dist_obj,in_the_flow,h)
dist_1 = 0;
dist_centerflow = h/cosd(angle_on_z);
if dist_centerflow <= dist_obj && in_the_flow == true
dist_1 = dist_centerflow + (dist_obj - h*tand(angle_on_z));
return
elseif dist_centerflow > dist_obj && dist_obj > 0 && in_the_flow == true
dist_1 = h/cosd(angle_on_z) - (h*tand(angle_on_z) - dist_obj)*cosd(90-angle_on_z);
return
end
end
Apply wind if tilt is greater than..
function y
= applyWindTilt(angle_on_z,in_the_flow)
y = false;
if angle_on_z > 15 && in_the_flow == true
y = true;
return
else
y = false;
return
end
end
==PAGE:116==
110
D Physics implementation in Simulink
Figure D.4
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX E
Simulink and Simscape
implementation of the
control algorithm and
gripper model
Drone Simulink Model. More detailed implementation of the model can be
seen in the ”RealDroneModel_FINAL.slx” Files can be found in Gitlab folder in
the following link
==PAGE:118==
112
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
Approach reference Generation function code
function [ref,
SP] = approachReferenceGen(pos_drone, pos_obj, angle,yaw, gripper, gripper_feedback)
a = 0.60; % Desired setpoint distance from the center of the drone
x_0 = pos_drone(1); % Position of the drone on x axis
y_0 = pos_drone(2); % Position of the drone on y axis
z_0 = pos_drone(3); % Position of the drone on z axis
x_1 = pos_obj(1);
% Position of the object on x axis
y_1 = pos_obj(2);
% Position of the object on y axis
x_SP = x_0 + a*cos(yaw); % Position of the desired gripping setpoint on x axis
y_SP = y_0 + a*sin(yaw); % Position of the desired gripping setpoint on y axis
delta_ref_x =
x_1 - x_SP; % the distance error between the object and setpoint on x axis
delta_ref_y =
y_1 - y_SP; % the distance error between the object and setpoint on y axis
yaw_angle = angle;
%% Go down after object (gripper is not closed and the object is in the gripping range)
if norm([delta_ref_x delta_ref_y], 2) < 0.3 &&
gripper == 0 % Use this if using tighether with gripper node:> gripper_feed
ref_z = 0.65;
disp("Go Down");
%% Back up a little and go up and home (after the gripper command has received )
elseif
gripper == 1 % Use this if using tighether with gripper node:>
gripper_feedback == 1
if
z_0 > 1.4 % If the drone altitude is greater than 1.4 m, keep yaw angle at 0 radians
yaw_angle = 0;
end
ref_z = 1.5;
disp("Go Home");
%% Approach the object at altitude 2.5m
else
ref_z = 2.5;
disp("Approach");
end
delta_ref_z =
-z_0 + ref_z;
SP = [x_SP, y_SP];
ref = [delta_ref_x,delta_ref_y,delta_ref_z,yaw_angle];
return
end
==PAGE:119==
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
113
Figure E.1: Simulink Code. Top part of the code is the tracking controller implemen-
tation, the bottom part is the simulated system (to test the tracking algorithm on the
real drone, the bottom part is commented out).
==PAGE:120==
114
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
Figure E.2: Drone Simulink Model implementation with the buoyancy and propeller
induced wind blocks
==PAGE:121==
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
115
Figure E.3: Drone Simulink Model Force from Propellers
==PAGE:122==
116
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
Figure E.4: Full Drone Simulink Model With contoller cascade
==PAGE:123==
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
117
Figure E.5: Tracking Algorithm Implementation Setup
==PAGE:124==
118
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
Figure E.6: Reference Selector block of the Tracking algorithm
Figure E.7: PD controller of the Tracking algorithm
==PAGE:125==
E Simulink and Simscape implementation of the control algorithm and gripper model
119
Figure E.8: Gripper SimScape Model implementation in Simulink
==PAGE:126==
120
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX F
Tracking Algorithm and Full
sequence trajectory plots
The videos of the Simulation test runs can be seen in attachment folder of
the Appendix F or in the following links in YouTube.
Tracking algorithm video files and links:
- ”Tracking_0.mp4” Object initial position [0; 0].
https://youtu.be/f7b6ZPObS24 - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_1.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; 0].
https://youtu.be/frX2nEM3JPM - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_2.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; -2.5].
https://youtu.be/_KMW03QWjSo - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_3.mp4” Object initial position [0; -2.5].
https://youtu.be/CoBn6Z4TkWI - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_4.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; -2.5].
https://youtu.be/GVUaT4_8VoE - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_5.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; 0].
https://youtu.be/IHOnHl1d4CU - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_6.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; 2.5].
https://youtu.be/cRqiPX6Jcrc - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_7.mp4” Object initial position [0; 2.5].
==PAGE:128==
122
F Tracking Algorithm and Full sequence trajectory plots
https://youtu.be/f0P_HqDvt6g - Video Link.
- ”Tracking_8.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; 2.5].
https://youtu.be/LEJaWgsP2UQ - Video Link.
==PAGE:129==
   	
 	

 !"#$ %#""
 &"#$ %#"'"

#()("($("(("*''+,-
$*#$%#""#$./0 %#"" !"-"*#$%#"'"#$.

(1/0 0 (
2/(232"*-(
4/(432"*-(
5(
0 4("(./0 
0 4("(6// 3$0 4(7"(8 ("	9#	
2*3,,,-
4*3,,-
#()("($("(("*''+,-
$,*#$%#""#$./0 %#"-"*#$%#"'"#$./0 %

(1/0 0 (
2/(232"*-(
4/(432"*-(
:/(:32"*-(
5(
0 4("(./0 
0 4(7
2*3''-
4*3'+'+-
:*+-
 
	
 	
++
 !"#$ %#""
 &"#$ %#"'"

#()("($("(("*''+,-
$*#$%#""#$./0 %#"" !"-"*#$%#"'"#$.
==PAGE:130==
 
	
	 			
	

	

	 	
				 	 	!"#$	%	#

&'()'

**
+ %	
,			 	-././0//*//
 *
%( 1	( (2%	
3&%( 1	( (2%	
3&%( 1	( (2%	
3.%( 1	( (2
 
	
	 			
	

	

4	
4
	 	
				!

.'(56

.(0'(0
4
/.(0
	

#7 1.(#8
+9&3&5/6
	--:
&9%( 1	-( (2%	
&&8
	--;
&9%( 1	-( (2%	
&.8
	
+ %	
,			 	-././0//*//
 
%( 1	( (2%	
3&%( 1	( (2%	
3&	--:
3&%( 1	( (2%	
3.%( 1
 
	
	 			
	

	

	 	
				 	 	!"#$	%	#
==PAGE:131==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('./
)('
*(
0'121/
$

3,$4	(35
 6 2 
	78 67		  5
	79 67		 5
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	78 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$):""	7'	#$)-;$	3	<
3
==PAGE:132==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('./
)('
*(
$

0,$1	2(03
 4 5
	67 46		  3
	68 46		 3
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	67 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)9""	6'	#$)-:$	0	;
0
==PAGE:133==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('.
)('. 
*(
/00.1 
$

2,$3	(24
 5  66
	78 57		  4
	79 57		 4
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	78 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$):""	7'	#$)-;$	2	<
2
==PAGE:134==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('.
)('
*(
/  012
$

3,$4	.(35
 6  
	78 67		  5
	79 67		 5
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	78 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$):""	7'	#$)-;$	3	<
3
&(' 12
)(' 12.
==PAGE:135==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('.
)('
*(
/01011
$

2,$3	0(24
 5  6
	78 57		  4
	79 57		 4
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	78 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$):""	7'	#$)-;$	2	<
2
==PAGE:136==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&('.
)('
*(
/01  
$

2,$3	4(25
 6   .
	78 67		  5
	79 67		 5
	
 	
		
		 !"#$	 	78 		!

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$):""	7'	#$)-;$	2	<
2
==PAGE:137==
 	
		
		 !"#$	 		!"#$	

	
		
%	"#$#$
&"&'&(
)")'&(
*"*'&(
	
+	,#$)!"#$,#$)-
&(' .
)(' 
*(
/0 1.0

==PAGE:138==
132
F Tracking Algorithm and Full sequence trajectory plots
The simulation plots of the full sequence - approaching - grabbing - going
to home position.
Full algorithm sequence - Pickin up object links:
- ”FullSequence_1.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; 2.0].
- https://youtu.be/fcEWQTEyXfg - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_2.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; 0].
- https://youtu.be/DotUTZXEfzM - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_3.mp4” Object initial position [2.5; -2.5].
- https://youtu.be/KBw5Ni9fH0U - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_4.mp4” Object initial position [0; -2.5].
- https://youtu.be/E2ELklOa_UI - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_5.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; -2.5].
- https://youtu.be/QiHr6piGsV8 - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_6.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; 0].
- https://youtu.be/tPfITNHKMNA - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_7.mp4” Object initial position [-2.5; 2.5].
- https://youtu.be/kVxPesxgMTk - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_8.mp4” Object initial position [0; 2.5].
- https://youtu.be/Ti7TrXtpbqg - Video Link.
- ”FullSequence_9.mp4” Object initial position [0; 0].
https://youtu.be/XXqQyx0Yy5E - Video Link.
==PAGE:139==
   	
	

 
!"#$ 
  %# ""
 
&"#$ 
  %# ""

#'('"'$ '"' '")**+**,**-
$)#$   %# ""#$ ./0   %# "" 
!"-")#$   %# ""#$ .

'/0 0  '
1/'121 ")-'
3/'321 ")-'
4'50 3'"'./0 50 3'"'6//
2$0 3'7"'8 '"	 # 	
 
	
	
,
 
!"#$ 
  %# ""
 
&"#$ 
  %# ""

#'('"'$ '"' '")**+**,**-
$)#$   %# ""#$ ./0   %# "" 
!"-")#$   %# ""#$ .

'/0 0  '
1/'121 ")-'
3/'321 ")-'
4'50 3'"'./0 50 3'"'6//
2$0 3'7"'8 '"	 # 	
1)2-
3)2-
==PAGE:140==
 
	
	


 !"
#!  

$ !"
#! % 

!&'& &"& && (%)%)*))+)),
"(!"#!  !"-./ #!  
 , (!"#! % !"-

&./ / &
0.&010 (,&
2.&210 (,&
3&4/ 2& &-./ 4/ 2& &5..
1"/ 2&6 &7 & 	!	
 
	
8	
%)8+
==PAGE:141==
    	
  

    
  



    ! ! "!! #!!$

 
% &'()
%	
%$ 
%&
 

  * '() ()
+'
+ , +  -$
.'
. , +  -$

/ 0().&'() 0().1'' , ().23)454
) 

4-*5#-4
   % !6#
    	
  

    
  



    ! ! "!! #!!$

 
% &'()
%	
%$ 
%&
 

  * '() ()
+'
+ , +  -$
.'
. , +  -$

/ 0().&'() 0().1'' , ().23)454
==PAGE:142==
 
	
	


 !"#
$"!!

%!"#
$"!&!

"'('!'#'!''!)&*&*+****,
#)"#$"!!"#-./ $"!!
 !,!)"#$"!&!"#-

'./ / '
0.'010!),'
2.'210!),'
3'4/ 2'!'-./ 4/ 2'!'5..
1#/ 2'6!'7 '!	"	
 
	
	
&*&

 !"#
$"!!

%!"#
$"!&!
==PAGE:143==
 
 	
   		 			
   !"# $   %&   !

 	 '"# $# $ 	
(" 	()(*	
+" 	+)(*	
  ,	 -# $+		!"# $-# $+		.""% )# $+	/	0$	12  1
(*)3 4
+*) 435
$ 
1%*'2*16
7  83
 %& 7%    6
 %9 7%   6
 
 	
   		 			
   !"# $   %&   !

 	 '"# $# $ 	
(" 	()(*	
+" 	+)(*	
  ,	 -# $+		!"# $-# $+		.""% )# $+	/	0$	12  1
==PAGE:144==
 
	
	

 
!"#$ 
  %# ""
 
&"#$ 
  %# "'"

#()("($ ("( ("*''+,-
$*#$   %# ""#$ ./0   %# "" 
!"-"*#$   %# "'"#$ .

(/0 0  (
1/(121 "*-(
3/(321 "*-(
4(50 3("(./0 50 3("(6//
2$0 3(7"(8 ("	 # 	
1*29'-
3*299-

==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX G
Gripper ROS node source
files
The Full file package for the gripper node can be seen in the
attachment folder for the Appendix G and the manual test
videos can be found in the attachment folder or in the following
YouTube Links.
Links:
Gripper Manual Load Test. - https://youtu.be/bDJBmlZs8eA- Video Link.
Gripper Manual Water Test. - https://youtu.be/2Nl-S8mkom0- Video Link.
Files can also be found in Gitlab folder in the following link in the .zip file ”dynamixel-
workbench.zip”.
Dynamixel Controller Launch file - dynamixel_controllers.launch
<launch>
<arg name="usb_port"
default="/dev/ttyUSB0"/>
<arg name="dxl_baud_rate"
default="1000000"/>
<arg name="namespace"
default="dynamixel_workbench"/>
<arg name="use_moveit"
default="true"/>
<arg name="use_joint_state"
default="true"/>
<arg name="use_cmd_vel"
default="true"/>
<param name="dynamixel_info"
value="$(find dynamixel_workbench_controllers)/config/wheel_1_0.yaml"/>
<node name="$(arg namespace)" pkg="dynamixel_workbench_controllers" type="dynamixel_workbench_controllers"
required="true" output="screen" args="$(arg usb_port) $(arg dxl_baud_rate)">
<param name="use_moveit"
value="$(arg use_moveit)"/>
<param name="use_joint_states_topic"
value="$(arg use_joint_state)"/>
<param name="use_cmd_vel_topic"
value="$(arg use_cmd_vel)"/>
<rosparam>
publish_period: 0.010
dxl_read_period: 0.010
dxl_write_period: 0.010
mobile_robot_config:
<!--this values will be set when 'use_cmd_vel' is true-->
seperation_between_wheels: 0.160
<!--default value is set by reference of TB3-->
radius_of_wheel: 0.03
<!--default value is set by reference of TB3 0.033-->
</rosparam>
</node>
</launch>
==PAGE:146==
140
G Gripper ROS node source files
Dynamixel configuration .yaml file - wheel_1_0.yaml
# You can find control table of Dynamixel on emanual (http://emanual.robotis.com/#control-table)
# Control table item has to be set Camel_Case and not included whitespace
# You are supposed to set at least Dynamixel ID
# This example is compatible with Dynamixel using protocol 1.0
left:
ID: 1
Return_Delay_Time: 0
CW_Angle_Limit: 0
CCW_Angle_Limit: 0
Moving_Speed: 0
==PAGE:147==
G Gripper ROS node source files
141
Gripper Operator Launch file - gripper_operator.launch
<launch>
<arg name="namespace"
default="dynamixel_workbench"/>
<node name="gripper_operator" pkg="dynamixel_workbench_operators"
type="gripper_operator" required="true" output="screen" ns="$(arg namespace)"/>
</launch>
Gripper Operator Source file - gripper_operator.cpp
#include <fcntl.h>
// FILE control
#include <termios.h>
// Terminal IO
#include <ros/ros.h>
#include <geometry_msgs/Twist.h>
#include <sensor_msgs/JointState.h> //*
#include <std_msgs/String.h>
#include "std_msgs/Bool.h"
#include <std_msgs/Float64.h>
#include <sstream>
#include <string>
#define ESC_ASCII_VALUE
0x1b
#define FORWARD
0x77
#define BACKWARD
0x78
#define LEFT
0x61
#define RIGHT
0x64
#define STOPS
0x73
// Messages
//std_msgs::String command;
std_msgs::Bool gripper_fdb_bool_msg;
std_msgs::String string_msg;
geometry_msgs::Twist twist_msg;
sensor_msgs::JointState joint_msg;
// Function declarations
void TimeControl();
void rollOut();
void rollIn();
void stopMotion();
// Global Variables
double timer_val = 0.0;
double start_time = 0.0;
double end_time = 0.0;
double elapsed_time = 0.0;
double lin_vel_step = 0.05;
double ang_vel_step = 0.1;
double wheel_radius = 0.03; // check with controller launch file setting
double roll_distance = 0.65;
double roll_speed = 0.25;
double roll_time = 0.0;
double
dxl_cmd_read_position;
double
dxl_cmd_read_velocity;
double
dxl_cmd_read_efford;
double error;
double lastPosition_asReference;
bool rollingOut = false;
bool rollingIn = false;
bool rollingOut_enabled = false;
==PAGE:148==
142
G Gripper ROS node source files
bool rollingIn_enabled = true;
bool rollingIn_finished = false;
bool rollingOut_finished = false;
bool rollingFeedback =false;
bool gripper_command_read;
int getch(void)
{
struct termios oldt, newt;
int ch;
tcgetattr( STDIN_FILENO, &oldt );
newt = oldt;
newt.c_lflag &= ~(ICANON | ECHO);
newt.c_cc[VMIN] = 0;
newt.c_cc[VTIME] = 1;
tcsetattr( STDIN_FILENO, TCSANOW, &newt );
ch = getchar();
tcsetattr( STDIN_FILENO, TCSANOW, &oldt );
return ch;
}
int kbhit(void)
{
struct termios oldt, newt;
int ch;
int oldf;
tcgetattr(STDIN_FILENO, &oldt);
newt = oldt;
newt.c_lflag &= ~(ICANON | ECHO);
tcsetattr(STDIN_FILENO, TCSANOW, &newt);
oldf = fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_GETFL, 0);
fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_SETFL, oldf | O_NONBLOCK);
ch = getchar();
tcsetattr(STDIN_FILENO, TCSANOW, &oldt);
fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_SETFL, oldf);
if (ch != EOF)
{
ungetc(ch, stdin);
return 1;
}
return 0;
}
void chatterCallback(const std_msgs::Bool::ConstPtr& msg)
{
gripper_command_read = msg->data;
}
void jointCallback(const sensor_msgs::JointState::ConstPtr& msg)
{
dxl_cmd_read_position = msg->position[0];
dxl_cmd_read_velocity = msg->velocity[0];
dxl_cmd_read_efford = msg->effort[0];
}
void timerCallback(const ros::TimerEvent&){
timer_val = timer_val + 0.1;
}
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
// Init ROS node
ros::init(argc, argv, "gripper_operator");
ros::NodeHandle node_handle("");
==PAGE:149==
G Gripper ROS node source files
143
// Initializing publishers
// Command velocity of the dynamixel
ros::Publisher cmd_vel_pub = node_handle.advertise<geometry_msgs::Twist>("cmd_vel", 10);
// Standard String message
ros::Publisher std_string_pub = node_handle.advertise<std_msgs::String>("std_string_msgs", 1000);
// Gripper Status feedback message
ros::Publisher gripper_feedback_pub = node_handle.advertise<std_msgs::Bool>("/simulink/gripper_feedback", 1000);
// Initializing subscirber
// Gripper command from Simulink ROS topic
ros::Subscriber sub = node_handle.subscribe("/simulink/gripper", 1000, chatterCallback);
// Gripper command from Simulink ROS topic
ros::Subscriber joint_sub = node_handle.subscribe("/dynamixel_workbench/joint_states", 1000, jointCallback);
// Initializing Timer
ros::Timer timer = node_handle.createTimer(ros::Duration(0.1), timerCallback);
// Preparing node header info
std::stringstream test_msg;
test_msg << "Hello";
string_msg.data = test_msg.str();
ROS_INFO("Gripper Node says %s!", string_msg.data.c_str());
std::string msg =
"\n\
Gripper Control! \n\
--------------------------- \n\
\n\
Force stop -
s\n\
\n";
ROS_INFO("%s", msg.c_str());
// Setting ROS loop rate Hz
ros::Rate loop_rate(100);
// ROS loop
while(ros::ok()){
// Conditions for Rolling In/Out functions
//char c = getch();
if (gripper_command_read == false)
{
rollOut(); // Execute Rolling out. g = 0
}
else if (gripper_command_read = true)
{
rollIn(); // Execute Rolling in. g = 1
}
if ((rollingIn == false and rollingOut == false) and gripper_command_read == gripper_fdb_bool_msg.data){
printf("Motor Idle : %f \n", lastPosition_asReference);
error = lastPosition_asReference - dxl_cmd_read_position;
printf("error : %f \n", error);
twist_msg.linear.x = error*0.25;
}
// Dynamixel Force stop by pressing "s" key
if (kbhit()){
char c = getch();
if (c == 's')
{
stopMotion();
printf(" Stop!");
}
}
// Publishing messages
cmd_vel_pub.publish(twist_msg); // Dynamixel velocity publisher
std_string_pub.publish(string_msg); // String message publisher
gripper_feedback_pub.publish(gripper_fdb_bool_msg); // Gripper status feedback publisher
==PAGE:150==
144
G Gripper ROS node source files
TimeControl();
ros::spinOnce();
loop_rate.sleep();
}
ros::spin();
return 0;
}
void rollOut(){
if (rollingOut_enabled == true && rollingIn != true)
{
start_time = timer_val;
twist_msg.linear.x = roll_speed;
rollingOut = true;
rollingOut_enabled = false;
rollingIn_enabled = true;
printf("Rolling out...");
}
}
void rollIn(){
if (rollingIn_enabled == true && rollingOut != true)
{
start_time = timer_val;
twist_msg.linear.x = (-1)*roll_speed;
rollingIn = true;
rollingIn_enabled = false;
rollingOut_enabled = true;
printf("Rolling in...");
}
}
void stopMotion(){
twist_msg.linear.x = 0.00;
rollingOut = false;
rollingIn = false;
printf("Final variable status:\n");
printf("
Rolling Out %d\n",rollingOut);
printf("
Rolling In %d\n",rollingIn);
printf("
Rolling Out enabled %d\n",rollingOut_enabled);
printf("
Rolling In enabled %d\n",rollingIn_enabled);
printf("
Gripper Command read %d\n", gripper_command_read);
printf("
Rolling Feedback %d\n",rollingFeedback);
}
void TimeControl(){
roll_time = roll_distance/roll_speed; // Calculate the movement time
// Feedback status signal setting after motion has finished
if (rollingOut_finished == true && rollingIn_enabled == true
&& (rollingIn == false || rollingOut == false )
&& rollingFeedback != gripper_command_read) { // Rolling Out finished
rollingFeedback = gripper_command_read;
gripper_fdb_bool_msg.data = rollingFeedback;
} else if ( rollingIn_finished == true && rollingOut_enabled == true
&& (rollingIn == false || rollingOut == false )
&& rollingFeedback != gripper_command_read) // Rolling In finished
{
rollingFeedback = gripper_command_read;
gripper_fdb_bool_msg.data = rollingFeedback;
}
// Sending Stop motion command after the elapsed time has reached the roll time
==PAGE:151==
G Gripper ROS node source files
145
if (elapsed_time > roll_time*7.5/6 && rollingIn == true){
stopMotion();
elapsed_time = 0.0;
rollingIn_finished = true;
rollingOut_finished = false;
lastPosition_asReference = dxl_cmd_read_position;
//printf("
\nLast position %f\n",lastPosition_asReference);
} else if (elapsed_time > roll_time*7/6 && rollingOut == true){
stopMotion();
elapsed_time = 0.0;
rollingOut_finished = true;
rollingIn_finished = false;
lastPosition_asReference = dxl_cmd_read_position;
//printf("
\nLast position %f\n",lastPosition_asReference);
}
// Calculate elapsed time
if (rollingOut == true || rollingIn == true){
elapsed_time = timer_val - start_time;
printf("Elapsed Time: %f\n",elapsed_time);
printf("Rolling Out %d\n",rollingOut);
printf("Rolling In %d\n",rollingIn);
printf("Rolling Out enabled %d\n",rollingOut_enabled);
printf("Rolling In enabled %d\n",rollingIn_enabled);
printf("Gripper Command read %d\n", gripper_command_read);
printf("Rolling Feedback %d\n",rollingFeedback);
printf("\n");
}
}
==PAGE:152==
146
==PAGE:153==
APPENDIX H
Manual Test Flight and
Tracking Test Flight
The manual test flight video with the gripper can be found in
the attachment folder for this Appendix H or in the following
YouTube links-
- ”VIDEO_ManualGripperTestFlight_1.mp4”
- ”VIDEO_ManualGripperTestFlight_2.mp4”
Manual flight with the gripper attached YouTube Links:
Manual Fight with gripper Test 1. - https://youtu.be/MSyOx7TD6wo- Video Link.
Manual Fight with gripper Test 2. - https://youtu.be/0v_AkWGMT0M- Video Link.
The Tracking test flight video can be found in the attachment
folder for this Appendix H or in the following YouTube links-
- ”VIDEO_Tracking_TestRunNr_1.mp4”
- ”VIDEO_Tracking_TestRunNr_2.mp4”
Autonomous Tracking algorithm test run YouTube Links:
Tracking Algorithm Test Run Nr. 1. - https://youtu.be/PKOf_-z8uW0- Video Link.
Tracking Algorithm Test Run Nr. 2. - https://youtu.be/H9i4qIUkDhM- Video Link.
==PAGE:154==
148
==PAGE:155==
Bibliography
[AGi]
A.Gibiansky. “Quadcopter Dynamics, Simulation, and Control”. url: https:
/ / andrew . gibiansky . com / downloads / pdf / Quadcopter % 20Dynamics ,
%20Simulation,%20and%20Control.pdf. (accessed: 14.06.21).
[Bat67]
G.K. Batchelor. An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics. 1967, pages 339–341.
isbn: 0-521-66396-2.
[CN]
W. Khan R. Caverly and M. Nahon. “Propeller slipstream model for small
unmanned aerial vehicles”. url: http://arc.aiaa.org/action/showImage?
doi=10.2514/6.2013-4907&iName=master.img-000.jpg&w=307&h=105.
(accessed: 24.05.21).
[CN13]
W. Khan R. Caverly and M. Nahon. ““Propeller slipstream model for small
unmanned aerial vehicles”.” In: (2013). doi: https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
2013-4907.
[CPl08]
C.Plickover. Archimedes to Hawking. Laws of Science and the Great minds be-
hind them. Oxford University Press USA, 2008, pages 41–42. isbn: 9780195336115.
[MK11]
Daniel Mellinger and Vijay Kumar. “Minimum snap trajectory generation and
control for quadrotors.” In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation. May 2011, pages 2520–2525. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2011.
5980409.
[Ori10]
Bruno Siciliano Lorenzo Sciavicco Luigi Villani Giuseppe Oriolo. Robotics.
Modelling, Planning and Control. 2010. isbn: 9781846286414.
[PCh11]
L. Lazari P.Christodoulides F.Dias. “Impact of Fluid Streams on Horizontal
Walls.” In: (2011).
[PGą16]
W.Giernacki A.Bondyra S.Gardecki P.Gąsior. “Performance of Coaxial Propul-
sion in Design of Multi-rotor UAVs.” In: (March 2016). doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-29357-8_46.
[pri]
princeton.edu. “Bernoulli’s Equation. Stagnation pressure and dynamic pres-
sure”. url: https://www.princeton.edu/~asmits/Bicycle_web/Bernoulli.
html#dynamic_pressure. (accessed: 27.05.21).
[px4]
px4. “PX4 User Guide”. url: https://docs.px4.io/master/en/. (accessed:
19.06.21).
[ROB]
ROBOTIS. “USB2DYNAMIXEL”. url: https://emanual.robotis.com/
docs/en/parts/interface/usb2dynamixel/. (accessed: 11.06.21).
==PAGE:156==
150
Bibliography
[Rob]
Robotis. “Dynamixel AX-12A manual”. url: https://emanual.robotis.
com/docs/en/dxl/ax/ax-12a/. (accessed: 11.06.21).
[ROSa]
ROS. “About ROS”. url: https://www.ros.org/about-ros/. (accessed:
11.06.21).
[ROSb]
ROS. “ROS Concepts”. url: http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Concepts. (ac-
cessed: 11.06.21).
[ROSc]
ROS. “What is ROS?” url: http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Introduction.
(accessed: 11.06.21).
[Ser86]
Raymond A. Serway. Physics for scientists and engineers. Philadelphia : Saun-
ders College Pub., 1986, pages 202–203. isbn: 0030045347.
[Wei]
Eric W. Weisstein. “Spherical Cap”. url: https://mathworld.wolfram.
com/SphericalCap.html. (accessed: 15.06.21).
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
151
==PAGE:158==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
