==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Angle controlled assembly of van der Waals
heterostructures
Mads Troelsgård (s154377)
Building 309 DTU Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
Department of physics
Technical University of Denmark
Building 309
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis the fabrication of twisted bi-layer graphene has been investigated. This
specific van der Waals heterostructure can exhibit very different properties like su-
perconductivity, ferromagnetism, and light manipulation. The fabrication of van der
Waals heterostructures made of a combination of 2D materials like graphene, hexago-
nal boron nitride, and transition metal dichalcogenides can be used to create devices
as transistors, LEDs and solar cells.
To fabricate twisted bi-layer graphene a robotic system is further developed to
remove more of the manual share in the van der Waals heterostructure assembly
process. This robotic system can control the stamp by piezo motors and the rotation
angle and movement of the substrate by stepper motors. All the parts are controlled
via Inter integrated circuit by the master Raspberry pi. This can be programmed
to control the temperature and movement of the system during assemble, which is a
step closer to an automated system for assembly of van der Waals heterostructures.
The system was found to be able to fabricate van der Waals heterostructures with
controlled angle between the layers. The precision of the rotation is in the order of
half a degree which is not enough to consistently fabricate superconducting bi-layer
graphene samples with an angle of 1.1◦. Thus the robotic system has to be developed
further to reproducibly fabricate van der Waals heterostructures.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Physics at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark from 4 January 2021 to 4 June 2021 in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a master’s degree in engineering of physics and nanotechnology. This
master thesis project corresponds to 30 ECTS and was supervised by associate Pro-
fessor Tim J. Booth and Ph.d. Leonid Iliushyn.
Building 309 DTU Kongens Lyngby, 2021-06-11 12:52
Mads Troelsgård (s154377)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the process of completing my master thesis I have received help and
assistance from a number persons, and I am very grateful for that. First of all my
supervisor Tim it has been a pleasure having you as my supervisor and working
together with you. Thanks to Leonid for helping me with all aspects of the stacking
procedure and for preparing h-BN and graphene for me, that helped a lot. Daniel
has imaged my twisted graphene layer samples in the TEM, a very important part
for my work. I would also like to thank Cheng for helping me with CAB transfer and
providing MoS2. It has been fun and giving to supervise the three students Niels,
Gustav, and Gustav and they contributed a lot to the strain sensor implementation.
Sarah the lab technician also deserves a word for keeping the lab in good order and
full of chemicals. I also appreciate that my friend Jakob joined me in the oﬀice, so I
had someone to talk to when the experiments did not go as planned.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
2D Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Van der Waals heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Why develop a machine to fabricate van der Waals heterostructures? .
2
2
Experimental techniques
3
2.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Atomic force microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures
9
3.1
Fabrication of two-dimensional materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Exfoliation of graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Exfoliation of h-BN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Assembly of van der Waals heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Preparation of stamps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Pick up of 2D materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Drop down of 2D materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Fabrication of twisted bi-layer graphene heterostructures . . . . . . . .
16
4
Autostacker implementation
19
4.1
Overview of the Autostacker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Inter Integrated Circuit - I2C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
I2C implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
Programming of the Arduino Due and the Raspberry Pi . . . .
25
4.3
Slide holder with piezo motors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.4
DAC and amplifier circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.1
Second amplifier circuit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Arduino for temperature control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Arduino for motor control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.7
Raspberry Pi and GUI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.8
Strain gauge implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8.1
Backlash for the stepper motors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8.2
Electrical circuit for strain sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.9
Temperature measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results and discussion
39
5.1
Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Raman for twisted bi-layer graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Controlled assembly of Van der Waals heterostructures . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Rotational control of the stage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
55
7
Outlook
57
Bibliography
58
A
Microcontrollers and Raspberry Pi 3
63
A.1 Pins for Arduinos and Raspberry Pi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B
Programs
67
B.1
Motor controlling Arduino Due . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.2
Raspberry Pi program for the user interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.2.1
Graphical user interface code with I2C implemented . . . . . .
85
B.2.2
I2C read data data Raspberry Pi (Master) . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
B.2.3
Sinewave
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
B.2.4
Step function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
B.3
Temperature controlling Arduino code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
B.3.1
Processing code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
ix
Acronyms
• ACK - Acknowledge
• AFM - Atomic force microscope
• CVD - Chemical vapour deposition.
• DAC - Digital to analogue converter.
• h-BN - Hexagonal boron nitride.
• I2C - Inter integrated circuit
• IPA - Isopropanol alcohol.
• MoS2 - Molybdenum disulfide.
• NACK - No-acknowledge
• PCB - Printed circuit board
• PDMS - Polydimethylsiloxane
• PPC - Polypropylene carbonate
• SCL - Serial clock
• SDA - Serial data
• SiO2 - Silicon dioxide.
• SMBUS - System management bus
• TEM - Transmission electron microscope
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
2D Materials
The first material called a 2D material was successfully fabricated in 2004 by Novoselov
et al. [1]. Here graphene was found and proved to have some special properties as
stated by Novoselov et al. [2] e.g. a high electric conductivity of ∼2700S/cm as shown
by Murata et al. [3]. Other 2D materials like hexagonal boron nitride have differ-
ent properties and by combining different 2D materials devices having extraordinary
properties can be fabricated. There are also a range of transition metal dichalco-
genides as MoS2 that can be used for transistors see the article by Ahmed et al. [4].
These atomically thin materials can be fabricated by exfoliating a larger crystal or
by chemical growth.
1.2
Van der Waals heterostructures
All these 2D materials makes up a huge collection that can be put together to achieve
new properties of materials. The same material also changes properties as multiple
layers of it are stacked on top of each other. The resulting structure also depends
on the angle between the layers that are stacked as two layers of graphene stacked
with an angle of 1.1 degrees can become superconducting at low temperatures see
e.g. the article by Cao et al. [5]. Recently the research in twisted bi-layer graphene
has been very active as such twisted bi-layer graphene can be used as a condensed
matter quantum simulator see Kennes et al. [6]. Likewise, ferroelectricity can be
achieved in twisted bi-layer graphene as shown by Zheng et al. [7]. One can also
utilise moire lattices for enhanced optical harmonics manipulation as stated by Ha et
al. [8]. Thus engineering of 2D materials leads to a lot of physical phenomenons that
can be explored and used in devices. To assemble 2D materials one have to pick up
one layer and drop it down onto another layer, and in this process there is a lot of
engineering required for controlling this process.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.3
Why develop a machine to fabricate van der
Waals heterostructures?
When assembling heterostructures many parts of the process are done manually. A
micro-manipulator is controlled by hand to pick up 2D materials. This entails han-
dling the micro-manipulator, a manual process that is diﬀicult to reproduce with the
proper degree of rigorousness suitable for an experiment. To minimise the human
impact on the assembly and decrease variations in the process one could try to auto-
mate the assembly process by having a robotic system to do the assembly. This is
exactly what certain researchers have looked into, see e.g. Masubuchi et al. [9].
At DTU Tim Booth has built a robotic system for exactly this purpose of au-
tomating the assembly of heterostructures. In this system one can control a micro-
manipulator by stepper motors. Thereby, instead of knowing that you move slowly
during assembly you know the actual speed of the elements. This gives more control
over the process, and makes it easier to reproduce. This robotic system, called the
Autostacker, has in the past year been moved around and can be developed further.
The state of the system before the beginning of the present project was documented
by Eli Carlin-Coleman, Peitro Fontana, and Tim Booth in the manual [10]. I have
during my project in collaboration with my supervisor Tim further developed the
Autostacker by setting up I2C communications, eucentric rotation, made a graphical
user interface, making amplifier circuits with digital to analogue converters for the
piezo motors, and started implementing a strain sensor. The strain sensor implemen-
tation is done in collaboration with three students Niels Frederik Flemming Holm
Frandsen, Gustav Thomsen, and Gustav Friis Fléron. All of this in order to improve
the assembly of heterostructures and minimise the human impact on the process, and
be able to do more complex heterostructures where the angle between the lattice vec-
tors in the 2D materials are also controlled. In particular fabricating twisted bi-layer
graphene samples using the Autostacker has been an objective.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Experimental
techniques
The experimental techniques optical detection, Raman spectroscopy, atomic force
microscopy (AFM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) have been used to
characterize samples fabricated on the Autostacker. These techniques provide differ-
ent information used to investigate van der Waals heterostructures and are generally
accepted techniques in the literature see e.g. [11]. Optical detection, Raman, and
AFM are described more in depth in the next sections.
2.1
Optics
To detect if graphene has been produced after exfoliation the fastest and easiest
technique is by optical inspection. These materials are one or a few atomic layers
thick and suspended graphene absorbs 2.3 % of the light in the visible spectrum [12].
This means that suspended graphene can be detected optically with the right contrast
enhancement. Placing graphene on a substrate enhances the absorption and contrast,
which makes it easier to detect. The wavelength can also be adjusted to get a good
contrast. It was shown by Blake et al. [13] that the contrast can be enhanced by
placing graphene on either 90 nm silicon dioxide or 280 nm dioxide, while using visible
light. This makes graphene detectable with an optical microscope if the graphene is
either grown or exfoliated on said 90 nm or 280 nm oxide. In this project silicon oxide
with a thickness of 90 nm has been used. The contrast depends also on the optical
system used. All images in this report are reflection images and taken with a NIKON
eclipse L200N or a Pi camera with a custom build optical lens system made of parts
from Thorlabs. An image captured by the optical system in the Autostacker (the
picamera) can be seen in figure 3.3. Three images made using the Nikon microscope
are shown in figure 2.1. By Raman spectroscopy the presence of single layer graphene
can be verified (see section 2.2). This gives the possibility of finding the contrast
for graphene in the Autostacker images. The process of detecting graphene could
be optimised by optically scanning the wafer with graphene and having auto focus
implemented during the scan. Then followed by a computer program programmed to
identify all areas with the specific contrast in question. This can be done as shown
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Experimental techniques
Figure 2.1: Image of graphene flake with areas of one graphene layer, two layers of
graphene and multi-layers. a: One area with graphene is labelled 1, the label 2 is in
an area with two layers of graphene. Magnification x 100. c: Dark field image with
magnification x 100.
by Jessen et al. [14]. This step is also needed for the stacking process to become
automated as a program needs to be able to detect the 2D materials and align them
using optics.
Optical detection can be used to find graphene flakes as described above. However,
optics is limited by the diffraction limit which for the middle of the visible spectrum is
d ≈0.3 µm. This means that we can not resolve or detect any feature smaller than the
diffraction limit. Thus if contaminants as bubbles or the position of the atoms need
to be visualised other methods like atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) need to be used. Nevertheless, optical microscopy is a
very useful tool, since it is fast and gives a lot of information, which makes it suitable
for fast characterization of heterostructures. The exposure time for an image is on
the order of 5 ms - 3 s.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Raman spectroscopy
5
2.2
Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a measurement technique probing the different energy levels
of the phonons in a material. A phonon is a specific oscillation in a lattice of atoms.
This spectroscopy can be used see if there are defects in the material and the spectra
depends on number of layers and twist angle. The measurements are done by shining
a monochromatic laser beam onto the sample. The laser beam will have a spot size
where it hits the sample. This is the area of the sample that will yield the results of
the Raman spectroscopy. The laser light will excite phonons and electrons in the 2D
material of interest. Most of the excitations, excited by the monochromatic light will
return to its original state and create a photon with the same wavelength as the laser,
but in a random direction. This does not give much information about the system.
However, around 0.000001 % of the light will decay into another energy state [15].
Thus a photon with a different wavelength from the laser is created and measured.
Thus the Raman spectrometer uses a notch filter to discard all the photons with a
wavelength close to the laser wavelength and then measure all the photons with a
frequency shift. These frequency shift gives information about the energy levels of
the phonons in the sample material.
Two Raman spectra can be seen in figure 2.2 d. The phonons that can exist in
a material depend on the lattice structure and the band structure that this gives
rise to. As Ferrari et al. [16] writes graphene has three optical phonons and three
acoustic phonons. Only some of them are Raman active as concluded by Nemanich
et al. [17]. These are the two phonons E2G each double degenerate. The out of plane
phonons shown in the figure 2.2 are weaker interactions than the in-plane phonons
and therefore more diﬀicult to measure. For pristine graphene the Raman spectrum
should look like the top spectrum in figure 2.2 d. Here the G peak corresponds to
the high frequency phonon E2G at the gamma point. The 2D peak is the overtone
of the D peak and should always be present. Likewise the 2D’ will be present. The
D peak arises from the transverse optical phonons close to the kappa point in the
Brillouin zone. These phonons need a defect for them to exist, such as missing atoms
or edges. Thus if the D peak is present there are probably defects in the probed area
of the sample. But the D peak has almost the same position as one peak from h-BN.
A Raman spectrum measured with the DXR Raman Microscope from Thermo Fisher
used in this project is shown in figure 2.3 to the right. When comparing this to the
spectrum in figure 2.2 d one can see the peak from the h-BN at around 1366 cm−1.
All Raman spectra are made by measuring 3 times 30 s at 5 mW power for the laser.
The time 30 s and the power was chosen to give enough counts in the spectra and
three times to have measurements that are repeatable.
For AB stacked bi-layer graphene the Raman spectrum changes and it can be
seen in figure 2.4. Here the 2D peak becomes wider and the position changes. The
intensity of the G peak increases as the number of layers increase.
For graphene
stacked randomly they do not interact in the same way and are more decoupled.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Experimental techniques
Figure 2.2: a: The electronic band structure of graphene close to the K point. b:
Illustration of the different phonons modes there can exist in graphene and multi
layer graphene. c: The electronic band structure between the different point in the
Brillouin zone. d: Raman spectrum of perfect graphene (top) and graphene with
defects (bottom). This figure is reprinted from [16].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Atomic force microscope
7
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
ω (cm−1)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
counts (au.)
 Raman spectrum
Figure 2.3: Left: Image of stack made from the top of h-BN and graphene. Right:
Raman spectrum measured from the centre point of the optical image to the left.
Here the spectrum depends on the twist angle and the laser wavelength see Jorio et
al. [18].
Figure 2.4:
Raman spectres for graphene in one, two, three, and four layers.
Reprinted from the website [19].
2.3
Atomic force microscope
An atomic force microscope (AFM) is used to image the topography of surfaces. It is
capable of measuring heights of structures in the nanometer range. An AFM works
by scanning an atomically sharp tip over a sample. The tip is controlled by piezo
scanners made of piezo crystals that contract or expand when a voltage difference
is applied.
The tip is mounted on a beam/cantilever as seen in figure 2.5.
The
cantilever deflection is measured with a laser beam that is reflected on the backside
of the cantilever and then hits a four-part photo detector. When the cantilever is bent
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Experimental techniques
Figure 2.5: Illustration showing the basic principle of an AFM, the insert is a zoom
of the tip and how it is suppose to be atomically sharp. Adapted from [20].
due to the interaction between the tip and the sample, the laser beam will change
position on the photo detector and this position shift lead to an increase or decrease in
signal from the four parts in the detector. The precision of a photo detection system
is reported by Engel et al. [21] to be able to measure a deflection of 0.1 nm. Now
the deflection of the beam is known, but to find the force applied from the tip to the
sample Hooke’s law can be used. The spring constant of the cantilever is given by
the supplier and thus the force from the tip to sample can be calculated. The AFM
can work in several modes. One of the simplest is the contact mode with constant
force. Here the force between the tip and the sample is held constant by adjusting
the height of the cantilever. This adjustment is exactly what yields the image of
the sample topography because the cantilever needs to follow the sample to ensure
it applies a constant force.
This limits the speed of the scans.
Tapping mode is
another way of running an AFM. Here the cantilever is vibrating with a frequency in
the kHz regime. In each oscillation the maximum force applied to the sample is held
constant again by adjusting the height. Typical forces are around 1 nN. This makes
AFM a good technique to measure how flat the surface of a material or samples is.
In this project multiple 2D materials have been stacked together, and in the process
contaminants can be caught inside the stack. This can result in bubbles and these can
be detected by an AFM. Contaminants in the form of bubbles and doping can effect
the shape of the graphene and will result in more scattering and affect the electron
mobility.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Fabrication of van der
Waals heterostructures
To fabricate van der Waals heterostructures firstly the desired 2D materials need to
be prepared. In this project that is graphene and h-BN. These materials can be grown
by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) see e.g. the article by Khan et al. [22] where
one or few layers h-BN is grown. 2D materials can also be fabricated as done in this
project by exfoliation from a larger crystal.
3.1
Fabrication of two-dimensional materials
3.1.1
Exfoliation of graphene
The procedure to exfoliate graphene is as follows:
1. Place a graphite crystal on a 15 cm long piece of Scotch brand invisible Magic
tape. Apply a light pressure with a pair of tweezers to make part of the crystal
stick to the tape. Remove the rest of the crystal with the tweezers.
2. Fold the tape together and exert a small pressure on the tape with your fingers.
Pull the tape apart and fold it back together again making sure the crystals are
place on a empty place on the tape every time. Continue this around 10 times,
this is until most of the tape is covered by graphite.
3. A new piece of Magic Scotch tape is prepared and place on top of the piece
covered with graphite.
4. A SiO2 wafer piece is cleaned by sonication in acetone for 10 min and left in
IPA for 10 min. Hereafter it is place on a hotplate at 150 ◦C. Here one can
choose to plasma ash the wafer instead as this will increase the adhesion to the
graphene/graphite but using only heating the dry pick up of graphene as shown
below in section 3.3 is possible and that makes fabrication of twisted bi-layer
graphene easier.
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures
5. Now this new piece of tape is removed from the other one and placed on the
wafer that has been taken off the heater for 3-4 s, to do not melt the tape when
placed on top but still have as little water on the wafer surface as possible.
6. Apply a small pressure with the backside of a blunt object to the tape on the
wafer to make the flakes adhere better to the wafer surface.
7. Peel of the tape slowly at an angle of 90◦at room temperature.
Now the graphene and graphite flakes can be inspected in a microscope to find the
graphene flakes. One graphene flake can be seen in figure 3.1. All the flakes on the
wafer are now ready to be picked up and assembled into a heterostructure.
Figure 3.1: A graphene flake with the lightest area, the left part of the flake being
single layer graphene and the rest of the flake being multi-layer graphene that can be
used for fabricating heterostructures. a: Magnification x 20. b: Magnification x 100.
3.1.2
Exfoliation of h-BN
To fabricate h-BN flakes with a thickness of 5-50 nm, h-BN crystals bought from e.g.
HQ Graphene are used and these steps are followed:
1. The h-BN crystal is placed on a piece of 2 x 2 cm Nitto Denko SWT 20+ die
sawing tape. Another piece of tape with the same size is place on top of the
crystal. Two pairs of tweezers are used to separate the tape pieces and put them
together again. This tear apart the layers in the crystal, thus when repeated
many times the result will yield many thin flakes of h-BN instead of the one
large crystal. Continue to separate the crystal until all of the tape surface is
covered by h-BN.
2. Now you place one of the tape pieces on a piece of thinner SWT 20+ tape.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Assembly of van der Waals heterostructures
11
3. Before this, a piece of silicon wafer with 90 nm oxide grown on it is cleaned by
sonication in acetone for 10 min followed by placing it in IPA for 10 min and
dried using a nitrogen gun. The wafer piece is plasma ashed for 8 min with 40
W of power in a pressure of 300 mTorr. This cleans the surface of the wafer
and improve the adhesion to the h-BN flakes.
4. As fast as possible after the plasma ashing the thin tape piece is placed on top
of the wafer piece. A light pressure is applied to the back side of the tape to
promote adhesion between the SiO2 and the h-BN flakes.
5. The wafer is placed on a heater at 80◦C. After one minute the tape is peeled
slowly of at an angle of 10◦with a pair of tweezers.
Now the h-BN flakes are ready to assemble into van der Waals heterostructures.
3.2
Assembly of van der Waals heterostructures
The method to assemble heterostructures in this project is the method described in
the article by Pizzocchero et al. [11] called hot pick up. The implementation of this
method in this project is described in the following sections.
3.2.1
Preparation of stamps
In the process of assembling heterostructures one needs a stamp to pick up the differ-
ent layers of material and place them on top of each other. For this purpose, a stamp
is fabricated. In this project it consists of a Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) block of
2 x 2 mm with Polypropylene carbonate (PPC) spin coated on top. The process to
fabricate them is as follows:
1. Pour a portion of Sylgaard PDMS into a petri dish and bake until it is dry.
2. Spin coat a 15% PPC in anisole solution on top at 1500 rpm for 60 s.
3. Dry the PPC by baking.
4. Cut out the PDMS/PPC into 2 x 2 mm squares with a scalpel.
5. Fasten a piece of the PDMS/PPC 1 cm from the end of a glass slide with a small
amount of fast curing transparent epoxy and let it cure for 5 min at 110◦C.
3.2.2
Pick up of 2D materials
In order to pick up graphene, flakes of h-BN are used. Stamps of PDMS and PPC
fabricated as described in section 3.2.1 are used to pick up h-BN flakes. The steps to
pick up h-BN flakes are the following and illustrated in figure 3.2:
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures
1. Place stamp in a designated holder on the Autostacker.
2. Place the wafer piece with the target flake on the wafer holder and turn on the
vacuum.
3. Position the target flake in the field of view of the camera using the graphical
user interface (GUI).
4. Heat the wafer holder to 45◦C.
5. Move the stamp into the field of view by hand. This changes the optical path
length and thereby the focal point is shifted. Therefore adjust the focus again.
6. Lower the stamp using the GUI controls until the edge of the stamp is in contact
with the wafer. A contact front now appears. Lower the slide slowly to let the
front move over the h-BN flake and around 100 µm further.
7. Retract the slide as fast as possible and watch if the flake is picked up by the
stamp. Now the h-BN flake should be on the PPC.
Figure 3.2:
The process for picking up a h-BN flake.
a: The contact front is
moving closer to the target h-BN flake. b: the contact front has moved past the
h-BN flake and there is contact between the PPC and the flake. c: The stamp has
been retracted and the h-BN flake is now sticking to the stamp. Seen by the new
reflection and refraction of the light from the h-BN flake. Magnification: x10.
Now a h-BN flake can be picked up. A next step could be to pick up graphene
using this h-BN flake. Also, other materials as eg. MoS2 can be used to fabricate
other heterostructures. The process of picking up graphene can be seen in figure 3.3
and these steps are used:
1. Keep the temperature of the wafer holder at 45◦C.
2. Place the wafer piece with the target graphene flake on the wafer holder and
turn on the vacuum.
3. Position the target graphene in the field of view of the camera by moving the
stage using the GUI.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Assembly of van der Waals heterostructures
13
4. Lower the stamp with the h-BN flake on top until it is about 500 µm from the
wafer surface.
5. Align the h-BN flake over the target graphene flake, by moving the focus be-
tween the two flakes.
6. Lower the stamp while making sure the flakes are aligned to make the h-BN
flake hit the target graphene flake.
7. Lower the stamp using the GUI until the contact front appears in the field of
view. Lower the stamp slowly, meaning that the contact front should move
over the graphene flake with a velocity of 0.5µm/s. Continue slowly until the
contact front is all the way over the graphene and move it fast until the front
is 100µm past the graphene flake.
8. Now retract the slide as fast as possible and watch if the h-BN flake picked up
the graphene flake. Focus on the wafer surface to see if the graphene is still
there or not. Now there is graphene on the h-BN on the PPC.
Figure 3.3: The process for picking up a graphene flake. a: The contact front is
moving closer to the target graphene flake. b: the contact front has past the graphene
flake and there is contact between the PPC and the flake. c: The stamp has been
retracted and the part of graphene flake that was in contact with the h-BN flake is
now sticking to the stamp. This is verified by inspecting the place on the wafer where
the graphene was before pick up. The graphene flake used here can be seen in figure
3.1. Magnification: x10.
3.2.3
Drop down of 2D materials
To encapsulate the graphene one can drop this heterostructure on a new h-BN flake.
Three images of this process are shown in figure 3.4, and the steps to do this is:
1. Change the temperature of the wafer holder to 90◦C.
2. Position the target h-BN flake in the field of view of the camera using the GUI.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures
3. Lower the stamp with the h-BN/graphene flakes on top until it is about 500
µm from the wafer surface.
4. Align the h-BN/graphene flakes over the target h-BN flake, by moving the focus
between the two surfaces.
5. Lower the stamp while making sure the flakes are aligned to make the h-
BN/graphene flakes hit the target.
6. Lower the stamp using the GUI until the contact front appears in the field of
view. Lower the stamp slowly, meaning that the contact front should move
over the graphene flake with a velocity of 0.5µm/s. Continue slowly until the
contact front is all the way over the h-BN and around 50µm more.
7. Now retract the slide slowly. The PPC should be molten at this temperature,
which should result in leaving the heterostructure on the wafer surface covered
in PPC. If this is not what is happening, raise the temperature 10 ◦C and try
again from step 4.
Figure 3.4: The process of dropping down h-BN/graphene onto a h-BN flake. a:
The contact front is moving closer to the target h-BN flake. b: The contact front has
past the heterostructure and there is contact between the graphene and the bottom
h-BN flake. c: The stamp has been slowly retracted, yielding this pattern of molten
PPC. d: The stamp has been fully retracted and the heterostructure covered in PPC
is left on the wafer. Magnification: x10.
To remove the PPC from the stack the following is done:
1. Put the wafer in acetone at 80◦C for 15 min.
2. Move the wafer to IPA at room temperature for 10 min.
3. Blow the wafer dry with nitrogen.
The stack is now ready for visual inspection and other measurement techniques
to probe the properties of the materials. The stack fabricated as shown in the figure
3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 resulted in the stack shown in figure 3.6. The h-BN flakes before
assembly are shown in figure 3.5 and the graphene in figure 3.1. This is the main
method, with variations, used in this project to fabricate heterostructures.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Assembly of van der Waals heterostructures
15
Figure 3.5: Two h-BN flake suitable for fabrication of heterostructures. These two
flakes have been used to encapsulate graphene. The result can be seen in figure 3.6.
Magnification: x 100.
Figure 3.6: A van der Waals heterostructure assembly by h-BN, graphene, and
h-BN. Magnification: x 100.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures
3.3
Fabrication of twisted bi-layer graphene
heterostructures
To fabricate twisted bi-layer graphene heterostructures the developed machine called
the autostacker is used. The construction of this machine is described in chapter 4.1.
The stacking process is almost the same as described earlier in section 3.2, where the
h-BN flake is picked up with a PPC stamp and then that is used to pick up graphene
and place this on a new h-BN flake. For twisted bi-layer graphene fabrication one
more step is needed. This is when the h-BN flake has been used to do a dry pick up
of the first graphene layer. A dry pick up is when the PPC is not melted and left
on the wafer. Here the temperature is kept under the glass transition temperature of
PPC and the stamp will not leave any polymer on the surface of the wafer. In this
step it is important to only pick up part of the graphene flake. This ensures that
the graphene part left on the wafer can be rotated by the desired number of degrees.
After rotating the wafer holder with the graphene, the stamp is used again to pick
up the rest of the graphene in the same way as the first part was picked up. Now the
three layers being h-BN, graphene, and twisted graphene can be dropped down on a
clean wafer or a h-BN flake. The method is the same as described in section 3.2.3.
To illustrate how the twisted bi-layer heterostructure is fabricated a series of
images can be seen in figure 3.8.
Figure 3.7: A graphene flake ready for pick up to fabricate a twisted graphene
heterostructure. Magnification: x 100.
For transferring a stack to a TEM grid the method using CAB described in the
thesis by Joachim Thomsen[23] is used. Experiments for doing drop down directly
on a TEM grid has been performed, but only 2 of 10 attempts succeeded. The stacks
did not adhered suﬀiciently to the grid to stay when the PPC was molten.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Fabrication of twisted bi-layer graphene heterostructures
17
Figure 3.8: The process for fabricating twisted bi-layer graphene heterostructures.
a: A h-BN flake is dropped down onto half of the graphene flake to pick it up. b: The
stamp is retracted to pick up the graphene. c: Here the graphene flake can be seen
through the stamp, and the part of the flake that has been picked up can be seen.
d: The stack is dropped down onto the rest of the graphene flake. e: The stamp has
been retracted and the part of the graphene flake that has not been picked up can
be seen. Here all the graphene should have been picked up, but that did not happen.
f: The stack is dropped down onto a TEM grid with an aperture of 25 µm x 25 µm
with the area of twisted bi-layer graphene suspended. Magnification: x10.
==PAGE:30==
18
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Autostacker
implementation
4.1
Overview of the Autostacker
The Autostacker is a machine designed to do controlled assembly of van der Waals
heterostructures. In order to make the assembly process more automated one have to
replace the human in the fabrication process. For this to be done a lot of components
and electronics are required.
Thus, the Autostacker is composed of the following
parts:
• Mechanical frame and stage.
• Motors and the motor controllers.
• Stage with wafer holders and heating.
• Camera and objectives.
• I2C communication system.
• Slide holder with piezo motors.
• Amplifiers and digital to analogue converters for control of piezo positioning.
• An Arduino for temperature control.
• An Arduino and stepper motor drivers for motor control.
• A Raspberry Pi 3 with a monitor.
• A computer to program and read data from the Arduinos.
• Electronic box with power supplies.
These can be seen in the figures 4.1 and 4.2. The mechanical frame is made based on
Openbuilds kits to build machines like 3D printers and CNC milling machines. The
frame, motors and motor controllers, wafer holder with heating, camera, objectives,
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Autostacker implementation
and slide holder are described more in depth in the documentation by Eli [24]. In
order to power up all the electrical devices in the Autostacker different power supplies
are needed. The top one can be seen in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.1: Image of the autostacker system. 1: Raspberry Pi camera. 2: Objectives
5x, 10x, and 50x. 3: Lead screw for the x-axis. 4: Wafer holder with heating. 5: Slide
holder. 6: Motors for the x and y-axis. 7: Micro manipulator with piezo motors.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Overview of the Autostacker
21
Figure 4.2:
The electronic black box of the Autostacker, this includes: 1.
An
Arduino for temperature control. 2. A temperature driver with PID control via a
thermo couple. 3. adaptors to get cables out of the box and to the Auto stacker.
Figure 4.3:
The lower part of the electronic black box of the Autostacker, this
includes: 1. Several power supplies. 2. Seven motor drivers for the stepper motors.
3. A Raspberry Pi for viewing the Pi camera and controlling the Arduino’s thus
controlling the Autostacker. 4. Arduino for controlling the stepper motors.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Autostacker implementation
The electronic connections of all the parts are quite hard to see in the images, but
can be seen in the schematic image of the Autostacker in figure 4.4
Figure 4.4:
Schematic illustration of the electronic connections between the dif-
ferent parts of the Autostacker. The red wires are the Serial data line for the I2C
communication, the green wires are the Serial clock line in the I2C, and the black
wires represents different connections.
4.2
Inter Integrated Circuit - I2C
To control all the different components of the Autostacker a communication line is
needed. Here an inter integrated circuit (I2C) is used. This communication has the
advantages that it uses two wires, has one master device and can have multiple slave
devices connected to the two buses. One of the wires is called SCL for Serial Clock
Line. This bus is used to synchronisation and to tell when there is data available on
the Serial Data Line (SDA) which is the other bus used to transmit data. The SDA
bus has bidirectional data transfers up to 100 kbit/s in Standard operation mode.
The devices also need to have common ground.
In the autostacker system the master device is the Raspberry Pi. There are the
following slave devices:
• Arduino for temperature control.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Inter Integrated Circuit - I2C
23
• Arduino for motor control.
• Three DACs to control the piezo motors in the micro-manipulator.
• Accelerometer on the slide holder.
These slaves have each a unique address, so the master can send information for only
one at a time. The Raspberry Pi sends information using System Management Bus
(SMBus), this is an implementation of the I2C protocol in Python.
The I2C protocol for sending bits on the lines is shown in figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Protocol for I2C communication, showing the order of the bit used
for what. Printed here from [25]. ACK is acknowledge and NACK stands for No-
acknowledge.
Figure
4.6:
The
sequence
of
bytes
that
is
put
into
the
function
bus.write.i2c.block_data(), this is the sequence that needs to be read in the Arduino
for motor control in order to use the information sent on the I2C. Each of the bytes
in this sequence is transferred as shown by the protocol in figure 4.5.
4.2.1
I2C implementation
A protocol for the I2C bus that consist of transmitting and receiving 16 bytes has been
designed. These bytes are split into four, giving 4x4 byte each 4 bytes representing one
integer. This is because an Arduino Due saves integers as 4 bytes. 4 bytes gives the
possibility to represent a number from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647. This protocol
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Autostacker implementation
is needed for the Arduino Due to know what code to execute when a message from
the Raspberry Pi is sent on the I2C bus. The first integer is reserved for the so-called
MAGIC NUMBER, which represents a desired command. The magic numbers
and the corresponding commands are listed here:
• 0-99 - basic system control commands, where 1 is used to disable the keyboard
control directly given at Arduino, 2 is used to update target position, and 3 is
used to update the current position.
• 100-199 - stepper commands, where 100 is used to set the target to the current
position, 111 is used to give the command move the stage by a number of steps,
and 121 is used to give the command move the stage to the absolute position
given by the integer Int 1.
• 200-299 - Burleigh commands, which is the piezo motor control of the slide.
• 300-399 - Heater commands.
• 500-599 - Vacuum commands.
The following three integers are parameters that can be used in the command with
the given MAGIC NUMBER. In the command for motor control the three integers
corresponds to STEPS, DIRECTION and AXIS. For temperature control the first
integer is used for setting the temperature and the two last integers are unused. These
integers can be used to send different data and do not have to be the number of steps
or the temperature.
The integer STEPS contains the number of steps to move or the absolute position
in steps of a given axis. The Arduino moves the stage relative to the current position
or moves the stage to the absolute position of the specific axis. The STEPS is a
signed integer, where we use 3 bytes out of 4 bytes to express the number of steps.
The 3 bytes is suﬀicient for the stage to move from one end of an axis to the other
end. The remaining 1 byte is used to indicate if the number is positive or negative.
The DIRECTION uses only 1 byte of 4 bytes and is used to indicate if we are going
in positive (1) or negative (0) direction. The autostacker has 7 stepper motors which
are assigned as AXIS such that:
• AXIS=0 →for x axis control of stage
• AXIS=1 →for y axis control of stage
• AXIS=2 →for z axis control of microscope
• AXIS=3 →for x axis control of pickup slide
• AXIS=4 →for z axis control of pickup slide
• AXIS=5 →for slide stage A rotation control
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Inter Integrated Circuit - I2C
25
• AXIS=6 →for slide stage B rotation control
By sending integer data 0 to 6 in the AXIS, we choose the corresponding axis of
control. This gives control of the motion of the stage, the microscope, and the slide
holder during an assembly process.
1 byte contains 8 bits of data. As 1 bit can be used to express 2 integer values (usually
0 and 1), 8 bits or 1 byte can be used to express 28 integer values, from 0 to 255.
Therefore, to increase the range of values used for the operations, we used 4 bytes of
data for transmitting instructions. For sending 4 byte integer data from Raspberry
Pi to Arduino, we convert the integer data type values for MAGIC NUMBER,
STEPS, AXIS and DIRECTION from integer to byte arrays on the Raspberry
Pi.
4.2.2
Programming of the Arduino Due and the Raspberry Pi
To program the Raspberry Pi to send messages on the I2C bus we have chosen the
programming language Python.
The code to send data on an I2C bus can be seen in section B.2.1 in appendix. The
second last line in the function I2Cpicontrol() is the code for sending bytes on the
bus. The rest of the function I2Cpicontrol() turns the given integer inputs, we want
to send, into a list of bytes.
For the Raspberry Pi to read data from the I2C bus the function I2Cpireceivedata
shown in section B.2.2 in appendix is used. This program reads 28 bytes from the
bus.
Before this function is used the Raspberry Pi needs to write a message to the Arduino
telling it to write the current or target position on the I2C bus.
To program the Arduino as a slave in the I2C communication we wrote the code seen
in section B.1. In this code the void receiveEvent is used to make the Arduino listen
to the bus all the time for messages. The I2C communication is setup in the void
setup. Based on the instruction received from Raspberry Pi, the Arduino executes
functions programmed in it, depending on the numbers: MAGIC NUMBER, Int
1/STEPS, Int 2/AXIS and Int 3/Int 3. The following functions are included:
• Go to target position [void I2CGotoTarget()]: This function is called when the
Arduino receives the MAGIC NUMBER 199. The values of STEPS, AXIS
and Int 3 are irrelevant for this function.
• Moving the stage by relative position [void I2CSetAxisTargetPositionRelative()]:
This function is called when the Arduino receives the MAGIC NUMBER 111.
The stepper motor axis assigned by AXIS sets the target position to the value
assigned in STEPS relative to its current position in the direction assigned by
the integer Int 3.
• Moving the stage to absolute position [void I2CSetAxisTargetPositionAbsolute()]:
This function is called when the Arduino receives the MAGIC NUMBER 121.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Autostacker implementation
The stepper motor assigned by AXIS sets the target position to the as the ab-
solute position as assigned in STEPS. DIRECTION is irrelevant for this
function.
• Updating the target position of the stage [void SendtargetPosition()]: This func-
tion is called when the Arduino receives the MAGIC NUMBER 2. This
writes the target positions of the axes on the I2C bus. The values of STEPS,
AXIS and DIRECTION are irrelevant for this function.
• Updating the current position of the stage [void SendcurrentPosition()]: This func-
tion is called when the Arduino receives MAGIC NUMBER 3. This writes
the current positions of the axes on the I2C bus. The values of STEPS, AXIS
and DIRECTION are irrelevant for this function.
4.3
Slide holder with piezo motors
The slide holder is mounted on a Burleigh PCS-5200-7 piezo stage see figure 4.1 label
7. This stage has three axes, each with a micrometer screw and a piezo motor. The
range for the micrometer screws are 25 mm and the range for the piezo motors are 150
µm, see the datasheet in [26]. One of the motors is attached to the Z micrometer screw
for controlling lift of and drop down of the 2D materials. A piezo motor consists of a
piezo crystal that contracts or expands depending on the voltage drop across it. The
movement can be controlled with a resolution of 60 nm, thus this is very fine control
of the position. All three piezo motors on the stage are connected to an amplifier
circuit controlled over the I2C connection. This setup makes it possible to move the
slide in a programmed pattern with the piezo motors while dropping down a flake
of 2D material. One stepper motor moves the slide holder in the x direction, thus
the Y-axis has to be manually adjusted for the stamp to get over the 2D materials of
interest. As the wafer holder can move in this direction no functionality is lost.
4.4
DAC and amplifier circuit
To create an analogue signal to control the three piezo motors in the Burleigh stage
a digital to analogue converter (DAC) is used. The piezo motors are controlled by
applying a voltage across the piezo crystal which makes it contract or expand. The
goal is to control the Burleigh stage from the Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry Pi is
a digital device and sends information in bytes. One byte is 8 bites, and one bit is
zero or one. This information in a digital signal needs to be converted to an analogue
signal. Here the DAC MCP4725 is used, see the datasheet in [27]. This uses 12 bits
to control the output. 12 bits gives numbers from 0 to 4096. This is how many steps
the signal can be divided in. Thus, to create a sine wave the wave should be given
values from 0 to 4096 for the largest possible amplitude. The DAC’s output goes from
0 V to 5 V in 4096 steps. The Burleigh motors can be controlled with voltages from
==PAGE:39==
4.4 DAC and amplifier circuit
27
-60 V to 60 V. Thus we need to amplify the voltage. This is done with two amplifiers.
The first amplifier was placed on a printed circuit board (PCB) together with the
DAC’s. The schematic of the board is shown in figure 4.7. And the PCB can be seen
in figure 4.9 and the connections in figure 4.8. In the schematic below the inverting
and non-inverting terminals were accidentally swapped around. The amplifier part
of the board was then made on a stripboard. The stripboard can be seen in figure
4.9. It corresponds to the right side of the schematics in figure 4.7. The code for
controlling the DACs can be seen in appendix section B.2.3 and B.2.4.
Figure 4.7: The schematics of the DAC board with an amplifier.
4.4.1
Second amplifier circuit
The analogue signal needs to be amplified even more to be able to use more of the piezo
motors range. This is done with the amplifier seen in figure 4.11. The schematics for
this amplifier can be seen in figure 4.10. The gain is approximately 2, which means
that the system is capable of creating a signal in the range of -10 V to +10 V. The
supply voltage is ±35 V.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Autostacker implementation
Figure 4.8: The connections on the DAC PCB board.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 DAC and amplifier circuit
29
Figure 4.9:
Left: First amplifier in the piezo motor circuit, the corresponding
schematics is seen in the right side of figure 4.7. Right: Image of the DAC PCB
board, with one connected DAC.
Figure 4.10: The schematics of the second op-amp in the piezo controller.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Autostacker implementation
Figure 4.11: The second op-amp in the piezo controller circuit.
4.5
Arduino for temperature control
The Arduino Uno in figure 4.1 with label 1 is programmed to control the temperature.
The pins can be seen in appendix in figure A.1. The Arduino reads the value measured
with a connected thermocouple and by the help of a PID temperature controller driver
circuit it heats the wafer until the setpoint value set by the user is reached. The
program running on the Arduino can be seen in appendix B.3. The program writes
the temperature values to the serial port. The computer reads the serial port with
the program Serialplot or Processing and with the program shown in appendix B.3.1
the values are plotted. The setpoint value is set by the user on the Raspberry Pi, this
value is sent on the I2C bus to the Arduino. An example of heating graph is shown
in figure 4.12, here the time for the temperature to increase from 20 to 90 is around
1 min.
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Arduino for motor control
31
Figure 4.12: Temperature when heating the wafer holder from 20 degrees to 90
over approximately 60 s. The blue curve is the set point, and the red curve is the
temperature measured by the thermocouple. The X-axis is time in arbitrary units,
and the Y-axis is in degrees Celsius.
4.6
Arduino for motor control
The stepper motors are controlled using a 32 bit Arduino Due micro-controller which
keeps track of the stepper motors positions. It can be seen in figure 4.2 with label 4.
The pin configuration for an Arduino Due can be seen in appendix figure A.2. This
Arduino is connected as a slave to the I2C bus, and the positions of the motors can be
updated from that Raspberry Pi and a keyboard. When the Pi sends a message that
the position of a motor needs to be changed to a new value, the Arduino updates
the target positions of the motors.
The Arduino then calculates the movements
needed and gives commands to the stepper motor drivers, which in turn control the
stepper motors. The stepper motors have a maximum of steps per rotation of 25600
steps/rotation. This corresponds to 0.014◦/step. This gives a very fine resolution
when rotating the wafer holder. Thus this fine resolution comes with a smaller torque
from the stepper motors to stay in the given position.
4.7
Raspberry Pi and GUI
A Raspberry Pi 3 is used as the main controller in the Autostacker. The pin config-
uration for a Raspberry Pi 3 can be seen in appendix A.3. In this project Python
was used to program the Pi and connect it to the I2C as the master and send and
receive all the data needed. The Raspberry Pi is running Raspbian Jessie. By hav-
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Autostacker implementation
ing a Raspberry Pi as the master in the I2C communications, it is possible to do a
lot of calculations or image analysis to improve the automation of the assembly pro-
cess. A Raspberry Pi is still not the fastest computer, and if more calculation power is
needed a normal computer could be connected to the I2C as the master instead of the
Raspberry Pi. This would require an interface between the computer and the I2C bus.
A graphical user interface (GUI) has been developed in order for a user to control
the Autostacker from the Raspberry Pi. This has been done using the package Tkinter
for Python. The interface can be seen in figure 4.13 and the code for it is shown in
appendix B in section B.2.1. To move the stage by the stepper motors a distance is
chosen or written manually and the desired axis and the direction to move are chosen
by clicking on the arrows. This results in the stage moving that direction as fast as the
electronics can manage. The stage can also be rotated by either 10 degrees or a written
angle by pressing the rotate buttons. For this project only the rotation of wafer A was
used. The wafer holder can be rotated in two ways. Normal rotation which will move
the rotation stepper motor only. Thus, the viewing area in the camera will change.
The other mode which has been implemented is eucentric rotation. Here the wafer
holder centre needs to be found by calibration. This calibration is achieved finding
two points on the rotating arc, with a known angle θ between, on the autostacker
that is 20◦in the current calibration procedure. The position of a point after rotation
around the origin can be calculated by the formula:
[x′
y′
]
=
[cos(θ)
−sin(θ)
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
] [x
y
]
(4.1)
Where (x,y) is the coordinates of the point to be rotated and (x’,y’) is the rotated
point. To make this formula working for an arbitrary origin the point to rotate around
is translated to the origin before rotation around the origin. Hereafter, all the points
are translated back again. This gives two equations with one unknown point, the
wafer centre point. The solution for the wafer centre, given the coordinates of the
two points on the circle arc, are given by:
WC[0] = sin(θ)(P1[0] + P2[0]) + (cos(θ))(P1[1] −P2[1])
2 sin(θ)
(4.2)
WC[1] = sin(θ)(P1[1] + P2[1]) −(cos(θ))(P1[0] −P2[0])
2 sin(θ)
(4.3)
Where the two points on the circle arc are called P1 and P2 and the wafer centre is
called WC, these variables have two coordinates each indexed by P1[0].
For the user of the Autostacker this calibration is done in four steps:
1. Pressing the button Calib. eucentric rot. and find a point to use for calibra-
tion.
==PAGE:45==
4.7 Raspberry Pi and GUI
33
2. The button Calib. point found is pressed and the stage will rotate 20◦. Now
the calibration point needs to be found again using no rotation of the wafer
holder.
3. When the calibration point is found and positioned at the same point in the
camera view the button Calib. point found is pressed again.
4. Lastly the button Cal. wafer centre is pressed and the calibration is done.
After calibration when the user presses the rotation buttons the system will do eu-
centric rotation meaning that the X and Y motors will move so the field of view for
the camera is the same after the rotation of the wafer holder. Thus, if you want to
rotate a flake you do not have to find it again every time.
Figure 4.13: The guided user interface for controlling the Autostacker.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Autostacker implementation
The temperature can be set by writing the wanted temperature under the button
set temp to. The speed of assembly is an important parameter, thus you can set
the stamp to approach the wafer with a chosen velocity in the up right corner of
the GUI by the Set slow motion speed to button. A negative velocity makes the
stamp retract. It is the Arduino due that makes sure that this velocity is kept, as
this micro-controller runs faster than the Raspberry Pi. This is done by calculating
the step times corresponding to this speed and use a timer to see when it is time for
a step.
When finding flakes of 2D materials for assembly, the position can be stored by
pressing the buttons save position 1/2. The Autostacker will return all the seven
stepper motors to these positions when the go to position button is pressed. The
positions of the stepper motors in steps can be seen by pressing update position.
When changing objective, the focal length changes and the images for the camera
will not be in focus. Thus when changing the objective, which is done manually, the
buttons with 5x to 10x lens can be used to get the image into focus fast. To start
the camera capturing images the button picam live is pressed and images can be
captured using the picam capture. If a video of the assembly’s is desired, it can be
started/stopped by the start/stop recording button.
All these functions are coded in Python. This means that functions can be changed
by replacing some of the code or added by adding more code. If a special procedure is
needed that can be coded and the system can follow it automatically. E.g. when doing
a CAB transfer to a TEM grid the CAB needs to be heated from room temperature
to 140 degrees over 15 min and cooled to room temperature again. A program for this
has been written, and is started by pressing the button Start temp. ramp from
20 to 140 C. This ensures a smooth ramping of the temperature, and the sample
can be viewed through the camera during the process.
4.8
Strain gauge implementation
In order to improve the automation of the assembly process, a way of knowing when
the stamp is in contact with the wafer is needed. One way to do that is to measure
the strain in the glass slide in the stamp. When the strain reaches a threshold value
the stamp should be in contact with the wafer. This can be confirmed visually. The
project of fabricating a strain sensor for this purpose has been through collaboration
and supervision of three students Niels Frederik Flemming Holm Frandsen, Gustav
Thomsen, and Gustav Friis Fléron doing their Fagprojekt on implementing a strain
sensor. They measure the strain of the stamp by placing a scale in the Autostacker
and move the stamp by the stepper motors. That resulted in a stacking force position
curve for the stamp without a PDMS piece on shown in figure 4.14. By stacking force
is meant the force between the stamp and the surface it is interacting with.
Next a glass slide with a PDMS piece glued on also called a stamp is used in the
same setup. The data for that experiment is shown in figure 4.15. The glass slide
can ideally be modelled as a beam that deflects lineally with force following Hooke’s
==PAGE:47==
4.8 Strain gauge implementation
35
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Deflection [μm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
Stacking force [cN]
Glass slide deflection
Fit
Measurement
Figure 4.14: Data from bending a glass slide and measure the weight on a scale.
When fitting a linear function to the data a spring constant can be obtained. The
data was obtained by Niels, Gustav, and Gustav.
law. For the glass slide only that seems to be a good model and the spring constant
is found to be 0,15 g/µm. When the PDMS block is added to the slide the curve is
not completely linear. This system consists of two springs in series. Ideally the spring
constant is found by:
1
ktotal
=
1
kP DMS
+
1
kglass
(4.4)
As the PDMS is a lot softer than the glass this would give a spring behaving like
PDMS. As we see in the curve in figure 4.15 that is not the case. For large deflections,
the curve up has the same slope as the curve for the glass slide only. The slope is
smaller for lower deflections. Thus we have a smooth transition from the PDMS block
acting mostly as the spring to mainly the glass acting as the spring. But the system
cannot be modelled as being linear.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Autostacker implementation
0
50
100
150
200
250
Deflection [μm]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Stacking force [cN]
Stamp deflection
Figure 4.15: Data from bending a stamp and measure the weight on a scale in the
Autostacker. The data was obtained by Niels, Gustav, and Gustav.
4.8.1
Backlash for the stepper motors
Another thing that was observed was the backlash of the stepper motors. This was
seen by making an experiment as above, but also retracting the slide until there was
no force from the slide to the scale. A curve like that where the stamp is moved
with stepper motors can be seen in figure 4.16. When doing the same using the piezo
motor it is seen that there is no backlash, as there should not be for a piezo motor.
And the size of the backlash for the stepper motor in the z direction is ≈55µm.
4.8.2
Electrical circuit for strain sensor
The results shown above show that the strain in the glass slide is quite small as the
glass slide bends in the µm range. Thus, we need a strain sensor that can measure
in this range. This sensitivity is reached by having a Wheatstone bridge and amplify
the voltage output from that. This gives a precise measurement of the resistance in
the strain sensor. The electrical circuit for implementing the strain sensor has been
fabricated on a PCB and the circuit can be seen in figure 4.17
==PAGE:49==
4.8 Strain gauge implementation
37
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
Motor movement [μm]
0
1
2
3
4
Stacking force [cN]
Glass slide deflection
Motor moving down
Motor moving up
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Piezo motor movement [μm]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Stacking force [cN]
Deflection by piezo motor
Piezo motor moving down
Piezo motor moving up
Figure 4.16: Motor position vs. weight curves. Left: Done with the stepper motor.
Right: done using the piezo motor. The data was obtained by Niels, Gustav, and
Gustav.
Figure 4.17: The electrical circuit for reading out the strain in the strain sensor.
The strain sensor is the shown as the variable resistance R3 in the Wheatstone bridge.
From the Wheatstone bridge the signal is amplified to get to voltages between around
1 V. The second amplification also calibrates the signal resulting in the signal to show
no strain after a stamp is mounted. The data was obtained by Niels, Gustav, and
Gustav.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Autostacker implementation
4.9
Temperature measurements
The temperature for the wafers is measured with a thermocouple taped to the heated
metal plate and to check this system an external thermometer is placed on top of
the wafer holder. For a range of temperatures, the temperature has been measured
by the thermocouple and a thermometer seen in figure 4.18. The data measured is
shown in table 4.1 and is plotted in figure 4.18. The temperature measured with the
external thermometer is seen to be consistently ∼13 degrees higher than the thermo-
couple measurements. Thus, it seems that there is an offset for the temperature when
measured by the thermocouple. Ideally the two measurements had resulted in the
same temperature, but the thermometer is placed so it rests on the stage where the
thermocouple is taped onto one layer of tape on the stage and the size of it is smaller.
By this the temperature of the thermometer should give the same value or a lower
one for the temperature. This is not the case and shows that there is some unknown
off set in the temperature when measured with the thermocouple.
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Setpoint temperature [ ∘∘]
40
60
80
100
120
Temperature [ ∘∘]
Temperature calibration
Thermocouple value
External thermometer
Figure 4.18: Left: Setup for temperature measurements. Right: The temperature
measured by the thermocouple and an external thermometer for different set point
temperatures.
Set point temperature
Temp. measured with thermocouple
With external thermometer
120
120
134
100
100
110
80
80
96
60
60
77
43
43
59
Table 4.1: Temperature calibration data all numbers have the unit ◦C.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
5.1
Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
Several attempts was made in order to fabricate twisted bi-layer graphene. Most of
them were unsuccessful and several samples were lost during CAB transfer. However
but the stacks shown in figure 5.1 and 5.5 were transferred to a TEM grid. These
samples were made with twisted multi-layer graphene and during fabrication, the
attempted twist angle was 1.1 degrees. Optical images of stack 20 can be seen in the
figures 5.1 and 5.3.
To examine the samples further a Raman spectrum was acquired with the samples
placed on a TEM-grid.
As the layers interact less if they are not exactly in AB
stacking, the Raman spectrum from a twisted bi-layer graphene sample should depend
on the twist angle. The Raman spectrum for stack 20 is shown in figure 5.2. Here
the G peak is seen to be around the double height than the 2D peak. This indicates
that the sample consists of multi-layer graphene stacked in AB stacking. However,
this does not tell whether or not there is twisted multi-layer graphene.
Thus, to
determine the presence of twisted multi-layer graphene and a potential twist angle,
optical images and a TEM image was acquired by Daniel Kelly.
Figure 5.1:
Stack 20 with h-BN and potentially 1.1 degrees twisted multi-layer
graphene. Left: On SiO2. Right: Transferred to a TEM-grid.
A diffraction TEM image can be seen in figure 5.4. Here the diffraction pattern
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results and discussion
Figure 5.2: Raman of Stack 20, FWHM(2D):60 cm−1, I(2D)/I(G): 0.42 .
for a hexagonal lattice can clearly be seen. The pattern is as expected due to the
presence of h-BN in the sample. Since h-BN and graphene have almost identical lattice
constants, the distances between the diffraction points and the centre are likewise
identical. Consequently, if graphene is present in the sample, a similar hexagonal
diffraction pattern would appear. As only a single diffraction pattern is present, the
only way the diffraction pattern for graphene can be present is to be exactly aligned
on top of that from h-BN. As the area the diffraction pattern was obtained from is
unknown, it is most likely that this area only contains h-BN and no graphene. As
the Raman spectrum reveals the presence of graphene in the sample.
For twisted multi-layer graphene the TEM image should reveal two hexagons
rotated with the twist angle in addition to the hexagon from h-BN. If only one
graphene pattern were to be observed it could be due to only one of the multi-layer
graphene flakes being transferred to the TEM-grid or the two flakes having snapped
into a AB stacking and made one piece of graphite. To conclude whether twisted
multi-layer graphene have been fabricated more TEM data is needed.
The second sample (stack 21) successfully transferred to a TEM grid is shown
in figure 5.5 before and after transfer to the TEM-grid. This sample is also made
of h-BN; multi-layer graphene; twisted multi-layer graphene. The area of twisted
multi-layer graphene is smaller than for stack 20, which is due to only part of the
multi-layer graphene flake was picked up during assembly. The outline of the flakes
can be identified vaguely in the the image of the stack on the TEM-grid and the
contrast enhanced image in figure 5.7. A raman spectrum of the sample is shown in
figure 5.6. Here the characteristics of multi-layer graphene can be seen. Thus again
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
41
Figure 5.3: Contrast enhanced image of stack 20.
Figure 5.4: Diffraction TEM image of Stack 20, acquired by Daniel Kelly.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results and discussion
the spectrum can not tell whether the layers are twisted or not. A TEM image of
the sample can be seen in figure 5.8. As expected, the hexagonal pattern for h-BN is
observed. The dots seem to be split into two, but it is hard to resolve them into two
spots and in addition the physical area from which the data is obtained is unknown.
Therefore it is diﬀicult to distinguish any flakes from each other and conclude that
there is a twist in the layers. If two spots could be seen the angle can be measured
by doing a polar plot of the intensity in the image and find the peaks in the intensity
plot. There will be a lower bound on the angle that can be measured by the TEM,
and it can be that this boundary is close to 1 degree. Consequently a different method
capable of measuring small twist angles is needed.
Figure 5.5: Stack 21, h-BN with 1.1 degrees twisted multi-layer graphene.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
43
Figure 5.6: Raman of Stack 21, FWHM(2D):59.6 cm−1, I(2D)/I(G): 0.5 .
Figure 5.7: Contrast enhanced image of stack 21.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results and discussion
Figure 5.8: Diffraction TEM image of Stack 21, acquired by Daniel Kelly.
5.1.1
Raman for twisted bi-layer graphene
As this project is about controlling the assembly of heterostructures with graphene,
Raman spectra of a stack with twisted bi-layer graphene was obtained. Unfortunately
this sample was lost during transfer to a TEM-grid. The first spectrum of the stack
shown in figure 5.9 and 5.10 can be seen in figure 5.11. By overlaying the optical
image of the stack, it may be determined that no graphene is present in the area
probed by the laser for generating the spectrum of fig. 5.12, which is also confirmed
by the spectra. Likewise areas with graphene and areas with bi-layer graphene can
be determined. The next raman spectrum is obtained from a region with one layer
of graphene and is shown in figure 5.12. The spectrum comprises the characteristics
from that of single-layer graphene, which is confirmed by the optical image. When
measuring in an area with twisted bi-layer graphene on the sample the Raman spec-
trum produced can be seen in figure 5.13. Here the some of the peaks change shape.
The height of the 2D peak is slightly smaller than the G peak. This shares many sim-
ilarities with the spectrum for bi-layer graphene seen in section 2.2 figure 2.4. This
can be compared to a spectrum acquired from a region with bi-layer graphene and
twisted graphene shown in figure 5.14. Here the ratio of the intensity of the G over
the 2D peak is even higher. As expected from bi-layer graphene.
Therefore, it may be concluded that the Raman spectrum shown in fig. 5.13 is
that of twisted bi-layer graphene and not merely that of bi-layer graphene.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
45
Figure 5.9: Stack 9 with twisted bi-layer graphene. Left: The graphene flake used
in stacking. Right: Image after first drop down of the h-BN flake.
Figure 5.10: Stack 9 with twisted bi-layer graphene. Left: Image after second drop
down of the h-BN flake. Some of the graphene rolled up when the the sample was
put in acetone. Right: Image of the encapsulated twisted bi-layer graphene stack.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results and discussion
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
ω (cm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
counts (au.)
 Raman spectrum
Figure 5.11: Raman spectrum measured from the red marked centre point of the
optical image to the left. The spectrum confirms that no graphene is present in this
part of the sample.
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
ω (cm−1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
counts (au.)
 Raman spectrum
Figure 5.12: Raman spectrum measured from the red marked centre point of the
optical image to the left. The spectrum confirms the presence of graphene in this
area of the sample.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Twisted bi-layer graphene samples
47
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
ω (cm−1)
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
counts (au.)
 Raman spectrum
Figure 5.13: Raman spectrum measured from the red marked centre point of the op-
tical image to the left. The spectrum reveals the presence of twisted bi-layer graphene.
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
ω (cm−1)
0
5
10
15
20
25
counts (au.)
 Raman spectrum
Figure 5.14: Raman spectrum measured from the red marked centre point of the
optical image to the left. Here there is twisted graphene on top of non-twisted bi-layer
graphene.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results and discussion
5.2
Controlled assembly of Van der Waals
heterostructures
To test the Autostacker and how it can do controlled assembly of van der Waals
heterostructures a stack made of graphene encapsulated in h-BN was fabricated. For
this process the stepper motors were used to make contact between the 2D materials.
The speed of the stamp approaching the wafer piece can be controlled in the system
and was set to 1 µ/s for this assembly. The resulting stack can be seen in figure
5.15. To probe the properties of the graphene a Raman spectrum was obtained as
seen in figure 5.17. This stack was annealed at 600◦C as there might be contaminants
trapped inside the stack during stacking, which is one of the reasons more control
of the assembly is desired. The intensity peak ratio I(2D)/I(G) gives an indication
of the electron mobility in the graphene and this is observed to increase when the
stack is annealed. To examine how flat the 2D materials are assembled AFM is used.
The result is shown in figure 5.18 and a line profile of the image is shown in figure
5.19. Here some bubbles can be observed along with primarily plane areas. These
observations show that the Autostacker is capable of doing controlled assembly of
heterostructures to some extend. There are still contamination in the structures and
sometimes the flakes snap to the wafer which prevents a smooth drop down.
Figure 5.15: Optical image of stack 1 before annealing.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Controlled assembly of Van der Waals heterostructures
49
Figure 5.16: Stack 1 before annealing with the contrast changes to enhance the
graphene flake.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results and discussion
Figure 5.17: Raman of stack 1 before and after annealing, FWHM(2D): 25.2 cm−1
Before annealing, 21.4 cm−1afterannealing I(2D)/I(G): 4.2 before annealing, 6 after
annealing.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Controlled assembly of Van der Waals heterostructures
51
Figure 5.18: AFM of stack 1 before annealing. The line profile shown in figure 5.19
is taken along the indicated line.
Figure 5.19: AFM line profile along the line indicated in figure 5.18.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results and discussion
5.3
Rotational control of the stage
When the stage is rotated one way and back, it may not end exactly at the same
position. Likewise, if it is rotated the other way and then reversed, it may end at
a different position. This issue can be seen from the optical images shown in figure
5.20. The shift depends on the way the stage rotated just before the current position.
This rotating error might mainly be due to the wire that makes up the heating of the
stage. This wire applies a force in some direction and the motor turning the stage has
to resist this force. The error on the angle can be calculated by knowing the wafer
centre from the calibration eucentric rotation. Hereafter, measuring the points of a
index mark during rotation in the optical images. Now three point are known and the
angle they span can be calculated. The error found from this experiment was 0.12◦
which corresponds to 14.2 steps for the stepper motor. To investigate this further the
wire was pulled to both sides manually and images of the index marks were captured.
These can be seen in figure 5.21. Here the maximal angular error was found to be 1
◦. This experiment should represent the worst case scenario for the force from the
wire: Going from maximum in one direction to maximum in the opposite direction.
This will not happen when rotating small angles, but can potentially apply for larger
angles. This experiment prepares the ground for redoing the heating connection to
the wafer holder as this can be a large error source during assembly.
Figure 5.20: Rotational error illustrated by captured a series of images. In the
second image (center), the stage was rotated 5 degrees in negative direction and then
back. In the third image (right), the stage was rotated 5 degrees in positive direction
and then back. The position of the index mark has clearly changed position. In total,
this yields a difference in angle of 0.12 degrees. The images were captured using a
x10 objective.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Rotational control of the stage
53
Figure 5.21: Maximal rotation error due to force from the heating wire. An image is
captured (left) then the wire is pushed manually to one side and an images is captured
(centre). Finally, the wire is pulled to the other side and an images is captured (right).
Together with the centre of the wafer holder and the starting position of the motors
the maximum angle can be calculated. This results in a maximum error of the angle
of 0.94 degrees. The images were acquired using a x5 objective.
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this project, the Autostacker system has been developed to (i) be able to use piezo
motors for control of the stamp in the assembly process, (ii) be controlled using I2C
from a Raspberry Pi, (iii) rotate the wafer holder by eucentric rotation, (iv) control
the temperature of the stage over the I2C. Furthermore, the implementation of a
strain sensor for measuring stacking contact has been started in collaboration with
the three students Niels Frederik Flemming Holm Frandsen, Gustav Thomsen, and
Gustav Friis Fléron. Moreover, it has been shown that the Autostacker is capable of
doing controlled assembly of van der Waals heterostructures controlled by a human.
It has also been shown that the twist angle for 2D materials can be controlled with
a precision better than 1◦.
Attempts were made to fabricate twisted bi-layer graphene with a desired twist
angle of 1.1◦shown to provide superconducting graphene.
Several samples were
studied by TEM but the resulting data were inconclusive and thus could not confirm
a successful fabrication of twisted bi-layer graphene. Thus, more TEM imaging and
more samples need to be obtained/fabricated to show that the Autostacker is capable
of fabricating twisted bi-layer graphene, in particular with the desired twist angle.
Nevertheless, a method to fabricate these twisted structures has been shown. The
angular control of the rotation has been examined and found that it needs to be
changed in a way to reduce the error on the rotation in order to consistently be able
to fabricate bi-layer graphene samples that could be superconducting.
The piezo motors have been characterized by the help of three students Niels,
Gustav, and Gustav. Using the piezo motors and the stepper motors, the bending of
a glass slide with a PDMS block on has been examined. Hereafter, an electrical circuit
has been developed and implemented with a strain sensor in order to be able to detect
when the stamp is in contact with the substrate. This is intended for implementing
an automated pick up of 2D materials and give more control and information of the
assembly process.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Outlook
To develop the Autostacker further for more automated assembly of heterostructures
some things can be changed and new things can be added. The first thing could
be to fully integrate the strain sensor to have automated pick up of materials and
measure the strain during assembly. The Autostacker could also be placed on an
optical table to reduce vibrations. To automate the process further image analysis
and recognition can be developed on the Raspberry Pi to find flakes of 2D materials
and then the strain sensor can be used to pick them up. To control the Autostacker
easier for a user a joystick could also be attached to control some of the stepper
motors. Another thing that is needed to have for automated assembly is auto focus
for the Pi camera, this should also be developed. The DACs for the piezo motors
are placed on a PCB that has a wire soldered to it, this could also be changed. To
continue the study of twisted bi-layer graphene when more samples have been made,
they could be examined by electrical measurements. And then be placed in a cryostat
to check whether the sample could become superconducting.
==PAGE:70==
58
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Kostya S Novoselov, Andre K Geim, Sergei V Morozov, Dingde Jiang, Yanshui
Zhang, Sergey V Dubonos, Irina V Grigorieva, and Alexandr A Firsov. Electric
field effect in atomically thin carbon films. science, 306(5696):666–669, 2004.
[2]
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab, K. Kim,
et al. A roadmap for graphene. nature, 490(7419):192, 2012.
[3]
Hiromasa Murata, Yoshiki Nakajima, Noriyuki Saitoh, Noriko Yoshizawa,
Takashi Suemasu, and Kaoru Toko.
High-electrical-conductivity multilayer
graphene formed by layer exchange with controlled thickness and interlayer. Sci-
entific reports, 9(1):1–5, 2019.
[4]
Sohail Ahmed and Jiabao Yi. Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides
and their charge carrier mobilities in field-effect transistors. Nano-micro letters,
9(4):1–23, 2017.
[5]
Yuan Cao, Valla Fatemi, Shiang Fang, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi,
Efthimios Kaxiras, and Pablo Jarillo-Herrero. Unconventional superconductivity
in magic-angle graphene superlattices. Nature, 556(7699):43–50, 2018.
[6]
Dante M Kennes, Martin Claassen, Lede Xian, Antoine Georges, Andrew J Mil-
lis, James Hone, Cory R Dean, DN Basov, Abhay N Pasupathy, and Angel Ru-
bio. Moiré heterostructures as a condensed-matter quantum simulator. Nature
Physics, pages 1–9, 2021.
[7]
Zhiren Zheng, Qiong Ma, Zhen Bi, Sergio de la Barrera, Ming-Hao Liu, Nannan
Mao, Yang Zhang, Natasha Kiper, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, et al.
Unconventional ferroelectricity in moiré heterostructures. Nature, 588(7836):71–
76, 2020.
[8]
Seongju Ha, Nam Hun Park, Hyeonkyeong Kim, Jiseon Shin, Jungseok Choi,
Sungmin Park, Ji-Yun Moon, Kwanbyung Chae, Jeil Jung, Jae-Hyun Lee, et al.
Enhanced third-harmonic generation by manipulating the twist angle of bilayer
graphene. Light: Science & Applications, 10(1):1–10, 2021.
==PAGE:72==
60
Bibliography
[9]
Satoru Masubuchi, Masataka Morimoto, Sei Morikawa, Momoko Onodera, Yuta
Asakawa, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, and Tomoki Machida.
Au-
tonomous robotic searching and assembly of two-dimensional crystals to build
van der waals superlattices. Nature communications, 9(1):1–12, 2018.
[10] Timothy J. Booth Eli B. Carlin-Coleman. Autostacker - Technical Documen-
tation and Manual.
DTU, Anker Engelunds Vej 1 Bygning 101A, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby, 1 edition, 8 2019.
[11] F. Pizzocchero, L. Gammelgaard, B. S. Jessen, J. M. Caridad, L. Wang, J. Hone,
P. Bøggild, and T. J. Booth. The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of
van der waals heterostructures. Nature communications, 7:11894, 2016.
[12] S Peter Apell, GW Hanson, and Carl Hägglund.
High optical absorption in
graphene. arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.3071, 2012.
[13] P Blake, EW Hill, AH Castro Neto, KS Novoselov, D Jiang, R Yang, TJ Booth,
and AK Geim. Making graphene visible. Applied physics letters, 91(6):063124,
2007.
[14] Bjarke S Jessen, Patrick R Whelan, David MA Mackenzie, Birong Luo,
Joachim D Thomsen, Lene Gammelgaard, Timothy J Booth, and Peter Bøggild.
Quantitative optical mapping of two-dimensional materials. Scientific reports,
8(1):1–8, 2018.
[15] Raman spectroscopy. https://integratedoptics.com/Raman-Spectroscopy.
Accessed: 2021-06-10.
[16] Andrea C Ferrari and Denis M Basko. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool
for studying the properties of graphene. Nature nanotechnology, 8(4):235–246,
2013.
[17] RJ Nemanich, G Lucovsky, and SA Solin. Infrared active optical vibrations of
graphite. Solid State Communications, 23(2):117–120, 1977.
[18] Ado Jorio and Luiz Gustavo Cançado. Raman spectroscopy of twisted bilayer
graphene. Solid State Communications, 175:3–12, 2013.
[19] Raman imaging of single-layer and multi-layer graphene.
https://www.
nanophoton.net/applications/nano-carbon/multilayer-graphene.
Ac-
cessed: 2021-06-08.
[20] Scientific image - atomic force microscope illustration.
http://www.nisenet.
org/catalog/scientific-image-atomic-force-microscope-illustration.
Accessed: 2019-01-02.
[21] A. Engel, H. E. Gaub, and D. J. Müller. Atomic force microscopy: a forceful
way with single molecules. Current biology, 9(4):R133–R136, 1999.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
61
[22] Majharul Haque Khan, Hua Kun Liu, Xudong Sun, Yusuke Yamauchi, Yoshio
Bando, Dmitri Golberg, and Zhenguo Huang.
Few-atomic-layered hexagonal
boron nitride: Cvd growth, characterization, and applications. Materials Today,
20(10):611–628, 2017.
[23] Joachim Dahl Thomsen. Atomic Scale Structural Control of Two-Dimensional
Materials.
PhD thesis, Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology Technical
University of Denmark, Anker Engelunds Vej 1 Bygning 101A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby,
7 2017.
[24] Timothy J. Booth Eli B. Carlin-Coleman. Autostacker technical documentation
and manual. Master’s thesis, Technical university of Denmark, 2019.
[25] Basics of i2c communication.
https://www.circuitbasics.com/basics-of-
the-i2c-communication-protocol/. Accessed: 2021-05-12.
[26] Datasheet for burleigh stage.
http://www.alascience.com/products/pdf/
PCS5000_web.pdf. Accessed: 2021-01-20.
[27] Datasheet
for
dac
mcp4725.
https://www.sparkfun.com/datasheets/
BreakoutBoards/MCP4725.pdf. Accessed: 2021-01-20.
[28] Arduino uno tutorial.
https://diyi0t.com/arduino-uno-tutorial/.
Ac-
cessed: 2021-06-02.
[29] Arduino due. https://store.arduino.cc/arduino-due. Accessed: 2021-06-
02.
[30] Raspberry pi gpio access. https://www.electronicwings.com/raspberry-pi/
raspberry-pi-gpio-access. Accessed: 2021-06-02.
==PAGE:74==
62
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Microcontrollers and
Raspberry Pi 3
A.1
Pins for Arduinos and Raspberry Pi
Figure A.1: Pin descriptions for an Arduino Uno, copied from the website [28].
==PAGE:76==
64
A Microcontrollers and Raspberry Pi 3
Figure A.2: Pin descriptions for an Arduino Due, copied from the website [29].
==PAGE:77==
A.1 Pins for Arduinos and Raspberry Pi
65
Figure A.3: Pin descriptions for a Raspberry Pi 3, copied from the website [30].
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Programs
B.1
Motor controlling Arduino Due
1 #include "KeyboardController.h"
2
3 #include <Wire.h>
4
5 // Debugging output: from https://forum.arduino.cc/index.php?topic=46900.0
6 // toggle debug output by commenting out this line
7 //#define DEBUG
8
9 // debugging output definitions
10 #ifdef DEBUG
11
#define DEBUG_PRINT(x)
Serial.print (x)
12
#define DEBUG_PRINTDEC(x)
Serial.print (x, DEC)
13
#define DEBUG_PRINTLN(x)
Serial.println (x)
14 #else
15
#define DEBUG_PRINT(x)
16
#define DEBUG_PRINTDEC(x)
17
#define DEBUG_PRINTLN(x)
18 #endif
19
20 // Initialize USB Controller
21 USBHost usb;
22
23 // Attach keyboard controller to USB
24 KeyboardController keyboard(usb);
25
26 int oem; //the oem keycode for the keyboard key pressed
27 int mod; //the keycode for the modifier key pressed
28
29 // Initialize all the variable needed as the type needed.
30 unsigned char rxMessage[32] = "\0";
31 volatile bool newMessageAvailable = false;
32
33
34
35 int messageLength = 4;
36 int msglenbytes = 16;
37 int receivedmessage[16]={0};
38 int input1[4]={0};
39 int input2[4]={0};
40 int input3[4]={0};
==PAGE:80==
68
B Programs
41 int input4[4]={0};
42 int output1=0;
43 int msgrecievedint[4]={0};
44 int msgsend[4]={0};
45 int steptimeslide = 5;
46 int approachsteps = 1000;
47 volatile bool approachtrue = false;
48 int timestart = 0;
49 int timeend = 2;
50 int h=0;
51 long signed txmessage[7]={0};
52 bool keyboardEnabled = true;
53 bool slowmotionDir = true;
54
55
56 int defaultStepTimes[] = {100,100,100,100,20,500,500};
57
58 String axisNames[] = {"stageX", "stageY", "microscopeZ", "burlX", "burlZ", "
wafer1", "wafer2"};
59
60 byte axisDirPins[] = {22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34};
61 // this array holds the Arduino pin references for the direction pins.
62
63 byte axisStepPins[] = {23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35};
64 // this array holds the Arduino pin references for the step pins.
65
66 const byte numAxes = sizeof(axisStepPins); // since the pin refs are bytes,
no worries.
67
68 bool axisInverted[] = {true, true, true, true, true, true, true};
69
70 long signed currentPosition[] = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0};
71 // holds the present position. Using negative numbers to indicate that the
stage is not homed.
72 // 30 million gives us 0.9375 meters to play with before we go positive, and
this is much bigger
73 // than the present stage size.
74
75 long signed targetPosition[] = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0};
76 // holds the target position. Again negative numbers for the unhomed.
77
78 long signed savedPositions[10][(numAxes+1)]; // we use the final value as a
flag to indicate the
79 //position has been set.
80
81 long signed deltaPosition[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}; // don't think we ever
use this
82
83 long unsigned previousMicros[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
84
85 long unsigned currentMicros[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
86
87 bool stepState[] = {LOW, LOW, LOW, LOW, LOW, LOW, LOW};
88
89 byte currentDirection[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
==PAGE:81==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
69
90
91 volatile bool limitSwitchTriggered[] = {false, false, false, false, false,
false, false};
92 //volatile because we change this in an interrupt service handler
93
94 bool homed = 0;
95 //set to true when the stage is homed.
96
97 long signed axisMaxima[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
98 long signed axisMinima[] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};
99
100 int stepTime;
101 long nSteps;
102
103 ////// begin function definitions , axes
104
105 // Caluculate the difference between the target and the current position for
all axes
106 void calculateDelta(){
107
for(int i = 0; i < numAxes; i++){
108
deltaPosition[i]=targetPosition[i]-currentPosition[i];
109
};
110
111
};
112
113 void stopfunction(){
114
setTargetToCurrent();
115
approachtrue = false;
116
117 }
118
119
120
121 void moveToTarget(){
122
while(memcmp ((const void *)targetPosition , (const void *)currentPosition ,
sizeof (targetPosition)) != 0){
123
//this compares the memory blocks directly, and only evaluates true if
the contents are
124
//the same. This means the loop iterates until the target and current
positions match.
125
126
for(int i = 0; i < numAxes; i++){
127
if(targetPosition[i]-currentPosition[i]>0){
128
moveAxisNoDelay(i, true);
129
}
130
else if(targetPosition[i]-currentPosition[i]<0){
131
moveAxisNoDelay(i, false); //move forwards towards zero difference
132
}
133
else{
134
};
135
};
136
};
137 };
138
139
/*****
==PAGE:82==
70
B Programs
140 moves the axis without using delay - doesn't block the code. Doesn't specify
when or how to
141 stop, so will just run the axis indefinitely. It updates the (
currentPosition), so this is the best
142 way to terminate it. It also gives a return of 1 if the motor moved, and 0
otherwise.
143
*****/
144
145
int moveAxisNoDelay(byte axisNum, bool direction){
146 //want to leave direction out as a separate parameter to allow limit
switches to bounce the axes
147
148
byte i = axisNum;
149
if (direction != axisInverted[i]){
150
digitalWrite(axisDirPins[i], HIGH);
151
}else{
152
digitalWrite(axisDirPins[i], LOW);
153
};
154
155
currentMicros[i] = micros();
156
if ( (currentMicros[i] - previousMicros[i] > defaultStepTimes[i]) &&
stepState[i] == HIGH ){
157
previousMicros[i] = currentMicros[i];
158
stepState[i] = LOW;
159
digitalWrite(axisStepPins[i], stepState[i]);
160
};
161
162
//if the step state is low and it's time for a step, then we
163
if ( (currentMicros[i] - previousMicros[i] > defaultStepTimes[i]) &&
stepState[i] == LOW ){
164
previousMicros[i] = currentMicros[i];
165
stepState[i] = HIGH;
166
digitalWrite(axisStepPins[i], stepState[i]);
167
if (direction){
168
currentPosition[i]++;
169
return 1; // i moved
170
}else{
171
currentPosition[i]--;
172
return 1; // i moved
173
};
174
175
};
176
return 0; // i didn't move
177 };
178
//Function to move axis by steps
179 void moveAxisBySteps(long nSteps, byte axisNum, bool direction){
180
int i = axisNum;
181
for(int j=0; j < nSteps; ){
182
j += moveAxisNoDelay(axisNum, direction);
183
};
184 };
185 // moveAxisNoDelay returns 1 if the axis moves and 0 otherwise
186
//irrespective of direction. Maybe get it to return -1 or 1 or 0
187
//and use abs() and an 'if' here? Probably no point unless we
188
//want a useful return value.
==PAGE:83==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
71
189
190
191 /*****
192 Just provides serial port echoing of the keypresses for debugging purposes
193 *****/
194 void echoKeypress(){
195
DEBUG_PRINT("Pressed: key = ");
196
DEBUG_PRINT(oem);
197
DEBUG_PRINT(", modifier = ");
198
DEBUG_PRINTLN(mod);
199 };
200
201 void echoStagePosition(){
202
for (byte i = 0; i < numAxes; i++){
203
Serial.print(axisNames[i]);
204
Serial.print(": ");
205
Serial.print(currentPosition[i]);
206
Serial.println();
207
};
208 };
209
210 //Function to save position
211 void savePosition(byte index){
212
for(int i = 0; i<numAxes; i++){
213
savedPositions[index][i] = currentPosition[i];
214
};
215
savedPositions[index][numAxes] = 1;
216 };
217
218
219 void echoSavedPositions(){
220
for(int i = 0; i<10; i++){
//watch out - this breaks if the size of the
saved array changes.
221
Serial.print("Saved position: ");
222
for(int j = 0; j<numAxes; j++){
223
Serial.print("(");
224
Serial.print(savedPositions[i][j]);
225
Serial.print(")");
226
};
227
Serial.println();
228
};
229 };
230
231
232 byte recallPosition(byte index){
233
if (savedPositions[index][numAxes] == 1){
234
for(int i = 0; i<numAxes; i++){
235
targetPosition[i] = savedPositions[index][i];
236
};
237
return 1;
238
}else{
239
return 0;
240
};
241 };
242
==PAGE:84==
72
B Programs
243 //Function to set target as current position
244 void setTargetToCurrent(){
245
for(int i = 0; i<numAxes; i++){
246
targetPosition[i] = currentPosition[i];
247
};
248
Serial.println("target set to current");
249 };
250
251
252 /*****
253 Lookup table for keyboard-based movements
254 *****/
255 int modifierToSteps(int mod){
256
if (mod == 0){return 4;}; // none
1.25µm
257
if (mod == 2){return 16;}; // lshift
5µm
258
if (mod == 1){return 80;}; // lctrl
25µm
259
if (mod == 8){return 320;}; // lwin
100µm
260
if (mod == 4){return 1600;}; // lalt
500µm
261
if (mod == 64){return 3200;}; // altgr
1mm
262
if (mod == 128){return 8000;}; // rwin
2.5mm
263
if (mod == 16){return 16000;}; // rctrl
5mm
264
if (mod == 32){return 32000;}; // rshift 10mm
265
return 0;
266 };
267
268 /*****
269 Lookup table for keyboard-based movements
270 *****/
271 int modifierToAngle(int mod){
272
if (mod == 0){return 7;}; // none
0.1 deg
273
if (mod == 2){return 36;}; // lshift
0.5
274
if (mod == 3){return 79;}; // lctrl + lshift 1.1109375
275
if (mod == 1){return 178;}; // lctrl
2.5
276
if (mod == 8){return 356;}; // lwin 5.0
277
if (mod == 4){return 534;}; // lalt 7.5
278
if (mod == 64){return 1067;}; // altgr
15
279
if (mod == 128){return 2133;}; // rwin
30
280
if (mod == 16){return 3200;}; // rctrl
45
281
if (mod == 32){return 6400;}; // rshift 90 degrees
282
return 0;
283 };
284
285
286
287 /*****
288 Moves the stage repeatedly to test for reproducibility and backlash. Range
gives the maximum
289 number of steps to move
290 *****/
291 void testAxis(byte axisNum, bool direction, int range, int repeats){
292
293
294
295
for (int i = 0; i < repeats; i++){
296
==PAGE:85==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
73
297
int n1 = 0;
298
int n2 = 1;
299
int n3 = 1;
300
301
for ( ; n3 < range; ) {
302
if(direction){
303
//if(direction^axisInverted[axisNum]){
304
targetPosition[axisNum]=targetPosition[axisNum]+n3;
305
moveToTarget();
306
echoStagePosition();
307
delay(500); //to read the micrometer!
308
targetPosition[axisNum]=targetPosition[axisNum]-n3;
309
moveToTarget();
310
echoStagePosition();
311
delay(500); //to read the micrometer!
312
}else{
313
targetPosition[axisNum]=targetPosition[axisNum]-n3;
314
moveToTarget();
315
echoStagePosition();
316
delay(500); //to read the micrometer!
317
targetPosition[axisNum]=targetPosition[axisNum]+n3;
318
moveToTarget();
319
echoStagePosition();
320
delay(500); //to read the micrometer!
321
};
322
323
n1 = n2;
324
n2 = n3;
325
n3 = n1 + n2;
326
};
327
};
328 };
329
330
331 /*****
332 Sets up actions to take on particular keypresses
333 *****/
334 void keyPressed(){
335
//Serial.println("keypressed");
336 oem = keyboard.getOemKey();
337 Serial.println(oem);
338 mod = keyboard.getModifiers();
339
340 /*
341 mods:
342 lctrl 1
343 lshift 2
344 lalt 4
345 lwin 8
346 rctrl 16
347 rshift 32
348 altgr 64
349 rwin 128
350 */
351
==PAGE:86==
74
B Programs
352
switch (oem){
353
case 92:
354
//left arrow numpad
355
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 0, false);
356
break;
357
358
case 94:
359
//right arrow numpad
360
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 0, true);
361
break;
362
363
case 96:
364
//up arrow numpad
365
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 1, true);
366
break;
367
368
case 90:
369
//down arrow numpad
370
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 1, false);
371
break;
372
373
case 86:
374
//numpad -
375
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 2, true);
376
break;
377
378
case 87:
379
//numpad +
380
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 2, false);
381
break;
382
383
384
//burleigh steppers
385
case 85:
386
//numpad *
387
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 3, false);
388
break;
389
390
case 84:
391
//numpad /
392
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 3, true);
393
break;
394
395
case 75:
396
//PgUp
397
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 4, false);
398
break;
399
400
case 78:
401
//PgDn
402
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToSteps(mod), 4, true);
403
break;
404
405
406
//rotations
==PAGE:87==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
75
407
408
case 20:
409
//q
410
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToAngle(mod), 5, false);
411
break;
412
413
case 8:
414
//e
415
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToAngle(mod), 5, true);
416
break;
417
418
case 4:
419
//a
420
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToAngle(mod), 6, false);
421
break;
422
423
case 7:
424
//d
425
moveAxisBySteps(modifierToAngle(mod), 6, true);
426
break;
427
428
429
case 30:
430
// 1 key
431
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
432
savePosition(1);
433
Serial.println("Position 1 saved");
434
echoSavedPositions();
435
};
436
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
437
recallPosition(1);
438
Serial.println("Position 1 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
439
};
440
break;
441
442
//... here we use the number row to recall 10 different positions
443
444
//case 31:
445
// 2 key
446
//testAxis(0, true, 20, 10000, 1000);
447
//break;
448
449
//case 32:
450
// 3 key
451
//testAxis(0, false, 20, 10000, 1000);
452
//break;
453
454
case 31:
455
// 2 key
456
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
457
savePosition(2);
458
Serial.println("Position 2 saved");
459
echoSavedPositions();
460
};
461
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
==PAGE:88==
76
B Programs
462
recallPosition(2);
463
Serial.println("Position 2 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
464
};
465
break;
466
467
case 32:
468
// 3 key
469
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
470
savePosition(3);
471
Serial.println("Position 3 saved");
472
echoSavedPositions();
473
};
474
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
475
recallPosition(3);
476
Serial.println("Position 3 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
477
};
478
break;
479
480
case 33:
481
// 4 key
482
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
483
savePosition(4);
484
Serial.println("Position 4 saved");
485
echoSavedPositions();
486
};
487
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
488
recallPosition(4);
489
Serial.println("Position 4 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
490
echoSavedPositions();
491
};
492
break;
493
494
case 34:
495
// 5 key
496
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
497
savePosition(5);
498
Serial.println("Position 5 saved");
499
echoSavedPositions();
500
};
501
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
502
recallPosition(5);
503
Serial.println("Position 5 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
504
};
505
break;
506
507
case 35:
508
// 6 key
509
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
510
savePosition(6);
511
Serial.println("Position 6 saved");
512
echoSavedPositions();
513
};
514
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
515
recallPosition(6);
516
Serial.println("Position 6 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
==PAGE:89==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
77
517
};
518
break;
519
520
case 36:
521
// 7 key
522
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
523
savePosition(7);
524
Serial.println("Position 7 saved");
525
echoSavedPositions();
526
};
527
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
528
recallPosition(7);
529
Serial.println("Position 7 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
530
};
531
break;
532
533
case 37:
534
// 8 key
535
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
536
savePosition(8);
537
Serial.println("Position 8 saved");
538
echoSavedPositions();
539
};
540
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
541
recallPosition(8);
542
Serial.println("Position 8 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
543
};
544
break;
545
546
case 38:
547
// 9 key
548
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
549
savePosition(9);
550
Serial.println("Position 9 saved");
551
echoSavedPositions();
552
};
553
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
554
recallPosition(9);
555
Serial.println("Position 9 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
556
};
557
break;
558
559
case 39:
560
// 0 key
561
if (mod == 2){ //lshift
562
savePosition(0);
563
Serial.println("Position 0 saved");
564
echoSavedPositions();
565
};
566
if (mod == 1){ //lctrl
567
recallPosition(0);
568
Serial.println("Position 0 recalled. Press Enter to go to.");
569
};
570
break;
571
==PAGE:90==
78
B Programs
572
case 40:
573
// enter key
574
moveToTarget();
575
echoStagePosition();
576
break;
577
578
case 41:
579
// escape key
580
setTargetToCurrent();
581
moveToTarget();
582
echoStagePosition();
583
break;
584
585
case 42:
586
// backspace
587
Serial.println("Target position set to current position.");
588
setTargetToCurrent();
589
break;
590
591 /*
case 4:*/
592 /*
// a*/
593 /*
break;*/
594 /*
*/
595 /*
case 7:*/
596 /*
// d*/
597 /*
break;*/
598 /*
*/
599 /*
case 26:*/
600 /*
// w*/
601 /*
break;*/
602 /*
*/
603 /*
case 22:*/
604 /*
// s*/
605 /*
break;*/
606 /*
*/
607 /*
case 21:*/
608 /*
// r*/
609 /*
break;*/
610 /*
*/
611 /*
case 9:*/
612 /*
// f*/
613 /*
break;*/
614 /*
*/
615 /*
case 20:*/
616 /*
// q*/
617 /*
break;*/
618 /*
*/
619 /*
case 8:*/
620 /*
// e*/
621 /*
break;*/
622 /*
*/
623 /*
case 73:*/
624 /*
// Ins*/
625 /*
break;*/
626 /*
*/
==PAGE:91==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
79
627 /*
case 74:*/
628 /*
// Home*/
629 /*
break;*/
630
631
//case 75:
632
// PgUp
633
//testAxis(0, false, 20000, 1000);
634
//break;
635
//break;
636
637 /*
case 76:*/
638 /*
// Del*/
639 /*
break;*/
640 /*
*/
641 /*
case 77:*/
642 /*
// End*/
643 /*
break;*/
644 /*
*/
645 /*
case 78:*/
646 /*
// PgDn*/
647 /*
break;*/
648
649
};
650
echoKeypress();
651
echoStagePosition();
652 };
653
654 /*****
655 This function intercepts key release, right now does nothing except returns
1.
656 *****/
657 int keyReleased() {
658
DEBUG_PRINTLN("Keys Released");
659
return 1;
660 };
661
662
663
664 //I2C functions to call with the corresponding magic number.
665
666
667
668 //Move stage by steps relative to current position
669 void I2CSetAxisTargetPositionRelative(int msg[]){
670
unsigned int rxAxis = msg[2];
671
bool rxDir = (bool)msg[3];
672
unsigned int rxSteps=msg[1];
673
674
if(rxDir){
675
targetPosition[rxAxis]=targetPosition[rxAxis]+rxSteps;
676
}else{
677
targetPosition[rxAxis]=targetPosition[rxAxis]-rxSteps;
678
};
679
680 }
==PAGE:92==
80
B Programs
681
682 //Move stage to position absolute to steps
683 void I2CSetAxisTargetPositionAbsolute(int msg[]){
684
unsigned int rxAxis = msg[2];
685
bool rxSignIsNegative = (bool)msg[3];
686
unsigned int rxPosition=msg[1];
687
Serial.println("absolute moved");
688
Serial.println(rxPosition);
689
690
if(rxSignIsNegative){
691
targetPosition[rxAxis]=-rxPosition;
692
}else{
693
targetPosition[rxAxis]=rxPosition;
694
};
695 }
696
697 //Move the stage to target position
698 void I2CGotoTarget(){
699
moveToTarget();
700 }
701
702 //Move the slide by step down with certain speed.
703 void I2CSetAxisTargetPositionApproachRelative(int msg[]){
704
approachtrue = true;
705
timestart = millis();
706
707 }
708
709
710
711 void I2CStopApproach(int msg[]){
712
approachtrue = false;
713
Serial.println("Approach done");
714 }
715
716 void I2CSetApproachSpeed(int msg[]){
717
steptimeslide = msg[1]/1000;
718
approachsteps = msg[2];
719
slowmotionDir = (bool)msg[3];
720
Serial.print("steptime set to:");
721
Serial.println(steptimeslide);
722
Serial.println(slowmotionDir);
723 }
724
725
726 //send target position via I2c bus
727 void SendtargetPosition(){
728
for(int i=0;i<7;i++){
729
txmessage[i]=targetPosition[i];
730 }
731 }
732 //send current position via I2c bus
733 void SendcurrentPosition(){
734
for(int i=0;i<7;i++){
735
txmessage[i]=currentPosition[i];
==PAGE:93==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
81
736 } }
737
738
739 void I2CSetTargetToCurrent(){
740
setTargetToCurrent();
741
Serial.print("set target complete");
742 }
743
744 void parseMessage( int msg[]){
745
// 0-99 - basic system control commands
746
// 100-199 - stepper commands
747
// 200-299 - burleigh commands
748
// 300-399 - heater commands
749
// 400-499 -
750
// 500-599 - vacuum commands
751
// 600-699 - ...
752
Serial.println(msg[0]);
753
Serial.println("L");
754
if(msg[0]==0){
755
keyboardEnabled = false;
756
Serial.println("Manual keyboard control DISABLED");
757
}else if(msg[0]==1){
758
keyboardEnabled = true;
759
Serial.println("Keyboard enabled.");
760
}else if(msg[0]==100){
761
I2CSetTargetToCurrent();
762
Serial.println("stop move");
763
//100 - cancel the intended move
764
}else if(msg[0]==111){
765
I2CSetAxisTargetPositionRelative(msg);
766
//111 dx dy ... set to move relative
767
}else if(msg[0]==121){
768
I2CSetAxisTargetPositionAbsolute(msg);
769
//121 x y ... set to move absolute (careful now...)
770
}else if(msg[0]==130){
771
I2CSetAxisTargetPositionApproachRelative(msg);
772
//131 set z aproach speed to userdefined speed
773
}else if(msg[0]==131){
774
I2CSetApproachSpeed(msg);
775
//131 set z aproach speed to userdefined speed
776
}else if(msg[0]==132){
777
I2CStopApproach(msg);
778
//132 stop the approach
779
}else if(msg[0]==199){
780
I2CGotoTarget();
781
Serial.println("Go to target position");
782
//actually make the move
783
}else if(msg[0]==2){
784
SendtargetPosition();
785
//actually make the move
786
}else if(msg[0]==3){
787
SendcurrentPosition();
788
//actually make the move
789
}else{
==PAGE:94==
82
B Programs
790
//more commands here - I2CReportCurrent , I2CReportTarget ,
I2CSetHomePosition
791
//I2CReport... must populate txMessage with the requested value. The
master
792
//device will request it and then sendData is called.
793
794
// (manually to set a specific position just change both the target
and current positions *while not moving*)
795
Serial.println("Got a message I didn't understand , check the magic
number.");
796
}
797 }
798
799
800 // Function to change integers that need to be written on the I2C bus into
four bytes.
801 void intToBytes(int input,int output[4])
802
{
803
int in=input;
804
if(input <0)// If the integer is negative assign the first byte as 1.
805
{
806
in=abs(input);
807
}
808
output[0]=in/(256*256*256);
809
in=in%(256*256*256);
810
output[1]=in/(256*256);
811
in=in%(256*256);
812
output[2]=in/(256);
813
output[3]=in%(256);
814
if(input <0)
815
{
816
output[0]=1;
817
}
818
819 }
820 //Function that takes four bytes as input and convert that to a integer
821 void bytesToInt(int input[4],int output)
822 {
823
output1 = pow(-1,input[0])*(input[1]*256*256 + input[2]*256+input[3]);
824
//Serial.println(output1);
825 }
826
827 // Function that read bytes from the I2C bus.
828 void receiveEvent(int howMany)
829 {
830
while(1 < Wire.available()) // loop through all but the last
831
{
832
for(int i = 0; i <= msglenbytes; i++)
833
{
834
receivedmessage[i]= Wire.read(); // receive byte as a character
835
}
836
}
837
newMessageAvailable = true;
838
Serial.println("New message available");
839
// Turn the bytes read into integers
==PAGE:95==
B.1 Motor controlling Arduino Due
83
840 for(int i = 0; i <= 16; i++)
841
{
842
//Serial.print(i);
843
if(i<4)
844
{
845
input1[i]=receivedmessage[i+1];
846
//Serial.print(input1[i]);
847
}
848
else if(i<8 && i>=4)
849
{
850
input2[i-4]=receivedmessage[i+1];
851
}
852
else if(i<12 && i>=8)
853
{
854
input3[i-8]=receivedmessage[i+1];
855
}
856
else if(i<16 && i>=12)
857
{
858
input4[i-12]=receivedmessage[i+1];
859
}
860
// Serial.print(input1[i]);
861
//Serial.print("\n element of input 1");
862
863
}
864
865
866 bytesToInt(input1,output1);//Overwrites the global variable output1 to the
integer.
867 msgrecievedint[0]=output1;
868 bytesToInt(input2,output1);
869 msgrecievedint[1]=output1;
870 bytesToInt(input3,output1);
871 msgrecievedint[2]=output1;
872 bytesToInt(input4,output1);
873 msgrecievedint[3]=output1;
874 //parseMessage(msgrecievedint);// Message recived, so now execute the
message.
875 }
876
877 // Function that writes msgsend to the I2C bus
878 void sendData(){
879
for(int j=0; j<7; j++)
880
{
881
intToBytes(txmessage[j],msgsend);
882
for(int i=0; i<4; i++)
883
{
884
Wire.write(msgsend[i]);
885
}
886
}Serial.println("Data written to the I2C bus");
887
}
888 //--------------------------------------------------------
889 // Setup the I2C and the addresse
890 void setup() {
891
// put your setup code here, to run once:
892
Serial.begin(9600);
==PAGE:96==
84
B Programs
893
Serial.println("Program started");
894
pinMode(43,INPUT_PULLUP);
895
attachInterrupt(digitalPinToInterrupt(43),stopfunction ,FALLING);
896
897
Wire.setClock(100000);
898
899
// initialize i2c as slave
900
Wire.begin(8);
901
902
// define callbacks for i2c communication
903
Wire.onReceive(receiveEvent);// Make the arduino listen to the I2C bus to
read when a meassage is send.
904
Wire.onRequest(sendData);
905
906
//delay to allow USB device to warm up
907
delay(500);
908
Serial.print("receiving");
909
910
for (int i = 0; i < numAxes; i++){
911
pinMode(axisDirPins[i], OUTPUT);
912
pinMode(axisStepPins[i], OUTPUT);
913
}
914 }
915
916
917 void loop() {
918
//if(keyboardEnabled){
919
//usb.Task();
920
//};
921
if (newMessageAvailable){
922
parseMessage(msgrecievedint);// Message recived, so now execute the
message.
923
newMessageAvailable = false;
924
}
925
926
if(approachtrue){
927
int timenow = millis();
928
//Serial.println(timenow);
929
//Serial.println(timestart);
930
if (timenow>timestart+steptimeslide){
931
if(slowmotionDir){
932
targetPosition[4]=targetPosition[4]+1;
933
}else{
934
targetPosition[4]=targetPosition[4]-1;
935
};
936
moveToTarget();
937
timestart = millis();
938
}
939
940
941
}
942 };
==PAGE:97==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
85
B.2
Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
B.2.1
Graphical user interface code with I2C implemented
1 # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2 """
3 Created on Thu Oct 22 11:59:25 2020
4
5 @author: Mads
6 """
7 addr=0X8
8
9 leadscrewpitch=8000
# microns per revolution
10 stepsperrotation=200
11 microstepsperstep=128
12 mustepspermicron = stepsperrotation*microstepsperstep/leadscrewpitch
###
number of steps per micron
13 mustepsperdegree = (microstepsperstep*stepsperrotation)/360
14
15 burleighleadscrewpitch = 793.75 # microns per revolution
16 burleighmustepspermicron = stepsperrotation*microstepsperstep/
burleighleadscrewpitch
### number of steps per micron for burleigh
micromanipulator
17 #distancetomoveinmicrons = 100
18 #angletomoveindegrees = 1
19 #mustepstomove = disancetomoveinmicrons * microstepspermicron
20 #mustepstomovebyangle
21 steps=mustepspermicron*100
#initialized to move 100 microns
22 angle=0
23 axis=0
24
25 from smbus2 import SMBus
26 from pathlib import Path
27 import tkinter as tk
28 from tkinter import messagebox as mb
29 import tkinter.ttk as ttk
30 from math import *
31 import time
32 import numpy as np
33 from I2Cpicontrol2 import I2Cpicontrol
34 from I2Cpireceivedata import I2Cpireceivedata
35 import os
36 from subprocess import call
37 import threading
38
39 #from picamera import PiCamera
40 import picamera
41 import datetime
42 from PIL import Image, ImageTk
43 import cv2
44
45
46
47 #wafer center
==PAGE:98==
86
B Programs
48 WC = np.array([0,0])
49
50 Cpx=np.zeros(4)
51 Cpy=np.zeros(4)
52 count =0
53 eucalib=False
54
55 #### Arrays for saving positions
56 pos1 = np.array([0,0,0])
57 pos2 = np.array([0,0,0])
58 pos3 = np.array([0,0,0])
59
60 # Set up the camera
61 camera = picamera.PiCamera()
62 dt_string="1"
63
64 ## Variable for approach slowly
65 approachStepTime = 1 # 1 ms
66
67
68 folderpath="interfacebottoms/"
69
70 target_position=[]
71 current_position=[]
72
73 bus = SMBus(1)
74
75 def I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir):
76
magic=list(magic.to_bytes(4,'big'))
77
if steps<0 :
#If
steps is negative send the first byte as 1
78
steps1=abs(steps)
79
a=1
80
steps=list(a.to_bytes(1,'big'))
81
steps.extend(list(steps1.to_bytes(3,'big')))
82
else :
83
steps=list(steps.to_bytes(4,'big'))
84
85
86
axis=list(axis.to_bytes(4,'big'))
87
Dir=list(Dir.to_bytes(4,'big'))
88
#print(Dir)
89
value =[]
90
value.extend(magic)
91
value.extend(steps)
92
value.extend(axis)
93
value.extend(Dir)
94
msgreceivelen = 28
95
intreceived = np.zeros(7)
96
97
time.sleep(0.1)
98
bus.write_i2c_block_data(addr, 0, value)
99
print("Written successfully from here!")
100
101
==PAGE:99==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
87
102
103 #Functions to specify what we tell the arduino to do when pressing buttons.
104 #inverting the X.Y and slide X axis. Set them equal to 0 if they should not
be inverted.
105 inverta = 1
106 invertb = -1
107
108 def moveposx():
109
axis=0
110
magic=111
111
Dir=1+invertb
112
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
113
print("Target position set relative")
114
magic=199
#go to the target postition
115
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
116
print("Go to the target position")
117
118 def movenegx():
119
axis=0
120
magic=111
121
Dir=0+inverta
122
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
123
print("Target position set relative")
124
magic=199
#go to the target postition
125
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
126
print("Go to the target position")
127
128 def moveposy():
129
axis=1
130
magic=111
131
Dir=1+invertb
132
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
133
print("Target position set relative")
134
magic=199
#go to the target postition
135
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
136
print("Go to the target position")
137
138 def movenegy():
139
axis=1
140
magic=111
141
Dir=0+inverta
142
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
143
print("Target position set relative")
144
magic=199
#go to the target postition
145
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
146
print("Go to the target position")
147
148
149 def moveposz():
150
axis=2
151
magic=111
152
Dir=1
153
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
154
print("Target position set relative")
155
magic=199
#go to the target postition
==PAGE:100==
88
B Programs
156
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
157
print("Go to the target position")
158
159 def movenegz():
160
axis=2
161
magic=111
162
Dir=0
163
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
164
print("Target position set relative")
165
magic=199
#go to the target postition
166
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
167
print("Go to the target position")
168
169
170 def moveposslidex():
171
axis=3
172
magic=111
173
Dir=1+invertb
174
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
175
print("Target position set relative")
176
magic=199
#go to the target postition
177
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
178
print("Go to the target position")
179
180 def movenegslidex():
181
axis=3
182
magic=111
183
Dir=0+inverta
184
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
185
print("Target position set relative")
186
magic=199
#go to the target postition
187
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
188
print("Go to the target position")
189
190
191 def moveposslidez():
192
axis=4
193
magic=111
194
Dir=0
195
burleighsteps = round(steps*burleighmustepspermicron/mustepspermicron)
196
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,burleighsteps ,axis,Dir)
197
print("Target position set relative")
198
magic=199
#go to the target postition
199
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
200
print("Go to the target position")
201
202 def movenegslidez():
203
axis=4
204
magic=111
205
Dir=1
206
burleighsteps = round(steps*burleighmustepspermicron/mustepspermicron)
207
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,burleighsteps ,axis,Dir)
208
print("Target position set relative")
209
magic=199
#go to the target postition
210
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
==PAGE:101==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
89
211
print("Go to the target position")
212
213 # Approach function for speed control
214
215 def start_thread():
216
global threadStop
217
threadStop = 0
218
t1 = threading.Thread(target = tempRamp)
219
t1.start()
220
print("Thread started!")
221
222
223 def tempRamp():
224
print("Ramping")
225
timebetweenramps = (15*60)/120*1-0.2
226
for i in range(20,140):
227
temp = i
228
if threadStop==1:
229
print("Ramp stopped")
230
break
231
temp=list(temp.to_bytes(1,'big'))
232
tempaddr=0X9
233
with SMBus(1) as bus:
234
time.sleep(0.2)
235
bus.write_i2c_block_data(tempaddr, 0, temp)
236
print("Temperature written successfully from here as:")
237
print(temp)
238
time.sleep(timebetweenramps)
239
print("Ramp completed")
240
temp = 20
241
temp=list(temp.to_bytes(1,'big'))
242
tempaddr=0X9
243
with SMBus(1) as bus:
244
time.sleep(0.2)
245
bus.write_i2c_block_data(tempaddr, 0, temp)
246
print("Temperature written successfully from here as:")
247
print("Cooldown started")
248
249 def stop():
250
global threadStop
251
print("stopping")
252
threadStop = 1
253
254
255 def approachslidez():
256
axis=4
257
magic =130
258
Dir=1
259
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
260
print("Approaching")
261
262
263 def approachStop():
264
magic =132
265
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
==PAGE:102==
90
B Programs
266
print("Stopping")
267
268 def automaticApproach():
269
approachslidez()
270
time.sleep(0.5)
271
magic = 600
272
addr = 0X7
273
274
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic, 0, 0, 0)
275
276
approach_done = I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
277
if approach_done == 1:
278
approachStop()
279
280
281
282
283
284
285 def moveposrota():
286
if eucalib==False:
287
axis=5#Rotate the wafer
288
magic=111
289
Dir=1
290
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
291
magic=199
#go to the target postition
292
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
293
print("Rotate normally")
294
else:#Move the stage so it becomes eucentric rotation if calibrated.
295
Dir=0
#save the current position
296
magic=3
297
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,Dir)
298
currentPosition=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
299
startx=currentPosition[0]
300
starty=currentPosition[1]
301
theta = (angle/mustepsperdegree)*np.pi/180
302
Start = np.array([[startx],[starty],[1]])
303
R = np.matrix([[np.cos(theta), -np.sin(theta),WC[0]-np.cos(theta)*WC
[0]+np.sin(theta)*WC[1]], [np.sin(theta), np.cos(theta),WC[1]-np
.sin(theta)*WC[0]-np.cos(theta)*WC[1]], [0,0,1]])
304
#go to this point
305
newpoint = R*Start
306
print(WC)
307
print(Start)
308
print(newpoint)
309
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(newpoint[0]),0,0) # move absolute to the
new position
310
print("sleep1")
311
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(newpoint[1]),1,0)
312
axis=5#Rotate the wafer
313
magic=111
314
Dir=1
315
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
316
magic=199
#go to the target postition
317
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
==PAGE:103==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
91
318
319
320
321
322 def movenegrota():
323
if eucalib==False:
324
axis=5#Rotate the wafer
325
magic=111
326
Dir=0
327
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
328
magic=199
#go to the target postition
329
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
330
print("Rotate normally")
331
else:#Move the stage so it becomes eucentric rotation if calibrated.
332
Dir=0
#save the current position
333
magic=3
334
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,Dir)
335
currentPosition=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
336
startx=currentPosition[0]
337
starty=currentPosition[1]
338
theta = -(angle/mustepsperdegree)*np.pi/180
339
Start = np.array([[startx],[starty],[1]])
340
R = np.matrix([[np.cos(theta), -np.sin(theta),WC[0]-np.cos(theta)*WC
[0]+np.sin(theta)*WC[1]], [np.sin(theta), np.cos(theta),WC[1]-np
.sin(theta)*WC[0]-np.cos(theta)*WC[1]], [0,0,1]])
341
#go to this point
342
newpoint = R*Start
343
print(WC)
344
print(Start)
345
print(newpoint)
346
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(newpoint[0]),0,0) # set to move absolute
to this position
347
print("sleep1")
348
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(newpoint[1]),1,0)
349
axis=5#Rotate the wafer
350
magic=111
351
Dir=0
352
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
353
354
magic=199
#go to the target postition
355
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
356
357 def moveposrotb():
358
axis=6
359
magic=111
360
Dir=1
361
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
362
print("Target position set relative")
363
magic=199
#go to the target postition
364
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
365
print("Go to the target position")
366
367 def movenegrotb():
368
axis=6
369
magic=111
==PAGE:104==
92
B Programs
370
Dir=0
371
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
372
print("Target position set relative")
373
magic=199
#go to the target postition
374
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
375
print("Go to the target position")
376
377
378 ################################################
379
#define steps
380 def steps5():
381
global steps
382
steps=5*mustepspermicron
383
steps=round(steps)
384
385 def steps25():
386
global steps
387
steps=25*mustepspermicron
388
steps=round(steps)
389
390 def steps100():
391
global steps
392
steps=round(100*mustepspermicron)
393
steps=round(steps)
394
395 def steps500():
396
global steps
397
steps=500*mustepspermicron
398
steps=round(steps)
399
400 def steps1mm():
401
global steps
402
#global mustepspermicron
403
steps=1000*mustepspermicron
404
steps=round(steps)
405
print("Step size set to 1 mm")
406
407 def steps5mm():
408
global steps
409
steps=5000*mustepspermicron
410
steps=round(steps)
411
412 def angle10Degrees():
413
global angle
414
angle=round(10*mustepsperdegree)
415
print(angle)
416
417
418 def setvalue():
419
global steps
420
steps=round(float(entry1.get())*mustepspermicron)
421
422 def setangle():
423
global angle
424
angle=round(float(entry2.get())*mustepsperdegree)
==PAGE:105==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
93
425
426 def settemp():
427
temp=round(float(entry3.get()))
428
temp=list(temp.to_bytes(1,'big'))
429
tempaddr=0X9
430
with SMBus(1) as bus:
431
time.sleep(0.2)
432
bus.write_i2c_block_data(tempaddr, 0, temp)
433
print("Temperature written successfully from here as:")
434
print(temp)
435
436
437 def setapproachspeed():
438
if entry6.get()=="":
439
approachspeed =1# set speed tp 1 mu/s
440
print("Approach speed set to 1 mu/m")
441
else:
442
approachspeed = float(entry6.get())
443
if approachspeed < 0:
444
Dir = 0
445
else:
446
Dir =1
447
steptime = 0.03105/abs(approachspeed)
448
steptime = round(steptime*10**6) # send steptime as int in milliseconds
449
burleighsteps = round(steps*burleighmustepspermicron/mustepspermicron)
450
magic = 131
451
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steptime,burleighsteps ,Dir)
452
453
454
455 def normalrot():
456
global eucalib
457
eucalib=False
458
print("Normal rotation enabled")
459
460 def eucentricrot():
461
global eucalib
462
if WC[0]!=0:
463
eucalib=True
464
print("Eucentric rotation enabled")
465
else:
466
print("Please calibrate first")
467
468
469
470 def video_stream():
471
global o
472
#camera.framerate = 24#maximum is around 40 else the resolution goes
down.
473
camera.start_preview(fullscreen=False,window=(-160,0,1280,720))
474
camera.resolution = (640,480)
475
476
camera.framerate = 24
477
#camera.resolution=(1440,1080)
478
# Create an array representing a 1280x720 image of
==PAGE:106==
94
B Programs
479
# a cross through the center of the display. The shape of
480
# the array must be of the form (height, width, color)
481
a = np.zeros((640,480, 4), dtype=np.uint8)
482
a[320, :, :] = 0xff
483
a[:, 440, :] = 0xff
484
a[:, 441, :] = 0xff
485
#print(a)
486
# Add the overlay directly into layer 3 with transparency;
487
# we can omit the size parameter of add_overlay as the
488
# size is the same as the camera's resolution
489
o = picamera.PiOverlayRenderer(camera,bytes(a),layer=3,fullscreen =
False, window =(-160,0,1280,720))
490
#camera.resolution=(640,480)
491
camera.exposure_mode = 'auto'
492
camera.awb_mode = "auto"
493
494
495 def exitvideo():
496
global o
497
o.close()
498
#camera.remove_overlay(o)
499
camera.stop_preview()
500
501
502 def picam_capture():
503
dt_string=datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%d_%m_%Y_%H_%M_%S")
504
camera.capture("/home/pi/ImagesFromRaspberryPi/autostacker_capture"+str(
dt_string)+".jpg")
505
506 def picam_record():
507
global dt_string
508
dt_string=datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%d_%m_%Y_%H_%M_%S")
509
# Start recording
510
camera.resolution=(640,480)
511
camera.start_recording('/home/pi/MoviesFromRaspberryPi/Hfiles/video'+
dt_string+'.h264')
512
513
514
515 def picam_stoprecord():
516
# Stop recording
517
camera.stop_recording()# The camera is now closed.
518
print("We are going to convert the video.")
519 # Define the command we want to execute.
520
command = "MP4Box -add /home/pi/MoviesFromRaspberryPi/Hfiles/video"+
dt_string+".h264 /home/pi/MoviesFromRaspberryPi/converted"+dt_string
+".mp4"
521 # Execute our command
522
call([command], shell=True)
523 # Video converted.
524
print("Video converted.")
525
526
527
528
==PAGE:107==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
95
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536 def eucentricrotation():
537
global count
538
global eucalib
539
eucalib=True
540
count=0
541
print("Find a calibration point on the wafer and press the botton
calibration point found. After the wafer has rotated find the same
point again! After this press calculate Wafer center point")
542
543
544
545 def found():
546
global Cpx
547
global Cpy
548
global count
549
Dir=0
550
magic=3
551
axis=0
552
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,round(steps),axis,Dir)
553
currentPosition=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
554
Cpx[count]=currentPosition[0]
555
Cpy[count]=currentPosition[1]
556
time.sleep(0.1)
557
558
if count ==0:
559
angle=round(20*mustepsperdegree) #rotate 20 degrees
560
axis=5
561
magic=111
562
Dir=1
563
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,angle,axis,Dir)
564
magic=199
#go to the target postition
565
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
566
print("Go to the target position")
567
count=count+1
568
569 def calculateWC():
570
global WC
571
theta = 20*np.pi/180
572
P1 = np.array([Cpx[0],Cpy[0]])
573
P2 = np.array([Cpx[1],Cpy[1]])
574
WC[0] = (np.sin(theta)*(P1[0]+P2[0])+(np.cos(theta)+1)*(P1[1]-P2[1]))
/(2*np.sin(theta))
575
WC[1] = (np.sin(theta)*(P1[1]+P2[1])-(np.cos(theta)+1)*(P1[0]-P2[0]))
/(2*np.sin(theta))
576
print(P1,P2)
577
print(WC)
578
579
==PAGE:108==
96
B Programs
580
581
###########################################3
582
583
584 def saveposition1():
585
global pos1
586
Dir=0
587
magic=3
588
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,round(steps),axis,Dir) # Tell the arduino to
write the current position to the I2C bus
589
pos=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic) # Read the I2C bus
590
pos1[0]=pos[0]
591
pos1[1]=pos[1]
592
pos1[2]=pos[5]
593
594 def saveposition2():
595
global pos2
596
Dir=0
597
magic=3
598
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,round(steps),axis,Dir) # Tell the arduino to
write the current position to the I2C bus
599
pos=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic) # Read the I2C bus
600
pos2[0]=pos[0]
601
pos2[1]=pos[1]
602
pos2[2]=pos[5]
603
604 def gotoposition1():
605
if (pos1[0] == 0) :
606
print("Please save a position before trying to go there!")
607
else:
608
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos1[0]),0,0) # set the x axis position
absolute to the saved one
609
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos1[1]),1,0)
# set the y axis
610
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos1[2]),5,0)
# set the angle axis (5)
611
612
magic=199
#go to the target postition
613
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
614
615 def gotoposition2():
616
if (pos2[0] == 0) :
617
print("Please save a position before trying to go there!")
618
else:
619
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos2[0]),0,0) # set the x axis position
absolute to the saved one
620
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos2[1]),1,0)
# set the y axis
621
I2Cpicontrol(addr,121,int(pos2[2]),5,0)
# set the angle axis (5)
622
623
magic=199
#go to the target postition
624
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
625
626
627
628 def update_pos():
629
Dir=0
630
magic=2
==PAGE:109==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
97
631
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,round(steps),axis,Dir)
#
Tell the arduino to write the targetposition to the I2C bus
632
targetPosition=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
# Read the I2C
bus
633
time.sleep(0.1)
634
magic=3
635
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,round(steps),axis,Dir)
636
currentPosition=I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic)
637
global my_label1
638
global my_label2
639
tpos.configure(text="TP:"+str(targetPosition))
640
cpos.configure(text="CP:"+str(currentPosition))
641
642 #Lens shift lenghts
643 def x5to50x():
644
callbackx50()
645
axis=2
646
magic=111
647
Dir=0
648
steps = 90624-7744
649
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
650
print("Target position set relative")
651
magic=199
#go to the target postition
652
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
653
print("Go to the target position")
654
655 def x5to10x():
656
callbackx10()
657
axis=2
658
magic=111
659
Dir=0
660
steps = 90624-10784
661
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
662
print("Target position set relative")
663
magic=199
#go to the target postition
664
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
665
print("Go to the target position")
666
667 def x10to5x():
668
axis=2
669
magic=111
670
Dir=1
671
steps = 90624-10784
672
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
673
print("Target position set relative")
674
magic=199
#go to the target postition
675
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
676
print("Go to the target position")
677
678
679
680 def x50to5x():
681
axis=2
682
magic=111
683
Dir=1
==PAGE:110==
98
B Programs
684
steps = 90624-7744
685
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
686
print("Target position set relative")
687
magic=199
#go to the target postition
688
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
689
print("Go to the target position")
690
691
692 def x50to10x():
693
axis=2
694
magic=111
695
Dir=1
696
steps = 10784-7744
697
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
698
print("Target position set relative")
699
magic=199
#go to the target postition
700
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
701
print("Go to the target position")
702
703 def x10to50x():
704
axis=2
705
magic=111
706
Dir=0
707
steps = 10784-7744
708
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,steps,axis,Dir)
709
print("Target position set relative")
710
magic=199
#go to the target postition
711
I2Cpicontrol(addr,magic,0,0,0)
712
print("Go to the target position")
713
714
715 def callbackx10():
716
mb.showinfo('Protect the objectives','Please change the objective to x
10 and press ok')
717
718 def callbackx50():
719
mb.showinfo('Protect the objectives','Please change the objective to x
50 and press ok')
720
721
722
723
724
725 ####Programming the interface
726
727 #from I2Cpicontrol import targetPosition
728 #from I2Cpicontrol import currentPosition
729
730 #def update_pos():
731
732
#
my_label1.config(str(targetPosition))
733
#
my_label2.config(str(currentPosition))
734
735
736 #global my_label1
==PAGE:111==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
99
737 #global my_label2
738 #my_label1= Label(window, text="target position")
739 #my_label1.grid(column=1, row=11)
740 #my_label2= Label(window, text="current position")
741 #my_label2.grid(column=2, row=11)
742
743 #btn = Button(window,text="update position",command=update_pos)
744 #btn.grid(column=0, row=11)
745
746 window = tk.Tk()
747 window.title("Autostacker controller")
748
749 photo1 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"right.png")#Path to image
750 photo2 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"left.png")
751 photo3 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"up.png")
752 photo4 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"down.png")
753
754 photo5 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"x.png")
755 photo6 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"y.png")
756 photo7 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"z.png")
757 photo8 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"slide_x.png")
758
759 photo9 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"slidez.png")
760 photo10 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"A.png")
761 photo11 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"B.png")
762 photo12 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"rotpos.png")
763 photo13 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"rotneg.png")
764 photo14 = tk.PhotoImage(file = folderpath+"stop.png")
765
766
767
768
769 a=4
770
771 photoimage1 = photo1.subsample(a, a) #Resizing the images/bottoms.
772 photoimage2 = photo2.subsample(a, a)
773 photoimage3 = photo3.subsample(a, a)
774 photoimage4 = photo4.subsample(a, a)
775
776 photoimage5 = photo5.subsample(a, a) #Resizing the images/bottoms.
777 photoimage6 = photo6.subsample(a, a)
778 photoimage7 = photo7.subsample(a, a)
779
780 photoimage8 = photo8.subsample(a, a)
781 photoimage9 = photo9.subsample(a, a) #Resizing the images/bottoms.
782 photoimage10 = photo10.subsample(a, a)
783 photoimage11 = photo11.subsample(a, a)
784 photoimage12 = photo12.subsample(a, a)
785 photoimage13 = photo13.subsample(a, a)
786 photoimage14 = photo14.subsample(a, a)
787 #window.title("Autostacker controller")#Titel of window
788
789 #window.geometry('1000x800')#Size of window in pixels
790
791 #lbl = Label(window, text="Stage control")
==PAGE:112==
100
B Programs
792 #lbl.grid(column=1, row=2)# Position of the widget/text
793 tpos = tk.Label(window, text="target position")
794 tpos.grid(column=4, row=21)
795 cpos = tk.Label(window, text="current position")
796 cpos.grid(column=4, row=22)
797
798
799 tk.Button(window,text="Start temp. ramp from 20 to 140 C",command=
start_thread).grid(column=3, row=20)
800 tk.Button(window,text="Stop temperature ramping",command=stop).grid(column
=3, row=21)
801
802
803 tk.Button(window,text="update position",command=update_pos).grid(column=4,
row=20)
804
805
806 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage1 , command=moveposx).grid(column=0, row
=1)
807
808 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage2 ,command=movenegx).grid(column=0, row=2)
809
810 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage3 , command=moveposy).grid(column=1, row
=1)
811
812 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage4 ,command=movenegy).grid(column=1, row=2)
813
814 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage3 , command=moveposz).grid(column=2, row
=1)
815
816 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage4 ,command=movenegz).grid(column=2, row=2)
817
818 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage1 , command=moveposslidex).grid(column=3,
row=1)
819
820 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage2 ,command=movenegslidex).grid(column=3,
row=2)
821
822 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage3 , command=moveposslidez).grid(column=4,
row=1)
823
824 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage4 ,command=movenegslidez).grid(column=4,
row=2)
825
826 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage12 , command=moveposrota).grid(column=0,
row=21)
827
828 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage13 ,command=movenegrota).grid(column=0,
row=22)
829
830 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage12 , command=moveposrotb).grid(column=1,
row=21)
831
832 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage13 ,command=movenegrotb).grid(column=1,
row=22)
==PAGE:113==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
101
833
834
835 #select axis
836
837 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage5).grid(column=0, row=0)
838
839 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage6).grid(column=1, row=0)
840
841 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage7).grid(column=2, row=0)
842
843 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage8).grid(column=3, row=0)
844
845 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage9).grid(column=4, row=0)
846
847 #Rotation
848 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage10).grid(column=0, row=20)
849
850 tk.Button(window,image = photoimage11).grid(column=1, row=20)
851
852
853 ### Steps to take when pressing an arrow
854
855
856 tk.Button(window,text="5 mu",command=steps5).grid(column=0, row=7)
857
858 tk.Button(window,text="25 mu",command=steps25).grid(column=1, row=7)
859
860 tk.Button(window,text="100 mu",command=steps100).grid(column=2, row=7)
861
862 tk.Button(window,text="500 mu",command=steps500).grid(column=0, row=8)
863
864 tk.Button(window,text="1mm",command=steps1mm).grid(column=1, row=8)
865
866 tk.Button(window,text="5mm",command=steps5mm).grid(column=2, row=8)
867
868 tk.Button(window,text="10 degrees",command=angle10Degrees).grid(column=1,
row=25)
869
870 # Shift lens fokus lenghts
871
872 tk.Button(window,text="5x to 50x lens",command=x5to50x).grid(column=2, row
=23)
873 tk.Button(window,text="5x to 10x lens",command=x5to10x).grid(column=2, row
=24)
874 tk.Button(window,text="50x to 5x lens",command=x50to5x).grid(column=2, row
=25)
875 tk.Button(window,text="10x to 5x lens",command=x10to5x).grid(column=2, row
=26)
876 tk.Button(window,text="50x to 10x lens",command=x50to10x).grid(column=2, row
=27)
877 tk.Button(window,text="10x to 50x lens",command=x10to50x).grid(column=2, row
=28)
878
879 #picam
880
==PAGE:114==
102
B Programs
881 tk.Button(window,text="picam live",command=video_stream).grid(column=0, row
=12)
882
883 tk.Button(window,text="exit live",command=exitvideo).grid(column=0, row=13)
884
885 tk.Button(window,text="picam capture",command=picam_capture).grid(column=3,
row=12)
886
887 tk.Button(window,text="start recording",command=picam_record).grid(column=2,
row=12)
888
889 tk.Button(window,text="stop recording",command=picam_stoprecord).grid(column
=2, row=13)
890
891 # Set approach speed and approach botton
892 entry6 = tk.Entry(window,width=10)
893 entry6.grid(column=4, row=8)
894
895 tk.Button(window, text="Set slowmotion speed to[mu/s]", command=
setapproachspeed).grid(column=4, row=7)
896 tk.Button(window, text="Approach!", command=approachslidez).grid(column=4,
row=10)
897 tk.Button(window, text="Stop Approach/retrackt!", command=approachStop).grid
(column=4, row=13)
898 tk.Button(window, text="Automatic Pickup", command=automaticApproach).grid(
column=4, row=15)
899
900
901 # User specified value
902 entry1 = tk.Entry(window,width=10)
903
904 entry1.grid(column=1, row=10)
905
906 tk.Button(window, text="Set value to[mu]", command=setvalue).grid(column=0,
row=10)
907
908
#User specified angle
909 entry2 = tk.Entry(window,width=10)
910
911 entry2.grid(column=1, row=24)
912
913 tk.Button(window, text="Set angle[deg]", command=setangle).grid(column=1,
row=23)
914
915 #User specified temperature
916 entry3 = tk.Entry(window,width=10)
917
918 entry3.grid(column=3, row=16)
919
920 tk.Button(window, text="Set temp to[degrees]", command=settemp).grid(column
=3, row=15)
921
922
923
924
==PAGE:115==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
103
925 tk.Button(window,text="Normal rotation",command=normalrot).grid(column=0,
row=23)
926
927 tk.Button(window,text="Eucentric rotation",command=eucentricrot).grid(column
=0, row=24)
928
929
930 ###################################################
931
932
933
934
935
936
937
938
939
940
941
942
943 tk.Button(window,text="Calib. eucentric rot.",command=eucentricrotation).
grid(column=0, row=25)
944
945 tk.Button(window,text="Calib. point found",command=found).grid(column=0, row
=26)
946
947 tk.Button(window,text="Cal. wafer center",command=calculateWC).grid(column
=0, row=27)
948
949 tk.Button(window,text="Save position 1",command=saveposition1).grid(column
=3, row=23)
950 tk.Button(window,text="Go to position 1",command=gotoposition1).grid(column
=4, row=23)
951 tk.Button(window,text="Save position 2",command=saveposition2).grid(column
=3, row=25)
952 tk.Button(window,text="Go to position 2",command=gotoposition2).grid(column
=4, row=25)
953 #tk.Button(window,image = photoimage14 , command=stopmove).grid(column=2, row
=21)
954
955 window.mainloop()
B.2.2
I2C read data data Raspberry Pi (Master)
1 import time
2 from smbus2 import SMBus
3 import numpy as np
4
5 currentPosition = np.zeros(7)
6 targetPosition = np.zeros(7)
7
==PAGE:116==
104
B Programs
8 def I2Cpireceivedata(addr,magic):
# Input is the addresse and
the magic number for reading either the targetposition or the
currentposition
9
bus = SMBus(1)
10
msgreceivelen = 28
11
intreceived = np.zeros(7)
12
#Read
bytes
from
the
I2C
bus
13
data = bus.read_i2c_block_data(addr, 0, msgreceivelen)
14
15
for i in range(0,7):
16
j=4*i
17
if(data[j]==1):
#for negative numbers the first byte is send as 1.
18
intreceived[i]=-int.from_bytes(data[j+1:j+4],'big')
19
else:
20
intreceived[i]=int.from_bytes(data[j+1:j+4],'big')
21
22
if(magic==2):
23
targetPosition =intreceived
24
print ("target position is")
25
print (targetPosition)
26
return targetPosition
27
28
29
elif(magic==3):
30
currentPosition = intreceived
31
print ("current position is")
32
print (currentPosition)
33
return currentPosition
34
35
elif(magic==600):
36
37
38
else:
39
print("Wrong magic number, enter 2 or 3 for targetposition or
currentposition")
B.2.3
Sinewave
1 # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2 """
3 Created on Mon Jan 18 09:04:26 2021
==PAGE:117==
B.2 Raspberry Pi program for the user interface
105
4
5 @author: Mads
6 """
7 from smbus2 import SMBus
8 import Adafruit_MCP4725
9 import time
10 dac = Adafruit_MCP4725.MCP4725(address=0x65)
11
12 import numpy as np
13
14 import wave
15
16 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
17 dacmax = 4096
18
19
20 # frequency is the number of times a wave repeats a second
21
22
23 frequency = 10
24 num_samples = 30
25 timestep=(1/frequency)/num_samples
26 # The sampling rate of the analog to digital convert
27
28 sampling_rate = frequency*num_samples
29
30 amplitude = dacmax/2
31 offset = dacmax/2
32
33 sine_wave = [np.sin(2 * np.pi * x/num_samples) for x in range(num_samples)]
34 time0 = np.arange(0,1/frequency,timestep)
35 if len(time0)!=100:
36
time1 = time0[0:100]
37
38 else:
39
time1=time0
40
41
42 print('Press Ctrl-C to quit...')
43 while True:
44
starttime = time.perf_counter()
45
for i in range(len(sine_wave)):
46
dacvalue = int((amplitude*sine_wave[i])+offset)
47
dac.set_voltage(dacvalue)
48
t0 = time.perf_counter()
49
nextsteptime = (starttime+timestep*(i+1))
50
while nextsteptime > t0:
51
t0 = time.perf_counter()
52
53
54
55
56
57
58 #plt.figure()
==PAGE:118==
106
B Programs
59 #plt.plot(time1,sine_wave)
60 #plt.show()
B.2.4
Step function
1 from smbus2 import SMBus
2 import Adafruit_MCP4725
3 import time
4 #addr = 0x61 # bus address for Dac 1
5 #bus = SMBus(1) # indicates /dev/ic2-1
6 dac = Adafruit_MCP4725.MCP4725(address=0x65)
7
8 timesleep = 1
9 print('Press Ctrl-C to quit...')
10 while True:
11
#print('Setting voltage to 0!')
12
dac.set_voltage(0)
13
time.sleep(timesleep)
14
#print('Setting voltage to 1/2 Vdd!')
15
dac.set_voltage(2048*2)
# 2048 = half of 4096
16
time.sleep(timesleep)
17
#print('Setting voltage to Vdd!')
18
#dac.set_voltage(4096, True)
19
#time.sleep(2.0)
20
21
22
23
24 """
25
26 print ("Enter NUMBER")
27 for i in range(msgLength):
28
value.append(int(input(">>>>
")))
29
# print(type(value[i]))
30 print (value)
31 bus.write_i2c_block_data(addr,1,value[:])
32 print("Written successfully from here!")
33 time.sleep(1)
34 data=bus.read_i2c_block_data(addr, msgLength)
35 print (data)
36 """
B.3
Temperature controlling Arduino code
1 #include <PID_v1.h>
2 #include <Wire.h>
3
4
5 int PiSetpoint[1]={10};
==PAGE:119==
B.3 Temperature controlling Arduino code
107
6
7
8 /* AD595 */
9 const int AD595_pin = A0; /* temperature sense from AD595 output */
10 int AD595_current; /* the value output by the AD595 and converted by the ADC
*/
11 double current_temperature; /* the temperature obtained by conversion of the
tcouple_val */
12 const int setpoint_pin = A1; /* potentiometer for adjusting setpoint */
13 int setpoint_val; /* potentiometer value as read by ADC */
14 int AD595_setpoint; /* the temperature set point converted to an ADC value
*/
15 double setpoint_temperature; /*the temperature setpoint */
16
17
18 /* MOSFET PWM output */
19 const int PWM_pin = 5; /* On the Uno and similar boards, pins 5 and 6 have a
frequency of approximately 980 Hz.*/
20 double PWM_val; /* duty cycle 0 to 255 [analogWrite(pin, value)] */
21
22 /* For smoothing */
23 const int numReadings = 100;
24
25 int readings[numReadings];
// the readings from the analog input
26 int readIndex = 0;
// the index of the current reading
27 int total = 0;
// the running total
28 double average = 0;
// the average
29
30 /* PID */
31 PID myPID(&average, &PWM_val, &setpoint_temperature , 10, 1, 0, P_ON_M,
DIRECT);
32 //PID myPID(&current_temperature , &PWM_val, &setpoint_temperature , 2, 5, 1,
P_ON_M, DIRECT);
33 // myPID(input, output, setpoint, k, i, d,
34 //P_ON_M specifies that Proportional on Measurement be used
35 //P_ON_E (Proportional on Error) is the default behavior
36
37 unsigned long serialTime; //this will help us know when to talk with
processing
38
39
40
41
42 void setup() {
43
Wire.begin(9);
// join i2c bus with address #9
44
Wire.onReceive(receiveEvent); // register event
45
Serial.begin(9600); /* Define baud rate for serial communication */
46
myPID.SetMode(AUTOMATIC);
47
48
for (int thisReading = 0; thisReading < numReadings; thisReading++) {
49
readings[thisReading] = 0;
50
}
51 }
52
53 void loop() {
==PAGE:120==
108
B Programs
54
AD595_current = analogRead(AD595_pin);
55
current_temperature = ( ((AD595_current * 4.88) - 0.0027 ) / 10.0 );
56 //Serial.println(current_temperature);
57
// subtract the last reading:
58
total = total - readings[readIndex];
59
// read from the sensor:
60
readings[readIndex] = current_temperature;
61
// add the reading to the total:
62
total = total + readings[readIndex];
63
// advance to the next position in the array:
64
readIndex = readIndex + 1;
65
66
// if we're at the end of the array...
67
if (readIndex >= numReadings) {
68
// ...wrap around to the beginning:
69
readIndex = 0;
70
}
71
72
// calculate the average:
73
average = total / numReadings;
74
// send it to the computer as ASCII digits
75
//Serial.println(average);
76
77
//Serial.print("Temperature = ");
78
Serial.print(average);
79
Serial.print(" ");
80
//Serial.print("\r\n");
81
82
//setpoint_val = analogRead(setpoint_pin);
83
setpoint_val = PiSetpoint[1];
84
//setpoint_temperature = map (setpoint_val , 0, 1023, 20, 200); /* maps the
value of the ADC to the desired temperature range */
85
setpoint_temperature = setpoint_val;
86
//setpoint_temperature = 100;
87
//Serial.print("Setpoint = ");
88
Serial.print(setpoint_temperature);
89
Serial.print(" ");
90
//Serial.print("\r\n");
91
92
float error = setpoint_temperature - average;
93
//Serial.print("error = ");
94
//Serial.print(error);
95
//Serial.print(" ");
96
//Serial.print("\r\n");
97
98
myPID.Compute();
99
analogWrite(PWM_pin, PWM_val);
100
101
//Serial.print("output PWM = ");
102
Serial.println(PWM_val);
103
//Serial.print("\r\n");
104
105
//delay(500);
106
107
/* refresh the Arduino Terminal Screen (must use putty or similar) */
==PAGE:121==
B.3 Temperature controlling Arduino code
109
108
//Serial.write(27);
// ESC command
109
//Serial.print("[2J");
// clear screen command
110
//Serial.write(27);
111
//Serial.print("[H");
// cursor to home command
112
113
114
//send-receive with processing if it's time
115 //
if(millis()>serialTime)
116 //
{
117 //
SerialReceive();
118 //
SerialSend();
119 //
serialTime+=500;
120 //
}
121
122
123
124 }
125
126 void receiveEvent(int howMany)
127 {
128
while(1 < Wire.available()){ // loop through all but the last
129
int dummy = Wire.read();
130
PiSetpoint[1]= Wire.read(); // receive byte as an int
131
//Serial.print(receivedmessage[i]);
132
//Serial.println(sizeof(receivedmessage[16]));
133
//Serial.print("\n");
// print the character
134
}
135
//int x = Wire.read();
// receive byte as an integer
136
//PiSetpoint = x;
137
//Serial.println(Wire.read());
138
//Serial.println(setpoint_temperature);
139
//Serial.println(average);
140
//Serial.println("Setpoint received from PI:");
141
//Serial.println(PiSetpoint[1]);
// print the integer
142 }
143
144 /********************************************
145
* Serial Communication functions / helpers
146
********************************************/
147 //
148 //
149 //union {
// This Data structure lets
150 //
byte asBytes[24];
// us take the byte array
151 //
float asFloat[6];
// sent from processing and
152 //}
// easily convert it to a
153 //foo;
// float array
154 //
155 //
156 //
157 //// getting float values from processing into the arduino
158 //// was no small task.
the way this program does it is
159 //// as follows:
160 ////
* a float takes up 4 bytes.
in processing , convert
161 ////
the array of floats we want to send, into an array
162 ////
of bytes.
==PAGE:122==
110
B Programs
163 ////
* send the bytes to the arduino
164 ////
* use a data structure known as a union to convert
165 ////
the array of bytes back into an array of floats
166 //
167 ////
the bytes coming from the arduino follow the following
168 ////
format:
169 ////
0: 0=Manual, 1=Auto, else = ? error ?
170 ////
1: 0=Direct, 1=Reverse, else = ? error ?
171 ////
2-5: float setpoint
172 ////
6-9: float input
173 ////
10-13: float output
174 ////
14-17: float P_Param
175 ////
18-21: float I_Param
176 ////
22-245: float D_Param
177 //void SerialReceive()
178 //{
179 //
180 //
// read the bytes sent from Processing
181 //
int index=0;
182 //
byte Auto_Man = -1;
183 //
byte Direct_Reverse = -1;
184 //
while(Serial.available()&&index <26)
185 //
{
186 //
if(index==0) Auto_Man = Serial.read();
187 //
else if(index==1) Direct_Reverse = Serial.read();
188 //
else foo.asBytes[index -2] = Serial.read();
189 //
index++;
190 //
}
191 //
192 //
// if the information we got was in the correct format,
193 //
// read it into the system
194 //
if(index==26
&& (Auto_Man==0 || Auto_Man==1)&& (Direct_Reverse==0 ||
Direct_Reverse==1))
195 //
{
196 //
setpoint_temperature=double(foo.asFloat[0]);
197 //
//Input=double(foo.asFloat[1]);
// * the user has the ability to
send the
198 //
//
value of "Input"
in most
cases (as
199 //
//
in this one) this is not
needed.
200 //
if(Auto_Man==0)
// * only change the output if
we are in
201 //
{
//
manual mode.
otherwise we'
ll get an
202 //
PWM_val=double(foo.asFloat[2]);
//
output blip, then the
controller will
203 //
}
//
overwrite.
204 //
205 //
double p, i, d;
// * read in and set the
controller tunings
206 //
p = double(foo.asFloat[3]);
//
207 //
i = double(foo.asFloat[4]);
//
208 //
d = double(foo.asFloat[5]);
//
209 //
myPID.SetTunings(p, i, d);
//
==PAGE:123==
B.3 Temperature controlling Arduino code
111
210 //
211 //
if(Auto_Man==0) myPID.SetMode(MANUAL);// * set the controller mode
212 //
else myPID.SetMode(AUTOMATIC);
//
213 //
214 //
if(Direct_Reverse==0) myPID.SetControllerDirection(DIRECT);// * set
the controller Direction
215 //
else myPID.SetControllerDirection(REVERSE);
//
216 //
}
217 //
Serial.flush();
// * clear any random data from
the serial buffer
218 //}
219 //
220 //// unlike our tiny microprocessor , the processing ap
221 //// has no problem converting strings into floats, so
222 //// we can just send strings.
much easier than getting
223 //// floats from processing to here no?
224 //void SerialSend()
225 //{
226 //
Serial.print("PID ");
227 //
Serial.print(setpoint_temperature);
228 //
Serial.print(" ");
229 //
Serial.print(current_temperature);
230 //
Serial.print(" ");
231 //
Serial.print(PWM_val);
232 //
Serial.print(" ");
233 //
Serial.print(myPID.GetKp());
234 //
Serial.print(" ");
235 //
Serial.print(myPID.GetKi());
236 //
Serial.print(" ");
237 //
Serial.print(myPID.GetKd());
238 //
Serial.print(" ");
239 //
if(myPID.GetMode()==AUTOMATIC) Serial.print("Automatic");
240 //
else Serial.print("Manual");
241 //
Serial.print(" ");
242 //
if(myPID.GetDirection()==DIRECT) Serial.println("Direct");
243 //
else Serial.println("Reverse");
244 //}
B.3.1
Processing code
1 /*
2 Purpose:
3
This program will graph coordinate pairs, sent from the
4
microcontroller , through Serial.
5
6 Function:
7
Accept Serial string and print to terminal.
8 Plan:
9
Tokenize string, save as coordinate pair, print to terminal.
10
Set up plot and format acceptably.
11
Plot coordinate pairs.
12
Cleanup.
==PAGE:124==
112
B Programs
13 */
14
15
16
17 import processing.serial.*;
18
19
20 //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
21 // Variables and Objects
22 //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
23 //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
24 // Serial
25 //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
26 Serial myPort;
// The Serial port
27 String inBuffer;
28
29 // Data
30 //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
31 String[] token;
32 int i;
33 float
x, y, z, t;
34 void setup()
35 {
36
size(200,200);
37
38
//~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
39
// Initialize Serial Port
40
//~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
41
// List all the available serial ports
42
printArray(Serial.list());
43
// Open the port you are using at the rate you want
44
myPort = new Serial(this, Serial.list()[0],9600);
45 }
46
47 void draw()
48 {
49
background (0);
50
51
if (myPort.available()>0){
52
inBuffer = myPort.readString();
53
}
54
// Is there a string in the port to read?
55
while (myPort.available() > 0)
56
{
57
// Read a string in
58
inBuffer = myPort.readString();
59
// Did we actually read anything in?
60
if (inBuffer != null)
61
{ // We did
62
// Print it to the terminal
63
print(inBuffer);
64
// Split that string into tokens
65
token = splitTokens(inBuffer);
66
println(token.length);
67
// Print those tokens to terminal
==PAGE:125==
B.3 Temperature controlling Arduino code
113
68
for (i = 0; i < token.length; i ++)
69
{
70
print(">>");
71
println(token[i]);
72
x = parseFloat(token[0]);
73
y = Integer.parseInt(token[1]);
74
z = Integer.parseInt(token[2]);
75
t = Integer.parseInt(token[3]);
76
}
77
}
78
}
79 }
==PAGE:126==
114
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
