==PAGE:1==
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabili-
tation purposes with eye-tracking.
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with
eye-tracking.
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Stela Ago
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Implementation and Per-
formance Management Section, Department of Technology, Management and Eco-
nomics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Electrical Engineering, Automation and Robot Technol-
ogy, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of eye-tracking,
virtual reality, eye-data manipulation, signal processing.
Stela Ago - s190043
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
4th June 2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Brain strokes have a big impact on the life of people affected and on their families.
Rehabilitation after strokes is extremely important and it has to be done as soon as
possible. Robotics exoskeletons and new technologies can make rehabilitation more
pleasant for patients who usually struggle to find motivation due to the diﬀicult
situation.
A controlled study with N=12 subject was conducted at Gaze Lab of the Technical
University of Denmark to investigate how physical rehabilitation exercises have an
effect on cognitive load and mental fatigue. The physical tasks required to lift three
different weights with their right arm where an upper limb exoskeleton was placed.
During the performance, the exoskeleton was supporting the subjects with a small
nudge during some of the tasks. The goal was to investigate if physical fatigue can
bring mental fatigue, the role played by the support of the exoskeleton and the effect
of the different weights.
The controlled study was carried out in one experimental session that lasted around
one hour for each participant. We investigated physical fatigue and mental fatigue
through the analysis of eye data and subjective questionnaires. The experiment was
operated in a Virtual Reality (VR) environment and the eye-data collection was
possible thanks to the eye-tracker integrated into HTC Vive Pro Eye headset.
For our analysis, we will consider and evaluate the diameter of the pupil size, peak
pupil diameter, eye-blinking and blinking frequency. In addition, we will analyze
data from the subjective questionnaires which investigate mental fatigue, physical
fatigue, effort, temporal demand, performance and frustration. We will investigate
how the results will be affected by the different loads, by the support of the ex-
oskeleton and by the level of physical fatigue.
The result of our thesis shows that is possible to generate mental fatigue with physi-
cal tasks but it strongly depends on the condition of the experiment. Indeed, mental
fatigue is significantly affected by high levels of physical fatigue.
In conclusion, we discuss the limitations of our project and the challenges we expe-
rienced. Also, we present some improvements and future works.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Added Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Goal and research question
4
3
Background and related works
5
3.1
Strokes and rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Rehabilitation with VR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Exoskeleton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Fatigue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Physical fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Methods
10
4.1
Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Ethical approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Independent variables and dependent variables . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Results
18
5.1
Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
Analysis of Task4 and Task8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Pupil diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Peak pupil diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
Number of blinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.6
Blink Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.7
NASA-TLX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Discussion
34
6.1
Analysis of Task4 and Task8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Independent variable Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Independent variable Help . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Independent variable Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
v
==PAGE:8==
6.5
Comment, limitations and improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.6
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Conclusion
40
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Bibliography
41
A Questionnaires
48
B Data cleaning
55
C Figures & Tables
56
C.1
Analysis Task4 and Task8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C.2
Pupils size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
C.3
Peak pupil diameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
C.4
Number of blinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C.5
Blink frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
C.6
Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
vi
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The World Health Organisation (WHO) has defined stroke as the rapidly developing
clinical signs of focal (or global) disturbance of cerebral function, with symptoms
lasting 24 hours or longer or leading to death, with no apparent cause other than
vascular origin [1]. It happens because of the sudden death of some brain cells due
to lack of oxygen when the blood flow to the brain is lost by blockage or rupture
of an artery to the brain [2]. Eurostat estimates 432,904 stroke cases in Europe in
2013 [3] and the World Health Statistic 2020 report estimates 7 million deaths in
2016 [4]. Clearly, the numbers show there is demand in investigating further stroke
disease therefore, we would like to focus on patients and give an insight from their
perspective.
Stroke is a personal catastrophe resulting in devastating and far-reaching sequelae,
which lead to considerable changes in the lives of individuals [5]. Stroke patients
have to deal with several problems in their daily routine, some of the most common
issues are walking, talking, leaving houses, and having leisure activities [6]. Also,
reduced quality of life in young survivors was associated with dependence, depres-
sion, being single, fatigue and being unemployed [7]. It is almost impossible for this
patients to have a life that resembles the one they had before ([8],[9],[10],[11],[12]).
All this factors together lead to depression which is the most common neuropsy-
chiatric disorder occurring after stroke.
Indeed, 35% of the patients’ experience
post-stroke depression, 20% manifest apathy and 20% have catastrophic reactions
[13]. Of course, this behaviour has an impact on the families of the patients and on
spousal relationships which in most of the cases are the people who assist patients
in their post-stroke lives [5].
Rehabilitation is a complex set of processes usually involving several professional
disciplines and aims at improving the quality of life for people facing daily living
diﬀiculties caused by chronic diseases. The purpose of rehabilitation is to limit the
impact of stroke-related brain damage on daily life by using a mixture of therapeu-
tic and problem-solving approaches [14]. There is scientific proof that neurological
and functional recovery from strokes occurs mainly within the first 6 months after
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
1
==PAGE:10==
stroke, and it is a general clinical impression that the majority of motor recovery
occurs within 6 weeks ([15],[16],[17]). Therefore, rehabilitation for stroke patients is
fundamental and it has to start as soon as possible.
There are multiple rehabilitation techniques and Occupational Therapy (OT) plays
a central role. The activities are specifically geared to promote the re-education
process and encourage the development of lost skills while accommodating for spe-
cific physical, cognitive or affective impairments [18]. We would like to focus on
chronic rehabilitation techniques for the upper limb. For the purpose, besides the
classical rehabilitation techniques, it seems to be effective to employ Virtual Reality
for rehabilitation purposes. Virtual reality offers major sensory feedback while the
subjects are immersed in a virtual reality environment witnessing their own body
in movement. Technological advances are expected to reduce the kinetosis linked
to the time delay between the visual information received by the subjects and their
movements performed in total immersion
In addition, there is a big chance that patients recovering from strokes are depressed
and tired due to their impairments. This lead to less motivation in doing the re-
habilitation exercises. It is interesting to investigate this condition because it will
bring an understanding of what causes fatigue and its nature. As a consequence, we
will be able to overcome the problem by proposing some application and solutions.
1.1.1
Thesis project context
This Master Thesis Project is part of ReHyb project acting as an overarching frame.
The ReHyb project is a European, international research project counting multiple
members forming a consortium all around the continent. It is funded by and is
part of the Horizon 2020 Framework Program of the European Union. This thesis
was written at a research group at the Department of Management, Institute for
Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark
which is also part of the ReHyb consortium.
The goal of the thesis is to investigate if physical fatigue brings mental fatigue
while performing gaze control of an exoskeleton in a virtual reality environment.
1.2
Added Value
We would like to explore the concept of mental and physical fatigue while performing
physical tasks resembling rehabilitation exercises conducted by stroke patients. On
top of that, we are interested to know which are the factors that influence more
mental fatigue given the circumstances.
The result of this investigation can be beneficial for the rehabilitation industry and
for the patients. Knowing what is the element that increases the fatigue can be the
first step to designing new rehabilitation devices more functional to their purpose.
Decreasing the fatigue and frustration of patients can motivate them to exercise
more and achieve better and faster results.
In addition, we found it interesting to investigate how physical fatigue can bring
mental fatigue. In literature, we can find few papers regarding the topic. Indeed, in
most of the researches and experiments that examine mental fatigue, this is indeed
2
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:11==
just with cognitive load (e.g mental exercises).
Our research might be beneficial also for jobs that require a high level of attention
but are carried in conditions that are physically tiring.
1.3
Overview of the thesis
Chapter 2 - Goal and research question: the chapter contains a short description of
the thesis, the goals we want to achieve with the project and the research questions
to which we aim to find an answer.
Chapter 3 - Background and related works: in the chapter we report the litera-
ture related to the topics we treat in the thesis.
Chapter 4 - Methods: in the chapter we explain in detail our project. We start
by introducing the instruments we used and explaining the selection process for the
participants that took part in the experiment. Then, we describe all the details of
how we conducted the experiment and how we collected the dataset.
Chapter 5 - Results: the chapter contains all the results we achieved in our ex-
periment. We explain how we reached the result and show them in figures.
Chapter 6 - Discussion: the chapter contains a detailed interpretation of the re-
sults we achieved in the experiment. Also, we report some improvements for the
future.
Chapter 7 - Conclusion : the chapter contains a summary of the master thesis.
Here we give an answer to the research questions we raised in Chapter 2.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Goal and research question
The goal of the thesis is to investigate whether mental fatigue can be induced
through physical fatigue. For this purpose, we run a controlled study with volunteer
participants. The experiment was conducted in a Virtual Reality (VR) environment
and the physical tasks resembled classical rehabilitation exercises. Indeed, the par-
ticipants were asked to lift three different weights with their right arm where an
upper limb exoskeleton was placed. The tasks were conducted with three different
weights and in some of them, the subjects were supported by a nudge from the ex-
oskeleton. In addition two of the tasks were conducted in special conditions namely
the participants were asked to lift 5kg weight until they reached their maximum
level of physical fatigue.
With our experiment, we would like to answer the following research questions:
Does physical fatigue affect mental fatigue?
Does the support of the exoskeleton affect the level of mental fatigue perceived by the
participants?
Will mental fatigue be affected by the load of the weights that participants have to lift?
Do high levels of physical fatigue affect more the level of mental fatigue?
4
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3
Background and related works
Summary
This chapter presents the background concepts of the thesis. It gives an overview
of stroked and rehabilitation with a focus on rehabilitation in a VR environment.
Then we explain how robotic exoskeletons and eye-tracking devices are related to
rehabilitation for stroke patients. Finally, we give an overview of what is mental
fatigue and which are the most common ways to measure it.
3.1
Strokes and rehabilitation
The most common and widely recognised impairment caused by stroke is motor im-
pairment, which can be regarded as a loss or limitation of function in muscle control
or movement or a limitation in mobility. Motor impairment after stroke typically
affects the control of the movement of the face, arm, and leg of one side of the body
and affects about 80% of patients [19]. Therefore rehabilitation therapy should begin
as early as possible once the person’s condition has stabilised. Usually, it takes place
in several phases. Initially following the stroke rehabilitation will take place in the
hospital and next there are some home-based programs [20]. We would like to focus
on the second part of the rehabilitation process. As a matter of fact, there are many
home-based technologies that patients can use. From the most common we have
games which make the repetitive exercises more engaging and motivating; robotic
devices replace manual rehabilitation provided by healthcare professionals with au-
tomated motor assistance; VR devices use computing technologies to provide virtual
environment that simulates the physical environment [21].
3.2
Rehabilitation with VR
VR technologies provide multimodal, interactive, and realistic 3‐D environments
with a high level of control of the parameters and applications that can be adjusted
for each user [22]. This technology provides the capability to create an environment
in which the intensity of feedback and training can be systematically manipulated
and enhanced in order to create the most appropriate, individualized motor learn-
ing paradigm.
The potential benefits of training in VR would be the ability to
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
5
==PAGE:14==
increase the duration, frequency, and intensity of therapy that could be provided to
patients by using semiautomated programs [23]. VR-based rehabilitation systems
have several other advantages, as well. VR rehabilitation exercises can be made
to be engaging, such that the patient feels immersed in the simulated world. This
is extremely important in terms of the patient motivation [24]. Furthermore, VR
allows the therapist to exercise more control over the environment compared with
real-life settings [25]. This enables the therapist to grade the task to the appropriate
level of challenge. Also, the use of VR allows a broader range of activities to be
offered in hospital and rehabilitation settings [26].
3.3
Exoskeleton
A robotic exoskeleton system (or an exoskeleton robot) is a novel man-machine
intelligent system. It fully merges human intelligence and machine power. It is
an orthotic device with corresponding joints and links to the human joints and
links. In recent years, several upper extremity robotic exoskeleton systems have been
proposed for various purposes such as an assistive device and rehabilitation device
[27]. Many universities and research groups have designed robotic exoskeletons and
here we bring some examples ([28], [29], [30]).
3.4
Fatigue
Oxford English Dictionary defines fatigue as ” Lassitude or weariness resulting from
either bodily or mental exertion” [31]. Fatigue is often accompanied by a peculiar
sense of discomfort, desire to rest, and reduced motivation [32]. There are many
ways to classify fatigue depending on its nature [33] but the primary classification
is into mental fatigue and physical fatigue [34]. We are interested in analysing the
characteristics of these two types of fatigue and their interaction if any.
3.4.1
Mental fatigue - eye metrics
Mental fatigue refers to the effects that people experience following and during
the course of prolonged periods of demanding cognitive activity, requiring sustained
mental eﬀiciency ([35],[36]). Fatigue due to prolonged task performance is a common
phenomenon in our everyday lives.
When people become fatigued, they usually
experience diﬀiculties in maintaining task performance at an adequate level ([37],
[38]). Mental fatigue is very observed in people working in some job areas. An
example are pilots aviation [39], truck drivers [40], construction workers [41] and
night train operators which operate under stressful and changing conditions [42].
We would like to show and analyse some of the most common parameters to measure
the level of mental fatigue based on eye features. For this purpose we will focus on
pupil diameter, eye-blinking and saccade [43].
Pupil
The pupil is the most observed eye-metrics in research experiments that aim to
investigate mental fatigue. A meaningful parameter to consider is baseline pupil
diameter. It is calculated by averaging the pupil diameter in the first millisecond
(usually 500ms) before the task starts. From the experiments conducted that we can
find in the literature, we expect the baseline pupil diameter to decrease during the
time if compared to consecutive tasks where the cognitive load is applied. Namely,
6
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:15==
the baseline is an indicator of mental fatigue which decrease during the time while
mental fatigue increases ([44]).
The most investigated pupil measure is pupil diameter. During the experiments,
it is usually measured all the time through eye-trackers. It is common practice to
calculate the average pupil diameter during the time of the task. Also, normalised
pupil diameter to the baseline condition is frequently considered. From the litera-
ture, we know that prolonged performance tasks induce cognitive fatigue [45] and we
expect pupil diameter to decrease when the subjects feel mental fatigue. This out-
come has been proofed in the most of experiments we can find in literature ([46],[44]
[47],[48],[49])
Blinks
Eye blinking is an involuntary reflex of our eyes that has been analysed in many
research and experiments. In particular, blinking duration and blinking frequency
are mostly investigated in order to find a correlation with mental fatigue. Blinking
duration is the time spent blinking and it is usually calculated as an average for
each task, blinking frequency indicates how often eye-blinking happens during a
task. In the literature, we can find several demonstrations that both parameters
are correlated with mental fatigue. Namely, increase in mental fatigue brings an
increase in blinking duration and blinking frequency ([50], [51], [45]).
Saccade
A saccade is defined as a brief, rapid movement of the eye from one position of rest
to another, whether voluntary (e.g. in reading) or involuntary (e.g. when a point
is fixated) [31]. In our case, we will consider saccades as involuntary eye move-
ments between two fixation points. Saccades behaviour are widely analysed and
investigated in literature as a consequence of mental fatigue. The most evaluated
parameters are mean saccade velocity, peak saccade velocity, saccade duration, sac-
cade frequency and saccade amplitude. The saccade duration is the time spent on
a fixation point. Many studies have shown how saccade duration is an indicator of
mental fatigue, namely mental fatigue brings saccade duration to increase ([52],[53],
[54], [50]).
Eye saccade amplitude is the distance (in degrees) during rapid eye
movements. Controlled studies have shown how time has a significant effect on eyes
saccade amplitude, with an increase in the amplitude during the time. Therefore,
it can be considered as a further indicator of mental fatigue [49]. Saccade frequency
is calculated by dividing the number of saccade in a period by the period. Also, in
this case, we observe that saccade frequency increases over time and it’s observed
when there is mental fatigue ([55],[49]). Mean saccade velocity is calculated as the
distance between two consecutive saccades divided by the time between them. A
lot of experiments have analysed the relation between mental fatigue and saccade
velocity showing that mean saccade velocity decrease during the time, namely sac-
cade velocity decrease with mental fatigue ([56], [53],[54],[50]). Finally, peak velocity
is the maximum saccade velocity value reached during a task. It has proofed that
it decrease during the dime as a consequence of mental fatigue ([57],[54],[50]).
3.4.2
Mental fatigue - subjective questionnaires
Another widely used method to measure mental fatigue is through self-report. An
example of self report are subjective questionnaires which reflect individual’s subjec-
tive experience of fatigue [47]. In the research papers we have studied for this thesis
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
7
==PAGE:16==
almost each experiment used subjective questionnaires as an indicator of mental
fatigue. The main part used self-report questionnaires ([47] [45] [44] [48]), the other
has used more popular questionnaires: Rating Scale Mental Effort ([46], [49]),Multi-
dimensional Fatigue Inventory[51], Visual Analog Scale ([57] [49] [58]), NASA-TLX
([50] [59]), Chalder fatigue scale, mental workload test ([53]) and cognitive fatigue
[34].
3.5
Physical fatigue
In common sense, when we talk about fatigue we mean a decrease in physical per-
formance associated with an increase in the perceived diﬀiculty of a task or exercise
[60]. Muscle fatigue is a complex, multifaceted phenomenon and is most commonly
defined as the inability to maintain a required force level after prolonged use of the
muscle [61]. Fatigue develops progressively until the muscle is not able to perform
the requested task anymore. It is a complex phenomenon whose mechanisms are
influenced by the characteristics of the task being performed (type, duration and
speed of the exercise). Nevertheless, neuromuscular fatigue will cause the neuro-
muscular system to adapt to effort in a number of ways, in order to sustain force
generation [62]. Decrease in force generation and physical fatigue can be central or
peripherical and it is caused by several different physiological phenomena. [63]. The
neuromuscular system tries to compensate for the decrease in force generation by
implementing a variety of nervous and muscle-related mechanism, in order to delay
the point at which the task can no longer be performed [64].
3.5.1
Physical fatigue affects mental fatigue
Some studies have verified there is an interaction between physical activities and
mental fatigue. However, few studied are focus on the effect of physical activities
on mental fatigue. Therefore, how physical activities affect mental fatigue is still
unclear. Finding out the effect of physical activities on mental fatigue will help
deepen understanding of mental fatigue, and on the other hand, it will benefit the
prevention of mental fatigue [65].
Brain parameters
Literature shows Electroencephalography (EEG) is a promising method to estimate
mental fatigue ([66],[67]). A research group from the University of Tianjin conducted
an experiment with 14 healthy participants. They were asked to perform a physical
task while their EEG data were recorded.
The energy parameters, connectivity
parameters and complexity parameters indicate fatigue in a physical task.
The
results show successfully how a physical task can bring mental fatigue [65]. Also,
the University of Osaka has conducted an experiment that assessed the effect of
physical fatigue on neural activity under the condition of simulated physical load.
The experiment consisted of one fatigue-inducing physical task session performed
between two MEG sessions.
The physical task lasts 10 minute and participants
had to perform the maximum effort. During the experiment, alpha-frequency was
collected and it appears the value has decreased from the beginning to the end of
the task. The experiment has identified changes in oscillatory brain activities due
to physical fatigue under the condition of physical load [58].
8
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:17==
Eyes parameters
We can observe the effects of physical fatigue on eye metrics. Indeed, during mental
effort, an increase in pupil diameter has been constantly observed in a very wide
variety of tasks [68]. A research group from the University of Louvain investigated
the effort of physical effort on pupil size. In their experiment, they asked 12 healthy
volunteers to perform a power grip task with different force levels. Pupil size was
monitored by means of an eye-tracker with a 500Hz sampling rate. The data were
collected, cleaned and manipulated in order to not have missing values with Mat-
lab®. The study found the pupil size increased systematically during physical effort.
Also, the result shows that pupil size is a good indicator of the actual intensity of
the physical exercise and how effortful it is perceived [69].
Another research conducted by the University of Wuhan investigated how physical
workload affects the mental workload of laparoscopic surgeons. The experiment was
executed in a laparoscopic virtual simulator which can provide feedback on the oper-
ation performance of the participants. The physical load during the surgery depends
on the phase therefore we can recognise some moments which require more physi-
cal efforts. The simulator environment allows participants to wear an eye-tracker
which will be able to collect eye data, particularly pupil dilatation. The outcome
of the research shows the pupil size diameter was particularly larger in the parts
of the surgery where more physical effort was needed [59]. As we know, another
indicator of cognitive load is eye blinking which can cause mental fatigue. We have
found many types of research proofing how physical fatigue had an impact on men-
tal fatigue analysing eye blinking. Indeed, a research group from the University of
Vila Real has developed a computer vision technique to count eye blinking during a
physical task. They recorded the faces of the participants and using facial recogni-
tion managed to recognise the eyes of the patients and count the number of blinks.
The outcome of the research shows the eye blinking rate increased during the time
[70]. Also, a research group from the University of Keio conducted an experiment
with participants to assess blinking rate during physical tasks. For this purpose,
they used a small sensor that could be attached to regular eyeglasses. The device
is light and not invasive which doesn’t affect subjects’ stress level. The results they
obtained show the number of blinks increased monotonously with the number of
test [71].
Other parameters
Several pieces of research have focused on proofing physical fatigue affects mental
fatigue base on other parameters (e.g. subjective questionnaires, etc.). A research
group from the University of Konstanz addressed the question of whether cognitive
fatigue can be provoked by physical exercises. For this purpose, they recruited real
patients which were asked to walk on a treadmill until they were exhausted and felt
an urgent need for a rest. All participants were assessed with an attention test which
is an indicator of cognitive load. The results show that under physical load patients
reported significantly higher cognitive load than during rest condition confirming
that cognitive fatigue can be provoked through physical exertion [72].
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 4
Methods
Summary
In this chapter we present all the tools and instruments we used to complete the
experiment. Also we describe the goal of the study, procedure, independent and
depended variables and the data collected.
The goal of the thesis is to investigate the correlation between physical fatigue
and mental fatigue. More specifically we would like to examine if physical fatigue
can bring mental fatigue. We aim to gain insight from the eye-metrics data with
modalities and methods we learned from the literature. Therefore, we conducted a
controlled experiment with volunteers participants in the Gaze Laboratory in the
Department of Management and Technology at the Technical University of Den-
mark. The experiment consists of one experimental session which will be conducted
in a VR environment. For the purpose we used HTC Vive Pro Eye headset which
is equipped with an integrated eye-tracking system. Furthermore, participants were
provided of an upper limb exoskeleton which was able to support physical tasks such
as lifting weights. The control of the exoskeleton was possible through gaze control.
In Figure 4.1a we can see one of the participants of the experiment in the Gaze
Lab before starting the experimental session. He is wearing the HTC Vive Pro Eye
headset and an upper limb exoskeleton on his right arm. Also, he is lifting one of
the weights we used to perform the physical task and induce physical fatigue.
(a) Set-up
(b) Set-up
Figure 4.1: Images from the experiment
10
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:19==
4.1
Instruments
As we can see from Figure 4.1a a lot of different devices and instruments were needed
to conduct the experiment. In the following subsection, we will go through them
and we will provide a description of their functioning.
4.1.1
HTC Vive Pro Eye
The VIVE Pro Eye from HTC was released in June 2019. The VIVE Pro is an
immersive VR headset that uses two infrared sensors, called base stations, and
two handheld controllers to track the motion of users [73]. The headset must be
used in the range of the base stations to function properly and currently requires a
connection to a computer that can handle VR [74]. The area within the range of
the base stations is usually referred to as the “play area” and is often marked on
the floor in the physical spaces where the headsets are being used. The play area
should be kept clear of obstacles, including furniture, while the headset is in use
[75]. We have decided to use Vive Pro Eye for our experiment because it is proved
to be valid for research purposes ([76], [77]). Also, an eye tracker is integrated into
the headset which is extremely important for the purpose of the thesis.
Furthermore, we have used Vive Trackers which are powerful devices that are used
to integrate real-world objects with the VR game ([78], [79]).
They are able to
communicate with the Vive Pro Eye Headset and Unity. Furthermore, literature as
shown that they are reliable devices for research purposes ([80], [81]).
(a) Vive Pro Eye Headset
(b) Vive Pro Tracker
Figure 4.2: HTC Vive Pro devices.
4.1.2
Exoskeleton
For our project, we have used a prototype upper limb exoskeleton made with LEGO.
The exoskeleton was designed by a student of the Technical University of Denmark.
The exoskeleton is able to perform the required movements thanks to a Raspberry Pi
[82] which we coded in Python. Whereas the communication between the Raspberry
Pi (exoskeleton) and Unity happened thanks to UDP communication protocol [83]
and BrickPi [84].
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Exoskeleton
(b) RaspberryPi + BrickPi
Figure 4.3
4.1.3
Unity
Unity3D is one of the most famous VR tools, it is cross-platform game development
software, and now besides Mac OSX, Unity3D can fully support WindowsXP/Vis-
ta/7, Unity3D supports three scripting languages: JavaScript, C#, and a dialect of
Python called Boo ([85], [76]). We have decided to use unity because it integrated
pretty well with HTC Vive Pro Eye headset, HTC Vive Trackers and Raspberry Pi.
The programming language we used is C#.
4.2
Ethical approval
All the subjects recruited for the experiment signed a consent form, which we can
read in Appendix A, before the experiment and they were informed about the ex-
periment’s tasks. Furthermore, they were aware to be free to stop the experiment
at any moment as soon as they didn’t feel comfortable anymore or extremely tired.
Due to the special situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic we took extra pre-
caution in the modalities we conducted the experiment. As a matter of fact, all
participants had to show a negative COVID-19 test within the last 72h and wear a
face mask. Also, the laboratory where the experiment took part was provided with
hand sanitiser.
4.3
Participants
The participants were recruited on a voluntary basis and they are mainly students
or employees of the Technical University of Denmark and part of our personal social
network. We had a total of twelve participants (N=12) and we assessed them with a
pre-questionnaire that you can read in Appendix A. In the questionnaire, we asked
some general questions to have an insight into the characteristics of our group. From
the questionnaire, we learned that all subjects had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision (3 participants were using glasses or corrective lenses) and they are all right-
handed. Gender information was gathered based on three categories: female, male
and other. The data show we had 4 females, 8 males and 0 others. The average age
of the participants is A=25.75 and the standard deviation is SD=1.3568. Also, 1
participant use to train ”not at all”, 3 participants train ”sometimes” and 8 partici-
pants train ”often”. Finally, it appeared that 4 people have ”no experience”, 5 have
”little experience”, 1 has ”moderate experience” and 2 have ”a lot of experience”.
12
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:21==
4.4
Procedure
The participants were sitting at a table and they were helped to wear the arm
exoskeleton on their right arm which has to stand on the table in a relaxed position.
Next, they were helped to wear the VR glasses and instructed on how to calibrate
the headset’s eye-tracker. Also, HTC Vive Pro Eye headset allows calibration and
usage with corrective eyeglasses.
4.4.1
The scene
When we run our VR game, the participants found themselves in a scene where
they were welcomed by a welcome string as we can see in Figure 4.4a. We started
building the scene from a previous work namely a VR game designed by Barnabas
Homola during his Master Project thesis ”The impact of torque and sound on a
VR interface for rehabilitation exoskeleton” which he defended in January 2021.
We maintained the arm shape and its sense of embodiment and ownership from his
work which makes feel the virtual arm as it is your own. We added to the scene two
white arrows, one is pointing up and the other is pointing down as we can see from
Figure 4.4b.
(a) Welcome string
(b) Initial scene
Figure 4.4: Initial scene and welcome string
(a) Instruction string
(b) Last string
Figure 4.5: Last strings
4.4.2
The experiment
The experiment consists of eight tasks and it lasts approximately one hour for each
participant. After the welcome string, an instruction string appears in the scene
and explains the task that the participants have to complete as we can see in Figure
4.5a. Indeed, the up arrow turns from white to red as we can see in Figure 4.6a
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
13
==PAGE:22==
which means the participant has to focus the gaze on the arrow. When the gaze is
on the red arrow, this turns green as in Figure 4.6b. When the arrow is green the
subject has to lift up his arm. The arm movement will correspond to a movement in
the scene namely the participant will see the arm lifting up in the game. Vive Pro
Tracker tracks the shoulder of the subjects and makes the movement to feel real.
(a) Up arrow turns red
(b) Up arrow turns green
Figure 4.6: Up arrow
When the movement is completed, the person conducting the experiment will press
the space button on the keyboard of the computer as shown in 4.1b. This will turn
the up arrow from colour green to colour white and the down arrow from colour
white to colour red as we see in Figure 4.7a. Once again the participant has to focus
his gaze on the red arrow which will turn green as in Figure 4.7b. The participant
will lift his arm down and when it will be in the initial position the conductor of
the experiment will press the space key button on the keyboard. This will turn the
down arrow from colour green to colour white and the up arrow from colour white to
colour red. Then the experiment continues in this way until the end. We recorded
some short videos of the experiment and some extra images of the tasks that you
can find at this link.
(a) Down arrow turns red
(b) Down arrow turns green
Figure 4.7: Down arrow
Each participant will conduct a total of eight tasks. The lifts will be performed with
three different weights namely 0kg, 2kg and 5kg. Furthermore, in some of the tasks,
the participants are going to be supported by the exoskeleton thanks to a little push
which will be in the same direction as the lifting. Each task has a definite number of
repetitions which depend on the weight. The tasks with 0kg weight and 2kg weight
will require a total of 100 lifts (50 up and 50 down) whereas the tasks with 5kg will
14
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:23==
require a total of 20 lifts (10 up and 10 down). We decided to assign a lower number
of required lifts for the tasks with 5kg because we wanted to make sure that each
participant could complete it and we considered 20 lifts a reasonable number for our
participants. For this reason, we had two special tasks in our experiment (Task4 and
Task8) which were conducted with 5kg but the participants were free to perform as
many repetitions as they could. We took notes of the number of repetitions they
managed to perform.
The participants took their tasks in a randomised order [86] and in Table 4.1 we can
see the tasks performed for each participant. In the Table, ”H” indicates the tasks
where the exoskeleton was helping to perform the task and ”L” indicates the special
tasks namely Task4 and Task8.
Task1
Task2
Task3
Task4
Task5
Task6
Task7
Task8
P1
0kg
2kg
5kg
5kgL
0kgH
5kgH
2kgH
5kgLH
P2
2kgH
5kgH
0kgH
5kgLH
5kg
2kg
0kg
5kgL
P3
0kgH
5kgH
2kgH
5kgLH
0kg
2kg
5kg
5kgL
P4
5kg
0kg
2kg
5kgL
2kgH
5kgH
0kgH
5kgLH
P5
5kgH
0kgH
2kgH
5kgLH
2kg
0kg
5kg
5kgL
P6
2kg
0kg
5kg
5kgL
5kgH
2kgH
0kgH
5kgLH
P7
0kgH
2kgH
5kgH
5kgLH
0kg
5kg
2kg
5kgL
P8
5kg
0kg
2kg
5kgL
2kgH
0kgH
5kgH
5kgLH
P9
5kg
2kg
0kg
5kgL
5kgH
0kgH
2kgH
5kgLH
P10
0kg
5kg
2kg
5kgL
5kgH
2kgH
0kgH
5kgLH
P11
0kgH
2kgH
5kgH
5kgLH
2kg
5kg
0kg
5kgL
P12
2kgH
5kgH
0kgH
5kgLH
2kg
5kg
0kg
5kgL
Table 4.1: Experiment layout.
4.4.3
Cognitive Load
From the literature, we know that cognitive load brings mental fatigue and the
phenomenon is more visible if it is combined with the physical task as in our case.
Therefore, after each task, we induced cognitive load and we choose a 7-backwards
counting for the purpose. We decided on this type of exercise because backward
counting might be challenging but not extremely hard. Indeed, we want physical
fatigue to be the main reason to bring mental fatigue. Therefore we asked partici-
pants to start from 100 and count backwards removing 7. They had 30 seconds to
complete this task and the conductor of the experiment took note of the counting
mistakes and if the subjects managed to complete the exercise in time.
4.4.4
Subjective questionnaires
Subjective questionnaires and self-report are additional tools we can use to assess
our participants. Therefore, after each task, we ask the participants to answer to a
self report that we can find in Appendix A. We would like to know if the subjects
felt any help from the exoskeleton while they are performing the task and if that
was beneficial. The question we ask is:
Could you feel any help?
If yes, to what extent do you agree to this statement:
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
15
==PAGE:24==
”The help I felt from the exoskeleton was beneficial”. From 1 to 20 where 1 strongly
disagrees and 20 strongly agrees.
Next, we assessed the participant with a subjective questionnaire. For this purpose
we decided to use NASA-TLX which we can find in Appendix A. The questions
asked were the following:
1. How mentally demanding was the task?
2. How physically demanding was the task?
3. How hurried or rushed was the pace of the task?
4. How successful were you in accomplishing what you were asked to do?
5. How hard did you have to work to accomplish your level of performance?
6. How insecure, discouraged, irritated, stressed and annoyed were you?
All answers were measured on a scale from 1 to 20.
At the end of the experiment, each participant was asked to fill a questionnaire
where we asked open questions regarding the experience (Appendix A).
4.5
Data Collection
During all experiment, we collected a big amount of data both from the subjective
questionnaires and from the eye data.
Eye-data
The eye-data collection was possible thanks to the eye tracker integrated into HTC
Vive Pro Eye headset.
It allows collecting gaze coordinates and pupil diameter
which are the two main parameters that we are interested in since we would like to
investigate mental fatigue. The data were collected in a CSV file where we also saved
information about the timing and the status of the arm namely if it was supposed
to be up or down. For each task a CSV file was created, therefore we had eight CSV
files for each participant for a total of ninety-six files.
Subjective questionnaires
For what concerns the subjective data, the answers we received from all participants
were saved in a file in order to be easy to use for the data analysis.
4.6
Independent variables and dependent variables
4.6.1
Independent variables
In the design of our experiment, we have four independent variables which we will
describe below.
Help
With help we mean if the participants will be helped by the arm exoskeleton while
performing the tasks. We have two test conditions: with help when the exoskeleton
nudges the arm to perform the task and without help when the participants have
to make all the effort. We would like to investigate the role of the support of the
exoskeleton in the mental fatigue of our subjects.
16
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:25==
Load
The independent variable load indicates the weight the participants should lift. It
has three test conditions corresponding to the three different weights: 0kg, 2kg and
5kg. We are interested in the effect that different loads will have on mental fatigue.
Task
With tasks we mean the number of the task the participant is performing. We have
eight test conditions corresponding to the eight tasks: Task1, Task2, Task3, Task4,
Task5, Task6, Task7 and Task8, . We would like to observe the effect of the time in
the mental fatigue.
Max number of repetitions
With Max number of repetitions we mean the maximum number of lifts that each
participant could complete in Task4 and Task8. In these two tasks, the participants
work with their highest effort and we would like to see what effect this can have on
mental fatigue.
4.6.2
Dependent variables
For each independent variable, we would like to investigate the effect on mental
fatigue. Therefore we are going to observe the following parameters namely our
dependent variables. From the eye data we have: pupil diameter, peak pupil diam-
eter,number of blinks and blinking frequency; from the subjective questionnaires we
have mental fatigue, physical fatigue, effort, temporal demand and frustration.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 5
Results
Summary
The chapter contains all the results of the experiment. Here you will find the expla-
nation of how we cleaned our pupil eye data and how we calculated all the dependent
variables for each independent variable. All the results are supported by figures of
the results from the eye-data and subjective questionnaires.
In this chapter, we will present the results we obtained from our experiment. Both
eye-data and subjective questionnaire will be presented with an explanation of how
we reached the result. For what concerns eye data, we have a total of ninety-six
CSV files containing eye data for each task. The data were manipulated in MATLAB
[87] with a script written by the conductor of the experiment. Whereas subjective
questionnaires results were collected in a file and next imported in MATLAB for the
data visualisation.
5.1
Data cleaning
For what concerns eye data, all the results we would like to show are related to
pupil diameter which is one of the most important parameters to observe when you
want to investigate mental fatigue. Therefore, an explanation of how we cleaned
our data is necessary before starting our analysis.
In particular, when we work
with pupil size eye data there are some highly suggested steps to follow in order to
obtain a good signal. In Figure 5.1 we can see the left eye-pupil data of one of the
participants, in this case, is Participant4, while performing one of the tasks, in this
case, Task7 (lift 0kg weight without help from the exoskeleton). At this moment
it’s not important to analyse the conditions of the task but we want to focus on the
signal. It is clear from the figure that some sort of data cleaning is needed in order
to be able to use the data. The first problem we have to overcome is missing data
([88],[89]). As a matter of fact, the signal presents a big amount of missing values
which are represented by all the vertical lines reaching the zero value. Indeed, HTC
Vive Pro Eye saves missing values with a zero. Whether missing data deserve special
treatment is a matter of opinion. Some researchers prefer to interpolate missing data
[90] other researchers prefer to exclude trials with too much missing data [91]. In
our case, we will exclude these values from our dataset removing all values smaller
18
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:27==
than zero since our dataset is very large. We can read the MATLAB code of this
step in Appendix B. The signal we obtain after cleaning the signal from the missing
values is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.1: Pupil diameter before data cleaning.
Figure 5.2: Pupil diameter without missing values.
We can see that we have a good improvement in the signal already but we will try to
improve it more by removing some noise. The size of the pupil changes at most by a
factor of around 3 [92]. If pupil size as measured, changes more than this, it means
that something distorted is being recorded (they can be the values before or after
an eye-blinking) [89]. Therefore we applied what is called standard deviation filter:
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
19
==PAGE:28==
all values that differ more than 3 times from the mean value should be considered
outliers and removed [88]. In Appendix B we can see the code to obtain the result.
Figure 5.3: Cleaned pupil diameter.
In Figure 5.3 we can see the final signal we obtained and that we are going to use
for our analysis. We are going to clean all pupil size data with this method. Then
in the next sections, we will analyse how the mean eye data are affected by each
independent variable.
5.2
Analysis of Task4 and Task8
We start presenting our results from the two special tasks, Task4 and Task8. In
particular, we would like to give some extra attention to the independent variable
maximum number of repetitions. The two tasks were both performed with a 5kg load
(the heaviest weight) and the participants were asked to perform as many lifts as
possible and to stop the exercise when they reached their maximum level of physical
fatigue.
5.2.1
Independent variable Task
In Figure 5.4a we can see the comparison between the number of blinks in Task4
and Task8. We calculated the number of blinks for each participant for both tasks
and saved the values in a matrix. The matrix has two columns (one for each test
condition) and twelve rows as the number of participants. Then we averaged the
values of each task and we plotted the results in the Figure 5.4a. Whereas, in Figure
5.4b we show the blinking frequency namely the number of blinks per second. We
calculated the values dividing the number of blinks by the time used to perform the
task and we saved the values in a matrix that had two columns and twelve rows.
Next, we averaged the values of the two columns and plotted them in the graph.
20
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:29==
(a) Number of blinks
(b) Blinking frequency.
Figure 5.4
Figure 5.5
The number of blinks and blinking frequency are important parameters to observe
when we investigate mental fatigue. Nevertheless, pupil diameter and peak pupil di-
ameter are significant as well. We calculated the mean pupil size for each participant
for both test conditions and averaged the values for Task4 and Task8, respectively.
Whereas the lower peak pupil size was calculated saving the values of the minimum
diameter for each test condition for each participant and averaging the values for
Task4 and Task8. We can find the graphs we obtained for pupil size and peak pupil
size in Figure C.1a and Figure C.1b in Appendix.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
21
==PAGE:30==
In addition, in Figure 5.5 we show one of the most significant results we observed.
In the graph, we can see the comparison between the number of lifts, physical fa-
tigue and mental fatigue. Indeed, for Task4 and Task8 we took note of the number
of lifts that participants managed to perform and we averaged the values for each
test condition. Whereas mental fatigue and physical fatigue are the results of the
answers of the TLX subjective questionnaire.
5.2.2
Independent variable Help
We decided to investigate further Task4 and Task8.
Indeed, we split the tasks
performed with help and the tasks performed without help. In Figure C.3 we can
see the average number of blinks for Task4 and Task8 when they are performed with
help and without help. Also, in Figure C.3 we can see the comparison between blink
frequency for Task4 and Task8 when performed with help and without help. The
parameters were calculated in the same fashion we did previously. The reason behind
the choice of comparing the parameters of Task4 and Task8 with help and without
help separately is that we are interested to know how the independent variables task
and help interact together.
Figure 5.6: Number of blinks
In addition, we have analysed average pupil diameter and peak pupil diameter for
Task4 and Task8 both when they are performed with help and without help. The
values were calculated in the same fashion as above. We can see the results in Figure
C.2a and Figure C.2b in Appendix.
22
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:31==
5.3
Pupil diameter
5.3.1
Task independent variable
We would like to see how pupil diameter changes in each task. Therefore, after
cleaning the pupil eye data (left eye), we calculate the mean pupil size for each
task for each participant and save the value in a matrix where each column will
correspond to one test condition (Task1, Task2, Task3, Task4, Task5, Task6, Task7
and Task8 respectively). Next, we averaged the values of each column in order to
have the mean value of each task and in Table C.1 in Appendix we can see the values
we plotted in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Mean pupil size.
5.3.2
Help independent variable
Now we would like to see how the two test conditions of the independent variable
help affect the pupil diameter. First, we clean the left eye data and we calculate
the mean pupil size for the task with help and the tasks without help. We obtain
a matrix with two columns (corresponding to the two test conditions help and no
help) and forty-eight arrows since each participant performed four tasks with the
support of the exoskeleton and four tasks without the support of the exoskeleton.
In Table C.3 in Appendix we can see the obtained values which we plotted in Figure
C.4.
5.3.3
Load independent variable
Next, we will observe how the pupil size diameter changes with the independent
variable load. Therefore we will calculate the average pupil size for each load (0kg,
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
23
==PAGE:32==
2kg and 5kg) and we will consider the special case of Task4 and Task8 as a different
load which we will call 5kgL (L==long). Therefore we will have four loads in total.
First, we calculate the mean pupil size for each load and for each participant which
we saved in a matrix. The matrix will have four columns (one for each load) and
twenty-four arrows because each participant took two tasks for each load. Then, we
average the value of each column in order to have the mean pupil size for each load.
We obtain the values in Table C.2 in Appendix which we plot in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Mean pupil size.
5.4
Peak pupil diameter
In this section, we will analyse the dependent variable peak pupil diameter and
how it changes with respect to the test conditions of independent variables. Before
starting the analysis we clean the data with the process we explained in Section 5.1.
5.4.1
Task independent variable
We start calculating the minimum value of the pupil size for each task and for each
participant. We save this value in a matrix that will have eight columns (one for
each task) and twelve rows (one for each participant). Then we calculate the average
minimum pupil size for each task and we obtain the values in Table C.1 in Appendix
which we plotted in Figure 5.9.
24
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.9: Mean peak pupil size.
5.4.2
Help independent variable
We proceed with analysing peak pupil size for the independent variable help. We
calculate the minimum pupil size of each task when the participants are supported
by the exoskeleton and when they are not. Then we save these values in a matrix
which will have two columns (one for each test condition: help and no help) and
forty-eight rows because each participant performed four tasks with help and four
tasks without help. Next, we average the peak pupil size for the two test conditions
and we obtain the values in Table C.3 that we show in Figure C.5 in Appendix.
5.4.3
Load independent variable
Finally, we want to observe how the peak pupil size is influenced by the independent
variable load. Therefore, we calculate the minimum pupil size for each load and we
save the value in a matrix. The matrix will have a column for each load (once again
we will consider Task4 and Task8 as an additional weight which we call 5kgL) and
twenty-four row because each participant performed two tasks for each load. Next,
we average the peak pupil size for each load and we obtain the values in Table C.2
which we plotted in Figure 5.10.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.10: Mean peak pupil size.
5.5
Number of blinks
The information about blinks is obtained from the pupil data. Indeed during the
data pupil data cleaning, we have to handle blinks as well. Artifacts are typically
abnormal pupil diameter values that can be seen as the outliers of the pupil diameter
value distribution. In order to classify an observation as an artifact, we first calculate
the mean (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of such distribution (zero values are
excluded from such calculations) [93]. As we did in Section 5.1 we will consider
blinks the values belonging to the following interval:
] −∞; µ −3 · σ[
∪
]µ + 3 · σ; +∞[
(5.1)
In the next sections, we will analyse blinks for each independent variable.
5.5.1
Task independent variable
We would like to investigate how the number of blinks interacts with the independent
variable task. For each task, we analyse pupil data and every time we have a value
that satisfies condition 5.1 we consider that a blink and we increment the number
of blinks. Next, we save the value in a matrix that will have eight columns as the
number of tasks and twelve rows as the number of participants. Finally, we calculate
the average number of blinks for each task and we obtain the values in Table C.1
that we plot in Figure C.6 in Appendix.
26
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:35==
5.5.2
Help independent variable
In this section, we will observe how the number of blinks interacts with the inde-
pendent variable help. For each test condition (help and no help) and we analyse
the pupil diameter and when the values satisfy the condition 5.1 we increase the
number of blinks. In the end, we save the number of blinks in a matrix that has two
columns and forty-eight rows. Finally, we calculate the average numbers of blinks
for each test condition and we obtain the values in Table C.3 which are shown in
Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Number of blinks.
5.5.3
Load independent variable
Now we would like to see how the number of blinks interacts with the independent
variable load. For each load, we will analyse pupil diameter data and when the
value satisfies the condition 5.1 we increase the number of blinks and save the value
in a matrix. The matrix will have four columns (one for each test condition) and
twenty-four rows since each participant complete two tasks for each load. Finally,
we average the number of blinks for each load and we obtain the values we can see
in Table C.2 and Figure C.7 in Appendix.
5.6
Blink Frequency
The last eye data we would like to analyse is the blink frequency. We will calculate
the value as the number of blinks of a task divided by the time spent to perform
the task. We will present the results for each independent variable below.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
27
==PAGE:36==
5.6.1
Task independent variable
We would like to investigate how the blink frequency is affected by the independent
variable Task. We calculate the value for each participant and for each test condi-
tions and we saved the value in a matrix that has eight columns (as the number of
tasks performed) and twelve rows as the number of participants. Next, we averaged
the number of blinks for each task and we obtained the values in Table C.1 which
we can see in Figure C.8 in Appendix.
5.6.2
Help independent variable
Next, we would like to present the blink frequency with the respect of the indepen-
dent variable help. We calculated the blink frequency for each task ans saved the
values in a matrix which had two columns as the number of test conditions (help
and no help) and forty-eight rows because each participant took four tasks with the
support of the exoskeleton and four tasks without. Then we averaged the values of
each column which we can see in Table C.3 and Figure 5.12
Figure 5.12: blink frequency
5.6.3
Independent variable Load
Finally, we would like to investigate how the blink frequency is affected by the
independent variable load. We calculate the blink frequency for each task and for
all test conditions. Next, we saved the values in a matrix that has four columns
(one for each load) and twelve rows because each participant performed two tasks
for each load. Then we averaged the values for each test conditions and we obtained
the values in Table C.2 in Appendix which we can see in Figure C.9.
28
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:37==
5.7
NASA-TLX
In this section, we would like to focus on the subjective questionnaire and in particu-
lar the answers we collected from NASA-TLX. We will explain how we manipulated
the data and we will show the result.
5.7.1
Independent variable Task
In Figure 5.13 we show the answers to the TLX questionnaire for the independent
variable task. Indeed, on the edges of the graphs, we can see all the dependent
variables and how they are affected by the independent variables. To obtain the
graph we saved for every dependent variable the answers of each task for each
participant in a matrix. Therefore we had six matrices with eight columns as the
number of tasks and twelve rows as the number of participants. Next, for each
matrix, we averaged the values for each task and next, we plotted the average values
for each dependent variable in the graph. The graph carries a lot of information and
it gives a good idea about all the answers.
Figure 5.13: TLX questionnaire
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.14: TLX questionnaire comparisons
In Figure 5.14 we want to focus more in detail on some of the dependent variables
namely: mental fatigue, physical fatigue and effort. Also, we want to compare these
depended variables with the number of counting mistakes made after each task. We
choose to focus on these four variables because are significant for the purpose of the
thesis. We saved the values of each dependent variable and then we averaged for
each task. We obtained the values we show in the Figure above.
5.7.2
Independent variable help
In Figure 5.15 we show the dependent variable of the TLX questionnaire and how
they are affected by the two test conditions of the independent variable Help. For
each dependent variable, we saved the answers of the participants in six matrices.
Each matrix has two columns since we have two test conditions and forty-eight rows
because each participant took four tasks with help and four tasks without help.
Finally, we averaged the values of each dependent variable per test conditions and
plotted the values in the following figure.
30
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.15: TLX questionnaire comparisons
Figure 5.16: TLX questionnaire comparisons
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
31
==PAGE:40==
In Figure 5.16 we want to compare some of the most significant dependent variables
which are the number of counting mistakes, mental fatigue, physical fatigue and
effort. We saved the answers we obtained for each dependent variable for both test
conditions and we averaged the values.
5.7.3
Independent variable Load
In Figure 5.17 we can see the answers to the TLX questionnaire for the independent
variable Load. At the edges of the graph, we have the dependent variables and we
can see how these are affected by the four test conditions. To obtain the graph we
collected the answers of the participants for each dependent variable for each test
conditions. Then, we averaged the values for each test conditions.
Figure 5.17: TLX questionnaire comparisons
32
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.18: TLX questionnaire comparisons
In Figure 5.16 we show in detail some of the most significant dependent variables.
Also, we are interested to compare these variable and learn how they interact.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
33
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Summary
In this chapter, we are going to discuss all the results we obtained from our ex-
periment. We will comment separately the outcome of each independent variable
and we will give our interpretation. Next, we will list the limitations and improve-
ments of the experiment.
6.1
Analysis of Task4 and Task8
We would like to point our attention to two special tasks namely Task4 and Task8.
These two tasks can be considered different from the others because the participants
didn’t have a prefixed number of lifts to perform but they were asked to do as much
as they could and the tasks were performed with the 5kg load which is the heaviest
weight we used. The idea behind this choice is that we wanted to induce physical
fatigue in the subjects and bring them to reach their limit in order to be able to see
the effect on mental fatigue. As a matter of fact, we know from the literature that
physical fatigue brings mental fatigue but the phenomenon is more visible when the
physical fatigue is extremely high.
6.1.1
Independent variable Task
We start our analysis by considering the independent variable Task first. In Figure
C.1a we can see the mean pupil size for Task4 and Task8. We expected mean pupil
size to decrease from Task4 to Task8 as a consequence of mental fatigue caused
by physical fatigue. The graph doesn’t show a significant decrease but we can still
observe a slight decrease in Task8 which confirms in part our thesis. Also, we can
observe the same behaviour for the mean peak pupil size in Figure C.1b where
the mean lower peaks for Task4 and Task8 are basically the same. Nevertheless,
when we observe the number of blinks in Figure 5.4a we can see that the number
of blinks increases significantly from Task4 to Task8.
This result is positive for
our experiment since we expected the number of blinks to increase in Task8 as a
consequence of physical fatigue which is confirmed by the literature as well.
In
addition, in Figure 5.4b we can see how the blinking frequency changes from Task4
34
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:43==
and Task8. We expected the blinking frequency to increase form Task4 to Task8
and this is confirmed by the graph. Another important result is shown in Figure 5.5
where we can see the average physical fatigue perceived by the subjects from the
TLX questionnaire, the average mental fatigue perceived by the participants from
the TLX questionnaire and the average number of lifts that participants managed
to perform for each task. Therefore, we can see that the level of physical fatigue
perceived is basically the same for both tasks which mean there isn’t an increase in
the level of physical fatigue during the time (we know we take first Task4 and then
Task 8 as the last one). By contrast, the level of mental fatigue has a small increase
from Task4 to Task8. This result is confirmed both by the number of eye-blinking
and the blinking frequency. The most interesting fact is that the number of lifts that
the participants managed to perform from Task4 to Task8 decreased. Therefore, we
believe that this fact (which is an indicator of physical fatigue) caused the increase
in mental fatigue. For what concerns the pupil size data, we think we can’t observe
a significant decrease from Task4 to Task8 due to some noise present in our signals.
Overall, this is a successful result because we can see how physical tasks affects
mental fatigue.
6.1.2
Independent variable Help
We observe Figure C.3 where we can see the comparison between the number of
blinks for Task4 and Task8 when they are performed with help and without help.
We can see that in general, the number of blinks is higher in Task8 since it is the last
one performed. also, if we point our attention to the support of the exoskeleton we
can learn that the task is performed without help the number of blinks is significantly
higher. This is clear evidence of mental fatigue induced by a physical task. Therefore
our thesis is confirmed.
6.2
Independent variable Task
We start our analysis from Figure 5.7 where we can see how the pupil diameter
changes during the different tasks which were taken in the order Task1 to Task8.
From the theory we expect pupil diameter to decrease during the time due to the
combination of the physical task (lifting) and inducted cognitive load (7-backward
counting). From the image, it appears that in general the pupil diameter decrease
during the tasks even if the change is not significant. The result is coherent with
the peak pupil size which we can observe in Figure 5.9. The graph shows there is a
general decreasing trend but the decrease is quite small. Furthermore, the number
of blinks in Figure C.6 and the blink frequency in Figure C.8 doesn’t have a trend
that we can recognise with mental fatigue. Indeed, as know from the literature, the
number of blinks and blink frequency is supposed to increase as an effect of mental
fatigue. Therefore we can conclude we are not able to see mental fatigue for the
independent variable Task and the outcome is confirmed by the results we obtained
from the subjective questionnaire. Indeed, in Figure 5.14 we can see the comparison
between mental fatigue, effort and physical fatigue, and the number of mistakes
done during the 7-backwards counting. From the answers of the participants, it
appears that they didn’t feel high levels of physical fatigue which remains quite sta-
ble during all tasks. We have an exception for Task4 and Task8 which are the two
special case we discussed before. Therefore, since there isn’t a significant increase in
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
35
==PAGE:44==
perceived physical fatigue we can’t see its effect on mental fatigue. In addition we
know from the theory that effort plays a role in the motivation of the subjects([57]
[46]). In fact, low motivation entails disengagement therefore we will not be able
to see significant mental fatigue. For what concerns the counting mistakes, we can
observe that the number of mistakes decreases until Task5 then they increase again
significantly. We think that the counting mistakes decrease in the first part due to
the learning effect [94]. Whereas in the second part the mistakes increase because of
the increased cognitive load. This might be the reason for the slight pupil decrease
we observed.
Finally, Figure 5.13 gives an overview of all results we obtained with the indepen-
dent variable Task. We can see that mental fatigue has the lowest values whereas
performance has the highest. This suggests that the subjects felt they performed
well, indeed the physical demand is pretty low as well. We observe high values of
physical demands just for the two special cases Task4 and Task8 which is in line
with the previous findings. In conclusion, we have learned that we can’t see any
evidence of mental fatigue for the independent variable Task.
6.3
Independent variable Help
We proceed with investigating the independent variable Help. We start our analysis
by observing Figure C.4 where we can see the comparison between the mean pupil
diameter of the tasks completed with the help of the exoskeleton and without the
help of the exoskeleton. We expect to mean pupil size and peak pupil size to be
larger when the tasks are performed with the support of the exoskeleton because
the load to lift is perceived as lighter and this will bring less physical fatigue; as a
consequence, this should bring less mental fatigue. Nevertheless Figure C.4 and C.5
doesn’t fulfill our expectations. By contrast, the number of blinks and the blink
frequency that we can observe in Figure 5.11 and 5.12 respectively show a trend we
were expecting. Indeed, the number of blinks and blink frequency is supposed to
increase with mental fatigue. Therefore, in our case we expect them to be bigger
for the tasks performed without the support of the exoskeleton because the physical
fatigue is higher and this will bring mental fatigue. This is a good result for our ex-
periment because it shows how physical fatigue brings mental fatigue. The result is
confirmed by the answers we collected from the subjective questionnaire. In Figure
5.16 we compare the perceived level of mental fatigue, physical fatigue, effort and
the number of counting mistakes in the 7-backwards counting. From the graph is
clear that the physical fatigue and the effort participants experience are bigger in
the tasks performed without the support of the exoskeleton. This is in line with the
mental fatigue perceived by the participants and the number of counting mistake
which are higher in the tasks without support. In conclusion, we confirm that the
more physically demanding tasks bring more mental fatigue. For what concerns the
results we obtained for the pupil diameter and peak pupil diameter, we believe we
couldn’t see the effect of mental fatigue because of the data is too noisy.
Finally, we examine Figure 5.15 where we can see all the results of the TLX ques-
tionnaire. It is very useful because it gives a good idea about all the dependent
variables. From the image, we learn that physical fatigue, effort and mental fatigue
and frustration are higher in the task without help.
36
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:45==
6.4
Independent variable Load
In this section, we will finally investigate the last independent variable namely Load.
We begin our analysis from Figure 5.8 where we can see the mean pupil diameter for
all the different loads namely 0kg weight, 2kg weight, 5kg weight and 5kgL weight.
What we expect is that the mean pupil diameter is smaller for the heaviest weights
because this means that the physical demand is higher. Our expectation is satisfied
as we can see from the figure because the average pupil diameter is smaller for task
5kg and 5kgL. The result is confirmed by Figure 5.10 where we can see the mean
peak pupil size which lower for the heaviest weights. Also, we observed the number
of blinks in Figure C.7 and blink frequency in figure C.9. We expect to have higher
amounts of blinks and blink frequency for the tasks with the heaviest loads but from
the figure, it looks like the loads with the most average number of blinks are 5kg
(confirms our expectation) and 0kg which is unexpected. We believe that this result
might have been influenced by the limitations of the devices we used. Nevertheless,
from the TLX questionnaire in Figure 5.18 we can see that the physical fatigue
and effort are higher when for the heaviest load. For what concerns the number of
counting mistakes we can see that the number is higher when the weight is heavier.
Also, from Figure 5.17 we have an overview of all answers we collected from the
subjective questionnaire which confirms the analysis. In conclusion, we can confirm
that physical fatigue and effort are higher in the tasks with heavier weights and this
brings mental fatigue which is higher in the tasks with heavy loads.
6.5
Comment, limitations and improvements
Overall we are satisfied by the results we managed to reach in our experiment. Indeed
we investigated the effect of physical fatigue on mental fatigue with four independent
variables and we learned that our thesis was correct. Nevertheless, we want to point
out some limitations and challenges we encountered during the experiment that
could have affected our final results. As a matter of fact, we couldn’t really see the
effect of mental fatigue for the independent variable Task and we could have had
better results for the other independent variables as well. Therefore we would like
to list some of the limitations of our experiment and suggest some improvements for
the future.
Limitation in the code
One of the limits of our experiment was linked to the way the code of the VR game
was designed. As a matter of fact, the data of each task we collected were the result
of one simulation. This means that after each task we stopped the game, asked
the questions related to the subjective questionnaires and cognitive load and then
we started a new simulation with a new task. We believe that the break between
two consecutive tasks restored the levels of mental fatigue therefore the pupil size
diameter might have increased during this time. An idea of improvement for our
Unity game can be to design it in a different. For example, we can run the code
once and we can use some flags to save information on what load we are lifting or if
we are using the support of the exoskeleton. In this way, we will have eye data all
the time (also during the breaks) which will improve significantly the understanding
of eye data.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
37
==PAGE:46==
Long and repetitive tasks
Another limitation related to the design of our VR game is the nature of the tasks.
As a matter of fact, we realised that the tasks we asked to perform were very long and
repetitive. The reason behind that was to stress the subject as much as possible but
we end up having some disengagement. The literature confirms that very long and
repetitive tasks bring to disengagement and a negative effect on the mental fatigue
([46], [57], [44], [49] [95]). Therefore, it would be a good improvement to have tasks
that are more dynamic in order to maintain the level of interest and motivation
always high. This will reduce the level of disengagement which we experienced for
the independent variable Task.
Illumination
An additional problem for our experiment can be the brightness of the scene in our
VR game. As a matter of fact, we know from the literature that pupil diameter
occurs in response to illumination changes. Papillary response provides a sensitive
and reliable measure for cognitive load under constrained luminance conditions [96].
This might be one of the problems for having unexpected eye data in our experiment
since we didn’t take care of this aspect.
Number of participants
We conducted our experiment with N=12 participants which we learned to be a
small number, especially in our case because we had a lot of independent variables
and test conditions. We can improve conducting a power analysis to understand
which is the best number of participants to recruit in order to have more reliable
data.
Limitation in the devices we used
We collected eye data with HTC Vive Pro Eye which has a 90Hz refresh rate. This
means that every second we receive 90 new data. We learned this number to be
too restrictive for the type of experiment we conducted. Therefore, conducting the
experiment with a powerful eye-tracker would bring an improvement in the quality
and quantity of data collected.
Data processing
We believe some of the unexpected results we obtained from the eye data (especially
pupil diameter) are due to the data being too noisy. Even if we carefully cleaned
eye data following the literature, it was clear that some sort of further optimisation
is needed (e.g. applying a filter to clean more the values).
6.6
Applications
The outcome of the project can be useful and found applications in several fields.
First of all, it can be beneficial for the design of new rehabilitation games which we
suggest to be designed with dynamic scenes to increase the have always a good level
of engagement. As a consequence, patients will feel more motivated in rehabilitat-
ing.
Furthermore, we suggest to exoskeleton developers to introduce some sort of sup-
port in their devices especially when the tasks can be physically demanding. This
will allow the patients to complete also the most diﬀicult exercises without feeling
frustrated.
In conclusion, the fact that physical fatigue brings mental fatigue has to be taken
38
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:47==
into consideration for all jobs that require high level of concentration but that are
carried in physically demanding condition (e.g. medical doctors during surgery).
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
39
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The main goal of the thesis was successfully achieved. Indeed, we managed to prove
that mental fatigue can be induced through physical fatigue. In addition, all the
different test conditions of our experiment allowed us to give more detailed answers
to our research questions.
We learned from the special analysis we conducted for Task4 and Task8 that mental
fatigue is significantly more visible in humans physiological parameters when the
level of physical fatigue is really high.
Also, the diﬀiculty of the physical task has a noteworthy effect on physical fatigue.
As a matter of fact, a higher level of mental fatigue was observed for the heaviest
loads.
Furthermore, the tasks executed with the support of the exoskeleton showed a lower
level of mental fatigue compared to the others.
7.1
Future work
In the future, we would like to replicate the experiment introducing all the improve-
ments we listed previously. Also, we are interested in investigating more eye-data
parameters that are indicators of mental fatigue. In fact, saccade velocity and peak
saccade velocity are frequently investigated as an indicator of mental fatigue. Then,
we would like to support our findings with statistical and correlation analysis.
40
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
“Stroke–1989. recommendations on stroke prevention, diagnosis, and therapy.
report of the who task force on stroke and other cerebrovascular disorders.,”
Stroke, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1407–1431, 1989. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.20.10.1407.
eprint: https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1161/01.STR.20.10.1407.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1161/01.STR.20.
10.1407.
[2]
W. Johnson, O. Onuma, M. Owolabi, and S. Sachdev, “Stroke: A global re-
sponse is needed,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 94, no. 9,
p. 634, 2016.
[3]
Eurostat, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7247552/3-
04052016-BP-EN.pdf/fd9d9755-e9d0-4389-a0e8-8fa879efa375, Accessed: 2021-
03-02.
[4]
World Health Statistics report 2020, https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
handle/10665/332070/9789240005105-eng.pdf, Accessed: 2021-03-02.
[5]
H. S. Thompson and A. Ryan, “The impact of stroke consequences on spousal
relationships from the perspective of the person with stroke,” Journal of clin-
ical nursing, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1803–1811, 2009.
[6]
P. Pound, P. Gompertz, and S. Ebrahim, “A patient-centred study of the
consequences of stroke,” Clinical rehabilitation, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 255–264,
1998.
[7]
R. Morris, “The psychology of stroke in young adults: The roles of service
provision and return to work,” Stroke Research and Treatment, vol. 2011,
2011.
[8]
K. Kvigne, M. Kirkevold, and E. Gjengedal, “Fighting back—struggling to
continue life and preserve the self following a stroke,” Health care for women
international, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 370–387, 2004.
[9]
M. Kirkevold, “The unfolding illness trajectory of stroke,” Disability and re-
habilitation, vol. 24, no. 17, pp. 887–898, 2002.
[10]
J. Young, J. Murray, and A. Forster, “Review of longer-term problems after
disabling stroke,” Reviews in Clinical Gerontology, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 55, 2003.
[11]
C. L. Bays, “Quality of life of stroke survivors: A research synthesis,” Journal
of Neuroscience Nursing, vol. 33, no. 6, p. 310, 2001.
[12]
J. Wagle, L. Farner, K. Flekkøy, T. B. Wyller, L. Sandvik, B. Fure, B. Stensrød,
and K. Engedal, “Early post-stroke cognition in stroke rehabilitation patients
predicts functional outcome at 13 months,” Dementia and geriatric cognitive
disorders, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 379–387, 2011.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
41
==PAGE:50==
[13]
E. Chemerinski and R. G. Robinson, “The neuropsychiatry of stroke,” Psy-
chosomatics, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–14, 2000.
[14]
J. Young and A. Forster, “Review of stroke rehabilitation,” Bmj, vol. 334,
no. 7584, pp. 86–90, 2007.
[15]
H. S. Jørgensen, H. Nakayama, H. O. Raaschou, J. Vive-Larsen, M. Støier, and
T. S. Olsen, “Outcome and time course of recovery in stroke. part i: Outcome.
the copenhagen stroke study,” Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation,
vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 399–405, 1995.
[16]
N. E. Mayo, S. Wood-Dauphinee, S. Ahmed, G. Carron, J. Higgins, S. Mcewen,
and N. Salbach, “Disablement following stroke,” Disability and rehabilitation,
vol. 21, no. 5-6, pp. 258–268, 1999.
[17]
G. Nys, M. Van Zandvoort, P. De Kort, B. Jansen, H. Van der Worp, L.
Kappelle, and E. De Haan, “Domain-specific cognitive recovery after first-
ever stroke. a follow-up study of 111 cases.,” Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, vol. 11, pp. 795–806, 2005.
[18]
P. Govender and L. Kalra, “Benefits of occupational therapy in stroke reha-
bilitation,” Expert review of neurotherapeutics, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 1013–1019,
2007.
[19]
P. Langhorne, F. Coupar, and A. Pollock, “Motor recovery after stroke: A
systematic review,” The Lancet Neurology, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 741–754, 2009.
[20]
J. W. Burke, M. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. H. Crosbie, and
S. M. McDonough, “Optimising engagement for stroke rehabilitation using
serious games,” The Visual Computer, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1085–1099, 2009.
[21]
Y. Chen, K. T. Abel, J. T. Janecek, Y. Chen, K. Zheng, and S. C. Cramer,
“Home-based technologies for stroke rehabilitation: A systematic review,” In-
ternational journal of medical informatics, vol. 123, pp. 11–22, 2019.
[22]
B. Johansson, “Current trends in stroke rehabilitation. a review with focus on
brain plasticity,” Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, vol. 123, no. 3, pp. 147–159,
2011.
[23]
D. Jack, R. Boian, A. S. Merians, M. Tremaine, G. C. Burdea, S. V. Adamovich,
M. Recce, and H. Poizner, “Virtual reality-enhanced stroke rehabilitation,”
IEEE transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering, vol. 9,
no. 3, pp. 308–318, 2001.
[24]
V. Popescu, G. Burdea, M. Bouzit, M. Girone, and V. Hentz, “Orthopedic
telerehabilitation with virtual force feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2000.
[25]
A. “ Rizzo and G. J. Kim, “A swot analysis of the field of virtual reality
rehabilitation and therapy,” Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 119–146, 2005.
[26]
K. Laver, S. George, J. Ratcliffe, and M. Crotty, “Virtual reality stroke rehabilitation–
hype or hope?” Australian occupational therapy journal, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 215–
219, 2011.
[27]
R. Gopura, K. Kiguchi, and D. Bandara, “A brief review on upper extremity
robotic exoskeleton systems,” in 2011 6th international Conference on Indus-
trial and Information Systems, IEEE, 2011, pp. 346–351.
42
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:51==
[28]
K. Kiguchi, K. Iwami, M. Yasuda, K. Watanabe, and T. Fukuda, “An exoskele-
tal robot for human shoulder joint motion assist,” IEEE/ASME transactions
on mechatronics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 125–135, 2003.
[29]
J. C. Perry, J. Rosen, and S. Burns, “Upper-limb powered exoskeleton design,”
IEEE/ASME transactions on mechatronics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 408–417, 2007.
[30]
B.-C. Tsai, W.-W. Wang, L.-C. Hsu, L.-C. Fu, and J.-S. Lai, “An articu-
lated rehabilitation robot for upper limb physiotherapy and training,” in 2010
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE,
2010, pp. 1470–1475.
[31]
O. E. Dictionary, “Oxford english dictionary,” Simpson, JA & Weiner, ESC,
1989.
[32]
T. Kitani et al., “Term commitee of japanese society of fatigue science,” Nihon
Hirougakkaishi (In Japanese), vol. 6, no. 2, p. 1, 2011.
[33]
S. M. Marcora, W. Staiano, and V. Manning, “Mental fatigue impairs physical
performance in humans,” Journal of applied physiology, 2009.
[34]
M. Tanaka, A. Ishii, and Y. Watanabe, “Neural effect of mental fatigue on
physical fatigue: A magnetoencephalography study,” Brain research, vol. 1542,
pp. 49–55, 2014.
[35]
M. M. Lorist, M. A. Boksem, and K. R. Ridderinkhof, “Impaired cognitive
control and reduced cingulate activity during mental fatigue,” Cognitive Brain
Research, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 199–205, 2005.
[36]
M. A. Boksem and M. Tops, “Mental fatigue: Costs and benefits,” Brain re-
search reviews, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 125–139, 2008.
[37]
M. A. Boksem, T. F. Meijman, and M. M. Lorist, “Mental fatigue, motivation
and action monitoring,” Biological psychology, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 123–132,
2006.
[38]
M. A. Boksem, M. Tops, E. Kostermans, and D. De Cremer, “Sensitivity
to punishment and reward omission: Evidence from error-related erp compo-
nents,” Biological Psychology, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 185–192, 2008.
[39]
S. Peißl, C. D. Wickens, and R. Baruah, “Eye-tracking measures in aviation:
A selective literature review,” The International Journal of Aerospace Psy-
chology, vol. 28, no. 3-4, pp. 98–112, 2018.
[40]
J. M. Wise, K. Heaton, and P. Patrician, “Fatigue in long-haul truck drivers:
A concept analysis,” Workplace health & safety, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 68–77, 2019.
[41]
J. Li, H. Li, H. Wang, W. Umer, H. Fu, and X. Xing, “Evaluating the impact
of mental fatigue on construction equipment operators’ ability to detect haz-
ards using wearable eye-tracking technology,” Automation in Construction,
vol. 105, p. 102 835, 2019.
[42]
K. Itoh, H. Tanaka, and M. Seki, “Eye-movement analysis of track monitoring
patterns of night train operators: Effects of geographic knowledge and fatigue,”
in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, vol. 44, 2000, pp. 360–363.
[43]
T. Bafna and J. P. Hansen, “Mental fatigue measurement using eye metrics:
A systematic literature review,” Psychophysiology, e13828, 2021.
[44]
J. F. Hopstaken, S. Wanmaker, D. van der Linden, and A. B. Bakker, “Does
dysphoria lead to divergent mental fatigue effects on a cognitive task?” Plos
one, vol. 10, no. 6, e0130304, 2015.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
43
==PAGE:52==
[45]
S. E. Burke, I. Babu Henry Samuel, Q. Zhao, J. Cagle, R. A. Cohen, B. Kluger,
and M. Ding, “Task-based cognitive fatigability for older adults and validation
of mental fatigability subscore of pittsburgh fatigability scale,” Frontiers in
aging neuroscience, vol. 10, p. 327, 2018.
[46]
J. F. Hopstaken, D. van der Linden, A. B. Bakker, and M. A. Kompier, “The
window of my eyes: Task disengagement and mental fatigue covary with pupil
dynamics,” Biological psychology, vol. 110, pp. 100–106, 2015.
[47]
R. McGarrigle, P. Dawes, A. J. Stewart, S. E. Kuchinsky, and K. J. Munro,
“Pupillometry reveals changes in physiological arousal during a sustained lis-
tening task,” Psychophysiology, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 193–203, 2017.
[48]
——, “Measuring listening-related effort and fatigue in school-aged children
using pupillometry,” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, vol. 161, pp. 95–
112, 2017.
[49]
M. B. Herlambang, N. A. Taatgen, and F. Cnossen, “The role of motivation
as a factor in mental fatigue,” Human factors, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1171–1185,
2019.
[50]
R. Z. Marandi, P. Madeleine, Ø. Omland, N. Vuillerme, and A. Samani, “Eye
movement characteristics reflected fatigue development in both young and
elderly individuals,” Scientific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2018.
[51]
M. Gergelyfi, B. Jacob, E. Olivier, and A. Zénon, “Dissociation between mental
fatigue and motivational state during prolonged mental activity,” Frontiers in
behavioral neuroscience, vol. 9, p. 176, 2015.
[52]
D. K. McGregor and J. A. Stern, “Time on task and blink effects on saccade
duration,” Ergonomics, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 649–660, 1996.
[53]
L. L. Di Stasi, R. Renner, A. Catena, J. J. Cañas, B. M. Velichkovsky, and S.
Pannasch, “Towards a driver fatigue test based on the saccadic main sequence:
A partial validation by subjective report data,” Transportation research part
C: emerging technologies, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 122–133, 2012.
[54]
L. L. Di Stasi, M. B. McCamy, S. Martinez-Conde, E. Gayles, C. Hoare, M.
Foster, A. Catena, and S. L. Macknik, “Effects of long and short simulated
flights on the saccadic eye movement velocity of aviators,” Physiology & be-
havior, vol. 153, pp. 91–96, 2016.
[55]
S. J. Heinen, E. Potapchuk, and S. N. Watamaniuk, “A foveal target increases
catch-up saccade frequency during smooth pursuit,” Journal of neurophysiol-
ogy, vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 1220–1227, 2016.
[56]
M. Juhola, V. Jäntti, and I. Pyykkö, “Effect of sampling frequencies on com-
putation of the maximum velocity of saccadic eye movements,” Biological cy-
bernetics, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 67–72, 1985.
[57]
R. E. Paladini, L. Diana, T. Nyffeler, U. P. Mosimann, T. Nef, R. M. Müri,
and D. Cazzoli, “The asymmetrical influence of increasing time-on-task on
attentional disengagement,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 92, pp. 107–114, 2016.
[58]
M. Tanaka, A. Ishii, and Y. Watanabe, “Physical fatigue increases neural
activation during eyes-closed state: A magnetoencephalography study,” Be-
havioral and Brain Functions, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2015.
[59]
J.-Y. Zhang, S.-L. Liu, Q.-M. Feng, J.-Q. Gao, and Q. Zhang, “Author correc-
tion: Correlative evaluation of mental and physical workload of laparoscopic
44
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:53==
surgeons based on surface electromyography and eye-tracking signals,” Scien-
tific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–1, 2018.
[60]
B. R. MacIntosh, P. F. Gardiner, and A. J. McComas, Skeletal muscle: form
and function. Human kinetics, 2006.
[61]
M. L. Latash, F. Danion, and M. Bonnard, “Effects of transcranial magnetic
stimulation on muscle activation patterns and joint kinematics within a two-
joint motor synergy,” Brain research, vol. 961, no. 2, pp. 229–242, 2003.
[62]
S. Boyas and A. Guével, “Neuromuscular fatigue in healthy muscle: Underlying
factors and adaptation mechanisms,” Annals of physical and rehabilitation
medicine, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 88–108, 2011.
[63]
N. Place, T. Yamada, J. D. Bruton, and H. Westerblad, “Muscle fatigue: From
observations in humans to underlying mechanisms studied in intact single
muscle fibres,” European journal of applied physiology, vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 1–
15, 2010.
[64]
R. M. Enoka and D. G. Stuart, “Neurobiology of muscle fatigue,” Journal of
applied physiology, vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 1631–1648, 1992.
[65]
R. Xu, C. Zhang, F. He, X. Zhao, H. Qi, P. Zhou, L. Zhang, and D. Ming, “How
physical activities affect mental fatigue based on eeg energy, connectivity, and
complexity,” Frontiers in neurology, vol. 9, p. 915, 2018.
[66]
S. K. Lal and A. Craig, “A critical review of the psychophysiology of driver
fatigue,” Biological psychology, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 173–194, 2001.
[67]
——, “Driver fatigue: Electroencephalography and psychological assessment,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 313–321, 2002.
[68]
M. A. Just, P. A. Carpenter, and A. Miyake, “Neuroindices of cognitive work-
load: Neuroimaging, pupillometric and event-related potential studies of brain
work,” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, vol. 4, no. 1-2, pp. 56–88,
2003.
[69]
A. Zénon, M. Sidibé, and E. Olivier, “Pupil size variations correlate with
physical effort perception,” Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience, vol. 8, p. 286,
2014.
[70]
S. R. Khanal, A. Fonseca, A. Marques, J. Barroso, and V. Filipe, “Physical
exercise intensity monitoring through eye-blink and mouth’s shape analysis,”
in 2018 2nd International Conference on Technology and Innovation in Sports,
Health and Wellbeing (TISHW), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[71]
R. Horiuchi, T. Ogasawara, and N. Miki, “Fatigue assessment by blink de-
tected with attachable optical sensors of dye-sensitized photovoltaic cells,”
Micromachines, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 310, 2018.
[72]
D. Claros-Salinas, N. Dittmer, M. Neumann, A. Sehle, S. Spiteri, K. Willmes,
M. A. Schoenfeld, and C. Dettmers, “Induction of cognitive fatigue in ms pa-
tients through cognitive and physical load,” Neuropsychological rehabilitation,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 182–201, 2013.
[73]
Htc vive pro oﬀicial website, https://www.vive.com/us/product/vive-pro/.
[74]
Requires pc specifications htc vive pro eye, https://www.vive.com/us/ready/.
[75]
D. C. Ogdon, “Hololens and vive pro: Virtual reality headsets,” Journal of the
Medical Library Association: JMLA, vol. 107, no. 1, p. 118, 2019.
[76]
G. Bruder, S. Cobb, and S. Yoshimoto, “Htc vive pro time performance bench-
mark for scientific research,”
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
45
==PAGE:54==
[77]
A. Sipatchin, S. Wahl, and K. Rifai, “Eye-tracking for low vision with virtual
reality (vr): Testing status quo usability of the htc vive pro eye,” bioRxiv,
2020.
[78]
Htc vive trackers oﬀicial website, https : / / www . vive . com / eu / accessory /
tracker3/.
[79]
Htc vive trackers specifications, https://dl.vive.com/Tracker/Guideline/HTC_
Vive_Tracker(2018)_Developer+Guidelines_v1.0.pdf.
[80]
J. Lwowski, A. Majumdat, P. Benavidez, J. J. Prevost, and M. Jamshidi,
“Htc vive tracker: Accuracy for indoor localization,” IEEE Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics Magazine, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 15–22, 2020.
[81]
M. Guaitolini, F. E. Petros, A. Prado, A. M. Sabatini, and S. K. Agrawal,
“Evaluating the accuracy of virtual reality trackers for computing spatiotem-
poral gait parameters,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 10, p. 3325, 2021.
[82]
Htc vive trackers specifications, https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-
pi-4-model-b/.
[83]
Udp comunication protocol specifications, https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/user-
datagram-protocol-udp/.
[84]
Brickpi, https://www.dexterindustries.com/site/?product=brickpi-advanced-for-
raspberry-pi.
[85]
S. Wang, Z. Mao, C. Zeng, H. Gong, S. Li, and B. Chen, “A new method of
virtual reality based on unity3d,” in 2010 18th international conference on
Geoinformatics, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[86]
I. S. MacKenzie, “Human-computer interaction: An empirical research per-
spective,” 2012.
[87]
Udp comunication protocol specifications, https : / / www . mathworks . com /
products/matlab.html.
[88]
S. Zugal, J. Pinggera, M. Neurauter, T. Maran, and B. Weber, “Cheetah exper-
imental platform web 1.0: Cleaning pupillary data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09468,
2017.
[89]
S. Mathôt, J. Fabius, E. Van Heusden, and S. Van der Stigchel, “Safe and
sensible preprocessing and baseline correction of pupil-size data,” Behavior
research methods, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 94–106, 2018.
[90]
T. Knapen, J. W. de Gee, J. Brascamp, S. Nuiten, S. Hoppenbrouwers, and
J. Theeuwes, “Cognitive and ocular factors jointly determine pupil responses
under equiluminance,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 5, e0155574, 2016.
[91]
T. Koelewijn, A. A. Zekveld, J. M. Festen, and S. E. Kramer, “Pupil dilation
uncovers extra listening effort in the presence of a single-talker masker,” Ear
and Hearing, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 291–300, 2012.
[92]
D. McDougal and P. Gamlin, “Pupillary control pathways,” 2008.
[93]
M. Pedrotti, S. Lei, J. Dzaack, and M. Rötting, “A data-driven algorithm
for offline pupil signal preprocessing and eyeblink detection in low-speed eye-
tracking protocols,” Behavior Research Methods, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 372–383,
2011.
[94]
J. F. Hopstaken, D. Van Der Linden, A. B. Bakker, and M. A. Kompier,
“A multifaceted investigation of the link between mental fatigue and task
disengagement,” Psychophysiology, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 305–315, 2015.
46
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:55==
[95]
C. Thompson, J. Fransen, A. Beavan, S. Skorski, A. Coutts, and T. Meyer,
“Understanding the influence of a cognitively demanding task on motor re-
sponse times and subjective mental fatigue/boredom,” Brazilian Journal of
Motor Behavior, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 33–45, 2020.
[96]
A. T. Duchowski and A. T. Duchowski, Eye tracking methodology: Theory and
practice. Springer, 2017.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
Questionnaires
Consent form
CONSENT FORM 
 
During this experiment you will be asked to perform some physical tasks. You  should feel 
free to proceed with the experiment as long as you feel comfortable and stop it as soon as it 
is too physical demanding. 
 
Also, during the experiment you will be asked some questionnaires which will allow us to 
conduct our research about mental and physical fatigue. 
 
The data collected will be voluntary demographics (e.g. age, gender), information and 
opinions about the experiment and eye-tracking data. The data are anonymous. Statistical 
analysis will be conducted by the principal researcher for scientific reports, which will only 
contain aggregate results.  
 
To contact us reach Stela Ago, s190043@student.dtu.dk, +45 52828017. 
 
Date                                                                                                                                          Sign 
___________________                                                                                    __________________ 
 
  
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
49
==PAGE:58==
First questionnaire
QUESTIONNAIRE – STELA’S EXPERIMENT 
First part: 
 
• 
Initials of your name: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
• 
Age:  …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
• 
Sex:          Male                                  Female                                   Other 
 
• 
Do you wear glasses or corrective lenses?           Yes                               No 
 
• 
Do you have experience with Virtual Reality? 
 
No experience                       Little experience                   Moderate experience                     Lot of experience 
 
 
• 
How often do you exercise and train? 
Not at all                      Sometimes                     Often                              Always 
 
• 
Which hand do you write with?       Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand do you hold scissors with?   Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand do you hold a spoon with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
When using a knife and fork, which hand holds the knife?   Left                     Right                     Both 
 
• 
When holding a knife on it's own, which hand do you use?   Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand do you brush your teeth with?       Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand do you throw a ball with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand would you told a tennis racket with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which foot would you kick a ball with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
When holding a guitar, which would do you strum with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand do you use a computer mouse with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
In which hand do you hold a hammer? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
50
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:59==
• 
Which hand do you deal cards with? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand would fire a pistol? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
• 
Which hand opens a jar lid? Left                          Right                     Both 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
51
==PAGE:60==
Second questionnaire
• 
Could you feel you had any help? 
Yes                                 No                                    I’m not sure 
 
• 
If yes, to what extend do you agree to this statement: “The help I felt from the exoskeleton was 
beneficial”. 
From 1 to 20. 
1 == strongly disagree 
20 == strongly agree 
 
 
52
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:61==
TLX Questionnaire
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
53
==PAGE:62==
Last Questionnaire
• 
Do you have any comment on the experiment? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
• 
Do you have any suggestion to improve the experiment? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………… 
 
• 
Which issues did you observe? 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………… 
 
What potentials do you see in this technology? 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………… 
 
Would you suggest other ways of interacting with gaze? 
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
54
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B
Data cleaning
Clean pupil size from missing values.
1
index2=1; %index of the new array psL2 (withou missing values)
2
missingValues2 = 0; %number of misisng values in our signal
3
for k=1:length(psL) %psL is pupil size left eye (with missing
values)
4
if(psL(k) >= 0 && psR(k) >= 0) %if there is no missing value
5
psL2(index2) = psL(k); I save it in the new array psL2
6
psR2(index2) = psR(k);
7
t2(index2) = time(k);
8
index2 = index2 +1;
9
else
10
missingValues2 = missingValues2 +1; %otherwise I increase
the number of misisng values
11
end
12
end
Clean pupil size from unrealistic values.
1
for r=1:length(sL2)
2
if(sL2(r) >= meanSL2 - 3*stdSL2
&& sL2(r) <= meanSL2 +3*
stdSL2 )
3
sL3(index3) = sL2(r); %save data in a new array
4
sR3(index3) = sR2(r);
5
t3(index3) = t2(r);
6
index3 = index3 +1;
7
else
8
missingValues3 = missingValues3 +1; %data deleted from
the dataset
9
end
10
end
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
55
==PAGE:64==
Appendix C
Figures & Tables
C.1
Analysis Task4 and Task8
Independent variable Task
(a) Mean pupil size.
(b) Peak pupil diameter.
Figure C.1
56
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:65==
Independent variable Help
(a) Pupil diameter.
(b) Peak pupil diameter.
Figure C.2
Figure C.3: Blink frequency
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
57
==PAGE:66==
C.2
Pupils size
Pupil size with independent variable Help
Figure C.4: Mean pupil size.
C.3
Peak pupil diameter
Peak pupil diameter with independent variable Help
Figure C.5: Mean peak pupil size.
58
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:67==
C.4
Number of blinks
Number of blinks with independent variable Task
Figure C.6: Number of blinks.
Number of blinks with independent variable Load
Figure C.7: Number of blinks.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
59
==PAGE:68==
C.5
Blink frequency
Independent variable Task
Figure C.8: Blink frequency
Independent variable Load
Figure C.9: Blink frequency
60
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
==PAGE:69==
C.6
Tables
Results with independent variable Task
Task1
Task2
Task3
Task4
Task5
Task6
Task7
Task8
Pupil size
3.7284
3.6214
3.4932
3.4920
3.5324
3.4638
3.4023
3.5361
Peak pupil size
2.9721
2.8611
2.7254
2.5967
2.6893
2.6033
2.5873
2.6411
Blinks
61
54
64
45
48
41
71
51
Blink frequency
0.4782
0.4469
0.5285
0.2931
0.4045
0.3381
0.5131
0.3777
Table C.1: Average results with independent variable Task.
Results with independent variable Help
Help
No help
Pupil size
3.4837
3.5837
Peak pupil size
2.5712
2.7709
Blinks
56
53
Blink frequency
0.4303
0.4171
Table C.2: Average results with independent variable Help.
Results with independent variable Load
0kg
2kg
5kg
5kgL
Pupil size
3.6108
3.6749
3.5573
3.4920
Peak pupil size
2.8487
2.9166
2.7932
2.5967
Blinks
62
58
59
44
Blink frequency
0.4696
0.4600
0.4751
0.3164
Table C.3: Average results with independent variable Load.
Exploring gaze control of an exoskeleton for rehabilitation purposes with eye-tracking.
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.man.dtu.dk
