==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Thesis
Geotechnical Analysis for Environmentally
Friendly Inﬂatable Dikes
Dimitrios Karadimos - s192711
June 4, 2021
==PAGE:2==
i of 70
Abstract
The current Master’s Thesis revolves around the investigation of a new type of infrastruc-
ture, capable of securing the coasts of Denmark from potentially catastrophic ﬂoods. This
investigation was based on a collection of data for the implications of ﬂoods in Denmark,
laboratory testing for the integrity of the infrastructure, and parametric analysis using
numerical modelling. The data that were acquired were plotted in maps through QGIS
that showcase the signiﬁcance of such an infrastructure. The weaknesses of the structure
were highlighted through the experimental setup and therefore solutions were advised. A
simulation of how the structure will deform was also constructed using COMSOL. Fi-
nally, the geotechnical veriﬁcation of the infrastructure was done by a Python script used
in PLAXIS that showed potential risks, as well as potential hydraulic implications were
examined using ABAQUS.
==PAGE:3==
ii of 70
Acknowledgements
I would like to dedicate this project to the people that have stood by me through this
endeavour.
I would like to thank very much the associate professor Dr. Irene Rocchi, who assisted
me throughout the whole project, despite the diﬃcult circumstances imposed from COVID-
19.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Asger Gramkow for giving me the opportunity to
work in this innovative and potentially necessary infrastructure.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family that has supported me throughout my academic
studies. Moreover, I would like to give my gratitude to Maria who has been there in every
step of the way.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Flood Protection Risks & Measures
5
2.1
Importance of Dikes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Importance in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Geotechnical Risks Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Existing Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Concept of Hidden Dikes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Methodology
26
3.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.1
Important Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
COMSOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
PLAXIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
ABAQUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iv of 70
4
Results
40
4.1
Dike geometry based on simulation of inﬂation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.1
Vejle - Type 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.2
Randers - Type 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.3
Amager - Type 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Internal Seepage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
Horizontal Sliding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusion
66
5.1
Recommendations for future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Bibliography
68
==PAGE:6==
1 | Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Since the pre-industrial period, between 1850 and 1900, the Earth’s climate system has been
observed. Because of the rising human activities and fossil fuel burning, greenhouse gases
are trapped in Earth’s atmosphere [1], which lead to increasing the average temperature
of the planet. That could possibly aﬀect the return period of extreme weather events,
such as: severe storms, heat waves, ﬂoods and droughts [2].
In economical terms, 10
years of ﬂooding in the European Union has produced over 50 billion euros in damage
[3]. Speciﬁcally, in July of 2011 a storm in Copenhagen has resulted in damages over 800
million euros [4].
Worldwide it is apparent that ﬂoods are the biggest cause of disaster as seen in Figure
1.1 [5].
The second largest type of disaster is storms which can be closely correlated
together. Cumulatively, over 5 thousand events have occurred in almost two decades.
Figure 1.1: Number of disasters per type in the period between 1998-2017 [5].
1
==PAGE:7==
1.2. Objectives
2 of 70
Based on Figure 1.2 it is apparent that a large amount of people are aﬀected by ﬂoods
and storms. Between 1998 and 2017, almost 3 billion people were collectively aﬀected as
seen in Figure 1.2. The reasons why so many people were aﬀected from such a natural
occurrence are that many big cities are located on ﬂoodplains [6]. Moreover, there are
no proper precautionary measures which means that there is a lack of resistant buildings,
warning systems and proper awareness of ﬂooding hazard.
Figure 1.2: Number of people aﬀected per disaster type in the period between 1998-2017.
[5]
1.2
Objectives
This thesis presents an understanding and quantiﬁcation of ﬂood risk, mapping of risk
areas, and feasibility study for the implementation of a new technology. In more detail,
through examples of worldwide destruction due to ﬂoods, the signiﬁcance of correct mea-
sures against ﬂooding is done. Furthermore, the importance of such measures in Denmark
is also stressed through maps that were created through QGIS, that showcase the possible
economical and human losses. Finally, the concept of a new technology that will protect
against ﬂoods is introduced, the hidden dike. An analysis of the system is done, as well as
a concept sketch of it when activated is provided.
Analyses through ﬁnite element software is also done.
Through the concept of the
==PAGE:8==
1.3. Structure of thesis
3 of 70
hidden dikes the inﬂation of it is examined through COMSOL in order to ensure the
expected results when tested on the ﬁeld. Through PLAXIS geotechnical risks are also
considered by understanding if the bearing capacity of the foundation soil will pose a risk
or if there will be diﬀerential displacements that could aﬀect the usability of the hidden
dike concept. In order to tackle those risks, analyses take place where the stability of the
system is examined. Furthermore, the hydraulic seepage is examined in ABAQUS where
a ﬂow net is constructed and examined in terms of risk. Finally, a script in Python is
constructed where the intended outcome was the correlation of the angle of friction of the
foundation soil and the safety factor against sliding. A veriﬁcation of the numerical results
with a large scale site test was planned, but due to various limitations wasn’t performed.
1.3
Structure of thesis
Chapter 2 has an introduction to the signiﬁcance of the structure in Denmark and coastal
areas, as a more thorough investigation is carried out, pointing out the main areas that
are at risk in Denmark. The concept behind the hidden dike is then explained, as well as
the results of a small-scale experiment simulating the structure.
Chapter 3 explains the methodology that was followed in every software that was
utilized. A theoretical background behind the methodology from each software package
will be explained. Firstly, COMSOL is used in Section 3.2, by introducing the geometrical
characteristics and material of the hidden dike. The second software package that is used
is PLAXIS as seen in Section 3.3, where the geometric shape of the inﬂated hidden dike is
imported from COMSOL. Furthermore, soil properties from the areas under examination
are also imported. The internal seepage is examined through ABAQUS in Section 3.4,
by implementing a simpliﬁed shape of the inﬂated hidden dike and the soil properties of
a clay proﬁle. Finally, in Section 3.5 a script in Python is explained as it calculates the
correlation between the angle of friction of the foundation soil with the factor of safety
with input the simpliﬁed geometric characteristics of the inﬂated hidden dike and the soil
properties at that location.
Chapter 4 presents the results that were produced. The results will be divided in terms
of the software that was used to acquire them, as well as an explanation of them will be
==PAGE:9==
1.3. Structure of thesis
4 of 70
done. To begin with, from COMSOL in Section 4.1 the geometric shape of the hidden
dike when inﬂated is acquired, as well as a preliminary understanding of the induced
stresses and deformations. The results from PLAXIS in Section 4.2 regard the calculation
of the bearing capacity of the foundation soil, along with the calculation of the induced
settlements in three diﬀerent case studies. In Section 4.3 the results from ABAQUS are
presented, which explain if there is a risk against internal seepage and possible instability
of the dike. The horizontal sliding issue is examined in Section 4.4 through the results that
are acquired from Python, by presenting a graph correlating the angle of friction and the
safety factor.
Chapter 5 is a summary of the results that can be taken out of this thesis. Additionally,
recommendations for future work are also given.
==PAGE:10==
2 | Flood Protection Risks & Mea-
sures
2.1
Importance of Dikes
Most urban developments are located close to water bodies, either in coastal areas or along
rivers. The coastlines around the globe present a rare opportunity for acquiring valuable
economical and environmental resources such as land, coastal waters, minerals and living
organisms [7]. Based on these facts, the ﬁrst civilizations have always thrived near coasts,
even if these areas presented hazards due to the risk of ﬂooding.
Coastal erosion and coast-related hazards recently have been exacerbated due to the
rising water levels in the last few centuries [8]. For instance, as seen in Figure 2.1, since
the 18th century the absolute sea-level curve at Kattegat has been increasing. Since 1900,
the global mean sea level (GMSL) has increased at a hastening rate, in total 19 cm [9].
Figure 2.1: Absolute Sea Level curve of Kattegat [8].
5
==PAGE:11==
2.1. Importance of Dikes
6 of 70
The climate models predicted how the GMSL will rise under two diﬀerent scenarios [9],
depending the degree of emissions. The project based on a low emissions scenario indicates
that the GMSL during the 21st century, will increase 0.29 - 0.59 m with a 66% conﬁdence.
On the other hand, a high emission scenario predicts 0.61 - 1.10 m increase in GMSL. If
the polar ice sheets melt at a faster rate, compared to the current trend, then the GMSL
would rise to 2.4 m by 2100 and 15 m in 2300. This requires an increase in engineering
solutions that limit the negative impact of water on urban areas, such as dikes.
A dike is a physical infrastructure that runs parallel to a water body, for example, a
river or sea. Several countries have been extensively using sea dikes as an eﬀective measure
against coastal erosion and for land reclamation purposes, such as the Netherlands [10].
The ﬁrst dikes built in that region can be traced back to the Iron Age (8th century BC),
when new settlements developed in salt marshes, where there was an abundance of ﬁsh
and grazing pastures for livestock due to population growth [11].
In the same region, 2500 people died and the country suﬀered tremendous economical
impact of the order of 1.5 billion guilders, which is approximately 5.4 billion euros, fol-
lowing the North Sea ﬂood in 1953 [12]. Following this event, a complete overhaul of the
coastal protection was performed to avoid future occurrences. Regardless, severe weather
conditions, such as those in the 2019 summer, when the national heat records around the
globe were beat, underline the importance of coastal protection for future generations as
low-lying countries and coastal regions are endangered by the rising sea level [13].
The construction of dikes can be proven useful in areas that are not directly inﬂuenced
by climate change. It is common for the coastal areas sediments to be young sediments,
which are extremely prone to settlement. Furthermore, the intensive groundwater exploita-
tion that occur in big cities can lead to signiﬁcant sinking, making the dikes an essential
need even without taking into consideration the sea level rise. The Indonesian capital of
Jakarta is one of the fastest sinking cities in the world. On average, the city is sinking by
an average of 1-15 cm a year, while it has already sunk 2.5m in a decade [14]. The reason
behind this situation lies in the extreme rate at which Jakarta extracts groundwater for
either everyday purposes or for luxurious reasons. Over-exploitation of groundwater is a
serious geotechnical risk that could potentially cause cities to sink around the world.
==PAGE:12==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
7 of 70
2.2
Importance in Denmark
Denmark is also a low-lying country, which resulted in having experience with sea dikes.
Historically, Denmark’s coasts were ravaged in 1872 by the Baltic Sea ﬂood [15], also
referred to as a storm ﬂood. It is important to note that the highest recorded peak water
level was approximately 3.3 m above sea level. Based on the storm’s strength and impact,
it counts statistically as a 100-year ﬂood.
Furthermore, from 1976 to 1981, Denmark
experienced signiﬁcant storm surges, which mandated the government to reinforce already
existing dikes. The Wadden Sea dikes [16] present such an example, which are in Southern
Jutland. This site is particularly important as they can be described as some of the ﬁrst
instances of coastal protection in Denmark since the Middle Ages.
In present times, Denmark has a coastline of 8750 km, of which almost 1800 km are
protected by dikes or similar infrastructures. Consequently, the coastal regions and cities
in Denmark that currently do not have coastal protection, pose a great risk in the coming
decades, as climate change will inevitably increase the water levels.
A second threat that aﬀects coastal regions is coastal erosion. This phenomenon can
be stated as the removal of material from the coast due to waves and tides. The result of
this action is coastal retreat, that can harm in the long term Denmark both ecologically
and economically [17].
A study has shown that if no actions are taken, 33% of the damages will only occur in
the capital region of Copenhagen resulting in damage costs between 5 and 35 billion DKK
[17]. Furthermore, it is projected that Denmark will experience a mean sea water lever
rise between 0.3m and 0.6m by the year 2100. This magnitude can always increase due to
the rapid rate of climate change.
The Danish coast is heterogeneous and diﬀerent types of coasts can be encountered
as seen in Figure 2.2. There are four main diﬀerent coastal typologies and each presents
diﬀerent challenges to overcome for urban protection. The ﬁrst type concerns coastal cities
built on a fjord, which have the risk of ﬂooded harbours, industrial or residential areas
at low elevation. Furthermore, these can be exposed to hazards from nearby river bodies,
where there is a potential risk from ﬂooding following extreme rainfalls. A second type
==PAGE:13==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
8 of 70
of urbanized coastal areas with potential ﬂood risk is represented by bays with elevated
hinterland, where storm surge would impact only the local areas close to the shore. The
third type is similar but with low-lying hinterland, where the ﬂood can spread to a wider
area. Lastly, urban developments on cliﬀs have local coastal ﬂoods jeopardizing the front
buildings as well as beach roads.
Figure 2.2: Coastal typologies in regards to storm surge type [17], from left to right: Type
1 - Deep fjord with river estuary, Type 2 - Bay with elevated hinterland, Type 3 - Bay
with low-lying hinterland, Type 4 - Cliﬀ
In 2015, an assessment of ﬂood hazard and ﬂood risk maps was completed in Denmark
to identify the areas most prone to ﬂoods, which are all located along open coastline and
fjords [18]. Three scenarios were described in the Floods Directive, therefore three relevant
hazard elements were included on maps. The scenarios that were assessed included low with
a return period of 1000 years, medium with a return period of 100, and high probability
with a return period of 20 years.
There are some fjords that have large rivers ﬂowing into them. In this case, the scenario
where the increased water ﬂow in the river and the elevated water level in the fjord could
lead to extreme water levels near the mouth area of the fjord, was also examined. The
point being that the resultant water levels locally at the mouth of the fjord would be higher
than both events individually. Such an extreme event could lead to severe consequences,
as most of the times there are urban areas in the mouth areas.
In order to assess the ﬂooding hazard correctly, every possible source needs to be iden-
tiﬁed. There are seven categories that can lead to ﬂooding following diﬀerent mechanisms:
ﬂuvial, pluvial, coastal, groundwater, artiﬁcial water bearing infrastructure, and sewerage
systems. Of course, some of these sources are not applicable to Denmark as only the ﬂu-
vial and coastal ﬂoods were taken under consideration. Regarding the return periods of 20
and 100 years, the projected water levels were based on statistic data from observations,
==PAGE:14==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
9 of 70
whereas for the 1000 years return period, the data were either derived by statistical data
or based on the 1872 storm ﬂood due to the lack of required information. Existing ﬂood
defences, such as dikes, were taken into account in the construction of the ﬂood risk maps.
The report [18] considers that in Denmark only ﬂuvial and coastal ﬂoods were considered
as important although dike overtopping was also considered, overall dike failure, e.g. due
to slope instability, was not considered.
In the event of ﬂood, there are ﬁve main categories that are at risk. These are the
risks to human health, to economic activity, to critical infrastructure, to Water Framework
Directive (WFD) protected areas and to other such as cultural heritage. For the afore-
mentioned categories, maps were constructed to highlight a possible outcome from a ﬂood
event.
According to the report [18],there are eleven areas with potential ﬂood risk in Denmark:
Holstebro, Randers Fjord, Juelsminde, Vejle, Fredericia, Aabenraa, Odense Fjord, Korsør,
Køge, Amager and Nakskov. As already mentioned, all these areas are either coastal or
located at the access of large river bodies.
Analysis of selected areas
From the aforementioned ﬁve areas, three of them were considered characteristic of the
three coasts types as mentioned in Figure 2.2. To identify which city falls in which category,
elevation maps were created in QGIS with data that were acquired from the Agency for
Data Supply and Eﬃciency of Denmark [19].
The ﬁrst type of coastal typology is a deep fjord with river estuary. A characteristic
example of such is Vejle where, as mentioned, two fjords converge at the location. From
Figure 2.3, it is apparent from the elevation data that the elevation at the city level, where
the ﬂooding will happen, is signiﬁcantly lower, rather than the surrounding sudden rise of
elevation. A second characteristic city of this type is Aabenraa, which as seen in Figure
2.4 has the same topographical characteristics as Vejle.
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
10 of 70
Figure 2.3: Elevation map of Vejle.
Figure 2.4: Elevation map of Aabenraa.
==PAGE:16==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
11 of 70
The second type of coast as mentioned in Figure 2.2, is a bay with an elevated hinter-
land. Randers and its surrounding area can be described as such, as the ﬂooding occurs
closely to the fjord bank, while at the same time the hinterland experiences higher eleva-
tions as seen in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Elevation map of Randers.
The ﬁnal type of coastal typology is a bay with low-lying hinterland. Amager is an area
which has a consistent low elevation throughout the island’s area. Therefore, when a ﬂood
will happen there will be risk even far away from the coast, as seen in Figure 2.6. Apart
from Amager, another characteristic city of this type is Juelsminde as seen in Figure 2.7,
where due to the low elevations of the area the ﬂood will impact a large area in hinterland.
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
12 of 70
Figure 2.6: Elevation map of Amager.
Figure 2.7: Elevation map of Juelsminde.
==PAGE:18==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
13 of 70
Selected areas with ﬂooding hazard
To exemplify the eﬀects of ﬂooding related to its causes, in this section the ﬂood risk
maps of the following ﬁve areas are presented: Aabenraa, Vejle, Amager, Randers Fjord
and Juelsminde. The QGIS maps that were constructed showcase the severity of ﬂoods
in terms of total economical risk, the amount of inhabitants aﬀected, and the damage
in cultural heritage. Subsequently, these areas were also examined in terms of their soil
stratigraphy. The data where taken from the second phase of the EU directive [20], as well
as from the national well database [21].
Aabenraa is located in Southern Denmark [22], at the head of the Aabenraa Fjord.
For a storm event having a 1000-year return period, the whole coastal area is at risk as
showed in Figure 2.8, where the scale represents economical damage. The map shows that
the destruction due to the ﬂood expands inland, producing economical damage of millions
of Danish kroner. On Figure 2.9, the amount of the aﬀected inhabitants is illustrated,
highlighting the signiﬁcance of the imposed threat that it will have in human lives.
Figure 2.8: Total Economical Damage in the 1000-years Event in Aabenraa.
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
14 of 70
Figure 2.9: Aﬀected Inhabitants in the 1000-years Event in Aabenraa.
The town of Vejle is at risk as it is surrounded by a bay and lakes. Vejle is in the
southeast of the Jutland Peninsula [23], and speciﬁcally at the head of Vejle Fjord. It is
important to note that it’s at this point that the Vejle River and Grejs River and their
valleys converge.
Additionally, the urban area is surrounded by steep hills as well as
multiple large water bodies and the bay of the city, that contribute negatively to the ﬂood
protection of the city. Contrary to Aabenraa, in the case of the 100-years event ﬂood, the
economic damage in Vejle is not distributed in the whole ﬂooded area but in speciﬁc parts
of the city, as seen in Figure 2.10. The economic losses in this case would also be millions
of Danish kroner.
In addition to the economic losses in the event of ﬂooding, a tremendous amount of
people will be aﬀected, as it can be seen in Figure 2.11. Vejle has thousands of probable
aﬀected inhabitants, since their concentration can be spotted in the north part of the area
where the ﬂood spreads. Furthermore, inhabitants situated further from the coast, such
as in the case of Aabenraa, seem to also be at risk.
==PAGE:20==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
15 of 70
Figure 2.10: Total Economic Damage in the 100-years Event in Vejle.
Figure 2.11: Aﬀected Inhabitants in the 100-years Event in Vejle.
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
16 of 70
Randers is the sixth largest city in Denmark, located in Central Denmark Region on the
Jutland peninsula [24]. The city is a prime example ﬂood risk due to the fjord overﬂowing.
As already mentioned, the city is at risk due to the Gudenaa river that enters the Randers
Fjord as seen in Figure 2.12, where the total economic damage from the 1000-years event
ﬂood is shown.
Figure 2.13 shows the aﬀected inhabitants in the case of the 1000-years event ﬂood.
By observing the map, it is evident that not only the city of Randers, but also residents
to other urban centers located in the banks of Randers fjord are highly susceptible to be
aﬀected by such ﬂood.
Another important aspect is the damage that may be dealt in the cultural and historical
heritage, as Randers history can be traced back to the middle ages, preserving many
important structures and locations. In Figure 2.14, the important heritage areas that need
to be maintained and protected from ﬂood threats events are illustrated, highlighting the
signiﬁcance of protecting the area.
Figure 2.12: Total Economic Damage in the 1000-years Event in Randers.
==PAGE:22==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
17 of 70
Figure 2.13: Aﬀected Inhabitants in the 1000-years Event in Randers.
Figure 2.14: Cultural Heritage Importance in the 1000-years Event in Randers.
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
18 of 70
The island of Amager is situated south of Zealand and it is the most densely populated
island in Denmark, with more than 210,000 inhabitants [25].
It is part of the capital
area of Denmark. Furthermore, Amager contains the protected natural area of Naturpark
Amager, that has an area of 96 km2. During the Second World War, a dam was built for
land reclamation, doubling the island area. As seen from Figure 2.15, the total economic
damages arising from a 1000-years ﬂood event are tremendous, as the area hosts a numerous
housing facilities, businesses and recreational areas.
As mentioned, Amager is a highly populated area, with many residential and industrial
buildings. As a result, in case of a 1000-years event ﬂood, thousands of inhabitants will
be aﬀected, both near the southeast coast of the island and deeper inside the land, in the
Ørestad area.
Apart from the economical and human losses, the island of Amager has signiﬁcant
historical and cultural heritage that will be aﬀected. As it can be seen on Figure 2.17, the
port of Dragør and St.Magleby village are of heritage importance. Therefore, Amager is
at further risk when considering the protection of cultural heritage areas.
Figure 2.15: Total Economic Damage in the 1000-years Event in Amager.
==PAGE:24==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
19 of 70
Figure 2.16: Aﬀected Inhabitants in the 1000-years Event in Amager.
Figure 2.17: Cultural Heritage Importance in the 200-years Event in Amager.
==PAGE:25==
2.2. Importance in Denmark
20 of 70
Juelsminde lies in East Jutland, between Horsens and Vejle [26]. It is a well know
summer destination, with many attractions and beach resorts. Hence, it is a coastal town
that experienced signiﬁcant economical growth in the past ﬁve decades and an increase
in infrastructure. As a result, the area that will be aﬀected by a possible ﬂood event will
largely aﬀect the whole area of the town, leading to enormous economical losses, as it can
be seen below in Figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18: Total Economic Damage in the 200-years Event in Juelsminde.
Moreover, the aﬀected inhabitants from the 200-years event ﬂood can be seen in Figure
2.19.
It can be observed that the aftermath of such an event will aﬀect the residents
throughout the whole city, and not only in the coastal areas, as the town is approached by
the sea from the North, East and South.
==PAGE:26==
2.3. Geotechnical Risks Description
21 of 70
Figure 2.19: Aﬀected Inhabitants in the 200-years Event in Juelsminde.
2.3
Geotechnical Risks Description
A dike is an artiﬁcial earthen wall, meant to prevent ﬂooding of the hinterland.
It is
therefore expected for dikes to be able to withstand extreme loading. There are multiple
geotechnical failure mechanisms that need to be examined when constructing a sea dike.
Brieﬂy, some of the failure mechanisms consist of slope stability, uplifting of the wa-
ter - retaining layer, and seep erosion such as piping and heave, beneath and along the
dike. Being a coastal infrastructure of signiﬁcant length, the bearing capacity of the soil
underneath the dike should examined, as well as the induced settlement of the foundation
layer.
Additionally, dikes should be examined regarding the water seepage at the base of the
dike, with respect to possible soil liquefaction. The action of the water ﬂowing inside the
soil is called seepage. This occurs when there is a diﬀerence in the water height between
two sides of a structure, which is something that is expected when the hidden dike will be
deployed.In the following chapters of this thesis, these potential geotechnical risks will be
==PAGE:27==
2.4. Existing Technologies
22 of 70
examined thoroughly.
Traditional dike construction can be complex and several parameters need to be taken
into account. The foundation should be prepared as every obstacle, such as trees, stumps,
or organic matter that could interfere with the infrastructure must be removed [27]. As
there are diﬀerent classes of dikes, depending on the its conditions and the design & con-
struction requirements, diﬀerent materials should be used, which can be proven as diﬃcult
if that materials cannot be found close to the construction site, increasing the costs by
importing them. Finally, maintenance of a traditional dike is important as it is possible
that after severe ﬂoods certain parts could develop weaknesses, capable of collapsing the
whole infrastructure endangering human lives and high costs. The main parts of a tradi-
tional dike can be seen in Figure 2.20, where the complexity of such an infrastructure is
apparent.
Figure 2.20: Main parts of a traditional dike [28]
2.4
Existing Technologies
In the past decades, numerous innovative approaches have been developed for coastal
protection. Most of these approaches try to counteract the fact that dike construction is
a lengthy procedure and requires a permanent land use, typically corresponding to a large
footprint. These new technologies instead try to apply temporary fast-built solutions.
The TEMPO-DAM [29] is a Danish solution that was designed for extreme weather
events. It is one of the fastest mobile dams in the world, and it has a deployment speed of
1-5 km/hour. The mechanism works by having water ﬂowing into the barrier, which ﬁlls
==PAGE:28==
2.4. Existing Technologies
23 of 70
it and raises the triangular part by water force as seen in Figure 2.21. Furthermore, the
Velcro joints have a special sealing system, to make them water tight.
Figure 2.21: Tempo-Dam ﬂood protection mechanism.
The Rapidam [30] is a similar solution by a British company that can be provided in
a variety of forms, such as: the boltdown Tip Forward (TF), the boltdown stand-up (SU),
and free standing (FS). The Rapidam can deploy a 100 metres long infrastructure in 30 to
40 minutes.
Figure 2.22: Rapidam ﬂood protection mechanism.
==PAGE:29==
2.5. Concept of Hidden Dikes
24 of 70
Finally, the Tubebarrier [31] is an Dutch temporary ﬂood defence barrier. In this case,
a 100 meters mobile dam can be deployed in an hour.
Figure 2.23: Tubebarrier ﬂood protection mechanism.
From the aforementioned solutions, it is clear that there are multiple alternatives to
temporary measures against ﬂoods. It is important to note though that all of these solutions
need deployment every time a ﬂood could strike. Therefore, a temporary measure with a
permanent installation could be useful in areas that are frequently at risk, without being
too expensive.
2.5
Concept of Hidden Dikes
With the aim of covering the modern needs of ﬂood protection, the hidden dikes were
conceptualized.
The intent of this type of structure is to create a permanent solution
which has temporary usage.
The concept behind the hidden dikes lies to its function to inﬂate whenever it is needed.
The structure will be installed permanently, but when there is no risk of ﬂooding it will
remain deﬂated. In its deﬂated situation the hidden dike will be indistinguishable from the
rest of its surrounding environment, as it will be covered from a layer of synthetic grass.
==PAGE:30==
2.5. Concept of Hidden Dikes
25 of 70
During ﬂood events that could potentially cause economical damage and human loss,
the hidden dike will be activated. The beneﬁts of such a construction are apparent as the
hidden dike will be able to inﬂate fast enough, even when facing unexpected storm surges.
As mentioned the hidden dike would be deﬂated when it is not needed. When there
is a risk of a storm surge, water will pump into the membrane causing it to increase its
height up to 0.9 meters. The pumping mechanism will be under the hidden dike so there
will be no danger of having external damage to it. In order to assure that the dike will
be kept into place, a set of anchors will be placed to ensure that. A concept sketch of the
hidden dike when inﬂate can be seen in Figure 2.24
Figure 2.24: Concept sketch of hidden dike in action.
==PAGE:31==
3 | Methodology
In the current chapter, the methodology that was implemented in the experimental setup
will be examined, as well as the various software used.
It will establish a connection
between a theoretical background and the results that were acquired, ensuring the correct
application of the software and the integrity of the results. Firstly, the experimental setup
that was used to simulate the inﬂation and deﬂation of the hidden dike, is discussed in
detail in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 presents the methodology that was followed to construct
a realistic representation of the inﬂation of the hidden dike in the COMSOL multiphysics
software.
The theoretical background to understand and process the results that were
acquired from PLAXIS is presented in Section 3.3. The second multiphysics software that
is used is ABAQUS, and the methodology that was followed can be read in Section 3.4. In
order to enumerate the safety factor against sliding, the programming language Python is
used, where the analytical process that is used is explained in Section 3.5.
3.1
Experimental Setup
To understand better how the inﬂatable dikes will work, a small-scale laboratory experi-
ment was constructed. The setup of this experiment was comprised of a small transparent
plastic box, Fontainebleau sand that acted as the establishing soil, a balloon that acted as
the inﬂatable dike and cloth as the geotextile.
Speciﬁcally, the sand was introduced with a water content w equal to 15 %.
This
mixture was then homogenized and compacted.
The ﬁnal amount of sand and water
mixture in the box weighted approximately 450 g. The box has a square shape with sides
equal to 22 cm and the compressed sand had a depth of 5 cm. Based on that the bulk
density of the material can be calculated as 0.16 g/cm3.
To simulate the inﬂatable dike, a balloon was used that was steadily inﬂated by pumping
water. In order to understand how the geotextile would follow the steady inﬂation and
26
==PAGE:32==
3.2. COMSOL
27 of 70
deﬂation of the dike, a piece of cloth was used, as it would produce a similar movement.
In the expected sea side of the dike a series of nails were installed. Their purpose was
to assist the dike from the horizontal load induced by the water.
3.1.1
Important Outcomes
The initial experiments were successful in terms of inﬂation and deﬂation of the dike
and produced important outcomes. It was noted that the cloth although it followed the
movement of the dike when inﬂating, it wouldn’t follow it when deﬂating. To overcome this
problem, the original setup was modiﬁed by adding a series of rubber bands that would
act as a way to bring the cloth back to its original place. The ﬁnal experimental setup can
be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Final experimental setup.
Based on this it is deduced that a mechanism to ensure the suﬃcient deﬂation of the
system should be installed. Such a system should be a pumping mechanism that would
retract all of the water inside the hidden dike, as well as a set of nails that would act as
ﬁxing points.
3.2
COMSOL
The present subsection presents a preliminary study of the diﬀerent parameters that inﬂu-
ence the behaviour of the inﬂatable dike in order to ﬁnd and design the optimal shape.
==PAGE:33==
3.2. COMSOL
28 of 70
The COMSOL simulation performed is aimed at modelling inﬂation and therefore starts
from a deﬂated conﬁguration. Assuming a perimeter of 7.5 m, the conﬁguration of the dike
adopted can be seen in Figures 3.2 & 3.3, which shows that initially the horizontal length
is the same as the diameter (i.e. 3.75 m) and the membrane has a thickness of 2 mm.
The geometry has been designed in AUTOCAD and imported in COMSOL, due to the
complexity of the structure. In particular, the analyses were performed for a plane strain
situation with a depth of 30 m. Furthermore, an inlet was also designed from where the
water enters the deﬂated dike. Lastly, a soil proﬁle was also created in order to have a
realistic scenario.
Figure 3.2: Total horizontal length of the dike before inﬂation.
Figure 3.3: Close-up of Figure 3.2 showing conﬁguration at the corner and thickness of the
membrane used.
Based on the information available in the "Status lab test Aquanamic projekt forår
2020" by the Teknologisk Institut [32], the Volta polyurethane transportband (PUR FZ)
was used for the model from the three available options. In particular, the mechanical
properties of the material were those in Table 3.1.
==PAGE:34==
3.2. COMSOL
29 of 70
Elastic Modulus (MPa)
72
Poisson’s Ratio
0.39
Density (kg/m3)
930
Table 3.1: Mechanical Properties of Polyurethane.
At the "Status lab test Aquanamic projekt forår 2020" by the Teknologisk Institut [32]
report, two other materials were also examined. the Rom Gummi EPDM roofcover and the
GSE/Solmax geomembrane Proﬂex®. The reason why the polyurethane was ultimately
used was that it was the weakest out of the three. Meaning that if the hidden dike concept
can be implemented with the weakest of the materials, there shouldn’t be any issues if the
other ones were used, provided they are more economical.
Initially, a pressure was applied to the internal boundary of the membrane to simulate
inﬂation. The pressure was applied using a ramp function, which ensured a steady inﬂation.
When the most eﬃcient shape is deﬁned, a water inlet was introduced to the system where
water was pumped by using a constant pressure.
Certain boundary conditions were also introduced to the model to ensure stability.
The interface between the membrane and the establishing soil at the seaside was ﬁxed
into place. Two diﬀerent geometries were targeted, in order to ensure which is the most
suﬃcient by comparing the amount of water needed for full inﬂation, and what was the
height that was achieved. These geometries were a circular shape and a teardrop one. For
the circular cross section, the rest of the membrane was allowed to move freely. On the
other hand, for the teardrop cross section, the upper part of the membrane was restrained
from deforming in the horizontal direction, which corresponds to a stiﬀer material in this
section.
To improve the model, inﬂation was performed applying the pressure through simu-
lation of water inﬂow to take into consideration of gravity eﬀects. The geometry of the
membrane remained constant as seen in Figures 3.2 & 3.3, as well as the material used to
simulate the membrane from Table 3.1.
Water inﬂow to the membrane was performed through a water inlet at the base of
the membrane providing constant water pressure. The shape of the inlet is square with
==PAGE:35==
3.3. PLAXIS
30 of 70
sides equal to 5 cm. Furthermore, the pressure that is used to inﬂate the hidden dike,
without risking failure of the membrane is constant with a value of 0.004 psi. Moreover,
the design of the membrane was developed further with the anchoring of the far left point
of the membrane. With the intention of a complete geotechnical analysis considering the
eﬀects of inﬂating the membrane with water, a soil body was also introduced beneath the
membrane. The soil characteristics of the clay used can be inspected on Table 3.2.
Characteristic
Value
Young’s Modulus (E)
65e4 [kPa]
Poisson’s Ratio (v)
0.3
Density (p)
2141 [kg/m3]
Cohesion (c’)
20 [kPa]
Angle of Friction (φ)
30 o
Table 3.2: Material characteristics of Clay.
In every case boundary conditions regarding the soil body were applied. At the edges
of the soil body the horizontal movements were ﬁxed. Whereas the base of the soil body
was ﬁxed for every movement. That didn’t aﬀect the ﬁnal deformations as the model was
suﬃciently large.
3.3
PLAXIS
There are some important geotechnical risks that an structure faces in its construction and
service as mentioned in Section 2.3. One of them is the bearing capacity of the founding
soil and the settlements induced when a load is applied to it. The Finite Element Method
software PLAXIS will be utilized to approach and examine the behaviour diﬀerent soil
proﬁles in which the hidden dikes will be constructed. Furthermore, other geotechnical
risks that could potentially harm the hidden dike will be examined with other suitable
tools and software, due to software limitations.
The analysis was divided in two scenarios, a drained and an undrained one.
Both
situations were parametrically run in terms of cohesion. Furthermore, to ensure that the
results were in accordance with the analytical solutions, a comparison was made with the
==PAGE:36==
3.3. PLAXIS
31 of 70
solutions proposed by Terzaghi and Meyerhof [33].
To calculate the bearing capacity of the soil based on Terzaghi’s method, Eq. 3.1 was
used.
qu = c′Nc + qNq + 1
2γBNγ
(3.1)
Based on the fact that the hidden dike will not be buried within the ground, the factor
qNq is equal to zero. For the rest of the factors in terms of the angle of friction Table 3.4
was used.
Figure 3.4: Terzaghi’s bearing capacity factors[34].
Similarly, to calculate the bearing capacity based on the Meyerhof’s method, Eq. 3.2
was used.
==PAGE:37==
3.3. PLAXIS
32 of 70
qu = c′NcFcsFcdFci + qNqFqsFqdFqi + 1
2γBNγFγsFγdFγi
(3.2)
Correspondingly, the values of the factors Nc and Nγ were taken from Table 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Meyerhof’s bearing capacity factors[34].
To extract the bearing capacity of the soil, a big load was slowly applied at the location
of the dike. Then the bearing capacity was the product between the maximum load and
SM-weight which is a parameter with values between 0 and 1. It shows the degree of the
applied load that Plaxis managed to apply on the soil without having soil failure [35]. If
the value reaches the number 1 it means that the load has been applied with no issues and
the foundation soil hasn’t failed.
Three diﬀerent locations where examined in PLAXIS, in regards to their type of coastal
==PAGE:38==
3.3. PLAXIS
33 of 70
typology, namely Vejle, Randers and Amager. To formulate the soil stratigraphies for each
city, borehole data from GEUS were acquired. The boreholes and their distribution that
were selected can be seen below in Figures 3.6, 3.7 & 3.8. For Vejle, the stratigraphy
comprises from a layer of gyttja and interchanging layers of clay and sand.
Table 3.3
shows with detail the thickness of each layer.
Figure 3.6: Borehole distribution in Vejle.
Layer
Thickness (m)
Gyttja
2
Clay
1,5
Sand
6
Clay
3
Sand
5,5
Table 3.3: The thickness of soil layers in Vejle.
In comparison with Vejle, the general area of Randers has a thicker layer of gyttja,
which follows two large layers of sand and clay, which ﬁnally lead to limestone as seen in
==PAGE:39==
3.3. PLAXIS
34 of 70
Table 3.4.
Figure 3.7: Borehole distribution in Randers.
Layer
Thickness (m)
Gyttja
4
Sand
14
Clay
14
Limestone
8
Table 3.4: The thickness of soil layers in Randers.
The stratigraphy in Amager is signiﬁcantly simpler when compared to Vejle and Ran-
ders, as seen in Table 3.5.
Layer
Thickness (m)
Clay
6
Limestone
3
Table 3.5: The thickness of soil layers in Amager.
==PAGE:40==
3.3. PLAXIS
35 of 70
Figure 3.8: Borehole distribution in Amager.
In order to have consistency in the results across the diﬀerent models examined, the
same soil parameters where used. These material characteristics are depicted in Table 3.6.
Characteristic
Gyttja
Clay
Sand
Limestone
Young’s Modulus (E)
550 [kPa]
650 [MPa]
40 [MPa]
27E3 [MPa]
Poisson’s Ratio (v)
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
γunsat
14.20 [kN/m3]
21 [kN/m3]
16.50 [kN/m3]
25 [kN/m3]
Cohesion (c’)
10 [kPa]
45 [kPa]
-
10 [MPa]
Table 3.6: Material characteristics of soil layers used in PLAXIS.
After calculating the bearing capacity in the three distinct cases, the settlements of
the soils were examined. In order to produce realistic results, the geometry of the fully
inﬂated dike was acquired directly from the COMSOL simulation. After implementing the
shape of the structure in PLAXIS, the inﬂated dike was simulated as a soil body using the
characteristics as seen in Table 3.7.
==PAGE:41==
3.4. ABAQUS
36 of 70
Membrane Parameters
γunsat
10 kN/m3
γsat
10 kN/m3
E’
72E3 kN/m2
v’
0.3
Table 3.7: Parameters used in Plaxis to simulate the membrane.
3.4
ABAQUS
The ﬁnite element software ABAQUS [36] was used to ensure that there is no risk against
internal seepage. As soils contain interconnected voids, the water is allowed to ﬂow through
them. The size of these voids is responsible for the amount of water that will pass through.
The coeﬃcient of permeability is a factor that determines it. The larger the voids that a
soil has, the bigger the factor permeability is.
To have a better understanding on how the ﬂow will be aﬀected due to the installation
of the hidden dike, a ﬂow net was constructed. The ﬂow net is a graphical representation of
the ﬂow of water around the structure [37]. In short, it represents a two-dimensional steady-
state groundwater ﬂow through squares that are constructed using the equipotential and
ﬂow lines. The ﬂow is concentrated in the areas where these squares are smallest. These
are the areas that need to be examined for potential risks.
The dike is simulated as a soil material using the soil parameters as seen in Table 3.8.
To achieve realistic results the geometry that was selected was that of a trapezoid shape.
Its bottom base was 2.5 meters and its top was 1.3 meters.
Characteristic
Dike
Young’s Modulus (E)
650 [MPa]
Poisson’s Ratio (v)
0.3
Mass Density
1019.37 [kg/m3]
Table 3.8: Material characteristics of dike used in ABAQUS.
Based on the stratigraphies of the analyzed coasts, it can be deduced that top layer is
==PAGE:42==
3.4. ABAQUS
37 of 70
mostly comprised of clayey and ﬁne grained materials. Hence, the ﬂow net was constructed
based on a clay soil proﬁle, with material properties as seen in Table 3.9.
Characteristic
Dike
Young’s Modulus (E)
650 [MPa]
Poisson’s Ratio (v)
0.3
Mass Density
2140.67 [kg/m3]
Permeability
1E-11 [m/s]
Void Ratio
1
Angle of friction (φ
35o
Table 3.9: Material characteristics of clay used in ABAQUS.
The acquirement of the equipotential and ﬂow lines was possible through the imple-
mentation of certain boundary conditions in the ABAQUS model. The geometry of the
model can be seen in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Model geometry in ABAQUS.
To acquire the equipotential lines on the upstream side of the hidden dike a pore water
pressure boundary condition equal to the height of expected water was applied. At the
same point on the downstream side of the hidden dike the pore pressure boundary condition
was assigned to 0 kPa, as no water is expected at that side. Furthermore, the whole model
is not allowed to deform, as vertical and horizontal displacements are not of interest in
==PAGE:43==
3.5. Python
38 of 70
this type of analysis. Lastly, the base of the model was assigned impermeable boundary
conditions.
Similarly, to plot the ﬂow lines, the expected pore water pressure based on the water
height was applied to the base of the soil layer. While at the same time, the zero pore
water pressure boundary condition was applied to the base of the dike.
3.5
Python
Finally, calculations regarding the safety factor against sliding were performed analytically,
automatizing the calculations within a Python script.
To do so, it was important to break the problem down to its most simpliﬁed case. For
this reason, the dike was simulated using a trapezoid shape. The parameters that needed
user input were the geometrical characteristics of the dike, such as its height, its top width,
its bottom width, and the speciﬁc weight of the material used for simulating it.
Regarding the founding soil, the only parameter used is the angle of friction. Further-
more, the examination against sliding was done parametrically in terms with the angle of
friction. It was decided that values as low as 10 degrees should be tested, as the future
sites of installation of the hidden dike are marine environments with unpredictable soil
layers. Moreover, the height of the water table is needed to calculate the value of the
water pressure at the base of the dike.
Due to lack of accurate dimensions and established soil, a series of parametric analysis
were done by changing the value of the interface angle of friction, while the rest of the
dimensions and values can be seen collectively in Table 3.10. In total, analyses were done
with an initial value of 10 degrees and an increment of 1 degree up to 45 degrees.
==PAGE:44==
3.5. Python
39 of 70
Height of Dike
0.9 m
Height of Water Table
0.85 m
Top width of Dike
1.6 m
Bottom width of Dike
3.2 m
Unit weight of Dike
10 kN/m3
Table 3.10: Characteristics that were considered to calculate the safety factor against
horizontal sliding.
==PAGE:45==
4 | Results
4.1
Dike geometry based on simulation of inﬂation
Two diﬀerent cross-sectional shapes, teardrop and circular, were used to simulate the in-
ﬂatable dike to compare their volumes, and were examined whether it is possible to reach
a total height of 1.5 m following the suggested deformed shape. The pressure required to
reach this height was 1.6 psi. The results of the inﬂation can be seen in Figures 4.1 & 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Teardrop Shape
Figure 4.2: Circular Shape.
40
==PAGE:46==
4.1. Dike geometry based on simulation of inﬂation
41 of 70
Due to the small thickness (only 2 mm) of the membrane, and the physical properties
of the elastic material being used for the model, the membrane started inﬂating even at
low pressure values. As seen in Figure 4.2, a perfect circular shape cannot be achieved
in the model, due to the original shape of the dike and the methodology used to apply
the pressure.
Furthermore, the teardrop shape could only be obtained by restraining
the horizontal deformation on the top surface of the membrane. Based on the inﬂated
conﬁgurations, the deformed perimeter, area, and volume were obtained as seen in Table
4.1.
Shape
Length (m)
Area (m2)
Volume (m3)
Teardrop
8.76
3.86
115.79
Circular
9.13
4.72
141.58
Table 4.1: Comparison of the two inﬂated shapes.
From Table 4.1, it is evident that the teardrop shape requires less volume and defor-
mation to reach a height of 1.5 m and thus this is the most economical solution.
To assess whether the inﬂation required to reach 1.5 m brings any permanent deforma-
tions to the membrane, the strains were also examined and compared to the reference yield
point provided in the report "Status lab test Aquanamic projekt forår 2020" [32], which
corresponds approximately to 25% of strain. As seen in Figure 4.3, the higher values of
strains occur at the seaside near the top of the inﬂatable dike, as expected. Furthermore,
the strains can be seen to be around 20%, which is below the limit values obtained from
the report.
==PAGE:47==
4.1. Dike geometry based on simulation of inﬂation
42 of 70
Figure 4.3: Strains near the top of the dike from sea side.
From the above results, it can be concluded that the teardrop shape is also the most
eﬃcient shape, as it requires less volume of water to reach a height of 1.5 m, and that the
membrane remains in the elastic regime while it inﬂates, avoiding permanent deformations.
The resulting values are as seen in Figure 4.4 in terms of the Von Mises stresses on the
membrane and the water pressure inside the membrane. When inserting the desired soil
proﬁle below the dike, the soil displacement under the membrane has also been calculated
and it is shown in the said ﬁgure. It is important to note that the modelling capabilities of
the software employed are insuﬃcient to fully erase the inﬂuence of the initial conﬁguration
on the inﬂated geometry and therefore a small kink is noticeable at the points where the
membrane was folded. Due to a numerical artefact, this leads to high stress values in the
membrane at these points. However, these are products of the limitations of the modelling
tool and do not depict what would occur in reality.
==PAGE:48==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
43 of 70
Figure 4.4: Inﬂated dike and interaction with clay.
Based on the results presented in the above ﬁgure, the water volume required for
inﬂation is 2.66 m3/m. With a focus of achieving a behaviour that could simulate reality,
the boundary conditions of the model were kept to the necessary, letting the membrane
to deform and inﬂate freely, while at the same time simulating its contact with the soil
beneath it and ﬁnally detaching from it. Again, the inﬂated perimeter was inspected to
ensure that the membrane did not reach plastic deformations as a result of inﬂation. Its
perimeter was the same as when deﬂated (i.e. 7.51 m).
Furthermore, the model was run specifying higher stiﬀness for the top part of the
membrane to obtain a tear drop shape. However, this did not resulted in any signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the inﬂated geometry.
Derived from the results from these two sets of simulations, it can be observed that the
height achieved is about 50% less, as a result the volume of water required is consistently
lower. However, the strains accumulated are virtually nonexistent and the pressure required
for inﬂation is also negligible as the membrane is not deformed.
4.2
Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
After the conﬁguration of the shape and the load of the hidden dike through the COMSOL
software, a detailed geotechnical analysis was conducted using PLAXIS. The new analyses
take into consideration the stratigraphy of the three selected areas of interest that were
mentioned in Section 2.2, as well as the established geometry of the hidden dike.
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
44 of 70
With the intention of calculating the bearing capacity of the soil, the structure was sim-
ulated as a trapezoid load. For the investigation of the induced settlements, the structure
was simulated using two methods; as a trapezoid load and as its realistic shape.
4.2.1
Vejle - Type 1
From the borehole investigation for Vejle, a generalized stratigraphy was constructed in
PLAXIS as seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Soil stratigraphy of Vejle with inﬂated dike as a load in PLAXIS.
The interaction of the service load with the soil in undrained conditions was ﬁrst exam-
ined. The results can be seen in Figure 4.6, where it is apparent that Plaxis produces similar
results to the theoretical ones. There are only diﬀerences for high values of undrained shear
strength for gyttja, any further increase of that parameter is not increasing the bearing ca-
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
45 of 70
pacity of the layer. Moreover, it is only for cases of gyttja that has extremely low cohesion
which the service load exceeds the bearing capacity of the soil.
Figure 4.6: Bearing capacity in undrained conditions.
Subsequently, the bearing capacity in drained conditions was calculated. In this sce-
nario, gyttja, which was the soil under parametric study, had an angle of friction φ equal
to 30 degrees. It is important to note that there are substantial diﬀerences between the
numerical modelling results and the ones acquired from the theoretical background, as seen
in Figure 4.7. In drained conditions it seems that the theoretical methods are overestimat-
ing the bearing capacity of a soil such as gyttja. Whereas through numerical methods the
bearing capacity seems steady at approximately 250 kN/m.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
46 of 70
Figure 4.7: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with φ = 30o.
Further analysis was carried out in drained conditions, but in terms of the angle of
friction. As seen in Figure 4.8, the top layer was examined for a range of angle of friction
values, between 30 to 45 degrees. Similarly to the drained analysis in terms of the cohe-
sion, the increase of the angle of friction produces similar values for the bearing capacity.
Regardless of the value of the angle of friction, the structure shouldn’t be in any immediate
danger.
==PAGE:52==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
47 of 70
Figure 4.8: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with c’ = 10 kPa in terms of the angle
of friction φ.
A further risk when installing a structure in such a soil is diﬀerential settlements. For
that reason, total displacements plots were constructed for both undrained and drained
conditions. In undrained conditions it is apparent that the deformation can reach to depths
equal to almost -18 meters as seen in Figure 4.9, although the value is not signiﬁcant. The
maximum value of total displacement occur at the placement of the dike and is equal to
17 mm.
Figure 4.9: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
48 of 70
In drained conditions the impacted area seems to minimize, with deformations to a
depth of 9 meters. In this case the maximum displacement is equal to 24 mm and occurs
at the same location, as seen in Figure 4.10. There is no evidence of signiﬁcant diﬀerential
deformations in both cases.
Figure 4.10: Total displacements in drained conditions.
In order to achieve results with higher accuracy, the geometry that was created through
COMSOL was extracted and imported in PLAXIS as well. The material used for simulating
the hidden dike can be seen in Table 3.7, as well as the geometry in PLAXIS in Figure
4.11. The rest of the soil retained the same material properties as before. In this case,
only the total deformation of the founding soil was examined.
==PAGE:54==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
49 of 70
Figure 4.11: Soil stratigraphy of Vejle with inﬂated dike as a soil body in PLAXIS.
In the undrained conditions, the soil seem to deform similarly to Figure 4.9 as seen in
Figure 4.12. The main diﬀerence between the results is the increase of the maximum total
displacement to 19 mm.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
50 of 70
Figure 4.12: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
The results from the drained conditions can be seen in Figure 4.13. The results still
seem comparable with the simpliﬁed case, with the only diﬀerence being the increase of
the maximum total displacement to 0.26 mm.
Figure 4.13: Total displacements in drained conditions.
4.2.2
Randers - Type 2
The second area under examination is the Randers fjord. After a careful consideration of
the boreholes that were selected, a general stratigraphy was constructed as seen in Table
==PAGE:56==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
51 of 70
3.4. The material properties used for simulating the gyttja, sand, and clay are the same
as used in Vejle as shown in Table 3.6.
Figure 4.14: Soil stratigraphy of Randers with inﬂated dike as a load in PLAXIS.
The undrained conditions were ﬁrst examined as seen in Figure 4.15.
Overall, the
numerical method and the theoretical analyses produce similar results. The diﬀerences
occur at high values of undrained shear strength, similarly to the previous case of Vejle.
It is only in extremely low values of undrained shear strength that the structure is at risk.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
52 of 70
Figure 4.15: Bearing capacity in undrained conditions.
In Figure 4.16, the behaviour of the gyttja layer in drained conditions was examined.
Due to the complex nature of the soil stratigraphy the results between PLAXIS, Terzaghi,
and Meyerhof have large diﬀerences. It is apparent that the theoretical methods overesti-
mate the bearing capacity of the gyttja. Through PLAXIS, a smaller range of values were
acquired, between 250 kN/m to 400 kN/m. Nevertheless, the load from the structure is
not enough to cause any damage.
Figure 4.16: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with φ = 30o.
==PAGE:58==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
53 of 70
An analysis in terms of the angle of friction was also carried out, with the results as
seen in Figure 4.17. Based on these results it can be deduced that there will be no problem
for the structure, as regardless the value of φ the bearing capacity is larger than the service
load.
Figure 4.17: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with c’ = 10 kPa in terms of the angle
of friction φ.
The displacements in undrained conditions were plotted as seen in Figure 4.18. The
behaviour and the way that the soil will deform is quite diﬀerent from the similar case for
Vejle. In this case, it seems that only the small layer of gyttja will deform. The maximum
displacement is equal to 24 mm and occurs where the load is applied.
==PAGE:59==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
54 of 70
Figure 4.18: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
On the other hand, the drained condition produces some similar results as well. As
seen in Figure 4.19, the aﬀected zone is now even less than in the undrained conditions.
Additionally, the maximum displacement has increased to 39 mm.
Figure 4.19: Total displacements in drained conditions.
For the sake of accuracy, the stratigraphy of Randers was also examined under the
realistic shape of the dike as seen in Figure 4.20.
==PAGE:60==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
55 of 70
Figure 4.20: Soil stratigraphy of Randers with inﬂated dike as a soil body in PLAXIS.
In a similar manner with the results from the the simpliﬁed modelling of the load
induced by the dike when in service, the total displacements in undrained conditions were
calculated as seen in Figure 4.21. Although the area that is aﬀected is similar, the expected
displacements are smaller and equal to 22 mm.
==PAGE:61==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
56 of 70
Figure 4.21: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
The total displacements under drained conditions were also examined as seen in Figure
4.22. Correspondingly to the behaviour of the simpliﬁed load when in drained conditions,
the area of concern is signiﬁcantly less than in the undrained conditions. Furthermore, the
maximum value of the total displacements is less in this case, with 38 mm.
Figure 4.22: Total displacements in drained conditions.
==PAGE:62==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
57 of 70
4.2.3
Amager - Type 3
The last area that was studied was the island of Amager. It was deduced that the soil
stratigraphy of this area is simpler than the previous ones, as seen in Table 3.5, with only
two layers. In Figure 4.23, the stratigraphy is shown as depicted in PLAXIS.
Figure 4.23: Soil stratigraphy of Amager with inﬂated dike as a load in PLAXIS.
As the stratigraphy is simpliﬁed the results were expected to follow closely the ones
from the theoretical methods. In Figure 4.24, the undrained bearing capacity is shown,
where the results from all three methods seem to converge, with minor diﬀerences.
==PAGE:63==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
58 of 70
Figure 4.24: Bearing capacity in undrained conditions.
Furthermore, the bearing capacity in drained conditions was also calculated as shown
in Figure 4.25. Although the results from PLAXIS seem to produce unstable values, in
each case the theoretical methods are overestimating the bearing capacity of the clay.
Figure 4.25: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with φ = 30o.
Finally, the bearing capacity in drained conditions in terms of the angle of friction
was calculated, as seen in Figure 4.26.
Similarly to the previous case, there seems to
be an instability in the results but still the theoretical methods are overestimating the
==PAGE:64==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
59 of 70
bearing capacity. In any case the structure is not in any risk as the service load is much
less than the bearing capacity.
A possible explanation for these discrepancies can be
that the theoretical methods are expecting the simplest case, having one homogeneous
layer when calculating the bearing capacity.
That is apparent as in every calculation
regarding the drained conditions, as the value of the angle of friction is increasing so is the
bearing capacity, using the theoretical methods. Such a behaviour is not replicated through
PLAXIS, as it takes into account the complexity of each stratigraphy and produces more
accurate results.
Figure 4.26: Bearing capacity in drained conditions with c’ = 10 kPa in terms of the angle
of friction φ.
Due to the thick layer of clay it was expected that the displacements would be less
than the ones that the dike experienced when the top layer was gyttja. For this reason, the
undrained displacements were ﬁrst calculated as seen in Figure 4.27. Although it seems
that aﬀected area is quite signiﬁcant the order of magnitude of the displacements is very
small, with the maximum total displacement being equal to just 0.02 mm.
==PAGE:65==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
60 of 70
Figure 4.27: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
Likewise, the drained conditions were also examined as seen in Figure 4.28. In this case
the maximum total displacement is larger than the ones that the dike experienced in the
undrained conditions, with a value of 0.04 mm, but still it can be deemed as insigniﬁcant.
Figure 4.28: Total displacements in drained conditions.
To acquire the total displacements with higher accuracy, the realistic geometry of the
membrane was also used, as seen in Figure 4.29.
==PAGE:66==
4.2. Bearing Capacity and Settlements Investigation
61 of 70
Figure 4.29: Soil stratigraphy of Amager with inﬂated dike as a soil body in PLAXIS.
The total displacements in undrained conditions were ﬁrst examined as seen in Figure
4.30. The area that is aﬀected is similar to the one in the simpliﬁed description of the
load in Figure 4.27. The only diﬀerence being a slight increase of the maximum total
displacement to 0.03 mm.
Figure 4.30: Total displacements in undrained conditions.
==PAGE:67==
4.3. Internal Seepage
62 of 70
Finally, the total displacements in drained conditions were examined as shown in Figure
4.31. There has been a slight increase, as in this case the maximum total displacement
is equal to 0.044 mm, although such a displacement shouldn’t cause any problem to the
structure.
Figure 4.31: Total displacements in drained conditions.
From the conducted analyses, it can be derived that the structure has no immediate
danger. Furthermore, after examining the serviceability load of the dike, as well as a more
realistic representation of it, in three diﬀerent stratigraphies the bearing capacity of the
soil is enough. Lastly, there is no indication for any diﬀerential deformation that could
potentially put the structure at risk.
4.3
Internal Seepage
In similar types of infrastructure regarding coastal protection, an important risk that needs
to be evaluated is piping [38]. To assess if the structure at hand is in danger of piping or
total failure, the ﬂow net needs to be constructed. To construct such a ﬂow net, a basic
dike design was created as seen in Figure 4.32.
==PAGE:68==
4.3. Internal Seepage
63 of 70
Figure 4.32: Three dimensional design of a basic dike in Autocad.
The construction of a ﬂow net for a simplistic case of a dike can be seen in Figure 4.33,
as it was constructed in ABAQUS.
Figure 4.33: Flow net as it was established through Abaqus.
An important parameter that needs to be enumerated is the critical hydraulic gradient
[33], which regards corrosion. Depending on its value, it can be determined if the water
on the sea side can erode the structure. To calculate it, Eq. 4.1 will be used, where γs is
the unit weight of the foundation material, which it’s equal to 21 kN/m3.
ic = γs −γw
γw
(4.1)
Upon replacing the required values in Eq. 4.1, it is found that the critical hydraulic
==PAGE:69==
4.4. Horizontal Sliding
64 of 70
gradient is equal to:
ic = 1.1
To examine if the structure is subjectible to corrosion, the critical hydraulic gradient
needs to be compared to the local hydraulic gradient at the toe of the dike, as it is the most
crucial part of the infrastructure. To calculate the local hydraulic gradient, the quotient
between the head loss ∆H and the distance between the equipotential lines ∆L, using Eq.
4.2.
i = ∆H
∆L
(4.2)
An approximation of the factor ∆L can be calculated from Figure 4.33, and is equal
to 0.2182. To calculate the head loss, the quotient between the height of the water table
and the number of equipotential lines needs to be enumerated, as seen in Eq. 4.3.
∆H =
H
#eq.li.
(4.3)
After combining equations 4.2 through 4.3 it is found that the local hydraulic gradient
at the toe of the dam is equal to:
i = 0.57
Since the local hydraulic gradient is less than the critical hydraulic gradient, there is
no immediate danger from corrosion.
4.4
Horizontal Sliding
Being a coastal defense infrastructure, dikes are expected to withstand severe horizontal
wave loads [39]. It is therefore important for the inﬂatable dike to stay in place when
subjected to this type of loading. To examine that, a Python script was created for a
==PAGE:70==
4.4. Horizontal Sliding
65 of 70
preliminary analysis of the safety factor against horizontal sliding.
The calculation of the safety factor takes into account the geometrical characteristics
of the dike, the height of the water table, the unit weight of the dike, and the interface
between the inﬂatable dike and the established soil.
The results were satisfactory, although for the lowest value of the interface angle of
friction the factor of safety was of the order of 1. The values of the factor of safety for the
rest of the interface angle of friction can be seen in Figure 4.34. Based on these results,
for higher angles of friction it can be deduced that there is no need for extra stabilization
mechanisms against horizontal sliding, such as anchors or soil nails. It is only for very low
values of φ, that extra measures are required.
Figure 4.34: Safety factor in terms with the angle of friction.
==PAGE:71==
5 | Conclusion
Throughout the current thesis an understanding of the importance of measures against
ﬂoods was made clear.
Moreover, the introduction to a new type of counter measure
against ﬂooding was executed.
At ﬁrst, a preliminary understanding of the risk and the potential failure mechanisms
was acquired. Furthermore, the importance of ﬂoods worldwide in general and in Denmark
speciﬁcally was highlighted. Especially for Denmark, risk areas were mapped where the
risk was underlined in economical terms, in terms to human losses, and in some cases in
terms of loss of cultural heritage. The beneﬁts of proper infrastructure was also underlined
through the process of the mapping. Furthermore, existing technologies in the market
were also mentioned and analyzed. The concept of a new technology against ﬂooding, the
hidden dikes, was also described, as well as a presentation of the outcomes of a small scale
experiment were presented.
The third chapter concerned the methodology that was followed in each of the soft-
ware package that was used in the current thesis. In more detail, the theory behind the
construction of the models and a veriﬁcation of the correct application of the software was
done.
In the ﬁnal chapter, the presentation of the results from the analyses was executed. The
analysis that was conducted in COMSOL produced a realistic representation and expec-
tation of how the inﬂated version of the hidden dike would turn out to be. Subsequently,
parametric studies through PLAXIS were conducted in terms of the cohesion and the angle
of friction. Plots showing the expected behaviour of the soil, as well as a veriﬁcation of
the safe deployment of the hidden dike was done. Afterwards, an internal seepage analysis
was performed in ABAQUS. Through these results the risk against internal seepage and
potential long-term failure of the infrastructure was abolished. Lastly, a code in Python
was written that calculated the risk against sliding. That was made possible through a
parametric study in terms of the angle of friction, whereas the results were displayed in
66
==PAGE:72==
5.1. Recommendations for future work
67 of 70
terms of the safety factor.
5.1
Recommendations for future work
Several potential ways that the current work could be expanded will be reported. First of
all, the examination of more diverse founding soil proﬁles should be taken into account,
and a connection between soil properties acquired in-situ should be done.
The interaction between the inﬂated hidden dike and waves should be examined. This
could be achieved by introducing a wave load acquired from real life buoys to PLAXIS.
This would show how the infrastructure will behave against dynamic loading.
The inﬂation of the hidden dike in diﬀerent ways could also be examined. Instead
of ﬁlling it up with just water, a ratio between water and air could also be examined as
it could be proven helpful against puncture. Finally, a three dimensional model of the
inﬂated hidden dike against dynamic wave loading could be done as it would be the most
representative to the real life case.
==PAGE:73==
6 | Bibliography
[1]
Overview: Weather, Global Warming and Climate Change. url: https://climate.
nasa.gov/resources/global-warming-vs-climate-change/.
[2]
Melissa’ ’Denchak. Are the Eﬀects of Global Warming Really that Bad? Mar. 2016.
url: https://www.nrdc.org/stories/are-effects-global-warming-really-
bad.
[3]
The economics of ﬂooding. Mar. 2014. url: https://app.croneri.co.uk/feature-
articles/economics-flooding?product=144.
[4]
K. Arnbjerg-Nielsen, L. Leonardsen, and H. Madsen. “Evaluating adaptation options
for urban ﬂooding based on new high-end emission scenario regional climate model
simulations”. In: Climate Research 64.1 (2015), pp. 73–84. issn: 16161572. doi: 10.
3354/cr01299.
[5]
Floods. url: https://www.who.int/health-topics/floods#tab=tab_1.
[6]
Why should we care about ﬂoodplains? Mar. 2021. url: https://www.eea.europa.
eu/publications/why-should-we-care-about-floodplains.
[7]
Sea Dykes as a Coastal Protection Strategy: Eﬀectiveness and Constraints in Kien
Giang, Vietnam. url: https://www.longdom.org/open-access/sea-dykes-as-
a-coastal-protection-strategy-effectiveness-and-constraints-in-kien-
giang-vietnam-18139.html.
[8]
Jens Morten Hansen et al. “Absolute sea levels and isostatic changes of the eastern
North Sea to central Baltic region during the last 900 years”. In: Bungenstock &
Schäfer 41 (2004), pp. 180–208. issn: 0300-9483. doi: 10.1111/j.1502-3885.
[9]
Global and European sea level rise. Dec. 2020. url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/
data-and-maps/indicators/sea-level-rise-7/assessment.
[10]
Matthew’ ’Linham and Robert’ ’Nicholls. Dikes.
[11]
Dike History. url: http://dutchdikes.net/history/.
68
==PAGE:74==
69 of 70
[12]
The ﬂood of 1953. url: https://www.rijkswaterstaat.nl/en/water/water-
safety/the-flood-of-1953.
[13]
Continuing the work on the delta: down to earth, alert, and prepared. Tech. rep.
[14]
Mayuri’ ’Mei Lin and Rafki’ ’Hidayat. Jakarta, the fastest-sinking city in the world.
Aug. 2018. url: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-44636934.
[15]
1872 Baltic Sea Flood. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1872_Baltic_Sea_
flood.
[16]
The Wadden Sea Dikes. url: https://kyst.dk/english/the-wadden-sea-dikes/.
[17]
Eva Sara and Rønde Nielsen. General rights Coastal protection technologies in a
Danish context. Tech. rep. 2021. url: http://www.vandibyer.dk/.
[18]
Assessment of Flood Hazard and Flood Risk Maps. Tech. rep. 2015. url: https:
//ec.europa.eu/environment/water/flood_risk/pdf/fhrm_reports/DK%
20FHRM%20Report.pdf.
[19]
DHM-2007/Terræn (1,6 m grid). url: https://download.kortforsyningen.dk/
content/dhm-2007terr%C3%A6n-16-m-grid.
[20]
EU oversvømmelsesdirektiv, perioden 2010-2015, 2. plantrin. url: https://miljoegis.
mim.dk/spatialmap?profile=oversvoem2-aabenraa.
[21]
National boringsdatabase (Jupiter). url: https : / / www . geus . dk / produkter -
ydelser-og-faciliteter/data-og-kort/national-boringsdatabase-jupiter.
[22]
Aabenraa. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aabenraa.
[23]
Vejle. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vejle.
[24]
Randers. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Randers.
[25]
Amager. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amager.
[26]
Juelsminde. url: https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juelsminde.
[27]
NATIONAL ENGINEERING HANDBOOK. Drainage of agricultural land. url:
https://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov/OpenNonWebContent.aspx?content=
18367.wba.
[28]
CIRIA. et al. The international levee handbook. CIRIA, 2013, p. 1332. isbn: 9780860177340.
==PAGE:75==
70 of 70
[29]
TEMPO-DAM ® fast, strong, safe & stable! url: https://tempo-dam.com/tempo-
dam/.
[30]
Rapidam - "oﬀwall" temporary barriers. url: https://sites.google.com/site/
floodguards/services/rapidam.
[31]
FIGHTING WATER WITH WATER. url: https://tubebarrier.com/.
[32]
Status lab test Aquanamic projekt forår 2020. Tech. rep. Teknologisk Institut, 2020.
[33]
G. E. Barnes. Soil Mechanics: Principles and Practice. First Edition. London: Macmil-
lan Education UK, 1995. isbn: 978-0-333-59654-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-349-13258-
4.
[34]
Braja Das. Principles of Foundation Engineering. Seventh Edition. Stamford: Cen-
gage Learning, 2011.
[35]
Plaxis. PLAXIS 2D Tutorial Manual CONNECT Edition V20. 2020.
[36]
Sam Helwany. Applied Soil Mechanics: with ABAQUS Applications. First Edition.
Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2007, p. 385. isbn: 9780471791072.
[37]
Muni Budhu. Soil Mechanics and Foundations. Third Edition. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 2011.
[38]
Robin Fell et al. Geotechnical Engineering of Dams. Second Edition. London: Taylor
& Francis Group, 2015.
[39]
Construction Industry Research and Information Association., Civieltechnisch Cen-
trum Uitvoering Research en Regelgeving (Netherlands), and Centre d’études mar-
itimes et ﬂuviales (France). The rock manual : the use of rock in hydraulic engineer-
ing. CIRIA, 2007, p. 1268. isbn: 9780860176831.
