==PAGE:1==
1
Developing a 
REUSABLE PRODUCT-
SERVICE SOLUTION 
for The Delivery and 
TAKEAWAY Food Industry, 
with a User-Centred Design 
Approach
Developed by
Mike Slotsborg
Sneaster Asrat 
Signe Friis Schack 
Astrid Anna Toftegaard
DTU Mechanical Engineering I Design & Innovation I Master Thesis 2021
==PAGE:2==
2
Master Thesis project: Developing a Reusable Product-Ser-
vice Solution for The Delivery and Takeaway Food Industry, 
with a User-Centred Design Approach
Danish Title: Udvikling af en genbrugelig produkt-service 
løsning til fødevare og take-away industrien, med en bruger-
centreret design tilgang
Major 	 	
	
Design and Innovation (Msc)
Semester 	
	
12th
Supervisor 	
	
Michael Deininger
Project Period 	 	
25/1 2021 - 6/7 2021
Number of pages 	
177
Illustrations 	
	
By authors unless other is stated
Publisher 	
	
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Printed	 	
	
25/6 2021
s154658 
Mike Slotsborg 
s154660
Sneaster Asrat 
s153130 
Signe Friis Schack 
s154178
Astrid Anna Toftegaard
	
==PAGE:3==
III
Abstract
To meet the 12th sustainable development goal; ensure sus-
tainable consumption and production patterns before 2030, 
new solutions for minimising the use of resources are needed. 
During the Covid-19 pandemic, the takeaway market has ex-
panded which has resulted in increased amounts of resources 
used for single-use packaging.  
This master thesis has investigated how to develop a Reusable 
Product-Service Solution for The Delivery and Takeaway 
Food Industry, with a User-Centred Design Approach. This 
project has aimed to reduce the consumption of resources 
used for packaging for takeaway meals, as well as creating 
an innovative and user-friendly solution, which serves as the 
favoured alternative to single-use packaging. 
The scope of this project has been to develop a product-ser-
vice solution to be implemented in canteens. Here the canteen 
company Kokkenes Køkken has served as a case-partner. Af-
ter establishing a proof of concept and infiltrating the canteen 
market, the vision is to expand the reusable container system 
to the restaurant takeaway market. 
Through extensive research, including literature studies, 
market analysis, explorative user studies, ideation, concept 
development and evaluation phases, a final product-service 
solution, ROTINE, has been developed. Throughout the de-
sign process methods and approaches from circular economy, 
product-service system design, participatory design and be-
havioral design have been used to explore, analyse and eval-
uate. 
The ROTINE system consists of a reusable container and a 
service platform. The ROTINE container is designed for cir-
cularity and emotional durability. With its organic shape, the 
design is unique and aesthetically pleasing but also function-
al. The service platform includes a website for employees of 
canteens to manage menus, orders, containers and statistics as 
well as an app for consumers to view menus, order takeaway 
and manage their containers. 
Furthermore, the platform aims to motivate both employees 
and consumers by providing insights into the system’s sus-
tainability benefits. Before implementing the ROTINE system 
to Kokkenes Køkken’s canteens further work must be done, 
such as implementing final touches to the container before 
manufacturing and developing the service platform. 
The ROTINE container will break even in terms of CO2 emis-
sion compared to single-use at six uses. After the six uses the 
ROTINE container will become a more and more sustainable 
alternative to single-use packaging. 
==PAGE:4==
IV
Preface
This report is created by Astrid Anna Toftegaard, Mike Slots-
borg, Sneaster Asrat and Signe Friis Schack and serve as 
documentation of the master thesis project Developing a Re-
usable Product-Service Solution for The Delivery and Take-
away Food Industry, with a User-Centred Design Approach. 
The project accounts for 30 ECTS points and has been con-
ducted as the final project on the master of Design and Inno-
vation at the Technical University of Denmark.
Reading Manual
This report consists of 13 chapters,
01/ Introduction 
02/ Literature Study
03/ Design Process
04/ Market research
05/ Project Scope
06/ Explorative User Studies
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
08/ Concept  Evaluation
09/ Choosing the Final Solution
10/ Defining the Final Solution
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
12/ Evaluating the Final solution
13/ Discussion, Conclusion & Reflection
Not all chapters are equally important for gaining an under-
standing of the project and its outcome. Chapter 02/ Literature 
Study can be used as an overview of methods and approaches 
used throughout the report, which can be consolidated while 
reading about the design process. Most chapters include an 
introduction and a summary or conclusion, which highlights 
the most important aspects from the chapter. The concept cat-
alogue concludes chapter 07/Ideation and Concept Develop-
ment and the solution catalogue concludes chapter 11/Detail-
ing the Final Solution. 
Three types of boxes are used throughout the report; notable 
information (blue boxes with blue icon), reflection (red boxes 
with red icon) and key insights (yellow boxes with yellow 
icon), see below. Key insights summarises the most important 
outcomes of either an activity or Section, and is therefore es-
sential to read. Information and reflection boxes include addi-
tional insights, which are not a part of the main report.  
Note that this report is prepared for print. Therefore it is rec-
ommended to use a two-sided view (with frontpage), if read-
ing this document digitally, as some figures are spread over 
two pages (if reading in Adobe Acrobat reader choose Show 
coverpage in two page view).
In addition to the report a Concept Catalogue and a Solution 
Catalogue are developed, which are handed in as separate 
documents. These represent the results of respectively chap-
ter 07/ and chapter 11/ and 12/ and are therefore essential to 
the project. 
Furthermore, there are two types of appendices; A and B. 
Appendix A serves as the main appendices supporting the re-
search and documentation of the project while Appendix B 
consists of original documents such as excel files and unpro-
cessed user data.
The appendices are in the report referred to as: A or B followed 
by the relevant chapter number and the chronological number. 
An example: A08.02 is the second A appendix relevant to the 
/08 chapter. Some appendices might contain several pages.
  
Tables, Figures and Pictures are referred to using the same 
logic: Section number, followed by the chronological number. 
E.g. Figure 04.6.1, meaning the first Figure in Section 04.6. 
All Tables, Figures and Pictures are created by the project 
group unless otherwise is stated.
Furthermore abbreviations are used throughout the report. 
These include; 
BMC = Business Model Canvas 
CE = Circular Economy
KK = Kokkenes Køkken
LCA = Life Cycle Assessment
MVP = Minimum Viable Product
PSS = Product-Service System 
sLCA =  Simple Life Cycle Assessment
TCO = Total Costs of Ownership
Box icons
==PAGE:5==
V
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Maj, Asmus, Teddy and Rune from Kokkenes Køk-
ken for providing valuable insights and feedback throughout 
the project, expressing continuous excitement and occasional-
ly providing us with delicious free lunch. A special thanks to 
Teddy for being our biggest cheerleader on instagram. 
Thank you to Kasper Dunvad from Dutec Plast A/S for guid-
ance in production of the container.  
Thank you to Bo Hagelskjær Larsen for printing our 3D mod-
els at DTU Ballerup
Thanks to all the loyal followers of @the.kitchenteam insta-
gram account.
Thanks to all who participated in our design research and 
evaluation by e.g. filling in workbooks, participating in work-
shops or answering surveys. 
We would especially like to thank Micheal Deininger for the 
last couple of years at the Design Master and for being the 
greatest couples counsler at times where we needed it the 
most! 
Responsibility Overview
All members of the project group have contributed equally to 
the execution of this report and project in general. 
However, some areas of expertise has been distributed:
Sneaster and Mike: 
Fieldwork at Edison huset as well as the co-creation ses-
sion. 
Astrid and Signe:
Generative workbooks and workshops.
Sneaster and Astrid:
Prototyping of UI wireframes in Xd.
Mike and Signe:
Development of the container in CAD software.
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
Abstract	III
Preface	 IV
Reading Manual	 IV
Acknowledgements	
V
Responsibility Overview	 V
01/ INTRODUCTION	
3
01.1 Introduction	4
01.2 Kokkenes Køkken as a Key Partner	
4
01.3 Motivation	 5
01.4 Aim	
5
01.5 References	 5
02/ LITERATURE STUDY	
7
02.1 Introduction	8
02.2 Sustainability, CE and LCA	
8
02.3 Product-Service System (PSS)	10
02.4 Behavioural design	
12
02.5 Participatory design	 15
02.5 Summary 	
19
02.6 References	 19
03/ DESIGN PROCESS	 23
03.1 Introduction	24
03.2 Design Thinking, Agile and Lean Startup	
24
03.3 The Overall Design Process 	 26
03.4 References	 26
04/ MARKET ANALYSIS	
29
04.1 Introduction	30
04.2 Potential Markets	
30
04.3 Key Competitors 	
31
04.4 Competitiveness and Value 	
33
04.5 Three Step Roadmap	35
04.6 Market Size and Feasibility	
36
04.7 Summary	
37
04.8 References 	 38
05/ PROJECT SCOPE	 41
06/ EXPLORATIVE USER STUDIES	
45
06.1 Introduction	46
06.2 Ecosystem 	 46
06.3 Fieldwork at Edison Huset	
47
06.4 MVP Test	
64
06.5 Generative Design Approach 	 66
06.6 Workbook Segmentation	
75
06.7 Survey	
82
06.8 MVP Test Luring with Free Takeaway	 83
06.9 Affinity Diagram // Summary of Insights	
83
06.10 Design specification 	
89
06.11 References	89
07/ IDEATION & CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT	 91
07.1 Introduction 	
92
07.2 Co-creation	 92
07.3 Developing Concepts	98
07.4 Development of the System Concept	
100
07.5 Development of the Container	103
07.6 Concept Catalogue	
107
07.7 References	 107
08/ CONCEPT EVALUATION	
109
08.1 Introduction	110
08.2 MVP Test Evaluation	110
08.3 Feedback from Kokkenes Køkken	
111
08.4 Enacting, Telling, Making 	
114
09/ CHOOSING THE FINAL SOLUTION	
119
09.1 Introduction	120
09.2 Choosing the Final System Concept	
120
09.3 Choosing the Final Container Concept	 120
09.4 Choosing Materials for the Container	
122
09.5 References	 123
10/ DEFINING THE FINAL SOLUTION	125
10.1 Introduction 	
126
10.2 The Updated BMC and Value Proposition	
126
10.3 Behavioural Strategies Used	 126
10.4 Updated Service Blueprint 	
127
10.5 PSS Morphology and Archetypes	
127
10.6 Summary // Mont’s Model	
136
10.7 References	 137
11/ DETAILING THE FINAL SOLUTION	
139
11.1 Introduction	140
11.2 Development of Final System Platform	140
11.3 Development of Final Container	
146
11.4 Solution Catalogue	
153
11.5 References	 153
12/ EVALUATING THE FINAL SOLUTION	
155
12.1 Introduction	156
12.2 TCO and Return of Investment	
156
12.3 Circular Economy 	
159
12.4 sLCA	
160
12.5 Rebound effects 	
163
12.6 Design specification 	 165
12.7 Implementation Plan	 168
12.8 References	 170
13/ DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION & REFLECTION	
173
13.1 Discussion 	 174
13.2 Conclusion	 176
13.3 Reflection 	 177
==PAGE:7==
Appendix A
03/ Design process
A03.01 | Gantt Chart
04/ Market Analysis
A04.01 (1-2) | Descriptions of potential markets
A04.02 (1-3) | Pros and cons
A04.03 (1-3) | Market trends - restaurant and canteen market
A04.04 | Competitors and relevant businesses
A04.05 | Kleen hub
A04.06 (1-2) | reCIRCLE
A04.07 | Testing Kleen Hub 
A04.08 | Overview of Porter’s Five Forces
A04.09 | Back of the envelope calculation - costs
A04.10 | Back of the envelope calculation - earnings and rev-
enue
06/ Explorative User Studies
A06.01 (1-2) | Platforms used by KK for ordering takeaway
A06.02 (1-4) | Fieldwork pictures
A06.03	 | MVP Test, QR codes
A06.04 	| Borrow survey
A06.05	 | Return survey
A06.06 	| Seven different containers
A06.07	  | Feedback from simple test
A06.08	  | MVP add, pamphlet and posters 
A06.09 (1-2) | Placing of MVP material 
A06.10 	| Voting results of three logos
A06.11 	 | Workbook overview
A06.12 	| Notes for workshop pages
A06.13 (1-8) | Workbook pages
A06.14 	| Email instructions to use Miro
A06.15 	| Detailed agenda and presented agenda (physical 
workshop)
A06.16 	| Follow up on workbooks
A06.17 	| Positive brainstorm
A06.18 	| Negative brainstorm
A06.19 	| Pitch of container and system
A06.20 	| Detailed agenda and presented agenda (online)
A06.21 	| Overview of content in Miro
A06.22 	| Workshop outcome (room 1)
A06.23 	| Workshop outcome (room 2)
07/ Ideation & Concept Development
A07.01 	| Outline of co-creation session
A07.02 	| Workshop plan
A07.03 	| Verbal moodboard
A07.04 	| Luups Bakken Moodboard
A07.05 	| Inspirational image
A07.06 (1-3) | Modified design specifications
A07.07 (1-2) | Value propositions
A07.08 (1-6) | System concepts
A07.09 	| Swimlane diagram, the Capitalist
A07.10 	| Swimlane diagram, Greta Thunberg
A07.11 (1-2) | Swimlane diagram, the Community
A07.12 (1-4) | Vision in Product Design Brainstorm
A07.13 (1-6) | Brainstorm of container designs
A07.14 	| Function-means tree (container)
A07.15 (1-4) | Drawn container concepts
08/ Concept Evaluation
A08.01 (1-2) | MVP Follow-up Questionnaire
A08.02 | Feedback on The Capitalist
A08.03 | Feedback on Greta Thunberg
A08.04 | Feedback on Community life
A08.05 (1-2) | Evaluation Matrix and diagram on system (KK)
A08.06 | Feedback on container (KK)
A08.07 | Fan favorites (KK)
A08.08 | Planning of reenactment session
A08.09 (1-3) | Feedback on The Capitalist, Greta Thunberg 
and Community life (users)
A08.10 (1-2) | Evaluation matrix and diagram on containers 
09/ Choosing the Final Solution
A09.01 | Evaluation matrix (master group)
10/ Defining the Final Solution
A10.01 | Mont’s Model
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
A11.01 | User story map, customer app 
A11.02 | User story map, customer website 
A11.03 (1-5) | Customer app wireframes 
A11.04 (1-5) | Desktop wireframes
A11.05 | Inspirational Elements
A11.06 (1-4) | Different CAD versions of the container  
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution 
A12.01 | TCO assumptions
A12.02 (1-4) | TCO scenarios
A12.04 | Chosen materials, manufacturing process and EoL 
potential (single-use packaging)
A12.05 | Chosen materials, manufacturing process and EoL 
potential (reusable container)
A12.06 | sLCA assumptions
A12.07 | Rebound effects
==PAGE:8==
B Appendices
B01.01 | Sisse Fagt (Interview)
B01.02 | Luup Bakken 
B01.03 | Kokkenes Køkken Pamphlet
B06.01 | All Workbooks
B06.02 | Workbook Segmentation
B06.03 | Survey Results
B06.04 | Design Specification v1.0 (Affinity)
B07.01 | Design Specification v2.0 (Discussion KK)
B09.01 | Design Specification v3.0 (Choosing materials)
B11.01 | Presentation Material Kokkenes Køkken
B12.01 | TCO Calculations (excel)
B12.02 | sLCA Calculations (excel)
B12.03 | sLCA data
B12.04 | Final Design Specification
==PAGE:9==
The project group wishes you happy reading! 
==PAGE:10==
01/ 
==PAGE:11==
CONTENT
Introduction
Market trends
Potential markets
Key competitors
Three step roadmap
Appendices
Key competitors
Three step roadmap
INTRO-
DUCTION
What is the scope of this project?
INTRO-
DUCTION
CONTENT
Introduction
Kokkenes Køkken as a Key Partner
Motivation
Aim 
References
==PAGE:12==
4
01.1 Introduction
Climate change is one of today’s greatest challenges. For 
many years convenience has been one of the biggest priorities 
in a world of consumerism, causing a “take-make-dispose” 
mindset towards resources. This linear economy has espe-
cially been dominating when it comes to the takeaway food 
industry, where meals are purchased in single-use packaging. 
Furthermore, the Covid-19 pandemic has caused a significant 
increase in the takeaway food industry, as restaurants have 
been forced to close down for inhouse customers and only 
sell takeaway meals. A study estimates that 2.025 million sin-
gle-use containers are used for food in the European Union on 
a yearly basis (Gallego-Schmid et al., 2019). Another reason 
behind the increase in the takeaway food industry is due to 
the changed perception. Consumers have become aware of 
the possibility to purchase a good and healthy meal from local 
restaurants instead of the common fast foods. This was stated 
in an interview with Sisse Fagt from the National Food insti-
tute of Denmark, see Appendix B01.01 
If the 12th Sustainable Development Goal; ensure sustainable 
consumption and production patterns, set up by the United 
Nations, is to be met by 2030, new solutions rethinking pack-
aging for the delivery and food industry need to be developed 
and implemented (UN, n.d.).
Many initiatives have been made nationally as well as inter-
nationally to help minimise the use of resources and transition 
to a circular economy. Most recently a new waste directive 
has been approved by the European Union, which will be-
come effective by 2025 (EU Commision, 2018). New targets 
include recycling, packaging and landfilling as key elements 
in the Circular Economy Action Plan. The plan states that all 
packaging should be reduced by 65% in 2025. It is expected 
that the new legislation will provide an economic incentive 
to an Extended Producer Responsibility, entailing that the 
producers responsibility, which might also include producers 
of food, is extended to the post-consumer phase of the prod-
uct life cycle. This can potentially have consequences for the 
restaurant industry, if they do not accommodate for a more 
sustainable transition. Therefore the delivery and takeaway 
food industry needs to take action in implementing new al-
ternative solutions for their takeaway to mitigate this future 
legislation. 
01.2 Kokkenes Køkken as a Key 
Partner
Prior to this project a contact has been established to the can-
teen company Kokkenes Køkken (KK) through the special 
course Solution for handling dishes in canteens managed by 
Figure 01.2.1 Luups Bakken
==PAGE:13==
5
01/ Introduction
Kokkenes Køkken and concept solution for packaging of their 
takeaway (see Appendix B01.02). KK manages 25 canteens 
located in different areas in Denmark and are firstmovers 
when it comes to implementing innovative food solutions, 
while they aim to fight food waste and be sustainable. 
KK has developed a concept called SANS! (Danish abbrevi-
ation of: Smag - Ansvarlighed - Neurogastronomi - Sammen-
hæng), which among other things replaces the conventional 
buffet with pre-served meals, creating a smaller variety while 
increasing the quality of the dishes (see Appendix B01.03). 
An important aspect of the SANS! Concept is the implemen-
tation of neurogastronomy, which emphasizes the importance 
of all senses in an eating situation, including the surroundings 
and the sense of touch. Thus, aesthetics as well as the tactile 
feel of tableware is important to the overall eating experience. 
Elements from the SANS! concept have been implemented in 
all of KK’s canteens, and food waste has been reduced to less 
than 10% compared to 30% for traditional canteens according 
to the CEO of KK Maj Toppenberg. 
The output of the special course project was a product design 
of a tray (referred to as Luups Bakken) to make it easier for 
consumers to carry the pre-served meals. Luups Bakken has 
later on been produced in large scale to KK’s canteens. 
As KK wishes to be more sustainable, they have a vision to 
replace single-use packaging for their takeaway. A collabora-
tion for this project has therefore been established with KK, 
ensuring valuable insights to the canteens workways as well 
as experiences with serving food. Furthermore, KK allows the 
project group to test solutions at their facilities. 
The four stakeholders, that have been involved throughout the 
project are;
Maj Toppenberg: CEO of KK and founder of Luups 
ApS (selling Luups Bakken)
Teddy Rosé Losé: Head Chef at the canteen in Edison 
Huset
Rune Skov Petersen: Operations Manager  
Asmus Thorsøe Hamann Quality Manager 
01.3 Motivation
The execution of this project is motivated by the urge to de-
velop a sustainable and circular solution to replace disposable 
takeaway packaging. Choosing to order takeaway is a highly 
convenient choice for consumers, and changing the conven-
tions of the current use-patterns is both necessary in terms of 
reaching the 12th SDG but also highly challenging, as this 
requires a shift in user behaviour. 
As design engineers we are highly motivated to solve this 
wicked problem, by designing an innovative PSS with a us-
er-centred focus, that includes both industrial product design 
as well as holistic system design. Furthermore, working as a 
consultancy closely together with the canteen company Kok-
kenes Køkken is highly motivating, as a real life implementa-
tion of the final solution is feasible. 
01.4 Aim
This project aims to reduce the use of resources used for pack-
aging of takeaway meals to ensure sustainability and circu-
larity. The goal is to design a product-service system, that in-
cludes an innovative reusable container to replace single-use 
packaging, as well as a service platform, that facilitates and 
enhances the use of the container. The ultimate goal is to de-
sign a solution that is not only the most sustainable alternative 
to single-use packaging but also a favoured solution amongst 
the users. 
01.5 References
1.	
EU Commission. (2018). New waste rules will make EU 
global front-runner in waste management and recycling. 
Retrieved February 15, 2021, from https://ec.europa.eu/info/
news/new-waste-rules-will-make-eu-global-front-runner-
waste-management-and-recycling-2018-apr-18_en 
2.	
Gallego-Schmid, A., Mendoza, J. M. F., & Azapagic, A. 
(2019). Environmental impacts of takeaway food containers. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 211, 417–427. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.220 
3.	
UN. (n.d.). Goal 12 | Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. Retrieved June 23, 2021, from https://sdgs.un.org/
goals/goal12
==PAGE:14==
02/ 
==PAGE:15==
CONTENT
Introduction
Sustainability, CE and LCA
Product Service System (PSS)
Behavioural design
Participatory design
Summary
References
LITERATURE 
STUDY
==PAGE:16==
8
02.1 Introduction
Several design practices have to be explored in order to incor-
porate relevant methods and approaches in the further work. 
The circular economy (CE) framework has been investigat-
ed in order to identify relevant design strategies and business 
models for developing a sustainable solution. A method for 
evaluating the environmental impact of the final solution is 
defined as well. The definition and methodologies related to 
developing a product service system have to be mapped out in 
order to act as a baseline throughout the development phase. 
Theories regarding behaviour and behavioral design tools are 
important to account for in order to apply behavioral termi-
nology and design approaches. Lastly, participatory design 
methods are defined and two different approaches highlighted 
to include user in the design process as a part of the user cen-
tered design approach. 
02.2 Sustainability, CE and LCA
Sustainability can be measured and evaluated using a range 
of different frameworks. Some of these are focused on de-
tailing and accounting for environmental impacts that can be 
attributed to products and systems, while other methods are 
more concerned with the broader picture and focus on the 
way resources flow through many different systems. In this 
report two systems are used to evaluate sustainability; circu-
lar economy is looking at the overall structure of the flow of 
resources, business model and product design, while Life Cy-
cle Analysis (LCA) accounts for the environmental impacts 
in more detail. In order to use the two frameworks to evaluate 
the environmental sustainability of takeaway packaging it is 
first important to determine how circular economy and LCA 
are related to environmental sustainability, which is the aspect 
of sustainability that is focused on in this project. 
Circular economy - a regenerative system 
Geissdoerfer et al. (2017) has investigated the differences 
and similarities between sustainability and circular economy. 
They define circular economy as a  
“(...) regenerative system in which resource input and waste, 
emission, and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, clos-
ing, and narrowing material and energy loops. This can be 
achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, 
reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling”. 
It provides an idea of how the economy (understood in a broad-
er sense and not just monetary) could be organised in order to 
minimise resource input and provide guidelines for how to do 
so. The motivations within the circular economy framework 
are clear: To make better use of resources by moving from a 
linear model to a circular one. One of the core elements in a 
circular economy is that economic actors are prioritised. They 
are the ones who drive the change and the benefits for busi-
nesses and governments have been stressed the most. Societal 
benefits are seen as a consequence of the beneficial changes to 
the economy and the environment (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). 
The goals and motivations for sustainability are less clear and 
depend on the perspective of the user of the term and their in-
terests. Within the sustainability framework the societal bene-
fits are just as important as the economic and environmental. 
Sustainability is generally easier to fit into a wide range of dif-
ferent contexts and goals, as the frase is much looser defined 
than that of circular economy. The responsibility for carrying 
out the change is not placed on businesses and governments, 
but is diffusely divided between everyone in a common effort 
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). 
Circular economy does not encompass all the elements of sus-
tainability, but the relationship between the two is not wide-
ly agreed upon in literature, according to Geissdoerfer et al. 
(2017). In some of the literature circular economy is described 
as one of or the main conditions for a sustainable system. Oth-
ers view it as one solution out of many which is beneficial 
when building a sustainable system, but not the only way to 
go. Finally there are those who are more skeptical towards 
connecting circular economy with sustainability, either be-
cause they believe there are a lot of trade offs or because they 
emphasise that circular economy does not encompass all of 
the elements related to sustainability. 
The fact that the circular economy has clear goals and moti-
vations in line with the ambitions for producing a sustainable 
product system in this project, makes it a suitable framework 
for evaluating environmental sustainability as the design 
work progresses. Concrete design tools and business models 
for achieving a circular economy are described by Bocken et 
al. (2016). 
One very relevant business model for slowing down resource 
loops (keeping resources within use for a longer time or 
creating a more efficient use of resources) is the access and 
performance model. The aim of this model is to deliver ac-
cess to a product rather than ownership. A similar term for 
this kind of business model is a product-service system. The 
circular economy strategy is highly relevant for this project, 
as creating a product-service system is the aim for this de-
sign process. Creating a product-service system contributes 
==PAGE:17==
9
02/ Literature Study
to a circular economy, not only because it reduces the need 
for owning physical products. Businesses providing a prod-
uct-service system have a financial incentive to make long 
lasting products and to repair them in order to keep them in 
use for as long as possible, which slows down resource loops 
(Bocken et al., 2016). 
Design strategies for a circular economy includes design for 
trust and attachment. This strategy is focused on creating 
products that the user will love and therefore keep using and 
take care of. Another design strategy is designing for dis- and 
reassembly, which ensures that the product can stay in use 
for as long as possible (as fragile parts can be replaced= and 
effective recycling (parts made of different materials can be 
separated into different fractions). 
Another relevant design strategy described by Bocken et al. 
(2016) is designing for a technological cycle. This strategy 
is primarily focused on recycling materials, either through 
primary recycling (the recycled material has properties equal 
to the original material) or tertiary recycling (materials are 
broken down into their chemical components and remanufac-
tured). 
The circular economy framework provides tangible business 
models and design strategies, which can be used in the de-
velopment of the product service system. It is, however, not 
a framework which can provide exact measurements for en-
vironmental performance, which is why LCA is needed as a 
supplement.  
LCA as an evaluation tool
LCA is a method used to determine the most eco-efficient 
solution among alternatives, as stated by Moltesen & Bjørn 
(2018). It is focused solely on the environmental aspects of 
sustainability, and does therefore not comply with the under-
standing of sustainability as consisting of environmental, so-
cietal and economic dimensions. Moltesen & Bjørn (2018) 
stress that the LCA methodology has been developed in order 
to evaluate technological progress within manufacturing and 
determine the environmental impacts of different alternatives. 
LCA differs considerably from circular economy in the way 
they view the economic dimension of sustainability. The eco-
nomic dimension is prioritised in circular economy as it is the 
driver for change, but Moltesen & Bjørn view this differently. 
They stress that economic sustainability is only relevant when 
any gains are to the benefit of the poor, not just strengthening 
businesses. 
Moltesen & Bjørn see LCA as a valuable tool, but one that 
cannot stand alone in the efforts to transition into more sus-
tainable systems. There are no considerations as to whether 
the product or service is really valuable or necessary in a giv-
en system. 
In conclusion, both circular economy and LCA can be used to 
evaluate a sustainable product service system. They address 
some, but not all of the sustainability dimensions, environ-
ment, society and economy, though both of them address 
environmental sustainability, which is the main focus of this 
project. Design principles and business models aimed at cre-
ating a circular economy can be used in the design process. 
LCA is great for evaluating the final concept in order to deter-
mine whether the designed solution is preferable to existing 
alternatives in regards to environmental sustainability. 
The two frameworks will compliment each other in designing 
and evaluating the solution. 
sLCA - a simplified version
Conducting an LCA is a great way to evaluate the environ-
mental impact of a product or system, but it can be a very 
cumbersome task. The goal of this project is not to investigate 
the environmental impact of a new packaging solution in de-
tail, but rather to provide an estimate of whether the solution 
uses less resources than disposable packaging and roughly the 
order of magnitude. Therefore a simpler version of the LCA 
called a sLCA will be conducted as described by McAloone & 
Bey (2008). McAloone & Bey describes a seven step process. 
In this case four steps have been selected for the analysis: (1) 
describing the  use context, (2) gathering an overview of the 
environmental impact, (3) identifying hotspots and (5) quan-
tifying the environmental impacts. 
Relevant Sections in regards to sustainability 
aspects: 
•	
Section 09.4 Choosing the Materials for the 
Container: Sustainability consideration regarding 
recycling are listed for different materials
•	
Section 12.3 Circular Economy: Circular economy 
aspects of the final solution are described
•	
Section 12.4 sLCA: An sLCA is conducted in order 
to compare the final solution with the single-use 
packaging reference system 
==PAGE:18==
10
A PSS concentrates on minimizing the environmental impact 
of consumption by e.g., closing material cycles, minimising 
consumption by changing how products are used, or/and 
increase the overall resource productivity and efficiency of 
PSSs (Mont, 2002).
Archetypes - classification of PSSs
There are many different classifications of PSSs. This project 
will use the eight archetypical PSS business models (Tukker, 
2004) as the main framework to analyse and develop the PSS 
(see Figure 02.3.1). The model shows the interval from pure 
products to pure services, with the three subcategories in the 
middle being a mixture of both products and services.
Figure 02.3.1 - Main and subcategories of PSS (Tukker, 2004) 
The sub-categories consist of:
•	
Product-oriented; the business model is mainly focused 
on selling products but with some extra services. 
•	
Use-oriented; products are borrowed, rented or leased. 
The provider owns the product. 
•	
Result-oriented; the end product is a result rather than a 
physical artefact. 
The solution will be evaluated based on the three sub-cate-
gories in order to determine the main orientation of the PSS. 
Barriers/limitations related to Product Service Systems
A PSS can demand both tangible and intangible sacrifices of 
the user, by implying the user would have to invest both time 
and effort into the PSS, e.g., learning how to use Bycyklen, 
which could end up lowering the potential market value of the 
PSS (Tukker, 2004). Furthermore, external barriers are often 
related to disagreements between stakeholder, suppliers, pro-
viders and/or customers, which can lead to distrust. Whereas 
the internal barriers often are related to barriers within an or-
02.3 Product-Service System 
(PSS)
Developing product-Service Systems (PSSs) has been a trend 
during the last decade. This trend is seen in systems such as car 
and bike-sharing systems, where users buy access to a service 
which allows them to go from A to B. The reason for the in-
creasing interest over the last couple of years is due to various 
benefits that PSSs provide, such as shifting towards sustain-
ability by applying changes in production and consumption 
patterns (Mont, 2002). As mentioned in the previous Section 
the PSS business model is one strategy for developing a circu-
lar economy, as described by Bocken et al. (2016). 
The most common motivational factors for choosing to devel-
op a PSS business model is to increase focus on sustainability, 
accessibility, availability, and ease of use, which is crucial in 
the conquest of developing a sustainable, reusable solution to 
the delivery and takeaway food industry (Mont, 2004). Other 
drivers would be related to legislation because of the rising 
focus on environmental impact, circular economy, efficient 
use of resources and new market possibilities (Mont, 2004).
This project seeks to utilise already existing use patterns to 
promote a more sustainable and profitable solution which 
counteracts consumerism. Additionally, our society and the 
rest of the world are finally starting to invest in the environ-
ment and sustainable initiatives. This will move markets away 
from costs and focus on quality and added value for the rel-
evant stakeholders (Mont, 2002). Therefore, by utilising the 
potential PSSs offer, it is possible to create value for both cus-
tomers, suppliers, users, the environment, and the rest of the 
entire system of interaction.
Tangible products and intangible services
As of now, there is no consensus on the definition of a PSS 
system, however, several prominent authors have come up 
with their definition, where one definition by Tukker and 
Tischner has been chosen as a starting point for this project. 
 
“Product service (PS): a value proposition that consists of a 
mix of tangible products and intangible services designed and 
combined so that they are jointly capable of fulfilling integrat-
ed, final customer needs. Product-service system (PSS): The 
product service including the (value) network, (technological) 
infrastructure and governance structure (or revenue model) 
that ‘produces’ a product service.” 
(Tukker & Tischner, 2006)
==PAGE:19==
11
02/ Literature Study
PSSs provide. 
For companies, PSSs provides new business opportunities, 
hence staying competitive in an ever-evolving market. More-
over, PSSs can enhance and maintain the customer relation-
ship between customer and provider, increase affordability, 
and disconnect needs from material consumption. Further-
more, the economic improvements are related to a constant 
cash flow and closer contact with the customers during the life 
cycle (Mont, 2004). Therefore, it is a way for companies to 
compete on other value parameters than manufacturing cost 
alone (Kjaer, Pigosso, & McAloone, 2017)
Furthermore, manufacturing companies’ service components 
will have the possibility to add extra value to their products, 
by refurbishing or upgrading. It will also help them under-
stand the consumer preferences. 
For service companies, product components will extend and 
differentiate their service and make their service more tangi-
ble for common users (Mont, 2002).  
Lastly, the interesting aspect for companies to buy into prod-
uct service systems is that they have the ownership. Therefore, 
they would have to manufacture and develop solutions, prod-
ucts etc, which last longer and utilize energy and resources. 
For the government and society, PSSs will demand new pol-
icies due to the increased awareness and promote sustainable 
initiatives of consumption. Additionally, it could assist in cre-
ating new jobs due to new markets, and therefore less unem-
ployment (Mont, 2002). 
ganization, such as costs, conceptual design etc.
It is also necessary to find a social system or infrastructure 
which accepts or supports the initiatives of a proposed PSS 
solution. Finally, the most common barrier is to get customer 
acceptance of service-oriented solutions, such as Bycyklen 
(Mont, 2004). Furthermore, consumers might not be enthu-
siastic about going towards ownerless consumption (Mont, 
2002). This might be a hurdle in the future development of a 
use-oriented PSS for the delivery and takeaway food indus-
try. It is therefore important to have a user centered approach 
when developing the PSS. 
The potential barriers of the final solution will be evaluated in 
Section 12.6 (implementation plan). 
Sustainability benefits related to Product Service Systems
The sustainable benefits of PSS systems are described by 
Bocken et al. (2016) as a part of the Access and performance 
model (see section 02.2) from a circular economy point of 
view. The sustainability aspects are however investigated in 
the PSS literature as well. 
Consumers/users have the possibility of choosing between 
a wider variety of services and products, e.g., leasing, rent-
ing, maintenance and repair services. Therefore, the user has 
more options and can decide how much ownership they want 
through subscriptions- and payment-based models. This will 
make expensive things more accessible, provide the con-
sumer with new high combinations of products and services 
(Mont, 2002). Together, all this will add value to the user ex-
perience and motivate users to enter the market and choices 
System level assessment
Scenario assessment
PSS design option
assessment
Scope
Purpose
PSS consequence
PSS comparison
PSS optimisation
Baseline situation
without PSS
Pre- deﬁned alternative
PSS itself
External reference system
Internal reference
system
Reference 
system
Figure 02.3.2 - Scopes for environmental  
assessment of PSS (Kjaer et al., 2017)
==PAGE:20==
12
food in single-use packaging ensuring ultimate convenience. 
The users will only have to pick and choose their meal, buy 
it, oftentimes get it delivered at the door, and finally throw out 
the remains when done, without having to do any cleaning. 
When aiming to replace single-use packaging with a reusable 
solution, it is essential to understand the underlying factors 
that drive human behaviour to ultimately design for sustain-
able behaviour. Behavioural design is therefore examined to 
explore how frameworks, principles and tools can be used to 
persuade and design for a desired behaviour. 
Behaviour
The dual process theory (DPS) states that there are two cog-
nitive states of the human mind that controls decision making 
and behaviour; system 1 and system 2 (Miltenberger, 2011 
and Nielsen et al., 2017). 
•	
System 1 (unconscious) are the automatic, autonomous 
processes that ensure fast decision making. 
•	
System 2 (conscious) is the rational mind, that requires 
working memory and decision making processes are 
therefore more deliberate and slower (see Figure 02.4.1)
System 2
System 1
Unconscious
Reﬂex
Involuntary control
Eﬀortless
Intuition
Conscious
Reason
Concentration
Eﬀort
Analytics
Figure 02.4.1 - characteristics of system 1 and 2
The behavioural design consultancy firm KL7 describes two 
states of the cognitive mind as the monkey and the business 
suit (Mølgaard et al., 2015), where we as humans generally 
perceive humans as business suits, with the ability to make 
reasonable and well argumented decisions. However, in re-
ality it is the monkey that controls most of our behaviour 
and habits. The monkey is controlled by external or internal 
triggers, e.g. needs, situations, senses, rather than rational ar-
guments. The two states of the cognitive mind help describe 
why human behaviour is oftentimes difficult to change, as it is 
seldomly enough to target the rational and logical mind. 
Scoping the system
As stated by Kjaer, Pigosso, & McAloone, 2017, there are 
three ways to scope the development of a new PSS; PSS con-
sequences, PSS comparison and PSS optimisation, where the 
PSS consequence and optimisation both have an external ref-
erence system and the PSS optimisation has an internal refer-
ence system. In this project the scope is to go from a product 
reference system to a PSS and the scope is therefore PSS con-
sequence (see Figure 02.3.2). 
The Proteus handbook by Finken et al. (2013) will be used in 
the further development of the PSS and supplemented by an 
environmental evaluation in the form of an sLCA (see section 
02.2).
The methods and framework will help aid the understanding 
of all relevant customers/users, the key elements of the com-
pany’s technology offerings, and the value delivery process 
from supplier to final receiver of the PSS (Finken et al., 2013).
Relevant Sections for the PSS framework
06/ Explorative user studies
•	
The current canteen context has been explored 
through an ecosystem map (section 06.2)
10/ Defining the final solution
•	
The solution has been described through a ser-
vice blueprint (section 10.4)
•	
A summary of the final solution is presented 
through Monts model (section 10.6)
11/Detailing the final solution
•	
The total cost of ownership has been calculated 
(section 12.2)
12/Evaluating the final solution
•	
Rebound effects have been accounted for (sec-
tion 12.5). 
•	
Potential barriers are listed (section 12.7). 
•	
A roadmap for the further work has been created 
(section 12.7)
02.4 Behavioural design
When developing a reusable product-service solution for the 
delivery and takeaway food industry, it is relevant to exam-
ine behavioural design, as such a solution will most likely 
require a change in the user behaviour or habits. The current 
use patterns of the takeaway industry is to buy ready made 
==PAGE:21==
13
02/ Literature Study
Besides targeting either unconscious or conscious behaviour 
change (implicit/explicit), Nielsen et al. (2017), suggests fur-
ther elements to consider when developing a strategy; 
•	
The three factors: Motivation, Ability and Trigger 
(this will be further described in the Persuasive design 
section)
•	
Whether the solution should either positively encour-
age the new behaviour or negatively discourage the old 
behaviour. 
Furthermore, strategies can be either structural or informa-
tional. Structural strategies aim to change contextual factors, 
by e.g. limiting access to products that facilitates a certain 
behaviour (Cash, et al., 2017). Where informational strategies 
are more focused on changing knowledge, awareness, norms 
and attitudes (Abrahamse & Matthies, 2016). Structural inter-
vention strategies can be very efficient, however, removal of 
choice is often perceived as negatively encouraging. 
Figure 02.4.3 suggests a way to categorise four types of inter-
vention models according to whether it is targeting the uncon-
scious or conscious cognitive state of mind and whether it is a 
structural or informational intervention. The four intervention 
models are described as following (Michie et al. 2011): 
•	
Coercive: creating expectation of punishment or cost
•	
Decisive: deciding by removing choice or ability
•	
Seductive: unconsciously and gradually affecting be-
haviour
•	
Persuasive: using communication to induce positive 
or negative feelings or stimulate action (persuasive 
approaches are well researched and described in liter-
ature, and are therefore investigated further in the next 
section).
Khadilkar et al. (2020) claims that most behavioural design 
strategies have a complex mix of behavioural design elements 
to enable a target behaviour, and a robust behavioural design 
process includes the exploration of different strategies and in-
tervention models. 
Persuasive design
Persuasive design is described by Fogg (2009), who states 
that there are three factors that are essential to affect a per-
son’s behaviour; motivation, ability and triggers/prompts. He 
affirms “that for a person to perform a target behavior, he or 
she must (1) be sufficiently motivated, (2) have the ability to 
Behavioural design
Khadilkar & Cash (2020) propose the following definition for 
behavioural design: 
“Behavioural design has the goal to explicitly and ethical-
ly realise positive behaviour, desired by both the individual 
and society; the object of design is behaviour itself, which 
is explicitly understood and designed for using behavioural 
theories and brought into effect by actively changing user 
psychology with the help of artefacts.”
According to Mølgaard et al. (2015), the main purpose of be-
havioural design is to bridge the gap between intentions and 
actual actions. 
When looking at a behaviour as an action, this can be de-
scribed by the ABC model, as consisting of three linear steps 
(Miltenberger, 2011); 
Antecedent (trigger)
Behaviour
Consequence (result)
The antecedent is the step where the mind is triggered to be-
gin a certain behaviour, and the consequence is the outcome 
of the behaviour. Interventions to change behaviour can hap-
pen in all three steps. 
Furthermore, behavioural design strategies can target either 
the unconscious state of mind (system 1) - an implicit inter-
vention, or the conscious (system 2) - an explicit intervention. 
Implicit and explicit interventions can through an artefact 
be coupled with one of the ABC steps. Strategies can also 
combine multiple steps of the ABC model (see Figure 02.4.2) 
(Cash, et al., 2017).
Antecedent
Behaviour
Consequence
System 2
Conscious
System 1
Unconscious
Artefact
User
Figure 02.4.2 - Behavioural design strategies
==PAGE:22==
14
influence the ability (money and time is often a 
tradeoff)
3.	
Physical effort; if too much physical effort is re-
quired to perform the target behaviour it is no longer 
simple 
4.	
Brain cycles; thinking in new ways or of difficult 
issues requires ability, and can therefore be a barrier 
for performing a target behaviour 
5.	
Social deviance; going against the norms or breaking 
the rules can be difficult
6.	
Non-routine; people are more likely to follow their 
usual routines, and asking them to perform a be-
haviour that is unfamiliar might not be simple
The “simplicity profile” is different from person to person, as 
some people have more money than others, while some have 
more time, etc. 
The third factor in the FBM are triggers, these can be divided 
into three different categories; (1) spark, (2) facilitator and 
(3) signal. Spark is a type of a trigger that sparks users with 
low motivation provoking any of the core motivators. If the 
user has high motivation but low ability a facilitator can be 
used, as facilitators are triggers that make it easier to perform 
the action. Signals as triggers are most efficient when users 
are both highly motivated and have high ability, these mainly 
serve as reminders. 
perform the behavior, and (3) be triggered to perform the be-
havior.” All three factors must furthermore occur at the same 
time. The Fogg Behavior Model (FBM) describes the rela-
tionship between the three factors (see Figure 02.4.4). 
If the user is highly motivated, he or she is more likely to per-
form the target behavior (go above the action line), whereas if 
the user is not motivated, it becomes more difficult to perform 
the action. The same goes for the ability, the easier it is for the 
user to perform the action, the likelier it is for the user to cross 
the action line. Thus higher motivation and ability increases 
the likelihood for the user to perform a target behaviour. How-
ever, high motivation and ability is not enough, as the user 
also needs to be triggered for a behaviour to occur. 
There are three main motivators; (1) sensation: pleasure/pain, 
(2) anticipation: hope/fear and (3) social cohesion: accep-
tance/rejection. Ability refers to how easy it is for the user to 
perform the action. Humans are fundamentally lazy, and are 
generally resistant to learning new things. Therefore simplici-
ty is key. Fogg describes six elements of simplicity; 
1.	
Time; if a target behaviour takes too much time, the 
behaviour is not simple 
2.	
Money; if people are financially limited this can 
Figure 02.4.3 - Mapping of intervention 
models
Coercive
Decisive
Seductive
Persuasive
Conscious
active interventions
Unconscious
implicit interventions
Structural
negatively encouraging
Informational
positively encouraging
==PAGE:23==
15
02/ Literature Study
02.5 Participatory design
This project aims to understand the user experience when in-
teracting with takeaway packaging. In order to map out the 
full experience it is important to not only listen to what users 
have to say, but actively involve them in the design process 
as well. Participatory design methods aim to uncover the 
latent user experience and behaviours and will therefore be 
used in the research, design and evaluation phase of this proj-
ect. Working with participatory design methods is one of the 
methods chosen for developing a user centered design. 
A wide range of participatory design methods exists (see e.g. 
Hansen et al., 2019), resulting in a variety of different methods 
and approaches. The participatory design approach applied in 
this project is based on elements from Sanders & Stappers 
(2012), who call their approach generative design, and Beyer 
& Holtzblatt (1998) contextual design approach. How the two 
approaches define participatory design, how they understand 
the user experience and which methods they apply throughout 
the design process will be outlined below. Additionally the 
co-creating method is introduced and its relation to participa-
tory design defined. 
Section especially relevant in regards to be-
havioural design methodolgy 
06/ Explorative User Studies
•	
Workbook content: how questions about partic-
ipants behaviour have been incorporated into 
workbooks (see Section 06.5)
•	
Insights to the Participants Behaviour with 
Packaging: evaluating user behaviour from the 
filled in workbooks (see Section 06.6)
•	
Survey: evaluating user abilities and motiva-
tions (see Section 06.7)
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
•	
07.4 Development of the System Concept: high-
lighting factors (motivation, ability and triggers) 
for each concept (see Section 07.4)
09/ Defining the Final Product-Service system
•	
Behavioural design: describing the behavioural 
strategies used in the final solution (see Section 
10.3)
Figure 02.4.4 - Fogg’s behaviour model and subcompo-
nents (adapted from Fogg (2009))
Motivation
Ability
Target 
Behavoir
Increasing likeliness to perform target behaviour
Action line
Triggers
Type of triggers
Spark
Facilitator
Signal
1.
2.
3.
Main motivators
Sensation: pleasure/pain
Anticipation: hope/fear
Social cohesion: 
acceptance/rejection
1.
2.
3.
Elements of simplicity
Time
Money
Physical eﬀort
Brain cycles
Social deviance
Non- routine
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
==PAGE:24==
16
Understanding the users experience - design research
As the users are experts in their own experience the challenge 
is to gain the insights that they can provide. Both Sanders & 
Stappers (2012) and Beyer & Holtzblatt (1998) agree that deep 
understanding cannot be gained through interviews alone, as 
the users will seldom be able to express their emotions, de-
sires and knowledge. Important elements of their experience 
are hidden from the conscious mind. How these latent parts of 
the experience are accessed differs within different participa-
tory design methods. 
Beyer & Holtzblatt (1998) emphasises the importance of be-
ing present with the user as they are in the context of the ex-
perience. Their approach is focused on designing IT systems 
for work practices, so they are stressing the importance of the 
designer actively participating in the work practice through 
the master/apprentice relationship, as described in the previ-
ous section. The context itself will probe the user to reveal 
much more details about their experience, as they are able to 
express tacit knowledge to the designer by actually playing 
out their experience in the familiar context. 
Sanders & Stappers (2012) have a slightly different approach. 
In their approach the experience happening now can not be 
separated from the memories from our past, which should be 
investigated before moving forward towards the dreams for 
the future. This framework, which Sanders & Stappers call 
the path of expression (2012) is based on the perception of 
creativity introduced in 1926 by Graham Wallas in The Art of 
Thought. Wallas states that it is essential for creativity that the 
mind is introduced to work that focuses on the problem and 
then has time to work with the problem in the unconscious 
mind (see Figure 02.5.1). 
Explore the present
Think about the 
past
Find the 
underlying layers
Move towards 
the future
Figure 02.5.1 - Sanders & Stappers framework for using the present 
and the past to imagine the future (adapted from Sanders & Stapper 
(2012)) 
Definition of participatory design
Sanders & Stappers (2012) describes participatory design as 
“an approach to design that attempts to actively involve the 
people who are being served through design in the process 
to help ensure that the designed product/service meets their 
needs”. 
Participatory design can be seen as a way to ensure a more 
democratic design process, as users are actively engaged in 
developing solutions that benefit them (Hansen et. al, 2019)
An important element in participatory design is using phys-
ical artefacts to communicate with users and organise user 
insights (Sanders & Stappers, 2012). 
It can be used primarily for the fuzzy front end of design as 
Sanders & Stappers (2012) do it (though it is argued that gen-
erative design approaches can take place at any point in the 
design process), but tools and approaches from participato-
ry design can also be used throughout the entire design pro-
cess and even as an evaluation tool, as suggested by Beyer & 
Holtzblatt (1998) or Hansen et. al (2019). 
The role of the intended end user is an important character-
istic of participatory design, but what exactly the role is can 
differ within different approaches. In the participatory design 
approach described by Beyer & Holtzblatt (1998) the rela-
tionships between the user and the researcher/designer should 
be characterised as a master/apprentice relationship. The mas-
ter is the user, who will show and explain their actions while 
the apprentice (designer) listens and asks questions.
Sanders and Stappers (2012) describes this relationship a little 
differently within generative design research. They define the 
role of the researcher as being a facilitator, where the main 
job of the researcher is to allow the user’s creativity to be 
expressed by introducing them to tools that allow them to do 
so. The designers role within workshops is to bring all of their 
expertise within their field and practical experience with pro-
totyping. 
Despite some differences in the way the role of the user and 
the designer/researcher is described one thing is widely agreed 
upon: The user is the expert of his/hers own experience. This 
mindset is at the core of participatory design. 
Beyer & Holtzblatt do not explicitly state that they view their 
practice as participatory design, but it makes sense to include 
their methods and approaches here, as the user is actively in-
volved in the contextual design practice. 
==PAGE:25==
17
02/ Literature Study
In practice, sensitizing is often done by asking users (who are 
later participating in a generative workshop session) to docu-
ment their experiences with the wider research topic for a pe-
riod of time before the workshop (Sanders & Stappers, 2012). 
This is typically done by asking them to write a diary or fill in 
a workbook provided by the research team (which can include 
prompts, placeholders for pictures, stickers, etc.). 
Observation - what users do
Both generative design and contextual design highlights that 
observations of the users actions is an important part of un-
derstanding their experience, but active observation through 
the master/apprentice relationship is at the very core of the 
contextual design approach described by Beyer & Holtzblatt 
(1998). 
The master/apprentice approach to design research has the 
observation of the experience as the starting point for all in-
teractions. The goal of the observation is therefore in line with 
the generative design approach, which is also aiming at un-
covering tacit and latent knowledge. 
Observation in the contextual design framework should not 
stand alone, as continuous questions from the apprentice are 
essential for uncovering further details and encourages the 
user to talk about previous experiences. The uncovering of 
Sanders & Stappers furthermore stress the importance of us-
ing three different types of research tools, which are distin-
guished by what kind of activity the users are participating 
in: Do, Say and Make. The three categories are addressing 
different parts of the timeline, as do techniques are concrete 
and focused on the present (could be enactment or roleplay-
ing exercises), make techniques can be more abstract and are 
good for retrieving memories or imagining the future (e.g. 
prototyping) and say techniques can assist in covering the rest 
of the user experience (including more traditional methods 
such as interviews, surveys and storyboards). 
Participatory design applied
Participatory design can be applied to all parts of the design 
process to ensure that the user is included. Figure 02.5.2 be-
low illustrates participatory design methods that are applied 
from the early research phase to the evaluation of a prototype. 
Sensitizing
This step is an important part of generative design research 
(it is not a part of the contextual design approach), as it intro-
duces the users to the context of a problem and allows the un-
conscious mind to work with the subject matter before being 
creative in a generative session. 
Figure 02.5.2 - Participatory design process in generative 
design and contextual design 
Ellen McArthur 
Foundation
Sensitising
Learn what users 
do in their usual 
context
Observe what user 
do (reinactment)
Hear what users 
say (interviews)
See what users 
make (prototyping)
Make prototypes 
as props for 
reenactment
Use storyboards to 
tell the story
Make changeable 
prototypes and 
reiterate on the 
spot
5 work models
Analysis on the 
wall
Sanders & Stappers
Beyer & Holtzblatt
Both
==PAGE:26==
18
feel, they are objects that are meant to be interacted with and 
actively used in a conversation with the user. It is important 
that this prototype does not look finished or unchangeable, as 
the goal is to invite the user to make changes and suggestions. 
The user is encouraged to act out the intended scenario and 
use the prototype actively in order to reveal how the changes 
in design might affect the interaction. 
Sanders & Stappers agree with Beyer & Holtzblatt that tra-
ditional prototyping activities are not enough to explore the 
more complex design challenges we face today. They argue 
that the way a designer bridges the gap to the user is by mak-
ing, telling and enacting. Making activities is e.g. to build tra-
ditional prototypes, but also props that can be used to make 
stories and enactments more realistic and detailed. Enacting 
focuses on the actual interaction and therefore enactment with 
props gives a much deeper experience than simply looking 
at a prototype. Storytelling allows the designer to place the 
design in the emotional context. 
A combination of the methods described by Sanders & Stap-
pers and Beyer & Holtzblatt will be used throughout this 
design project. The main focus will be on generative design 
research, including activities such as sentisising and do, say 
and make activities. Elements from contextual design will, 
however, be applied as well, with a special focus on active 
observations through the master/apprentice relationship. As 
described in the previous sections the two approaches have 
many things in common, and are therefore easy to combine. 
Co-creation
Co-creation methods are closely related to participatory de-
sign, as it is a way to engage users in the design process. 
Mattelmäki & Visser (2011) describe the relation between 
participatory design and co-creation as tight, as both design 
approaches are concerned with empowering the user to take 
part in the design process. 
Co-creation practices are characterised by changing the role 
of the designer into a facilitator, who provides tools for the 
user and prompts them to come up with their ideas and con-
cepts (Mattelmäki & Visser, 2011). Generative design has 
co-creation elements in the workshop formats, as participants 
are asked to prototype and come up with new concepts with 
the help of probs delivered by the design team. 
Co-creation practices will be implemented throughout the de-
sign process. 
previous experiences is in line with the generative design ap-
proach as well as described above, as the memories of the past 
are processed before imagining the future. 
The generative design approach does not have rigid require-
ments for where observations should take place, as it could be 
both in the context of the experience or within a generative 
workshop session. 
Analysis
All of the user data collected in the previous phase needs to 
be organised in an effective manner in order for it to become 
useful during the design phase. 
In the contextual design approach analysis is done by creating 
five different workmodels, each focused on a specific aspect 
of the context: physical, artefact, sequence, flow and cultural. 
The models map out important elements in the user context 
and forces the designer to notice details within the five areas. 
Notes taken during the interaction with the user will inform 
the models and all of the information gathered will contrib-
ute to an affinity model, which is the first point where the 
designers gather all observations and quotes into meaningful 
statements. After creating the affinity models (which is an ac-
tivity that all members of the design team participate in) the 
work models are consolidated and updated based on the new 
collective insights. 
Generative design has the same basic approach to data han-
dling. It is stressed by Sanders & Stappers that the extent of 
the analysis depends on how big the project is, what the re-
sources are and what the designers want to gain from the user 
data. One option is to do an analysis on the wall, which is very 
similar to the affinity diagram created in the contextual design 
analysis. The data in the generative session is organised into 
themes, rather than statements. 
Bridging the gap
Effective communication with the user is an essential part of 
maintaining user involvement when progressing from the re-
search phase to the design phase. How this process is facil-
itated and how much the users are engaged depends on the 
approach to participatory design. A traditional way to achieve 
this is by making prototypes.  
In the contextual design approach described by Beyer & 
Holtzblatt (1998) the designers will make the first prototypes 
based on all of the insights they have gathered in the initial 
research phase. These prototypes should not, however, be 
viewed as models for how the end product should look or 
==PAGE:27==
19
02/ Literature Study
02.6 References
1.	
Abrahamse, W. & Matthies, E. (2016). 21 Informational 
strategies to promote pro- environmental behaviour : Chang-
ing knowledge , awareness and attitudes. In Environmental 
Psychology: An Introduction.
1.	
Beyer, H. & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual Design - Defin-
ing Customer-Centered Systems. Academic Press. 
2.	
Bocken, N. M. P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., & van der Grinten, 
B. (2016). Product design and business model strategies for 
a circular economy. Journal of Industrial and Production 
Engineering, 33(5), 308–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/216810
15.2016.1172124
3.	
Cash, P. J., Hartlev, C. G., & Durazo, C. B. (2017). Be-
havioural design: A process for integrating behaviour 
change and design. Design Studies, 48, 96–128. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.destud.2016.10.001 
4.	
Finken, K. H., McAloone, T. C., Avlonitis, V., Garcia i Mateu, 
A., Andersen, J. A. B., Mougaard, K., Neugebauer, L. M., & 
Hsuan, J. (2013). PSS Tool Book. In A workbook in the PRO-
TEUS series. http://www.proteus.dtu.dk/Results/Workbooks
5.	
Fogg, B. (2009). A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. 
Photochemistry and Photobiology, 56(5), VII–VIII. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-1097.1992.tb02203.x
6.	
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M. P., & Hultink, 
E. J. (2017). The Circular Economy – A new sustainability 
paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production (Vol. 143, pp. 
757–768). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcle-
pro.2016.12.048
7.	
Hansen, N. B., Dindler, C., Halskov, K., Iversen, O. S., 
Bossen, C., Basballe, D. A., & Schouten, B. (2019). How 
participatory designworks: Mechanisms and effects. ACM 
International Conference Proceeding Series, 30–41. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3369457.3369460
8.	
Kjaer, L. L., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017). A 
guide for evaluating the environmental performance of Prod-
uct/Service-Systems. Retrieved from http://www.ecodesign.
dtu.dk/PSS-GUIDE
9.	
Khadilkar, P. R., & Cash, P. (2020). Understanding be-
havioural design: barriers and enablers. Journal of Engineer-
ing Design, 2020(10), 508–529. https://doi.org/10.1080/09544
828.2020.1836611 
10.	 Mattelmäki, T. & Visser, F.  (2011). Lost in Co-X. World Con-
ference of Design Research, the Netherlands.
11.	 McAloone, T. C., & Bey, N. (2008). Miljøforbedringer 
gennem produktudvikling: En guide. Retrieved June 7, 2021, 
from https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2389469441
12.	 Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. (2011). The 
behaviour change wheel: A new method for characterising and 
designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation 
Science, 6(1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-42
13.	 Miltenberger, R. (2011). Behavior modification: Principles 
and procedures. Belmont, CA, USA: Wadsworth Publishing.
14.	 Mont, O. (2002). Clarifying the concept of product-service 
system. Journal of Cleaner Production, 10, 237-245.
15.	 Mont, O. (2004). Drivers and barriers for shifting towards 
more service-oriented businesses: Analysis of the PSS field 
and contributions from Sweden. The Journal of Sustainable 
Product Design, 2(3/4), 89–103. https://doi.org/10.1023/b:-
jspd.0000031027.49545.2b
16.	 Moltesen, A & Bjørn, A. (2018). LCA and Sustainability. In 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K. & Olsen, S. I. (Eds.)  
Life Cycle Assessments - Theory and Practice (pp. 43-55). 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark: Springer.  
Section especially relevant for participatory 
design methods are: 
06/ Explorative User Studies
•	
Fieldwork at Edsion Huset has been conducted 
using the master/apprentice method and five 
workmodels have been used to organise insights 
(see section 06.3)
•	
Generative design methods have been used to 
research current takeaway experiences (see 
section 06.5)
•	
Insights from the participatory design research 
has been analysed (see section 06.6. and 06.9)
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
•	
A co-creation session has been conducted with 
stakeholders from Kokkenes Køkken (see sec-
tion 07.2)
02.5 Summary 
The literary study forms the foundation for the methodologi-
cal toolbox used throughout the research and design process. 
Designing for sustainability can be done by applying ele-
ments from the circular economy framework such as business 
models and design strategies. A simpler form of the life cycle 
analysis called sLCA can be used for evaluating the environ-
mental impact of the final solution. 
The PSS framework is closely linked to the circular econo-
my framework, as creating a PSS is one of the strategies for 
achieving a circular economy. Designing a PSS is related to a 
wide range of methodologies, which can be used in creating, 
describing and evaluating the solution. 
Behavioural design methods can be used for changing be-
haviour by introducing coercive, decisive, seductive and per-
suasive intervention models. Ability, motivations and triggers 
will determine whether the user will perform the targeted be-
haviour. 
Participatory design methods empowers the users to share 
their experiences and thereby affect the design methods. Gen-
erative design and contextual design are both forms of partic-
ipatory design, but represent different approaches, which can 
supplement each other in the further design process. 
As the theoretical foundation has now been established the 
rest of the design process can be approached. 
==PAGE:28==
20
17.	 Mølgaard, C., Borum Olsen, S., Bentholm Hansen, S., & 
Holm Sørensen, M. (2015). Adfærdsdesign #1: Aben og Jak-
kesættet. KL.7. 
18.	 Nielsen, C., Daalhuizen, J., & Cash, P. (2017). Behavioural 
Design Workbook: An Introduction to Behavioural Design 
and its Application in Copenhagen Commune. DTU Manage-
ment Engineering & Byens Drift.
19.	 Sanders, L. & Stappers, P. J. (2012). Convivial Toolbox - Gen-
erative Research for the Front End of Design. Laurence King 
Publishing. 
20.	 Tukker, A. (2004). Eight types of product-service system: 
Eight ways to sustainability? Experiences from suspronet. 
Business Strategy and the Environment, 13(4), 246–260. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.414
21.	 Tukker, A., & Tischner, U. (2006). New Business for Old 
Europe: Product-Service Development, Competitiveness and 
Sustainability. Greenleaf Publishing Ltd.
==PAGE:29==
21
02/ Literature Study
==PAGE:30==
22
03/ 
==PAGE:31==
23
CONTENT
Introduction
Design Thinking, Agile and Lean Startup
The Overall Design Process
References
DESIGN 
PROCESS
==PAGE:32==
24
03.1 Introduction
To develop a reusable product-service solution for the de-
livery and takeaway food industry, a user-centred design ap-
proach is key. Changing the behaviour and shifting the owner-
ship of packaging requires a good understanding of the users. 
But in order to develop a feasible and sustainable business 
model a business perspective needs to be incorporated into 
the approach when designing for the holistic system. Further-
more, as the main aim is to reduce the use of resources used 
for packaging of takeaway meals to ensure sustainability and 
circularity, design for sustainability and circularity is equally 
important. Thus it was decided that the three main perspec-
tives of designing the PSS would be; user centred design, 
business design and design for sustainability and circularity 
(see Figure 03.1.1). 
Business
User- centred 
Design
 CE and
Sustainability
Developing a Reusable Product- Service Solution 
for The Delivery and Takeaway Food Industry
Figure 03.1.1 Three perspectives incorporated in the design 
process
03.2 Design Thinking, Agile and 
Lean Startup
To find the best design methodology and structure the initial 
plan of the design process, elements from Design Thinking, 
Agile Development and Lean Startup were investigated. 
Design Thinking supported by Agile principles and Lean 
Startup
Design thinking is a methodology applied for approaching 
complex and ill-defined problems (wicked problems) in an ef-
fective and creative way. The five stages of the methodology 
(emphatise, define, ideate, prototype and test) helps in under-
standing the unmet needs of the user to reduce risks associat-
ed with launching a product or service, generating innovative 
solutions and making it easier to learn and iterate faster. 
However, design thinking lacks clear directions on how to ap-
proach the problem-solving part from a project management 
perspective, where being efficient, competitive and costly 
plays a great role. Incorporating the four principles of agile 
can supplement the prior methodology by introducing con-
straints in time, prioritisation and focus in the design process. 
This synergy can facilitate an effective production and imple-
mentation of creative ideas. Furthermore, the business aspects 
of the agile-design thinking hybrid are supplemented with the 
Lean Startup methodology (see Figure 3.2.1). While the two 
Figure 03.2.1 - The first iteration on how 
the process of the project was envisioned
Launch product to 
test remaining 
parts of the 
business model
Deliver
Empathise
Deﬁne
Deﬁne requirements
Feedback on 
hypothesis
Exploration of market 
attractiveness
Review
Measure
Deploy
Learn
Ideate
Design
Build MVP
Prototype
Develop
Quick tests
/experiments
Test
Test
Test
Initial hypothesis
==PAGE:33==
25
03/ Design Process
other methodologies focus on testing the product against the 
users, the Lean Start-up focuses on testing the product against 
the market to ensure that the product sells. The following 
sub-sections will provide a further description of the elements 
used in the agile and lean start-up methodology. 
The Agile Manifesto
The agile methodology is based on the Agile Manifesto draft-
ed by a group of software developers in 2001 (The Agile 
Manifesto for Software Development, n.d.). It emphasises on 
four principles that demand for the use of iterative methods 
for product development:
1.	
Individuals and interactions over processes and 
tools (research, define and ideate phases)
2.	
Working software over comprehensive documen-
tation 
3.	
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation 
(research, define and ideate phases)
4.	
Responding to change over following a plan (proto-
type, test phases)
These principles are appropriate in projects where the level of 
uncertainty is high, as it provides an agility to respond to un-
known unknowns with less impact on time and cost  (Darrin 
& Devereux, 2017). It is important to highlight that the sec-
ond principle is not as applicable as the others in this project, 
as it is a part of an academic report where documentation is 
required. In addition, working agile is often associated with 
software development, where it is easy to deploy and deliver 
working software. However, this is not a software project, but 
a design project as a part of a master thesis. A working proto-
type is valued over comprehensive documentation, but within 
the lines of reason.
Lean startup
The Lean Startup methodology builds on many of the ideas 
seen in management and product development including de-
sign thinking, agile development, lean manufacturing and 
customer development (Ries, 2011). However, the method-
ology differs by introducing the following five principles to 
scientifically manage and build a successful business and 
startup:
1.	
Entrepreneurs are everywhere (ability to design 
new solutions under uncertain conditions)
2.	
Entrepreneurship is management (ability to manage 
in a context of extreme uncertainty)
3.	
Validated learning (learn how to build a sustainable 
business)
4.	
Innovation accounting (measure progress, set up 
milestones, prioritise work)
5.	
Build-Measure-Learn (turn ideas into products, 
measure customer response, pivot or persevere)
The primary purpose of using Lean Startup in this project 
is not to create a startup, but to build a sustainable business 
model by following some of the principles described above. 
Principle 5 explaining the Build-Measure-Learn will espe-
cially be used to continuously adjust the developed solution 
according to the measured customer response. This will be 
done by creating Minimum Viable Products (MVP) through-
out the design process to test the elements in the PSS. 
Approaching the agile aspect by Scrum 
While the agile principles provide the overall guideline, the 
specific steps are found in different methods such as Crystal 
Clear, Scrum, Kanban, etc. The design process in this project 
is supported by aspects of the Scrum framework in a degree 
found relevant to promote a better response to changing stake-
holder requirements, improved team communication, morale 
and lastly also increased development productivity, in har-
mony with the Design Thinking principles and Lean Startup 
methodology. 
The overall activities in this design process are mapped out in 
a Gantt Chart (see Appendix A03.01) with milestones indicat-
ing the start of a new phase. Each phase is seen as a sprint with 
a maximum duration of five weeks. By the end of each sprint, 
a physical product is released in the sense of e.g. a literature 
study, written document, prototype, etc. This redefinition to 
include a physical product is an adaptation to the framework, 
as the sprints are usually restricted to the prototype and test 
phase in a software development context (Cooper, 2016). The 
daily work is organised by two Daily Scrum meetings to in-
spect and adapt progress towards the Sprint Goal. The first 
Scrum meeting is performed in the morning before initiating 
the work where the plan for the day is set, while the second 
one is performed by the end of the day as a wrap up.
The remaining activities are performed as described in the 
Scrum Guide, however, in a less formal way as e.g. the roles 
of being Product Owner, Developer and an adaptation of the 
SCRUM master role was implemented, as one member of the 
group was responsible for the time management and external 
communication each week.  (Schwaber, 2015). Furthermore, 
the sprints were intended to be more usable in the ideate, pro-
==PAGE:34==
26
The branch of business design is of main primary focus in 
the initial stages of the design process in order to ensure that 
the PSS is developed for a feasible market. Hereafter, the 
user-centred design approach has served as the main driver 
for the development of the solution. CE and sustainability 
strategies have been used towards the end of the design pro-
cess to help make final decisions on e.g. materials as well as 
evaluating and comparing the final solution against single-use 
packaging. 
03.4 References
1.	
Cooper, R. G. (2016). Agile-stage-gate hybrids. Research 
Technology Management, 59 (1), 21–29. https://doi.org/10.10
80/08956308.2016.1117317 
2.	
Darrin, M. A. G., & Devereux, W. S. (2017). The Agile Man-
ifesto, design thinking and systems engineering. 11th Annual 
IEEE International Systems Conference, SysCon 2017 - Pro-
ceedings. https://doi.org/10.1109/SYSCON.2017.7934765 
3.	
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup - How Today’s Entre-
preneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically 
Successful Businesses. Crown Business.
4.	
Schwaber, K. (2015). The Scrum Guide. Soft-
ware in 30 Days, (November), 133–152. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781119203278.app2  
5.	
The Agile Manifesto for Software Development. (n.d.). Man-
ifesto for Agile Software Development. Retrieved February 1, 
2021, from https://agilemanifesto.org/  
totype and test phases as described in (Cooper 2016), where 
versions of the product (prototypes/MVP) will be presented 
and tested with the stakeholders in a serie of build-test-feed-
back-revise iteration or as described as the build-measure-
learn principle.
03.3 The Overall Design Pro-
cess 
The overall design process has been very iterative with many 
changes made to the Gantt chart. Figure 03.3.1 shows an over-
view of the methodologies and activities used in the different 
phases; 04/ Market Analysis, 05/ Project Scope, 06/ Explor-
ative User Studies, 07/ Ideation and Concept Development, 
08/ Concept Evaluation, 09/ Choosing the Final Solution, 10/ 
Defining the Final Solution, 11/ Detailing of the Final Solu-
tion and 12/ Evaluating the Final Solution. Furthermore these 
activities are structured in three tracks, representing the three 
perspectives described in the introduction; user centred de-
sign (red), business design (blue) and design for sustainability 
(green).
The output of each phase, which feeds into the next phase is 
mapped as a grey arrow. 
04/ Market 
research
06/ Explorative
User Studies
05/ Project 
Scope
07/ Ideation and Concept 
Development
Business
User- centred design
Market size and
potential customers
Competitiveness
Market trends
Key competitors
Exploration
of markets
Development
Arena
MVP test
Generative 
workbooks
Generative 
workshops
Field study and
5 work models
Ecosystem
Swimlane
Investigation of 
behaviors
Survey
Aﬃnity
diagram
Design
speciﬁcation
BMC
Value
Proposition
Co- creation
workshop
Service blueprint
System
morphology
ViP
Container
morphology
Moodboards
Magic thing
Ideation 
based on 
settings
Choosing 
between 
initial 
concepts
Evaluation of 
design 
speciﬁcation
Mock- ups
Concept
catalogue
Roadmap
Figure 03.3.1 The Overall Design Process
==PAGE:35==
27
03/ Design Process
10/ Deﬁning the 
Final Solution
08/ Concept 
Evaluation
 CE and
Sustainability
09/ Choosing the 
Final Concepts
11/ Detailing the 
Final Solution
Enacting, 
telling, making 
workshop
 Evaluation
matrix
Feedback from 
KK
PSS Archetype
Service blueprint
Value proposition
BMC
Behavioral design
strategies
Choosing materials
for the container
Mont's
model
Ecosystem
map
User stories and
user story map
sLCA
12/ Evaluation of 
the Final solution
Wireframing App
Wireframing
website
Feedback session
with KK
Exploration
of shapes
Production
of container
Mock- ups
Prototyping
Drawing in CAD
TCO and return of 
investment
MVP evaluation
CE strategies
MECO
Rebound eﬀects
Key competitors
Roadmap
PSS concept
evaluation
Solution
Catalogue
Design
speciﬁcation
PSS morphology
Design for 
disassembly
==PAGE:36==
04/ 
==PAGE:37==
CONTENT
Introduction
Potential Markets
Key Competitors
Competitiveness and Value
Three Step Roadmap
Market Size and Feasibility
Summary
MARKET 
ANALYSIS
==PAGE:38==
30
04.1 Introduction
In order to develop a successful PSS it is important to look at 
the business perspective of the reusable product service sys-
tem by exploring the delivery and takeaway food industry. A 
wide range of different industries could match this category, 
ranging from online supermarkets to to-go coffee purchased 
from a cafe. The following distinctions have been provided, in 
order to make the intended system a bit more defined,
 
1.	
“Food” is defined as some kind of meal, not exclu-
sively drinks or groceries. 
2.	
The system has to include some  kind of transport. A 
hospital serving food to patients does not fit within 
this description, as the meals never leave the premise. 
Transport can mean both delivery and consumers 
collecting the meal themselves. 
3.	
The system has to include some kind of packaging. 
Plates carried from one place to another do not count 
as packaging.
 
The purpose of the market analysis is to identify markets 
which match these distinctions and evaluate the possibilities 
and challenges in creating a reusable packaging PSS solution. 
This analysis will provide a basis for identifying blue oceans 
within potential markets by looking at opportunities and key 
competitors. An approach for entering the selected market 
will then be presented. Lastly, calculations regarding the size 
of the market and feasibility will be presented. 
 
The market analysis has been conducted primarily through 
desk research, which has been great for finding published 
data on the markets investigated, analysing other markets and 
published information on key competitors. Information about 
market trends and specific data for the canteen market has 
been provided by the CEO from KK (see Section 01.2). In 
order to understand the business model of key competitors 
research “in the field” has been conducted as well, though 
these activities have been limited due to the pandemic. A 
competitor’s product service system has been tried out simply 
by downloading the app and visiting one of the collaborating 
coffee shops. 
04.2 Potential Markets
Based on the defined distinctions described in the previous 
Section, potential markets were identified in a brainstorm. 
The six potential markets for implementing a packaging PSS 
are listed on Figure 04.2.1. 
The markets have been identified in an initial discussion. The 
descriptions for each market (see Appendix A04.01), pros and 
cons (see Appendix A04.02) are based on prior knowledge 
and assumptions about the market. The purpose of the over-
view was to gain an understanding of what kinds of takeaway 
markets exist and which ones would be interesting to further 
analyse. 
Evaluation Matrix
The six markets were mapped in a matrix with feasibility on 
one axis and impact on the other, in order to evaluate which 
market provides the best opportunity, see Figure 04.2.2. Some 
of the markets were thought to have a limited impact, as it 
is estimated that a reusable packaging solution will not have 
a big environmental impact nor a high potential profit. One 
example is the meal box market, where a lot of the packaging 
is being brought back to the producers already. Other markets 
have a high impact, but low feasibility, as it would either be 
hard to find collaboration partners or the system is too com-
plex, such as the supermarket convenience meals, where the 
amount of involved stakeholders makes it hard to enter the 
market. 
The takeaway for restaurants market was estimated to have 
the biggest impact, but is also difficult to enter due to the com-
plexity of dealing with a diverse range of restaurants. The can-
teens are in a sweet spot with a combination of high feasibil-
ity, e.g. due to existing contacts within the canteen business, 
and high impact, as a lot of people have access to a canteen 
through their workplace. Therefore it was decided to further 
explore both the market of canteens and takeaway for restau-
rants. There are relevant trends within both of these markets, 
Figure 04.2.1 - Initial brainstorm on 
potential markets
Delivery of 
food for 
elderly 
people
Supermarket 
convenience 
meals
Catering
Meal 
boxes
Take- away 
for 
restaurants
Canteens
==PAGE:39==
31
04/ Market Analysis
such as increased focus on sustainability, which makes the 
two markets even more relevant to explore (see Appendix 
A04.03). Key competitors and the general competitiveness of 
the two markets could now be explored.  
04.3 Key Competitors 
Competitors and relevant businesses were explored through 
desk research. An  overview can be found in Appendix 
A04.04. 
Based on the research three key competitors were highlight-
ed; Kleen Hub and Dabba in Denmark and reCIRCLE in 
Switzerland and Germany. 
Kleen Hub is the only player in Denmark providing a reus-
able solution for takeaway meals with the vision of building a 
network in the restaurant and cafee industry (KleenHub.dk). 
Kleen Hub is still a fairly new concept, and has not yet dom-
inated the market in Denmark, though the business is grow-
ing rapidly, as they have expanded from very few locations to 
about 60 in the last couple of months. Kleen Hub is therefore 
viewed as a direct competitive threat. They provide both box-
es for takeaway and reusable cups, see Appendix A04.05. 
An even younger company, Dabba, has established a business 
based on selling lunch in reusable boxes, which they deliver 
by bike within the 8000 postal code around Aarhus (Dabba.
dk). Dabba is therefore viewed as a key competitor, as they 
are both delivering takeaway in reusable boxes as well as 
competing with the existing canteens. 
In Switzerland reCIRCLE has succeeded in making a sustain-
able business of providing a network of reusable packaging, 
with about 1500 partner restaurants (reCIRCLE.ch). reCIR-
CLE therefore provides a good case to learn from, but should 
also be viewed as a competitive threat, as they are likely to 
expand to the rest of Europe and has already expanded to 
Germany. More information about reCircle can be found in 
Appendix A04.06.
An overview of the three competitors can be seen in the info-
boxes presented on the next page. 
Figure 04.2.2 - Evaluation matrix of the 
seven different markets
High feasibility
High impact
Canteens
Low feasibility
Take- away for 
restaurants
Low impact
Meal boxes
Catering
Supermarket 
convenience 
meals
Delivery of food for 
elderly people
Feasibility
complexity of system e.g. 
amount of stakeholders
possibility of collaboration
Impact
amount of resources 
saved
potential proﬁt
==PAGE:40==
32
Kleen hub
Reusable food containers and cups for the 
take-away industry
Consumers borrow either a box or a cup for free, 
and will have to return the box within 10 days 
and the cup within 5 days, otherwise they will 
buy the item for 100 DKK. Consumers can ex-
tend the borrowing period by 3 days for 10 kr. 
Restaurants pay a subscription to Kleen Hub 
who owns the products (prices and agreements 
are unknown).
Copenhagen
14 	
Restaurants
39 	
Cafés
reCIRCLE
Reusable food containers and cups for the 
take-away industry
Consumers pay 10 CHF (68,75 DKK) for the re-
CIRCLE BOX with the possibility to keep it as 
long as they want or return it to any partner. 
Restaurants pay a subscription to reCIRCLE and 
can order products and hand them out to their cus-
tomers. There are two subscription models; the 
‘basic’ for 150 CHF (1.032 DKK) annually and the 
‘flatrate subscription’ for 180 CHF a year (1.238 
DKK). It is unclear how the models differentiate 
and whether the subscription provides unlimited 
access to boxes.
Switzerland & Germany
1500 	
Restaurants
==PAGE:41==
33
04/ Market Analysis
and the transparent but very foggy lid made the coffee look 
unpleasant. 
The experiences with the KleenHub system and the overview 
of relevant competitors painted a picture of a developing mar-
ket where there is still room for innovation and improvement. 
An evaluation of the general competitiveness and potential 
value was, however, still needed in order to evaluate which 
market to choose for further development. 
04.4 Competitiveness and Value 
To analyse and define the competitiveness of the potential 
market segments within canteens and takeaway from restau-
rants Porter’s Five Forces Framework was used (as described 
by Kippenberger, 1998). The five factors are buyers power, 
suppliers power, threat of new entry, threat of substitution and 
intensity of rivalry, which are evaluated and listed in Appen-
dix A04.08. 
The market competitiveness is in general quite low for both 
of the market segments with the only real competitor being 
Kleen Hub in Denmark in the takeaway from restaurant mar-
ket. It is therefore concluded that a solution for both markets 
is feasible. However, a rise of competitors is expected within 
the near future, especially for the restaurant industry consid-
ering the growing sustainability focus and the roll-out of the 
new EU legislation in 2025, which intends to reward compa-
nies with sustainable design solutions and economic incentive 
(European Commission, n.d.). 
Companies that provide more single-use packaging, claiming 
to be more sustainable, are viewed as indirect competitors. An 
example is the Danish Re-Bag that has developed biodegrad-
able packaging, which has a reduced environmental impact 
compared to conventional bags left in nature (https://www.
re-bag.dk/). 
To gain more insights on the user experience of Kleen Hub the 
thesis group went to Coffee Collective, the first partner café 
(launched the 17th of February), to try out the system (see 
Figure 4.3.1 and Appendix A04.07). 
Here it was found that Coffee Collective had created their 
own monetary incentive for its customers to use Kleen Hub’s 
system by providing a 10% discount on coffee sold in Kleen 
Hub’s cups . Through an informal interview with the baris-
ta, it was found that Coffee Collective pays a “very small” 
amount for the service, and was happy to be able to provide a 
sustainable alternative to single-use cups. 
Tracking of containers worked by scanning a barcode with 
the app, which linked a container to the personal app-account. 
As cups could be returned in all of Coffee Collective loca-
tions, Coffee Collective had to distribute the cups internally 
between their different coffee shops. 
The barista did not like the design of the cups, as she thought 
it was way too big for the coffee portions. She also pointed 
out that the lid was very unfortunate, as it could not be sealed 
Dabba
Prepare and deliver lunch meals by bike to 
people working from home.
Consumers pay 55 DKK per meal, and 5,4 DKK 
per kilometer. Dabba only delivers meals within the 
postal code 8000.
Aarhus
05 	
Restaurants
==PAGE:42==
34
tainer design, but is connected to the service provided as well. 
The service can make it easier for consumers to buy takeaway 
from their canteen and thereby provide an easy choice for din-
ner, without having to feel bad about single-use packaging. 
There are significant benefits for the canteens as well, as 
implementing a sustainable PSS will be great for compa-
ny branding. The solution has the potential to increase the 
amount of takeaway sold from canteens and provide them 
with a great way to make a profit on leftovers. The PSS might 
even be a way to reduce expenses for packaging, as there will 
be no need to continuously buy single-use packaging. 
Both the canteen market and the restaurant market provide 
great opportunities for implementing a reusable packaging 
PSS, as investigated in the previous sections. The focus for 
the further design process was therefore planned out in a three 
step roadmap, which is described in the next section. 
As there is not yet any solution helping canteens sell take-
away in reusable containers (Dabba does not collaborate with 
canteens), developing such a solution would create a whole 
new value curve. As a part of a blue ocean strategy tool the 
four actions framework (Chan & Mauborgne, 2005) was used 
to investigate the new value curve. Factors that should be 
reduced, raised, created and eliminated to create value were 
mapped (see Figure 04.4.1). The exercise helped the team get 
an overview of which factors are relevant for a value prop-
osition, as well as certify that creating a reusable packaging 
system for canteens has great potential for being a blue ocean 
strategy. 
A reusable packaging PSS for canteens can provide benefits 
for both consumers (the people who buy takeaway from the 
canteen) and canteens. Creating a reusable container for take-
away makes it possible to optimise the quality of the contain-
er, as it is used several times. The reusable container can be 
tailored to enhance the eating experience of the meal, unlike 
most of the disposable packaging currently available. The val-
ue created for the consumer is not limited to an enhanced con-
Figure 04.3.1 - Display of Kleen Hub’s cups and 
system in Coffee Collective
==PAGE:43==
35
04/ Market Analysis
cluding bringing back the containers. In terms of behavioural 
design, initiating the new PSS in canteens rather than for take-
away restaurants is expected to be a lot easier.  The consum-
er’s ability related to the PSS is higher in the canteen market, 
as consumer will go to the canteen at work most days, which 
will make it easy for them to create a routine of e.g. bringing 
back the containers. This will also save them time and effort, 
and they will not have to think too much about planning. 
Therefore it is seen as a great advantage to start changing the 
mindset of consumers relationship with packaging (and re-
sources in general), in a setting where the ability to partake in 
the PSS is higher. 
Furthermore, it is an advantage to start developing a solution 
for canteens, as a collaboration with Kokkenes Køkken has 
already been established. One of their canteens can therefore 
be selected for developing an MVP and tactically serve as a 
beachhead market (Sull, 2004). Once proof of concept has 
been made, the solution can be rolled out to the rest of Kok-
kenes Køkkens canteens as well as at other canteen providers 
(see Figure 04.5.1). When the solution is mature within the 
04.5 Three Step Roadmap
One of the great challenges with implementing a new reusable 
product-service system for takeaway packaging, is changing 
the users’ mindset. Users will have to get into a new routine of 
not throwing out their packaging, but reusing it instead, which 
will require them to follow new steps of the given system, in-
Reduce
Create
Raise
Eliminate
A new 
value curve
Canteens
Continuous expenses 
single- use packaging
Material waste
Storage
Food waste
Consumers
Time used for ﬁguring 
out dinner
Worry during transport 
(due to potential 
leakages in low quality 
containers)
Going out with trash
Society
Throw away culture
Canteens
Easier way of selling 
take- away
New business 
opportunities: delivery 
of food for home- oﬃce
Service system
Way to handle leftovers
Consumers 
Incentive to bring 
leftovers home
Canteens
Company branding 
CSR)
Consumers
Quality of packaging 
(insulation, micro- wave ...)
Experience (neurogastronomy)
Convenience when 
transporting (by good product 
design)
Society
Environmental 
sustainability
Consumers
Feeling bad about 
consumerism
Canteens
Single- use packing
Continuous purchase
Figure 04.4.1 - Four actions framework 
for developing a PSS for canteens
Figure 04.5.1 - Three step roadmap 
TAKEAWAY 
RESTAURANTS
CANTEENS
KOKKENES 
KØKKEN
Step 1
Proof of 
concept 
Step 2
Expanding to 
the canteen 
market
Step 3
Expanding to 
the takeaway 
market
==PAGE:44==
36
 
Containers as a service
For this business model consumers do not buy the container 
up front but instead pay a monthly subscription fee in order to 
use the container service. The monthly fee varies between 30-
40 DKK, depending on how many customers are in the sys-
tem, e.g. for the smallest market at Edison Huset the month-
ly fee is 40 DKK.. The expenses are the same as for selling 
containers plus expenses for developing an app to support the 
service and salary for the personnel who have to keep the ser-
vice running smoothly, e.g. distribute the containers between 
canteens or restaurants.
 
Estimates for the size of the takeaway from restaurant market 
and canteen market were conducted. 
 
Takeaway market
15% of Danes between 15 and 74 years old eat takeaway at 
least once a week according to a survey performed by Coop 
Analyse (Coop analyse, 2009). There were 4,353,657 Danes 
in this age group at the end of 2020 (Danmarks Statistik, 
2021), resulting in 653,498 Danes who eat takeaway at least 
once a week.
 
Canteen market
2,303,400 Danes were full time employed in 2019 (Danmarks 
Statistik, Fakta om arbejdsmarkedet, 2021) . 34% of all full 
time employed (or students) are eating lunch at their canteen 
on most days during the workweek (Landbrug og Fødevarer, 
2016), which amounts to 783 165 Danes.
 
Kokkenes Køkken manage canteens equal to 1% of the can-
teen market according to CEO of KK Maj Toppenberg, so ap-
canteen market, the solution can be expanded to the restaurant 
takeaway market.
04.6 Market Size and Feasibility
Back of the envelope calculations were conducted in order 
to investigate the market potential of the canteens from Kok-
kenes Køkken, the canteen market in general and the restau-
rant takeaway market. All calculations can be found in Ap-
pendix A04.9 and A04.10.  
 
It should be noted that the following calculations are focused 
on the revenue and expenses for the business providing the 
PSS (e.g. if the master group decided to create a start-up). It 
was assumed at this point that this company will sell direct-
ly to the consumer buying takeaway (from either canteens or 
restaurants).
 
A lot of factors were unknown at this point, including the 
business model for the reusable container system. Two simple 
business models were therefore used for the calculations:
 
Selling containers
This business model is based on consumers buying the con-
tainers. The revenue for this model is based on the number 
of containers sold minus the production cost and the cost of 
maintaining a website as a selling platform. The price of the 
container is dependent on how many containers are produced 
(as fixed costs such as paying for an injection mould are dis-
tributed between more containers). The price ranges from 100 
to 150 DKK. It is assumed that consumers buy one container 
each within the first year. After the first year 5% buy another 
container each year (as they have lost the container/need an-
other one, etc.)
Table 04.6.1 - Overview of potential 
market size and potential revenue
Kokkenes Køkken
Canteens
Takeaway restaurants
Frequent users in system
7831
783156
653498
Potential customers (10%)
783
78315
65349
Revenue when selling containers
First year [DKK]
72,804
6,166,932
6,433,298
Five years [DKK]
81,541
9,982,712
10,417,664
Revenue when selling subscription
First year [DKK]
- 353,424
23,504,361
22,856,072
Five years [DKK]
306,150
159,652,441
156,470,767
==PAGE:45==
37
04/ Market Analysis
consistent revenue over time. It is also possible to get a sig-
nificantly higher revenue by using a subscription model. The 
potential canteen market is, surprisingly, a bit bigger than the 
restaurant market. It should be noted that the calculations on 
market size are rough estimates. Even if the canteen market 
is bigger it is still desirable to reach the restaurant market as 
well.
 
In conclusion both the restaurant and canteen market are big 
enough to make a feasible business case for developing a re-
usable container PSS for takeaway. The market analysis can 
now be summarized. 
04.7 Summary
This chapter has explored the business perspective of devel-
oping a PSS system. Firstly, relevant markets within the take-
away food industry have been explored in order to identify the 
ones most suitable for developing a reusable packaging solu-
tion. Secondly, key competitors have been identified within 
these markets in order to determine the competitiveness of 
the market and develop a blue ocean strategy. This analysis 
formed the basis for a plan on how to enter the market through 
a three-step plan. Lastly, back of the envelope calculations 
have been conducted in order to determine the potential and 
feasibility of entering the targeted markets.
Creating a solution for the takeaway from the restaurant mar-
ket would undoubtedly have a big impact, but it is also a very 
complex system with a lot of different actors. The system is 
open ended, as the customer might never come back to the 
same restaurant. The takeaway from the canteen market is 
more overlooked but could potentially increase its relevance 
over time. The canteen system has the advantage of fewer ac-
tors and the fact that employees come back to the same place 
again and again. The main focus was therefore chosen to be 
the canteen market, which later on can be expanded to the 
restaurant takeaway industry. 
 
The most direct competitor within the takeaway from restau-
rant market in Denmark is Kleen Hub, who have already 
launched their reusable containers for takeaway. Competitors 
abroad such as reCIRCLE have reached further maturity with 
a substantial network of restaurants. On the canteen market 
the company Dabba is a key competitor, as they are selling 
lunch options for employees working from home in reusable 
containers.
Back of the envelope calculations show that there is a mar-
proximately 7,831 people frequent the canteens most week-
days.
 
In the following calculation it is assumed that 10% of the mar-
ket are willing to buy the reusable containers or subscribe to 
the container service.
 
Very rough calculations of the potential revenue of each mar-
ket were now conducted. 
 
The calculations show (unsurprisingly) that the bigger the 
market, the bigger the revenue. It might not be feasible in 
the short term to develop a solution only for customers fre-
quenting the canteens belonging to KK, as the cost will be 
bigger than the earnings from subscription payments. In the 
case of a limited customer base it will be wiser to sell contain-
ers instead, as the income up front will make it a sustainable 
business within the first year. The subscription model does, 
however, provide a much better business model for making a 
Calculations
The calculations represented here are very rough repre-
sentations of what the cost structure might look like for 
two different business models. All expenses are based 
on estimates. The production price for each container 
has been determined with guidance from Maj Toppen-
berg.
 
The two business models should be seen as very min-
imal concepts, which illustrates two ends of the busi-
ness model spectrum for the PSS – From a product 
oriented to a result oriented focus. Representing the 
two business models in the calculations provided an 
understanding on how selling containers and selling a 
subscription affect revenue on the short and long term.
The takeaway market was expected to be bigger than 
the potential for the canteen market, but the market 
size estimates show that the canteens might have more 
potential customers. How much takeaway is sold from 
canteens currently is not factored into the calculations, 
as one of the main goals for the PSS system is to pro-
mote and facilitate selling takeaways from canteens. It 
is therefore deemed more relevant how many consum-
ers are regularly using their canteens, as they are the 
potential customers. 
==PAGE:46==
38
ket potential for both the restaurant and canteen market. The 
estimated potential market is bigger for canteens than for the 
restaurant market, but both markets can potentially include 
more than half a million consumers. It would be beneficial to 
go from a product-oriented focus, where containers are sold 
directly to consumers, to a more use- or result-oriented focus 
where consumers pay a subscription to ensure a recurring rev-
enue flow. However, selling containers as a business model 
will be more feasible for a startup as a starting point.  
 
With the conclusion of the market analysis the rest of the proj-
ect can be scoped, which will be outlined in the following 
chapter. 
04.8 References 
1.	
Coop analyse (2009). Madplanlæggere spiser mindre 
takeaway. Retrieved from  https://coopanalyse.dk/analy-
se/11_50-take-away/
2.	
Dabba, n.d. Jordnær frokost i øjenhøjde. Retrieved from 
https://dabba.dk
3.	
Danmarks statistik, 2021. Fakta om arbejdsmarkedet https://
www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/bagtal/2019/2019-02-15-fakta-om-ar-
bejdsmarked
4.	
Danmarks statistik, 2021. Statistik banken. Retrieved from  
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/default.as-
p?w=1440
5.	
European Commission, n.d. A European Strategy for Plastics 
in a Circular Economy. Retrieved from https://www.europarc.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Eu-plastics-strategy-bro-
chure.pdf
6.	
Kim, W. C. & Mauborgne, R. (2005). Blue Ocean Strategy: 
How to create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Com-
petition Irrelevant. Harvard Business School Press.
7.	
Kippenberger, T. (1998). Strategy according to Michael 
Porter. The Antidote, 3(6), 24–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/
eum0000000006625
8.	
Kleen Hub, n.d. Smart coffee cups and food boxes. Retrieved 
from  https://www.kleenhub.com 
9.	
Landbrug og fødevarer, 2016. Kantinegæstens stemme. https://
lf.dk/tal-og-analyser/forbrugere-og-trends/2016
10.	 Re-Bag, n.d. Vi designer og producerer bæredygtige tasker, 
poser og bokse. Retrieved from  (https://www.re-bag.dk/).
11.	 reCIRCLE, n.d. We choose to reuse! Retrieved from  https://
www.recircle.ch/en/ 
12.	 Sull, D. N. (2004). Disciplined entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 46(1).
==PAGE:47==
39
04/ Market Analysis
==PAGE:48==
05/ 
==PAGE:49==
PROJECT 
SCOPE
==PAGE:50==
42
Based on the initial literature study and the market analysis 
the scope of this project is defined as: 
This project will explore how to replace single-use pack-
aging with a reusable product-service system. The project 
will first of all focus on developing a solution for the 
canteens of Kokkenes Køkken, while the long-term vision 
is to expand to the rest of the canteen market and later on 
the takeaway market for restaurants. 
The product-service system will include a reusable container 
and a system to support the use of the containers. 
The development arena of this project is mapped to get an 
overview of all relevant actors (see Figure 05.1). The three 
markets included in the three step roadmap are mapped as; 
Kokkenes Køkken (red circle), canteens (green circle) and 
takeaway restaurants (blue circle). The project scope (red 
dashed line) revolves around KK and the canteens in gen-
eral, where only the consumers of takeaway restaurants are 
included as actors within scope (as these are users that have 
valuable experience with takeaway). Furthermore, Danish 
legislation, food authorities and the assessment “Verdensmål i 
Værdikæden” are included in the project scope (view Appen-
dix A04.03 for further description of these actors). 
The main users of the scope that the further study will focus on 
are the canteens (also referred to as partners), their employees 
and their customers, also referred to as the consumers.
KK has a great interest in transitioning their canteens to a new 
product-service system both to mitigate the new legislation 
as well as improving their sustainable CSR profile. Exploring 
and analysing user behaviour will therefore mainly be focused 
around the consumers of the system, as it is expected chang-
ing behaviour for these users will be the greatest challenge.  
When assessing the final PSS solution in terms of environ-
mental factors, the scope for the product-service system is 
categorised as a PSS consequences scope, as the PSS solution 
will replace a current solution that is not a PSS. Thus, the pur-
pose of the environmental assessment will be a system-level 
assessment with the baseline situation without PSS as an ex-
ternal reference system (see Figure 02.3.2). 
TAKEAWAY
(RESTAURANTS)
PROVIDERS
CANTEENS
Take- back systems 
(DK Pant)
Subscription meals
(Simplefeast)
Whole sale meals
(from markets)
Danish legislation
EU Regulations
UN: Sustainable 
Development Goals
Miljøstyrelsen
Food service
CPH Municipality
(for elderly)
Waste management
"Kostråd"
Ministry of Food 
Agriculture and Fisheries
"Verdensmål i 
Værdikæden"
Global Compact
Danish Industry
Danish Restaurants and 
Cafes (DRC)
DAGROFA
(Waste management 
organisation)
Plastic change
WWF
Ellen McArthur 
Foundation
Plastic Industry
(Design Guide)
Food approval
(certiﬁcation)
KOKKENES 
KØKKEN
LEGISLATION/INTEREST GROUPS
Maj
Customers at canteens
Takeaway consumers
KleenHub
Restaurants/cafes
reCIRCLE
Manufactures of 
single- use plastic
Hungry.dk
Wolt
JustEat
Too Good To Go
PROJECT SCOPE
Figure 05.1 - Development arena of the prod-
uct-service system
==PAGE:51==
43
==PAGE:52==
06/ 
==PAGE:53==
CONTENT
Introduction
Ecosystem
Fieldwork at Edison Huset
MVP Test
Generative Design Approach
Workbook Segmentation
Survey
MVP Test Luring with Free Takeaway
Affinity Diagram // Summary
Design Specification
References
EXPLORA-
TIVE USER 
STUDIES
==PAGE:54==
46
06.1 Introduction
Exploring the interactions, experiences and needs of potential 
users of a reusable packaging system is vital in order to later 
on develop a concept that truly fits the context. Therefore an 
exploration of the current context is needed in order to uncov-
er the context of a takeaway system from the perspective of 
both the canteen and the consumers. 
Firstly, the ecosystem illustrating the canteen industry is 
developed in collaboration with the CEO of KK in order to 
properly understand the flow of resources, information and 
products between the involved actors.  
The explorative study is then divided into two paths, each in-
vestigating one type of user group. 
The first type was the canteen personnel at Kokkenes Køkken, 
more specifically the personnel working in the canteen at the 
office building, Edison Huset. The work processes of the staff, 
the physical surroundings and existing takeaway solutions are 
documented using the contextual design approach described 
by Beyer & Holtzblatt (1998). 
 
The other type of user is the end consumer, who purchases 
the takeaway meal. Their experiences are documented using 
workbooks inspired by the generative design method de-
scribed by Sanders & Stappers (2012). Later on several gen-
erative workshops are conducted in order to explore wants, 
needs and behaviours in a new reusable packaging system. 
Insights from both paths are all gathered in affinity diagrams 
(one for the system and one for the container), to structure 
all insights. The affinity diagrams are used as a basis for the 
design specification. 
In parallel to the explorative user studies, an MVP test was 
developed and launched at Edison huset, as an element to 
measure customer response of a simple PSS, with the focus of 
adjusting the final solution accordingly.
06.2 Ecosystem 
An ecosystem was mapped in collaboration with the CEO of 
Kokkenes Køkken, with the purpose of gaining an overview 
of the different stakeholder interactions in the canteen and 
restaurant industry. Figure 06.2.1 (on next page) shows the 
ecosystem map with a primary focus on the canteen industry. 
The flows and transcriptions mapped between the different 
stakeholders are; money  (green line), information (dotted 
Figure 06.3.1 - Overview of canteen staff 
at Edison Huset
Sous chef
(Warm dishes)
Nutritionist
(Cold cuts)
Christina
Kasper
Dishwasher + salad 
chef
Prachanda
Part time dishwasher
Prokast
Meeting waiter + 
barista
Stin
Meeting waiter + 
barista
Pia
Cafe Edison
 Huset
Site manager + 
head chef
Teddy
Canteen
Edison Huset
==PAGE:55==
47
06/ Explorative User Studies
black line) and products which primarily refers to food and 
packaging (red line). 
06.3 Fieldwork at Edison Huset
Fieldwork at Edison Huset was conducted primarily using the 
contextual design method described by Beyer & Holtzblatt 
(1998) (see section 02.5 for an overview of the contextual 
design approach to participatory design). The fieldwork was 
conducted by observing and applying the master apprentice 
method to understand the breakdowns of the current work 
system. Afterwards, the five work models, described by Beyer 
& Holtzblatt, were used to gain a more in depth understanding 
of the sources to the breakdowns and issues in the system. 
Three different symbols are used in the world models to rep-
resent: lighting bolt (breakdowns), star (opportunities) and an 
exclamation point (things to be aware of). Company 1 and 2 
are companies that have their offices in Edison Huset. Finally, 
a swimlane diagram provided more in depth knowledge of the 
processes in ordering a takeaway meal in the current system, 
also including the related breakdowns.
Figure 06.2 shows an overview of the canteen staff at Edi-
son Huset. The site manager and head chef Teddy has been 
the primary contact within Edison Huset, while the other em-
ployees have contributed with insights related to their specific 
work role. 
A lot of insights has been gathered during the master/appren-
tice observations. Pictures from the fieldwork can be found in 
Appendix A06.02. The insights have been used to inform the 
five workmodels and the swimlane diagram. However, some 
general observations which do not inform a specific work-
model are relevant to note (see next pages). 
The swimlane model depicts the current takeaway process
Ecosystem
	
●
The canteen companies do not usually own any 
of the facilities that they use. They either rent or 
have a common agreement with the company or 
real estate owner.
	
●
The company/facility owner has the final say in 
the kind of crockery set and packages used (usu-
ally with a focus on price)
	
●
The lunch agreement is normally paid by the 
consumer via the company/employer. Extra food 
or beverages as well as takeaway is paid by the 
consumer directly to the canteen
	
●
Waste handling is managed by Daka and it is the 
company/facility owners responsibility to handle 
this. 
	
●
All accounting goes through KK
	
●
Canteens having an operational agreement rather 
than a management agreement have a higher 
incentive to sell takeaway meals
	
●
Currently different canteens within KK use 
several different platforms for ordering takeaway, 
these include: CanteenPro and Go Appified (Ap-
pendix A06.01)
	
●
Canteens often sell convenience meals 
	
●
Chefs are usually not tech savvy people. The 
platforms should be as user friendly as possible 
with a steep learning curve.
==PAGE:56==
48
Kokkenes 
Køkken
Director
Canteens
Company/
employer
Real estate/
facility owner 
(Oﬃce houses)
Employment/labor
Sometimes rent
Legislation
Food 
suppliers
Packaging
suppliers
Commodities
Packaging
Circular Economy Action Plan
Concept
and guidelines
Subsidies
Forenede 
services
Info and managing
Food waste
Agreements
Waste handling
(per weight)
Salary
Order
Invoice
Figure 06.2.1 - Ecosystem map showing the dif-
ferent interactions between the stakeholders 
==PAGE:57==
49
06/ Explorative User Studies
Maj 
Toppenberg
The 
Kitchen 
Team
Consumers
/Employees
Contact person
Meals
Money
Information
Products (food and packaging)
Salary
Payment for extra
food/stuﬀ e.g. take- away
Restaurants
Wolt
Just Eat
Kleen Hub
Daka
(Waste)
Michael 
Deininger
Knowledge
Lunch agreement
TAKEAWAY RESTAURANTS
==PAGE:58==
50
Entrance
There are several entrances to the canteen in Edison 
Huset, each with a screen for “checking in”. The can-
teen receives payment from the different companies 
within Edison Huset based on how many of their em-
ployees have checked in. 
As the check in counters have to be passed by all em-
ployees who are using the canteen it is a great location 
for promoting takeaway from the canteen. Employees 
are currently not exposed to any information about 
takeaway, as there are no signs or information about 
this option anywhere in the canteen.
Serving Area 
The canteen concept is based on SANS! (see Section 
01.2), which is why there is no buffeet but instead in-
dividually served dishes. The canteen environment can 
be chaotic around lunch time, which makes it difficult 
to promote new concepts such as takeaway. 
Single-use Packaging
Around 1000 single-use packages are stored within the 
canteen kitchen. The rest of the container storage is in 
the basement. There is not that much storage space and 
they do not have a specific procedure of handling boxes 
and containers. 
==PAGE:59==
51
06/ Explorative User Studies
Return Stations
Return stations for used plates and utensils can be 
found in two locations at the canteen. 
Dishes are gathered continuously during the lunch break 
and early in the morning on trays and put through the 
industrial washing machine, which runs programmes at 
85-90 degrees celsius.
Café
The cafe is currently the only place to collect takeaway 
meals. 
The capacity of the current takeaway setup is limited, 
as takeaway meals are stored in a small refrigerator. 
Pia and Stin work in the cafe in shifts from 7am till 3 
pm and 9am till 5 pm. The takeaway meals can, howev-
er, be picked up after 5 pm as the fridge is always open 
(trust based system). 
Convenience Meals
The canteen is trying to sell convenience food in glass 
containers, which do not need to be returned. The 
meals cost around 100 DKK. Consumers often return 
the glass containers anyway because they do not have 
space at home and do not think that they should go to 
waste. 
The glass containers can be fragile and break in the 
dishwasher or freezer.
==PAGE:60==
52
Cultural Model
There are several interesting relationships between 
stakeholder groups within the canteen arena. Each in-
dividual canteen has to take into account the overall 
agendas from Kokkenes Køkken as well as dealing with 
the companies they provide a service for. The cultural 
model shown here is based on interviews with several 
members of the canteen staff and therefore reflects their 
point of view and how they perceive the company cul-
ture within Edison Huset. 
Breakdowns
Many of the companies including Company 1 and 2 
expect the cafe staff and cleaners to go around and 
collect used utilities (cutlery, plates etc.) from the 
canteen. The employees are furthermore too lazy to 
put dishes on the cleaning racks in their own office 
kitchens. This might as well become a problem when 
returning used containers for a takeaway solution if 
the system boundaries are not clearly represented.
1
Others
Company 
2
Company 1
Kokkenes 
Køkken
Companies
Takeaway at 
Edison
1
2
Kokkenes Køkken have certain 
standards and expects the 
individual canteens to buy 
packaging from partners.
The most important factors are:
1. Sustainability
2. Design & aesthetics
3. Economics
Buying snacks and takeaway 
is based on trust
(people can buy snacks after 
closing hours and it seems to 
work just ﬁne).
The employees 
expect the people 
from the cafe and 
cleaning to take care 
of used dishes
Expects the canteen 
personel to motivate the 
employees to return used 
plates to the canteen, put 
dishes on the cleaning 
racks, etc.
Cafe
Canteen
1
Company 1 has almost 
500 employees. They are 
mainly young adults in 
the age group of 20-29 
and have a no- plastic 
culture and sustainable 
mindset.
Company 2 diﬀer from
Company 1 as they have a 
higher average age, and a more 
corporate identity.
==PAGE:61==
53
06/ Explorative User Studies
2
Management in companies like Company 1 feel en-
titled to think that it is the job of the canteen staff 
to educate their employees about proper cleaning be-
haviour, as they are a big company and an important 
customer for the canteen. 
Opportunities
The trust based culture is working very well and can 
actively be used in creating a takeaway solution with 
reusable containers. 
Kokkenes Køkken would like to create awareness 
and make a brand for themselves, so all employees 
working at Edison Huset know that the kitchen/cafe 
staff are a part of Kokkenes Køkken. 
1
2
Employees are able to 
purchase gift items in 
the cafe area.
This is possible even 
when the meeting 
waitresses are not 
present
Trust based
"Take a bottle vine on 
the way home.
Free choice 50DKK
Pay in the cafeteria or 
on mobilepay 601854.
Have a great day!"
"People can just 
take the items we 
put out, however, 
we trust them not 
to do so" 
- Teddy Rosé Lose, 
head chef
Culture and standards
Powerstructures
Group Identity
The culture is really trust- 
based. However, there seems 
to be diﬀerent 
understandings on the 
standard of e.g. cleaning, as 
some employees expect the 
canteen staﬀ to collect dirty 
dishes.
TopDanmark owns the 
building and is renting out 
the spaces for the 
companies.
Therefore, all companies 
should be equal.
However, Company 1 is the 
biggest company in the 
house and therefore an 
important stakeholder for 
Kokkenes Køkken.
There is a common group 
identity associated with being 
a part of Edison Huset.
However, the diﬀerent 
companies have their own 
group identities, which can 
cause some frictions or 
diﬀerent 
opinions/viewpoints.
Employees self understanding 
and group identity
Most of the canteen staﬀ are 
relatively new, therefore, the 
identity of being a chef, washer 
etc. within Kokkenes Køkken 
might not be fully formed.
Furthermore, the companies in 
Edison Huset might not know 
that the canteen staﬀ is from 
Kokkenes Køkken which is 
something Kokkenes Køkken  
want to change.
2
==PAGE:62==
54
Breakdowns
The menu of the week is currently uploaded onto 
three different platforms manually. Sometimes the 
menu is not uploaded to Instagram or the website be-
cause of the time consuming aspect of it.
There are many different ways for the canteen cus-
tomers to order takeaway, which might be confusing 
for the customers and in addition create a lot of com-
plexity for the canteen staff. 
Flow Model
The flow model illustrates responsibilities and agendas 
for different stakeholders in the canteen system with 
a special focus on actions related to the current take-
away ordering system. The head chef Teddy is the main 
responsible for the canteen menu (which covers both 
lunch and takeaway) while the canteen staff provides 
inputs. The cafe staff is involved in the ordering pro-
cess, as they register some of the orders for takeaway. 
The flow model is mainly informed by the head chef 
Teddy and the cafe staff Pia and Stin.  
1
2
Meeting waiter + 
barista
Stin
Meeting waiter + 
barista
Pia
Cafe staﬀ
Receives takeaway orders via mail, phone 
or in person
Brew the coﬀee for the canteen and bake  
bake- oﬀ croissants
Pack and bring fruit and milk for the diﬀerent 
oﬃce areas
Make personally ordered sandwiches
Make food labels for the lunch of the day
Services the cafe and meeting areas if food and 
beverages have been ordered
Print of physical order
Received orders are
written and printed
Amount of orders received
Date
Name, etc.
Mail order
Instagram menu
Consumers
Work in Edison Huset in one of the 17 
companies
Eat breakfast and lunch at the canteen
Use the cafe to buy coﬀee
Order takeaway from the canteen
Works at Company 2
Consumer 2
Works at
Company 1
Consumer 1
Mail menu
Website menu
1
Call or go and order
Go and order
Post on
whiteboard
2
1
==PAGE:63==
55
06/ Explorative User Studies
Orders are organized on the whiteboard, which might 
be difficult to keep up to date if there are many or-
ders. 
Opportunities
Posting the menu on social media could be a great 
opportunity to connect with the employees at Edison 
Huset and give them a more personal connection to 
the canteen.  
3
1
Nutritionist
(Cold cuts)
Christina
Sous chef
(Warm dishes)
Kasper
Canteen staﬀ
Receive takeaway orders via 
mail, phone or in person
Responsible of cold and warm 
cuts + salads
Decide menu of the week
Order commodities
Prepare food
Clean dishes
Whiteboard
Part time
dishwasher
Prokast
Dishwasher + salad 
chef
Prachanda
Overview of orders
Overview of menu
Important phone  
numbers
Food information
3
Site manager + 
head chef
Teddy
Keeps kitchen running and 
manage employees
Print sand distributes menu 
online
Manages and coordinates 
schedules
Handles logistics
Management team
Quality manager
Asmus
Decides trajectory of the 
company
Takes economy decisions
Funding
Guidelines
Operations 
manager
Rune
CEO
Maj
Menu in word
Chip in with ideas
Provide instructions
and guidelines
Head chef
Decides on menu
Update with new orders
Canteen staﬀ
informed about order
Info about orders
Prepares and send menu
==PAGE:64==
56
Artefact Model
Several types of packaging currently used for meals at 
Edison Huset are examined in this artefact model. The 
types of packaging seen here are used for meals that 
are not eaten in the canteen area, but somewhere else 
in the building e.g. in a meeting room due to a work-
shop. The head chef Teddy demonstrated the different 
types of packaging and recalled the feedback from the 
consumers. 
 
Breakdowns
The canteen personnel tried to serve the salads in flat 
cardboard containers. However, the consumers did 
not like the appearance of the salad in the containers, 
as it looked flat, boring and not fresh. Furthermore, 
the containers gave some consumers unflattering as-
sociations to nursing home food.
 
1
Experiment 
with the metal 
lunch box for a 
meeting
The metal 
containers were 
ordered to test 
reusable packaging 
for serving snacks at 
meetings in house
The metal box received 
good feedback, especially 
from Company 2. They 
would be willing to invest in 
these, because they seem 
more sustainable.
Reusable metal container
1
==PAGE:65==
57
06/ Explorative User Studies
 Opportunities
The employees working at Edison Huset respond-
ed well to snacks served in reusable packaging at 
meetings. The impression of a sustainable packaging 
choice is a value in itself.  
Consumers find it appealing when the food is visible 
through the packaging. This was especially seen with 
the salads, as they looked much more appealing in 
the see-through cylindrical containers.
Some types of meals require specialized packaging 
(such as sandwiches, which are most easily served in 
plastic/paper bags).
The type of packaging used has a big effect on how 
the meal is perceived. Changing the packaging can 
make a dish much more flattering and popular.
1
2
3
4
60 sandwiches are 
made and 
delivered 
everyday to  
Company 2, in 
these bags
Cylindrical 
containers that are 
stackable and 
appealing to look at. 
Resemblance to 
7/Eleven salad 
packaging.
The smart bags 
are easy to work 
with. Sandwiches 
are simply placed 
in the bag and 
closed with tape.
Initial containers bought 
for serving salads. Not so 
popular amongst the 
consumers. The consumers 
described containers as 
giving them associations to 
nursing home meals.
This is a great 
example of a 
container which 
makes the salads 
look ﬂat, boring 
and less fresh.
The transparency 
makes the salad 
seem more fresh 
and delicious.
1
!
Plastic salad
container
Smart bags
Flat salad
 container
The ﬂat container 
was replaced with 
the cylindrical 
after negative 
responses from 
canteen users.
2
3
4
==PAGE:66==
58
Physical Model
The ground floor of Edison Huset has been explored 
in order to determine where employees from Company 
1 and Company 2 are exposed to the current takeaway 
touch points. The analysis is based on field work (walk-
ing around in Edison Huset) and conversations with the 
head chef Teddy and the cafe staff, Stin and Pia.
Breakdowns
Some people never go by the cafe, as they are too far 
away from it. They see it as being problematic to go 
the extra distance for a takeaway meal or snacks
Opportunities
 
Promote takeaway by the entrances in the canteen
Promote takeaway at the dead entrance
1
1
2
NORTH
ENTRANCE
THE
"DEAD SPACE"
Employee from 
Company 2: "I never 
go in the cafe - I 
have to go through 
the canteen to go 
there"
Some people 
never go by 
the cafe, due 
to the distance
1
COMPANY 2
AREA
CANTEEN
2
1
5
!
==PAGE:67==
59
06/ Explorative User Studies
Put out flyers etc. when going around with snacks
 
Making the food more accessible
Put up refrigerators with takeaway in the canteen
Put up refrigerators in the dead zone with takeaway
3
4
4
CANTEEN
CAFE
SOUTH
ENTRANCE
120 meals 
are 
delivered to 
Company 1
Biggest 
company at 
Edison 
Huset
COMPANY 1
AREA
Customer touchpoints for 
takeaway
1
3
4
!
==PAGE:68==
60
Sequence Model
The sequence model depicts the current challenges of 
communicating the lunch and takeaway menu to the 
consumers. Communicating the menu to consumers 
is an important requisite for selling more takeaway, as 
most consumers want to know which dish they are re-
serving takeaway for. The process for sharing the menu 
is based on information from the head chef, who is the 
main responsible for creating and communicating out 
the menu.
Breakdowns
Sharing the menu on many different platforms is a lot 
of work, as it is currently not possible to share across 
all platforms at the same time. 
The menu is written on a black board in the canteen, 
but it is the only daily dish that is displayed there. 
Consumers will therefore not be able to rely on this 
information for takeaway, as it has to be ordered a 
day in advance before 12 o’clock. 
1
2
Weekly menu posted on 
Instagram by Teddy. 
(Customers can see this)
This is done manually, which 
takes up time when they also 
have to transfer the menu  
manually to Instagram and 
the previous website
Handwritten menu of 
the day displayed in 
the canteen
Sequence
Nutritionist
(Cold cuts)
Christina
Decide on menu of the week
Write in the menu
Post on instagram
Send mail to people in 
Edison
1
Kasper
Sous chef
(Warm dishes)
Teddy
Site manager
+ head chef
Teddy
Site manager
+ head chef
(No longer relevant)
Post on website
==PAGE:69==
61
06/ Explorative User Studies
Opportunities
Sharepoint is being used for sharing menus with oth-
er canteens in Kokkenes Køkken. The knowledge 
sharing could be enhanced by integrating shared rec-
ipes as a part of a menu creation tool. 
Creating a platform that allows the head chef to eas-
ily share the menu with consumers will save a lot of 
time and make it more likely that the menu will actu-
ally be posted on multiple platforms. 
1
2
The ﬂow of publishing the 
menu to the consumers is 
not optimal as it has to be 
put up manually on 
diﬀerent channels. This 
takes too much time, which 
often makes Teddy down 
prioritise this task.
Weekly and daily menu
Made in Word by Teddy, Kasper and 
Christina
They are already using MS SharePoint. 
This would make for an interesting case 
by using some of the macros to send 
data from excel further.
Teddy has to post and create content manually, which 
takes up a lot of time. Therefore, he does not always do it 
and has recently chosen to stop posting the menu on the 
website. This means that canteen customers are not aware 
of what to expect the following week. This could hinder the 
takeaway sale. By looking into this system it is possible to 
get the most out of the takeaway system in relation to a 
continuous information ﬂow.
1
1
==PAGE:70==
62
Swimlane Diagram
The swimlane model depicts the current takeaway pro-
cess with focus on the actions that are handled by the 
consumer, cafe personnel, canteen staff and the back-
ground system. The model sums up the different as-
pects (breakdowns of the takeaway system depicted in 
the five workmodels.
Place an 
order
Call/email cafe
Talk with canteen 
personal
Receive order
Write and 
print order
Place order on board 
and inform canteen 
personal
Write order on 
canteen board
Consumer
Canteen personal
Cafe personal
System
==PAGE:71==
63
06/ Explorative User Studies
Invoice consumer
Fetch food and 
place it in cafe 
fridge
Scan card
Throw out 
single use 
packaging
Make order
Place meal in 
the canteen 
fridge
Grab food from 
fridge
Take home and 
eat
==PAGE:72==
64
Together with KK it was decided to order a total of 60 con-
tainers to start with, where all takeaway meals would be 
served in a reusable container (not giving the consumers the 
choice to choose between single-use and reusable containers). 
A new email was created for the consumers to order from: 
takeaway-edison@kokkeneskoekken.dk, latest the day before 
at noon. The orders would be placed for collection in the café/
reception and should be returned at the cleaning stations in 
the canteen. 
To keep track of the containers borrowed and returned a QR 
code linking to a survey was placed at both the place of col-
lection and return (see Appendix A06.03). In the “borrow” 
survey customers were asked to write their email (the same 
as they used for ordering) and state how many containers 
they were borrowing. In the “return” survey customers were 
asked the same questions as well as how their experience was 
including a followup question (see Appendix A06.04 and 
A06.05). The emails of the customers using the system were 
later used for more qualitative interviews. 
Choosing the MVP container
To choose the best suited container for the MVP test, a test 
with seven different containers was made in Edison Huset 
(see Appendix A06.06). Participants were asked to vote for 
the container they would prefer to transport food in, eat from 
as well as which one they overall liked the most taking all 
aspects into consideration (see Figure 06.4.2).
30 customers came by the stand to give their vote. Scores can 
be found in Appendix A06.07. 
06.4 MVP Test
A minimal viable product (MVP) was developed in parallel 
to the explorative user study to gain a quick customer re-
sponse on the overall concept of selling takeaway meals in 
a reusable container system. The MVP test was conducted 
at Edison Huset as the first step in the 3-step roadmap (see 
Figure 04.5.1), with the aim of making a proof of concept at 
Kokkenes Køkken. This step is broken down into two steps; 
step 0, where the proof of concept is to be made via the MVP 
launched at Edison huset, whereafter step 1 is focused on ex-
panding the system to the rest of KK’s canteens (see Figure 
06.4.1). 
Furthermore, the purpose was to gain feedback on the solu-
tion (both the container and the system), gain insights on con-
sumers’ behaviour patterns and statistics as well as exploring 
the unknown unknowns.
The MVP Scope
The scope of the MVP test was based on the current ability 
of the master group and the canteen at Edison Huset. The aim 
was therefore to develop and implement a solution as simple 
as possible. It was decided together with Kokkenes Køkken 
to only initiate the test at Edison Huset, to avoid unnecessary 
complexity. Advertisement of the takeaway service and the 
reusable container system was launched on the 12th of April 
2021, as selling takeaway meals has not been an active ser-
vice provided by the canteen at Edison Huset. The idea was to 
initiate the test and collect ongoing feedback and implement 
changes accordingly, as described in the 5. principle in Lean 
Startup methodology (build, measure, learn) (see Section 
0.3.2). Therefore, the end date was not determined. 
TAKEAWAY 
RESTAURANTS
CANTEENS
Step 1
Launch solution 
to the rest of KK's 
canteens 
Step 2
Expanding to 
the canteen 
market
Step 3
Expanding to 
the takeaway 
market
Edison 
Huset 
Step 0
MVP test /
Proof of 
concept
KOKKENES 
KØKKEN
Figure 06.4.1 - The 3-step roadmap updated with a 
step 0, MVP test/proof of concept.
==PAGE:73==
65
06/ Explorative User Studies
based on the 7 options
Furthermore the canteen staff were to choose their preferred 
type of container. Different arguments for choosing a round 
container over a rectangular were discussed, including that a 
round container would be more appropriate to serve food in 
and more familiar to eat from (as it resembles a round plate), 
whereas a rectangular container would be better for storing 
both in bags under transportation as well as in the fridge or 
shelves. In the end it was decided to buy two types of contain-
ers for the MVP test, a round and a rectangular one. By doing 
so, it was possible to easily perform an A/B test to investi-
gate the most preferred shape by the users (consumers and 
canteen). The two different shaped containers from the brand 
Frigoverre can be seen in Figure 06.4.4.. 
30 of each container was bought, and the consumers were giv-
en the free choice between the two shapes, testing the most 
popular shape based on the ones that were borrowed first. 
Furthermore, the kitchen staff also got to test which one they 
Results showed that most people do not necessarily prefer the 
same container for transporting as they want their food served 
in, as each context requires different functionalities. The most 
preferred container was the standard IKEA glass container 
with a plastic lid (see Figure 06.4.3). Arguments for voting on 
this container were based on its appropriate size (not too big 
nor too small), the fact that leftover food can be microwaved 
directly from the container and due to the familiar snap clos-
ing mechanism sealed with rubber strips that makes it seem 
secure and leakage proof.
 Figure 06.4.3 - The overall most preferred container 
Figure 06.4.2 - Setup of MVP container 
test in Edison Huset
==PAGE:74==
66
erative design approaches as described by Sanders & Stappers 
(2012) were used to uncover existing behavioural tendencies 
and experiences with takeaway and packaging to visions for 
future solutions (see section 02.5). Note that the focus for the 
generative user studies was the takeaway market in general 
and not the canteens market specifically, as most people have 
experiences related to takeaway (from restaurants), while sig-
nificantly fewer have tried to order takeaway from their work-
place canteen. 
Workbooks
Within generative design a key part of the process is sensitiz-
ing participants to think about their use patterns and experi-
ences before engaging in e.g. a workshop. Sensitizing is often 
done by asking participants to document their own experienc-
es on the topic of the study. It is custom in this type of material 
to make the focus a bit broader than the specific design con-
text (Sanders & Stappers, 2012). An example could be that 
sensitizing material for developing a new shaver would focus 
on morning hygiene practices. The sensitizing material devel-
oped for this project is therefore focused on experiences with 
takeaway and more specifically packaging for takeaway, but 
not necessarily in the context of buying a takeaway meal from 
a canteen. Choosing this broader focus makes it much more 
likely to find participants who can document their experience 
and makes sense in the broader scope of this project, as expe-
riences with takeaway in general will aid in the development 
of a product-service system which can be scaled up to include 
the restaurant market. 
Workbook content
A workbook was developed, which prompts the participants 
to describe their takeaway experience through choices, pic-
tures and open-ended questions. The workbook follows the 
guidelines for sensitizing material provided by Sanders & 
Stappers (2012), as it encourages self-documentation of facts, 
behaviours and feelings about takeaway and the participants 
were able to fill them out in their own time (they had a week 
prefer the most in relation to placing the food, storage, etc.   
Development of Advertising Material
The most necessary material for the MVP test to be developed 
was: the QR code posters - both for borrowing and returning, 
a pamphlet describing how to use the system, as well as a 
poster for general advertisement of takeaway, see Appendix 
A06.03 and A06.08.  See also the placement of the advertising 
material in the canteens in Appendix A06.09. 
To make the MVP test resemble a real commercial solution, 
a “brand” was developed. The master thesis group settled on 
a name “Rutine”, where a logo for the reusable container sys-
tem was developed based on a quick individual brainstorm in 
the group. Three different design logo versions were exposed 
to the group’s Instagram followers, who voted for the best 
logo, see Appendix A06.10. The winner logo was selected and 
made in Adobe illustrator as a vector file, see Figure 06.4.5. 
The “u” in “Rutine” was changed to an “O” due to the design, 
making the final brand name ROTINE.
Figure 06.4.5 - the chosen logo
06.5 Generative Design Ap-
proach 
The fieldwork conducted in the canteen at Edison Huset pro-
vided great insights about the current work systems in the ex-
isting canteens. The thoughts, feelings, behaviours and expe-
riences of the potential end consumer of a reusable packaging 
system was, however, still largely unexplored. Therefore gen-
Figure 06.4.4 - The two chosen containers 
==PAGE:75==
67
06/ Explorative User Studies
cial bubble. Therefore, the outcome of the workshop is also 
characterised by the type of participants - all three are in their 
mid-twenties, with backgrounds in design, engineering, busi-
ness and entrepreneurship.  
Even though the participants all knew each other, the first 
part of the workshop focused on creating comfort; the work-
shop was opened by the facilitator, stating the purpose and 
the agenda (see Appendix A06.15), then all participants short-
ly introduced themselves and stated their favorite takeaway, 
whereafter highlights from the participants individual work-
books were briefly discussed (see Appendix 06.16). 
The next part of the workshop focused on awakening a cre-
ative mindset, and breaking down any constraints in terms of 
drawing and brainstorming, this was done by a 1 minute exer-
cise where the participants had to draw a helicopter followed 
to do it) and in the comfort of their own home.
The inspiration for the content of the workbook came from 
other sources of self-reflection and documentation, such as 
travel diaries (one group member had an impressive collec-
tion), scrap books and friend books (most commonly used for 
documenting friendships and interests in childhood). All of 
these have a creative outlet in common, where the writers are 
able to express themselves. The creative expression is encour-
aged in the takeaway workbook by prompting participants to 
take pictures of their experience and express themselves using 
hashtags and emojis.
The workbook consists of 8 pages; Introduction, Tips and 
Tricks, Takeaway it is, The Arrival, Dinner is Ready, The Af-
termath, Now it is all Over and Thank You, guiding the partic-
ipants to describe their journey from the decision making to 
the cleaning in the end. An overview of all pages is shown on 
the next pages (see also Appendix A06.11 to A06.13). 
As the purpose of the workbooks also was to explore users 
behaviour in relation to takeaway and takeaway packaging, 
questions related to the three factors affecting user behaviour; 
triggers, abilities and motivation were incorporated (these 
factors are described in Section 02.4 Behavioural Design). 
Examples are listed below: 
•	
Triggers: “I decided to order takeaway when ...”
•	
Motivation and/or ability: “I’m having takeaway today 
because I’m …” or “What I considered before choosing 
my meal ...” or “I ate from … (my own plate/bowl or the 
packaging) because I …”
However, note that the answers to the stated questions will be 
the users own reflection upon the factors, making the answers 
their conscious perception of their behaviour.
Physical workshop 
After the participants had filled out the workbooks, ss in-
structed by mail (see Appendix 06.14), a physical workshop, 
prior to an online workshop, was held with the focus of gain-
ing insights from the conversations between the participants, 
while doing fun design exercises regarding the development 
of both a container and reuse system. The physical workshop 
was hosted by two of the group members (Astrid and Signe), 
which took turns in facilitating. Due to the covid-19 situation, 
only three participants were invited (the workshop took place 
in a conservatory with the capacity of 5 people), where all 
three were already a part of one of the group members’ so-
The Miro Platform
The workbook material has been developed in the Miro, 
an online visual collaboration tool that has been very 
valuable throughout the entire design process. Miro 
allows collaborators to work on a huge virtual white-
board with familiar elements such as post-its, different 
shapes, arrows, emojis and more. After discussing pros 
and cons it was decided that the participants should fill 
in the workbook directly in Miro. The expectation was 
that this might be difficult for some of the participants, 
as most of them were not familiar with using the online 
tool. To combat any difficulties an email with thorough 
instructions was composed (see Appendix A06.14) and 
the participants were told that they were welcome to 
call if any difficulties should come up. Some of the par-
ticipants in the 60+ age group were a bit hesitant to 
try out the platform. An alternative was provided in the 
form of a PDF version of the workbook, which could be 
printed and manually filled in or edited in other (more 
familiar) programs such as Powerpoint. All participants 
were, however, able to fill out the workbook in Miro 
in the end (with varying degrees of guidance). As the 
workbooks were digitally filled in, the material was 
ready to be processed afterwards. The workbook was 
tested both by the two other group members as well 
as a couple of other users before sending it out to all 
participants.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
69
06/ Explorative User Studies
==PAGE:78==
70
Figure 06.5.1 - The participants during 
individual exercise
==PAGE:79==
71
06/ Explorative User Studies
a lot of insights, especially concerning requirements for the 
container, as well as good inputs to a future sales pitch. 
Online workshop
The physical workshop focused mainly on the container de-
sign (due to the slipped time schedule), which was ideal for 
making fun, concrete design exercises that fitted well with-
in a physical workshop format. A lot of good insights were 
achieved during the physical workshop exercises, however it 
was agreed that the online workshop should mainly focus on 
the system around the container, to gain more user insights 
concerning this aspect. 
Based on the learnings and the shift of focus, a new agenda for 
the online workshop was developed (see Appendix A06.20). 
Furthermore, the strengths and weaknesses of an online for-
mat were carefully considered when developing the content 
and structure. A new adaptation of the generative workshop 
by a 5 minute individual negative brainstorm of a reusable 
container (see Appendix 06.17). The participants were all 
brainstorming eagerly, resulting in fun and interesting nega-
tive ideas, e.g. a container made from endangered species or 
a container made from styrofoam (as one of the participants 
hate the sensory feeling of styrofoam). The participants were 
afterwards asked to co-create a “perfect reusable container” 
solution, by first doing individual (positive) brainstorms (see 
Appendix 06.17), which they used as a basis for discussion, 
where they agreed on their three most important specifica-
tions; be pretty, be eaten from and preserve temperature. 
These specifications were used as concepts in a morphology 
exercise. As the time schedule slipped, a few moderations to 
the agenda had to be made - and the participants only got to 
draw lines for the first concept, the pretty container, via the 
morphology. This concept was sketched (see Figure 06.5.2). 
 
Figure 06.5.2 - Drawing of the “pretty container” concept, made via 
morphology
The next part involved designing the system around the con-
tainer that they had designed. Due to lack of time, parts of 
the agenda were skipped - e.g. the exercise concerning be-
havioural elements, and individual brainstorms. The partici-
pants were asked to discuss elements important to the system. 
They were gradually given more props to help them in their 
concept development - including guidance to stages of the 
system relevant for the scope, as well as post-its with draw-
ings of humane and inhumane actors, to prime them to in-
clude relevant elements. The participants were then asked to 
“detail” their concept of the system, by illustrating it using 
pen and paper, post-its etc. Finally a 2 minute pitch was per-
formed by the participants, selling their full concept including 
the container and the system around (see Appendix 06.17). 
Despite sitting by a rocky table in a cold conservatory, the 
workshop was a fun and successful session, which created 
Physical Workshop
	
●
Sustainability aspects are important, as it is one 
of the main drivers for participating in a reus-
able takeaway container system. (see Appendix 
A06.18)
	
●
One of the participants did not appreciate eating 
from plastic containers. Another pointed out that 
a lot of plastic in the packaging made the meal 
look less attractive (see Appendix A06.16)
	
●
Practical aspects of the container are important, 
such as the container being lightweight, seal 
proof, easy to clean, etc. (See Appendix A06.17)
	
●
Important that the container is ergonomic, e.g. 
that you are able to hold it with one hand. This is 
an important functionality when eating straight 
out of the container (see Appendix A06.17) 
	
●
Important that the container represents the meal 
in an appealing way. The different elements of 
the meal should be separated (see Appendix 
A06.17)
	
●
The container has to accommodate solo eating, 
which often means balancing the container on the 
lap (see Appendix A06.17). 
	
●
The container should stand out from “a boring 
IKEA container” (see Appendix A06.19)
==PAGE:80==
72
approach as described by Sanders & Stappers (2012) had to 
be applied for the online format in order to make sure that 
the participants were creatively stimulated by the exercises 
and felt comfortable sharing their thoughts and ideas with the 
rest of the group even if they had only connected with them 
online. 
The online workshop was hosted via Microsoft Teams, with 
a total of 8 participants (see Figure 06.5.3 and 06.5.4). These 
were divided into two online “rooms”, having a facilitator in 
each. Both rooms were mixed gender and included at least 1 
participant that was 60+ years old and 3 participants in their 
mid-twenties. On each team at least one Design and Innova-
tion student was present (as they undeniably are some of our 
best friends, who are always engaged and eager to help). Both 
rooms got access to their own Miro board, where specific con-
tent had been prepared (see Appendix A06.21). 
The same basic structure of creating comfort and awakening 
the creativity within the rooms before starting to develop was 
used in the online workshops. The participants briefly got to 
touch upon the container design, by first doing an individual 
brainstorm, and then deciding on the most important func-
tionalities (these insights were used directly in the affini-
ty diagram later on). Afterwards, the facilitator presented a 
basic outline/premise for the system to help scope the solu-
tion space, thus staging the relevant discussions (see Figure 
06.5.5). The specific outcomes for both rooms can be found 
in Appendix A06.22 and A06.23. 
Hereafter, two rounds of specific questions, regarding e.g. 
stakeholders, motivation, delivery and return, were made for 
the groups to discuss. Based on these discussions the partici-
pants had to explain their system, using all the prompts they 
wanted to in Miro. 
Even though the two rooms had the same agenda, the out-
comes were very different. Room 1 followed the design agen-
da quite closely, while room 2 had many heavy discussions 
on what was actually the most convenient (e.g. to get the con-
tainer picked up by someone or to deliver it at some kind of 
station). The discussions were characterised by the different 
lifestyles - young people living in the city vs. middle aged 
living in a house in the suburbs. Especially because of the dif-
ferences in the sessions, many different insights were gained 
from both rooms. 
The physical and online workshops provided great insights 
into how the participants interact with packaging in their daily 
Workshop
Time aspect
	
●
The agenda was too optimistic - there were simply 
too many exercises in relation to the time given.
	
●
A good non-rushed brief of exercises as well as 
small talk between sessions are important to create 
a friendly and comfortable vibe (this took more 
time than expected).
	
●
Participants need time to explain their thoughts 
after e.g. brainstorming sessions.
Gaining the right insights
	
●
Especially one of the participants (the engineer) 
was quite constrained by what is physically doable 
and financially feasible when ideating. The pur-
pose of the workshop was not to make a final solu-
tion, but rather to reveal reflection and priorities. 
It was therefore important as facilitators to keep 
stressing that the participants should imagine that 
everything is possible, and focus on how the ideal 
solution would be. 
	
●
It became clear that getting the participants to 
brainstorm over “closing mechanisms’’ for the 
morphology exercise, did not bring much value, as 
the focus became too technical. The focus should 
mainly be on creating insights of the functional-
ities important for the participants, as users, and 
not getting them to solve engineering issues. 
	
●
Finding the right balance between leading the 
participants in the right direction and not limiting 
their creativity is important. When discussing 
the system the participants could have benefited 
from a bit more scoping, as they started to discuss 
cradle-to-cradle steps of the container - including 
where and how it should be produced. 
Using the right language
	
●
As all participants were Danish speaking it was 
not natural to make them ideate and converse in 
English - therefore the content for the next online 
workshop was developed in Danish, as all partici-
pants here were Danish as well.
==PAGE:81==
73
06/ Explorative User Studies
Figure 06.5.3 - Online workshop, room 1
Figure 06.5.4 - Online workshop, room 2
==PAGE:82==
74
look at the filled in workbooks and see whether any patterns 
could be detected in the participants’ documentation. 
Insights to the Participants Behaviour with Packaging
The workbook made the participants reflect upon their ex-
periences with takeaway, explaining why, how and when 
they performed certain behaviours. Based on the 19 filled 
out workbooks, motivations, abilities and triggers could be 
derived. The participants mentioned that the most common 
reasons for ordering takeaway was that they were craving 
takeaway food, or that it was more convenient to order a meal 
than make one, as they were either tired or knew they would 
come home late. What specifically triggered the behaviour is 
therefore not entirely clear, as it might have been a signal, 
such as a commercial post on Instagram that unconsciously 
triggered the final decision to buy takeaway. Some, howev-
er, mentioned that they only ordered takeaway as the proj-
ect group had asked them to, and being given this task might 
therefore be the biggest trigger of all. Gaining insights on the 
motivation and ability influencing the participants behaviour 
was in contrast a bit easier:
•	
Most participants (12 out of 19) were motivated to buy 
takeaway by the pleasure of treating themselves with a 
nice meal as well as the pleasure of satisfying a certain 
craving
•	
12 out of 19 participants chose to order takeaway either 
lives, what they value in a reusable container and how they 
would like a return system to look like. The workbooks that 
all participants had filled out beforehand worked great as a 
sensitising activity, as the participants had their previous ex-
periences with takeaway fresh in mind. The filled in work-
books did, however, have a lot of value as stand alone docu-
ments, as they provided a detailed view into 19 participants’ 
thoughts, feelings and habits related to takeaway. Sanders & 
Stappers (2012) state that sensitizing material such as work-
books can be a great source of insights and can be included in 
the analysis of data. It was therefore decided to take a closer 
Figure 06.5.5 - Scoping of the system
Online Workshop
Container
	
●
A lot of the same priorities and ideas as those 
from the physical workshops was pointed out in 
the online workshops as well, including: 
	
●
The container should be leak proof
	
●
It should be lightweight 
	
●
It is important that the meal is presented in a 
desirable way and that different elements are kept 
seperate
	
●
Important that the material for the container feels 
sustainable. 
	
●
The lid of the container should fit together with 
all versions of the container (or else you will end 
up stuck with a lid that does not match any of 
your containers). 
	
●
The container has to be attractive.
	
●
The container has to be stackable.
System
	
●
The meal should be more expensive if you do 
not have your container with you, as it creates 
motivation for using the system. 
	
●
It has to be very easy to order. 
	
●
The way the container is returned has to fit into 
the regular schedule, else it will most likely be 
forgotten. 
	
●
It would be convenient if the return system 
allowed for other people than the person who 
borrowed it to return the container(s). 
Køkken/Restaurant
Kunde
Transport af mad i beholder
Transport af tom beholder
Rene beholdere
Industriel rengøring
anretter mad i beholder
Bestiller mad
Kunde
Genbrugelig beholder
==PAGE:83==
75
06/ Explorative User Studies
in how the meal is perceived, including the factors of interact-
ing with the packaging.
It is relevant to note that the types of food associated with the 
fast and convenient expectation often have highly specialised 
packaging, which is optimised for one particular type of food 
(such as pizza boxes, burger boxes, sandwich wrap, etc.). This 
kind of highly optimised single-use packaging would be dif-
ficult to adapt to a reuse system. The eating patterns from the 
fast and convenient expectation are interesting, as they reflect 
a relaxed everyday interaction with the meal. Takeaway meals 
from the canteen could easily fit into this setting as they have 
the same kind of ground settings. 
The type of food served in the canteens of Kokkenes Køkken 
is more similar to both of the settings in the experience expec-
tations, with a combination of hot dishes with a carbohydrate 
side and meals with a lot of smaller elements. The experience 
expectation is more in line with how Kokkenes Køkken want 
their meals to be perceived, as seen in the SANS! concept. 
The head chef Teddy stated that he wants the customers to 
experience the takeaway as exclusive. The nicely presented 
individual meal is interesting in this context, as the packaging 
is perceived as having value for the eating experience and is 
put directly on the Table. The ideal for sharing setting is in-
teresting, as this is probably how a lot of families eat when 
buying takeaway. 
In conclusion the reusable takeaway container should provide 
excitement and a wow factor as seen in the nicely present-
ed meal setting. The container has to be presentable enough 
for taking center stage at the Table when sharing a meal with 
friends and family, but at the same time support a dinner eat-
en on the couch after a long workday. Therefore, the further 
focus has been scoped to only include the experience expecta-
tions (see Figure 06.6.1).
due to convenience or being in a tired/lazy mood. This 
implies that the takeaway solution requires less ability 
than cooking themselves, in terms of time and physical 
effort. 
•	
Half of the participants (10 out of 19) ate directly from 
the packaging, as this was more convenient, which im-
plies that the physical effort it takes to transfer the food to 
a plate and clean it afterwards makes it less simple than 
just eating from the packaging. 
•	
11 out of 19 participants threw the packaging out in gen-
eral trash, where few stated that they had considerations 
(mostly in relation to whether it could have been recy-
cled). One participant wrote: “No. I just wanted to get 
rid of it so I could lay down”. This behaviour suggests 
that the single-use packaging requires very low ability in 
terms of physical efforts. 
Furthermore, many of the participants stated that they had 
never given much thought into the packaging before filling 
out the workbook (the workbook also asked the participants 
to thoroughly describe the packaging as well as how they han-
dled it afterwards). This empathises how great a challenge it 
is to change people’s mindset about packaging, as the current 
single-use packages are merely perceived as a convenient way 
of storing and transporting food. Interactions with the con-
tainer after it has fulfilled its purpose are limited and mainly 
unconscious, as it cannot provide any more positive impact.
06.6 Workbook Segmentation
Most of the data from all the filled in workbooks (see Appen-
dix B06.01) were transferred to an Excel sheet (see Appen-
dix B06.02), making it possible to sort the entries based on 
different criteria and look for patterns. Looking through all 
workbook material provided a good overview and an under-
standing of the elements that distinguish the experiences. The 
distinguishing factors were mainly based on priorities when 
ordering takeaway, how formal the setting was, which kind 
of meal it was and what the eating situation looked like. Two 
different expectations for the takeaway experience were iden-
tified – the fast and convenient vs. the experience. These will 
be presented in the next three spreads. 
Please look at all three spreads on the following pages before 
continue reading.
As seen from the segmentation of the workbooks the take-
away experience cannot be defined as just one thing. The ex-
pectations of the meal and the setting makes a big difference 
==PAGE:84==
76
“Eating from the bed is what we 
always do because it is easier”
“I want to avoid 
unneccesary dishes”
The fast and convenient
No of workbooks 6/19 (4,5,6,9,11,14).
Considerations Price, specific craving.
Types of food Pizza, Burger, Sandwich 
This expectation is held by participants who just want some-
thing quick and tasty to eat. The takeaway is not used to mark 
a special occasion but is rather fitting into a busy lifestyle as a 
convenient choice. This expectation is common when eating 
alone, but can also occur when eating with a partner, especial-
ly if ordering takeaway is part of a regular routine. An afford-
able price is an important factor when choosing this type of 
takeaway as well as a specific craving. It is assumed that the 
users have a local restaurant that they rely on when wanting 
to meet this expectation.
The fast and convenient takeaway is eaten directly from the 
packaging (which is often some kind of paper wrap or card-
board box). It is common for this type of meal to be eaten on 
the sofa or even in the bed. There are typically no leftovers 
from the meal. All of the packaging is thrown out afterwards.
 
Six out of 19 workbooks belonged in this category, which has 
been sorted by filtering for ate from packaging and no cutlery 
or chopsticks (see Appendix B06.02). All of them are living in 
Copenhagen and are in their mid-twenties. 
==PAGE:85==
77
06/ Explorative User Studies
“I wanted a casual and 
relaxing dinner”
Did you have any con-
siderations about throw-
ing the packaging out?
“Not really - it was a 
pretty normal order and 
amount of trash I would 
say :-)”
“I do not have ideal kitchen 
facilities at home at the moment, so 
I ate straight out of the container to 
save dishes”
==PAGE:86==
78
The nicely presented 
individual meal
No of workbooks 7/19 (1,4,6,13,15,17,18).
Considerations Price, specific craving.
Types of food Sushi, Middle Eastern, Ramen 
Participants who want to celebrate a special occasion or gath-
er friends or family expect more from their takeaway experi-
ence. They are more likely to consider health and they want 
to make sure that they are getting a high quality meal, which 
they often ensure by choosing a restaurant they have tried be-
fore or relying on recommendations.
The meal has to be presentable, as it is often shared with 
friends, family or a loved one. It is typically eaten at the din-
ing Table. Participants who expect a bit more from their take-
away meal experience are more likely to order bigger por-
tions, which creates leftovers.
 
13 out of 19 workbooks fit into this category (see Appendix 
B06.02), which has been sorted for extra items provided with 
the takeaway and used own plate and cutlery.
 
The two sorting criteria distinguish two different settings 
within this expectation – the nicely presented individual meal 
and the ideal for sharing meals. The two settings are different 
in the way the meal is eaten and how leftovers are stored. This 
spread showcases the nicely presented individual meal.
 
The meal in this category is well presented in the packaging 
and is therefore often eaten straight from it. Extra items are 
provided with the meal, such as napkins, dressing, chopsticks, 
etc., which shows that the restaurant has thought about the 
eating experience. The meal is individually served. The pack-
aging is presentable enough to be placed on the Table.
The packaging for this kind of meal is very often cardboard 
in a combination with plastic. The cardboard containing food 
remnants cannot be recycled and is therefore thrown out in 
residual waste. The leftovers are most often stored in the 
packaging, as it is not convenient to transfer into the users 
own container. All participants showing this behaviour were 
in their mid-twenties and living in Copenhagen. They were 
often eating together with friends. 
“It was convenient to eat 
from the packaging - no 
dishwashing”
==PAGE:87==
79
06/ Explorative User Studies
“When the food is nicely placed 
it is nice to eat directly from the 
packaging, because it is easier and 
faster”
“The sun was shining and it was 
convenient to sit outside”
==PAGE:88==
80
Ideal for sharing
No of workbooks 7/19 (2,7,8,10,12,16,19)
Considerations Health, specific craving.
Types of food Indian, Thai, Danish 
This meal is also eaten together with friends or family, but all 
elements are typically shared. The dishes are separated into 
different packaging, which are all placed on the table. The 
table is typically set nicely with its own plates and cutlery (the 
plates are necessary when gathering a bit of everything). This 
setting is very similar to a home cooked meal, where pots, 
pans and serving dishes are on the Table and everyone helps 
themselves.
 
The packaging used for these dishes (typically Indian, Thai or 
traditional Danish food) is most often made of plastic, which 
is sorted for recycling (or, in one case, kept and reused).
Leftovers are often stored in their own containers.
7 out of 19 workbooks displayed this setting. Most of them 
are a bit older and live in a house.
“I prefer to from a prop-
er plate instead of the 
plastic packagin”
==PAGE:89==
81
06/ Explorative User Studies
“I ate from a plate be-
cause I shared the meal 
with my wife”
“I never eat from plastic 
packaging in my own 
house”
Participants sorted for 
recycling
Participants used their 
own containers for 
leftovers
==PAGE:90==
82
asked about their habits and preferences regarding takeaway 
(described in the following paragraf) from the canteen even 
though they had already stated that they did not use the work-
place canteen for takeaway. In these cases the participants 
have either tried to answer the questions based on what they 
think they would do or typed in that they do not have experi-
ence with takeaway from canteens. 
The majority of participants buy takeaway from restaurants 
(almost 80% for both groups). Using takeaway as a treat and 
buying a reasonably priced meal are also popular reasons 
(18.9%). Most participants would share the meal with their 
family (41.9%) or eat it by themselves (21.6%). Almost half 
of participants (47.3%) agree or strongly agree that they are 
more likely to eat from the packaging when the meal is nicely 
presented within the packaging. 65% are more likely to eat 
from their own plate if they want to have a nice Table setting. 
Takeaway meals in general
Being leak proof is by far the most important quality in a con-
tainer, with 73% giving it a rating of 5/5 in how much they 
value this quality. Furthermore, most participants eat at their 
dining Table, with 85.6% normally eating dinner at the Table 
(the survey allowed participants to choose more than one op-
tion). In addition, 27% normally eat dinner on the couch. 
Motivations and ability for participating in a reusable 
container system
A survey was made to further investigate takeaway habits and 
priorities as well as validate the patterns revealed from the 
workshops and workbook material. 
06.7 Survey
A survey was sent out through social media and shared with 
the CEO of Kokkenes Køkken. The full results can be found 
in Appendix B06.03. Here, 275 participants answered the sur-
vey with most of them being in the age group of 25-34 years 
old (52.7%). This might be due to the fact that the survey 
was shared with the network available to the project group. 
The survey respondents primarily live with their partner 
(43.3%) or roommate(s) (24%), but some also live either by 
themselves (16%) or with their partner and children (13.5%). 
The majority of participants were either full time employed 
(44.7%) or students (39.6%). 
Buying takeaway from canteens
14.8% of participants without children buy takeaway from 
their canteen at work. This number was slightly higher for 
participants with children, as 21.7% of them buy takeaway 
from their canteens. The most common reason for ordering 
takeaway from the canteen is not having enough time to cook 
(as 31.1% of participants stated).
It should be noted that there was an error in the way that the 
survey was set up resulting in the survey respondents being 
TAKEAWAY
(RESTAURANTS)
CANTEENS
KOKKENES 
KØKKEN
Indian
PROJECT SCOPE
Middle eastern
Thai
Cold cuts
Pizza
Burger
Durum
Japanese
Fastfoods
Chinese
Mexican
Salads
Poke balls
Figure 06.6.1 - Narrowing the project scope
==PAGE:91==
83
06/ Explorative User Studies
The survey respondents were asked to choose factors which 
would increase the likelihood of them participating in a re-
usable container system (they were allowed to choose more 
than one factor). The most influential factor is whether the 
container is easy to return, with 77.7% of respondents stat-
ing that this aspect would make them more likely to use the 
system. This implies the importance of simplicity; the time, 
physical effort and brain cycles it takes to return the contain-
er are very important aspects when ensuring that the user’s 
ability is high enough to perform the targeted behaviour of 
returning the container. The second most influential factor is 
not having to be stressed about returning a container (66.2%), 
this suggests that a negatively encouraging coercive interven-
tion model, where users will be punished for not returning the 
container in time is not preferred. The third most influential 
factor is the motivation for contributing to a more sustainable 
system (56.9%). Other popular factors are getting a discount 
on meals (52.3%), having the possibility to buy the container 
(22.7%) and not having to return the container (45.8%). 
06.8 MVP Test Luring with Free 
Takeaway
The MVP test was launched on the 12th of April 2021. No 
one had sadly ordered any takeaway after 3 weeks of launch. 
Therefore, it was agreed with KK to tempt and motivate the 
canteen customers to try out the system by offering them a 
free meal. During a lunch break 12 customers signed up for a 
free meal, and gave insightful feedback as to why they had not 
yet tried out the system.
When discussing the MVP feedback with the site manager, 
the need for having one platform for all communication and 
planning of the food was empathised. This was also seen in 
the earlier presented workmodels. As users have different 
needs when ordering takeaway - an idea emerged: all users 
should be able to subscribe for food either by food type or 
by weekday (one user mentioned that he would like to order 
every Tuesday, as it was his cooking day at home). It would 
be possible for the canteen to create food plans a couple of 
weeks in advance, making users cross off the days they want 
to order for. 
06.9 Affinity Diagram // Summa-
ry of Insights
To organise all insights gained during the explorative user 
studies, including fieldwork at Edison Huset and the gener-
Survey
There is a big potential for selling more takeaway 
from canteens, as buying takeaway from restaurants 
is very common.
Buying takeaway from canteens is something that 
fits into a busy weekday schedule, where there is not 
enough time to cook, as seen in the fast and conve-
nient expectation from the workbook segmentation. 
Takeaway meals from the canteens can, however, 
also be a way to treat yourself, which is an important 
part of the experience expectation. 
About half of the participants are in line with the doc-
umentation from the workbooks in regard to being 
more likely to eat out of the packaging when the meal 
is presented nicely. 
The survey confirmed that it is common to eat from 
your own plates when desiring a nice table setting.  
While most people eat at their dining table, quite a 
lot of people also eat dinner on the couch, which is 
also noticed in the generative user studies. This type 
of eating should therefore be accommodated in the 
container design. 
An easy return system is the most powerful motivator 
for getting consumers to participate in the system. 
Sustainability is an important motivator for using the 
system. 
Survey
The project group had hoped to reveal some kind of 
characteristics from the survey and workbook seg-
mentation, which could be used to develop personas 
that could act as a guiding star in relation to the user 
needs in the ideation phase. However, the survey and 
workbook segmentation did not reveal any specific 
habits related to any age or ways of living, meaning 
that the purpose of buying takeaway is not as simple 
as that. Nevertheless, the user insights are structured 
in an affinity diagram which are used to develop de-
sign specifications as described in the last section of 
this chapter.
==PAGE:92==
84
ative user studies, an affinity diagram was made (see Figure 
06.9.1). 
The diagram was divided into two parts; the first part includ-
ed all concrete insights focusing on the packaging functional-
ities, with the purpose of supporting the design specification 
for the reusable container (product according to the core ele-
ments of Mont’s framework). The second part focused on all 
other aspects relevant to a reusable container system (service, 
infrastructure, actor network), in order to support the design 
specification for the system (see Appendix B06.04). 
Affinity diagram Part 1 - packaging functionalities
The first part of the affinity diagram was divided into 7 overar-
ching categories: Durability, Aesthetics, Protecting the Food, 
Optimised for Storage, Optimised for Travel, Food Safety and 
Eating Situation. The sub-themes for each overarching cate-
gory are listed in Table 06.9.1. 
Affinity diagram Part 2 - aspects relevant to a reuse 
system
After several iterations of grouping the statements of the 
second part of the affinity diagram, 6 overarching categories 
were formed; Eating experience, Infrastructure, Sustainabil-
ity, Plastic perceptions, Convenience and Motivation. Sub-
themes of two levels are listed in Table 06.9.2. 
Lack of Participants
Most common reasons why users had not yet tried 
the system 
•	
Users had not seen the advertisement and did 
not know about the option (the advertisement 
material had therefore failed in broadcasting the 
offer)
•	
Users thought takeaway meant “to-go” food 
during lunch hours (the communication was not 
clear enough)
•	
Many users worked from home due to corona, 
so they either had not seen it or it did not make 
sense for them as they were only allowed in the 
office once a week
Reasons for actively not choosing to buy takeaway
•	
A well structured cooking routine at home
•	
Already subscribing to Aarstiderne or other meal 
services
What would make consumers use the system?
•	
The users should be able to check the menu, as 
many disclaimed that the type of food is very 
important to whether or not they want to buy the 
meal for dinner
•	
The menu should be available at least one week 
in advance, as some of the users have weekly 
meal plans for themselves and their family 
•	
Some users also mentioned that it was too much 
planning/too inflexible to order the day before 
at noon, as they were just not in the mindset of 
planning for the takeaway yet (the takeaway ser-
vice is not commonly known at Edison Huset yet 
or at least a part of the “culture”)
•	
The food should be preserved well and not shak-
en around in the container
•	
Some mentioned that the price was important - it 
should make sense for them economically and 
50 DKK seems like a good compromise
Regarding the box
•	
It was mentioned that many people bike to and 
from work, and it would therefore be a physi-
cal challenge if they should carry food for the 
whole family (4 containers for 4 meals). Weight, 
size and stackability of the container is therefore 
once again stressed as very important. 
•	
Most people preferred the round container to the 
rectangular, as it was more aesthetically pleasing
Furthermore, most of the users mentioned that they 
would like to use the reusable container system. They 
mentioned that they did not see it as a problem to re-
turn the container back to the canteen, as they would 
come back to the office and canteen everyday. The 
hypothesis that consumers in the canteen market have 
a high ability to return containers stated in the market 
==PAGE:93==
85
06/ Explorative User Studies
Category
Subtheme
Durability
I don't want to worry about breaking the container
I always want the packaging to look pristine
It should look clean even after several uses
Easy cleaning is important
Aesthetics
A nice container would make me want to keep it
The container should be pleasing to look at
The meal is more important than the looks of the packaging
Fit well together aesthetically with entire design/brand 
identity (tray)
Protecting the food
Keeping the food fresh is very important
Food should be separated
Modular design is good, (also when you want to separate 
the elements of the meal)
The packaging should preserve the temperature of the food
Optimised for storage
The container should not take up too much space
I leave leftovers in my own container
Packaging is convenient for storing leftovers
Possible to minimise the  shape of the container, once the 
food is eaten
Optimised for Travel
It is nice that the packaging is lightweight
The packaging should protect the food
The packaging should be sturdy for transport
I would like my food to be in a leakage proof/sealed 
container
Food safety
The container should be food approved
Eating situation
A good sealing should not be difficult to open/close
Food should be able to be reheated in the packaging
The container should give a good sensory experience
Eating straight from the container should feel inviting
Allows for eating on the go
Table 06.9.1 - First part of the affinity 
diagram described by 
==PAGE:94==
86
Table 06.9.2 - Second part of the affinity diagram with six overar-
ching categories and their sub-themes
Category
Sub-theme 1
Sub-theme 2
Eating experience
I eat in a way that is practical
Messy takeaway makes me want to use utensils/plate”
Eating from packaging can be practical”
It is important to me that the 
food is served at the right 
temperature
The temperature when it arrives is important
I sometimes use my microwave for takeaway
I like to eat from a plate
I value familiarity when I eat
It is nicer to eat from own plates
It is easier to eat from own plates
I would like to share my food
The unboxing experience is 
important to me
Making a good impression is important
The sensory experience is important
Playfulness and extra details makes the experience more exciting
I like to see my meal through the container
Industrial look turns me off
Nice serving is important to make the food look inviting
Change can be refreshing
The type of dish makes a 
difference
Quantity makes a difference when placing the food
Size and quantity of food
Infrastructure
We need the right 
infrastructure to establish a 
takeaway system
We want to keep it simple
The system should be fast and easy to use (for the personnel)
A bigger system requires more resources
Expectations for the system are not the same for all consumers
A trust based system works well within a canteen
I want to pick my takeaway meal up on the way
Sustainability
Environmental sustainability 
is a crucial selling point when 
comparing to single-use
Green branding is a must
The sustainability aspect should be aesthetically visible
The solution should actually have reduced impact on the 
environment compared to single-use
I am aware of the environmental impacts of my actions
I have ambitions to recycle
==PAGE:95==
87
06/ Explorative User Studies
Plastic 
perceptions
I'm skeptical about plastic
(I associate plastic with 
unsustainable packaging)
I do not like plastic
I would feel better if the plastic was eco-friendly
Plastic implies fast food, that should be consumed fast
I do not find plastic sustainable
I do not like to eat from plastic - it is not cosy
Convenience
I am only going to use the 
system if it is convenient for me
The system has to fit into the 
existing society
I hate going down with the trash because of single-use 
packaging e.g. pizza containers
I am worried that the system will not be convenient enough
I eat takeaway for ultimate convenience
it is convenient to eat directly from the packaging
I do not think about throwing my packaging out
I would like if it fits with existing solutions
I would like the returning system to be universal and convenient
Motivation
Financial incentives is a 
powerful motivator
Take back systems are would 
be the optimal solution
We want to create awareness of 
our business (KK)
A system change should not be expensive
Discounts and "carrots" can be important incentives
The take back system should have a price
A new take back system should resemble familiar take back 
systems
Table 06.9.2 - Second part of the affinity diagram with six overar-
ching categories and their sub-themes
Figure 06.9.1 - Affinity diagram in the 
making (in Miro)
==PAGE:96==
88
Design Specification V1.0
Factor
Requirements 
(need to have)
Criteria 
(nice to have)
Comments
Product - Container(s)
Material
Should weigh between XX-XX grams
Should be light enough for travelling 
- but still give the feeling of quality. 
What the appropriate weight range 
would be was not know at this point 
(see updated design specification 
Appendix B12.04). 
Must be microwaveable
The meal should be visible from the 
top of the container
Shape
Should not have any hard to clean 
grooves
Cleaning should be easy
The container should take up as little 
space as possible when empty
This can be achieved by stacking the 
container
The shape (and material) should 
invite for consumers to eat directly 
from the container
Should be optimised for storage in 
fridge
Aesthetics
Should present the food as nicely 
as possible (enhance the food 
experience)
Should have a strong visual brand 
identity
Through elements such as form, 
material, logo, etc. 
Protecting the food
Must be sealed/leakage proof
Should be percieved as leakage 
proof
Service - System
Communication platform
The communication platform should 
inform/notify the user of when rented 
containers must be returned
The canteen platform must give 
an overview of containers in 
stock and in use
Collect & return
The customer should have enough 
time to return the container
==PAGE:97==
89
06/ Explorative User Studies
Each container must have an 
identification number
Should be able to track where all 
containers are
To differentiate between the different 
containers in circulation
Motivation
The price of the container should not 
be so expensive that it demotivates 
the use/entry of the solution 
Financial structure should be 
economical appealing for canteens
General 
The solution should be more 
environmentally sustainable 
than using single-use 
packaging
06.10 Design specification 
The affinity diagrams ensured that the most important points 
from the research and analysis phase were gathered and struc-
tured in one place. A design specification could now be creat-
ed based on all the input along with practical considerations 
for the development of the system and container. As with the 
affinity diagram the design specification is divided into two 
parts, one for the system and one for the container. The design 
specification is a very comprehensive document. An extract 
is shown here.  
The Design Specification v1.0 (see Appendix B06.04) was 
later in the design process reviewed, with representatives 
from Kokkenes Køkken as a part of the co-creation workshop, 
see Section 07.2. 
The design specification formed the basis for the further de-
velopment of the product service system. The early develop-
ment phases are described in the following chapter Ideation 
and Concept development. 
06.11 References
1.	
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual Design. Defin-
ing Customer-Centered Systems. Academic Press.
2.	
Sanders, L., & Stappers, P. J. (2012). Convivial Toolbox - 
Generative Research for the Front End of Design. Laurence 
King Publishing.
==PAGE:98==
07/ 
==PAGE:99==
CONTENT
Introduction
Co-creation
Developing Concepts
Development of the System Concepts
Development of the Container Concepts
Concept Catalogue
References
IDEATION & 
CONCEPT 
DEVELOP-
MENT
==PAGE:100==
92
07.1 Introduction 
Before ideating and developing concepts for the solution,  a 
co-creation session with KK is held. The focus of the session 
is to evaluate the Design Specification v1.0 (see Appendix 
B06.04) seen from a canteen perspective, as well as conduct 
exercises that will allow the project group to deep dive into 
the different thoughts and visions the stakeholders might have 
for the solution. 
Based on both the co-creation session with KK and the find-
ings from the explorative user studies, ideation on both the 
system and the container is initiated. To evaluate and concep-
tualise ideas, several different methods are used, including a 
morphology exercise for both the system and the container. 
Ideating and conceptualising the system is mainly based on 
the broader takeaway system in the restaurants (as described 
as step 3 in the three-step roadmap) to ensure that the ideas 
are not limited to or restrained by the narrowed canteen per-
spective. 
Finally, three system concepts and six container concepts are 
chosen. App wireframes for the consumers are made for each 
system concept, and mock-ups are made for all container con-
cepts. These are described and presented in the Concept Cat-
alogue (see separate document).
07.2 Co-creation
Co-creation is a helpful tool to fully understand the user and 
their needs. It includes multiple actors and can be used in 
different stages of the design process (Mattelmäki & Visser, 
2011). An introduction to the co-creation methodology can be 
found in Section 02.5.
A co-creation workshop was conducted with employees from 
Kokkenes Køkken, all with different roles and areas of exper-
tise (see Appendix A07.01). The objective of the workshop 
was to apply the participants’ expertise and together create 
a vision of how the product and system should look and per-
form, as well as to create engagement in the change-oriented 
goals. The co-creation process should in the end interweave 
the participants ideas and skills together with the project 
group’s in an iterative way (Mattelmäki, 2008). 
A workshop plan was outlined to structure and define the 
overall purpose of inviting the participants into a workshop. 
The initial purpose was to include the participants in the de-
velopment process of the container and make them choose 
between different concept ideas. However, this was adjusted 
to support the design phase at the given time. With a brief 
look at the Gantt Chart to uncover the tasks to come in the 
future design process. It was decided to use the time with the 
participants on (1) understanding and uncovering their mo-
tivation and expectations for the project, (2) make them pri-
oritise the pre-defined design requirements and (3) make a 
customer profile and value map of the “to be” solution. The 
plan was structured to accommodate the three key stages in a 
co-creation workshop: create comfort, stage discussion and 
develop together (see Appendix A07.01 and A07.02 for the 
workshop plan).
Exercises
The workshop was conducted online on the visual collabo-
ration tool Miro, due to COVID-19 restrictions (see the in-
formation box in Section 06.5 for an elaboration of the tool). 
Using Miro has its pros and cons, as it creates the opportunity 
to support the exercises with probs. However, this does not 
CO- CREATION 
WORKSHOP
/ Velkommen (må vi optage?)
/ Introduktion til workshoppen
/ Hvordan bruger man Miro?
/ Skabe et æstetisk udtryk
/ Validering af design krav
/ Prioritering af design kriterier
/ Værdi forslag til et fremtidigt koncept
AGENDA!
Øvelse i at bruge Miro
Vælg din krop
/ Træk kroppen over til skemaet til højre.
HINT: Markér elementerne ved at holde shift inde og trykke med venstre musetast. Derefter gruppér 
din avatar ved at trykke CTRL+G, så du kan flytte det som en enhed.
Figure 07.2.1 - Learning how to use Miro 
==PAGE:101==
93
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
necessarily come as an advantage if the participants are not 
properly familiar with the tool. 
The first exercise was therefore performed with the purpose 
of onboarding the participants in how to manage using Miro. 
This exercise was also used to create comfort, as they had to 
present a few facts about who they are, their favourite meal 
and why they are motivated for the project with their self-
made avatar, see Figure 07.2.1. The exercise was essential for 
the participants to get into the mindset of how to work with 
Miro, and it also proved to be a lot of fun for both participants 
and facilitators. 
The second exercise was the Verbal Mood Board also a part 
of the create comfort phase. The idea with this exercise was 
to get the participants in the creative zone and prepare them 
to perform the visual moodboard, which required an idea of 
what they would like the product to express or make them 
feel. Five minutes were given to write down different expres-
sions, followed by a discussion of the most interesting sub-
jects. The words provided guidance towards which style and 
expression the container should communicate in the visual 
moodboard (Appendix A07.03).
The third exercise consisted of creating a visual moodboard as 
the final part of creating comfort among the participants, see 
Figure 07.2.2. Here, the participants were given an individu-
al board to find pictures (on any search engine) that express 
the style or feeling they would like the container to include. 
The participants were also shown the moodboard of Luups 
Bakken as an inspiration before initiating the exercise (see 
Appendix A07.04) along with some inspirational pictures (see 
Appendix A07.05). 
The moodboards and their reflection provided a common 
visual understanding of the aspects that Kokkenes Køkken 
/ Hold CTRL (mac: Cmd) inde og Scroll (mus), ellers brug to fingre på 
mousepad.
Derudover kan der zoomes ind og ud i nederste højre hjørne ->
Prøv at læs hvad der står herunder ved at zoome.
Aster
Mike
Maj
Teddy
Asmus
Rune
Navn
ArbejdsstiÙing
Livret
Lasagne
Kandidat 
studerende på 
DTU.
Design og 
Innovation
Hint: tryk på          (poster ikonet) ude til venstre for at benytte post it's
Hvorfor vil du 
gerne have et 
genanvendeligt 
system?
Find dit navn og udfyld skemaet
Sidst men ikke mindst!
Zoom ind og ud
hej :)
Finde Mike og Aster
Benyt endelig "Find participant funktionen" oppe i højre hjørne ved at 
trykke på enten Aster eller jeg
Prøv at trykke på enten Aster eller jeg 
3 min til 
udfylde 
tabel
Jeg vil gerne være 
med til at skabe 
bæredygtige 
løsninger der hvor 
det er muligt
Kvalitetschef 
KK
Direktør
Siteman
ager/køk
kenchef
go' 
burger
Mad
Buﬀet 
og chips
Bæredygtighed
Driftschef
MAD
jeg vil gerne 
bidrage til bedre 
miljø og god 
bægerdygtighed
Gøre det mere 
indbydende  
og  bæredygtig
Kandidat 
studerende 
på DTU
Moules 
Frites
Jeg vil gerne være 
med til at udvikle 
fremtiden 
bæredygtige 
løsninger
Jeg vil 
gerne 
redde 
verden
==PAGE:102==
94
had an elegant and simple shape but it was at the same time 
easy to distinguish it from the other phones, as it had a differ-
ent look. The insights from this exercise is therefore of high 
value, as it emphasises the importance of sustainable styling 
along with simplicity and elegance. 
The participants were set to validate the predefined design re-
quirements as an exercise to stage a discussion among the par-
ticipants, see Figure 07.2.3. The exercise was set off by mak-
ing the participants read all the requirements and then making 
them individually state whether or not they found it important 
for the design solution. This was done by placing a label say-
ing “keep” or “drop”. All requirements with a drop label were 
discussed in plenum to gain some insight on their reasoning. 
It was interesting to see that there was a common agreement 
in regards to some of the functional properties, such as the 
weight and whether or not it should be able to go in the mi-
crowave. The reasoning for this was that they did not want to 
found interesting and valuable for their brand. In its essence, 
the exercise was also about figuring out what kind of visual 
identity KK wanted to brand themselves by, which this PSS 
can help them with. Therefore, the moodboards were used as 
inspiration in the ideation phase, to create ideas and concepts 
for the container design as well as to detail the final container 
concept (see Section 11/)
The exercise showed that all participants wanted the product 
to include a natural expression in the sense of nordic design, 
where pure plastic was not an option. This also correlates to 
the earlier user test, where most people disliked the look of 
plastic as it does not express sustainability. The vision of the 
project is to create a sustainable PSS, which also entails a style 
and brand identity that should signal sustainability. One of the 
participants also focused on elements such as an eye-catching 
signature colour or a shape that could make the product stand 
out in a crowd. He gave the example of the first iPhone, which 
Asmus
Maj
Aspects of 
nature
Beautiful and 
simple like an 
iceberg
The solution 
should also be 
"happy"
Elegant like 
glass
Have a raw 
look
Beautiful 
and ﬁne
Diﬀerent structures. Raw on the outside 
and smooth on the inside. The 
smoothness is also associated with 
hygiene
Food elements that 
illustrates nordic design. It 
does not have to look 
"international"
Things are easier to 
clean with a smooth 
Figure 07.2.2 - Visual Moodboard
==PAGE:103==
95
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
time choosing only three criteria when they found them all 
equally important. Once the ice was broken and they started 
to choose their criteria, it was possible to see how their dif-
ferent backgrounds and expertise pulled them towards certain 
criteria. E.g. Maj, the CEO at Kokkenes Køkken, went for the 
more technical criteria, such as good insulation properties and 
enhancing the airflow of the container. Whereas Teddy, the 
head chef at Edison Huset, went for more aesthetical criteria, 
such as providing the most pleasant sensory feeling (aesthet-
ically pleasing and comfortable to hold), while enhancing the 
visual brand of the company. Rune, the operational manager, 
preferred robustness, aesthetic and the sustainability of the 
container. Asmus agreed with Rune, however, he also high-
lighted that the presentation of the food was really important.
The empirical data provided by KK will be used for evaluat-
ing the (future) concepts in an Evaluation Matrix. This exer-
cise got a bit rushed, due to loss of time and it only took five 
constrain which material could be used for the final solution 
by demanding a certain weight or microwave ability. They 
rather saw this feature as a “nice to have”, in other words as 
a criteria. This exercise also gave the participants insights to 
the different tradeoffs that the project group needs to make 
when creating the final solution, as including all aspects in the 
solution would be difficult. 
The results from this exercise were used to modify the Design 
Specification into a version 2.0 (see Appendix A07.06 and 
Appendix B07.01)
Prioritising the design criteria was the second part of the 
staging a discussion phase, see Figure 07.2.4. Here, the par-
ticipants were given three votes to individually vote on the 
three criteria they found most important (their character emo-
jis were reused to represent their choices). This exercise was 
found quite difficult for the participants, as they had a hard 
Rune
Teddy
Colours are extremely important. 
New Nordic designs, are normally 
shown in earth tones, however it is 
also important to choose colours 
that signals a certain value and 
recognisability. Think of Frankies 
Aesthetically pleasant 
items
Molecular gastronomy 
appeals to the simplicity 
and awakening of an 
appetite by the use of a few 
ingredienses
Smørrebrød to symbolise 
the opposite of molecular 
gastronomy. Both appeal 
to my appetite
Good appeal! Reminds me 
of childhood - something 
solid, healthy and natural
Nordic design - down to 
earth. I like the earth tones, 
we should stick to those 
PH lamp 
symbolises classic 
design.
Clear and simple lines in the 
design. Should look appealing 
when it stands by it self on table
Could look nice with a raw outer 
surface and a smooth inner 
surface to get sensorially triggered 
when touching the container
==PAGE:104==
96
Validering af design krav
Skal kunne bruges mindst 200 gange? 
(eller mere?)
Skal kunne klare at blive rengjort ved 
minimum 90 grader celsius
Skal kunne klare at blive frosset ned 
til 20 grader celsius
Må ikke kunne blive ridset af metal 
bestik
Skal kunne komme i mikrobølgeovn
Beholderen/materialet må ikke blive 
afmærket af mad (fx tomatsovs)
Beholderen skal veje mellem 200g - 
500g gram
Beholderen skal kunne have mellem 500 
-  750 mL mad (volume)
Den skal være tæt/forseglet, derved 
ingen lækage.
Beholderen skal renses for alle 
rester, før den kommer tilbage i 
systemet igen
Beholderen skal kunne aflevere 
beholderen tilbage
Prisen skal ikke overstige 100 kr
(per beholder)
Design krav
Kunden skal kunne købe en beholder, 
hvis de ønsker det
Hele løsningen skal være mere 
bæredygtig end brugen af single- use 
packeging
Brugeren skal selv skylle beholderen 
efter brug
100 beholdere skal være hele tiden 
være til rådighed på lageret
Behold
Sortering af de opstillede design krav med henblik på at få dem valideret.
Hvilke krav skal beholdes?
Skal der tilføjes flere?
Hvilke skal fjernes?
Beholderen SKAL have denne egenskab for at 
kunne fungere
Hvilke krav skal der være til beholderen/systemet?
5 min til at 
læse + 
behold/drop
Behold
Drop
Drop
Drop
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Drop
Drop
Drop
Drop
Drop
Drop
Drop
Drop
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Drop
Drop
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Behold
Drop
Drop
Figure 07.2.3 - Validation of Requirements from the 
Design Specification v1.0 - 10 min
Co-creation Session
The product should have a simple and elegant shape 
with elements inspired by nature in the sense of nordic 
design.
The product should also be able to stand out in a crowd, 
which requires an eye catching colour or shape.
The product should be able to signal sustainability and 
eco-design alone by its design
The requirements moved to criteria were: 
Should be able to withstand -20 degrees
Should not be scratched when using metal utensils
Should be microwaveable
Should weigh between 100-500 grams
The requirements removed were: 
The user should rinse the container after use (as it 
could not be expected that the user would do so)
The prioritized criteria were:
Gain an overview of the containers in the system, the 
container has to permit airflow, and facilitate good in-
sulation (Maj, CEO of KK)
The container emits a good experience (aesthetically 
and comfortably when eating) together with a strong 
visual brand identity (Teddy, head chef at Edison 
Huset)
Robustness, sustainability, and aesthetics (Rune, oper-
ations manager)
Robustness, aesthetics and the possibility to nicely 
present the food (Asmus, quality manager)
The canteen experiences a lot of pains in the current 
system with communicating to the canteen customers 
from different platforms. The canteen would like to 
have one platform where they communicate the menu, 
sell meals and gather information about the orders
Consumer pains consist of not knowing the possibility 
of buying takeaway meals from the canteen, buying a 
meal in a container that does not keep the temperature 
and having to get rid of single-use packing after each 
purchased meal
The user should have a platform where they can keep 
track of the menu, their containers and the amount of 
CO2 emissions that they save by buying into a sustain-
able product-service system
==PAGE:105==
97
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
The value map and customer profile provided the project 
group with two value propositions that were used in the 
ideation phase when creating business models for the prod-
uct-service system.  The participants used their expertise and 
decided upon the most important values. These insights are 
used in the conceptualisation phase (see section 07.03). Fur-
thermore, view the filled out Value Propositions in Appendix 
07.07.
The most common pains that Kokkenes Køkken experience 
are mostly related to the communication of the takeaway sys-
tem, such as too many communication channels, high variance 
in sales which is hard to plan for, and not having a common 
way for managing and tracking takeaway orders. Whereas 
minutes instead of ten minutes. The changes made to the de-
sign criteria can be viewed in A07.06 and Appendix B07.01.
In the last exercise, the participants were asked to develop 
a modified value proposition canvas, in order to define the 
value they would like to give to the consumer as well as to 
themselves, see Figure 07.2.5 for a snippet of the exercise. 
The exercise consisted of developing a customer profile and 
a value map for the consumers and Kokkenes Køkken in a 
fun and alternative way. The main goal of the exercise was 
to make the participants define the customer profile, visualize 
the value to be created, and create a possible product/market 
fit as described in the Value Proposition Canvas (“Value Prop-
osition Canvas,” n.d.).
Jo bedre en sensorisk oplevelse desto 
bedre
Jo mindre plads den optager jo bedre, 
specielt når den er tom
Jo bedre den passer til dimensionerne, 
desto bedre
Jo bedre dimensionerne passer til en 
rygsæk, jo bedre
Jo bedre den er til at servere i, desto 
bedre (Køkkenpersonalet)
Jo mere formen (og materialet) er 
inviterende for kunderne til at spise 
fra, desto bedre.
Burde være æstetisk flot at kigge på
Burde præsentere maden på en lækker måde 
(med henblik på at forøge madoplevelsen)
Burde have en stærk visuel brand 
identitet
Det bæredygtige aspekt i beholderen burde 
være æstetisk synligt
Materialet burde ikke være alt for 
varmeledende
Burde muliggøre både at holde tæt og 
luftstrøm
Burde være nem at åbne/lukke beholderen
Burde være praktiskt/bekvemt at spise ud 
af beholderen
Beholderen bør være så nem at rengøre, 
som muligt
Burde være nemt at skifte delene på 
beholderen (låg og bund)
Burde være muligt at have et overblik 
over alle beholderne (i brug og på lager)
Systemet/beholderen burde have en 
økonomisk appellerende gevinst for 
kantinen (Kokkenes Køkken)
Burde virke så holdbar/robust som muligt
Burde have isolerende egenskaber der kan 
vedligeholde temperaturen, så meget som 
muligt (kold/varm)
Prioritering af design kriterier
Kriterier
Ikke nødvendigt at have denne 
egenskab, for at 
beholderen/systemet fungerer. 
Mere en "nice to have"
Læs de opstillede kriterier igennem og vælg 
individuelt jeres top tre favoriter. Før dem hen 
til "behold" kassen.
HINT: Copy/paste billederne ved at trykke 
CTRL+C (copy) og CTRL+V (paste).
5 min til at 
læse + 
vælge top 3
Figure 07.2.4 - Prioritising Criteria 5 min
==PAGE:106==
98
on how the solution should work as if it was a magic thing. 
It was clear that most of the ideas were based on all the in-
sights gained from the previous phases of the design process. 
This exercise therefore allowed all group members to align 
on which thoughts, ideas and elements of the system that they 
found important. 
 
After the initial brainstorming activity the system and the con-
tainer design were ideated and conceptualised in parallel, as 
the group agreed that these were not dependent. 
for the consumers (employees at Edison Huset) the pains are 
more related towards eating the food for dinner and lunch, not 
having an overview of the menu, and issues with temperature 
lowering the quality of the meal. All in all, this exercise pro-
vided Kokkenes Køkken perspective of what the problem was 
and how they thought it could be solved. A great exercise for 
mapping the value and creating a product/market fit. 
07.3 Developing Concepts
To open up the solution space and get into a proper creative 
and ideating mindset an individual “magic thing” brainstorm-
ing exercise on the holistic system (both system and contain-
er) of the broader takeaway system in the restaurants, was 
made (see Figure 07.3.1). All group members brainstormed 
1.2: Hvilke pains/ulemper er der ved at bestiÙe takeaway?
1.3: Hvilke gains ønsker Brian at opleve? Hvad giver det ekstra?
FOLK DER BESTILLER TAKEAWAY
Man skal 
købe 
billetten
Eksempel
/ Festivalgænger
Ligge i kø i 
 minimum 
24 timer
Den lange 
ventetid i 
køen og de 
hårde forhold
Eksempel
/ Festivalsgænger
Et lækkert og let 
layout med 
mulighed for at 
billeder med 
festivalsﬁltre.
Coronapas.
1.1: Hvilke steps skal Brian igennem, når han bestiÙer takeaway i 
det nuværende system?
Troppe op 
på festivals
- pladsen
Høre 
musik
/ Hvad frustrer Brian? Hvilke costs er der? Er det tiden?
Manglende 
information 
omkring transport 
til og fra 
festivalspladsen
/ Hvad forventer Brian? (fra f.eks. produktets design, service, etc.)
Eksempel
/ Festivalgænger
Prestige, ved 
at være en del 
af festivallen 
(og 
community)
Svært at 
ﬁnde 
madtilbud, 
samt
Brian skal 
først og 
fremmest 
bestille det....
At det ikke er 
muligt at købe 
takeaway på 
dagen...
Et 
miljøvenligt 
alternativ til 
takeaway...
Det her er Brian... Han 
bestiller takeaway hos jer.
At betale 
2000+ kr uden 
at have et 
overblik over 
programmet
5 min
5 min
5 min
Gå til 
events
Men hvordan foregår det?
Hvad skal han gøre?
Finde 
sine 
venner
Gå på 
opdagelse
Svært at ﬁnde 
sine venner 
eller ﬁnde 
rundt på 
pladsen
Svært at ﬁnde 
information 
omkring diverse 
ting (om 
festivallen)
At han ikke 
ved lige præcis 
hvor han skal 
bestille jeres 
lækre mad...
Let at ﬁnde 
rundt. Evt. 
funktion til at 
ﬁnde venner
Nem og 
sikker 
betaling
Frustrerer dette ham? 
Er der muligvis andre ting der kunne frustrere ham? 
Brian tænker meget på miljøet, men hvad mere?
Hvordan kunne vi give Brian det ekstra? 
spise i 
kantinen
Beslutte 
hvad han 
vil bestille
hente 
det i 
kantinen
ﬁnde et sted 
til opbevaring 
indtil han går 
hjem
beslutte 
om han vil 
ha maden 
med hjem
Finde plads i 
skraldespanden 
til de brugte 
beholdere
ﬁnde www. 
siden for at 
bestille
bestille det 
antalt han 
skal bruge
ﬁnde plads 
til maden i 
et køleskab
afhente i 
kantinen
At han skal 
spise det 
samme aften 
og frokost
Når han 
kommer hjem 
og skal skaﬀe 
sig af med 
emballagen
at den 
lækre salt 
er faldet 
sammen
at det kolde 
bliver lunkent 
og det varme 
koldt
for lidt eller 
for meget 
mad
størrelse på 
portioner 
(køkkenet skal 
være sikker på 
der er nok)
At brian er 
en god 
ambassadør 
for kantinen
Få at vide hvor 
meget man selv har 
bidraget med ift. 
CO2 cut osv. ved at 
købe i 
genanvendelige 
bokse
Nemt 
bestillings- 
system
Lækkert 
embalager 
som man vil 
vise frem når 
man går hjem
smart 
retursystem
Bonus i 
form af 
viden eller 
rabat
SANS logoer 
på alt så vi 
bliver 
synlige
Figure 07.2.5 - Customer profile + Value map - 30 min
==PAGE:107==
99
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
Co-creation Session
A co-creation workshop differs from a generative 
workshop with its structure and aim to gain a spe-
cific output. The co-creation workshop had in total 
three goals: (1) understand and uncover the partici-
pants motivation and expectations for the project, (2) 
make them prioritise predefined design requirements 
and criteria and (3) make a customer profile and val-
ue map of the “to be” solution. All three goals were 
reached and insights were gained due to the game 
plan, which was structured before conducting the 
workshop. However, even though a fair amount of 
time was set off to accommodate for each exercise, 
there were still some slips in the time schedule. This 
Self 
cleaning 
container
Container can 
be dropped in 
a skakt in 
apartment 
building
Cute children 
will come and 
collect 
containers
Containers are ideal 
for creating a really 
nice storage system 
for all your dried 
goods 
#guesswhosback
Containers are so 
attractive that people 
will want to post 
pictures on instagram 
with their containers 
#meandmycontainer
Children and 
spouses are 
exited when 
bringing home 
food in the 
container
You can spot a 
container from a 
mile away as their 
design is so 
recognisable and 
nice #reddot
Containers 
become a way 
to give back to 
society
Collecting 
containers 
is great fun
What do we do 
about people that 
want to buy food 
on the go? How 
does the reusable 
container ﬁt in?
All restaurants 
use our 
reusable 
containers
Containers can 
be returned in 
every 
restaurant
Restaurants get points 
based on the amount 
of containers they 
receive in return. This 
can be used as an 
advantage for them 
(discount or the like)
Delivery services 
pick up used 
containers, 
when delivering 
new food
Wolt drivers
/customer can 
receive 
points/discount in 
this interaction
Insulated 
container 
that can keep 
warm/cold
Foldable 
container
Julemanden 
sørger for at få 
leveret og 
hentet takeaway 
containerne
Vi bruger 
droner til at 
hente 
containers hos 
folk og levere
Postvæsenet 
henter containere 
og står for alt 
indsamling af 
takeaway
Vi benytter en hjemmeside, 
hvormed folk har en proﬁl 
og derigennem kan de 
følge med i hvordan de 
redder planeten ved at 
bruge genanvendelige 
beholdere.
Platformen kan 
tracke beholderne 
alt efter hvem der 
har dem, enten med 
chip, stregkode(QR), 
eller på anden vis 
(navn etc.)
Containeren er tæt og 
æstetisk ﬂot. Folk føler 
noget prestige i at 
bruge den og derfor 
køber nogle folk den 
også med hjem, da den 
også er funktionel!
Der er et display i 
den som fortæller 
hvor meget mad, 
vægt eller hvilken 
type mad der er i, så 
folk ved hvad de 
præcist får
Ellers kan de 
også se det 
igennem 
beholderen.
Den kan komme 
i ovn og 
mikrobølgeovn 
og så kan den 
fryses ned.
App
HTML 
chat BOT 
system
EXCEL 
macros, 
andet 
måske
deliver at all 
restaurants 
or at pant or 
at home
wolt takes 
it when 
youre done
automatically 
gets returned
universal - 
ﬁts within 
all types of 
food
easy 
branding - 
for all 
restaurants
always 
containers 
at all 
partners
Rotine 
cycles 
around the 
city
people who 
advocates 
for solution
such a 
sensory/aesth
etically 
pleasing 
experiencewants to 
keep 
it/buy it
look in the 
restaurants 
- gets 
attracted
seethrough 
on top
The way the 
food is placed 
is kept during 
transport
money worth 
- people 
cleaning the 
city (like pant)
no 
plastic 
bag
simple - 
other items 
not needed
easy return 
for all 
peoples 
situations
system like 
Uber - 
everyone can 
deliver/return
was expected as all participants were new to Miro 
and had extroverted personalities with a passion for 
the concept. The time schedule was adjusted continu-
ously to cater for the overall time plan, meaning that 
some exercises got a bit more attention than others 
- but this was expected when planning the workshop 
where each exercise got a priority in case time was 
short. 
Lastly, working in Miro had its pros and cons. How-
ever, the cons were easily mitigated by making proper 
preparation of the Miro boards and the exercises that 
the participants had to go through. The participants 
were primarily only asked to do simple tasks, such as 
move things around and not define new items.
Figure 07.3.1 - Output from the Magic Thing brain-
storming exercise.
==PAGE:108==
100
All group members brainstormed individually on the means 
to ensure that as much of the solution space was covered. All 
means were after the exercise gathered in one function-means 
tree. Some of the functions were split into two and some new 
ones were included. To decide on which concepts should 
be drawn in the morphology, another individual brainstorm 
was made. Afterwards the concepts were chosen by voting. 
Choosing and drawing concepts in the morphology was 
however a very time consuming and iterative process, as the 
functions-means tree was very elaborate by including both 
business, motivational and practical focuses of the complex 
system, forcing the group to go much more into detail with all 
concepts than necessary at that time being. See Figure 07.4.1 
for an overview of the drawn morphology concepts. 
07.4 Development of the System 
Concept
A function-means tree was developed in order to structurally 
approach all of the insights gathered in the explorative user 
studies. This included the following functions:
•	
Communication platform
•	
Cost structure
•	
Motivation
•	
Unique value
•	
Collection/deliver
•	
Return
•	
Lost Parts/responsibility
•	
Tracking
Compete with 
colleagues/fa
mily on saving 
resources
Absalon 
life
We're 
lazy
The 
$$Moneymaker$$
PSS 
tomorrow
Get 
wrecked
The 
hipster
Greta 
Thunberg
Player 
1
The 
royalist
The 
capitalist
Cost 
structure
Communication 
platforms 
Rotine oﬀers
Motivation
Money 
discount
Competitions 
and prices
Helping people 
in need (1 DKK 
for every 
transaction)
Minimizing 
environmental 
impact
People get 
discounts when 
they bring them 
back - the faster 
the better
You get more 
discounts if you 
buy more 
frequently every 
week gets you 
extra.
Rotines 
role
only 
selling 
boxes
Rotine 
helps with 
logistics 
etc.
Sustainability
aestetics
convenience
feel
community
access to 
speciﬁc 
food (only 
option)
Environmental 
measurement 
(how much 
packaging have 
you saved)
Get money for 
collecting 
containers for 
other people 
(like pant)
Slowly build your 
own 
storage/tupperware 
system at home 
with the reusable 
containers
Discount ala 
CoﬀeeCollective 
to onboard 
people
"Klippekort" 
hvor 
nummer 10 
er gratis
On being 
sustainable - 
you save xx by 
choosing this 
solution
Design and 
functionality
have a 
platform, 
where users 
and partners 
coordinate
Rotine is in 
 charge of 
everything
Design
Sustainability
Community
Economic incentive
only selling 
boxes to 
partners
1 +3 +5  - 
partners pay 
subscriptio 
n
2 + 3- 
consumers 
pay 
subscription
6 - extra fee is 
payed for 
containers when 
purchasing meal
user pays when 
not handing in 
container (maybe 
small charges 
gradually)
Consumer pay 
upfront (1 time 
pr. registered 
box)
Who owns 
the 
containers?
Consumer
Rotine
Partners
No return/
Responsibility
Customer 
buys the 
container 
when lost
insurance
pay 
50/50
free for 
user(paid for via 
subscription - so 
we can aﬀord)
Fee
/penalty on 
customer
The company 
pays in the  
enrolment phase 
to test the habits 
(Drivenow)
Nobody 
pays. It 
happens
User pays a 
deposit and gets 
it back when 
returning the 
container
User owns the 
container and 
can do with it 
what they 
please
The restaurant 
owns all boxes 
and will be 
responsible for 
collecting them
like 
library - 
charges...
Broken 
parts
Rotines 
responsibility
Consumers
responsibility
Partners 
responsibility
platform 
between 
partners 
and rotine
platform 
between 
all
platform 
between 
partners and 
consumers
platform 
between 
customers 
and rotine
existing 
platforms 
are used
The 
canteen?
The food 
addict?
(Anton ego)
Explore 
local 
restaurants
Get a personal 
relationship/h
abit with local 
restaurants
What did 
you think 
of the 
food?
planting 
trees
Close bond 
between 
Rotine and the 
consumers
Adds in 
the 
system
Get discount if 
you have a lot 
of points. 
Restaurants 
pay
Cheaper if 
you return 
earlier
Gamiﬁcation 
experience
Rotine has a 
partnership 
with existing 
solutions such 
as Wolt
Rotine 
takes 
the hit
Between 
Rotine and 
consumer
SS
MS
SA
SS
Figure 07.4.1 - Drawing concepts by morphology
==PAGE:109==
101
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
developed concepts covered the broader takeaway system in 
the restaurants (as described in step 3 of the three-step road-
map). 
After describing the six concepts it was decided not to proceed 
with the PSS Tomorrow, as it did not differentiate much from 
the MVP-test setup. Furthermore, Ultra Convenience was too 
dependent on strategic partnerships with e.g. Wolt, making 
the concept more appropriate as a future vision of what the 
PSS should be like. Community life, The Capitalist and Greta 
Thunberg were chosen as concepts to further detail and eval-
uate with users and stakeholders. Here, elements from Player 
1 could be incorporated.
In the end the initial concepts drawn were;
•	
Absalon life // community
•	
The capitalist 
•	
PSS tomorrow // MVP
•	
Greta Thunberg
•	
Player 1
•	
The royalist // the most convenient
The six concepts were further described by including high-
lights of the important system elements, strengths and weak-
nesses, a description of the value for consumers and partners, 
and lastly the behavioural advantages in relation to the con-
sumers motivation, ability and possible triggers (see Figure 
07.4.2 and Appendix A07.08 for detailed view). Note that the 
By the user
Unique 
value for 
the 
consumer
Delivery
Return 
(how)
Tracking
Be part of a 
system, which 
do all the dirty 
cleaning for 
you
We have 
our own 
delivery 
company
People can 
use it as 
pant (needs 
a system)
RFID 
chip
Stregkode
QR
Extreme 
quality - huge 
prestige for 
customers
Texture which 
captivates 
sustainability, 
while being more 
sustainable.
An 
üppergood 
eating 
experience
Customer 
check in 
(interaction)
Logistics 
(distributing 
containers)
check in 
by app
NFC 
CHIP
GPS 
tracker
Wolt/just 
eat other
Rotine 
delivery
Restaurants and 
their existing 
options (e.g. 
partnership with 
WOLT)
at specifc 
restaurant
at all 
partner 
restaurants
at postal 
shops
postman 
picks up
other 
users 
picks- up
at stands 
around 
the city
at 
super- 
markets
more points if 
returned at 
low stock (like 
low battery 
cars)
Rotine 
evenly 
distributes
restaurants 
own 
problem
containers 
delivered at 
same place 
as bought
better 
packaging
experience
cheaper 
in the 
long run
A broadly 
used 
system
A container that 
gives something 
extra to the 
food experience
Creating 
loyal 
customers
Collected 
at the 
restaurant
The customer 
own his/her 
own container 
and bring it 
along
Unique and 
simple, smart 
design/ 
functionality ala 
KleanKanteen
Sustainability 
brand value
Easy to adjust 
the 
appearance to 
your own 
brand
Get the 
food/container 
delivered to you 
by delivery service 
(PostNord, Wolt, 
etc.)
Never 
return the 
container - 
max  swap
Get delivery man 
(e.g. Wolt) to take 
it with him when 
ordering new one
Containers can 
be returned at 
boxes 
throughout the 
neighborhood
User writes 
down own 
info
Photo
scanning 
when 
returned
No 
tracking. 
Based on 
trust
unique 
value for 
the 
partners
Sustainable 
prestige
Environmental 
prestige
Unique and 
simple, smart 
design/ 
functionality
A completely new 
experience/trend 
(tiktok, instagram) 
Hipsters
Drone
Drone
Check in 
with 
website
Check in by 
personal 
card
Low tech, 
write on 
paper
Low low 
tech, tell 
the 
personel
User owns the 
container and 
swap with 
clean one
By OTHER 
Camera 
tracking
(AMAZON)
Tracking based on container ID
Tracking based on user/partner
Mobilepay! 
Easy acces for 
people! - 
Greatest IDEA 
EVER
You can cash 
rewards for 
handing it in 
for others
You get 
points/discounts 
if you hand in at 
restaurants that 
need containers
chain 
restaurant 
ala coﬀee 
collective
Perks
Rotine 
ambassador 
that works to 
pick up 
containers
Save 
money in 
the long 
run
Registered via 
order on 
existing 
platforms ala 
Wolt
==PAGE:110==
102
Figure 07.4.2 - Overview the six system concepts
Once the system is 
established it should 
be quite strong
Recurring revenue via 
subscription from 
partners
A loyal and supporting 
customer base
Prestige in owning a 
Rotine Box
Community Life
The Community Life concept is all about the social experience and your local community. The users will own the 
containers and swap containers at restaurants. Furthermore, being a part of Absalon Life, will provide you with 
recommendations from the chefs, and for new and fun experiences close to where you live. Help the 
environment and your local community by joining the community and be part of something bigger! The partners 
will buy a subscription, which provides them with the containers they need and exposure of their brand together 
with loyal customers.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
Creating loyal customers
Sustainable branding
Value is created through togetherness. By helping 
others and getting new exciting experiences close 
to where you live with people you love.
Social cohesion, by getting acceptance and being 
part of the community. Futhermore, to be part of a 
new social movement.
Social deviance. Being a part of the community 
makes it easier to enter the system.
Strengths
Facilitator and Spark, The app facilitates ﬁnding 
new spots in the local area and the 
recommendations from other users sparks an 
interest for new experiences.
Weaknesses
Explore your 
community
Compare with your 
colleagues, family and 
friends to see who will 
save the most C02
Find new experiences 
and explore your 
community
Be the ﬁrst to get 
amazing oﬀers in your 
community
Hard to implement, 
need loyal customers 
and traction
Can also be hard to get 
ambassadors (need 
early investment)
No tracking can lead to 
boxes missing - and 
that is a waste of 
resources
Buy a meal and a 
container at a local 
restaurant
Sign into the 
app/website
Browse all the 
recommendations 
and be part of 
something bigger
Post your experiences 
while getting local 
discounts and oﬀers
Show the rest 
of the 
community 
how green you 
are
EXPRESSO HOUSE
Explore the tasty coffee
Your profile
Carsten 
Nielsen
238kg/300kg CO2 saved
NIELS JENSEN
243kg/300kg CO2 saved
YOU
238kg/300kg CO2 saved
KARLA EMIL
232kg/300kg CO2 saved
1
2
3
Zoo
Explore animals at the zoo
Post meals and share 
restaurants directly on 
instagram, snapchat or 
facebook 
#meandmyrotine
2
2
The concept is simple 
avoiding too much 
complexity in tracking and 
distribution
Attracts all users that do 
not compromise on the 
environment
Concrete numbers on 
sustainability eﬀort
Greta Thunberg
This concept focuses on environmental sustainability above all. The user buys into the system by simply investing 
in a container. When buying takeaway the user brings their container along when they pick up their next meal - 
swapping the container for another one that has been cleaned by the restaurant, containing the meal. The 
business model excites the user to use their container again and again ensuring full utilization of resources.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
This concept gives the best sustainable brand value, 
and will attract all consumers that are not willing to 
compromise on behalf of the environment.
Partners save money in the long run, as they won't 
have to purchase single- use packaging anymore.
A feeling of making a diﬀerence for the environment. 
The consumer gets concrete numbers on the 
amount of CO2 saved by changing from single- use 
packing to reusable packaging.
Anticipation The concept inspires users to make a 
diﬀerence for the environment by changing little 
things in their day to day behaviour.
Brain cycles Users who want to make more 
sustainable choices are now able to participate in 
this system without having to plan anything.
Strengths
Facilitators. Users who want to live more 
sustainable now have a concrete way to do it.
Weaknesses
Users are motivated to use 
the container many times, 
but buying a new container 
is the only way for Rotine to 
gain revenue.
Restaurants will have to 
have extra containers in 
order to swap with users
The user is deviating from 
social norms by actively 
changing their behaviour in 
order to make a change for 
the environment, which can 
be a challenge.
App registers the 
use via partner 
conﬁrmation at 
restaurant
No tracking is 
needed
No distribution logistics 
are needed. Partner 
restaurants simply order 
the amount of extra 
containers needed
Keep track on how much CO2 
and material you have saved the 
environment
Whenever a part breaks Rotine 
recycles the material into a new 
container
A tree is planted for every tenth 
time you use your container
Hi Pete,
Your savings of the month
Container is made 
from sustainable 
sourced and 
recyclable materials
30 k
30 kg
30 pck
CO2 emission
Single- use packaging
Materials
Five trees have been planted in 
your name
Report a broken container
Get recommendations of how to 
improve your environmental 
impact.
Users go to 
restaurants and 
swap their container 
to a new when 
buying a meal
Rotine owns the container 
and is therefore also in 
charge of its life cycle.
All communication runs 
through Rotine meaning 
strategies can be adjusted 
accordingly
Users are building a habit 
of using the system
Player 1
This concept use elements of gamiﬁcation to create a challenge driven environment that prompts the consumer 
to use the app and service. The Rotine app will include design elements such as badges, levels and score points to 
inﬂuence and motivate the consumer. Rewards, such as discount or a free meal are given to the consumer (on the 
restaurants bill) to create a lot of immediate activity and eventually lock the customers loyalty to the service.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
Creating loyal customers
Sustainable brand value
Users are challenging themselves to earn 
badges, get points and get to higher levels 
within the system and are rewarded with 
points that can be used on unique takeaway 
experiences
Pleasure and hope. The gamiﬁed app will create a 
curiosity at the user. He/she will want to gain a 
(higher) reward for each accomplishment
Money. Users save money on their favorite 
takeaway by using the system and non- rutine is 
combatted by encouraging activities from day to 
day.
Strengths
Spark and signal. Users are triggered via 
notiﬁcations on the app that invites the user to play 
a game where discounts can be made to buy the 
next meal.
Weaknesses
Earn points based on activity and 
rise in level. Unleash new avatar 
skins.
Challenge your friends and see 
who has the highest level and 
the coolest skin
Finding appealing games 
that suits a wide audience 
Partners must be willing 
to oﬀer discounts to loyal 
customers
The app requires a lot of 
development to work 
properly
Consumer interacts 
with the app and earn 
points
A meal is ordered 
from a partner 
restaurant by using 
existing delivery 
services.
The meal is delivered 
in a container with a 
unique ID. Tracking 
information is 
registred on the app.
Pay container 
deposit. Refund of 
money upon return at 
all partner 
restaurants.
Earn points by 
returning your own or 
other users 
containers at a 
location with few 
containers in stock.
Low stock
Hood containers
Games that allows you to win 
free delivery, e.g. tap game or 
food ninja
Good motivation for 
entering the system 
(money is a strong 
motivation factor)
Recurring revenue 
via subscription
Relies on strong 
partnerships with 
restaurants - each 
individual consumer 
does not have to buy 
in on the solution
PSS Tomorrow
The PSS tomorrow is all about implementing a new product- service system as fast as possible. Partners will buy 
the containers and thereby have the ownership of the containers, while the system is owned by Rotine. Recurring 
revenue is based on the platform and tracking of the containers.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
Sustainable brand value
Staged communication between consumer 
and partners (a working system).
Get discounts on meals by using the system
Sustainable prestige.
Anticipation & sensation. The user chooses the 
better alternative for the environment and derives 
pleasure from receiving the meal in a container 
optimised for gastronomic experience.
Money. Customers receive discounts on their meals.
Strengths
Facilitator. Reminding the users that they can help 
the environment through this amazing new 
solution, while discounts can acts as a spark.
Weaknesses
Partners have to be 
willing to invest in 
the system and 
provide discounts on 
takeaway
People have to 
actively choose to 
use the system and 
return the 
containers.
User borrow 
containers through 
scanning a QR code
Partners provide 
discounts on meals
3 days to hand in - 
otherwise pay a small 
fee. After 10 days the 
consumer buys the 
container, if it is not 
returned.
Return the 
container at 
speciﬁc partner 
location
Goodbye single- use!
From the 13th of April you can order takeaway from 
the canteen in a reusable box. In this way you can help 
save a lot of resources by contributing to a circular 
community
for menu of the week
    Follow @edison_kokkenes_koekken
your delicious meal at home and rinse your                 box 
afterwards.
Order via takeaway- edison@kokkeneskoekken.dk 
Return
Enjoy 
1
2
3
4
your box to the dishwasher station in the canteen and scan the 
QR code here, so we know you have returned the box.
The mail should include: name, amount of meals and the day 
you are ordering. Order takeaway for any day of the week - 
latest before noon the day before.
your takeaway at the café between 14-17, where you scan a QR 
code so we know you have picked up your order.
Pick up
We're still developing
As we aim to design the best possible solution, this initiative is a part of a 
bigger design process. We need your feedback to make this happen!
Therefore we might write to the email you used for signing up with a few 
questions about your experience with the Rotine box.
Feel free to contact us at any time!
takeaway- edison@kokkeneskoekken.dk
Let's create a new
Good motivation for 
entering the system
Recurring revenue via 
subscription
Easier to keep users within 
the system
Creating loyal customers
Smart distribution of 
containers - not requiring 
extra resources.
The Capitalist
The Capitalist concept is based on monetary motivation for consumers. Users pay a monthly subscription, against 
always saving up to 10 % of meals from partner restaurants. A personal proﬁle is created via a mobile app, where an 
overview of all partner restaurants, containers borrowed and points earned is provided.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
Sustainable brand value
Creating loyal costumers
The consumers are rewarded for their active use 
of the system. The more they use it, the more 
they get.
Pleasure. The concept keeps motivating its users, 
by always oﬀering discounts on all meals. 
Furthermore users can earn extra points based on 
their activity unleashing various types of discounts 
to other stores and experiences.
Money. Users enters the system and stays within it, 
when they feel like they are really taking advantage 
of the perks provided. They "save money" by being 
a part of the system.
Strengths
Weaknesses
Points earned
Earn additional discounts based 
on your activity
Always save up to 10% on meals 
from partner restaurants
Rotine takes care of everything - 
should the container break or 
dissapear - we'll cover via your 
insurance
ASOS
Get your free discount
EXPRESSO HOUSE
Get your free discount
10%
Need to ensure 
partners agreement on 
discounts
using existing delivery 
platforms might create 
extra complexity in 
relation to coupling the 
speciﬁc container ID on 
the user
The insurance might be 
a very unsustainable 
business if users often 
loose the containers
238 points 
Not far from your 
next voucher!
Borrow containers 
via NFC chip
Use partners current 
delivery services
(partners ensures 
correct check in)
Tracking via unique 
container ID 
coupled with 
personal account
Containers can be 
returned at all
partner locations
Return at  low 
stock locations
and get extra 
discount
%
Spark. First month for free.
The opportunity to save 10% on meals.
The transition to the reuse 
system is easy
The user won't feel that it 
is more expensive
Ultra Convenience
Takeaway is all about convenience! The Ultra Convenience concept is based on creating a solution with as high 
convenience as possible, focusing on an easy transition from the use of disposable packaging to a reusable 
system. All choices are therefore based on what requires the least ability to enter the system. Rotine makes 
strategic partnerships, to ensure that the user won't have to enter a new platform to use the solution - all 
interactions happen via existing takeaway platforms such as Wolt.
Motivation
Ability
Possible triggers
Value for the Consumer
Value for Partners
Partners saves money in the long run, as they 
won't have to keep purchasing single- use 
packaging. Furthermore they are attracted by the 
sustainable brand value.
The consumer does not feel a big diﬀerence from 
single- use packaging to the reusable solution in 
terms of convenience. However, they get a 
greater value when it comes to the eating 
experience enhanced by the design and 
functionality of the containers.
Pleasure & social coherence. The users is mainly 
motivated by the environmental beneﬁts of using 
the system, ensuring social coherence by taking 
responsibility for the environment. Furthermore, 
the design of the container ensures a more 
pleasurable experience.
Money, time and non- routine. Users have a high 
ability to use the system, as it is simple in all ways. 
It does not cost much extra nor take much more 
time than usual. Users do not have to get to know 
a whole new platform, but merely try something 
new via accustomed platforms.
Strengths
Spark & signals. The system creates a new motivation by 
providing a more pleasurable eating experience and acts 
as a signal to make more sustainable choices.
Weaknesses
The concept requires 
strategic partnerships
The concept is not as 
convenient before a certain 
number of partner 
restaurants
The users motivation might 
not be so clear
Revenue requires that users 
keep choosing the solution
Chose to borrow a 
container 
automatically when 
ordering a meal
All partner delivery 
services can be used
Tracking via unique 
container ID coupled 
with existing 
accounts (e.g. Wolt 
or Mobilepay)
Containers can be 
returned at all
partner locations, or be 
picked up at home next 
time a meal is delivered
Rotine makes sure 
to evenly distribute 
the containers at 
partner 
restaurants
Only one click extra to choose 
the reusable solution.
The user pays for the system via a 
small fee each time a meal is 
purchased. The fee corresponds to 
the price of disposable packaging.
Rotine replaces broken containers. 
Users have 14 days to return the 
container.
==PAGE:111==
103
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
Vision in Product Design (ViP)
To try and open up the solution space for developing an in-
novative container an interaction-centred design approach, 
called ViP was tried out. Here, the group followed the pro-
cedure as presented in the article Dancing with a Machine: A 
Case of Experience-Driven Design by Hekkert et al. (2003). 
p
p
product
user
past
present / future
context
interaction
product
context
context
Figure 07.5.2 - Vision in product design approach (Hekkert et al., 
2003)
ViP shifts the focus of interacting with products from what 
the product does to how it does it (Hekkert et al., 2003). The 
main objective is to redesign products based on a visionary 
description of the interaction - the case study presented in the 
article a redesign of a photocopier based on a dance. 
This design approach was applied on the container by first-
ly describing the interaction with single-use packaging. The 
following contexts were described as “eating takeaway of a 
single-use packing”:
•	
“Like a one night stand”
•	
“Quickly over”
•	
“Could be bad/could be good”
•	
“No expectations”
•	
“Quickly forgotten”
•	
“Somewhat random”
Afterwards the future context for the new container design 
was defined as a new PSS for packaging.  Hereafter, an indi-
vidual brainstorm on experiences that could be used as visions 
was done (see Appendix A07.12). After discussing how the 
different experiences might work as visions for the container 
design, six experiences were chosen as visions and further de-
scribed, see Figure 07.5.3. 
The three concepts were further detailed by filling out a Busi-
ness Model Canvas (BMC) for each of the concepts along 
with highlighting the benefits of choosing one of the con-
cepts from the canteen perspective. And lastly, a Swimlane 
Diagram was made for each concept (see Appendix A07.09 to 
A07.11) and app wireframes were made to test the concepts in 
a generative way (see Concept Catalogue).
07.5 Development of the Con-
tainer
The container concept was developed using several different 
ideation methods, including an individual brainstorming ses-
sion of the two different settings (ideal for sharing and nice-
ly plated) (see Figure 07.5.1). This was done using Vision in 
Product Design (ViP) as well as an individual Morphology 
exercise. Furthermore, simple moodboards were used as in-
spiration on style, material and surfaces to support the com-
munication of the ideated container drawings.  
Morphology
Developing the system concepts based on morpholo-
gy turned out to be an extremely challenging and cum-
bersome exercise, which was a surprise to the group, 
as morphology is an exercise performed many many 
times before. The morphology exercise demonstrat-
ed the high level of complexity that the reuse system 
has, and the group had a hard time balancing the right 
level of detail for the functions and means. Many of 
the functions depended on each other, and the group 
was forced to consider a lot of detailed scenarios to 
be able to make a decision. This was therefore an ex-
tremely time consuming and iterative process, which 
might have benefitted from either blackboxing some 
of the functions, or conducting some more research 
before diving into making decisions (this could espe-
cially have been relevant for the logistical part of the 
functions; collection/delivery, return and tracking). 
Furthermore, the morphology also made it clear that 
the group did not always have the same understand-
ing of the concepts, which was also a big strength of 
the exercise, as the group could align understandings 
and expectations in relation to the concepts. 
==PAGE:112==
104
Experience - ideal for sharing
Like having a 
movie night
Like opening a 
new box of 
crayons
Relaxed 
setting
Everything 
is laid out
Familiar
Accesible
Excitement
Everything 
in its right 
place
You can 
take it with 
you 
everywhere
Like brewing 
coﬀee on a 
chemics
old 
fashioned 
way - but in 
new design
takes a bit of 
extra time - but 
this creates an 
exclusive/excitin
g feeling
Surprise
Like ﬁnding your 
bowling ball (Or going 
out bowling with tha 
gang)
You know 
you will 
have fun
You are just 
ﬁne with 
renting all the 
things you use
You know you 
have a good 
ball when you 
get the strike
Your ﬁngers and 
the ball create a 
perfect symbiotic 
match, which you 
like over short 
periods.
Divorced parents 
looking forward to 
have their kid (the 
container) come home
You have 
gotten used 
to the new 
routine
Excitement 
before 
he/she/it 
arrives
When you "open" 
he/she/it up you hear 
everything that your 
child has experienced 
during the time away 
from you - you 
appreciate it
You can see that 
your child have 
some ﬂaws 
(scratches), but 
you are ﬁne with 
it and accept it
Low 
tech
Like being at a 
festival with a 
childhood friend
Able to 
spot in a 
crowd
Predictable 
behaviour
Knowing each 
others 
preferences, 
needs and 
limit
We already 
have a 
history 
together
Easy to 
have a 
good time 
with
Each event adds 
to our friendship 
memories of good 
times we have 
together
Easy to 
understand 
once tried, but 
also a bit 
mysterious
The weekend has ended... 
You deliver your child back 
to his mom (restaurant). 
Both sad and happy. Sad 
because you will miss 
he/she/it. Happy because 
you got to spend some 
time with he/she/it
You cherish all 
the good 
memories you 
have together
Folding the 
ﬁlter lets the 
user be a part 
of the creation
Very 
homey 
and safe
Figure 07.5.1 - Brainstorming on the experience settings
Figure 07.5.3 - Six chosen visions for product design
==PAGE:113==
105
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
A sketching session for each vision was done individually, 
were fun and interesting ideas emerged from this exercise (see 
Figure 07.5.4 and Appendix A07.13). 
Morphology
The ViP exercise was summarised in a structured morpholo-
gy scheme, consisting of the following functions in the func-
tion-means tree:
•	
Style
•	
Shape 
•	
Edges 
•	
Outer surface
•	
Material 
•	
Closing mechanism
•	
Stack function 
•	
Ways of carrying
•	
Modularity 
Means for these functions were brainstormed and included in 
the functions-means tree (see Appendix A07.14). When trying 
to draw the concepts, it quickly became clear that all group 
members had their own perception and visions for the con-
tainer concepts, therefore it was decided to draw and visualise 
these individually (see Appendix A07.15). 
While still working individually the different concepts were 
ViP
The ViP exercise was really fun and interesting to 
try out. However, the group found it very difficult 
to ignore all of the gathered insights from the previ-
ous design phases and be creative without any con-
straints. Opening fully up for the solution spaces was 
therefore maybe a bit more limited than expected. 
However, at the end of the session some important 
aspects to include in the design of the container were 
discovered. 
•	
Visions such as “opening a box of crayons” 
made it clear that the experience when opening 
the container is important to consider. Opening 
the container should provide a “wow” effect and 
create excitement for the meal. It is therefore 
also important that the container shape allows 
for an appealing plating of the meal elements. 
•	
Ergonomic factors are important to consider in 
order to create a container that is inviting and 
comforting. 
•	
The container should have unexpected elements, 
while at the same time being familiar. 
Figure 07.5.4 - A snippet of the sketches made in the ViP exercise
==PAGE:114==
106
types were made out of laser cut cardboard (such as the HAY 
concept, Rotate, the SANS! concept as well as the New Old), 
which could give an impression of the form (though without 
draft). 
The functionality of the Rotate was prototyped via 3D printed 
elements (see Figure 07.5.6). The Eating Experience proto-
type had a more complex geometry - especially due to the 
elevational part in the bottom, which was difficult to convey 
in a cardboard prototype and was therefore 3D printed. The 
Functional container concept was represented by an existing 
IKEA container in order to convey essential functionality 
such as snaps.
sketched and further described using inspirational pictures of 
either interesting shapes, materials or textures. Frames were 
made with different elements like a scrapbook, that iteratively 
allowed for the different concepts to take place (see Figure 
07.5.5). 
The different concepts were compared, where similar con-
cepts were merged together. Through voting, six concepts 
were chosen; The Functional, The Eating Experience, Rotate, 
The Hay concept, The Shared child and The SANS! concept. 
These were further detailed and prototypes for the six con-
tainer concepts were created as well. Pictures of all prototypes 
can be found in the Concept Catalogue. Most of the proto-
Figure 07.5.5 - Overview of the different frames used to describe different concepts
==PAGE:115==
107
07/ Ideation and Concept Development
07.7 References
1.	
Hekkert, P., Mostert, M., & Stompff, G. (2003). Dancing with 
a Machine: A Case of Experience-Driven Design. Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Designing Pleasurable 
Products and Interfaces, 114–119.
2.	
Mattelmäki, T. (2008). Probing for co-exploring. CoDesign, 
4(1), 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875027
3.	
Mattelmäki, T. (2011). LOST IN CO-X Interpretations of 
co-design and co-creation. IASDR2011.
07.6 Concept Catalogue
Three system concepts and six container concepts were de-
veloped based on several different design methods. All con-
cepts are presented in the Concept Catalogue (see separate 
document). 
Inspirational Material
When developing the container concepts it was again 
clear that the group was not aligned in the under-
standing of the different concepts; e.g. how a futuris-
tic concept should look. Making the concept frames 
including inspirational pictures of material, texture, 
functions etc. very helpful in communicating the 
vision for the concept, as sketches were not always 
communicating this well enough. 
==PAGE:116==
08/ 
==PAGE:117==
CONTENT
Introduction
MVP Test Evaluation
Feedback from KK
Enacting Telling Making
CONCEPT 
EVALUA-
TION
==PAGE:118==
110
08.1 Introduction
This chapter focuses on evaluating the different system and 
product concepts, developed in the previous chapter, with the 
purpose of finding a concept that suits both the stakeholders 
at Kokkenes Køkken and the consumers of the system. First 
of all, findings from the MVP test were considered, followed 
by a feedback session with KK as well as an enacting, telling, 
making workshop. 
08.2 MVP Test Evaluation
Before evaluating the concepts with stakeholders of the sys-
tem, the project group seeked to evaluate the outcomes of the 
MVP test to finally conclude and learn from the findings. 
After signing up 12 participants for free takeaway, the kitchen 
staff had finally received orders for takeaway. However there 
had been some problems with the QR codes for borrowing 
and returning the containers, and it was therefore not possi-
ble for the group to track the activity. Furthermore, one of 
the participants stated that he had ordered takeaway, and that 
his meal was forgotten, where there had been no staff around 
when he came to pick it up. This example insinuates that it 
is difficult to start a new routine and that the simple system 
(sending an email), might not be enough to ensure that the 
staff remembers to make the meal. 
A questionnaire was created to get feedback from the partici-
pants, here the main purpose was to get an idea of the willing-
ness of the customers to buy containers to enter the reusable 
takeaway system, as well as getting an idea of the price range 
(see questionnaire in Appendix A08.01).
After sending the link to the questionnaire three times, only 
one of the participants had answered; a male between 18-24 
years old, who was willing to buy a set of containers for 50 
DKK (free text answer), and not willing to pay 250 DKK. 
However, one participant’s feedback was not sufficient to 
make any final conclusions on the price nor sufficient enough 
for a final validation of the reuse system. Thus, the MVP test 
can not serve as a proof of concept, and a new test needs to be 
implemented in the implementation plan (see Section 12.6). 
The MVP test did however give some valuable insights to the 
solution, as well as validate the need for a user friendly sys-
tem supporting the sales of takeaway.
MVP Test
	
●
Physical advertisement like posters and pamphlets 
are not enough to catch users attention
	
●
Users of Edison huset are in theory willing to 
start using a PSS system for reusable takeaway 
containers as their ability to return the containers 
are quite high and they are motivated by e.g. the 
sustainable benefits. 
	
●
Users needs to be triggered or get extra motivated 
to enter the system for the first time - e.g. via a 
campaign with discount on or free meals 
	
●
The system for ordering takeaway needs to be 
user friendly for both canteens and consumers
	
●
The system needs to help its users in their 
workflow; e.g. reminders for making orders are 
essential
	
●
Robust technology for borrowing and returning 
containers needs to be implemented
MVP Test
Seen in retrospect, the MVP test has been way too 
big a mouthful to implement and monitor in parallel 
to the full design process. If the reusable container 
system for takeaway should have been properly val-
idated as a proof of concept in Edison huset, more 
time and effort should have been put into it, and oth-
er parts of the project should not have been made or 
at least heavily down prioritised. As the test did not 
fully play out in the periods where the group worked 
on other things, the test became more of a burden to 
try to make work, than actually being a valuable in-
put to the solution. Testing within Edison Huset has 
undoubtedly also been more of a challenge than other 
canteens might have been, as there was no takeaway 
culture in Edison Huset to begin with. 
That being said, the group did learn a lot from mak-
ing the MVP test. 
==PAGE:119==
111
08/ Concept Evaluation
08.3 Feedback from Kokkenes 
Køkken
The Concept Catalogue was sent to the participants from KK 
containing the three system concepts and seven container 
concepts prior to the feedback session as preparation. 
First, the three system concepts were presented which nat-
urally initiated a loose discussion after the presentation of 
each concept (see feedback in Appendix A08.02-08.04). The 
discussion continued as the stakeholders were asked to fill 
out a simple evaluation Matrix together, weighing up the pa-
rameters; brand diversity/uniqueness, motivation for users, 
motivation for consumers, motivation for canteens, business 
model and tracking/logistics (see Table 08.3.1 and Appendix 
A08.05, page 1-2). A common agreement was found with mo-
tivation for consumers having the highest priority and track-
ing/logistics having the lowest priority. The prioritisation of 
the different elements in the PSS clearly shows that KK is a 
company that first of all wants to motivate their customers in 
using their additional services. Without the consumers there 
is no business. 
The Greta Thunberg concept had the highest score followed 
by the Capitalist and lastly Community Life. As explained by 
one of the stakeholders, the Greta Thunberg concept is the one 
that describes KK’s vision the best. 
Containers
Secondly, the six container concepts were presented for the 
stakeholders by showing the Concept Catalogue along with 
mock-ups that could give them an idea of the shape, size and 
material use. The stakeholders were all impressed by the dif-
ferent concepts but did not immediately find one favoured de-
sign (see feedback comments in Appendix A08.06). 
However, after some thoughts they all three decided on a fa-
Figure 08.3.1 - Image from the feedback 
session with stakeholders
==PAGE:120==
112
When discussing different materials that could be used for the 
container, all three stakeholders agreed that the lid should be 
made from transparent hard plastic and not glass as it is too 
heavy, fragile and noisy when colliding during cleaning.
The bottom part should be made from Kareline (see Section 
09.4). Arguments for choosing this material are;
•	
it has a good sustainability profile, as it is made from 
50% sustainably sourced wood fiber and can be injection 
molded and recycled, thus creating a good storytelling 
•	
It feels and looks sustainable (opposite to 100% plastic 
(see insights from Affinity diagram in Section 06.9) 
•	
It is very aesthetically appealing
•	
it fits together with Luups Bakken, that is also made from 
Kareline 
•	
It fits well with their overall brand identity
•	
it is a functional material that dries quickly
•	
Furthermore a contact is already established with a Finish 
supplier of the material as well as a manufacturer in Jut-
land, that because of the Luups Bakke, has experience in 
injection moulding the material
vorite, where Maj liked the functional concept the most, and 
Teddy and Rune combined elements from different concepts, 
respectively Hay and Rotate and Rotate and Eating Experi-
ence (see Appendix A08.07 for fan favourites). 
The stakeholders were supposed to evaluate the different con-
tainer concepts based on evaluation factors, but due to time 
limitations the stakeholders only got to prioritise the factors: 
•	
Uniqueness/recognizability (5, highest priority)
•	
Chefs ability to plate (pleasing to look at) (4) 
•	
Optimal for transport with food (3)
•	
Optimal for storage/transport when empty (2) 
•	
Pleasing to eat from (1, lowest priority) 
Container
	
●
Uniqueness and high recognisability is of higher 
priority than the container being optimal for trans-
port or storage
	
●
Functional elements such as snaps, stackability 
and optimised storage is important, but can be 
compromised in favour of a unique design
	
●
Using different colours and or unique shapes is a 
good way to attract attention
	
●
The elevational part of the eating experience is in-
teresting it can be used as a creative way to divide 
and nicely plate the food
	
●
All stakeholders want a container that has a 
bottom made of Kareline material and a lid made 
of transparent hard plastic. Lastly, the two parts 
should be sealed with snaps like IKEA containers.
System
	
●
Greta Thunberg is the concept scoring the highest 
across the weighted parameters; brand diversity/
uniqueness, motivation for users, motivation for 
consumers, motivation for canteens, business 
model and tracking/logistics
	
●
Merging the sustainability aspect in Greta 
Thunberg with the money raised incentive in 
the Capitalist could make sense in the long run. 
E.g. showing CO2 emission savings, that could 
be shared amongst friends, while still providing 
discounts to make people use the service. 
	
●
The stakeholders highlighted two business models 
that they believed would be the best;
	
●
Consumers buying a container, which can get 
swapped when they buy a new meal. Containers 
might be placed on an account, meaning that con-
sumers will not have to store them at home. 
	
●
Consumers subscribing to the containers by pay-
ing a symbolic subscription fee. 
	
●
Kokkenes Køkken is inevitably motivated by 
business plans that include a high profit. 
	
●
Community life is a good concept, but not optimal 
for implementing in the canteen industry. Shar-
ing the amount of takeaway meals purchased on 
a weekly/monthly basis with your colleagues is 
probably not that flattering. However, elements 
such as saving favourite meals and preferences 
could be implemented.
==PAGE:121==
113
08/ Concept Evaluation
Madglad
Madglad is a community kitchen in the heart of Vester-
bro. They have been front runners in establishing a re-
usable takeaway packaging system. An interview with 
the owner of Madglad Trine was held to get insights to 
their experiences with such a system. 
 
Choosing the container
Madglad started their reusable container takeaway 
system in 2009.  
In the beginning people would just come with their 
own plate, but the health authorities could not approve 
of the system, as bacteria might be transferred from 
the plate to the rest of the restaurant. They considered 
making their own containers to implement in a take-
back system, but the boxes were too expensive for the 
clientele frequenting the restaurant, as they would cost 
75 DKK.
They have now settled on a standard container from 
IKEA, which accommodates the most important prior-
ities; leakage proof, compact, versatile, freezer friend-
ly.
 
Business model
Around half of the customers get their meal as take-
away. Customers get 2 kr discount on every meal when 
using the box. 25-40 people a day (approximately 1/3 
of the customers getting their meal as takeaway) are 
using the boxes. Madglad swaps the container for a 
new one when customers hand them in and wash them.
 
The cost structure breaks even, the 2 kr is equal to 
what they pay for single-use packaging and the guest 
pay 30 kr for the packaging, which is what the contain-
er costs. Trine does not believe that the 2 kr discount 
motivates people. It is the loyal customers who invest 
in this system, a lot of people come every week.
It is quite simple for Madglad to keep up the system. 
Guests have formed a community and help each other 
Figure out how the system works. Trine believes that 
the sense of being a part of a community makes her 
customers take responsibility for their own actions.
 
Changing behaviour
Madglad believes that the behaviour change is well 
on its way and that consumers are changing behaviour 
patterns quickly. They have not considered using an 
existing system like Kleen Hub, because they want to 
keep it simple and cheap. Any extra cost will result in 
a more expensive meal.
The customers at Madglad have not requested more 
information about the sustainability aspects. Trine be-
lieves that a part of the success of the system is that it 
does not have a moral component to it.
However, she also states that it would be interesting 
for Madglad to know when the system breaks even 
sustainability wise.
Trine believes that habits are the most important com-
ponent in establishing a system like this.
Table 08.3.1- Overview of Evaluation Matrix
The Capitalist
Community Life
Greta Thunberg
Multiplier (1-5)
score
value
score
value
score
value
Brand diversity/uniqueness
2
1
2
2
4
3
6
Motivation for consumers
5
3
15
1
5
2
10
Motivation for canteen
4
2
8
1
4
3
12
Business model
3
2
6
1
3
3
9
Tracking/logistics
1
3
3
1
1
2
2
(1-5)
score
score
score
Feasibility
34
17
39
==PAGE:122==
114
The enactment activities were based on a restaurant takeaway 
context (see reflection below). The participants were taken 
through the onboarding process (introduced to the system, set-
ting up an account), ordering a meal, interacting with unique 
features for each system concept (such as sharing experience 
with friends, getting a discount or evaluating sustainability), 
interaction with the restaurant and returning the container. At 
the beginning of each enactment the participant was intro-
duced to a member of the master group who played a friend 
who wanted to show the participant a new app for a reusable 
takeaway system. The master group member then guided the 
participant through the app and to the “restaurant area”, where 
another member of the group interacted with the participant as 
a restaurant employee. After having gone through all parts of 
the system the experience was evaluated with the participant 
and the other system concepts were explained.  
 An overview of the agenda can be seen on Figure XX (see 
detailed agenda in Appendix 08.08).
 
After the system enactment exercise and evaluation, the par-
ticipants asked to rate all container concepts after interacting 
with the prototypes. Participants were guided through a sim-
ple version of evaluation matrix, as they were asked to rate 
five aspects of the container design after importance and then 
rate each container concept. The five aspect were:
 
1. 	
Ideal for sharing
2. 	
Ideal for individual meal
3. 	
Optimal for transport
4. 	
Optimal for storage/transport when empty
5. 	
Wow factor
 
The five aspects represent important parts of the container de-
sign, as discovered through the explorative user studies (see 
Chapter 8) and represented in the affinity diagram (see Sec-
tion 08.7).
An overview of the workshop activities can be seen on the 
following pages.
Feedback on system concepts
Participants were asked to provide feedback for the system 
concepts during the enactment exercise as well as afterwards. 
The six workshop participants tried out the enactment exer-
cise with one of the system concepts (explained through one 
of the app prototypes) and were only shown the two other 
concepts after the enactment exercise. Each system concept 
was therefore evaluated in detail by two participants and 
briefly evaluated by the four remaining participants. The most 
important insights for each of the system concepts are stated 
08.4 Enacting, Telling, Making 
A workshop was conducted with potential consumers in order 
to evaluate the three system concepts and six container con-
cepts. The workshop agenda was inspired by the generative 
design approach (Sanders & Stappers, 2012) for evaluating 
concepts and ideas in the relevant context. In the framework 
described by Sanders & Stappers three types of activities are 
important in order to bridge the gap between the designers 
and potential users:
•	
Making activities (such as making prototypes)
•	
Telling activities (such as communication through story-
boards).  
•	
Enactment activities (such as role play with props)
In preparation for the evaluation workshop the following ac-
tivities were conducted within each of the three categories.
 
Making
Wired UI prototypes for the consumer app for the three sys-
tem concepts (Greata Thunberg, Community life and the 
Capitalist) were created in order to realistically convey how 
participants might interact with the system. The wireframes 
were intended to convey some of the unique features of each 
concept and provide an impression of what the UI might look 
like. The prototypes were wired in a way where the partici-
pant was able to physically interact with the prototype (click 
on selected buttons) but it was not fully functional, as not all 
elements of the prototypes were interactive. It was therefore 
necessary to guide the participants’ use of the prototypes.
Furthermore the mock-ups of the six container concepts were 
used as props for the workshop (see Section 08.5)
 
Telling
It was decided to incorporate the telling activity in the system 
prototypes. This was done by introducing a few wireframes 
explaining each process as a part of the “create account” pro-
cess within each app prototype. The intro frames were used in 
the enactment exercise as an aid for introducing the system to 
the participant trying out the app. A member from the master 
group was standing beside the participant and provided addi-
tional information and answered any questions while going 
through the wireframes.
 
Enactment
Participants completed an enactment activity at the workshop, 
which allowed them to experience key elements of the system 
concepts through role play and interaction with prototypes. 
==PAGE:123==
115
08/ Concept Evaluation
tions with the system less stressful, as it is not necessary to 
return the box within a certain time limit. There are however 
concerns related to owning the box as well, as participants are 
afraid of forgetting the box at home. One participant was even 
afraid of getting too attached to the container and therefore 
not wanting to swap the box.
A general concern for this system is that it will limit the flexi-
bility which is associated with the takeaway experience.
Another participant commented that the overview of the sus-
tainable impact of the system made her feel that she was mak-
ing a difference for the environment. Another participant try-
ing out the Community life system noted that she would like 
to see how using the system affects CO2 emissions.
 
Community life
Renting the container for free is seen as an advantage of this 
system by the participants. Several participants were, howev-
er, shocked to find out that they would have to pay full price 
for the container (in this enactment the price was set to 100 
DKK) in case they did not return it.
Generally, the participants liked the overall concept of engag-
ing with local restaurants and sharing their takeaway experi-
ences. Several participants noted that this concept has a lot of 
value as a stand-alone app, as it could work as a social media 
platform for sharing food related experiences with friends. 
Another participant stated that she would not want to share 
all of her takeaway purchases with her friends, as she feared 
being judged by them.
 
below. A more detailed overview of statements related to each 
system concept can be found in Appendix 08.09 (page 1-3). 
The Capitalist
Participants were generally very focused on whether the dis-
count achieved by being a part of the system would be worth 
it compared to the subscription fee they would have to pay. 
They would like to have a free trial period for trying out the 
system. One participant noted that he did not think he ordered 
enough takeaway for the membership to become an advan-
tage. A general comment for this system concept is that the 
benefits (such as discounts or points) should be linked to take-
away in order to make sure the discounts are actually valuable 
for the consumers. Another participant noted that the system 
would have to include a lot of restaurants in order to make 
the subscription model worth it and to not feel too restricted 
when choosing takeaway by being a part of it. Furthermore, if 
the system included cups for coffee, the participant would be 
more likely to join.
One of the participants states that the subscription model 
would make him feel more attached to the system and there-
fore make him use it more.
Another participant stated that she would rather buy the con-
tainer than rent it.
 
Greta Thunberg
This system concept is based on consumers owning their own 
containers, which received mixed feedback from the partici-
pants. Owning the box can be convenient and makes interac-
Table 08.4.1 value for each concept 
The 
functional
The eating 
experience
Rotate
The hay 
concept
The new 
old
The SANS! 
concept
Total score 
for each 
category
Ideal for sharing
8.2
6.5
10.3
5.7
5
2.8
38.5
Individual meal 
(that it is easy to 
eat from)
13.5
17.5
10.7
12.8
6.3
9.2
70
Optimal for 
transport with 
food
20.7
8
7.7
15.2
17
12
80.5
Optimal for 
storage/transport 
when empty
12.2
13.8
2.8
7.7
13.2
9.8
59.5
Wow factor
10.8
13.7
16.7
13
6.2
6.2
66.5
Total
65.3
59.5
48.2
54.3
47.7
40
==PAGE:124==
116
was also smaller than the rest of the prototypes (to be able to 
fit within the print plate), which might also have influenced 
the participants perception of the concept.  
One participant noted that she would love to have a list of her 
previous takeaway purchases and ratings, which could serve 
as inspiration later on.
Several participants valued the fact that the platform could be 
adjusted to their preferences and show them takeaway options 
based on previous favourites. The participants noted that be-
ing able to see details about the menu and pictures of menu 
items made the app seem more appealing than the two other 
concepts.
 
The drawback for this concept was however, the weak con-
nection between the system functionalities and the reusable 
container system. The functionalities are great, but partici-
pants have a hard time connecting the social platform with the 
container concept.
Feedback on container concepts
An evaluation of the five factors revealed the following priori-
ty based on the average of ratings from all participants:
 
•	
Optimal for transport with food (5, highest priority)
•	
Ideal for individual meal (4)
•	
Wow factor (3)
•	
Optimal for storage/transport when empty (2)
•	
Ideal for sharing (1, lowest priority)
 
All of the container concepts were rated within each factor, 
where the rating 6 was given to the container that was ex-
pected to perform the best and the rating 1 was given to the 
container which was expected to perform the worst. The value 
for each concept was found by using the individually rated 
factors as a multiplier to the score (see Appendix A08.10, 
page 1-2).
 
The average values across all participants can be viewed in 
Table 08.4.1. 
The results show that the most popular container concept is 
the Functional, which is especially due to it having the high-
est score in the Optimal for transport with food factor. The 
second most popular concept is the eating experience, which 
has the highest score in regard to Ideal for individual meals. 
This concept also had the second highest score in regard to 
wow factor. 
Furthermore the eating experience scored the highest in the 
factor Optimal for storage/transport when empty, however 
this score might be influenced by the fact that this was the 
only prototype that was 100% 3D printed, thus having a draft 
that made it possible to stack it when empty. This prototype 
Workshop 
For the system concepts
There are drawbacks and advantages of all three busi-
ness models (subscription model, buying the container 
or renting the container).
A concept like The Capitalist needs to be widely imple-
mented in order for the concept to make sense.
Owning the container might be less stressful than rent-
ing it, as having to return the container within a dead-
line is considered a stress factor.  
Consumers will need to be reminded to bring their con-
tainer if they own them, as forgetting the container is a 
big concern.
Consumers who own a container will need an alterna-
tive if they forget it (such as the possibility to rent a 
container).
Displaying the environmental impact of the system can 
serve as motivation. Some participants expect this fea-
ture and request it when they cannot see it (this insight 
was also empathised in Section 06.7 survey).
Making the takeaway experience more personal by e.g. 
adjusting the platform based on personal preferences 
and displaying favourite meals is a good way to engage 
consumers.
Pictures of menu items makes the process of ordering 
takeaway more enjoyable.
 
For the container concepts
The most important functionality of the container is be-
ing able to safely and effectively transport the takeaway 
meal home.
Optimising the container for the individual meal is more 
important than being optimised for sharing a meal.
The snaps from The Functional container concept are 
perceived as a safe system for transport.
The Eating experience concept is viewed as the most 
ideal for the individual meal and for storage or trans-
port when empty.
==PAGE:125==
117
08/ Concept Evaluation
==PAGE:126==
09/ 
==PAGE:127==
CONTENT
Introduction
Choosing the Final System Concept
Choosing the Final Container Concept
Choosing Materials for the Container
CHOOSING 
THE FINAL 
SOLUTION
==PAGE:128==
120
09.1 Introduction
This chapter will go through the different considerations made 
when choosing the final system and product concept. The 
considerations are based on insights gained through both the 
explorative user studies, the MVP test as well as the feedback 
session with KK and the enacting, telling, making workshop 
described in the previous chapter 08/ Concept Evaluation.
The concepts are chosen based on which will perform the 
best as a PSS solution for canteens in Kokkenes Køkken, 
black-boxing (for now) the third step of the three step road-
map; expanding to the restaurant takeaway market (see Figure 
04.5.1). 
09.2 Choosing the Final System 
Concept
The three step roadmap illustrated on Figure 04.5.1 shows the 
strategic plan of reaching the desired end goal, which is to 
penetrate the restaurant takeaway market. The system con-
cepts (described in Section 07.4 and presented in the Concept 
Catalogue) was developed on the basis of this end goal. As 
participants of the enacting, telling, making workshop did not 
have much experience with buying takeaway from canteens, 
the reenactment was also conducted in relation to the broader 
restaurant takeaway industry. 
As the final system concept that should be developed with-
in the timeframe of this master project focuses primarily on 
canteens, the feedback given by Kokkenes Køkken is weight-
ed higher than the enacting, telling, making workshop when 
choosing between the concepts. 
Feedback from KK made it very clear that Greta Thunberg 
would be the most relevant and feasible concept to implement 
in their canteens, due to the simple business model as well as 
the focus on sustainability, and this concept is therefore cho-
sen as the basis for the final solution.
 
The overall user feedback on the Greta Thunberg concept was 
also positive, when having in mind that the users were asked 
to evaluate the concept seen from the perspective of buying a 
take-away meal from a restaurant. The only concern was on 
the aspect of forgetting the container at home when purchas-
ing a meal for swapping. Here, the users wanted the possibili-
ty of getting out of the situation in a comfortable way. There-
fore an option for renting containers, once the user has bought 
at least one container, is therefore added to the concept. Fur-
thermore, elements from the Community Life is added to the 
final customer platform to compliment the main sustainability 
focus and create a more gathered customer platform. 
Lastly, the evaluation feedback showed that a certain custom-
er base is required to make a good solution for the users to 
choose the Community and the Capitalist concept. This, once 
again, argues for the advantage of making a proof of concept 
with a simple solution such as Greta Thunberg at Kokkenes 
Køkken. This concept can therefore be used to test and learn, 
before expanding the solution to the remaining canteen and 
restaurant industry. The gained experience will most likely 
also help in making a strategic partnership with companies 
such as the delivery service Wolt (which is found very import-
ant for the consumers of the restaurant takeaway industry). 
The Chosen System Concept
The final system concept chosen is illustrated in the ecosys-
tem map (see Figure 09.2.1), and is further described below. 
The final system concept consists of a container and two user 
platforms: one for the canteen to upload menus, manage or-
ders, etc. and another for the customers to order meals, man-
age containers, etc. The canteens pay a monthly subscription 
a bit below the price already spent on single-use packaging 
along with an additional fee for the provided product-service 
system. The canteens have to continuously optimise their 
spendings and rarely purchase a product or service without 
cutting an expenditure somewhere else. The small discount on 
the containers are therefore given, as an incentive for the can-
teens to “save” money on the packaging while they in return 
receive a functioning system for handling takeaway meals in 
an environmentally sustainable way. 
The customers buy a set of containers to become a part of the 
system. Once the containers are bought, they have the pos-
sibility to order and pick up meals by swapping their own 
container with a new one. Users can return their containers to 
the system at any time before picking up a new meal, which 
is convenient if they do not want to store their containers at 
home. Should they forget to swap their container before pick-
ing up a new order, users have the possibility of renting a 
container, which will have to be returned within a certain time 
frame. 
09.3 Choosing the Final Con-
tainer Concept
After choosing the final system concept, the container concept 
was chosen. To do this all insights gained from the feedback 
==PAGE:129==
121
09/ Choosing the Final Solution
session with KK and from participants of the enacting, tell-
ing, making workshop (as described in the previous chapter) 
were gathered. These insights were, as opposed to choosing 
the system concept, weighted equally. 
Furthermore, the master group tried to individually rate the 
different container concepts using the same evaluation matrix 
exercise as the one applied on the participants in the enacting, 
telling, making session, to see how much the group’s score 
would differentiate from the workshop score (see Appendix 
09.01). Here, the functional concept had the overall highest 
score with the eating experience as a runner up equal to the 
scores of the participants. This highlights the common con-
flict found in wanting a product design to be highly functional 
but also unique and aesthetically pleasing. 
All concepts were furthermore held up against the design 
specification to see whether or not they lived up to the re-
quirements and criteria (see Appendix B09.01). Here, discus-
sions were made in regards to functionality, the different user 
preferences and whether or not some of the concepts could 
be merged (e.g. the lid of the eating experience concept had 
not been specified). Viewed from a high level perspective, 
all concepts essentially consist of a container, a lid and some 
kind of closing mechanism that connects the two parts togeth-
er. Elements from one concept can therefore easily be applied 
to another. 
In the end it was decided to choose the shape from the eating 
experience combined with the functionalities of stackability 
(bottom on lid) and snap closing mechanism from the func-
tional container (see Figure 09.3.1). 
The shape was chosen based on its high score on wow fac-
tor and with the reasoning that an alternative and interesting 
shape ensures uniqueness and recognisability. A compromise 
the stakeholders and the group were willing to take in relation 
to optimal shape for transport and storage. The snap closing 
mechanism was chosen based on the user insights gained 
from the generative workshops, choosing the MVP test con-
tainer (see Section 06.4) as well as the generative workshop. 
Here, all users made it very clear that proper sealing was of 
highest priority, where snaps were the element that most users 
trusted the most. Further arguments for choosing the eating 
experience are listed below.
Figure 09.2.1 - ecosystem of the chosen system concept with money, 
information and product flow highlighted.
Amount of orders
Purchased/rented 
containers
Amount of orders
Purchased/rented 
containers
Canteen
Rotine
Consumer
Website
App
Container
Update menu
Update menu
Money
(monthly 
subscription 
for PSS)
Buy container
Order meals
Rent container
Money
(for the container)
Operate/maintain 
containers
Update/
maintain 
platform
Update/maintain 
platform
Prepare ordered 
meals
Receive meal
Pay for meal
Money
Information
Products (food and packaging)
==PAGE:130==
122
degrees
•	
Must be sealed/leakage proof
•	
Must follow legislation for food packaging materials
•	
The sustainability aspect must be aesthetically visible 
(key insight from co-creation, Section 07.2)
While the criteria are described as:
•	
The material should give as sensory pleasant feeling as 
possible
•	
The shape (and material) should invite for consumers to 
eat directly from it
•	
Should be as aesthetically pleasing as possible
•	
Should have a strong visual brand identity
•	
Should be easy to open/close
•	
The material should be recyclable
•	
Food materials should not stain the (product) material
 
Choosing material for the container
Research in the early design process found that there is a sig-
nificant difference between the materials that the consumers 
perceive as being environmentally sustainable and the materi-
als that are actually environmentally sustainable (see Section 
06.9). Many consumers stated that they did not like the looks 
of plastic as they associate it with being unsustainable. How-
ever, plastics such as PP, PE or PET are the most common 
types of plastic to be recycled in Denmark, and making du-
rable products in these materials therefore makes it possible 
to prolong and close resource loops, ensuring a sustainable 
circular economy. 
The feeling of sustainability is also an important aspect for 
KK, as they want the product to visually express sustainabil-
ity, also supporting a simple way of storytelling. This was 
clearly seen in the moodboards they created during the co-cre-
ation workshop, which included a lot of nature elements and 
simple nordic design similar to the vision of the SANS! Con-
Simple, feasible and elegant design 
•	
Fits well with the moodboards created by KK and their 
vision of creating a nordic product design. 
•	
Fits well with Luups Bakken and the already established 
SANS! Concept
•	
Users think it has the most ideal shape for individual 
meals (individual meals are found more important than 
sharing meals)
•	
KK like the idea of the elevational part, that provides the 
option for dividing the meal in a creative way, without 
being limited to dividing food
•	
Good to hold in one hand (an aspect found important in 
user studies)
09.4 Choosing Materials for the 
Container
With the overall product elements in place, further detailing 
of the product is made by evaluating and finally deciding on 
the materials of the container. 
The different materials in this Section are evaluated based 
on the design specification, feedback session with stakehold-
ers and workshop with users. The design specifications have 
throughout the design process been refined to suit the contin-
uously gathered user insights from workshops and feedback 
sessions with users and stakeholders (see the iteration of the 
Design Specification v3.0 in Appendix B09.01). The most rel-
evant requirements from for the material is highlighted below:
•	
Must be more sustainable than single-use packaging
•	
Must endure a minimum of 500 wash cycles
•	
Must be able to withstand industrial dishwashing at 90 
Lid with snaps and sealing
Bottom stackable with lid
Elevation
Organic shape 
Figure 09.3.1- Overview of the different 
elements in the container concept
==PAGE:131==
123
09/ Choosing the Final Solution
The container and lid are sealed by a silicone rubber ring 
(placed in a notch of lid). This material has excellent insula-
tion properties which can ensure leakage proof transportation 
of the meal. A summary of silicone rubber is shown in Table 
09.4.1 (Silicone Rubber Properties and Disadvantages, n.d.). 
09.5 References
1.	
Roots & Design | Kupilka. (n.d.). Retrieved June 10, 2021, 
from https://kupilka.fi/en/roots-design
2.	
Polypropylen, PP-plast | Det Store Plastleksikon. (n.d.). 
Retrieved June 10, 2021, from https://plast.dk/det-store-
plastleksikon/polypropylen-pp/?fbclid=IwAR266fqG3Q-
twLzqCH9p3u31JU0LJoVA5TuARR_tuablYd6yIdCe2y-
FKUhQk
3.	
Si Rubber, Silicone Rubber Properties and Disadvantages. 
(n.d.). Retrieved June 10, 2021, from http://www.industrial-
rubbergoods.com/silicone-rubber.html
cept (see Appendix A07.05, page 1-2). 
Based on sessions with stakeholders from Kokkenes Køkken, 
workshops with users and the design specification, it has been 
chosen to use Kareline, as the material for the container part 
of the product. The wood plastic combination gives the ma-
terial a good tactile feel and look of wood rather than plastic. 
Thus the material resembles the look of nature (and sustain-
ability) as required by the users and stakeholders. A summary 
of the Kareline material is shown in Table 09.4.1 (Roots & 
Design | Kupilka, n.d.).
Choosing material for the lid and sealing
A comment that was repeated by all actors throughout the 
sessions, was that there must be a transparent element in the 
container, The chefs at Kokkenes Køkken want this to expose 
their nicely plated meals, while the consumers want it to see 
the meal that they are purchasing, without having to open the 
lid. This should rather be incorporated in the lid, as the food 
looks nicer from above. Polypropylene plastic (PP) is chosen 
as the material for this part, due to its strength and endur-
ance, which is necessary when incorporating functional ele-
ments such as the snaps. A summary of polypropylene plastic 
is shown in Table 09.4.1 (Polypropylen, PP-Plast | Det Store 
Plastleksikon, n.d.).
Table 09.4.1- Material overview of eating 
experience
Material
Description
Pros
Cons
Wood plastic 
composite
•	
50% wood 
based 
cellulose 
fibres 
combined 
with 50% 
thermoplastic 
•	
Good sustainable storytelling
•	
Users associate the texture and colours with 
sustainability 
•	
All finishing methods (welding, machine tooling, etc.) of 
plastic products can be used
•	
Good strength/weight ratio
•	
Can handle industrial dishwashing (90°C) and dries fast
•	
KK already have experience with Kareline as well as 
manufacturer from Dutec Plast
•	
Only recyclable 
if sent back to 
manufacturer
•	
Not 
microwavable
Thermoplastic
•	
Polypropylene 
plastic
•	
Possible to recycle in the Danish recycling system
•	
Easy to clean and dry (resistant to water and moisture)
•	
Durable
•	
Transparent (to a certain degree)
•	
Can handle industrial dishwashing (90°C)
•	
Strong and durable in relation to continuous use of the 
snap mechanism (open/close)
•	
Plastic is 
commonly not 
associated with 
sustainability
•	
Wear can be 
visible over time
Silicone 
rubber
•	
Polysiloxanes
•	
High elasticity and compressibility
•	
Excellent insulation properties
•	
Can handle industrial dishwashing (90°C)
•	
Relatively 
expensive
==PAGE:132==
10/ 
==PAGE:133==
CONTENT
Introduction 
The Updated BMC and Value Proposition
Behavioural Strategies Used
Updated Service Blueprint
PSS Morphology and Archetypes
Summary // Mont’s Model
References
DEFINING 
THE FINAL 
SOLUTION
==PAGE:134==
126
10.1 Introduction 
After choosing the concept for the service and the container 
(see Figure 09.2.1 and Figure 09.3.1 as well as the discussion 
and arguments for choosing presented in the previous chap-
ter), a further definition of the final product-service system is 
needed, before detailing the service platforms and container 
further. Thus, this chapter seeks to explore and define all ele-
ments that feed into the final product-service system solution 
ROTINE. 
The solution is defined through an updated description of the 
business model canvas and value proposition, which is also 
evaluated in relation to behavioural design strategies used. 
Furthermore the service blueprint model is updated from the 
previous version made (see Appendix A07.10 Swimlane Dia-
gram, Greta Thunberg) to define and gain a final overview of 
the details of the system. 
Finally the PSS Morphology was used to define the PSS from 
a high level perspective. To summarise the final definition of 
the product-service system, this is described using Mont’s 
Model. 
10.2 The Updated BMC and Val-
ue Proposition
The initial Greta Thunberg concept was updated in a new 
Business Model Canvas (see Figure 10.2.1). 
The most notable changes to the BMC are found in the cost 
structure, which was updated based on a thorough discussion 
with KK’s CEO. Here, where the following business elements 
decided during the discussion: 
•	
The canteens should pay a subscription fee 
•	
The consumers have to pay 120 DKK for a set of con-
tainers (at least two containers are required for a meal 
including e.g. a hot dish and a salad) in order to enter the 
system. 
•	
The amount of containers going out of the system has to 
be at least the same as the amount of containers going 
into the system, in order to sustain the flow and amount 
of containers at the canteen. The consumers can return 
their used set of containers whenever they pick up a new 
set of meals, but will have to return it before picking up 
the new meal. 
•	
If the consumer forgets to bring their meal or does not 
own enough containers for the amount of meals ordered, 
they will have the option to rent a container for 10 DKK. 
However, the container(s) have to be returned within 14 
days for them to avoid buying out the container for the 
full price.  
Additionally, two value propositions were described based on 
the elements in the BMC. The product-service system prom-
ises the following values to respectively the canteen and the 
consumers. 
ROTINE helps canteens who want to be sustainable frontrun-
ners and mitigate upcoming packaging legislation, by provid-
ing a system for selling takeaway in reusable packaging that 
elevates the gourmet food experience. Furthermore ROTINE 
provides an efficient platform that makes it easy for canteens 
to communicate to customers and manage orders.
ROTINE helps consumers at Kokkenes Køkken who want to 
treat themselves with high quality takeaway meals, without 
feeling guilty of unsustainable disposable packaging. This is 
done by offering a convenient reusable packaging system that 
makes it easy to make a sustainable habit in the busy everyday 
life.
10.3 Behavioural Strategies 
Used
The defined product-service solution uses different be-
havioural design elements and strategies.
Decisive intervention model
When implementing the ROTINE system in a canteen, this 
will be the only option, as single-use packaging should be 
100% replaced. Therefore a decisive intervention model is 
used. However, as seen in the case of Edison huset, some 
canteens implementing the ROTINE system will have no 
well-established takeaway culture. The goal of the solution is 
therefore also to get even more users to buy takeaway from 
their canteen. Therefore the three factors (motivations, abili-
ties and triggers) influencing whether users will be a part of 
the system or not has been carefully considered. 
Persuasive intervention model
Generally the solution is targeting the conscious state of 
mind, by positively encouraging users through an informa-
tional strategy. The users are persuaded to use the system by 
informing them about the sustainable benefits. Furthermore 
the sustainable tracking in the app and website will continu-
ously inform the users of the environmental performance of 
the ROTINE system compared to single-use packaging, en-
suring continuous persuasive interventions. 
==PAGE:135==
127
10/ Defining the Final Solution
Motivations, abilities and triggers
The sustainable tracking intends to motivate the users, while 
also the functional and aesthetical design of the container 
aims to create a pleasurable experience for the users. 
Furthermore the system aims to make it simple for users to 
enter the system, thus heightening the ability of using the sys-
tem. The time, physical effort and brain cycles it takes to use 
the system and return the container is very simple, as the users 
can easily bring the containers along any day at work, making 
it a part of their daily routine. 
When users have first entered the system, triggers are used to 
e.g. remind them when their favourite meal is on the menu. 
Furthermore notifications via the app are used to remind users 
to bring their containers when they have purchased an order 
or have rented containers.
Elements from a coercive intervention model
Users buy into the system by purchasing a set of containers, 
which they can keep until their next order. The up-front cost 
might be intimidating, however users found it more simple to 
make a one time purchase than paying for a continuous sub-
scription fee. This business model was chosen also, as it was 
found that users do not like coercive business models, where 
they will be punished for not bringing back the container in 
time (see Section 08.4). 
However some tradeoffs needed to be made in terms of the 
need for a more structural element of the business model. If 
users forget to return the container before picking up a new 
order, they need to have a simple alternative. Therefore the 
users have the option of renting a container for 10 DKK, (this 
is a symbolic price that will also remind the users to bring 
their own containers to avoid paying the fee again). To ensure 
that users return these containers back into the system a co-
ercive model is therefore used, “punishing” users by making 
them purchase the containers if not returned within 14 days. 
10.4 Updated Service Blueprint 
The journey of the service recipients (consumers and canteen 
employees) and the related service operations are mapped out 
in an updated version of the Greta Thunberg Service Blue-
print (see Figure 10.4.1 and 10.4.2). The blueprints were 
mapped out to cover the two main aspects of the user journey: 
(1) signing up and ordering a meal as a new customer and (2) 
returning the container and collecting a new takeaway meal. 
Consumers need the option to pick up their meal and return 
their used containers at all times and not only within the work-
ing hours of the canteen staff (from around 06:00 - 14:00). 
Furthermore robust technology needs to be implemented to 
track containers within the system (as found in the evaluation 
of the MVP test, see Section 08.2). Therefore it is decided to 
implement technology, which complies with the internet of 
things (IoT). This includes a smart fridge for storage of ready 
made meals and an identification chip moulded into all con-
tainers. To open the smart fridge, consumers scan the NFC tag 
on the fridge via their ROTINE app, ensuring that the system 
recognises them as a user and ensuring that they have ordered 
takeaway. The containers are returned to the system by scan-
ning the container at the return stations, thus tracking the con-
tainers and ensuring that they do not go missing. 
The communication protocol for opening the smart fridge 
was initially based on the company identification cards (RFID 
technology) of the consumer, with the assumption that all em-
ployees would have this in order to access the company build-
ing. However, after a feedback session with KK it was made 
clear that company ID cards are not necessarily used in all of 
their canteens. Therefore, it was necessary to explore other 
solutions when consumers used or returned a container. Both 
Bluetooth and NFC chip technology were investigated to get 
a further understanding of their differences. The research 
showed that the NFC technology would be more appropriate 
for the system as it is more secure and in a higher quality 
when sending small data packages on short distances (“NFC 
vs. Bluetooth: What are the 5 Key Differences?,” n.d.). 
10.5 PSS Morphology and Ar-
chetypes
The product-service system context is described by the use of 
the PSS Morphology to gain a high-level perspective of the 
concept in its entirety (Finken et al., 2013). The chosen vari-
ations of the strategic characteristics in the PSS are described 
in Figure 10.5.1. 
 
The product-service system is furthermore classified by com-
paring the strategic characteristics with the eight archetypical 
PSS business models described by Tukker (2004). Here, the 
comparison shows that the developed product-service system 
is a combination of all three categories (product-,  use- and 
result-oriented) as the solution caters for both the canteen and 
the consumers as listed below: 
The consumers have to buy a set of containers in order to gain 
access to the system (product oriented)
The consumers have the possibility to rent a set of containers 
==PAGE:136==
128
Key activities
What are the key steps to 
move ahead to your 
customers?
Cost Structure
How much are you planning to spend
on the product development and
marketing for a certain period?
Key resources
What resources do you need 
to make your idea work?
Key partners
What are your key partners 
to get competitive 
advantage?
Key propositions
How will you mak
customers' life 
Rotine Business Model Canvas
30 DKK per produced 
container. There is a 
need of  200-300% 
more containers than 
the amount sold in 
order to keep the 
system running
People to 
develop 
the app
Containers 
(manufacturers)
Kokkenes 
Køkken
Canteens
Production 
of 
containers
Development 
of platform
Logistics 
system
Rotine 
replaces 
broken 
containers
Expand 
to other 
canteens
Distribution 
of 
containers
Marketing of 
the PSS to get 
customers on 
board
Testing 
system in 
canteens
Blue = can
Pink= con
10 DKK per 
purchased 
container goes 
to sustainable 
incentives
Rotine helps canteens who
frontrunners and mitigat
legislation, by providing a sy
in reusable packaging that e
experience. Furthermore Ro
platform that makes it 
communicate to custome
Rotine helps consumers
who want to treat thems
takeaway meals, witho
unsustainable disposab
done by oﬀering a co
packaging system that m
sustainable habit in the
Figure 10.2.1 BMC of ROTINE
==PAGE:137==
129
10/ Defining the Final Solution
s
ke your 
happier?
Customer relationships
How often will you interact 
with your customers?
Channels
How are you going to reach 
your customers?
Customer segments
Who are your customers? 
Describe your target 
audience in a couple of 
words.
Revenue Streams
How much are you planning
to earn in a certain period?
Compare your costs and revenues.
Monthly 
subscription 
the system 
and service
Consumers 
eating at 
Kokkenes 
Køkken
App
Kokkenes 
Køkken 
social 
media
At the 
canteen
Interact every 
time consumer 
buys takeaway
Singles/
couples
Families
Food plan for 
next two 
weeks always 
accessible
Notiﬁcations 
via app when 
favorite meal 
is oﬀered
People who do not 
have the time to 
cook, or prefers to 
add a little extra to 
their life by ordering 
a top class meal to 
take home
Reminders 
via app 
when meal 
is ordered
People buy into 
the system by 
purchasing at 
least one 
container for 120 
DKK
nteens
nsumers
Monthly 
subscription based 
on current expenses 
for single- use 
packaging (varies 
according to 
canteen size)
It is possible to rent 
one container per 
container you own 
for 10 DKK - this has 
to be returned 
within 2 weeks (10 
workdays)
Canteens
o want to be sustainable 
te upcoming packaging 
ystem for selling takeaway 
elevates the gourmet food 
otine provides an eﬃcient 
easy for canteens to 
ers and manage orders.
s at Kokkenes Køkken 
elves with high quality 
out feeling guilty of 
ble packaging. This is 
onvenient reusable 
makes it easy to make a 
e busy everyday life.
==PAGE:138==
130
Figure 10.4.1 Service Blueprint 1
EVIDENCE
CUSTOMER 
JOURNEY
LINE OF 
INTERACTION
FRONTSTAGE
EMPLOYEE 
ACTIONS
TECHNOLOGY
LINE OF 
VISIBILITY
BACKSTAGE 
ACTIONS
LINE OF 
INTERNAL 
INTERACTION
SUPPORT 
PROCESSES
Downloads 
Rotine app
+ signs up
Sees menu + 
orders X amount 
of takeaway meals
Agrees to terms + 
buys container to 
activate account + 
sets preferences
App
Credit card
User settings (app)
Receipt
Order overview
Receive user 
information
Process and 
store 
information
Create user account
Process payment + 
activate preferences
Plans menu + 
publishes menu (2 
weeks ahead)
Convert menu 
from canteen 
platform to 
consumer app
Display menu in 
app
==PAGE:139==
131
10/ Defining the Final Solution
Opens smart fridge 
with phone (NFC) + 
picks up meal
Alternatively: Goes to 
canteen staﬀ
Receives 
notiﬁcation: 
Meal is ready
Notiﬁcation
Receives 
notiﬁcation: Order 
has been conﬁrmed 
and charged
Receipt
Smart fridge
User account
Process payment
Checks orders + 
buys groceries + 
prepares meal
Places orders in 
fridge + notiﬁes 
users via app
Send notiﬁcation + 
invoice
Update user acces to 
fridge + register 
containers in user 
possession
Send 
notiﬁcation
Process 
message from 
canteen
Register user + send 
feedback message: 
"fridge is open"
==PAGE:140==
132
Figure 10.4.2 Service Blueprint 2
EVIDENCE
CUSTOMER 
JOURNEY
LINE OF 
INTERACTION
FRONTSTAGE
EMPLOYEE 
ACTIONS
TECHNOLOGY
LINE OF 
VISIBILITY
BACKSTAGE 
ACTIONS
LINE OF 
INTERNAL 
INTERACTION
SUPPORT 
PROCESSES
Sees menu + orders X 
amount of takeaway 
meals (more than 
containers owned)
Menu overview
Order overview
Plans menu + 
publishes menu (2 
weeks ahead)
Convert menu from 
canteen platform to 
consumer app
Display menu in app
Rents XX amount of 
containers
Buys XX amount of 
containers
Scans used 
container(s) at return 
station + uses phone 
to register user info.
Container overview
Feedback 
message: 
Containers 
registered
Update container 
logistics
Orders more 
containers if 
needed
Update container 
logistics
Feedback message: 
Containers are 
registered as 
returned
Cleans used 
containers
Receipt
Container overview
Return station
==PAGE:141==
133
10/ Defining the Final Solution
Opens smart fridge 
with phone (NFC) + 
picks up meal
Alternatively: Goes to 
canteen staﬀ
Receives 
notiﬁcation: 
Meal is ready
Notiﬁcation
Receives 
notiﬁcation: Order 
has been conﬁrmed 
and charged
Receipt
Smart fridge
User account
Process payment
Checks orders + 
buys groceries + 
prepares meal
Places orders in 
fridge + notiﬁes 
users via app
Send notiﬁcation + 
invoice
Update user acces to 
fridge + register 
containers in user 
possession
Send 
notiﬁcation
Process 
message from 
canteen
Register user + send 
feedback message: 
"fridge is open"
==PAGE:142==
134
Figure 10.5.1 PSS Morphology
Strategic 
Characteristics
nted towards:
Transfer of 
ownership
Responsibility
during use
Management of 
life cycle activities
Availability
Expansion 
Economical
Level of 
digitalisation 
value based on
Variation A
Ownership of the 
physical product
After delivery
Customer has 
full responsibility
Company manages all before 
and included installation
Always present
at the customer
Core 
Transfer of ownership
Manual service:
Digital technology used 
for management at most 
Variation B
Use of 
the product
After 
installation
Company is responsible
for installing
Company manages the 
operation and maintenance
Present at the customer 
when needed (serial use)
aggregated together
Value based 
on per use
Digital service:
Digital technology used 
to provide service. 
Customer need 
to buy a set of 
containers to 
be a part of the 
system
Canteens clean 
the containers 
and change 
spare parts if 
needed
Customers own 
a container, 
making the PSS 
present at all 
times
==PAGE:143==
135
10/ Defining the Final Solution
Variation D
Consumption 
of the product
Is never transferred - owned by
 the company throughout its life
Company has full responsibility 
for the use of the product
Company manages 
continuous improvements
. . .
 . . .
Value of taking 
responsibility of the use
Variation E
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Value of the 
result of use
. . .
Variation C
Results of the use
 of the product
Returns to company
at end of life
Company installs, 
maintains and takes back
Company manages 
upgrading
Present at the 
company when needed
with each other
Value of the 
management activities
Industri 4.0 service:
Process and customer related 
digital service
. . .
Users have the 
possibility to 
take the 
container out 
of the system
Platform is 
continously 
improved 
==PAGE:144==
136
impression is crucial for making the PSS work. 
Regulatory
The product-service system has to cater for two types of 
regulatory requirements. Firstly, there are the national and 
international incentives to reduce waste such as the Circular 
Economy Action Plan as introduced in the /01 Introduction 
chapter. The canteens need to accommodate for the packaging 
responsibility that is to come sooner or later before it becomes 
a regulatory requirement. 
Secondly, the takeaway system needs to oblige with the food 
safety regulations by e.g. using food approved materials.
Cognitive
The PSS provides a platform for the canteens to handle all 
elements of managing takeaway orders in a gathered solution. 
This makes it easier to create and share the menu with the 
consumers as well as easily gain an overview of the ordered 
meals. For the consumers the PSS provides a simple way of 
ordering takeaway meals from the canteen. With the consum-
er platform is it also possible to create a habitual takeaway 
pattern. 
Normative
Normative settings which the PSS hope to create are con-
sumer habits like rinsing the container before returning it, or 
cleaning it if it is not swapped for a new one within the first 
days after use. Furthermore, norms such as only picking up 
the amount of meals purchased are expected.   
Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction is achieved through the design of the 
product, which fulfills user requirements such as aesthetics 
and functionality.
The platform facilitates ordering of takeaway, making it easier 
to purchase takeaway through their canteen. Furthermore, the 
platform intends to motivate both consumers and employees 
by continuously tracking the amount of resources and CO2 
emissions saved. 
Business viability
The business viability is ensured as the subscription fee for 
using the ROTINE system is cheaper in the long run com-
pared to single-use packaging. By subscribing to the ROTINE 
system, canteens ensure to meet future legislation on packag-
ing. Furthermore the service facilitates the implementation of 
a new business model for canteens, that have not yet found a 
way for selling takeaway. 
as a supplement to their already purchased set of containers 
(use-oriented)
The canteen pays for the predefined result of providing con-
tainers and a service platform to sell takeaway meals in  (re-
sult-oriented)
The product-service system is of a complex nature as it con-
sists of multiple solutions to substitute the reference system: 
single-use packaging. However, it brings a lot of value to oth-
er  aspects such as introducing a takeaway service platform. 
10.6 Summary // Mont’s Model
The definition of the final solution is summarized through 
Mont’s Product-Service Systems Framework. The design, 
environmental and institutional features of the PSS are de-
scribed in through the 10 elements (Mont, 2007). This is done 
in order to ensure that all parts of the PSS have been taken 
into account (see Appendix A10.01).
Product
The products that are included in ROTINE are containers with 
ID chips, smart fridges and scanners for returning containers. 
Service
The services include a digital platform (website and app) 
where the canteens can manage their orders and the consum-
ers can place their orders as well as a return system based 
on IoT to distribute the information flow going through the 
NFC-reader and the containers ID chips. 
Continuous improvements of the platforms are required for 
the PSS to work fully functioning. The services also include 
an initial distribution of the containers along with a continu-
ous operations and replacement management, in case the con-
tainers break. 
Infrastructure
The required infrastructure for canteens are: 
•	
Industrial kitchen and cleaning facilities to clean the 
containers
•	
Storage space for storing the containers when they are 
not in use
•	
Computer to access the canteen service platform
The required infrastructure for consumers is: 
•	
Smartphone to enable access to the smart fridge
Actor-network
The actor-network consists of Kokkenes Køkken and their 
canteen staff and the end-consumers. Establishing a good first 
==PAGE:145==
137
10/ Defining the Final Solution
Environmental soundness
The container is designed for emotional durability and to-
gether with a service system designed with a focus on us-
ers, this creates an incentive to use the containers again and 
again. This way resource loops are prolonged, and ultimately 
resources used for single-use packaging are saved. Materials 
used are recyclable. 
10.7 References
1.	
Finken, K. H., McAloone, T. C., Avlonitis, V., Garcia i Mateu, 
A., Andersen, J. A. B., Mougaard, K., … Hsuan, J. (2013). 
PSS Readiness Manual. Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU). Retrieved from http://www.proteus.dtu.dk/Results/
Workbooks
2.	
NFC vs. Bluetooth: What are the 5 Key Differences? (n.d.). 
Retrieved June 8, 2021, from https://blog.nortechcontrol.com/
nfc-vs-bluetooth
3.	
Polypropylen, PP-plast | Det Store Plastleksikon. (n.d.). 
Retrieved June 10, 2021, from https://plast.dk/det-store-
plastleksikon/polypropylen-pp/?fbclid=IwAR266fqG3Q-
twLzqCH9p3u31JU0LJoVA5TuARR_tuablYd6yIdCe2y-
FKUhQk
4.	
Roots & Design | Kupilka. (n.d.). Retrieved June 10, 2021, 
from https://kupilka.fi/en/roots-design
5.	
Si Rubber,Silicone Rubber Properties and Disadvantages. 
(n.d.). Retrieved June 10, 2021, from http://www.industrial-
rubbergoods.com/silicone-rubber.html
==PAGE:146==
11/ 
==PAGE:147==
CONTENT
Introduction
Development of Final System Platform
Development of Final Container
Solution Catalogue
References
DETAILING 
THE FINAL 
SOLUTION
==PAGE:148==
140
11.1 Introduction
After defining all the system elements of the PSS, the most 
important elements of ROTINE are detailed;  the two service 
platforms (app and webpage) as well as the container. During 
this phase a feedback session with the three stakeholders Maj, 
Rune and Asmus from KK was held to ensure that the right 
choices for both the service platforms as well as the shape of 
the container was made. 
The final solution is presented in a Solution Catalogue (which 
is a separate document). 
11.2 Development of Final Sys-
tem Platform
The development of the system platform was based on the 
decisions made for the final system concept (see Section 09 
Choosing the Final Solution). The final platform is therefore 
based on the Greta Thunberg concept with elements from 
Community. Previously mock-ups for the consumer app have 
been made in order to test the three system concepts in the 
generative workshop, these have served as inspiration for the 
final app for the consumers (see Concept Catalogue). The 
website serving as an internal platform for the canteen needed 
to be developed from scratch.
User stories and user story map
First step in developing the two platforms was to map out 
the essential user stories for each of the two user segments 
(consumers and canteens). The user stories is an agile tool 
(see Section 03.2) that helped specify what goals the two 
user groups wanted to achieve by using the platforms. The 
user stories are based on all the research and testing that has 
been done prior to developing the final concept. An overview 
of user stories can be seen in Table 11.2.1 and 11.2.2 below 
along with references to relevant research for each story.
 
The user stories made the basis for user story maps to be ap-
plied for the consumer app (see Appendix A11.01) and the 
canteen’s internal website (see Appendix 11.02). The user 
story maps have three layers. The top of the map represents 
the goal of the consumers or canteens, which is based on the 
user stories. The second layer consists of the activities the 
platform should perform in order to fulfill the goal. The last 
layer is the task layer, which breaks down the activities into 
concrete tasks which have to be performed by either the user 
of the platform or the background system. The tasks form the 
basis for developing wireframes for the system, as they form a 
concrete list of the actions that the system has to support. The 
user story maps show a comprehensive view of all the func-
tionalities of each platform. Wireframes have been developed 
in selected parts of the system in order to provide a sense of 
the functionality and experience of using the app and website 
(see Figure 11.2.1-11.2.3 and Appendix A11.03 & A11.04).
 
Feedback session with Kokkenes Køkken
Mockup wireframes were shown to Maj, Asmus and Rune 
from Kokkenes Køkken as a part of a feedback session, where 
both initial wireframes illustrating the canteen platform and 
prototypes for the final container concept were presented. The 
presentation material can be found in Appendix B11.01. An 
overview of the feedback provided can be seen below.
Feedback from KK
General feedback
	
●
The three representatives from Kokkenes Køk-
ken were generally excited about the functional-
ities the new system provides for them.
	
●
The platform encourages the chefs to continu-
ously update the system, as they create the menu 
within the system. Rune pointed out that this is 
probably much more effective than the current 
systems, where it is up to the reception to update 
the takeaway menu (which is often forgotten).
Features feedback
	
●
Having the option to add a “leftover” meal (if 
there is more food than expected left over from 
lunch) is something that Kokkenes Køkken was 
really excited about, as it can help prevent food 
waste and further enhance sustainable branding.
	
●
Using the platform as a tool for creating and 
sharing menus is really valuable. Creating a 
shared library with recipes across the canteens 
in Kokkenes Køkken is very useful, especially 
if the recipes are searchable. Rune pointed out 
that it would be great if recipes can be searched 
based on which ingredients are in season. The 
recipes should be tagged with a month, as what 
is in season changes on a monthly basis.
	
●
Maj noted that future updates of the platform 
could include showing CO2 footprint for each 
dish on the menu, as this is information that the 
canteen will be interested in displaying to the 
consumers in the future.
==PAGE:149==
141
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
Table 11.2.1 Canteen platform
User story
Relevant research
As a canteen employee I want a communication channel so I 
can create excitement and inspire my customers
See Section 07.2 (Co-creation workshop).
In the value proposition for the canteens Rune and Asmus 
stated that they wanted the system to inspire the consumers 
to try out new dishes in the canteen.
As a canteen employee I want to communicate the takeaway 
menu(s) efficiently from one platform, so I can save time 
when promoting and selling takeaway
See Section 06.3 (Workmodels, flow model and sequence 
model)
Communicating the menu to consumers was shown to be 
very time consuming in the current system. In Edison Huset 
the head chef Teddy use 3 different programs to create the 
menu and then post the menu manually to several different 
platforms.  
As a canteen employee I want to prepare for next days 
takeaway
See Section 06.3 (Workmodels, sequence model)
In the existing system consumers have several different 
channels for ordering takeaway, making it difficult for the 
canteen staff to gain an overview of the orders for next day.
As canteen employees we want to know how much 
resources we have saved so we can use it for sustainable 
branding
See Section 07.2 (Co-creation workshop).
An important part of the value proposition for the canteens is 
to use the system for sustainability branding.
As a canteen employee I want to get statistics on purchasing 
habits, favorite meals, habits and information about our 
customers (company, how frequently the buy, etc.) so I 
can plan ahead and ensure the best experience for my 
customers
As a canteen employee I want to offer leftover meals on the 
app to reduce food waste
See Section 07.2 (Co-creation workshop).
Rune and Asmus highlighted the unpredictability of takeaway 
orders as an important pain for the canteen. Having all 
orders in one place and creating statistics will help the 
canteen to predict the demand for takeaway.
See Section 07.2 (Co-creation workshop).
See Section 08.3 (feedback session with Kokkenes Køkken)
Rune and Asmus identified the risk of food waste as a 
pain when offering takeaway and highlighted the chance 
of minimizing existing food waste as a gain. The benefits 
of reducing food waste was further emphasized in the 
wireframe feedback session with Kokkenes Køkken.
==PAGE:150==
142
User story
Comments
As a consumer I want to manage my profile settings to adjust 
the takeaway experience to my preferences
See Section 08.4 (Enacting, Telling, Making)
See Appendix A10.13 Feedback on Community Life
Participants in the generative enactment workshop 
responded well to having the app tailored to their individual 
preferences (which was a part of the Community concept).
As a consumer I want to have an overview of the amount of 
resources I have saved so I can feel good about myself and 
track sustainability
See Section 06.7 (Survey results)
56.9% of participants stated that they would order 
takeaway in a reusable container if it is more sustainable. 
Communicating sustainability measures related to the 
system is therefore an important motivator (and a core part 
of the chosen concept).
As a consumer I want to order takeaway in a convenient way
See Section 07.2 (Co-creation workshop).
Kokkenes Køkken wants to provide a convenient takeaway 
system for their customers (important gain of new system in 
the value proposition for the consumers)
As a consumer I want to be inspired by what the canteen has 
to offer in order to keep my interest in the system
See Section 08.4 (Enacting, Telling, Making)
See Appendix 08.04 Feedback on Community Life
Participants in the enactment workshop responded well to 
seeing a lot of pictures of menu items.
As a consumer I want to have an overview of my containers 
so I can make sure that I have what I need and avoid any 
unforeseen fees
See Section 08.4 (Enacting, Telling, Making)
It became very clear after the enactment workshop that the 
participants wanted to be informed about exactly what they 
would be paying for and that they need to be informed about 
how the renting system works up front.
Table 11.2.2 Consumer platform
==PAGE:151==
143
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
Figure 11.2.1 Menu page (for canteens)
==PAGE:152==
144
Figure 11.2.2 Sustainability page 
(for canteens)
==PAGE:153==
145
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
Figure 11.2.3 Pages in app  
(for consumers)
==PAGE:154==
146
used later. A lid was made for all shapes (see Figure 11.3.3 
and 11.3.4). 
The mock-ups and playdough were brought to a workshop 
 Developing final wireframes
The final wireframes were developed in Adobe Xd in order to 
illustrate what the user interface might look like on the two 
platforms. An overview of the wireframes can be found in Ap-
pendix A11.03, page 1-5 (for the consumer app) and A11.03, 
page 1-5 (for the canteen website).
11.3 Development of Final Con-
tainer
The detailing of the container was based on the set of specifi-
cations made when choosing the final container (see Section 
09.3 and 09.4), see Figure 11.3.1. As the organic shape of the 
container had not been further specified, this was explored be-
fore choosing a final shape to detail. Mock-ups and drawings 
were brought to a the feedback session with three stakehold-
ers from Kokkenes Køkken, to choose the final shape before 
drawing this in CAD-software. 
Exploration of the Organic Shape 
The organic shape was further explored to ensure the right 
aesthetical look as well as the right functionality of the final 
container. 
First sketches of the outer shape were drawn in 2D (see Fig-
ure 11.3.2) with suggestions to how the elevational part might 
look (dashed contours). Different inspirational pictures were 
found to support the exploration (see Appendix A11.05). Af-
ter an internal voting session within the group, 8 shapes were 
selected. 
These were quickly mocked-up by laser cutting in cardboard. 
Some of the shapes were detailed in relation to how the ele-
vation might look, but as this took a long time to mock-up, it 
was decided to buy some playdough instead, which could be 
Top incl. snaps: Transparent PP
Bottom: Kareline (PP and ﬁberwood)
Silicon rubber sealing
Elevation
Organic shape 
Stackable top and bottom
Figure 11.3.1
Production
Production of the container was discussed with a con-
sulent from Dutec Plast A/S. Here it was confirmed 
that the snaps in the container should be moulded to-
gether with the lid in the same material and colour, 
as this is the smartest and cheapest way. Injecting the 
snaps and lid in one component is cheaper as only one 
mould is needed and no assembly is required. Further-
more it is assumed that the component will be less 
likely to break, as there will be no joints. It is possi-
ble to inject more than one colour or material for one 
component, however this would cost 20-40% more 
per component. 
Furthermore the possibility and price of injecting a 
chip into one of the components was discussed; if us-
ing the right setup and chip, this should not be too 
expensive (Dutec has robots that can easily handle 
this). The consultant referred to the following page 
for finding the right chip (Prosign.dk, n.d.)
The thickness of the container was discussed with the 
consultant as well, as the group was in doubt whether 
2, 2,5 or 3 mm would be best. The consultant advised 
using 3 mm, as this will feel more exclusive than 2 
mm, and the roundings/fillets would be better. 
==PAGE:155==
147
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
SFS
SFS
SA
MS
MS
SFS
SA
AT
SFS
AT
MS
AT
SA
SFS
SFS
MS
SFS
SA
SA
SA
Figure 11.3.2 
==PAGE:156==
148
together with Maj, Asmus and Rune from Kokkenes Køkken, 
to evaluate which shape was best suited for serving food in, fit 
most within their brand identity as well as which shape would 
function the best in their daily workflow. 
After several discussions the three stakeholders all agreed that 
the two best candidates were the bean and the SANS! shape, 
as these were the most aesthetically pleasing shapes (marked 
on figure 11.3.3). 
In the end it was agreed to choose the SANS! shape, as this 
complemented Luups Bakken the best with its three arches. 
The bean shape might be more functional as it could be placed 
side by side in a more obvious way, however the association 
with a yin and yan shape was not preferred. Furthermore Rune 
stated that: “I like that the SANS! shape is not the obvious 
choice”, which is a good example of how Kokkenes Køkken 
likes to be different and to make bold choices. 
All three stakeholders tried modelling out how they thought 
the elevation should look (see Figure 11.3.5). Here it was 
clear that the elevations should go from side to side of the 
container, to help food elements such as sauce stay in one 
compartment. Furthermore, Asmus (who had a lot of expe-
Figure 11.3.3 - Mockups of the sketched figures
Figure 11.3.4 - Lids on mock-ups
SANS! shape
bean shape
==PAGE:157==
149
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
tions of food (see Figure 11.3.6). 
While discussing how one meal would be placed in the two 
containers, the importance of joining the two containers in a 
set was empathised. Here several ways, that did not include 
changes in the container design, was brainstormed; 
•	
single-use rubber band
•	
single-use cardboard band
•	
Net
•	
Bag
•	
Reusable rubber
•	
Reusable fabric elastic
•	
Gift wrap
The different options were discussed, both the group and the 
stakeholders from KK would like to make a reusable solution. 
However the challenge here was to make sure that this ele-
ment would not get lost. As the group was very pressured on 
time, it was decided to use standard single-use rubber bands 
for starters (see Figure 11.3.7), as this seemed like the easiest 
and cheapest option with the least resource waste. 
Figure 11.3.7 single-use rubber bands
Furthermore it was decided to use dark colours; black, cold 
black and green for the containers to mitigate possible stains 
rience in plating takeaway food) stated that the best ratio be-
tween the two compartments would be 60/40, where one of 
the compartments consisted of the two smaller arches and the 
other compartment of the bigger arch. The height of the eleva-
tion should not be more than a third of the total height. 
Figure 11.3.5 - Stakeholders modelling the elevation part on the 
rapid prototypes
The stakeholders were very excited about the elegant way of 
dividing the container, as this will help them place the food 
nicely. However, as the Kareline material is not microwav-
able, the consumers will have to heat up the food in another 
container/plate if they want their food to be warm. The nice 
plating of food therefore might seem like a redundant detail, 
but the stakeholders from Kokkenes Køkken all stressed that 
the plating of food is very important, as giving a good first im-
pression of the meal to the customers is paramount. Further-
more the elevation will be helpful in keeping the placement 
of the food during transportation, while it is still possible to 
serve one type of food taking up space in both compartments. 
Therefore the container allows for many types of combina-
Figure 11.3.6 - A typical way for a meal to be 
placed in the set of containers 
Potatoes
Beef and sauce
Bread / salad 
Salad 
==PAGE:158==
150
ground shape is seen on Figure 11.3.9. 
Figure 11.3.9- the final measures in mm of the container bottom 
from e.g. tomato sauce (see Figure 11.3.8). 
Drawing the Final Container in CAD
After choosing the right shape for the container, the process 
of drawing this in CAD software began. First the ratio of the 
three circles were calculated to ensure the right ratio of the 
two compartments, as well as estimating the right diameters 
to end up with a volume between 750-800 mL, with a height 
of 50 mm (see Table 11.3.1). This method was mostly used 
as a starting point, as more or less volume would be added 
between the circles. Furthermore, a draft and fillet as well as 
the elevation would be added to the model, also influencing 
the volume. 
 After estimating the sizes the drawing began in CAD. First 
the ground shape was drawn and extruded with a 13 degrees 
draft and a fillet in the bottom was added, whereafter the mass 
volume of the solid body was calculated by the software. The 
size was iteratively adjusted until the volume was closer to 
800 mL (the volume should be slightly bigger, as some of 
the volume would go as material). The final measures of the 
Figure 11.3.8 Kareline coulours
Table 11.3.1- example of estimated diameters
Diameter [mm]
Radius [mm]
areal [mm^2]
volume [mm^3]
Ratio
small circle
68
34
3632
181584
23%
small circle 2
68,8
34,4
3718
185882
23%
big circle
104
52
8495
424743
54%
sum
240,8
120,4
15844
792209
100%
mL
792 mL
==PAGE:159==
151
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
extremely cumbersome and frustrating process, as the desired 
shape did not seem possible to draw (see Figure 11.3.10). 
In the end it was decided to 3D print three different versions 
to see how they look and feel in real life, as well as measure 
how many mL that could actually be in the different versions 
(see Figure 11.4.11).  
The most difficult part to draw was the elevation, as this should 
both look organic, follow the existing shapes, and blend into 
the walls of the shell. Therefore it should both differ in height, 
thickness and shape. Several different strategies of drawing 
in CAD were tried; extrude cutting before making a shell, ex-
truding afterwards, sweep cutting based on several sketches 
on several planes and so on (see Appendix 11.06, page 1-4, 
to see some of the different versions created). This was an 
Figure 11.3.10- an example of how SOLIDWORKS did not 
understand the intention of the applied feature 
Figure 11.3.12- IKEA snaps 
Figure 11.3.13- Section view of CAD 
drawing of the snap functionality  
==PAGE:160==
152
tional parts only needed to be drawn to indicate the placement 
and size, whereafter their enigeeners would help detail the 
dimensions to ensure the right functionality. The rubber ring 
was also drawn very simply as this would have to be adjusted 
according to the final lid (see Figure 11.3.12 and 11.3.13).  
Finally the container’s bottom and lid were detailed for stack-
ing. Here a rim was added in the bottom to add stability and 
the measures of the inside edge of the lid was adjusted to this 
(see Figure 11.3.14-11.3.16). 
Figure 11.3.16- the shape of the lid enabling stacking
When the CAD model was finished, the weight of the three 
parts was calculated using SOLIDWORKS Material cata-
logue and SOLIDWORKS Mass Properties tool see Figure 
11.3.17. Specifications for the Kareline material were found 
at MatWeb. The total weight of the container was calculated 
to 191,5 g. 
After evaluating the 3D prints, it was decided to try and 
modify version ELEV2. Again this process took much more 
time than expected and did not bring a better result. Finally a 
choice needed to be made in order to move on with the project 
(and not get even more mad at SOLIDWORKS) and it was 
decided to proceed with version ELEV1. 
Meanwhile the lid was drawn, as this did not depend on the 
elevation shape. The shape, snaps and rubber part were drawn 
similar to an IKEA container, as this has the desired function-
ality of the lid. As discussed with Dutec Plast A/S, the func-
Figure 11.4.11 The three 3D printed ver-
sions; ELEV1, ELEV2 and ELEV3
Figure 11.3.14- Rim in the bottom 
Figure 11.3.15- How the containers are stacked
ELEV1
ELEV2
ELEV3
==PAGE:161==
153
11/ Detailing the Final Solution
11.4 Solution Catalogue
After detailing the service platforms for the consumers and 
canteens as well as the container, the final PSS solution RO-
TINE is presented in the Solution Catalogue. 
11.5 References
1.	
Prosign.dk. (n.d.). RFID tags, RFID læsere og udvikling af 
RFID software. Retrieved June 22, 2021, from http://www.
prosign.dk/?gclid=Cj0KCQjw2NyFBhDoARIsAMtHtZ4cY-
oRIqyGm3j_m-fj7vMK8978kCbrBm9sOuwSJwpT-B8n9vZ_
Q1wYaAlQ4EALw_wcB
Figure 11.3.17- Material properties of the 
three elements 
Rubber ring
Material: Silicon rubber
Mass density: 0,0012465 kg/cm^3
Weight: 3,95 g
Bottom
Material: Kareline
Mass density: 0,0011 kg/cm^3
Weight: 126,18 g
Lid
Material: PP
Mass density: 0,00089 kg/cm^3
Weight: 61.37 g
Total weight: 191.5 g
==PAGE:162==
12 /
==PAGE:163==
CONTENT
Introduction
TCO and Return of Investment
Circular Economy
sLCA
Rebound effects
Design specification
Implementation Plan
EVALUATING 
THE FINAL 
SOLUTION
==PAGE:164==
156
12.1 Introduction
This Section seeks to evaluate the final PSS solution ROTINE 
(see Section 10/ and the Solution Catalogue). First the busi-
ness viability is evaluated through assessing the total cost of 
ownership (TCO) as well as the return of investment. After-
wards an environmental evaluation of the final solution is 
done through the CE framework and an sLCA. Evaluating the 
PSS further, an analysis of the potential rebound effects asso-
ciated with incorporating the PSS at KK is completed. Lastly, 
the three step roadmap is detailed into an implementation plan 
that includes further work as well as potential barriers which 
may occur in the future development of the PSS.
12.2 TCO and Return of Invest-
ment
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) calculations were conducted 
in order to get an overview of the costs and cost structure 
for developing the system and producing containers. The 
TCOs were furthermore used for estimating the feasibility of 
the business model, comparing the system to costs related to 
a single-use packaging system and identifying the return of 
investment point. All calculations can be found in Appendix 
B12.01 - TCO excel sheet.
 
TCO for four scenarios
It is assumed that members of the system will buy takeaway 
twice a week on average throughout the year. 
Every customer will buy a set of two containers for 120 DKK 
to get access to the system (as described in the final business 
model, see Section 10.2). To keep the system running, includ-
ing having containers to swap and rent, 1.5 times the amount 
of containers that have been bought by customers is assumed 
to be necessary for the canteens to have in stock. E.g. If 50 
customers have bought a set of containers (100 containers), 
the canteen will have 150 containers, meaning that 250 con-
tainers are needed in the system in total. All calculations are 
based on the scenarios investigated in the market size calcu-
lations in Section 4.6.
 
The scenarios are (see Section 4.6): 
1.	
Edison huset (50 customers) 
2.	
10% of customers from Kokkenes Køkken (783 
customers)
3.	
10% of frequent customers in canteens  (78,315 
customers)
4.	
10% of frequent takeaway customers (65,349 
customers)
Note that scenario 3 has a slightly larger amount of custom-
ers than scenario 4, which shows that reaching 10% of the 
canteens market (step 2 in the three step roadmap) is actually 
slightly more profitable than reaching 10% of the restaurant 
takeaway market (step 3 in the three step roadmap). Reaching 
both markets is of course still desirable.
The system is evaluated on an 8-year basis. After 8 years it is 
assumed that most of the ROTINE boxes will have to be re-
placed, as they will have gone through close to 500 use cycles 
Figure 12.2.1– TCO for one ROTINE box in scenario 2 after 8 years.
==PAGE:165==
157
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
(see Section 09.4 Design Specification v3.0).
 
The Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) calculations are based 
on assumptions, guidance from experts and estimates (see 
assumptions in Appendix 12.01). The included costs of the 
TCO are primarily upfront investments for ROTINE, such 
as production of moulds for ROTINE box (both bottom and 
top), production of containers, and development of app, web-
site and IoT integration. Furthermore, the recurring costs will 
include maintenance of the service platforms etc., marketing, 
and spare parts. The distribution of containers will be man-
aged by Kokkenes Køkken, and is therefore not a part of the 
TCO. The TCO for scenario 2 can be viewed in Figure 12.2.1, 
where the total cost of ownership is calculated to 728 DKK 
per box for 8 years (the TCO for scenario 3 and 4 are respec-
tively 66 DKK and 67 DKK. ).
 The largest cost associated with the ROTINE box is primarily 
the development and maintenance of the app (where the first 
version is assumed to cost 500 000 DKK to develop, followed 
by a total of 100 000 DKK for continuous maintenance during 
the 8 years). However, this will only be the case for scenarios 
where few ROTINE boxes are produced, as the total cost of 
producing the containers will become the highest expense for 
the bigger markets. TCO, cost and earnings overview of the 
other scenarios can be found in Appendix 12.02, page 1-4.
 
TCO of ROTINE box compared to single-use packaging
The TCO of the ROTINE box can be compared to the cost 
of single-use packaging. This is done by calculating the to-
tal price of the single-use containers that would be used per 
member during eight years. As it is assumed that each member 
will buy takeaway two times a week on average the amount 
of single-use containers needed would be 832 for eight years, 
which would cost almost 5000 DKK (as one container con-
taining both lid and bottom costs 6 DKK (according to the 
CEO of KK)). The price per single-use container will not 
change in relation to the number of consumers..
 
The TCO of a ROTINE container is on the other hand depen-
dent on the amount of members in the system. Table 12.2.1 
below clearly shows that the TCO of one box is very, very 
high when there are few members in the system (scenario 1). 
This is due to the high fixed costs for the app development, 
tools for production, infrastructure, etc. (as seen in the pre-
vious Section). The TCO drops significantly when there are 
more members and boxes in the system, as the high fixed 
costs will be split between a lot of containers. The TCO of 
the container is multiplied by 2.5, in order to make a fair com-
parison between single-use containers and the ROTINE box 
(as it was assumed that 1.5 extra containers are needed in the 
system for every container purchased by a customer).
Table 12.2.1 shows that the TCO is higher for the ROTINE 
system compared to single-use packaging when there are very 
few members of the system. This changes dramatically when 
the system expands, as the TCO for each container becomes 
much lower and is now favourable compared to the cost of 
single-use. The difference between the two systems is most 
significant in scenario 3 and 4, where the TCO of the RO-
TINE box times 2.5 amounts to less than 5% of the total cost 
of single-use containers.
Revenue and return of investment
The income in the ROTINE system comes from containers 
sold directly to members of the system and the subscription 
paid on a monthly basis from canteens (or restaurants selling 
Scenarios
Members 
of system
Containers 
sold
Containers 
in canteen
TCO 
ROTINE 
BOX [DKK]
TCO 
ROTINE 
BOX x 2,5 
[DKK]
Single-use 
containers 
per member
Cost of 
single-use 
containers 
used per 
member 
[DKK]
TCO of 2,5 X 
ROTINE box 
compared to cost 
of single-use 
containers over 8 
years
1
50
100
150
10,535
26,339
832
4,992
527.62%
2
783
1566
2349
728
1,821
832
4,992
36.48%
3
78315
156630
234945
66
kr 165
832
4,992
3.31%
4
65349
130698
196047
67
kr 167
832
4,992
3.35%
Table 12.2.1 – TCO of ROTINE box 
compared to single-use packaging.
==PAGE:166==
158
biggest part of the income by far is made on the subscription 
paid by the canteens/restaurants. This trend can be seen on 
Figure 12.2.2 below, where the total revenue for the system in 
the course of eight years can be seen for scenario 2.
Figure 12.2.2 clearly shows that the income from containers 
is insignificant compared to the income from subscriptions.
 
The TCO and other calculations presented in this Section 
largely supports the initial conclusions from the market size 
calculations found in Section 4.7. Selling the product service 
system to a very limited customer group, e.g. focusing on 
only one canteen, is not a viable business. This is especial-
ly due to the high costs associated with developing, updating 
and maintaining the app platform for the customers. A recom-
mendation based on these calculations is therefore to make 
a much simpler setup when launching the system to a very 
limited market. This could be done by developing a website 
instead of an app to the customers, as this is much cheaper.
 As expected from the market size calculations the biggest 
source of income over time is through the subscription paid 
by the canteens rather than the sale of containers.
What the ROTINE box should cost can be discussed, especial-
ly as the price of the container is not an essential part of the 
income structure. The psychological and behavioural consid-
erations regarding the price of the container are important to 
consider in this case. The 120 DKK for a set of two ROTINE 
boxes might be a barrier for entering the system for some con-
sumers. On the other hand, a very cheap price might make 
consumers perceive the container as a low quality product, 
and consumers might be less likely to treat the box with care 
or to remember to turn in borrowed boxes. Thus, too cheap a 
price goes against the wish of achieving emotional durability 
(see Section 12.3).  
takeaway). Any income from renting containers has not been 
accounted for in the following calculations, as it is difficult 
to estimate the amount of container rented and as the income 
from renting containers is very small (10 DKK per container). 
As stated earlier members pay 120 DKK for two containers 
when entering the system.
 
The reference system with single-use packaging was used to 
estimate how much the monthly subscription should cost for 
the canteens and takeaway restaurants. Two containers and 
two lids are always used per takeaway meal, resulting in a 
single-use packaging cost of ≈12 DKK per meal (according 
to the CEO of KK). The monthly subscription for each can-
teen is set to a bit less than what the canteen would spend on 
single-use packaging if each member of the system bought a 
takeaway meal two times a week. 
It should be noted that the average number of customers in 
a canteen is estimated to be 300 people, resulting in around 
30 members of the system in each canteen (assuming 10% of 
customers are willing to partake in the system). As there are 
only 30 members in each canteen the subscription price per 
canteen is lower than in Edison Huset, where it is assumed 
that 50 people are willing to partake in a pilot test. 
 
Table 12.2.2 shows that if the ROTINE system is only used by 
a small number of members, the business is not viable, as the 
income will never exceed the expenses. The return of invest-
ment will happen after two years if the system is expanded to 
all of Kokkenes Køkken and 10% are willing to participate 
in the system. If the system is successfully expanded to all of 
the canteen market or the takeaway market the return of in-
vestment will happen after one year. The table shows that the 
 Table 12.2.2 – Income, cost and return 
of investment for four scenarios.  
Scenarios
Number of 
canteens in 
system (B2B 
customers)
Monthly 
subscription 
per canteen 
(B2B) [DKK]
Containers 
sold
Income 
from selling 
containers 
[DKK]
Income from 
subscription 
[DKK]
Total 
costs 
[DKK]
Return of 
investment
1
1
5100
100
14,446
656,225
2,633,868
Never
2
25
3240
1566
226,227
8,202,814
2,851,825
2 years
3
2500
3252
156630
 22,626,989
808,499,162
25,905,965
1 years
4
N/A
N/A
130698
18,880,816
675,265,580
21,827,016
1 years
==PAGE:167==
159
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
The price point has to be investigated in the future work in or-
der to determine when the price is low enough for consumers 
to enter the system but high enough to make them treat the 
box with care and make sure they return used boxes.
Now the business viability of the final solution has been in-
vestigated and important insights have been found. The Sec-
tions to come will deep dive into the environmental viability 
and profile of the final solution and highlight potential barriers 
to overcome.
12.3 Circular Economy 
The framework described by Bocken et al. (2016) can be used 
to evaluate the final container and system concept on how 
well it fits into a circular economy as described in the liter-
ature study in  Section 02.2. Bocken et al. describes design 
and business strategies for narrowing, closing and slowing 
resource loops in order to transition from a linear to a circular 
economy (see Section 02.2). The main design and business 
strategies which have been applied in the development of the 
container and system design are listed below. 
Design strategies for the container
The main strategy to slow the resource loop for the container 
is designing long-life products, as the container is designed 
for attachment and trust (Bocken et al., 2016). The design of 
the container has been carefully considered, ensuring that user 
Figure 12.2.2 – Revenue for scenario 2 based on income from selling containers 
and subscriptions (red) and only selling subscriptions (green).
TCO
The TCO is based mostly on assumptions, which acts 
as a potential source of error. The production price per 
container should also be discussed as production pric-
es are reduced when a higher amount of units/items is 
produced.
The calculations are based on the assumption that each 
member of the system will buy takeaway two times a 
week on average. This estimate might be a bit high. If 
members buy takeaway less than two times a week the 
TCO per ROTINE box will be less favourable compared 
to single-use packaging, as the amount of single-use 
containers it replaces becomes fewer. The ROTINE box 
will, however, still be cheaper compared to single-use 
packaging for scenario 2, 3 and 4 even if members of 
the system buy takeaway only once a week on average. 
All in all, the TCO provides a good overview of how 
many participants would be necessary to run a healthy 
business. However, it is important to keep in mind that 
it was based on a lot of assumptions. There will defi-
nitely be more costs related to implementing the prod-
uct-service system, which would have to be elaborated 
in further work by getting offers on the different costs. 
==PAGE:168==
160
will therefore own the access to two containers, but the exact 
containers will be switched out with each use.
 
The ROTINE system provides many of the benefits associat-
ed with the Access and performance model as described by 
Bocken et al. (2016). The consumers can enjoy a meal from a 
reusable container without needing to wash it or even store it 
(as they can hand it in at the canteen for later use). If the con-
tainer breaks or has become too worn they can simply hand it 
in and get a new container.
 
The business model provides an incentive for producing con-
tainers that will last a long time, as the longer the container 
lasts the better the revenue. It is therefore also in the interest 
of the business to repair broken parts of the container (e.g. the 
rubber ring) in order to extend the use of the container. There 
is also a financial incentive for collecting worn or broken box-
es in order to remanufacture them.
The circular economy strategies applied in the development 
of the container and system provide a high level characteri-
sation of sustainability considerations. The following Section 
will dive deeper into the environmental impact of the system 
by conducting an sLCA. 
12.4 sLCA
A simple Life Cycle Assessment (sLCA) based on the litera-
ture from Section 02.2 is conducted in this Section with the 
objective of comparing the developed PSS with the existing 
solution of single-use packaging in Edison Huset (also re-
ferred to as the reference system). The assessment is scoped 
as a PSS Consequence, with the focus on analysing the envi-
ronmental changes caused by introducing a PSS to the refer-
ence system (see Section 02.3). Furthermore, the study focus-
es on assessing the CO2 emissions saved, as the developed 
PSS tries to extend the use of the product and material (Kjaer 
et.al., 2017). 
The sLCA is made based on elements from the seven step ap-
proach as described by McAloone and Bey (2008). The seven 
step approach has been adjusted to only include the steps rel-
evant to supplement the assessment. The following four steps 
are included and applied in the described order: (1) describing 
the  use context, (2) gathering an overview of the environ-
mental impact, (3) identifying hotspots and (5) quantifying 
the environmental impacts. 
Detailed identification of the product to be analysed
needs are satisfied creating emotional durability through its 
functionality, aesthetics, and uniqueness. Furthermore, the 
choice of material for the bottom part of the container (Kare-
line) is, among other reasons, chosen to distinguish the con-
tainer from regular plastic products which were found per-
ceived as cheap and unsustainable (see Section 6.9 Affinity 
Diagram).
The design for attachment and trust has been guide by the 
explorations in experience design conducted through the ViP 
design method in Section 07.5. Elements from the exploration 
have been incorporated in the final design, such as organic 
shapes to ensure a pleasant interaction with the container. The 
wow effect of opening the container has been achieved by in-
troducing the elevation in the bottom of the container, which 
makes it possible for the canteen to place different elements of 
the meal nicely and creates an unexpected element. 
Furthermore, the container is designed for disassembly to pro-
long the use phase. The most vulnerable part of the container 
is assumed to be the rubber ring inserted in the lid, which 
could either break or become unhygienic after many uses. The 
rubber ring can therefore easily be removed from the lid, as it 
is secured by a press fit with no glue or other adhesive. As the 
containers are handed in at the canteen regularly the canteen 
personnel will be able to spot any rubber ring that needs re-
placing and do so without having to discard the lid. 
The Kareline material used for the bottom of the container is 
a great choice for closing resource loops, as the containers can 
be collected, remelted and used for producing new contain-
ers. Old containers can be collected directly from the canteens 
(who will send the containers back when they discover that 
they are too worn to continue in the system). As all contain-
ers are made out of Kareline the continuous recycling of the 
material can continue in a closed loop, ensuring a high quality 
primary recycling (Bocken et al., 2016). A closed recycling 
system as a part of a PSS is in fact a prerequisite for recycling 
Kareline, as it can not be recycled in the conventional system. 
Circular business strategies
As stated in Section 02.2 (CE literature) the most relevant 
business model is the Access and performance model, which 
is basically the CE term for a PSS (Bocken et al., 2016). The 
business model for the ROTINE system is in line with this 
model, as consumers are buying access to the use of the RO-
TINE boxes. In the description of the system it is stated that 
consumers buy two containers when entering the system. 
Though it is true that they pay for two containers, the real 
value of participating in the system is not from the transfer of 
ownership when purchasing the boxes, but rather by swapping 
the boxes when purchasing the takeaway meal. The customers 
==PAGE:169==
161
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
lations for the reference flow in table 12.4.2. Note, that the 
reference flow for the reusable container does not include a 
rotation of the containers in the PSS. For this 11 reusable con-
tainers are required for the PSS to fully function, assuming 
that the reusable containers are returned the day after they 
have been used. 
(2) Gathering an overview of the environmental impact and 
(3) identifying hotspots
An overview of the product life cycle of the single-use pack-
aging is made to properly understand the significant envi-
ronmental impacts of the product, through a MECO-matrix, 
identifying the most hazardous environmental impacts in the 
four categories of Materials, Energy, Chemicals and Other 
(see Figure 12.4.1).  
Three hotspots identified for single-use packaging are relat-
ed to material extraction, energy used on extracting materials 
and disposal of materials. These three areas are not affected 
nearly as much for the product life cycle of the ROTINE box, 
as the lifespan is substantially  prolonged.
In contrast, the Rotone box affects the use phase, as it requires 
energy and water consumption to  continuously clean the con-
tainer. However, it can be argued that the created impact does 
not have a high enough effect to even out the three hotspots 
The objects of the sLCA study are the single-use packaging 
and the reusable container that are to be compared through-
out the product life cycle from cradle to grave. Their mate-
rial properties are listed in table 12.4.1 below. Note, that it 
was not possible to find all specific material properties in the 
GRANTA Edupack tool used for modelling the sLCA. Minor 
adjustments have therefore been made in order to conduct the 
assessment. This must be taken into account when concluding 
on the results. 
(1) Describing  the use context
The use context is described by a functional unit in order to 
gain a common reference frame,  which can be used to com-
pare the developed PSS with the single-use packaging. The 
obligatory properties of being able to contain and seal 750 mL 
has been the basis of the functional unit stated below.
Container of 750 mL meal for consumption 5 days a 
week for 8 years. The container must be reclosable and 
appropriate for transportation.
The reference flow for the single-use packaging is 2,080 
bottoms and lids, while the reference flow for the reusable 
containers are 4.16 bottoms, lids and silicone sealing (when 
assuming all three parts have the same lifespan). See calcu-
Table 12.4.1 - Material overview of the 
analysed objects
Table 12.4.2 - Overview of the products and their respective reference flows
Single-use packaging
Reusable container (PSS)
Actual properties
Edupack tool
Actual properties
Edupack tool
Bottom
Cardboard coated 
with PLA
Cardboard
Kareline (50% wood based 
cellulose fibres combined 
with 50% thermoplastic)
Kareline (30% fiberwood, 
70% polypropylene, virgin)
Lid
PLA
PLA
Polypropylene
PP (impact, copolymer, low 
flow, virgin)
Sealing
-
-
Silicone rubber ring
Silicone (VMQ, heat cured 
10-30% fumed silica, virgin)
Product
Reference flow
Single-use 
packaging
1 packaging · 5 days · 52 weeks · 8 years = 2,080 packaging
Reusable 
container
With the assumption that it can be washed and reused 500 times (as described in the design specification):
2,080 / 500 = 4.16 containers
4.16 · 2.5 = 10.4 containers = 11 containers (round up)
==PAGE:170==
162
packaging. The use phase is not taken into account in this 
comparison as it only focuses on investigating the product 
performance in relation to material consumption. 
The second comparison investigates the environmental impact 
of the two systems in relation to the functional unit and refer-
ence flow, and tries to answer whether the single-use packag-
ing in the product system is better than the reusable container 
in the product-service system. The calculation of the water 
and energy consumption for washing the reusable containers 
in a dishwasher are assumed to run once a week (assuming 
that 5 containers can fit onto one industrial dishwasher tray) 
for three minutes for 8 years. In addition, it is assumed that 
the consumers use 1 liter of water per used container to rinse 
it before returning. 
The following Section will describe the results of the two 
comparisons.  
Results
Results from the first comparison shows that one reusable 
container has a carbon footprint of 0.84 kg, while one sin-
gle-use packaging has a carbon footprint of 0.148 kg. This 
identified for the single-use packaging. 
(5) Quantifying the environmental impacts
The simple life cycle assessment is modelled in the GRANTA 
Edupack tool. See Appendix 12.04 and 12.05 to view the cho-
sen materials, manufacturing process and End of Life (EoL) 
potential in the software programme for both containers. Note, 
that all chosen materials are virgin materials, meaning that re-
cycled materials are not included in this assessment. Further-
more, the single-use packaging is at EoL sent to combustion 
to follow the Danish recycling guidelines (materials polluted 
with food that cannot be washed off should not be recycled). 
And lastly, the numbers used in the transportation phase are 
based on rough estimates by looking at the distance between 
the different production sites, as the assessment is solemnly a 
simple life cycle analysis. View Appendix A12.06 to gain an 
overview of the assumptions made to model the sLCA.
The single-use packaging has been compared to the reusable 
container in two ways. The first comparison investigates the 
amount of CO2 emission contributed by each container, with 
focus on finding the amount of times the reusable contain-
er has to be used in order to break even with the single-use 
Materials
Manufacturing
Transport
Oil
Tree
Use
Disposal
M
E
C
O
Energy for extraction 
and forestry
Chemicals 
when extracting
Processes of plastic 
forming and waste 
material -
       0.0215 kg CO2
Power for 
machines/facilities 
-        287,000 kJ
0.00438 kg
Chemicals waste 
when processing 
plastic granulation
Secondary and 
tertiary packaging
Fuel for transport:
Granulation, A - B
Final Form, B - C
               60,900 kJ
CO2 emissions 
when transporting
Packaging size/shape 
for optimal transport
Plastic waste
Residual waste
Water if rinsed
Energy to melt and 
sort recycling
Incineration
Toxic emissions 
when incinerating 
materials (plastics)
The material sent for 
disposal can instead be 
reused several times - 
Foodwaste do not 
have EOL potential 
A lot of energy is used 
to get oil for producing 
the plastic granulate - 
3,590,000 J
For every single plastic 
container more oil is 
used - 0.115 kg CO2
Plastics
Cardboard
The user might not 
recycle the plastic 
lid
Risk of oil spill
Figure 12.4.1 MECO-matrix 
==PAGE:171==
163
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
means that the CO2 emission of one reusable container is 
equal to around 6 single-use packaging (see Figure 12.4.1). 
In other words, the consumer would have to use the reusable 
container 6 times in order to break even with the analysed 
single-use packaging system. These results are based on not 
including the EoL potential. The reusable container will be 
equal to only two single-use packages if the EoL is included. 
See all calculations in Appendix B12.02 and the associated 
GRANTA Edupack evaluations in Appendix B12.03. This 
number needs to be further investigated in a real Life Cycle 
Analysis, as it seems a bit too optimistic that the EoL can in-
fluence the results that drastically. 
Results from the second comparison shows that the reusable 
containers in the PSS have a carbon footprint of 50.7 kg, while 
the single-use packages have a carbon footprint of 293.3 kg 
without including EoL Appendix B12.02 - sLCA. This means 
that the single-use packages have a 5.8 times higher impact 
on the CO2 footprint compared to the PSS. The impact dif-
ference increases to 10.8 when including EoL, as the bottom 
and lid in the reusable container are sent to recycling and the 
single-use bottom and lid to combustion (see Figure 12.4.2). 
Note that 2.080 single-use containers are required to fulfil the 
functional unit, while only 11 reusable containers in the PSS 
are required, as described in the reference flow. Furthermore, 
the saved amount of CO2 emission will only increase propor-
tionally with the amount of orders per week. Meaning that if 
there were 50 orders a week, it would require 110 reusable 
containers vs 20800 single-use containers which corresponds 
to CO2 savings which are around 10 times higher.
12.5 Rebound effects 
After looking at the positive environmental impact of the 
sLCA, a brief assessment of negative unintended environ-
mental impacts (Rebound Effects) that might occur is made. 
As mentioned in Section 02.3 these impacts might occur due 
to either behavioral or systemic responses of changing the 
takeaway system from single-use packaging to a reusable 
PSS (Kjaer, Pigosso, & McAloone, 2017). The rebound ef-
fects highlight the impacts related to the implementation of 
the system for the economic-, social-, and environmental 
sustainability. The assessment of the impacts can be seen on 
Figure 12.5.1.
Economic impact
It is expected that the implementation of the ROTINE box 
system will have a positive impact on the economy for can-
teens, as using the ROTINE system will be cheaper in the 
sLCA
The conducted sLCA is mainly based on assumptions 
in the phases of manufacturing, transport, use, disposal 
and EoL potential. This gives a certain degree of uncer-
tainty to the results presented e.g. it is assumed that the 
reusable containers can endure a use cycle of 500 times, 
based on the requirement made in the Design Specifica-
tion v3.0. The reusable container can most likely endure 
more use cycles (in comparison Kleenhub states that 
their containers can endure 1000 use cycles (Kleen Hub 
| Smart Coffee Cups and Food Boxes, n.d.)).
Furthermore, the EoL potential has a high influence on 
the amount of single-use packaging required to break 
even with the reusable container. The EoL potential 
should therefore be blackboxed in this sLCA, as the 
processes in EoL most likely include some sources of 
error.
In addition, the calculations in the sLCA are only made 
for one container and not a set of two, as the PSS solu-
tion actually consists of. This is reasoned by the fact 
that the same amount of containers (reusable or not) are 
required for the same amount of meals. Therefore, this 
does not have an effect on the results.
Furthermore, another important sustainability effect of 
replacing the reference system with the ROTINE PSS 
system, which has not been taken into account, is that 
the ROTINE box will most likely not end up as litter in 
nature, which is a great problem with single-use pack-
aging. Considering this aspect, the implementation of 
the PSS solution is even more preferable. 
In conclusion, the sLCA gives a good overview of the 
environmental performance of the reusable contain-
er and the PSS compared to the single-use packaging. 
However, a lot of assumptions were made throughout 
the assessment, which should be further validated in a 
proper LCA before publishing the results to the stake-
holders and consumers. That being said, an LCA study 
has not been made in this project, as it requires meet-
ing a lot of preconditions that are not within the project 
scope.
==PAGE:172==
164
Environmental impact
The usage of water will be higher due to the washing of the 
ROTINE boxes at the canteens. Furthermore, users of the sys-
tem will, if adhering to the norm, rinse them after use and re-
turn them, leading to more water used. However, a secondary 
benefit will be that people will buy meals which could have 
been wasted. Furthermore, if takeaway meals can help con-
sumers with providing portion served meals in their busy ev-
eryday life food waste might be saved as well. This is likely, 
as KK has proven to save food waste with the implementation 
of their SANS! Concept. 
Furthermore, another important sustainability effect of replac-
ing the reference system with the ROTINE PSS system is the 
fact that the ROTINE box will most likely not end up as litter 
in nature, which is a great problem with single-use packaging. 
Considering this aspect, the implementation of the PSS solu-
tion is even more preferable. 
Lastly, a huge material waste might happen if the system is 
not properly utilized, as the containers might end up in a stor-
age room. Therefore these considerations must be taken into 
account when detailing the implementation plan. The next 
Section will dive deeper into how to mitigate the potential 
barriers that can arrive in implementing the PSS solution, 
through well structured planning of a roadmap.  
Figure 12.4.1 - Environmental assessment of the breakeven 
point of CO2 impact for a reusable box with 6 units of sin-
gle-use packaging, from GRANTA EDUPACK.
Figure 12.4.2 - Environmental assessment of the two 
systems: reusable PSS and single-use packaging system, in 
relation to the functional unit.
long run compared to single-use packaging (one of the ben-
efits from CE business models is to earn money on the same 
resources again and again). Therefore the cost of producing a 
meal for the canteen will become cheaper resulting in a higher 
profit per meal. Furthermore, as prices for single-use plastics 
are expected to increase even more in the next few years, the 
profit will increase even more. The extra profit earned makes 
it more likely that companies (canteens and takeaway restau-
rants) will be more inclined to spend money on sustainable 
initiatives as this is the main focus of the danish legislation.
Furthermore, if ROTINE becomes a great success this will 
have a negative influence on the economy for single-use pack-
aging manufacturers. 
Social impact
Consumers are expected to increase their consumption pattern 
for takeaway from canteens, as ROTINE makes it easy to get 
good and healthy food to an affordable price (especially at 
canteens like Edison Huset that do not have an established 
takeaway culture). 
This new consumption pattern might result in a decrease in 
the consumption of other takeaway food (e.g. unhealthy fast 
food) creating a positive impact on health. 
Furthermore, this will also increase the sustainable profile for 
both the canteen, the employees, and the house.
==PAGE:173==
165
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
12.6 Design specification 
The previous chapters in this report have described how the 
final solution has been developed, detailed and evaluated. The 
solution can now be evaluated using the design specification, 
which contains all of the most important requirements and 
criteria discovered throughout the design process. The full 
design specification with notes of how all requirements and 
criteria have been implemented in the final solution can be 
found in Appendix B12.04. Table 12.6.1 shows an overview 
of some of the most essential parts of the design specification 
and the implementation of requirements and criteria in the fi-
nal solution. 
LESS MATERIAL WASTE
WATER
WATER
DIRECT REBOUND
MATERIALS
ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACT
MORE FOOD
WASTE FOOD
ROTINE BOX 
Better branding for 
canteens
Easier and cheaper to 
access gourmet food
Reusing containers
Rotine system is not 
used
Waste food gets 
bought
More water is used 
by the canteen
More water will be used 
by consumers (rinsing)
DIRECT REBOUND
DIRECT REBOUND
SECONDARY BENEFIT
Support sustainability 
in Denmark
Promoting a green 
culture
Consumption patterns 
of citizens increase
SOCIAL 
IMPACT
ECONOMIC 
IMPACT
SECONDARY BENEFIT
INDIRECT REBOUND
SECONDARY BENEFIT
People will increase 
their sustainable proﬁle
INDIRECT BENEFIT
DIRECT BENEFIT
Figure 12.5.1 - Rebound effects
==PAGE:174==
166
Final Design Specification
Factor
Requirements 
(need to have)
Criteria 
(nice to have)
Comments
Implemented in final solution
Product - Container(s)
Material
Should weigh 
between 150-400 
grams
The weight must not 
signal low quality by 
being too light, but should 
not be too heavy either.
The container (bottom, lid and silicon rubber 
sealing) weigh 191.5 g in total.
Must be more 
sustainable 
than single-use 
packaging
The Rotine box breaks even in terms of CO2 
emission after six uses compared to single use 
packaging. 
Shape
Should not have any 
hard to clean grooves
Cleaning should be easy
The organic shape makes the Rotine box easy 
to clean. The silicone rubber sealing can be 
replaced if it becomes unhygenic. 
The container should 
take up as little space 
as possible when 
empty
This can be achieved by 
stacking the container
The bottom of the container has a 13 degree 
draft which makes it possible to stack them when 
empty.
The shape (and 
material) should invite 
for consumers to 
eat directly from the 
container
The organic shape and the height of the container 
makes the container inviting to eat from.
Aesthetics
Should present the 
food as nicely as 
possible (enhance the 
food experience)
The groove on the inside of the bottom creates 
an unexpected eating experiences and seperates 
different elements of the meal. 
Should have a strong 
visual brand identity
Through elements such 
as form, material, logo, 
etc. 
The Rotine box meets the visual brand identity by 
both form and material, as it complies well with 
the Luups bakken and the vision of Kokkenes 
Køkken (SANS)
Protecting the food
Must be sealed/
leakage proof
Should be percieved 
as leakage proof
The clamps used for securing the lid is a tried and 
tested method, which has been proven to work on 
e.g. containers from IKEA. 
Lifecycle
The easier it is to 
change parts the 
better
The container is designed for disassembly. The 
rubber silicone sealing can easily be removed 
from the lid, as it is press fitted. 
The easier it is to 
recycle parts the 
better
All parts can be disassembled to ensure optimal 
recycling. PP is recyclable in the Danish system. 
Kareline is recyclable when send back to the 
producer. 
Table 12.6.1 - Most relevant requirements and 
criteria from the Final Design Specification
==PAGE:175==
167
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
Service - System
Communication platform
The communication 
platform should 
inform/notify the 
user of when rented 
containers must be 
returned
The consumer is notified by a notification from the 
app when it is time to return the container. The 
app contains an overview of bought and rented 
containers. 
The canteen 
platform must give 
an overview of 
containers in stock 
and in use
Canteens can see an overview of containers in 
stock and in use on the Container page. They 
can also see a list of members in the system, 
how many container each member has bought or 
rented, etc. 
Collect & return
The system should 
implement technology 
that makes the 
collection of takeaway 
and return of 
containers as easy as 
possible
The container is collected from the smart fridge 
using a phone to scan the an NFC chip.The 
container is simply scanned at the cleaning 
station when handing it in (made possible by the 
NFC chip embedded in the container). 
Motivation
The price of the 
container should not 
be so expensive that it 
demotivates the use/
entry of the solution 
The price for the container is 120 DKK. It is 
financially feasible to lower the price of the 
container if the initial testing shows that the 
pricepoint is discouraging consumers from trying 
out the system. 
Financial structure 
should be economical 
appealing for 
canteens
Canteens will receive an all-in-one solution, 
which helps them to manage takeaway orders, 
communicate takeaway offering to their 
costumers and create data on environmental 
footprint. The price of the subscription is less 
than what they currently pay for a takeaway 
management system and disposable packaging 
per month. 
General 
The system should 
be as convenient as 
possible
The containers can be handed in at the canteen 
of the consumers workplace, which is convenient, 
as they come there every day. The consumers 
are aided by the app in remebering their 
containers, as they receive a notification on the 
day they have ordered a meal. Consumers have 
the opportunity to buy containers and thereby 
avoided the hassle of having to return rented 
containers within a deadline. Consumers are 
also continuosly reminded to bring back rented 
containers. 
Acter network - Key stakeholders for relevant 
The solution 
should make the 
communication 
between stakeholders 
easier
The app establishes an effective communication 
platform between the canteen and the 
consumers. The canteen personnel can 
effectively communicate the menu of the week 
and advertise leftover meals.  
The solution should 
make the workways of 
the personnel easier
The canteen personell can use the platform to 
keep track of takeaway orders. The platform 
provides a valuable tool for planning the menu as 
well, as recipes can be shared across canteens 
and easily searched through the recipe library.  
==PAGE:176==
168
Step 1
Launch ROTINE 
system to the 
rest of KK's 
canteens 
Edison 
Huset 
Step 0
MVP test 
CAD model of 
container is modiﬁed
and sent to production 
(mold and injection 
molding)
Present
System platform; app 
and website is 
updated/developed
Fundraising
KOKKENES 
KØKKEN
Selected KK 
Canteens
Step 0.5
Launch 
MVP 2.0
Development of 
system platform for 
consumers and 
canteens webpage 
based
Buy extra containers 
(same as the 
containers used for 
MVP test 1.0)
Plan MVP test 2.0
Evaluate business 
viability (proceed or 
not?)
Plan launch of 
ROTINE system
Q3
Q4
2021
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2022
202
Figure 12.7.1 - Roadmap, the steps to business success
takeaway as a possibility and how to order. Therefore,  a new 
routine for employees needs to be implemented to make the 
solution viable. 
The hope is to create enough incentive and motivation from 
a sustainable perspective to change people’s norms and their 
behavior. Therefore, more tests and evaluations will be neces-
sary in the roadmap. 
Acceptance: The most common barrier, also described in the 
Section 02.3, is acquiring customer acceptance. Throughout 
this study it was found that accessibility and convenience are 
the most important characteristics to have in place in order to 
gain acceptance from the customers of takeaway systems (see 
Section 06.9 Affinity Diagram). Therefore, the platform has 
to meet most of the customers needs, and this will have to be 
tested in the roadmap.
Furthermore, the kitchen head chef at KK also made it clear 
at the last feedback session, that he would not like it if we 
changed his workways quite drastically, without properly ex-
plaining the benefits of doing so. So the final system would 
also have to be tested and evaluated with him and some of the 
other chefs. 
12.7 Implementation Plan
In this Section the implementation plan will be described 
as well as the potential barriers that need to be mitigated to 
implement the final solution successfully. Furthermore, this 
Section will revolve around how the final solution will be 
incorporated and which activities are necessary to enter the 
beachhead market (Kokkenes Køkken), the canteen market 
and lastly, the takeaway restaurant market.
Potential Barriers
Norms: Behaviours are hard to change, especially when the 
reason behind the existing behaviour is related to conve-
nience; consumers are used to ordering takeaway, where it is 
possible to throw the dirty packaging out after use instead for 
cleaning it and bringing it back into the system. As found in 
the literature study, the PSS will demand users to invest time 
and effort into the PSS, which could potentially lead to rejec-
tion (Section 02.3). Therefore, it is necessary to change the 
habits of the employees at Edison Huset and at other canteens 
as well to ensure the success of the ROTINE system. 
Furthermore, employees at Edison Huset have not been order-
ing takeaway because they were lacking the knowledge about 
==PAGE:177==
169
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
and evaluation will be needed, which is why step 0.5 is the 
launch of a MVP 2.0, see Figure 12.6.1. 
Furthermore many activities are necessary along the timeline 
to reach the final goal which is expanding the ROTINE box 
system into the canteen- and takeaway restaurant industry.   
Some of the work that has been completed as a part of the 
design process needs to be reevaluated before launching the 
PSS. 
Whether the financial structure with a combination of con-
sumers primarily buying and secondarily renting containers 
is the right approach can be discussed and explored through 
further user studies. The price of the container should be re-
evaluated with potential users in order to determine the ideal 
pricepoint where users are willing to buy the containers but at 
the same time careful not to loose them.  Results and response 
from the MVP test would have been beneficial in evaluating 
the business model from the user perspective, but as conduct-
ing the test did not go as planned further tests will have to be 
made.
The sLCA should be seen as a rough comparison between the 
new solution and the reference system. In order to fully de-
Partnerships: The partnerships are really important, how-
ever, KK seems really invested and interested in the system 
under development. The most important thing to overcome is 
to find a reasonable price point for the subscription between 
KK and ROTINE, as this is the primary income. The discus-
sion about the subscription prices will therefore, be really 
important for the further work of making the product-service 
system feasible. Afterwards partnerships will be necessary for 
the other canteen in order to really make an environmental 
difference and expand to other markets. 
Lastly, restaurants with loyal customers will be crucial if we 
are to expand the business into the takeaway restaurant mar-
ket, see the 3 step plan in the roadmap, Figure 12.6.1. 
Roadmap and Further Work  
A roadmap was created to plan and organise the implementa-
tion of the ROTINE box and its system. The roadmap seeks 
to define the overarching strategic objective associated with 
each step while acting as a tool for communication (Product-
plan, n.d.)
In the potential barriers Section above, the most important ac-
tivities were touched upon to make the business viable, which 
was the system itself and the adaptation of it. Therefore, tests 
TAKEAWAY 
RESTAURANTS
CANTEENS
Step 2
Expanding 
ROTINE to the 
canteen 
market
Step 3
Expanding to 
the takeaway 
market
Smart fridges 
with NFC
reader is 
launched
adjust no of boxes 
according to statistics - 
no of boxes needed 
per participants
Evaluate business 
plan for takeaway 
market
Evaluate business 
viability (make 
changes or not?)
Plan launch of ROTINE 
system
Pitch and sell ROTINE 
to other canteens
Pitch ROTINE to make 
strategic partnerships 
(e.g. Wolt, JustEat)
Further 
development of 
Rotine for takeaway
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
23
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2024
==PAGE:178==
170
Other: 
•	
Obtaining offers on ROTINE box molds.
•	
Obtain prices for website and app development. 
•	
Confirm that having a smart fridge can maybe control the 
flow of containers that go in and out of the system, due 
to the fact that many canteens already have a trust based 
system where they sell convenience meals. 
The completion of these practical tasks will bring the solution 
one step closer to implementation.
12.8 References
1.	
Bocken, N. M. P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., & van der Grinten, 
B. (2016). Product design and business model strategies for 
a circular economy. Journal of Industrial and Production 
Engineering, 33(5), 308–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/216810
15.2016.1172124 
2.	
Kjaer, L. L., Pigosso, D. C. A., & McAloone, T. C. (2017). A 
guide for evaluating the environmental performance of Prod-
uct/Service-Systems - Ecodesign research and implementation 
at DTU. Retrieved January 26, 2021, from https://ecodesign.
dtu.dk/PSS-GUIDE 
3.	
kleen hub | Smart coffee cups and food boxes. (n.d.). Re-
trieved May 23, 2021, from https://www.kleenhub.com/ 
4.	
McAloone, T. C., & Bey, N. (2008). Miljøforbedringer 
gennem produktudvikling: En guide. Retrieved June 7, 2021, 
from https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2389469441 
5.	
Productplan. (n.d.). Roadmap Basics: What is a Roadmap? 
Retrieved June 15, 2021, from https://www.productplan.com/
learn/roadmap-basics/ 
6.	
Kupilka, 2021. We care. Retrieved from https://kupilka.fi/en/
we-care
termine the environmental impact of the solution a full LCA 
analysis will have to be conducted and reviewed by other 
LCA practitioners. Some of the important assumptions made 
(such as number of containers in the system and lifetime of 
the container) will have to be tested in the further work in 
order to validate the calculations.
The final solution has to be evaluated with consumers in the 
relevant context. The MVP test was meant to be used as an 
evaluation tool for the final solution but did not go as planned. 
A lot of user input has been incorporated in the design pro-
cess, but a final evaluation of the concept is important before 
developing to a bigger scale.
Launch: As learned from the MVP test, a proper launch is 
needed to create the right awareness and kick start the use of 
the system. Awareness needs to be created, where physical 
advertisement is not enough. Therefore the launch might in-
clude a campaign with discounts to trigger and motivate users 
to enter the system for the first time. An event can be held to 
ensure that awareness is created.  For this purpose help from 
marketing experts is potentially needed.
Further work that needs to be done for the ROTINE box 
among others, see lists below: 
The ROTINE box: 
•	
Evaluate and detail the lid more to ensure a right snap 
fit, and make assembly of all parts more coherent. This 
will be done with the help from Dutec Plast A/S, who 
have provided guidance throughout the development of 
the concept. 
•	
Redefining the elevation dividing the rooms in the con-
tainer will be redefined so it blends into the walls in a 
more organic shape. 
•	
Implementing an open/closing mechanism in the lid to 
allow airflow in the container for food served hot - how-
ever, this will only be relevant for the takeaway restau-
rant market. 
•	
Development and incorporation of a ROTINE logo and 
tableware symbols will be created (approved for food 
use, dishwasher safe, freezer safe, not microwavable etc)
•	
Investigating which type of ID chips that is best suited to 
be injection moulded into the containers
•	
Furthermore, designing a better option for joining the 
two containers, this could be e.g. a reusable rubber band 
- however a way to ensure that these are not lost needs to 
be addressed as well. 
==PAGE:179==
171
12/ Evaluating the Final Solution
==PAGE:180==
13/ 
==PAGE:181==
DISCUSSION, 
CONCLUSION & 
REFLECTION
==PAGE:182==
174
13.1 Discussion 
Many choices have been made along the design process, 
which have influenced the final solution. Some of these deci-
sions have been made when deciding the focus for this thesis 
before the official start of the project. Here it was decided to 
focus on creating a reuse product service system for takeaway 
as an alternative to the current disposable packaging system. 
Other approaches to change the current system could have 
been applied, such as e.g. looking into optimising the recy-
clability of the disposable packaging. The PSS approach was 
chosen because it was seen as the most innovative solution 
for creating an entirely new way to think about packaging by 
incorporating user centred design approaches.
 
In the following Sections some of the most important choic-
es and factors that influenced the design process will be dis-
cussed.
 
Research
All research for the canteen market has been conducted in 
the canteen at Edison Huset, which is managed by Kokkenes 
Køkken. Edison Huset is therefore used as a model for all 
canteens in Kokkenes Køkken and even the rest of the can-
teen market. It is believed that the workways observed in the 
canteen at Edison Huset are representative for other canteens, 
at least when looking at the big picture, but features that are 
uniquely seen in Edison Huset might have influenced the re-
search conclusions. Small adjustments of the final solution 
might therefore be necessary if implemented in other can-
teens.
 
A lot of the research conducted in Kokkenes Køkken has been 
informed by the head chef Teddy Rose, as he is a part of many 
work processes related to the takeaway system. The other 
members of the canteen staff have contributed to the research 
within their field of expertise. The research conducted in the 
canteen may have been influenced by Teddy Rose’s subjective 
interpretation of how the system works. This subjectiveness 
would however be balanced by observations in the actual con-
text, as members of the master group conducted interviews 
and observed in the canteen.
 
As all other parts of society, the canteen at Edsion Huset has 
been influenced by the pandemic. The main influence in re-
gard to this project is fewer people frequenting the canteen. 
Takeaway orders for the canteen have been very limited, as 
employees were just starting to return to the canteen at the 
start of this project. This makes it difficult to document the 
extent of the current takeaway system accurately, as more em-
ployees might have placed orders outside of the pandemic. A 
more popular takeaway system would only be beneficial to 
the implementation of the solution.
 
The user centred perspective in the initial research comes 
from the generative design approach, where participants were 
asked to fill in workbooks on their latest takeaway experience. 
The material in the workbook has been constructed in order to 
let participants freely and creatively express their experienc-
es. Despite this intention the material might still have primed 
them through the questions and prompts. Questions like what 
they did with their packaging at the end of the meal could lead 
some of the participants to reflect upon sustainability aspects, 
which they might not have thought about otherwise. This can 
be both an advantage and a disadvantage, as it is desirable to 
get participants to reflect upon their interaction with packag-
ing, but undesirable to affect their view on it.
It can be discussed whether the experiences documented in 
the workbook reflect a typical takeaway experience for the 
participants. Some of the participants might have ordered 
takeaway because they wanted to document it for the research 
and not as a part of a regular routine. Even if this is the case 
the thoughts, feelings and behaviours documented in the 
workbooks are deemed to be a valid representation of a typi-
cal takeaway experience.
 
The participants in the generative design research were re-
cruited from the networks of the master group members. 
Recruiting people who already had a connection to the mas-
ter group made it much easier to gain access to descriptions 
and pictures from the participants’ own dining Table, which 
strangers might not have been willing to share. Being in close 
communication with participants made other aspects easier as 
well, such as instructing participants in the use of the Miro 
platform and how to fill in the workbook. Participants familiar 
to the master group were deemed to be more willing to par-
ticipate in several time-consuming research activities, such as 
filling out a workbook and participating in a workshop. The 
limitations to recruiting participants within friends and fam-
ily was the limited access to different age segments. Most of 
the participants in the generative design research are therefore 
between 20 and 30 years old, which may have influenced the 
results. The survey conducted later on (Section 06.7) include 
more age groups, though the majority of participants were 
still in their mid 20ies to 30ies.
The underlying structure of the survey turned out to have an 
error, which led some participants through questions on their 
experiences with buying takeaway from their canteen when 
==PAGE:183==
175
13/ Discussion, Conclusion and Reflection
they in fact had not tried buying takeaway from the canteen. 
The answers they provided are therefore based on assump-
tions about what their behaviour would be if they were to buy 
takeaway from their canteen. The answers are deemed rele-
vant for this project, but the error should be kept in mind.
 
Ideation, concept development and evaluation
Maj, Rune, Asmus and Teddy have been the primary repre-
sentatives for Kokkenes Køkken and the canteen business in 
general at both the co-creation session and at later concept 
evaluations. Their personal approaches to the canteen busi-
ness have probably affected the outcome of these sessions, as 
other stakeholders might have provided very different feed-
back. The four representatives have been chosen because they 
represent important aspects of the canteen business, from the 
CEO who has the overview of the entire business to the head 
chef, who knows what works in the canteen kitchen.
 
The evaluation with potential users was based on the restau-
rant takeaway context, as the system prototypes were based 
on ordering takeaway from restaurants. The feedback from 
the session might have been very different if the prototypes 
had been presented as a part of the canteen context, as a lot 
of the feedback was related to the complexity of the restau-
rant takeaway system. On the other hand, the takeaway from 
restaurant context made it simpler for the participants to relate 
to the system, as they had prior experiences with this context.
The potential users were introduced to all of the container 
concepts, but not all concept prototypes were detailed to the 
same level. This might have had an influence on their eval-
uations of the containers. The prototypes did, however, not 
stand alone, as the container concepts were explained to the 
participants as well.
 
Both the Functional and Eating experience container con-
cepts performed well in the evaluation with potential users 
and stakeholders from the canteen. The Functional concept 
could have been chosen for further development, but in the 
end the Eating experience concept was selected, as it repre-
sented a more innovative choice for the container, which suit-
ed the branding of Kokkenes Køkken well. Elements from 
the Functional concept have been implemented in the final 
solution in order to optimise the Eating experience concept, 
e.g. the clamps which hold the lid tightly sealed during trans-
port. Whether potential users will perceive the final container 
as a successful combination of the two container concepts will 
have to be evaluated in further user testing.
 
Some aspects of the final container concepts have only been 
validated with Kokkenes Køkken. This is true for the final 
form, as it was chosen at an evaluation session with represen-
tatives from the canteen. Potential user might have had other 
inputs for the final container shape. That being said, potential 
users have interacted and provided feedback on the initial pro-
totypes for the Eating experience concept, which had a similar 
shape to the final concept.
 
The choice of Kareline as the material for the base of the con-
tainer is mainly based on inputs from Kokkene Køkken as 
well. Their experiences with this material from the Loops tray 
have been incorporated in the evaluation. The fact that the 
material fits well with the brand identity of Kokkenes Køkken 
has been valued highly. The material choices for the differ-
ent concepts were shown to potential users at the evaluation 
workshop, but a formal evaluation was not conducted. It can 
be discussed whether a more formal evaluation with poten-
tial users would have influenced the choice of material, but 
in this case the input from Kokkenes Køkken was prioritised, 
as the material would have to be in line with their brand and 
approach to sustainability. The recyclability of Kareline is de-
pendent on keeping it in a closed recycling loop, where the 
containers are sent back to the manufacturers when broken 
or too worn to continue use. The fact that Kokkenes Køk-
ken already has implemented products made out of Kareline 
(the Loops tray) makes it likely that the recycling system will 
work for the ROTINE boxes as well. If it turns out not to be 
feasible to send the boxes back to the manufacturer it can be 
discussed whether a material that can be reused in the conven-
tional system would have been more appropriate.
 
There might be unforeseen costs related to the development 
and implementation of the final system, which have not been 
accounted for in the TCO calculation and which might change 
some of the results. The scenarios and assumptions used for 
the calculations might also need to be adjusted in the future. 
The TCO calculations should be regarded as rough estimates 
for whether the business model is feasible or not. Even if 
some of the calculations will have to be adjusted, most of the 
results represent pretty significant differences between the fi-
nal solution and the reference system.
 
This project has balanced between a holistic view of all the 
relevant elements related to the takeaway and canteen sys-
tem and trying to come up with detailed solutions for both 
system and container. The final solution should be seen as a 
steppingstone towards developing this system rather than a 
fully detailed concept.
==PAGE:184==
176
totyped and presented in a Concept Catalogue, which was 
shared and evaluated with stakeholders from KK. Further-
more, concepts were evaluated through an enacting, telling, 
making workshop. In the end a concept for both the system 
and the container was chosen. 
The final product service solution ROTINE has been devel-
oped and is presented in the Solution Catalogue. ROTINE in-
cludes a reusable container, with a system platform consisting 
of a website for canteen employees to manage menus, meals, 
orders and containers as well as an app for consumers to ex-
plore and order takeaway. The platform aims to motivate us-
ers by continuously updating the amounts of resources saved 
when using the system. 
Consumers buy into the system by purchasing a set of two 
containers, which is a one time fee. Canteens pay a monthly 
subscription covering both the service and products. Consum-
ers swap their containers whenever they are ordering a new 
meal, and can keep the containers for as long as they want in 
the meantime. Consumers also have the option to rent a set of 
containers. 
The ROTINE container is designed for circularity and emo-
tional durability. With its organic shape the container has a 
uniqueness and wow-factor that ensures recognisability. The 
elevational part in the bottom of the container facilitates a 
proper plating of food. 
The container’s bottom part is made from Kareline (50% PP 
and 50% sustainably sourced wood-fiber) which is recyclable 
in a closed loop system and the lid is made from transparent 
PP, which is recyclable in the danish system. Snaps are in-
cluded in the lid to ensure a proper sealing. A chip, which is 
molded into the container as well as NFC technology through 
the consumer app are used to support logistical activities, 
such as managing meals and locating containers. 
The total cost of ownership has been assessed and from this 
it is concluded that PSS is a viable business with a return of 
investment within two years when implemented in all can-
teens of KK. 
The environmental performance of the container is compared 
to single-use packaging through an sLCA. From this assess-
ment it was concluded that the container is more sustainable 
after 6 use-cycles and can endure up to 500 cycles, resulting 
in up to 83% CO2 saved (without EoL).
Before implementing the PSS solution to KK’s canteens and 
later on and expanding to the rest of the canteen industry and 
finally the restaurant takeaway industry, further work needs to 
be done, including further development of the container and 
13.2 Conclusion
As the environmental issues are becoming more and more 
predominant, the need for developing sustainable solutions 
and minimising the use of resources is paramount. During 
the covid-19 pandemic the takeaway market has dramati-
cally increased, which has resulted in enormous amounts of 
resources being used on single-use packaging. If the sustain-
able development goals, including the 12th goal sustainable 
consumption and production are to be met, new solutions that 
facilitate a circular use of resources needs to be developed and 
implemented. 
This report has investigated how Developing a Reusable 
Product-Service Solution for The Delivery and Takeaway 
Food Industry, with a User-Centred Design Approach can be 
done. Besides focusing on an user-centred approach the proj-
ect has been focusing business aspects as well as designing 
for sustainability and circularity. A collaboration with the can-
teen company Kokkenes Køkken was established. 
A literature study was done prior to the design process, in-
vestigating how methodology such as sustainability, CE, PSS, 
behavioural design and participatory design could be included 
in different phases of the design process. 
A market research was conducted to investigate potential 
markets and to evaluate the competitiveness and business po-
tential. A three step roadmap was mapped, to ensure a feasible 
penetration of the market, where the first step included proof 
of concept in one of Kokkenes Køkkens canteens, followed 
by an expansion to the rest of KK’s canteens and other can-
teens. The third step included the expansion to the rest of the 
delivery and restaurant takeaway industry. Thus the scope of 
the project was set to developing a solution for takeaway food 
for KK’s canteens, where the main users of the development 
arena were defined as the canteens, their employees and their 
customers (consumers). 
Expolarive user studies, including field research in Edison 
huset and generative design activities, was conducted to gain 
an understanding of the holistic system on several levels and 
to empathise with its users. Insights into breakdowns and op-
portunities, thoughts, experiences and behaviors were gath-
ered, mapped and categorised in an affinity diagram, which 
was used to form the first draft of the design specification for 
both the product, the service and the infrastructure of the PSS. 
In the ideation and concept development phase the require-
ments and criteria were evaluated with stakeholders from KK 
at a co-creation workshop. Ideation was done through several 
different brainstorming activities, and concepts for both the 
service and the container were drawn through morphology. 
Three system concepts and six container concepts were pro-
==PAGE:185==
177
13/ Discussion, Conclusion and Reflection
the final solution.
 
It might have been beneficial to focus more on the canteen 
context when developing the initial system concepts. The ini-
tial concepts were created with the restaurant market in mind 
in order to make sure that the system would be scalable and 
that the evaluation with potential users could be based on their 
experience with the restaurant takeaway market. Adaptations 
for the canteen market were then suggested. An earlier focus 
on the canteen market would have made it easier to use the 
provided feedback directly in the further concept develop-
ment, as the final solution is focused on the canteen context.
 
The planning for this project has tended to be overly opti-
mistic. Ambitions for conducting a lot of different research 
and design activities at once have sometimes overshadowed 
a more stringent focus, which would make the whole process 
less complex. An example of this is the effort to apply lean 
work methods in the form of an MVP test, which was set up 
in Edison Huset at the same times as other research activities 
were conducted. The lack of focus on the MVP test made it 
difficult to continuously check up on whether the test was run-
ning smoothly and communicate with the canteen employees. 
The test might have been successful if there had been more 
time dedicated to being present at the canteen.  
 
Completing the project during a global pandemic has not 
been without challenges. The pandemic made it very difficult 
to find an office for the group to use and meant that access 
to production facilities for e.g. creating prototypes has been 
limited, especially at the start of the project. That being said, 
adjustments have been made in order to make the best out of a 
difficult situation. The collaboration tool Miro has been a core 
part of the workflow throughout the project, as it allowed for 
online collaboration and could be used for on the wall anal-
ysis. Miro and Microsoft Teams have been key tools when 
facilitating online workshops, as material and selected boards 
could be prepared in advance and participants could access 
the material and contribute at the same time. The shift to an 
online workshop
format has not been without challenges, as participants had to 
be introduced to the new tools.
 
Two of the master group members unfortunately tested posi-
tive for Covid towards the end of the project. This was a chal-
lenging time, as all members had to stay in isolation and the 
productivity of the two sick members was at very low point 
during this period, which increased the time pressure on the 
final part of the project.  
the system platforms. 
As the ROTINE solution is further developed, this will help 
facilitate a circular use of resources, thus help reach the 12th 
sustainable development goal. Furthermore, the final PSS fa-
cilitates canteen’s sale of takeaway, either creating a whole 
new business for canteens or significantly improving existing 
solutions to ultimately upscale the sale of takeaway. 
13.3 Reflection 
The focus for the project has undergone iterations along the 
way. Creating a solution for the restaurant takeaway market 
was initially seen as the main focus, where the canteen market 
mainly served as an initial arena for trying out and refining the 
solution. Throughout the design process the complexity of the 
restaurant takeaway market became apparent and the focus 
was therefore shifted to creating a solution for canteen market 
with the possibility to expand to the restaurant market in the 
future. As a result of the shift of focus the delivery aspect of 
takeaway is something that will be considered in the future 
work, as delivery of takeaway is not a part of the investigat-
ed canteen takeaway system. A more stringent focus on the 
canteen market from the start would have made it easier to 
navigate the design process.
Participatory design methods have been chosen as the main 
approach for developing a user centered design. Other ap-
proaches, where the designer has an expert mindset and the 
user is viewed as a subject of the research rather than an active 
contributor, could have been applied instead. 
 
The master group wanted to gain a thorough understanding 
of many different aspects related to takeaway from canteens 
and restaurants. Therefore, several approaches have been 
used to investigate the system, including extensive market 
research, generative design, contextual design methods, ob-
servations and surveys. Furthermore, a wide range of methods 
has been used in the idea and concept evaluation phase, in-
cluding co-creation, input from users through workshops and 
evaluations with Kokkenes Køkken. The vast amount of input 
gathered from all of these methods was very challenging to 
implement in the development of the final concept. Efforts 
have been made in order to condense all inputs into tangible 
guides for the design such as the design specification. The 
extensive research did help create an informed final concept, 
which has been based on inputs from both potential consum-
ers and representatives for the canteen market. The extensive 
research phase and time used processing all the insights was 
a priority, which resulted in less time available for detailing 
==PAGE:186==
178
shops and provided thorough feedback on concepts even with 
very short notice. They have also answered questions that the 
master group had throughout the project quickly and effec-
tively.
 The collaboration between members of the master group has 
been very successful. The fact that the group consisted of four 
members made it easy to effectively split up the workload, 
as the group was able to split up into pairs and conduct sev-
eral activities in parallel. This has been done throughout the 
research and design process, where main responsibility for 
different aspects have been divided, which allowed members 
to work with the methods and approaches they felt most pas-
sionate about. The pair constellations have shifted throughout 
project, so all members have had the chance to work closely 
together.
 
The collaboration between group members have been 
strengthen through practices adopted from the SCRUM ap-
proach. Daily stand-ups have proved very valuable, as the 
group needed to establish a joint overview of tasks in order 
to work effectively. An adaptation of the SCRUM master role 
has been beneficial as well, as this role (which shifted be-
tween group members every week) made sure that one mem-
ber was in charge of keeping the process on track timewise 
and communicating with external stakeholders.
A ritual for the end of every milestone helped the group eval-
uate the process. The starfish model exercise summarised 
which work practices should continue in the following phase 
and which should be left behind. The exercise was used to 
evaluate the social dynamic in the group as well, in order to 
identify ways to strengthen the collaborations and dissolve 
potential conflicts. Additional efforts to strengthen the rela-
tionship between group members has been prioritised in the 
form of weekly dinners, silly traditions and even new forms 
of communication.
 
In order to communicate the research and design process to 
stakeholders an Instagram account was created. The account 
has served as a daily reminder to document activities related 
to the process and has proven to be an effective tool when an 
opinion outside the group was needed in order to decide on 
things such as the logo. An unexpected advantage of the ac-
count has been that the effective communication with friends 
and family led to easier recruitment of participants for re-
search, as many showed an interest in the project after fol-
lowing the Instagram account. The account strengthened the 
communication between the master group and the head chef 
at Edison Huset Teddy Rose, as Teddy followed the account 
closely and thereby remained updated on project activities.
 
The collaboration between the master group and Kokkenes 
Køkken has been effective throughout the project. Represen-
tatives from Kokkenes Køkken have participated in work-
==PAGE:187==
179
13/ Discussion, Conclusion and Reflection
==PAGE:188==
