==PAGE:1==
Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote
Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Andrei Sabau, s192631
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Remote Attestation (RA) is a two-party security protocol, in which a Veri-
ﬁer (external trusted entity) attests the software integrity of a remote device
(Prover). The Veriﬁer checks if the Prover is running valid software, or if it is
running malicious code as a result of a malware infection.
The small number of Remote Attestation protocols that attest networks of In-
ternet of Things (IoT) devices and detect mobile software adversaries are not
scalable and optimal for large swarms of IoT devices. In addition, most of the
existing swarm RA protocols attest the entire network during one process, which
results in temporary negative consequences on the availability of the network to
its users and on the swarm’s operations. Furthermore, the RA literature con-
tains only one swarm RA protocol that considers Publish-Subscribe networks,
even though this type of IoT network is adopted in a wide variety of industries
and is validated by multiple standardized IoT communication protocols.
The thesis proposes SERALDEB, a novel Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote At-
testation protocol for Large Distributed Event-Based systems.
The protocol
is designed to attest large networks of heterogeneous IoT devices that are set
up in a Publish-Subscribe network topology. Moreover, the protocol is able to
detect mobile software adversaries and to perform the attestation process in a
careful manner so that it does not cause any major negative disruptions on the
network’s availability and ﬂow of operations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Remote Attestation (RA) er en sikkerhedsprotokol med to parter, hvor en Veri-
ﬁer (ekstern betroet enhed) bekræfter softwarens integritet for en remote device
(Prover). Veriﬁeren tjekker om Proveren kører noget gyldig software eller hvis
der bliver kørt skadelig kode som følge af en malware-infektion.
Det lille antal Remote Attestation protokoller der bekræfter netværk af IoT-
enheder (Internet of Things) og registrerer mobile software-indtrængere, er ikke
skalerbare og optimale til store sværme af IoT-enheder. Desuden bekræfter de
ﬂeste af de eksisterende RA-protokoller for sværme hele netværket i én proces,
hvilket medfører midlertidige negative konsekvenser for netværkets tilgængelig-
hed for dets brugere og for sværmens drift. Endvidere indeholder RA-litteraturen
kun én sværm RA-protokol, der tager hensyn til Publish-Subscribe-netværk, selv
om denne type IoT-netværk er indført i en lang række forskellige brancher og
understøttes af ﬂere standardiserede IoT-kommunikationsprotokoller.
I afhandlingen foreslås SERALDEB, en ny skalerbar og eﬀektiv Remote Attesta-
tion til store distribuerede eventbaserede systemer. Protokollen er designet til at
bekræfte store netværk af heterogene IoT-enheder, der er oprettet i en Publish-
Subscribe-netværkstopologi. Protokollen er desuden i stand til at opdage mobile
software-indtrængere og udfører bekræftningsprocessen på en omhyggelig måde,
så den ikke forårsager større negative konsekvenser for netværkets tilgængelig-
hed og driftsﬂow.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering, under the supervision of Postdoc Edlira
Dushku and Professor Nicola Dragoni.
Lyngby, 18-June-2021
Andrei Sabau, s192631
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Edlira Dushku and Nicola Dragoni for their
constant help and guidance throughout the project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
IoT Remote Attestation Background
5
2.1
Remote Attestation of IoT Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Adversary Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
IoT Attacks prevented by Remote Attestation . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Remote Attestation Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Hardware Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
Number of IoT Devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Network Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.5
Communication Data Transferred between devices . . . .
17
2.3.6
Number of Veriﬁers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
19
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.1.2
Search strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Search mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.4
Literature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Swarm Network Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms .
24
3.3.1
SEDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
DARPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.3
SANA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.4
LISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.5
SCAPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.6
SALAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.7
PADS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.8
WISE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.9
slimIoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.10 RADIS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.11 ESDRA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.12 US-AID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.13 SHeLA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.14 HEALED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.15 SIMPLE+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.16 PASTA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.17 DIAT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.18 SARA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Proto-
col for Large Distributed Event-Based Systems
53
4.1
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3
Adversary Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4
Device Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.5
Security Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.6
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.7
Notations Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.8
SERALDEB description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.8.1
High-level overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.8.2
Initialization phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.8.3
Attestation phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.8.4
Collection phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.8.5
Veriﬁcation phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.9
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5
Evaluation
91
5.1
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
6
Conclusion
95
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Internet of Things (IoT) devices are becoming an essential part of our lives,
whether we realize it or not. The pervasiveness of IoT devices spreads from
smart homes (e.g., smart lights, voice-controlled personal assistants, smart fridges,
etc.) and healthcare products (e.g., pacemakers, patient monitoring, etc.) to
large scale IoT adoptions in distributed networks, such as smart city networks
[JGMP14], smart manufacturing and industrial control networks [CCC+10], pol-
lution monitoring distributed systems [FCV+15], and many others.
The majority of IoT devices have limited resources, i.e., limited computational
power, memory and energy. Also, often times the devices are deployed in harsh
environments or in places where getting physical access to them is not easy after
the devices are deployed (e.g., oil and gas exploration devices). Consequently,
most IoT devices are designed to perform a single task in an optimal manner
not to use too many resources. Moreover, the devices are in sleep mode for large
periods of time to conserve their energy.
Even though a lot of consideration was put into energy conservation and opti-
mally using the valuable resources on a device, a large number of IoT devices
lack a critical feature, i.e., security. Due to the fact that security is often seen
as a cost that uses resources and does not add quantiﬁable value to the prod-
uct, security is overlooked by IoT vendors and their devices can be infected by
malware fairly easy [CZFB14]. The lack of basic security protections can even
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
occur in devices of the following types:
• IoT devices that collect and store sensitive and private data about their
users, e.g., activity trackers and patient health monitoring devices.
• IoT devices that protect valuable objects, e.g., smart car keys and smart
home door locks.
• IoT devices responsible for safety-critical operations, e.g., programmable
logic controllers that control nuclear centrifuges.
In this sense, substantial research has been conducted with the goal of detect-
ing the compromised IoT devices from a network. The process of identifying
the infected devices is known as Remote Attestation (RA). An RA protocol is
consisted of a trusted third party (Veriﬁer) that attests a remote IoT device
(Prover) to verify its integrity and consequently detect if it is compromised or
not.
Over time, the process evolved from RA protocols that attest a single
device, to RA protocols that attest an entire network of IoT devices1.
The evolution took place as a result of the wide spread adoption of IoT devices
in diﬀerent industries, which led to a substantial increase in the size of the IoT
networks. Thus, RA protocols that attested the devices in a one-to-one process
between the Veriﬁer and a Prover became ineﬃcient and inapplicable on large
networks, resulting in the emergence of RA protocols that are able to attest
large swarms.
1.1
Problem Statement
Even though there are already a number of RA protocols that attest swarms in
the literature, due to the fact the IoT networks constantly change and evolve,
the same has to happen with the protocols as well. The ﬁrst swarm RA proto-
cols were designed to attest large static networks of IoT devices, while the ones
released more recently are able to attest autonomous networks of dynamic de-
vices, i.e., IoT devices that move throughout the network and regularly change
their neighbors.
Moreover, RA protocols evolved from detecting only a remote software adver-
sary, i.e., attacker that exploits vulnerabilities in the software of an IoT device,
1A large network of IoT devices is called a swarm in the Remote Attestation literature.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Research Objectives
3
to detecting physical adversaries, i.e., attackers that have physical access to the
devices and perform malicious operations on them.
However, as discussed in Section 3.4, at the moment there is no scalable swarm
RA protocol that is able to detect mobile software adversaries 2, and be applied
on large networks.
Moreover, since the majority of swarm RA protocols attest the entire swarm
during one process, they have a negative eﬀect on the network’s operations and
availability. This happens because all the devices have to put on hold their
current tasks and participate in the attestation process.
Furthermore, even though a large number of diﬀerent industries have adopted
standardized asynchronous protocols ( MQTT[MQT19]) that are based on the
Publish-Subscriber communication paradigm, this is not yet documented in the
RA literature. The only protocol designed to attest Publish-Subscribe networks
was released in 2020 and is called SARA [DRC+20].
1.2
Research Objectives
Based on the reasons enumerated above, which are described in more detail in
Section 3.4, this paper shows that an important type of IoT network lacks a
proper swarm RA protocol that can be used to detect the compromised devices
within the network.
Therefore, the goal of the thesis is to propose a novel
Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation protocol for Large Distributed Event-
Based systems.
The protocol should function properly in large networks of IoT devices that
follow the Publish-Subscribe paradigm, and where the networks are made of
both static and highly dynamic mobile devices. Moreover, the protocol should
be able to detect mobile software adversaries and it should not aﬀect the entire
network availability and operations, but only a small subset.
In the following, the research objectives of this thesis project are summarized:
• Investigate the Remote Attestation area to discover ﬁelds where more
research is required and perform an analysis of the existing RA protocols
in the literature that tackle swarm attestation.
2A mobile software adversary is a malware that can infect a device and after a period of
time the malware can delete itself from the device and move to (infect) other IoT devices.
More information about adversaries can be found in Section 2.2.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
• Analyze the types of adversaries that conduct attacks on IoT networks
and learn how they are detected by RA protocols.
• Design a swarm RA protocol that represents the solution for the identiﬁed
problem.
1.3
Contributions
The contributions of the thesis are the following:
• The project provides a comprehensive literature review of the existing
swarm RA protocols to identify the RA area where more research is
needed.
• This project deﬁnes the adversarial properties and the required security
characteristics in Publish-Subscribe networks.
• This project proposes SERALDEB, as a Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote
Attestation Protocol for Large Distributed Event-Based Systems. SER-
ALDEB the ﬁrst scalable swarm RA protocol that is able to detect mobile
adversaries and is designed to attest distributed-event based systems that
follow the Publish-Subscribe communication paradigm.
1.4
Thesis Outline
After the Introduction chapter, the thesis provides a background into the Re-
mote Attestation area to the reader in Chapter 2. In the RA background chapter
the general notion of a RA protocol is explained, together with the adversaries
detected by RA schemes and the diﬀerent types of RA protocols.
Next, Chapter 3 presents a thorough literature review of the state-of-the-art RA
protocols that attest swarms. All eighteen (18) swarm RA protocols that exist
in the literature, at the time of writing the present thesis, are investigated in
the chapter to understand where a research gap still exists. Chapter 4 describes
in detail the proposed swarm RA protocol, i.e., SERALDEB, and Chapter 5
provides an evaluation of the protocol. The ﬁnal part of the thesis is Chapter
6, which concludes the thesis and discusses what aspects of SERALDEB could
be improved in the future.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
IoT Remote Attestation
Background
This section explains what Remote Attestation is in the context of Internet of
Things, how it works, and its main advantages and disadvantages.
2.1
Remote Attestation of IoT Devices
The majority of Internet of Things (IoT) devices are prone to cyber attacks due
to various reasons:
• IoT devices have huge constraints on their resources, e.g., limited CPU,
memory, power consumption, network connectivity time, etc.
• Due to resource constraints, IoT devices do not usually have the most
sophisticated security mechanisms embedded in them. In the best case
scenario, they only have some lightweight security solutions, while in the
worst case, they have no security at all.
• Most IoT devices are deployed in unsafe conditions, i.e., in places where
unauthorized people might have direct physical access to them, or in places
==PAGE:20==
6
IoT Remote Attestation Background
where the attackers are in close proximity to capture the wireless, radio and
other over-the-air communication signals transmitted by the IoT devices.
• Depending on their environment and purpose, some IoT devices are at-
tractive targets for attackers if a successful attack on them will result in a
high reward, e.g., exploiting an IoT car key fob device will give access to
the car to unauthorized people.
• IoT devices are not standalone devices in a network, but they are inter-
connected with other IoT devices, forming a big network of IoT devices,
which can amplify the magnitude and impact of an attack. For example,
Mirai [DDDGS18], which is one of the most disruptive known DDoS 1
IoT malware, managed to infect hundreds of thousands of IoT devices and
used them to direct 1.2 terabits per second of Internet traﬃc toward its
targets to bring them down.
It is diﬃcult to prevent an IoT device from being compromised, due to the scarce
resources that IoT devices have, their deployment environments and because
they are susceptible to a great variety of cyber attacks. Thus, a more manageable
approach is to detect when an IoT device is compromised, or if it was infected in
the past and then take the appropriate measures. Once network administrators
know which devices are infected with malware, they can isolate the devices from
the network, inspect them, and eradicate/purge the malware from them.
Therefore, Remote Attestation (RA) protocols have been proposed to strengthen
the security of IoT devices and detect the ones which have been compromised.
At their core, Remote Attestation protocols guarantee that the device is send-
ing reliable evidence about its trustworthiness, even when it is compromised.
Consequently, a remote Veriﬁer is able to evaluate the integrity of the state and
conﬁguration of a Prover IoT device.
Remote Attestation is a security protocol, which involves two parties:
• Prover: the untrusted possible compromised IoT device which the Veriﬁer
attests.
• Veriﬁer: a trusted entity that does not have physical access to the IoT
device. At random times, the Veriﬁer checks remotely if the Prover device
continues to run its initial application. Then, based on the attestation
1Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) is a powerful attack that aﬀects the availability of
a target. A DDoS attack controls a botnet, also know as a zombie network. A botnet is an
army of infected IoT devices which are controlled by a malicious person and which can be
used for nefarious purposes. During the attack, the botnet devices generate Internet traﬃc
towards the target to make it inaccessible to the legitimate users that use the target’s services.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Remote Attestation of IoT Devices
7
result the Veriﬁer concludes if the device is infected by malware (compro-
mised) or not (healthy). The Veriﬁer knows in advance the state in which
the Prover should be, and during the attestation process they communi-
cate over a secure channel.
The Remote Attestation process is a challenge-response protocol, in which the
Veriﬁer sends a challenge c to the untrusted IoT device (Prover) to check its
state integrity. The challenge can be a random number, a nonce (number used
once), a timestamp, or any other object that a Prover cannot predict 2. Next,
the Prover retrieves its internal state S, e.g. the hash of its memory contents,
and creates an attestation response (proof), comprised of S and c, which is sent
to the Veriﬁer. The last part of the process is when the Veriﬁer compares the
received response with the expected legitimate state of the IoT device. If they
match, then the IoT device (Prover) is considered to be trustworthy, otherwise
the device was infected by malware and the appropriate measures need to be
taken. The Remote Attestation process is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Remote Attestation process
Based on the Remote Attestation process, the necessary requirements that need
2The requirement of having a new challenge for every attestation process, that cannot be
known in advance, is needed to guarantee the freshness of the attestation response and to
protect against replay attacks. A more detailed description of replay attacks can be consulted
in Section 2.2.1
==PAGE:22==
8
IoT Remote Attestation Background
to be fulﬁlled by an RA protocol are the ones outlined below, as described in
[FNRT12]:
• Fresh - The challenge has to be fresh, unpredictable and authentic to
guarantee the uniqueness of the attestation response and to protect against
replay attacks.
• Deterministic - given the Prover’s internal state S and the challenge c
received from the Veriﬁer, the attestation process generates an attestation
response r. The attestation process running on the Prover needs to be
deterministic to be able to generate the result that the Veriﬁer is expecting
if the device is not compromised.
The veriﬁcation process that is running on the Veriﬁer has to also be de-
terministic. This is needed in order for the veriﬁcation algorithm to obtain
the correct result after comparing the received attestation response r with
the expected well-deﬁned device state. If there are multiple Veriﬁers, all
of them need to obtain the same result.
• Immutable - the attestation code needs to be immutable to prevent against
attacks that could modify the attestation process’ code before being ex-
ecuted, e.g., time-of-check-to-time-of-use attacks 3. The successful exe-
cution of such an attack can result in the malware being able to hide
during the attestation process and trick the attestation protocol to yield
an incorrect result.
• Uninterruptible - the attestation process must not be interrupted by other
events. This is needed to protect against an adversary trying to change
the control-ﬂow of the attestation, with the goal of evading detection.
• Dynamic - the attestation process can be started on the Prover at any
given random time, with the condition that the attestation process is not
already running on the IoT device at that time. This property is needed to
protect against the malware from being able to predict the speciﬁc times
when the attestation process is being performed.
A malware that can
know in advance when the attestation process is going to take place on
the Prover device can remove itself from the device before the attestation
starts and it can infect the device again after the process is completed.
• Unforgeable - when sending the attestation result r back to the Veriﬁer,
r needs to be sent in a secure manner to protect against any malicious
3TOCTOU (time-of-check-to-time-of-use) is an attack caused by a race condition, which
involves the check of a state of an object and the use of the results generated by the check
at later point in time. Between the check and the use the attacker can perform malicious
actions, e.g., escalate privileges in a system.
Privilege escalation occurs when an attacker
gains administrative access rights on a system where it has only common user rights.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Adversary Models
9
modiﬁcations by an attacker during network transmission. Moreover, the
Veriﬁer should be able to determine if any modiﬁcations were performed
on r while it was in transit.
2.2
Adversary Models
Attackers will often try to compromise IoT devices and networks because of
various reasons, such as stealing conﬁdential data, infect poorly secured devices
to make them part of a botnet, get access to unauthorized places, etc. Remote
Attestation protocols take into consideration hardware and software adversaries,
which depend on the attackers’ location and the type of attacks they can per-
form.
Software adversary:
• Remote - the remote attacker can run malicious code on the IoT device,
either in the scope of the application running on the device or in the scope
of the ﬁrmware of the device.
• Mobile - the malware that infected the device can delete itself after it
compromised the device or move to other devices.
Hardware adversary:
• Physical Non-Intrusive - the malicious person is in close proximity to the
device and can eavesdrop/sniﬀon the communication headed to or from
the device, or the attacker can launch side-channel attacks to collect pro-
tected information stored inside the IoT device.
• Stealthy Physical Intrusive - the attacker has the ability to physically
capture a device and clone it or extract secrets from it. The malicious
person can disassemble the device, get access to the pins of its micro-
controller unit and probe the debugging and testing pins, e.g. JTAG 4, to
get access to diﬀerent pieces of information about the device.
• Physical Intrusive - on top of capturing a device, the attacker has the
ability to physically modify its components or add external hardware to
the device and change its initial structure.
4JTAG is a standardized interface which is present on printed circuit boards (PCB) and it
is used to interact with integrated circuits. JTAG pins present on PCBs are used for testing
and debugging the integrated circuits, ﬂash memory, and other parts of a micro-controller
unit.
==PAGE:24==
10
IoT Remote Attestation Background
2.2.1
IoT Attacks prevented by Remote Attestation
The current section highlights the main cyber attacks on IoT devices that are
prevented or detected by Remote Attestation. This is needed to understand
how eﬀective Remote Attestation is in remotely detecting the IoT devices which
are compromised by malware.
The Replay Attack is a type of cyber attack in which the adversary eavesdrops
on the communication of IoT devices and captures parts of it. The goal is to
resend the previously captured legitimate communication at a later point in
time to the same initial destination and pretend to be the original sender.
The replay attack against Remote Attestation protocols is prevented by the core
requirement of having a fresh challenge for every attestation process, that cannot
be known in advance. For example, an attacker can eavesdrop and capture parts
of the communication sent between the Veriﬁer and the Prover during a legiti-
mate Remote Attestation process. Later, the adversary infects the Prover IoT
device and during the next Remote Attestation process, the attacker can simply
resend (replay) the legitimate messages captured from the previous process, in
order to trick the Veriﬁer into believing that the device is not compromised.
However, if a fresh challenge is generated for every Remote Attestation process,
then all of the messages sent between the Veriﬁer and the Prover are unique
and the attacker cannot simply replay old messages. A successful replay attack
against the RA process can be seen in Figure 2.2.
The Code Injection Attack is performed by a remote software adversary, whose
goal is to inject and execute malicious code on the remote IoT device. A speciﬁc
example of the Code Injection attack is the buﬀer overﬂow attack. During the
buﬀer overﬂow attack the adversary sends a large amount of input data to an
application. The application has a buﬀer 5 where it stores the input data, but
if the buﬀer is not protected the attacker can send more data than the buﬀer
can hold. When the buﬀer becomes full the remaining malicious data that was
sent by the attacker is stored in other places in the memory, such as the stack
or the heap, where it can overwrite run-time objects and inﬂuence which code
is executed next and from what location. Ultimately, this enables the adversary
to alter the normal behaviour of the IoT device and make it perform unplanned
actions.
The Data Injection Attack can happen as a consequence of an IoT device being
compromised and still being part of the network afterwards.
This way, the
attacker can inject malicious data into the communication originated from the
5A buﬀer is a term that refers to a memory location of ﬁxed dimension, which was allocated
to temporarily store data.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Adversary Models
11
Figure 2.2: Successful replay attack on the RA process
compromised device, which can lead to inaccurate or totally fabricated sensor
data being delivered in the network.
The Run-time Attack exploits vulnerabilities in the memory, such as memory-
corruption and memory-safety vulnerabilities.
Once a memory vulnerability
is exploited by the attacker, the control-ﬂow of the application can be hijacked
using the Return Oriented Programming (ROP) technique [CW14]. ROP allows
an adversary to use pieces of code that already exist on a device and chain them
together in gadgets 6 to modify the behaviour and state of the application.
The Compression Attack appeared as a result of the memory constraints found
in IoT devices.
In some occasions, if an IoT device is compromised via the
Code Injection attack the adversary does not have enough space to store the
malicious code. Therefore, the Compression attack compresses the code that is
present on the IoT device to make space for the malicious code. Then, during
the attestation process the legitimate code is decompressed on-the-ﬂy to try to
trick the Veriﬁer into believing that the IoT device is not compromised.
6A gadget is a sequence of instructions present on the device that is used by an attacker
to alter the control-ﬂow of an application.
==PAGE:26==
12
IoT Remote Attestation Background
The Side-Channel Attack is a type of a Physical Non-Intrusive attack, which is
not a result of vulnerabilities found and exploited in IoT devices or applications
that run on them. However, the attack is based on the correct implementation
of an application, or algorithm, and the way it runs on the IoT device hardware.
Often times the cryptographic algorithms are implemented in a highly eﬃcient
way, and this can lead to the leakage of sensitive information. For example, in
an IoT device, the timing information, power consumption and electromagnetic
emanation observed during important processes, e.g., communication encryption
and decryption, can leak important information to an attacker, such as used
cryptographic keys used by the device.
The Roving attack is a sophisticated malware that knows when the attestation
is scheduled to take place. Thus, the malware is only actively running on a
device between consecutive attestation rounds. Moreover, the malware has the
capability to avoid detection by deleting itself at the beginning of the next
attestation protocol run.
2.3
Remote Attestation Protocols
The numerous Remote Attestation protocols that were proposed over the years
can be classiﬁed in diﬀerent ways, based on their core design approaches, as-
sumptions, and the environments in which they operate. Thus, there are six
main categories based on which a classiﬁcation of Remote Attestation protocols
can be performed: Hardware Design, Memory, Number of IoT Devices, Network
Topology, Communication Data Transferred between devices, and Number of
Veriﬁers. They are brieﬂy presented in the following sections.
2.3.1
Hardware Design
Based on the architectural hardware design the RA protocols can ﬁt into one of
the three categories:
• Software-based - RA schemes that do not beneﬁt from any hardware fea-
tures, such as secure hardware storage of cryptographic keys used for
communication encryption/decryption.
These protocols rely mainly on
the strict timing constraints of the attestation process, and on the lack of
memory on the IoT devices to store and execute extra code, which might
be malicious.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Remote Attestation Protocols
13
These schemes are a good ﬁt for IoT devices that are highly resource-
constrained since they do not impose any hardware restrictions. However,
the main disadvantages of Software-based RA schemes are that they can be
deployed only in one-hop networks 7, due to timing constraints. Moreover,
the protocols assume that the malware does not run during the attestation
process.
An example of a Software-based RA scheme is SWATT (Software-based at-
testation for embedded devices) [SPVDK04]. The SWATT protocol com-
putes a checksum of the memory of the Prover to verify its trustworthiness,
i.e., if it is infected or not. Moreover, SWATT relies on the assumptions
that the memory checksum process is slowed down if a malware is run-
ning on a device, and that the resulted checksum will be incorrect if the
malware modiﬁed parts of the attestation function.
• Hardware-based - RA schemes which use temper-resistant hardware fea-
tures to create a highly secure execution environment and protect against
malware. IoT devices can use secure execution environments, such as the
Trusted Platform Module (TPM) [AC15] or the ARM TrustZone [Yiu15].
The downside is that these modules are often expensive to put on an IoT
device compared to the device’s overall cost.
An example of a Hardware-based RA scheme is [THJ15], where the pro-
tocol is deployed in wireless sensor networks and is used to detect unau-
thorized tampering in the code of the applications running on the sensors.
All the sensor nodes in the scheme are equipped with Trusted Platform
Modules.
• Hybrid - RA schemes that rely on minimal hardware features on the IoT
devices, such as a small read-only hardware-protected memory, secure
cryptographic key storage, and the atomicity of the execution of certain
attestation functions8.
The main disadvantage of Hybrid RA schemes is the need of special hard-
ware requirements, which in most of the constrained IoT devices cannot
be met.
An example of Hybrid RA scheme is SMART [ETFP12], which is used
to establish a root of trust in a remote device dynamically. The scheme
requires some minimal changes to a microcontroller unit, i.e., the existence
of a ROM-resident code segment, to be able to provide concrete security
guarantees.
A generic illustration of the Hybrid RA process can be seen in Figure 2.3.
7Network in which there is maximum one hop (node) between the Veriﬁer and the Prover.
8An atomic operation is made of several CPU instructions that are executed without any
interference. Thus, an atomic operation is executed in a single step even if it is made of more
than one instruction.
==PAGE:28==
14
IoT Remote Attestation Background
Figure 2.3: Hybrid Remote Attestation process
2.3.2
Memory
Based on how the RA schemes use the memory contents during the attestation
process, the protocols can belong to one of the following two categories:
• Static Attestation - the algorithm computes a hash of the device’s memory
or takes a ﬁngerprint of it. The memory is accessed either in a predictable
and sequential way or in a pseudorandom fashion, where both the Veriﬁer
and the Prover agreed beforehand on the initial starting memory address
(the seed) from which the computation will start. In the pseudorandom
method, the memory addresses selected for performing the hash on their
contents appear to have been chosen randomly from an external perspec-
tive. However, the order is decided by the seed for the pseudorandom
generator, i.e., the initial memory address.
Static attestation is used by most of the RA schemes and provides a
straightforward approach on verifying the integrity of static objects. The
main drawback of this method is that it does not apply to dynamic objects
in the application. Hashing dynamic entities on a device is ineﬀective be-
cause they often change in an unpredictable way, making it impossible for
the Veriﬁer to keep track of their states. Runtime malware can modify dy-
namic objects, thus infecting the device and hiding from static attestation
protocols.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Remote Attestation Protocols
15
• Dynamic Attestation - the algorithm focuses on checking the integrity of
the dynamic properties of a running application in order to prove the
integrity of the runtime system.
Unlike performing a checksum of the
memory as it is the case of static attestation, the dynamic attestation
schemes continuously track dynamic properties, such as the Instruction
Pointer of the system 9, stack registers, or the application’s control ﬂow.
As stated in [KSA+09], one of the main challenges of dynamic attestation
schemes is the diﬃculty in identifying the "good" dynamic properties of a
system, based on which the runtime system integrity should be performed.
Moreover, there is a need for a large number of dynamic entities during
the attestation process, which need to be frequently measured, since their
state changes all the time.
However, the main advantage of dynamic
attestation is its ability to detect run-time attacks, compared to static
attestation which is not able to do this.
An example of a dynamic attestation protocol is ReDAS [KSA+09], which
attests the dynamic properties of a running system at the application level,
by using hardware support. ReDAS traces the order of the modules that
were launched in a system and analyzes the system calls performed at
run-time, based on which it assesses the integrity of the device.
2.3.3
Number of IoT Devices
Considering the number of IoT devices attested during the Remote Attestation
process, the RA schemes fall in two classes:
• Single device - RA scheme in which the Veriﬁer attests only one IoT device
during the RA process.
• Swarm (Collective) - RA scheme which attests a large group of IoT devices,
i.e., a swarm. The RA protocols that attest a big number of IoT devices at
the same time emerged due to two factors: the large number of IoT devices
already deployed in networks and the need for scalability and attestation
eﬃciency.
The swarm RA schemes allow the veriﬁer to obtain a unique attestation
value for the entire network of devices, i.e., the collective status of the
network [ACL+20]. Some swarm RA schemes provide the ability to also
get the individual status of device along with the collective network status.
9The Instruction Pointer, or Program Counter, is a register of the processor (CPU) which
indicates the memory address of the next instruction that will be executed in the program
sequence.
==PAGE:30==
16
IoT Remote Attestation Background
The ﬁrst remote attestation protocol that was designed for IoT swarms is
SEDA [ABI+15].
For the SEDA protocol to work, all the IoT devices
(Provers) need to be equipped with trusted components and a device
can only communicate with its neighbors.
The Veriﬁer chooses a ran-
dom Prover to start the attestation process. The initial Prover (P0) then
starts the attestation process by creating an overlay spanning tree 10 on
the swarm network whose root is P0, after which every parent node attests
its children. At the end, all the attestation results are accumulated by the
P0 root and sent to the veriﬁer.
An example of a generic swarm network can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Remote Attestation of a swarm network
2.3.4
Network Topology
There are two types of IoT swarm networks, which can be categorized as follows:
• Static swarm - network made of a large number of IoT devices, which are
static, i.e., the devices do not move inside the network and their logical
and physical positions in the swarm remain the same. In addition, the
neighbors of an IoT device from a static network are constant, i.e., they
do not change very often, except when new devices are introduced into
the network or old devices are removed from the swarm.
10A spanning tree is a subset of a graph G in which all the vertices of G are reached by the
least amount of of edges. Thus, a spanning tree contains no cycles and has a path between
each two vertices in G.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Remote Attestation Protocols
17
SEDA [ABI+15] is an example of an RA scheme that only works on static
swarms, because it relies on a spanning tree construction. If a device would
logically move 11 in the network, during the attestation process, i.e., after
the spanning tree was established, the spanning tree would break and the
attestation process would fail.
• Dynamic swarm - network made of a large number of IoT devices, which
are dynamic, i.e., the devices constantly change their neighbors inside
a network, even during the attestation process. For example, dynamic
networks such as networks of autonomous cars communicating with each
other during travelling, and networks of drones synchronizing with each
other to achieve a common goal, were not able to be attested by previous
RA mechanisms. Thus, the need to have eﬃcient RA schemes that attest
dynamic swarms is growing as a result of the new mobile and dynamic
networks of IoT devices that constantly emerge nowadays.
An example of an RA scheme which attests highly dynamic swarms is
PADS [ACL+18]. The PADS protocol aims to establish a consensus among
the participating devices in order to deliver an attestation result to the
Veriﬁer. Each Prover attests itself by self-initiating its own attestation,
after which the Prover broadcasts the attestation result to its neighbors.
When the Veriﬁer starts the attestation process on a Prover, the Veriﬁer
attests the Prover individually before receiving the Prover’s information
about the network.
2.3.5
Communication Data Transferred between devices
Another approach to categorize RA protocols is based on the schemes that
consider the data transferred between devices before or during the attestation
process (i.e., distributed services) and those that do not (i.e., swarms).
The RA schemes that focus on swarms usually work by putting the applications
that run on the IoT devices on hold while the attestation process is running.
However, there are RA protocols that do not suspend the normal execution
of IoT devices and attest distributed services executed by the devices, such as
SARA [DRC+20]. SARA is an RA scheme that focuses on the asynchronous
communication capabilities of IoT devices not to suspend their normal execu-
tion. Moreover, the protocol not only attests a device’s trustworthiness, but
11A device moves physically in a network if someone moves the device from its initial place to
another one, e.g. moving a temperature sensor from a room to another. When a device moves
logically in a network it means that the device has established communication with other
devices in the network, diﬀerent from the ones with which it was previously communicating
with, or the device is no longer in the same communication range with its previous neighbors.
==PAGE:32==
18
IoT Remote Attestation Background
it also takes into account the communication data exchanged between devices
during the attestation process to make sure that this data was not malicious
and did not previously aﬀect any of the Provers.
2.3.6
Number of Veriﬁers
All the previous ﬁve categories of RA protocols focused on the Provers, i.e., how
the attestation function works on them, how are they organized inside networks,
how they communicate, etc.
On the other hand, the ﬁnal method of classifying RA schemes concentrates on
the number of Veriﬁers that participate in the attestation process. Thus, there
are two types of RA protocols:
• Centralized Veriﬁer - RA scheme in which there is only one centralized
Veriﬁer, whose role is to collect the ﬁnal attestation result obtained as a
consequence of running the remote attestation process.
• Distributed Veriﬁer - most of the RA protocols are based on one-to-one or
one-to-many relations, where there is one Veriﬁer that attests one or more
Provers. However, the single Veriﬁer can be considered a single point of
failure. If the Veriﬁer fails during the attestation process the following can
happen:
– The failure can nullify all the attestation process steps that were
executed up to that point.
– The Veriﬁer cannot perform future attestation processes.
– The failure can leave the swarm in an inconsistent state that might
result in the IoT devices’ inability to perform their core jobs for a
long period of time.
Thus, RA schemes that are based on distributed Veriﬁers have relations,
such as many-to-one and many-to-many, i.e., multiple Veriﬁers attest one
or more Provers.
A Remote Attestation protocol that ﬁts into this category is ESDRA
[KFY+19], the ﬁrst RA scheme for swarm attestation based on distributed
Veriﬁers to attest the IoT devices. The protocol uses a reputation mech-
anism and enables neighbor nodes to attest Provers.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Literature Review of Swarm
Remote Attestation
Protocols
This chapter highlights the literature review conducted as part of the thesis. It
includes the methodology used to select relevant academic papers, the analysis
of the selected papers, and a discussion on the existing state-of-the-art Remote
Attestation protocols focusing on IoT swarms.
3.1
Methodology
This section presents the research methodology employed for selecting the rele-
vant academic papers on the topic of Remote Attestation of IoT swarms. The
majority of the research methods used in the current section are presented in
[PVK15] and [Woh14].
==PAGE:34==
20
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
3.1.1
Research questions
The literature review chapter aims to identify and analyze the existing state-
of-the-art Remote Attestation protocols that attest IoT swarms.
Thus, the
literature review section addresses the following main research questions:
• RQ1: Which are the Remote Attestation protocols that focus on attesting
IoT swarms?
• RQ2: What are the architectural properties and security capabilities of
the aforementioned protocols?
• RQ3: Do the protocols have any parts that can be improved or do they
lack certain critical design characteristic?
The goal of the ﬁrst research question is to gather all of the relevant academic
papers and surveys on the swarm RA topic. The second research question aims
to provide an analysis on how the protocols work and what attacks they can
detect. The last research question is meant to highlight the missing capabilities
that the current swarm RA schemes do not possess at the moment.
3.1.2
Search strategy
The search strategies adopted for ﬁnding the relevant academic papers, in the
swarm Remote Attestation area, include the PICOC [K+07] and forward snow-
balling [Woh14] procedures.
The ﬁrst search strategy used was PICOC, because its purpose is to identify
relevant keywords for the research process. The PICOC strategy was used in
the following way:
• Population - The academic papers considered for this project belong to
the Remote Attestation ﬁeld, with a particular focus on the ones which
address the attestation process in IoT swarms.
• Intervention - As per [K+07], the Intervention part refers to a tool, tech-
nology, methodology or procedure. In the current thesis the targets are
papers which propose a Remote Attestation protocol for IoT swarms.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Methodology
21
• Comparison - The comparison of IoT swarm RA schemes is based on their
design properties, security capabilities, individual advantages and disad-
vantages, their eﬀectiveness against an adversary model, their mitigation
features, etc.
• Outcomes - The Outcomes represent important factors for the RA study,
such as the approaches employed by the RA schemes, the cyber attacks
prevented by them and the limitations of the protocols.
• Context - The information presented in this chapter was taken from re-
search papers and studies within the academic ﬁeld, which describe RA
protocols in the context of IoT swarms.
By using the PICOC strategy, relevant keywords for the literature research
were produced, such as IoT swarm remote attestation, collective remote attesta-
tion, highly dynamic IoT network attestation, distributed remote attestation, au-
tonomous attestation for embedded systems and remote attestation of distributed
services in IoT devices.
The second search strategy was the snowballing procedure, which started from
an initial set of papers that were found using the keywords produced by the
PICOC method. Then, by using the backward snowballing procedure, all the
reference lists of the previously identiﬁed academic papers were analysed. Back-
ward snowballing is a recursive process, where each paper from a reference list
is evaluated to check if it matches certain criteria. In this thesis, the following
criteria were considered: if the publication language is English, if the publica-
tion year is from 2015 onward1, and if the publication type is of a peer-reviewed
nature. Next, the paper is compared with the ones previously found, and it
is added to the list of ﬁnal papers only if it was not already identiﬁed. The
last step is to examine the title, authors, paper abstract, and, ﬁnally, the entire
content to verify that the paper is relevant to the research ﬁeld. If it is, the
paper is included in the list of ﬁnal papers that are examined for the literature
review chapter.
3.1.3
Search mechanism
The two places where the search of academic papers was conducted are DTU
Findit and Google Scholar. DTU Findit is operated by the DTU library and it
1The ﬁrst Remote Attestation protocol for IoT swarms was SEDA [ABI+15], which ap-
peared in 2015.
==PAGE:36==
22
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
oﬀers the premium version to DTU students, which includes scientiﬁc publica-
tions from well-known venues, such as IEEE Xplore, Springer, ACM, Elsevier
and others.
For the search process the keywords identiﬁed in Section 3.1.2 were used, and
the following query was primarily utilized on DTU Findit to identify the starting
set of papers: "remote attestation" AND ("collective" OR "swarm")
AND ("IoT" OR "Internet of Things") AND year:[2015 TO 2021].
The query’s purpose is to ﬁnd the majority of academic papers published during
or after 2015, which are focused on Remote Attestation of IoT swarms, also know
as Collective Remote Attestation. From here on the terms Collective Remote
Attestation and Swarm Remote Attestation are used interchangeably. The DTU
Findit query found 47 results and a similar one, used on Google Scholar, found
309 results.
3.1.4
Literature selection
Starting from the initial 356 papers, they were ﬁltered in multiple inclusion and
exclusion phases, as detailed in [PVK15]. From the beginning, 31 of the papers
were identiﬁed as duplicates and were removed from any future analysis. The
criteria based on which certain papers were excluded, i.e.
exclusion criteria
(EC), are the following ones:
(EC1): The publication language is not in English.
(EC2): The paper is not accessible in full.
(EC3): The paper was not published during or after 2015.
(EC4): The paper does not present information about Remote Attestation mech-
anisms for IoT swarms.
After applying the exclusion ﬁlters, the remaining papers were reduced to 138.
After the next exclusion phase, when the title, author and abstract were eval-
uated, only 32 papers were still being considered relevant for the study. In the
ﬁnal exclusion phase, when the papers were read in full, 17 more academic pa-
pers were discarded. After the ﬁnal inclusion phase, in which the snowballing
technique was applied, 3 more papers were discovered, which gave a total of 18
papers that are analyzed in the current literature review chapter.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Swarm Network Model
23
3.2
Swarm Network Model
This section outlines the general network model of the IoT swarms considered
in the swarm RA protocols analyzed later in the project.
As detailed in [ACL+20], the swarm RA protocols attest a large network of
IoT devices, known as Provers (P), that are heterogeneous with respect to
their software and hardware components. The Provers are assumed to have the
capabilities to identify and communicate with their direct neighbors. Moreover,
the Prover devices are typically labeled as being either healthy or compromised
as a result of the attestation process. However, some RA protocols provide a
single healthy or compromised label for the entire swarm, without having the
possibility to identify the speciﬁc devices that are infected by malware.
An example of a generic swarm network addressed by swarm Remote Attestation
protocols can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Generic IoT Swarm Network
A generic system model for swarm RA schemes has the following four important
stakeholders:
• Veriﬁer (V) - As described in Section 2.1, the Veriﬁer is a trusted entity,
that usually starts the attestation process of the swarm network and, at
==PAGE:38==
24
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
the end, it collects the attestation result.
• Network Operator (O) - O is the stakeholder that owns and operates the
network of IoT devices. In addition, O is responsible to initially setup the
network and take care of its maintenance afterwards.
• Aggregator (A) - Some swarm RA protocols make use of Aggregator de-
vices. The purpose of an A is to relay message between network devices,
and to collect and aggregate attestation replies from Ps and other diﬀerent
As.
• Prover (P) - A Prover device is an IoT device from the swarm that is
periodically attested by V to check P’s status, i.e., if it is healthy or
compromised.
3.3
State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Proto-
cols of IoT Swarms
The existing single-device Remote Attestation protocols are hard to scale to
eﬃciently attest large and complex networks of IoT devices. Therefore, new
RA schemes have been proposed in the past years to improve the scalability
challenge of single-device protocols.
The swarm RA schemes, also known as Collective Remote Attestation protocols,
generate a unique attestation value for the entire network of devices, i.e., the
collective status of the network. These approaches aim to reduce the commu-
nication data and the complexity of the attestation process by oﬄoading some
operations, that are part of the attestation process, onto the Prover IoT devices.
By moving some attestation operations to the Provers, the attestation process
becomes faster and more eﬃcient. For example, instead of the Veriﬁer attesting
each device individually, some Provers have the responsibility to attest their
neighbors and then send the results to the Veriﬁer.
Moreover, the majority of Swarm Remote Attestation protocols rely on simple
Trusted Execution Environments (TEE), made of a Read-Only Memory (ROM)
component and a Memory Protection Unit (MPU), whose roles are to secure
the attestation code. However, some protocols rely on more expensive hardware
specialized components, such as the Trusted Platform Module (TPM) [AC15]
or the ARM TrustZone [Yiu15]. The RA protocols need the TEE to be able
to oﬀer high-security guarantees for the protocol and to protect the execution
of the attestation process from malware that may exist on a compromised IoT
device.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
25
3.3.1
SEDA
The ﬁrst Remote Attestation Scheme for large-scale Swarms is the Scalable Em-
bedded Device Attestation protocol (SEDA), which was described in [ABI+15].
The protocol was designed to attest eﬃciently a static network of IoT devices,
where a Prover can only communicate with its direct neighbors. SEDA works
by creating an overlay spanning tree on the swarm network, whose root is a
Prover device P0 that was randomly selected by the Veriﬁer. The main parts
of the protocol are outlined below, while an example of how SEDA works is
illustrated in Figure 3.2.:
1. Oﬄine phase - Step that is executed only one time and in which the IoT
devices are integrated into the swarm network. This phase is comprised
of two parts:
• Device Initialization - every Prover device P is initialized, in a secure
environment by the Network Operator O, with the correct software
conﬁguration c, a code certiﬁcate signed by O and the necessary
credentials (e.g., public key of O).
• Device Registration - phase in which a new device Pi that joins the
swarm network learns all the conﬁgurations cj from the neighbor
devices via a secure method (using O’s own PKI 2). At the end of
this step, Pi establishes a separate secret attestation key with each
of its neighbors.
2. Online phase - Step which is initiated by the Veriﬁer V at random times,
and which executes the attestation process. The ﬂow of the attestation
process is made of the following parts:
• V randomly selects a Prover device P0, known as the initiator, whose
role is to start the attestation process on the swarm network. More-
over, P0 has to receive the ﬁnal collective attestation result of the
swarm and send it to V.
• Starting from P0 every Prover Pi veriﬁes the authenticity of the at-
testation request and sends it to the direct neighbors (children), that
did not receive it yet. The communication between the parent nodes
and children is secured by the attestation keys established in the
Oﬄine phase.
• A spanning tree of the swarm network, rooted at P0, is constructed
as a result of the attestation process.
2PKI stands for Public Key Infrastructure
==PAGE:40==
26
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
• The leaf nodes, i.e., Prover devices which have no children, are at-
tested ﬁrst by their parents. For example, in Figure 3.2, Prover P2
attests its children, i.e., devices P4, P5 and P6, from the spanning
tree formation.
Every subtree rooted at Pi accumulates an attestation result from all
of its children and sends it to its parent. This process is performed
recursively until P0 receives the collective status of the network and
forwards it to V.
• The ﬁnal accumulated attestation result of the network is a boolean
value, i.e., 0 if the swarm is compromised or 1 if the swarm is healthy.
The main downside of SEDA is that the Aggregators are assumed to be trusted
and the network is assumed to be static. Since Aggregators are assumed to be
trusted, SEDA’s solution brings a single point of failure: if P0 is compromised,
all the accumulated result will be compromised.
Moreover, SEDA does not
detect which device was compromised, but SCAPI improves this as described in
Section 3.3.5. SEDA does not detect physical adversary, but DARPA improves
this as detailed in Section 3.3.2.
Figure 3.2: SEDA
==PAGE:41==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
27
3.3.2
DARPA
DARPA (Device Attestation Resilient to Physical Attacks) is a Remote Attes-
tation protocol for Swarms which was proposed by Ibrahim et al. [ISTZ16].
DARPA is a light-weight RA protocol that considers hardware attacks, such
as capturing and temporarily disabling and IoT device, inside networks with a
large number of Provers.
The idea behind the DARPA protocol started from the assumption that when an
adversary performs a physical attack on a device, the adversary will inevitably
render the IoT device inaccessible for a certain non-negligible period of time
[CDPG+10], [CDPMM08], [ISTZ16]. During that time, the attacker might take
the device apart to extract conﬁdential information or attach new malicious
hardware components. Moreover, the attacker might even replace the entire
device with a malicious one and then connect the latter to the network to im-
personate the original authentic IoT device. Therefore, when a device is absent
from the network, DARPA interprets it as being potentially compromised.
It should be noted that false positives might arise from time to time, i.e., when
there are problems with the network and the device is unreachable, or when the
device suﬀers a failure such as running out of battery. However, the authors in
[ISTZ16] focused more on minimizing false negatives, i.e., not detecting when
a device was potentially physically compromised, as the false negatives have a
much bigger negative impact on the security of the devices than false positives.
At its core, DARPA uses other swarm RA protocols, such as SEDA or others,
to attest the swarm of IoT devices, which can be either static or dynamic.
However, DARPA’s contribution is based on the ability to detect Provers that
are absent for a non-negligible time and which might be potentially captured
by an adversary. Having this capability, DARPA can attest a swarm network
more robustly, since it considers physical attacks as well. DARPA makes use of
two main operations, besides the Swarm RA protocol that initially attests the
network:
• the heartbeat protocol - is an absence detection protocol that is periodi-
cally run by each Prover device Pi in the network to check if one or more Pj
devices are absent from the network. Each device Pi broadcasts a heart-
beat message, at regular time periods, to its direct neighbors to prove its
presence. The message is signed by Pi’s private key and timestamped to
prevent against replay attacks. After a device Pj receives and veriﬁes the
heartbeat message from Pi, Pj broadcasts the message to its immediate
neighbors, and so on. This way Pi’s heartbeat message will be received
by all other P devices in the network. All Pj devices collect the heartbeat
==PAGE:42==
28
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
messages and store them in a log ﬁle.
• the collect protocol - is an operation initiated by the Veriﬁer V periodi-
cally, which takes place when V runs the attestation process on the swarm.
During the attestation process the logs containing the heartbeat messages
are retrieved from each P device. After the process ends V veriﬁes if any
device was absent from one or more heartbeat protocol runs since the last
attestation to identify the compromised devices.
The main downsides of the DARPA protocol are that the heartbeat protocol
introduces high communication overhead to the devices and that the rate of
false positives can be high in certain cases when, for example, the network is
down, and many IoT devices will be unreachable.
3.3.3
SANA
The Secure and Scalable Aggregate Network Attestation (SANA) protocol in-
troduced in [ACI+16] is a Swarm Remote Attestation scheme that addresses
some of the limitations seen in SEDA.
The SANA protocol relies on a cryptographic signature scheme, called Opti-
mistic Aggregate Signature (OAS). OAS is an eﬃcient signature algorithm that
has a constant complexity with respect to the network dimension, and that is
able to aggregate a large number of attestation responses as a result of the
short signature size and veriﬁcation time. The attestation results generated in
the network pass through untrusted Aggregators (A), which means that even if
an A device is compromised, this will not inﬂuence the integrity of the attesta-
tion process. By allowing untrusted Aggregators, SANA aims towards a more
realistic trust model, in which only the Provers need to be trusted.
Another contribution that the protocol has is that the ﬁnal attestation result
generated by SANA is publicly veriﬁable and contains information about the
compromised devices in the swarm. In addition, as a protective measure against
DoS attacks against the swarm, SANA employs an authorization mechanism
that allows only authorized Veriﬁers to execute the attestation process.
SANA is comprised of the six main steps described below:
1. The Veriﬁer V selects either randomly, or based on close physical proxim-
ity, an Aggregator A device to which it sends an attestation request and
an authorization token.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
29
2. Subsequently A veriﬁes the authorization token, the Aggregator sends the
attestation request in the network, and waits until it reaches all devices.
3. As a result of ﬂooding the network with the attestation request, a logical
aggregation tree is formed. The tree contains the Prover (P) devices as
leaves and the Aggregators as intermediary nodes. It should be noted here
that an Aggregator can be either a standalone physical device or an IoT
device which combines the functionalities of both a P and an A.
4. After the Provers received the attestation request and generate their own
attestation replies, they send it to their parent nodes.
5. Aggregators collect the attestation responses from their children, aggre-
gate them, and send them to their parent nodes.
6. The ﬁnal steps is when the aggregation report is received by V from the
initially chosen A.
A shortcoming of SANA is that the protocol does not fully consider a physical
adversary, such as DARPA does. SANA considers the swarm as benign if the
Prover devices in the network, except those that were physically attacked, still
run their correct software. Moreover, SANA has a strong assumption that an
adversary cannot forge the Optimistic Aggregate Signature in order for the
protocol to work correctly. Another shortcoming is that SANA requires full
connectivity amongst devices during the attestation process, i.e., there is at
least one path between any two IoT devices.
3.3.4
LISA
Carpent et al. proposed two Lightweight Swarm Attestation protocols, LISAα
and LISAs, in [CERT17], where LISAα is the asynchronous version of the pro-
tocol and LISAs is the synchronous version 3.
Similar to SEDA, both LISA versions work over a spanning tree network topol-
ogy. Moreover, the authors of LISA protocols assume a single symmetric master
key that is present on all IoT devices, which is securely stored in a Memory
Protection Unit (MPU). The single master key is used in the protocols because
the authors considered only a remote Software adversary, which cannot extract
cryptographic secrets from the MPU. Furthermore, the protocols operate on a
3In the synchronous version of LISA (LISAs) a Prover device waits for its children to reply
with their attestation responses before moving forward with the protocol. In the asynchronous
version of LISA (LISAα) this does not happen.
==PAGE:44==
30
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
quasi-static network, i.e., devices are allowed to move during attestation if they
do not inﬂuence or change the result of the attestation protocol.
The authors describe in [CERT17] the Finite State Machines (FSMs) of the
protocols for both the Veriﬁer and the Provers, which illustrate the ﬂow of the
attestation protocol during its execution. In LISAα, the nodes collaborate in the
parent-child relationship only to forward attestation requests or replies, which
decreases the overall computational overhead introduced by the protocol on the
devices. Moreover, to prevent replay attacks the Provers in LISAα verify each
attestation session before propagating a message to their parents.
The main idea behind the synchronous version of LISA is to save bandwidth
during the protocol execution by allowing devices to authenticate and attest
each other. This way, when a Prover Pi is attested by another one Pj, only
the identiﬁer of Pi needs to be sent to the Veriﬁer by Pj, instead of Pi’s entire
attestation response. Additionally, since in LISAs every parent waits for all of
its children’s attestation replies, the parent aggregates the packets it received
to reduce the number of messages sent next.
One downside of LISA is that it requires full connectivity across the swarm
devices during the attestation process, limiting its practicality in dynamic net-
works. However, the authors describe an attestation timeout that is used to
protect against connectivity issues, device mobility, collisions, or DoS attacks.
Using an attestation timeout the Veriﬁer, who is not aware of the network
topology, will not be blocked forever in case of an issue during the attestation
process.
Another shortcoming of LISA is the fact that it uses a single master symmetric
key on all devices. Thus, if the key is leaked or compromised the entire swarm
and attestation process will be compromised too.
3.3.5
SCAPI
Kohnhäuser et al. proposed SCAPI [KBGK17], the ﬁrst scalable Collective Re-
mote Attestation protocol that can detect physical attacks. Similar to DARPA,
the authors rely on the fact that during a physical attack the adversary brings
the device oﬄine to temper with it. Moreover, SCAPI brings improvements to
DARPA in several areas, such as reducing the number of messages per attesta-
tion from O(n2) to O(n), where n is the total number of devices in the swarm.
This improvement is orders of magnitude better than DARPA, and leads to a
more scalable RA protocol when applied on large swarms. Furthermore, SCAPI
also provides the ability to identify each individual device that is compromised,
==PAGE:45==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
31
compared to DARPA which does not have this capability.
In the protocol all physically uncompromised devices share a secret session key,
which is periodically distributed among the network by a leader device. When
the leader generates a new session key, the devices have to authenticate using
the previous session key to receive the newest session key. The session keys
are stored in secure lightweight storage areas and are transmitted via secure
channels in an encrypted format.
SCAPI works on the assumption that when an attacker physically captures a
device D, D will not receive the newest session key from the leader while it is
oﬄine. Thus, when D will be online again, after a period of time when the
attestation process will take place, D will use the old session key which will
reveal that D is physically compromised.
The SCAPI protocol is comprised of three phases:
• Initialization phase - the Network Operator O initializes each device with
the cryptographic secrets before deploying it to the swarm.
• Session key update phase - this is the core part of SCAPI, which involves
a periodical update of the secret session key that is shared by all healthy
devices in the network. For every time period, a leader device generates
a new secret session key and propagates it over a secure channel through
the network. To receive the new session key, a device has to authenticate
with the old one. A compromised device which is oﬄine will not receive
the new session key and will, thus, use an invalid one.
• Attestation phase - the software and hardware integrity is veriﬁed for all
devices in the swarm. The Veriﬁer V initiates this phase when sending
an attestation request to an arbitrary Prover P device. P propagates the
attestation request through the network creating a spanning tree rooted
at V.
V can either verify the overall network state or the precise network state.
For the overall network state the ﬁnal attestation report gives a boolean
result, e.g., if the network is compromised or not. On the other hand,
the precise network state will result in a ﬁnal report which identiﬁes each
individual compromised device.
Even though SCAPI improves DARPA with regards to the bandwidth used
for network communication and its overall run time, the main downsides of
SCAPI are that it does not support device mobility (dynamic swarms) and
device outages while the attestation protocol is executing.
==PAGE:46==
32
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
3.3.6
SALAD
In the paper titled "Salad: Secure and lightweight attestation of highly dynamic
and disruptive networks" [KBK18], the authors present the ﬁrst RA protocol for
attesting highly dynamic and disruptive swarms. SALAD tackles the problems
of device mobility within the swarm and network disruptions, which may take
place during the attestation process.
Compared to the previously mentioned Collective RA protocols that used a
spanning tree topology to propagate the attestation result, SALAD uses a dis-
tributed approach, in which all the nodes in the swarm uniformly reach to the
same attestation outcome in the end. The distributed approach helps SALAD
achieve resilience against DoS attacks, where some devices are targeted and
their communication is disrupted to try and stop the attestation of the entire
swarm. Moreover, since all devices will have the attestation report of the swarm
at the end, the Veriﬁer can obtain it from any device. This implies that full
connectivity is not needed for SALAD to attest correctly the network. Further-
more, the protocol detects both physical and software adversaries and manages
to substantially reduce the communication data between devices and the run
time of the attestation process compared to previous Collective RA protocols.
The SALAD protocol is comprised of two main phases:
• Deployment phase - is executed once in the beginning by the Network
Operator O. O initializes all the devices with their cryptographic keys in
a secure environment and deploys them in the swarm.
• Attestation phase - is initiated by the Veriﬁer V and attests the integrity
of the network. This phase consists of four steps:
1. V sends a signed attestation request to a device in the swarm to
initiate the attestation process.
2. The Prover P which received the attestation initiation packet, veriﬁes
its authenticity and then forwards it to the direct neighbors, which
are in close proximity. Moreover, the Provers that received the at-
testation initiation packet also attest their own software state and
generate an attestation report.
3. P exchanges its attestation report with all of its neighbors. After
both P and its neighbor guarantee that their software integrity is
still maintained, they aggregate their stored attestation reports with
the one received from the neighbor. Gradually, each P will contain an
attestation report composed of the status of more and more devices.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
33
4. Finally, V connects to a random P and collects the attestation report
for the swarm.
V veriﬁes if the report is valid and learns which
devices are healthy and which are compromised. At this point, V
may either stop the attestation phase or let it continue to attest
more devices in the swarm.
3.3.7
PADS
Another Collective RA protocol that attests highly dynamic swarms is known as
PADS (Practical Attestation for Highly Dynamic Swarm Topologies) and was
introduced by Ambrosin et al. in [ACL+18].
The protocol uses non-interactive attestation, i.e., the Prover devices perform
self-attestation of their software integrity at random times chosen by them, and
not at the Veriﬁer’s request. Moreover, PADS shifts the problem of attesting
a big network of IoT devices into a consensus problem. This way, the Prover
devices attest themselves and then propagate their attestation result to the
neighbor devices located within the communication range. The attestation re-
port is signed by the issuing device P and is comprised of a bitmap 4 that stores
the status of the network from the perspective of P. Over time, each attestation
report from a Prover device will fuse with its neighbors, and the attestation re-
port will become a collective result that holds a general overview of the health
status of all devices in the swarm. Since each device will know the state of the
other devices in the network, healthy devices can stop communicating with the
compromised ones to reduce the spread of malware.
PADS does not require full connectivity between the devices in the network,
and does not use an overlay spanning tree for the attestation process. This
makes PADS suitable for unstructured networks in which the devices are not
always reachable and often move throughout the swarm. At its core, the PADS
protocol is made of four phases:
• Initialization phase - the Network Operator initializes the devices with
a shared symmetric key and with a secret seed that is used to generate
pseudo-random attestation times.
• Self-Attestation phase - At predeﬁned times, triggered by a secure clock
and the secret seed, each Prover performs self-assessment procedure in
which the hash value of the underlying software is computed.
4In the context of PADS a bitmap is an array in which the index (position) in the array
corresponds to an IoT device from the swarm and the value at that position represents the
health state of the device.
==PAGE:48==
34
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
• Consensus phase - During this phase the Provers corroborate their attes-
tation reports using a distributed minimum consensus algorithm. They
will eventually merge their view on the network health, and each device
will have a bitmap with three possible states for a device: Good, Bad or
Unknown.
• Veriﬁcation phase - The Veriﬁer V randomly chooses a Prover, or multiple
Provers, from which V will retrieve the overall network status. Due to
the bitmap stored by Provers, the Veriﬁer knows the network coverage of
the attestation process and if some of devices did not participate in the
attestation scheme, V can retrieve the collective attestation report at a
later time.
The downside of PADS is that the shared symmetric key reduces the security
against a physical attack. If the key is compromised on one device then the
whole network and attestation process is compromised as well. Furthermore, the
protocol involves signiﬁcant complexity in term of communication, computation
and storage.
3.3.8
WISE
The ﬁrst intelligent approach of attesting large IoT swarm was proposed by
Ammar et al. in [AWC18] and it is titled WISE: Lightweight intelligent swarm
attestation scheme for IoT (the Veriﬁer’s perspective). The main goals of WISE
is to reduce the communication overhead and the power consumption during the
attestation protocol. In this sense, WISE performs a remote attestation of the
swarm over large time windows, where diﬀerent subsets of device are attested
at each time period. The time window can change for each subset of devices,
since it is adjusted automatically by the Veriﬁer.
The smart component of WISE is the fact that the Veriﬁer proposes candidate
subsets of IoT devices to be attested using machine learning methods based on
Hidden Markov Model. WISE is made up of two phases:
1. The initialization phase takes place oﬄine, once in the beginning, when all
the devices are initialized with cryptographic keys and are deployed into
the network by the Network Operator. The devices are grouped into clus-
ters, e.g., they are grouped by geographic location, hardware capabilities,
etc.
2. At random times decided by the Veriﬁer V, V performs collective attes-
tation over a subset of devices that were wisely chosen based on criteria,
==PAGE:49==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
35
such as:
• The attestation history of every device.
• The individual characteristics of devices, such as the maximum time
period of a device between attestation rounds, how many compro-
mised devices were found in the device’s neighborhood, etc.
The ﬁrst attestation is performed over the entire swarm using an overlay
spanning tree, and all subsequent runs of the protocol are carried out
across subsets of devices.
Due to the fact that WISE is unpredictable in terms of which devices are attested
and at what times, this makes WISE secure against the roving malware, which
was described in Section 2.2.1. However, the downsides of WISE is that it only
works over static swarms and requires full connectivity amongst the subset of
devices that are attested.
3.3.9
slimIoT
Ammar et al. introduced slimIoT in [AWRC18], which is a scalable lightweight
attestation protocol that is best suited for resource constrained IoT devices.
The protocol detects both software and physical adversaries and it works under
the assumption that a physical attack is time-consuming.
In this sense, the
protocol splits the swarm devices into clusters, which are attested regularly at
time intervals that are less than the time needed for an adversary to carry out
a successful attack. Thus, if a device is missing from the cluster then it can be
considered compromised.
slimIoT relies on authenticated parameterized broadcast messages that use sym-
metric key cryptography. In this manner, the protocol uses a one-way keychain,
that is made of n (no. of devices in the swarm) symmetric keys, where ki−1 =
hash(ki).
The slimIoT protocol is made up of two phases:
1. The ﬁrst phase is when the Network Operator initializes the devices with
public write-protected data and with private data, before deployment.
At this stage, the Veriﬁer V creates the keychain and the devices are
initialized with the secret key k0, which can be used to authenticate all
other keys recursively: k0 = hash(. . . hash(ki)). However, no device can
compute any other keys diﬀerent from k0.
==PAGE:50==
36
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
Once the devices are deployed they are loosely time-synchronized 5 with
the Veriﬁer by a write-protected real-time clock.
2. The second phase represents the attestation phase, which is executed pe-
riodically by V and can be accomplished in multiple ways:
• V can perform only physical attestation, by detecting the absent
devices. This will identify the Provers which were physically attacked.
• V can attest clusters of devices against both physical and software
attacks, which results in partial swarm attestation.
• V can carry out full attestation in which the entire swarm is attested
against both physical and software attacks.
Irrespective of which attestation method is chosen for the slimIoT’s second
phase, the downside is that the attested devices need to maintain a static net-
work topology.
3.3.10
RADIS
In [CDM19] the authors describe a protocol for Remote Attestation of Dis-
tributed IoT Services (RADIS), which shifts the challenge of attesting swarms
into a distributed service attestation problem.
The protocol was designed to work in a static network, such as a smart home,
where the IoT devices run distributed services on them. These services com-
municate with each other and exchange data in order to achieve a goal, e.g.,
remotely open the house door when a ﬁngerprint sensor detects an authorized
person. In this context, the main goal of RADIS is to detect the compromised
devices in the network together with the devices that are legitimate but perform
unauthorized operations due to the malicious data received from the infected
devices. For example, an adversary could compromise the ﬁngerprint sensor and
make it transmit corrupted data to the door lock, which could ultimately end
up in the door being unlocked by an unauthorized person.
The protocol is based on control ﬂow attestation, i.e., it attests the integrity of
the execution of an application, instead of attesting only the static properties.
By attesting the control ﬂow RADIS is able to detect run-time attacks, such as
the code-reuse attack.
5Two devices are loosely-time synchronized if they share a time upper bound that represents
the maximum synchronization error. In essence, the devices are not constrained by precise
timing requirements, but they allow for a margin of error.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
37
The main steps of RADIS are the following ones:
• The Network Operator conﬁgures the IoT devices with their correct con-
ﬁgurations and deploys them to the network.
• In an oﬄine phase the Veriﬁer V measures all the legitimate services that
are part of the distributed system. For every service, the Veriﬁer generates
measurements for each possible valid service ﬂow, and stores them in a
database.
• During the attestation phase V sends an attestation request to a Prover
Pi, which hosts the ﬁrst service Si of a known service ﬂow.
• When Pi receives the attestation request, Pi starts attesting the service
Si. While Si is running, the attestation uses a run-time trace model to
track all the instructions executed by Si and other services with which it
interacted.
The trace model uses an accumulative hash algorithm to generate a unique
hash for the entire service ﬂow of Si at run-time. For each node N in the
service ﬂow path, the accumulated hash is computed as follows: Hi =
hash(Hi−1,N).
• After all the instructions in the service ﬂow path of Si were traced and an
accumulated hash was generated, Pi sends the accumulated hash to V for
validation.
An illustration of how RADIS works and how the accumulated hash is calculated
can be seen in Figure 3.3. In the image H6 represents the ﬁnal accumulated
hash of the service ﬂow that is hosted on the ﬁngerprint sensor.
The main downside of RADIS is the need to precompute and store all the possi-
ble legitimate ﬂows on individual devices and on their interactions. This makes
RADIS hard to scale and eﬃciently apply on large IoT swarms of thousands of
devices.
3.3.11
ESDRA
Kuang et al. proposed the ﬁrst many-to-one remote attestation protocol for
IoT swarms in [KFY+19], called ESDRA (An Eﬃcient and Secure Distributed
Remote Attestation Scheme for IoT swarms). ESDRA aims to overcome the
single point of failure Veriﬁer challenge, which was not addressed in the previous
Collective Remote Attestation protocols.
==PAGE:52==
38
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
Figure 3.3: RADIS
ESDRA uses distributed attestation to validate the integrity of the IoT devices.
In this sense, the swarm is split into multiple clusters based on communication
distance, where each cluster has a designated cluster-head. Moreover, to detect
the compromised devices in the swarm ESDRA makes use of an accusation
mechanism which reports back the infected nodes.
The protocol is made of four diﬀerent phases:
1. Device Initialization - All devices are initialized by the Network Operator
O with basic information, cryptographic information (public key, private
key, certiﬁcates for identity and code) and conﬁgurations.
2. Device Linking - After each device is conﬁgured, the node exchanges in-
formation with its neighbors to create a connection (link) with each other.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
39
3. Network Construction - ESDRA uses a reputation mechanism for attesting
nodes, which speciﬁes credit scores (reputation scores) for devices based
on their past behaviors. Thus, the score of a device increases if it was
successfully attested by another devices, and decreases if the operation
fails.
Periodically, O selects the nodes with the highest credit score to be the
cluster-heads.
Each cluster-head communicates with the devices in its
cluster to establish links with them.
4. Device Attestation - Each Prover P device is attested by three of its neigh-
bors. In this manner, during the attestation phase the software conﬁgura-
tion of P is attested by its neighbors, since they know P’s code certiﬁcate
from the Device Linking phase. Ultimately, each cluster-head collects the
results from the Provers in its cluster and sends them to the Veriﬁer.
3.3.12
US-AID
Ibrahim et al. proposed US-AID (Unattended Scalable Attestation of IoT De-
vices) [IST18], which is the ﬁrst RA protocol for large autonomous 6 dynamic
swarms.
The protocol does not need a trusted centralized Veriﬁer because it uses in-
network attestation between the IoT devices. US-AID detects both software
and physical attacks due to key exchange mechanisms and periodical heartbeats
which identify when a device is absent from the network.
US-AID is consisted of the following phases:
1. The Network Operator conﬁgures the devices and initializes them with
cryptographic information before deploying them to the network. At this
stage the devices are considered to be healthy.
2. Every time two devices become neighbors they authenticate each other
and share their state using a roaming protocol.
3. At random times a pair of neighbor devices attest each other to check
their software states. A Prover cuts all communication with a neighbor
if the neighbor is compromised. By doing this, the infected device will
eventually be isolated from the network. Moreover, each device maintains
two lists: one for healthy devices and one for the compromised ones.
6An autonomous network is made of connected devices that interact with each other to
achieve diﬀerent goals. Most of the times an autonomous network does not have a centralized
entity to coordinate the actions of the devices.
==PAGE:54==
40
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
4. To detect physical attacks a Prover P periodically broadcasts heartbeat
messages to its neighbors to prove that it is present and not captured
by an adversary.
The devices that are absent from the network, for a
time greater than a threshold, will become isolated by their neighbors by
dropping all the communication with them.
3.3.13
SHeLA
Rabbani et al. described a novel RA scheme called SHeLA (scalable heteroge-
neous layered attestation) in [RVW+19]. SHeLA introduces a new layer of edge
devices 7 between the Veriﬁer and the swarm. The protocol is heterogeneous be-
cause the edge devices can communicate with the swarm using multiple wireless
protocols.
SHeLA’s main goal is to ensure redundancy, device mobility and availability
during the attestation phase, which is achieved with the edge layer. The edge
devices maintain a detailed overview of the status of the Provers and have a
direct connection with the Veriﬁer, who can request the status of swarm at any
time from any of the edge devices.
SHeLA is made of two phases:
• Oﬄine phase - The Network Operator O initializes and deploys the edge
devices, which attest each other before communicating with the swarm..
Moreover, O initializes the IoT devices, deploys them into the swarm and
registers them with a speciﬁc edge device.
• Online phase - is consisted of four steps that are accomplished by all edge
devices:
1. The edge device initiates one-to-one attestations with each swarm
device that was registered to it.
2. If a swarm node Pi that was registered with the edge device Ej is
not reachable, Ej receives updates from the other edge devices and
stores the attestation information it received about Pi.
3. All edge devices periodically perform a synchronization procedure
amongst themselves and share the attestation results on all swarm
nodes. Consequently, each edge device will have updated information
about the entire network.
7Device that has more memory, computational power and resources than the resource-
constrained IoT devices that are part of a swarm. An edge device helps with oﬄoading some
of the computation and storage from an IoT device.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
41
4. From time to time the root Veriﬁer attests the whole network by
making a request for the collective network status from a random
edge device. The collective network status received from the edge
device is then compared with the expected one to check the network
health.
3.3.14
HEALED
In [IST19] the authors proposed a Collective RA protocol that not only detects
the compromised Provers in a swarm, but also provides procedures to decon-
taminate the concerned devices. The protocol is known as Healed: Healing &
attestation for low-end embedded devices.
To detect and heal compromised devices, HEALED uses two protocols:
• Attest - A set of Veriﬁers Vs attest periodically random Provers Ps de-
vices. All Vs share pairwise symmetric encryption keys with all the Ps in
the swarm.
A Veriﬁer V sends an attestation request, together with a nonce N, to a
random Prover P. After having received the attestation request from V,
P performs a measurement of its software state by computing a Merkle
Hash Tree (MHT) and generating a MAC (message authentication code)
using the shared symmetric key. The MAC is sent to V for validation.
An example of an MHT generated by HEALED can be observed in Figure
3.4. The code that represents the software application running on an IoT
device is split into multiple code blocks. Gradually, the hash of the entire
code base is computed, where the root of the tree (h[1]) represents the
software state of the device. As it can be seen from the ﬁgure, by using
MHT a Veriﬁer can know exactly which code block was modiﬁed.
• Heal - If a device P is detected as compromised by V, then V searches
for a healer device H that has the same software conﬁguration as P had
originally. After H is found, H restores P’s software to the healthy version.
The main downsides of the HEALED protocol are that it is not scalable on a
large IoT swarm due to its mechanism, and that it does not guarantee that an
infected Prover will override the corrupted code with the benign one.
==PAGE:56==
42
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
Figure 3.4: Merkle Hash Tree generated by HEALED
3.3.15
SIMPLE+
Ammar et al. presented SIMPLE+ in [ACT20], which is a remote attestation
approach for resource-constrained IoT devices. The protocol tries to narrow the
gap between software-based and hybrid RA schemes by using a software-based
memory isolation mechanism, known as Security MicroVisor (SµV). SµV is an
open-source formally veriﬁed architecture that provides trusted memory protec-
tion similar to a Memory Protection Unit (MPU) in hardware. Moreover, SµV
isolates a software-based Trusted Computing Model (TCM) from the untrusted
application code by using assembly-level code veriﬁcation and selective software
virtualisation.
The main objective of the protocol is to oﬀer security guarantees that are equiv-
alent to a hybrid RA scheme, but without any hardware modiﬁcations on the
device.
Hence, the authors formally verify the architecture of SIMPLE+ to
guarantee that it is memory safe and crash free.
In essence, SIMPLE+ is a lightweight swarm RA protocol which has three
phases:
• Initialization phase - This phase takes place before the IoT devices are
deployment into the network.
The Network Operator O initializes the
secure memory area of the Provers with public and private data, which
==PAGE:57==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
43
will be used by the devices for their normal operations and during the
attestation process.
• Attestation phase - At arbitrary times the Veriﬁer broadcasts an attes-
tation request to the swarm. The Provers authenticate the attestation
request and if it is valid they broadcast it further to their neighbors so
that all nodes can receive it, even the mobile ones. Next, each Prover
checks their software integrity by computing an attestation report.
This phase is executed several times before moving to the Collection phase.
This is done in order to minimize the chances of having Provers that did
not participate in the attestation due to the network being dynamic.
• Collection phase - The Veriﬁer V broadcasts a collection request to the
Provers. Each Prover authenticates the request and then re-broadcasts it
to notify its neighbors. A virtual spanning tree rooted at V is created in
this process. V collects all the attestation reports from the Provers and
checks their health status.
3.3.16
PASTA
Kohnhäuser et al.
proposed a practical attestation protocol for autonomous
networks of embedded systems in [KBK19], called PASTA. The protocol has an
attestation process that incorporates many Veriﬁers and many Prover devices,
which ultimately generates a publicly veriﬁable token.
PASTA is a decentralized protocol in which the attestation result is distributed
to all devices. Hence, the protocol provides robustness against device outages
and network disruptions. Moreover, PASTA is able to detect both physical and
software adversaries, and has the ability to recover from long network disruptions
that segment the swarm in multiple parts.
At its core, the protocol consists of three phases:
1. Deployment phase - The Network Operator O initializes all devices with
cryptographic information, a token signature key pair, and a token set
before deploying them into the swarm.
2. Token generation phase - After the deployment phase is ﬁnished, the
Provers in the swarm periodically execute the token generation phase,
in which the Prover devices generate tokens. Each token is used to attest
the hardware and software integrity, at the token generation time, of all
the Provers that take part in the token creation process.
==PAGE:58==
44
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
This phase starts with a random Prover P that initiates the token gen-
eration process. A virtual spanning tree rooted at P is created to help
the eﬃcient propagation of the token generation request sent by P to the
Provers. After P receives the aggregated identities and commitments of
all Provers that participate in the process, P broadcasts the attestation
challenge to the participants. Over time, each Prover generates a par-
tial signature, which is sent to P, and is aggregated with other signatures
along the spanning tree path.
At the end, P creates the token T, from the information received from the
Provers, which holds the integrity of the participants.
3. Token exchange phase - All devices in the swarm, both Veriﬁers and
Provers, perform the token exchange phase to make this data available
to all the devices in the network. Devices update their token set with the
received missing tokens, after these token are veriﬁed and validated by the
device. At this point, all the devices in swarm know the health status of
the network and of the other devices too.
3.3.17
DIAT
Abera et al. described in [ABB+19] a collective run-time attestation protocol
for autonomous swarms of IoT devices. The protocol is called DIAT, which
stands for Data Integrity Attestation for Resilient Collaboration of Autonomous
Systems.
DIAT is a control-ﬂow attestation protocol that ensures data integrity on a
device against unauthorized manipulation, i.e., it checks if all the run-time ap-
plication variables and operations adhere to the data-ﬂow graph of the program.
The protocol’s main goal is to enable trust in the exchanged data between de-
vices. To achieve this, the IoT devices exchange an authentic integrity proof of
the data they send or receive. In this way the device at the other end can verify
that the data was created and handled correctly by the originating device.
The code on the IoT devices is split into multiple interacting modules. Thus,
to improve the performance of the protocol, DIAT identiﬁes the sensitive data
that needs to be veriﬁed and does the following:
• Attests the code of the modules that handle sensitive data.
• The modules are attested in the time window when they are handling the
sensitive data.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 State-Of-The-Art Remote Attestation Protocols of IoT Swarms
45
Between two Prover devices Pi and Pj, the DIAT protocol performs the next
successive steps:
• Pi sends a request for sensitive data to Pj, where Pj needs to generate
and handle the data in a secure manner. Along with the request a fresh
nonce is sent to Pj too.
• Once Pj receives and validates the request, it starts processing the data.
At the same time, a data-ﬂow monitor component begins to oversee the
communication between the software modules located on Pj. The data-
ﬂow monitor identiﬁes the modules which handle the requested sensitive
data and sends a list of their identiﬁers to a control-ﬂow monitor compo-
nent.
The control-ﬂow monitor component begins to analyse the control ﬂow of
the previously identiﬁed modules. The control-ﬂow monitor outputs a set
of attestation results for each critical module.
Ultimately, Pj digitally signs the sensitive data and the attestation results
with a secret key and sends them to Pi.
• The Pi device validates the received information and checks the integrity
of the control-ﬂow items. If all the validations are successful Pi considers
the data to be trustful.
3.3.18
SARA
Dushku et al. proposed SARA in [DRC+20], which is a secure asynchronous
RA protocol for IoT systems.
While attesting a swarm of IoT devices SARA, aims to avoid the unnecessary
suspension of the entire network’s activity, compared to previous RA protocols
that blocked the whole swarm operation during the attestation process. In this
sense, SARA attests a distributed service that is executed by the swarm and
communicates asynchronously with the devices to check if they were compro-
mised. Consequently, a device which ﬁnishes the local attestation of its software
can continue with its normal operation even though the global attestation pro-
cess of the swarm is not ﬁnalized at that point.
The protocol considers a publish-subscribe communication pattern between the
services that are running on the IoT devices. Thus, the services interact with
each other and form a distributed IoT system. SARA not only veriﬁes if the
software of the devices was compromised or not, but it also checks if the data
==PAGE:60==
46
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
exchanged between services has inﬂuenced in a malicious way the operation
of other services. SARA achieves the latter by collecting historical data from
the interactions between services, and shares the information with the Prover
devices.
The ﬁrst step of SARA is when the Network Operator securely bootstraps the
devices with the correct software and cryptographic data before being deployed
to the network. Next, the Veriﬁer V performs the attestation process, which
consists of two major parts:
• Initialization - During this phase, which is performed at time T0, V starts
the attestation process for at least one distributed service. To do this V
communicates with the device that has the publisher role in the distributed
service.
After a publisher P receives the attestation request, P performs the lo-
cal attestation procedure and publishes the normal data generated by its
operation together with the attestation report.
Later, every subscriber device which retrieves the normal operation data
from P will also receive P’s attestation report together with V’s attesta-
tion request. Next, the subscriber devices each perform their own local
attestation process.
• Attestation - During the attestation phase, which takes place at a later
time T1, V sends attestation requests to one or more subscriber service.
The subscribers operate as Provers in the RA protocol, and after receiving
the attestation request, they will return an attestation result to V. The
attestation result comprises all the attestation reports of the services that
took part in the events to which a subscriber was registered.
The ﬁnal step of the protocol is after V has retrieved the ﬁnal attestation
report from a subscriber.
SARA uses vector clocks [Fid87] to establish the
order of the events that take place in the distributed system and to overcome
the synchronization challenges that occur when using physical clocks. The ﬁnal
attestation report contains vector clock timestamps of the events that took place
in the distributed service. V then veriﬁes if the devices are compromised or not.
Moreover, based on the historical data V checks if the services are in an incorrect
state that was triggered by malicious data.
The main downside of SARA are that the ﬁnal attestation result increases lin-
early with the total number of services that participate in the report.
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Discussion
47
3.4
Discussion
Table 3.1 presents the diﬀerent properties of the Collective Remote Attestation
(CRA) protocols that are described in Section 3.3. The properties illustrated in
Table 3.1 are the following:
• Network type - this property outlines the network architecture addressed
by the CRA protocol, i.e., if the network needs to be static or dynamic
during the attestation process.
On top of that, a network can be au-
tonomous, regardless of its static or dynamic architecture, if there is no
central entity which oversees the actions and behaviour of the devices after
they are deployed into the swarm.
• Adversary - the adversaries addressed in the table are remote software
adversaries (AdvSW ) and physical intrusive adversaries (AdvP HY S). The
physical non-intrusive adversaries are not considered by the analyzed pro-
tocols since they are diﬃcult to detect.
• DoS mitigation - a CRA protocol can implement mitigations against the
Denial-of-Service attack to protect the network and make it available for
as long as possible.
• Exchanged data - this property refers to the ability of a protocol to take
into account the existence of data exchanged between devices. Protocols
with this capability are able to detect mobile software adversaries.
This type of attacker usually infects a device D in the network. Once D
is infected a mobile adversary can infect other devices in the network, or
it can remove itself from D and move to other devices.
Thus, if the data that is exchanged between devices is taken into account,
the mobile software adversary can be detected.
• Attestation type - this property refers to how the attestation process and
its related communication with the Veriﬁer is working. There are two types
of communication used by the protocols: synchronous and asynchronous.
Synchronous attestation protocols (AttSY NC) block the entire network
during the attestation process. Once the Veriﬁer sends the attestation
request, all the devices drop their current actions and start performing
local attestation procedures and communicate with their neighbors.
On the other hand, asynchronous attestation protocols (AttASY NC) are
closer to the IoT protocols used in real-life scenarios and do not suspend
the operations performed by the swarm devices. AttASY NC allows devices
to perform the local attestation procedure when they are available, thus,
not interrupting their normal operations.
==PAGE:62==
48
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
CRA Protocol
Network
Adversary
DoS
mitigation
Exchanged
data
Attestation
SEDA
static
AdvSW


AttSY NC
DARPA
static,
dynamic
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
SANA
static,
dynamic
AdvSW


AttSY NC
LISAs
quasi-
static
AdvSW


AttSY NC
LISAα
quasi-
static
AdvSW


AttASY NC
SCAPI
static
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
SALAD
static,
dynamic
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
PADS
static,
dynamic
AdvSW


AttSY NC
WISE
static
AdvSW


AttSY NC
slimIoT
static
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
RADIS
static
AdvSW


AttSY NC
ESDRA
static,
half-dynamic
AdvSW


AttSY NC
US-AID
static,
dynamic,
autonomous
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
SHeLA
static,
dynamic
AdvSW


AttSY NC
HEALED
static
AdvSW


AttSY NC
SIMPLE+
static,
dynamic
AdvSW


AttSY NC
PASTA
static,
autonomous
AdvSW ,
AdvP HY S


AttSY NC
DIAT
static,
dynamic,
autonomous
AdvSW


AttSY NC
SARA
static,
dynamic
AdvSW


AttASY NC
Table 3.1: Properties of the Collective Remote Attestation Protocols Table
All the CRA protocols take into account and detect software adversaries (AdvSW ),
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Discussion
49
since their main goal is to assess the integrity of the software running on a
Prover device. However, there are only a few protocols that address a physi-
cal adversary (AdvP HY S), e.g., DARPA [ISTZ16], SCAPI [KBGK17], slimIoT
[AWRC18], US-AID [IST18] and PASTA [KBK19]. All of them work, under
the assumption that AdvP HY S captures a device for a noticeable amount of
time during which other devices can detect the absence of the captured IoT
device. The two primary reasons of why the number of protocols that detect
AdvP HY S is low compared to the total number of presented CRA protocols are
the following:
• The protocol feature of being able to detect AdvP HY S increases the com-
plexity of the RA protocol and the overhead on the resource-constrained
devices in the network.
• AdvP HY S occurs less frequently than AdvSW because the adversary needs
physical access to the IoT devices and expensive specialized hardware lab
equipment [Sko12] to perform invasive procedures (attacks) on them.
As it can be seen from Table 3.1 all the protocols work on static networks,
in which the devices do not move or change neighbors during the attestation
process and are fully connected. i.e., all Provers are online and actively partici-
pate in the process. This is the simplest type of network architecture, which is
starting to change and evolve due to the following reasons:
• IoT devices are most of the times oﬄine to save battery power and they
are online only for short periods of time when they have to perform certain
tasks.
• Dynamic networks, such as interconnected cars, drones and robots that
map areas, etc., are becoming more frequent due to technological advance-
ments.
Half of the analyzed CRA schemes are able to function properly in dynamic
networks, where the IoT devices can relocate and change neighbors during the
attestation procedure. Moreover, US-AID [IST18] and PASTA [KBK19] are the
only protocols that were designed to attest autonomous decentralized networks.
Certain protocols, such as SCAPI [KBGK17] and SALAD [KBK18] take into
consideration Denial-of-Service attacks against the entire network or against cer-
tain devices (targeted DoS). SALAD protects against targeted DoS and achieves
this by sharing the ﬁnal attestation report with all Provers so that the Veriﬁer
can get it from any device.
==PAGE:64==
50
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
On the other hand, SCAPI’s method of protecting against DoS attacks is an
extension to the protocol in which the devices elect a new leader in a self-
organizing procedure, when the current leader is unavailable. Most of the CRA
schemes consider mitigations against DoS attacks out of scope because it is very
diﬃcult to protect against such attacks and because some protocols consider
the adversary to be undetected and stealthy while it tries to maliciously alter
attestation reports.
When referring to the type of communication performed during the attestation
process, between Prover devices and between Provers and Veriﬁers, all but two
of the CRA protocols previously presented require synchronous communication
(AttSY NC), as it can be seen in Table 3.1.
The protocols use synchronous communication because most often the devices
are arranged into a virtual spanning tree formation during the attestation pro-
cess, where each parent attests its children before propagating the result upward
in the tree. Additionally, the RA process has to last a very short period time
not to block the network more than it is necessary.
However, protocols, such as LISAα [CERT17] and SARA [DRC+20], employ
asynchronous communication (AttASY NC) during the attestation process. By
doing this they do not interfere with the normal operations of the network and
they allow devices to communicate with each other even when they are not
online at the same time.
The ﬁnal diﬀerentiating criteria between CRA protocols is the feature of taking
into account exchanged data between devices.
By doing this a protocol can
detect a specialized type of adversary, i.e., the mobile software adversary, which
can delete itself from a device and hop to another IoT device in order to escape
detection during the attestation process. Additionally, in a distributed service
context, a protocol that veriﬁes the integrity of the exchanged data can detect
if a service is performing an illegitimate operation due to malicious input data
from another service. The only swarm RA protocols that consider exchanged
data are RADIS [CDM19], DIAT [ABB+19] and SARA.
Unfortunately, none of the three protocols that consider exchanged data between
devices do this in a scalable manner that can be easily applied on large networks
of IoT devices.
RADIS and DIAT were the ﬁrst ones to introduce this concept and tackle this
challenge by using control-ﬂow attestation. Control-ﬂow attestation requires the
pre-computation and storage of all the possible paths (ﬂows) in a system. This is
not scalable for systems with a big number of interconnected components which
run on resource-constrained IoT devices.
Moreover, control-ﬂow attestation
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Discussion
51
increases the overhead on the Veriﬁer during the veriﬁcation process at the end.
On top of all these, the performance of RADIS is directly proportional to the
number of services in a distributed system. Thus, the more services there are,
the higher the runtime and overhead are on the IoT devices.
SARA does not rely on control ﬂow attestation, but it uses Vector Clocks to
order the events in the distributed IoT system, whose size increases linearly with
the number of devices in the network. Thus, the attestation result that is, at the
end, present on all the Subscriber devices in the swarm is long and ineﬃcient.
This leads to memory and computational overhead on the resource-constrained
devices, which need to store and send over the network the attestation report.
The previous analysis indicates that more research needs to be done into swarm
RA protocols that detect mobile adversaries, as the current state-of-art protocols
are ineﬃcient and unscalable for large networks. This makes them inapplicable
in massive swarms, thus making those large networks vulnerable to long-term
cyber attacks.
Moreover, SARA is the only swarm RA protocol, to the best of our knowledge,
that is designed to work in Publish-Subscribe IoT networks. These types of
networks are very common in practice, because of standard IoT communication
protocols, such as MQTT[MQT19] and AMQP [AMQ12]. These communication
protocols were designed with the Publish-Subscribe paradigm in mind and are
currently adopted by a wide variety of industries. In this sense, more research
into swarm RA protocols that work on Publish-Subscribe networks is essential,
in order to protect these types of networks as well.
Furthermore, the majority of swarm RA protocols attest the entire network
during the attestation process. By performing the attestation in this way, the
swarm might be unavailable to its users for a period of time. On the other hand,
only a small number of RA protocols (i.e., WISE, slimIoT and ESDRA) consider
this aspect and attest clusters of IoT devices at one time, instead of the entire
network, which is much better for the swarm’s operations and its availability.
Therefore, the goal of this thesis is to propose a novel Scalable and Eﬃcient
Swarm Remote Attestation protocol that is set in a Publish-Subscribe type of
network and that can detect mobile software adversaries. Moreover, the protocol
does not aﬀect the network’s availability and operations and it works in swarms
that are highly dynamic and mobile. Thus, the protocol tries to tackle the most
recent research goals of the RA protocols that attest large swarms.
==PAGE:66==
52
Literature Review of Swarm Remote Attestation Protocols
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4
SERALDEB: Scalable and
Eﬃcient Remote
Attestation Protocol for
Large Distributed
Event-Based Systems
4.1
Project Scope
This chapter explains SERALDEB, which is a Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote
Attestation Protocol for Large Distributed Event-Based Systems. SERALDEB’s
goal is to remotely attest the IoT devices in a swarm in a scalable way, because
the number of IoT devices connected to the Internet grows each year and so do
the networks that encompass them.
In this sense, SERALDEB is an eﬃcient and scalable swarm Remote Attestation
protocol that attests the software integrity of the IoT devices from a network,
where the devices communicate in an asynchronous fashion using the Publish-
Subscribe paradigm. The devices can be either Publishers, which publish data
==PAGE:68==
54
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
related to a topic, or Subscribers, which are devices that consume data connected
to a topic. To be able to communicate in a scalable way the network contains
edge devices that act as Brokers between the Publishers and Subscribers.
The Brokers are highly available and powerful devices that have more compu-
tational power, memory, energy and network resources compared to the usual
resource-constrained IoT devices in the network. Publishers publish data to the
Brokers and the Subscribers consume data from the Brokers.
The swarm in which SERALDEB is designed to operate is a highly dynamic
and mobile network, i.e., the IoT devices can move throughout the swarm and
establish connections with diﬀerent Brokers to send or receive data at certain
points in time.
The goal of SERALDEB is to attest the swarm in a scalable way by using the
edge devices and by periodically attesting subsets (clusters) of devices at one
time. The beneﬁts of attesting only a cluster of devices are the following:
• Little disruption of the network and of the well-functioning of the entire
IoT environment.
• Only the devices that participate in the attestation process use energy for
it, while the others can conserve their energy and use it to accomplish
their tasks.
• Limited extra network traﬃc in the swarm during the attestation process
compared to the network traﬃc that would be used if the entire swarm
was attested at the same time.
• SERALDEB remains scalable even in large networks that continue to grow.
SERALDEB has four main phases, i.e., the initialization phase, the attestation
phase, the collection phase and the veriﬁcation phase, which are explained in
Section 4.8. Also, the protocol can detect Remote Software Adversaries, Mobile
Adversaries and Subscriber devices that might be in an incorrect state due to
malicious data produced by compromised Publishers.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 System Model
55
4.2
System Model
This project considers a network of heterogeneous1 IoT devices, that form a
distributed event-based system. The network follows the Publish-Subscribe ar-
chitecture, in which the resource-constrained IoT devices can be either Publish-
ers or Subscribers. The Publisher devices are usually sensors that produce data
and messages for a certain topic. For example, a temperature sensor produces
data related to the temperature topic. On the other hand, Subscriber devices
consume data related to a particular topic, e.g., a thermostat device uses the
temperature from the temperature sensor to make the decision of heating up a
place, cooling it down or leaving its climate unchanged.
Besides Publishers and Subscribers, the network incorporates multiple Broker
devices that are geographically spread throughout the network. The Brokers
need to be able to reach all the IoT devices present in the swarm, irrespective
of the location of the IoT devices.
The role of a Broker is to decouple in space2 and time3 the Publishers and
Subscribers from each other. To achieve this the Broker acts as a middleman
between Publishers and Subscribers. When a Publisher produces an event E
for a topic T, the Publisher sends it to the Broker. The Broker then makes E
available to all the devices subscribed to topic T. When a Subscriber S contacts
the Broker to check for any events that are relevant to S, the Broker delivers E
to the Subscriber device.
An example of the above mentioned scenario is when a light intensity sensor
detects that outside is getting dark and sends this data to the Broker. Subscriber
devices, such as smart light bulbs, periodically query the Broker for any new
events related to the light intensity topic. After the event is published to the
Broker and the subscribers receive it, the smart light bulbs can increase the
amount of light that they emit.
Due to the fact that the Broker acts as a middleman between Subscribers and
Publishers, the devices communicate asynchronously between each other. This
is in line with current real-world examples of IoT networks that use Publish-
1Heterogeneous devices are IoT devices that have diﬀerent software conﬁgurations and
hardware parts, i.e., they are not identical to each other.
2Space decoupling between two devices occurs when the devices communicate indirectly
with each other, i.e., without ﬁrst addressing each other in a direct way. In the current scenario
a Publisher produces data for a topic, and the relevant Subscriber devices will receive the data
without the need for the Publisher to ﬁrst identify the exact receivers.
3Time decoupling between two devices occurs when the devices communicate indirectly
with each other, i.e., they communicate through a third party and they are not required to
be online at the same time.
==PAGE:70==
56
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Subscribe protocols, such as MQTT[MQT19], AMQP [AMQ12], and many oth-
ers. The asynchronous Publish-Subscribe IoT protocols provide stable commu-
nication between devices, since the IoT devices cannot be permanently online
due to various resource and energy constraints.
Most of the IoT devices that make up the swarm are considered to be highly
dynamic and mobile, which means that the devices constantly move through-
out the network. However, at any point in time when they need to publish
or consume data, they have to connect to the closest Broker device in their
communication range and check for events related to relevant topics.
The network is created and owned by a Network Operator O, who is a trusted
party that is responsible for initializing the IoT devices before deploying them
into the swarm. Moreover, O is in charge of the network maintenance and is
responsible to reconﬁgure the infected devices and bring them to their original
states.
At random times the Veriﬁer V, who is a trusted third-party, remotely attests
parts of the swarm, i.e., all the devices that are connected to a certain topic
T. The topic is also randomly chosen by V before the process is started. The
attestation process is described in depth in Section 4.8.
O communicates with V to inform the Veriﬁer about the correct states that
the IoT devices should be in. In this context, V has knowledge about all the
software conﬁgurations of the devices in the swarm and is able to identify which
devices are compromised, i.e., not in a correct state. Moreover, V informs O
about the devices that are not healthy, so that they can be restored to a healthy
state. However, these two communication aspects between O and V are out of
scope for the current paper.
The topology of the network described in this section is illustrated in Figure
4.1. The Network Operator and the Veriﬁer are trusted external entities. The
devices that form the network can be of the following types:
• Publisher - The Publishers are exempliﬁed by devices D1 (temperature
sensor), D2 (sensor for detecting when the door is locked or unlocked), D5
(light intensity sensor), D8 and D10 (smart video cameras).
Each Publisher produces data for a certain topic, such as the video feed
topic, the light intensity topic, the temperature topic, etc. The data is
then published to the Broker devices.
• Subscriber - The Subscribers are depicted in Figure 4.1 by devices D3
(smartphone), D9 (smart light bulb) and D11 (drone).
==PAGE:71==
4.2 System Model
57
Figure 4.1: Publish-Subscribe Network Topology with Brokers
==PAGE:72==
58
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Each device can subscribe to one or more topics. The majority of resource-
constrained IoT devices are subscribed to only one topic as they are built
to perform speciﬁc tasks related to a single subject. For example, a smart
light bulb is subscribed only to the light intensity topic to know when to
adjust the light that it emits. However, more powerful devices, such as
smartphones or tablets can subscribe to multiple topics to monitor the
state of the network. These devices are typically used by the Network
Operator, and their number in the swarm is minuscule compared to the
amount of IoT devices that are active in the network.
• Broker - The Brokers are represented by devices D4, D6 and D7 in the
network from Figure 4.1. Their role is to provide storage and availability
for the events that are introduced into the distributed system. For exam-
ple, the events and data produced by the Publishers for topic T should be
available to all Subscribers that want to consume events related to topic
T. Thus, even if the Publisher is not online anymore, the Subscribers are
able to retrieve the event at a later time from the Broker.
The Brokers are connected with other Broker devices, in such a way that
they form a static overlay network, in which there is at least one commu-
nication path between any two Brokers. The Broker devices are connected
to each other either via a wireless interface or via a wired interface.
When a Publisher device publishes an event E to a Broker, E is distributed
to the other Brokers to make it available to all relevant Subscriber devices.
However, this event distribution protocol is not in scope to be detailed
further in the current project.
4.3
Adversary Model
For the proposed RA protocol (SERALDEB) the type of adversary considered
is one that has full control over the messages sent inside the network, i.e., the
Dolev-Yao adversary model [DY83]. In this sense, the adversary is able to eaves-
drop and modify the messages sent between entities in the swarm. Moreover,
the adversary has the ability to create and insert new messages in the network
or delete existing ones. However, the adversary does not know the secret cryp-
tographic keys that are used during the encryption/decryption process of data
sent throughout the network.
Furthermore, the project considers a software-only adversary (ADVSW ), which
can be of the following types:
• Remote Software Adversary (ADVRSW ) - a remote software adversary is
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Adversary Model
59
able to exploit vulnerabilities in the software that is running on a Prover
device. Thus, ADVSW could inject malware into the memory of an IoT de-
vice if the software running on it has vulnerabilities. Additionally, ADVSW
can read and modify code from the unprotected parts of the memory, i.e.,
outside of the Trusted Execution Environment, and ADVSW has the abil-
ity to replay old messages to an entity with the goal of evading detection
during the attestation process.
• Local Software Adversary (ADVLSW ) - adversary that is in close physical
proximity to the IoT devices and performs software-only attacks on them:
eavesdrop on the network communication, modiﬁes, deletes and introduces
new messages into the network.
• Mobile Software Adversary (ADVMSW ) - this type of adversary is able to
delete itself from an infected device and hop to (infect) another IoT device
to avoid detection.
Since the data ﬂows only in one way between the resource-constrained IoT
devices, i.e., from Publishers to Subscribers, if a Publisher is compromised, the
device can produce incorrect data that will be received by Subscribers.
For
example, if a ﬁngerprint sensor is infected, the device can publish data to a
Broker to inform a smart door lock Subscriber that an authorized person was
detected and the door needs to be unlocked. In this case, even though the smart
door lock device is not infected, the IoT sensor is in an incorrect state due to
bad input.
Thus, if SERALDEB detects infected Publishers that are related to a topic T,
as a result of the attestation process, the protocol ﬂags the Subscriber devices
related to T to be reset by O. This way, after all the infected devices are restored
to their healthy software states, the Subscribers will start fresh and receive data
from the newly healthy Publishers.
The SERALDEB protocol does not consider Denial-of-Service attacks due to
the assumption that the adversary’s goal is to remain stealthy in the network
and not be detected by the Veriﬁer.
However, a targeted DoS attack in the current distributed events-based sys-
tem might be infeasible for the attacker, since the Publishers and Subscribers
only communicate with the Brokers, thus they do not allow fake messages sent
directly to them from other devices.
Moreover, for a network-wide DoS attack to be completely successful the at-
tackers would need to bring down all of the powerful edge devices, which is a
tough feature to achieve.
==PAGE:74==
60
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
4.4
Device Requirements
The IoT devices that are part of the swarm, except for the Brokers, are low-end
devices that have diﬀerent hardware and software capabilities. Moreover, they
have limited storage capacity, computational power, energy and network band-
width. Nevertheless, all of these IoT devices satisfy a few minimum software and
hardware properties that are necessary for the secure execution of the Remote
Attestation protocol:
• Read-Only Memory (ROM) - each IoT device has a ROM where it stores
all the procedures and code related to the attestation process.
• Memory Protection Unit (MPU) - the role of the MPU is to ensure that
only the allowed processes that are running on a device can access secret
data.
• Secure Key Storage - memory area where the cryptographic secrets, e.g.,
public and private keys, are stored in a secure manner.
The above mentioned security properties form an execution space that is
referred as the Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) on an IoT device.
• The same Remote Attestation procedures are running on all devices.
• The communication performed between IoT devices is unidirectional and
asynchronous, i.e., from Publishers to the Subscribers that consume a
certain topic and it takes place only through the Broker. Thus, two diﬀer-
ent Publishers or Subscribers cannot communicate directly between them-
selves.
This requirement matches real-life scenarios, where the IoT devices are
only online when they need to perform certain tasks. Most often the IoT
devices are in sleep mode to conserve energy and it rarely happens for two
communicating devices to be online at the same time.
Moreover, the requirement of having two devices of the same type not
being able to communicate with each other is in place, because IoT devices
are specialized systems that can perform only a small number of tasks in
an eﬃcient way targeted towards a single goal.
In this sense, a temperature sensor (Publisher) for example does not need
to do other work apart from getting the temperature and publishing the
data for others to use it. The same goes for a thermostat device that is
only interested in knowing the temperature in a place, in order to heat it
up or cool it down automatically and eﬀectively.
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Security Properties
61
The Brokers are edge devices that have higher storage space, computational
power and more resources than the normal resource-constrained IoT devices.
They are known as edge devices, because they represent the immediate ﬁrst hop
for any IoT device inside the swarm. Additionally, these devices are located at
the edge of the network, i.e., an edge device is the link between the internal and
external parts of the network.
Furthermore, the Broker devices are always online and provide high availability
to the events produced by Publishers in order for the Subscribers to receive the
events at any time they are online. Thus, the edge devices oﬀer communication
stability inside the network, together with high bandwidth and low latency for
the network data transferred between them and the resource constrained IoT
devices. Due to the fact that the IoT devices are mobile inside the network, and
because Brokers need to be able to communicate with all of them, the Brokers
have multiple wireless interfaces to meet this requirement.
Nevertheless, the Broker devices contain a secure memory area where they
can eﬃciently store, and later delete, the attestation results received from the
resource-constrained IoT devices. Similar to the Publisher and Subscribers in
the swarm, Brokers have a TEE made of a ROM, an MPU and Secure Key
Storage.
For the SERALDEB protocol the term resource-constrained IoT devices en-
compasses the low-end IoT devices, whose roles can be either Subscribers or
Publishers. The term does not refer to Brokers, because they are edge devices
with more resources than a normal IoT device.
4.5
Security Properties
The security properties that SERALDEB protocol should satisfy are outlined
below:
• Trustworthiness - SERALDEB should guarantee the software integrity
of the attested IoT devices by securely providing reliable proofs of their
software conﬁgurations.
• Freshness - SERALDEB should be able to protect against replay attacks
in which an adversary replays old attestation messages with the goal of
evading detection.
• Heterogeneity - SERALDEB should be suited for swarms comprised of
==PAGE:76==
62
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
many heterogeneous devices with diﬀerent software and hardware conﬁg-
urations.
• Scalability - SERALDEB should be applicable for large networks, have
low complexity when running on a resource-constrained IoT device and
be eﬃcient during the entire attestation process.
• Authenticity - each device participating in the attestation process should
be able to authenticate the devices with whom they communicate, and
authenticate the contents of the exchanged messages.
4.6
Assumptions
To work as designed, the SERALDEB protocol relies on the following assump-
tions:
• A software-only adversary (ADVSW ) is not able to compromise the hard-
ware protections in the IoT devices, i.e., their Trusted Execution Environ-
ments.
• The resource-constrained IoT devices should become online periodically
and connect to a Broker device to publish, or check for new events. For the
devices to be considered in a healthy state they should not exceed a time
threshold Tonline between two successive connections to a Broker. Tonline
represents the maximum amount of time the devices can be autonomous
and not connect to a Broker.
• The attestation code present on the IoT devices in the swarm is immutable,
atomic4, correct and it does not leak sensitive information, such as leaving
conﬁdential data in the RAM5.
• The Veriﬁer V and the Network Operator O are trusted parties, that
communicate with each other outside of the SERALDEB protocol. The
goal of the communication is for V to learn from O the correct software
conﬁgurations of the devices in the swarm, and for O to know which
devices are infected and need to be restored to a healthy state.
• V has a secure storage area where the correct software conﬁgurations for
each device in the network is stored.
4A piece of code that is atomic is execute on a processor without any interruptions. Even
though the code can be longer and made of multiple instructions, from a high-level overview
the execution of the code is identical to the execution of a single processor instruction.
5RAM stands for Random Access Memory and it is a type of volatile memory used by the
processor to read and write data to it faster than on physical storage areas.
==PAGE:77==
4.7 Notations Summary
63
4.7
Notations Summary
The summary of the notations used to describe the SERALDEB protocol can
be found in Table 4.1.
Notation
Description
ADVRSW
Remote Software Adversary
ADVLSW
Local Software Adversary
ADVMSW
Mobile Software Adversary
O
Network Operator, trusted third party
V
Veriﬁer, trusted third party
T
Topic to which Publishers publish data and from which Subscribers
consume data
B
Broker device
D
Any device that is part of the swarm: Publisher, Subscriber or Broker
P
Prover device, i.e. device that is attested by V: Publisher,
Subscriber or Broker
BAL
Broker Attestation Leader
BCL
Broker Collection Leader
Tonline
Maximum amount of time an IoT device can spend without
connecting to a Broker
Tatt
Duration of the attestation phase
PKD
D’s public key
SKD
D’s private (secret) key
SIGm
Signature of a message m
TABB_topics
B’s table where the devices that are connected to B are stored
based on their relevant topic
HTB
B’s Hash Table
n
Size of the Hash Table
LBindex
B’s Indexes List, with the HTB positions that contain tuples
encrypt(m, PKi)
Encrypt message m with public key PKi
decrypt(c, SKi)
Decrypt cypher text c with the secret key SKi
sign(m, SKi)
Sign message m with the secret key SKi
verify_sign(SIGm, PKi)
Verify Di’s signature SIGm using its public key PKi
hash(m)
Hash function that computes the SHA-256 hash of the message m
Table 4.1: Notations Summary Table
==PAGE:78==
64
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
4.8
SERALDEB description
This section describes in detail the proposed SERALDEB protocol. It starts
with a high-level description of SERALDEB, followed by a detailed explanation
of the four main phases of the protocol.
4.8.1
High-level overview
Similar to other swarm RA protocols in the literature, the SERALDEB protocol
is consisted of four main phases: the initialization phase, the attestation phase,
the collection phase and the veriﬁcation phase.
During the initialization phase the Network Operator (O) initializes all the de-
vices with their correct software conﬁgurations, before the devices are deployed
into the network. Moreover, O sets up the devices with the cryptographic in-
formation they need to function correctly during their operations.
Figure 4.2: High-Level Overview of the Initialization Phase
A high-level overview of the initialization phase is illustrated in Figure 4.2.
During the attestation phase, which is depicted in Figure 4.3, the Veriﬁer (V)
==PAGE:79==
4.8 SERALDEB description
65
selects a random topic T and a random Broker device BAL (Broker Attestation
Leader). As it can be seen in Figure 4.3, the Broker device D4 was randomly
chosen by V to be BAL. Then, V sends an attestation request to BAL to attest
all devices that have a connection to T. The group of attested device includes
all the Publishers and Subscribers that produce and consume events related
to T. Moreover, the group also includes all the Brokers in the network, since
all of them store events related to T and synchronize between themselves for
sharing new events. In the example from Figure 4.3, the attested entities are
the resource-constrained IoT devices D3, D5 and D10, and the edge devices D4,
D6 and D7, because they are related to the light intensity topic.
Figure 4.3: High-Level Overview of the Attestation Phase
The protocol’s main scalability feature comes from attesting only the subset of
==PAGE:80==
66
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
IoT devices that are connected to T. Thus, the protocol creates a logical cluster
in the network made of devices related to T, and is able to scale well even for
large swarms. Only a small number of IoT devices are connected to a topic T
compared to the total number of devices in the swarm, as it can be seen in the
network from Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.4: High-Level Overview of the Collection Phase
After BAL receives the attestation request from V, BAL forwards the request
to the other Brokers in the network, so that in the end all the Broker devices
have the attestation request from V. Next, during this phase each Broker Bi
attests the Provers (Publisher and Subscriber devices) related to T, when they
become online and try to establish a connection to Bi to publish or receive new
data linked to T. Unlike the asynchronous nature of the network, the Broker-
==PAGE:81==
4.8 SERALDEB description
67
Prover attestation process is synchronous, i.e., the Broker issues a challenge and
the Prover replies immediately with the attestation result. All the attestation
replies received from the IoT devices are stored eﬃciently in the secure memory
area on the Brokers.
The attestation phase is over after an amount of time Tatt (attestation time) has
passed, where Tatt was randomly chosen by V at the beginning of the attestation
process and is greater or equal to Tonline ( Tatt ≥Tonline). Thus, after the
attestation phase is over the collection phase begins.
During the collection
step V sends a collection request to a randomly selected broker BCL (Broker
Collection Leader) to retrieve all the attestation reports generated by the devices
in the swarm, and which are stored in the secure memory area of the Brokers.
A high-level overview of how the collection phase is functioning can be seen in
the above Figure 4.4, where V randomly selected D6 to become BCL.
Next, BCL forms an overlay spanning tree network made of all the Broker de-
vices, in which each parent Broker collects and eﬃciently aggregates the attes-
tation results belonging to topic T from its children Brokers. Before a child
Broker Bchild sends the attestation results received from the IoT devices to its
parent, Bchild attests itself and then sends everything to the parent. After this
process is ﬁnished, BCL has all the aggregated attestation results of the IoT
devices and sends them all to V. At the end, in the example from Figure 4.4,
V will have the attestation results from devices D3, D4, D5, D6, D7 and D10,
i.e., from both resource-constrained IoT devices that are related to the topic T
and from all edge devices.
The ﬁnal step of the protocol begins once V has received the aggregated attes-
tation results from BCL. V compares each attestation result hash of a device
with the software hash that V has in its memory. If they match it means that
the device is healthy, otherwise the device is infected. V sends a list of all the
infected devices to O, so that O can rebuilt their software conﬁgurations to a
healthy state.
Moreover, if any Publisher devices are compromised, V informs O that the
Subscriber devices need to be reset, because they might be in an incorrect state.
This happens when an infected Publisher sends false information to Subscribers.
By resetting a device, O forces the device to have a new fresh start, e.g., by
rebooting it. Then, the device will perform actions based on the valid input
from the newly healthy Publishers.
==PAGE:82==
68
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
4.8.2
Initialization phase
In the initialization phase, the Network Operator O initializes each device Di,
i.e., both edge devices and resource-constrained devices, with their correct soft-
ware conﬁgurations. Moreover, O assigns a topic to each Publisher and Sub-
scriber device, in order for Publishers to know to which topic to publish new
events and for Subscribers to know which events and data to consume. Also,
the devices in the swarm each have a unique numerical identiﬁer (ID). Thus, O
installs valid software on the devices before deploying them in the swarm.
Furthermore, O sets up the Trusted Execution Environment on each device
with the proper attestation code and cryptographic information, which prevents
untrusted parties from gaining access to them. The SERALDEB protocol uses
both asymmetric key cryptography, such as Elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC)
[Mil85] or RSA [RSA78], and symmetric key cryptography, i.e., AES [DR99],
for encrypting the communication between devices. Symmetric key encryption
is performed only on the communication between Broker during the attestation
process, when they send the aggregated attestation results.
In this sense, each device Di is set up with a secret key SKi and a public key
PKi, where PKi is used by an IoT device Dj to encrypt data sent to Di, and
SKi is used by Di to decrypt that data. The two keys are stored in the Secure
Key Storage protected memory of the device and work in the following way:
• Encryption of message m sent to Di: encrypt(m, PKi) = c, where c is the
resulted cypher text, i.e., the encrypted form of the message m.
• Decryption of the cypher text c received by Di: decrypt(c, SKi) = m,
where m is the plain text, i.e., the unencrypted form of the message m.
However, SKi can also be used to prove the identity of Di, by signing a mes-
sage m with SKi.
The process of signing m using SKi is the same as the
encryption process, but with the secret key SKi instead of the public key PKi:
sign(m, SKi) = SIGm, where SIGm is the resulted signature
Since SKi is only known by Di, it means that any device which receives SIGm
from Di can verify that the message was sent by Di, by using Di’s public
key PKi to obtain the original message. The process of verifying a signature
is similar to the decryption procedure except that the key used for signature
veriﬁcation is the public key PKi of the sending device Di:
verify_sign(SIGm, PKi) = m, where m is the original message
When setting up each IoT device, O computes a hash of the valid software
==PAGE:83==
4.8 SERALDEB description
69
running on the device by using a hashing algorithm, such as SHA-256. O makes
sure that no software hash is equal to 0, since a 0 hash implies that a device is
infected. The reason why a device D with a software hash equal to 0 is considered
to be infected is detailed in Section 4.8.4, which describes the collection phase.
Next, after O ﬁnished setting up all the IoT devices and deployed them into the
network, O communicates with the Veriﬁer V to share information about all of
the IoT devices in the swarm. In this manner, O sends to V the following data:
• Device IDs for each IoT device in the swarm.
• SHA-256 hashes of the legitimate software running on each device.
• The type of a device, i.e., Broker, Publisher or Subscriber.
• The topic associated to each Publisher or Subscriber device.
Therefore, V will know the correct software conﬁguration for each IoT device
in the swarm and will be able to identify the devices that are compromised.
Moreover, O sends this information for each new IoT device that is introduced
into the swarm, or when O modiﬁes the software on a device due to maintenance
reasons. Thus, O always informs V about changes to devices, e.g., devices that
are no longer in the network, to ensure that V has up-to-date information about
the network.
4.8.3
Attestation phase
The attestation phase takes place periodically, at random times decided by V.
Besides choosing the start time of the attestation process, V also chooses a
random topic T, and duration of the attestation phase Tatt. The topic’s role
is to make the protocol scalable and applicable for large networks, by attesting
only a subset of devices during an ongoing attestation process.
The role of Tatt is to make it hard for an adversary to foresee the exact duration
of the attestation process. By not having this information, the adversary can
infect IoT devices that will be attested next time they connect to a Broker.
This way, V has higher chances of detecting the infected devices in the swarm.
However, Tatt is required to be greater or equal to Tonline ( Tatt ≥Tonline), to
give the possibility to every IoT device related to T to connect to a Broker and
be attested.
==PAGE:84==
70
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Because the majority of resource-constrained IoT devices are connected to only
one topic T, when attesting the devices connected to T, only a small number of
devices will be attested. The attested devices are the ones that publish to T,
are subscribed to T, and all the Brokers.
Since the SERALDEB protocol considers a large dynamic swarm, the network
can contain from several thousands of devices to hundreds of thousands or even
millions of IoT devices. This means that the swarm incorporates devices con-
nected to a large number of topics, where each topic can form a small logical
cluster in the network, which is relatively small compared to the entire size of
the swarm.
For example, if V attests all the devices related to the light intensity topic in a
smart city network, V attests all the static and dynamic light intensity sensors
in the network (Publishers), together with the smart lights situated in light
poles, buildings, shops, etc. (Subscribers). Compared to the entire network
that contains IoT devices related to energy, healthcare, transportation, and
other topics, the devices connected to the light intensity topic represent only a
small fraction.
After V chose a random attestation time, a random topic T and the random du-
ration Tatt, V selects a random Broker device, known as the Broker Attestation
Leader (BAL). The role of BAL is to start the distribution of the attestation
challenge, received from V, to the other Brokers in the swarm.
The Brokers are positioned in diﬀerent parts of the network to cover all the
physical areas where the IoT devices can be located in.
This is needed due
to the dynamic nature of the devices in the swarm. Nevertheless, each Broker
device is connected to at least one other Broker via a wireless or wired interface.
In this sense, each Broker Bi can communicate with another Broker Bj either
directly, or indirectly via other Brokers.
Figure 4.5 depicts an overview of a swarm with six Broker devices. Each colored
circle corresponds to the wireless coverage area of a Broker device. Moreover,
the Brokers are connected in such a way that each Broker can communicate with
any other Broker device. For example, if B1 would want to interact with B6,
even though they are not directly connected they could communicate indirectly
via B2 and B4.
Once V chose BAL, V sends an attestation request ATTreq for topic T to BAL,
which is encrypted with BAL’s public key PKBAL and includes the following:
• Challenge C, which is a nonce used only for the current attestation process.
==PAGE:85==
4.8 SERALDEB description
71
Figure 4.5: High-Level Overview of the connections and covered areas by Bro-
kers in a swarm
C provides freshness for the message and for the entire attestation process,
since the unique number C is used during only one attestation operation.
• Topic T, which indirectly speciﬁes the devices in the swarm that will be
attested.
• The "attest" command, which is represented by a string.
• A signature SIGAT Treq, which signs the hash (HAT Treq) of the above ele-
ments using V’s secret key SKV :
hash(C, T, ”attest”) = HAT Treq
sign(HAT Treq, SKV ) = SIGAT Treq
The signature SIGAT Treq is used to authenticate the message and validate
that it was sent by V, and not by an untrusted party. The veriﬁcation
process verify_sign uses V’s public key PKV and it fails if the signature
did not use V’s secret key SKV , i.e., if V was not the original sender.
==PAGE:86==
72
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Moreover, SIGAT Treq provides non-repudiation, since the protocol as-
sumes that only an entity E knows its own secret key SKE. Thus, only E
is able to sign a message with SKE, which means that E cannot claim at
a later point in time that E’s signature of the message did not originate
from itself.
Furthermore, since the signature SIGAT Treq is performed over the hash
HAT Treq of the challenge C, topic T and the ”attest” command, SIGAT Treq
provides data integrity and ensures that no intentional (malicious) or un-
intentional modiﬁcations were performed on the original message. If an
attacker modiﬁes the encrypted message during its transmission in the
network, BAL is able to determine that it is not the original message be-
cause the hash from the signature SIGAT Treq will not match with the hash
of the received elements.
Thus, V sends the following message to BAL:
encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq ), PKBAL)
BAL receives the message and veriﬁes its authenticity and integrity in the fol-
lowing way:
• BAL tries to decrypt the message and if the decryption process fails, it
means that the message suﬀered modiﬁcations during transmission.
• After BAL decrypts the message, BAL computes the hash Hcheck of C, T and ”attest”.
• BAL uses V’s public key PKV to retrieve HAT Treq from the signature
SIGHAT Treq and verify the message authenticity.
• BAL compares the computed hash Hcheck with the hash HAT Treq extracted
from the signature SIGHAT Treq . If both hash values match each other it
means that the message did not suﬀer any modiﬁcations and that the
elements received are the ones transmitted by V.
The process described above is used throughout the protocol to verify the au-
thenticity and integrity of the exchanged messages. If an error is found during
the veriﬁcation process in a message m, m is dropped by the receiver and the
sender will retransmit m.
If no errors are found BAL starts the ATTreq distribution process, in which
ATTreq is shared with all the Brokers in the swarm. BAL creates a symmet-
ric key Katt_sess that is used during the current attestation session to improve
the runtime of the encryption and decryption of certain messages sent in the
==PAGE:87==
4.8 SERALDEB description
73
network. More exactly, Katt_sess is used to encrypt the Broker-to-Broker com-
munication in the collection phase, due to the fact that public key encryp-
tion/decryption is slow and the Brokers need to quickly send data between
themselves to aggregate attestation results from the IoT devices.
During the distribution process BAL sends the attestation request distribution
message (ATTreq_dist) to its Broker neighbors, where ATTreq_dist is made of
the following elements :
• C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , which were originally sent by V.
• Katt_sess, which will be used by all Brokers to encrypt and decrypt mes-
sages during the collection process of the attestation results.
• N, a nonce that provides freshness to the message and protects against
replay attacks. N is unique for each message sent from BAL to a neighbor
Broker.
• SIGHatt_dist_msg, which is BAL’s signature of the hash of the elements
listed above:
hash(C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , Katt_sess) = Hatt_dist_msg
sign(Hatt_dist_msg, SKBAL) = SIGHatt_dist_msg
SIGHatt_dist_msg oﬀers the same properties as SIGHAT Treq oﬀered to the
message sent by V to BAL, i.e., sender authentication, non-repudiation
and data integrity.
The distribution process is comprised of the following steps:
1. BAL sends ATTreq_dist to all of its Broker neighbors, where ATTreq_dist is
encrypted with each destination Broker’s public key PKB. Every ATTreq_dist
sent from BAL to its Broker neighbors contains a diﬀerent nonce N.
2. When a Broker Bi receives the encrypted ATTreq_dist from BAL, Bi de-
crypts and validates the message.
3. Bi then removes SIGHatt_dist_msg and creates a new signature of the hash
of the elements in the message, which is signed by its own secret key SKBi.
Next, Bi sends the new ATTreq_dist message to all of its neighbors except
BAL, from which Bi initially received the ATTreq_dist. Every ATTreq_dist
sent by Bi to its neighbors contains a unique nonce N and is encrypted
with the neighbors public key.
==PAGE:88==
74
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
4. Every Broker device Bj that receives ATTreq_dist from a neighbor Broker
Bi performs steps 2 and 3, similar to Bi. Hence, Bj decrypts and vali-
dates the message, after which Bj replaces SIGHatt_dist_msg with its own
signature and sends the new ATTreq_dist to its neighbors except Bi, since
Bi previously sent the ATTreq_dist message.
5. The ATTreq_dist message is ﬂooded in the sub-network formed by the
Broker devices, in order for every Broker to have the initial attestation
request sent by V. However, if a Broker Bx receives multiple ATTreq_dist
messages for the same attestation process from its neighbors, Bx performs
steps 2 and 3 only for the ﬁrst ATTreq_dist message received. Bx will
not act upon the subsequent ones, i.e., all the other ATTreq_dist received
starting from the second one are ignored.
6. The distribution process ends once each Broker has the attestation request
sent by V.
The attestation request distribution process is illustrated in Figure 4.6, where
V chose B2 to be BAL, and sends the following message to B2:
encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq ), PKB2)
B2 receives the attestation request from V, creates Katt_sess, adds its signature
SIGHatt_dist_msg and a unique nonce Ni for each message and sends them to its
three neighbors:





encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , Katt_sess, SIGHatt_dist_msg, N1), PKB3),
encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , Katt_sess, SIGHatt_dist_msg, N2), PKB4),
encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , Katt_sess, SIGHatt_dist_msg, N3), PKB1),
(4.1)
Afterwards, the above process repeats itself, i.e., B3 and B4 replace SIGHatt_dist_msg
with their own signatures and send the ATTreq_dist message to their neighbors.
Each new ATTreq_dist message contains a unique nonce N and are encrypted
with the receiver’s public key.
Once each Broker has received the ATTreq, the Brokers know the topic that is
attested and are able to identify the IoT devices that connect to that topic to
publish or consume events and data.
Each Broker device B stores a table TABB_topics in the memory, which contains
all the topics in the network together with every device that is connected to a
topic through B. The table changes constantly as there are dynamic mobile
devices in the network, that connect to B for a short period of time before
==PAGE:89==
4.8 SERALDEB description
75
Figure 4.6: Attestation Request Distribution Process
==PAGE:90==
76
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
disconnecting and moving on with their tasks. TABB_topics is used to identify
which devices need to be attested during an attestation procedure.
An example of a Broker’s table TABB_topics is highlighted in Figure 4.7. The
table contains four diﬀerent topics, i.e., light intensity, temperature, traﬃc con-
gestion and urban pollution monitoring levels. While a device Di (Publisher or
Subscriber) is connected to the Broker B, B records in TABB_topics that Di is
related to topic T. For example, devices D1, D15 and D3 are connected to B in
relation to the light intensity topic.
The list of devices connected to a certain topic stores the IDs of those devices.
Moreover, the list is unstructured, i.e., it is not ordered based on any criteria
since devices frequently connect to B and disconnect from B. After a device Di
is no longer connected to B, Di is removed from the list in which it was stored.
Figure 4.7: Example of a Broker’s table TABB_topics
In this sense, the TABB_topics table of each Broker device in the network is
used during the attestation process to identify the relevant devices that need to
be attested. Whenever a device Di connects to a Broker B, if Di is related to
the attested topic T, then B attests Di by initiating a synchronous challenge-
response protocol, as seen in Figure 4.8, which illustrates the Broker-Prover
attestation process.
B sends the ATTreq received from V, i.e., C, T, ”attest” and SIGHAT Treq .
Moreover, B adds a nonce N to protect against replay attacks, a signature of
the hash of the entire message SIGHmsg to ensure data integrity, authentication
and non-repudiation, and also B encrypts everything with Di’s public key PKDi.
Hence, the message sent to Di is:
encrypt((C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , N, SIGHmsg), PKDi)
==PAGE:91==
4.8 SERALDEB description
77
where
sign(hash(C, T, ”attest”, SIGHAT Treq , N), SKB) = SIGHmsg
Figure 4.8: Broker-Prover attestation process
The message received by Di is decrypted with the secret key SKDi and it is
checked for errors or for any modiﬁcations during transmission. If no errors are
found the attestation code starts running on the Prover device Di and generates
a hash HP (Prover’s hash) of the software that is currently executing on Di.
Next, the Prover device Di replies to B with the Prover’s software hash HP , the
initial attestation challenge C, a nonce constructed by incrementing the received
N by one (N+1) and a signature SIGHreply of the hash of the elements in the
message, where all of them are encrypted using B’s public key PKB:
encrypt((C, HP , N + 1, SIGHreply), PKB)
where
sign(hash(C, HP , N + 1), SKDi) = SIGHreply
After B receives the response from Di, B decrypts the message and checks if it
==PAGE:92==
78
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
suﬀered any errors during network transmission. If the message is intact, the
Broker inserts a tuple consisted of Di’s ID and software hash HP (IDDi, HP ) in
the secure memory area place designed to store attestation results from Provers.
The secure memory area place is a part of the memory which can be accessed
only by the attestation code that is running on a Broker. No other software
application that is running on the edge device is allowed to read or write to that
reserved memory place.
In this part of the memory the Broker B uses a Hash Table HTB to store the
(IDDi, HP ) attestation result tuples. A Hash Table is an associative array data
structure, i.e., a dictionary or map, that stores key-value pairs. Each Broker in
the swarm has a Hash Table HTB as an array of size n, where n is half of the
number of devices related to the topic that has the largest amount of devices
that are subscribed or publish to it.
For example, if the temperature topic
contains 1000 devices related to it, and the temperature topic is the biggest
topic in swarm in terms of the number of IoT devices related to it, then the size
n of HTB should be at least
1
2 ∗1000 = 500
The SERALDEB protocol recommends this size due to the dynamic nature of
the network and because at some points in time some Brokers might have more
IoT devices connect to them than to the rest of the edge devices in the network.
The Hash Table data structure was chosen for storage, because it has a constant
O(1) complexity for inserting and retrieving the elements (values) that corre-
spond to a certain key. Moreover, the Brokers are powerful edge devices with
enough memory to accommodate a Hash Table of size n.
The Hash Table is stored as an array, since the insertion mechanism requires
fast access to each position of the Hash Table. New elements are introduced into
the Hash Table by generating an index j for the array. The index is generated
by computing the hash of the Prover ID IDDi from the (IDDi, HP ) tuple, and
then using the modulo operator ( mod ) to produce a value between 0 and n−1.
Since the Prover ID IDDi is used to create an index in the Hash Table, IDDi
represents the key and the (IDDi, HP ) tuple that is inserted in the table is the
value.
The hash function used to obtain the hash value of the Device ID IDDi is the
same hash function used for attestation, e.g., SHA-256. The modulo operator
returns the remainder of the generated hash value divided by n. The modulo
operator is needed to make sure that no index is greater or equal to n (i ≱n),
==PAGE:93==
4.8 SERALDEB description
79
because the indices in the Hash Table array start from 0 and end at n −1, for
a total size of n. Thus, j is calculated as follows:
hash(IDDi) mod n = j
Once the Hash Table index j is generated the tuple is inserted into the array
at index j. However, there is a rare possibility that at position j there is an
already stored tuple. The phenomenon is known as collision, i.e., when two
Prover IDs generate the same index, and SERALDEB overcomes it by chaining
the tuples stored at a certain position in a linked list manner. Hence, if two
diﬀerent Device IDs IDD1 and IDD2 from the tuples (IDD1, HP1) and (IDD2,
HP2) generate the same index j, the tuples are chained together at position j
and any new tuple that needs to be stored at index j will be added the end of
the chain.
Figure 4.9: Hash Table collision during insertion
An example of a collision is depicted in Figure 4.9. The Hash Table already
contains a tuple (IDD87, HP87) at position j and the new tuple (IDD1, HP1)
needs to be inserted at the same index in the table. As it can be seen, the
new tuple will be chained to the already existing one. If a new tuple has to
be inserted to the same position, the new tuple will be linked to the last one,
i.e., (IDD1, HP1), and so on. However, the number of collisions is unlikely to
happen frequently as the Hash Table on one Broker is big enough to incorporate
half of all the attested devices, taking into consideration that there are multiple
Brokers in the swarm. Additionally, a cryptographic hash function that was
thoroughly tested by cryptographic specialists, such as SHA-256, has a uniform
distribution of hash values and it is resistant to collisions.
An important aspect to mention is that a hash function is a deterministic one-
way function which always returns the same output Y for an input X, i.e.,
==PAGE:94==
80
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
hash(X) = Y , every time X is given as an input. Hence, a collision can occur
because the same IoT device D is attested multiple times by the same Broker,
since the hash of the device ID will generate the same value every time.
In this sense, the new tuple containing the attestation result of D is not inserted
again in the Hash Table. However, the SERALDEB protocol performs a check
of the HP hashes from the two tuples to check if the state of the IoT device has
changed during the two attestations. If the two hashes are the same, then it
means that the device is in the same state as it was after the ﬁrst attestation.
The state can be either healthy or compromised, but the Broker does not know
D’s correct state, only V knows it.
The only time a Broker can determine that a device is compromised is if D’s
hashes from the two tuples do not match. If D’s software hashes change between
attestations, it either means that the device was infected or that the malware
deleted itself from D and the device is now healthy. In any of these two cases,
at one point in time D was compromised and the Broker can determine this
aspect. Thus, the Broker modiﬁes the tuple from the Hash Table by changing
D’s hash to 0. By doing this the Broker notiﬁes the Veriﬁer that the IoT device
D is compromised.
Figure 4.10: Example of the Indexes List LBindex and the Hash Table HTB of
a Broker
Along with the Hash Table HTB that is stored in the secure memory area of
the Broker, B also stores a list LBindex that is made of the HTB indexes where
tuples are stored. Each time a tuple is inserted at index j, the index is appended
to the LBindex list. LBindex is used for eﬃciently extracting all the elements from
==PAGE:95==
4.8 SERALDEB description
81
HTB during the collection phase of SERALDEB.
Figure 4.10 showcases an example of the Indexes List LBindex and the Hash
Table HTB that are stored in the secure memory area of a Broker during the
attestation phase of SERALDEB. LBindex stores all the indexes of the elements
that were inserted in HTB, in the order in which the tuples were added in the
table. For example, the tuple (IDD12, HP12) at index n −1 was the ﬁrst one
added into the table. Since at position j there are two tuples, the LBindex list
contains two elements having the same index. Every time a new tuple is inserted
into HTB the index is appended to LBindex.
The attestation phase needs to last at least Tonline time, before V initiates the
collection phase. This is needed to give enough time to all the IoT devices that
have to be attested to become online and establish a connection with a Broker.
At the end of the attestation phase, each Broker attests itself and stores the
attestation result in the Hash Table HTB, in the same way as the attestation
reports of the other IoT devices are stored in the secure memory area.
4.8.4
Collection phase
The collection phase is initiated by V after Tatt time has passed since the
beginning of the attestation phase, where Tatt ≥Tonline.
Similar to the beginning of the attestation phase, V selects a random Broker,
which becomes the Broker Collection Leader (BCL). BCL’s role is to collect and
aggregate all the attestation results from the other Brokers.
To start this phase, V sends the attestation report collection message ATTcollect
to collect, which includes the following:
• The same challenge C that was sent in the attestation request ATTreq
message to BAL.
• The same topic T mentioned in ATTreq.
• The "collect" command, which is represented by a string.
• A signature SIGHAT Tcollect , which signs the hash HAT Tcollect of the above
elements using V’s secret key SKV :
hash(C, T, ”collect”) = HAT Tcollect
sign(HAT Tcollect, SKV ) = SIGHAT Tcollect
==PAGE:96==
82
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Thus, V sends the following encrypted message to BCL:
encrypt((C, T, ”collect”, SIGHAT Tcollect ), PKBCL)
BCL receives the ATTcollect message, decrypts it and checks it for errors and for
any unwanted modiﬁcations. If no errors are discovered, BCL distributes the
ATTcollect message in the same manner as the ATTreq message was distributed
by BAL in the attestation phase. The only diﬀerence is that now the Broker-to-
Broker communication is encrypted with the symmetric key Katt_sess to have
faster encryption and decryption operations, compared to the same procedures
when using public-private keys.
In this sense, each Broker device sends an ATTcollect message to its Broker
neighbors, encrypted with Katt_sess, comprised of the following elements:
• C, T, ”collect”, and SIGHAT Tcollect , which were sent by V.
• A nonce N that is unique for each message.
• A signature SIGHBcollect of the hash of all the above elements:
hash(C, T, ”collect”, SIGHAT Tcollect , N) = HBcollect
sign(HBcollect, SKB) = SIGHBcollect
The encrypted ATTcollect message sent by a Broker to another Broker neighbor
is:
encrypt((C, T, ”collect”, SIGHAT Tcollect , N, SIGHBcollect ), Katt_sess)
The distribution process of the ATTcollect message is the same as the distribution
process of the ATTreq message from the attestation phase, and it can be seen
in Figure 4.11, highlighted by the red lines:
• Each Broker B sends ATTcollect to every neighbors except the one from
which B initially received ATTcollect. BCL is the only Broker that sends
ATTcollect to all of its neighbors.
• Once a Broker receives ATTcollect, it decrypts the message, checks for er-
rors, adds a new nonce N and its signature of the elements, and distributes
it further.
• If a Broker B receives ATTcollect from multiple neighbor Brokers, B will
keep only the ﬁrst one and ignore all the rest. For example, in Figure 4.11
B4 ignores the message sent by B5, because B4 received it earlier from B2.
At the end of the process, an overlay spanning tree network topology is created,
whose root is BCL. Each Broker Bc is in a parent-child relation with the Broker
==PAGE:97==
4.8 SERALDEB description
83
Bp from whom Bc ﬁrst received ATTcollect.
For example, if Bp is the ﬁrst
Broker to send the ATTcollect message to Bc, then Bp is the parent of Bc. The
overlay spanning tree is exempliﬁed in Figure 4.11, where the newly formed tree
is highlighted with the light green background color.
Figure 4.11: Collection Process
After each Broker in the swarm received ATTcollect, the spanning tree is created
and each Broker is in a parent-child relation with at least one of its direct
neighbors. A node can have one parent and multiple children. The collection
process is performed in a bottom-up approach, where each child Broker sends
its attestation results to the parent Broker, before the parent Broker sends the
attestation results further up in the tree. For the network in Figure 4.11, the
leaf nodes B1, B5 and B6 are the ﬁrst Brokers to send the attestation results to
their parents.
==PAGE:98==
84
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
Every parent Broker has to wait for all of its children to send their attestation
results before continuing the process, e.g., B2 in Figure 4.11 has to wait until
both its children B1 and B4 have sent their attestation results.
The process of sending the attestation results from child Broker Bc to the parent
Broker Bp is the following one:
1. Bc extracts all the tuples from its Hash Table HT one by one using the
Indexes List LBindex to access directly all the positions that have tuples
stored inside.
2. Bc prepares a list ATTlist, in which each elements is made of the (IDDi,
HPi) tuple together with its index j from Bc’s Hash Table HT. Hence,
each element in ATTlist is of the form: (j, (IDDi, HPi)).
3. Bc creates the message ATTcollect−reply, that is sent to Bp encrypted with
Katt_sess and contains the following entities:
• The list of attestation results ATTlist.
• The initial attestation challenge C and the topic T that were sent by
V.
• A nonce N to protect against replay attacks.
• A signature SIGHcollect−reply of the hash of all the above elements:
hash(ATTlist, C, T, N) = Hcollect−reply
sign(Hcollect−reply, SKBc) = SIGHcollect−reply
The encrypted message sent by Bc to Bp is:
encrypt((ATTlist, C, T, N, SIGHBcollect−reply ), Katt_sess)
4. Bc sends the encrypted ATTcollect−reply message to the parent node Bp.
Once Bc has sent the tuples to Bp, Bc purges the Hash Table and the
Indexes List by deleting everything from them to make them available for
the future attestation process.
5. Bp receives the ATTcollect−reply message from Bc, decrypts it with Katt_sess
and checks for errors. If no errors are found, Bp takes the ATTlist from
the message and inspects each element E in the list. Each E contains
an index j and a tuple (IDDi, HPi). The index in E corresponds to the
position at which the tuple was stored in Bc’s Hash Table.
All the Hash Tables of the Brokers are identical in terms of their size and
their construction. Also, the hash of the device ID IDDi is the same on
any Broker, since all use the same hash function SHA-256. Consequently,
the attestation result belonging to the device Di will be mapped at the
same position in the Hash Table irrespective of which Broker attests Dk.
==PAGE:99==
4.8 SERALDEB description
85
Due to this, Bp is able to use the index from Bc’s Hash Table to insert a
tuple into Bp’s own Hash Table.
6. Then, for each element E in ATTlist, Bp inserts the tuple (IDDi, HPi)
from E into its own Hash Table at index j, where j is the index speciﬁed
in E. However, before introducing a tuple into the Hash Table, Bp checks
if it already has a tuple for device Di at position j. If there is no tuple for
device Di, Bp inserts (IDDi, HPi) into the Hash Table at index j.
If there is already a tuple for device Di in Bp’s Hash Table, Bp checks
if the software hashes from the two tuples match. If they do, the new
tuple (IDDi, HPi) is discarded by Bp. If the two hashes do not match,
it means that Di’s state changed between attestations and Bp discards
the new tuple and modiﬁes the hash value of the existing tuple to 0, as a
means of informing V that Di is compromised.
When an tuple is inserted in Bp’s Hash Table at index j, the position j
is inserted into Bp’s Indexes List LBindex, in the same manner as it was
done in the attestation phase.
7. Bp performs the same process as described above to aggregate the attes-
tation results from all of its children. When there is no child node left
to send the attestation reports to Bp, Bp sends all the attestation results
that it has to Bp’s parent, and the process starts again from step 1, where
Bp now takes the role of a child node.
8. The process ends once all the aggregated attestation results are stored in
BCL’s Hash Table. Once BCL, who is the root of the spanning tree, has
received the attestation reports from all its children, BCL creates an array
of tuples ATTresults, and sends a message to V, encrypted with PKV ,
and made of the following components:
• The list of attestation results ATTresults.
• The initial attestation challenge C and the topic T that were sent by
V.
• A nonce N to protect against replay attacks.
• A signature SIGHresults of the hash of all the above elements:
hash(ATTresults, C, T, N) = Hresults
sign(Hresults, SKBCL) = SIGHresults
The encrypted message sent by BCL to V is:
encrypt((ATTresults, C, T, N, SIGHresults), PKV )
==PAGE:100==
86
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
4.8.5
Veriﬁcation phase
In the veriﬁcation phase the Veriﬁer receives the message from BCL with the
aggregated attestation results of the devices. V ﬁrst decrypts the message with
SKV and checks it for errors.
If no errors are found V starts to verify the
attestation reports.
V has in its own database the hashes of the IoT devices, which represent the
hash of the valid software running on a device. For each tuple (IDDi, HPi) in
ATTresults V, reads the hash HDi−V from its own database which belongs to
the device with ID IDDi. If the two hashes are equal, i.e., HPi = HDi−V , it
means that the device Di is healthy. If the hashes are diﬀerent, then he device
Di is infected and its software needs to be rebuilt.
V keeps track of every ID belonging to a compromised device. These IDs are
sent to O, because the Network Operator is responsible for maintenance and
rebuilding the software of compromised devices.
Moreover, if V detects that a Publisher device is compromised, V informs O
about this aspect, and O is expected to reset all the Subscriber devices con-
nected to the same topic T as the infected Publisher. This is needed because
there is a one-way line of communication in the swarm, i.e., from Publishers to
Subscribers. An infected Publisher can produce ﬂawed data and publish to a
Broker from where the Subscribers will receive it. Even though the Subscribers
will not be infected with malware they can be in wrong states.
For example, if a ﬁngerprint sensor Publisher device is infected, the sensor can
publish data to a Broker to inform the smart door lock Subscribers that an
authorized person’s ﬁngerprint was detected and the doors of the house need
to be unlocked. In this case, even though the smart door lock device is not
infected, the IoT sensor is in an incorrect state due to bad input.
By resetting an IoT device O gives the device a fresh new start, e.g., by rebooting
it. Then, the device will perform actions based on the valid input from the newly
healthy Publishers.
V also informs O about the devices that did not participate in the attestation
process. V has information in its database about the topics that are related to
the devices. If the attestation results of some IoT devices are not in ATTresults,
this means that those devices were oﬄine for more than Tonline and something
might have happened to them.
However, O’s actions based on the information received from V and the com-
==PAGE:101==
4.9 Discussion
87
munication between V and O are not in scope for the SERALDEB protocol.
4.9
Discussion
As previously described in this chapter, SERALDEB is a scalable and eﬃcient
Remote Attestation protocol for large swarms. To the best of our knowledge,
SERALDEB is the second RA scheme that is designed to work on networks that
adhere to the Publish-Subscribe paradigm.
In this sense, SERALDEB tries to ﬁll the gap between the extremely small
number of swarm RA protocols, speciﬁcally designed for this type of networks,
and the pervasiveness of Publish-Subscribe networks. The extensive acceptance
of Publish-Subscribe IoT networks is a result of two main factors:
• Standardized IoT Publish-Subscribe protocols (e.g. MQTT[MQT19], AMQP
[AMQ12], etc.) that oﬀer scalability and reliability for the communication
between devices.
• The widespread adoption of these protocols in a great variety of industries,
e.g., manufacturing, smart cities, automotive, telecommunications, etc.
The main scalability feature of SERALDEB is the fact that it attests one cluster
of IoT devices at a time, where the cluster is made of the devices that are related
to a topic T, i.e., the Publishers that produce data for T, the Subscribers that
consume data related to T and the Brokers that make the data available to the
network. Attesting only a subset of devices in the network at one time has the
following beneﬁts:
• A large network contains a multitude of topics, each with their own as-
sociated Publisher and Subscriber devices. This implies that even if the
network grows over time and the clusters expand directly proportional
to the growth of the network, the cluster growth is not as steep as the
network expansion, but it is more shallow.
In this sense, the current version of SERALDEB is expected to scale well
on continuously evolving IoT networks for more time compared to a RA
protocol that attests the entire network during the attestation process.
• A swarm RA protocol that attests the entire network during the attes-
tation process aﬀects the availability of the systems and their operations
in a negative way. Usually, during the network-wide attestation process
==PAGE:102==
88
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
the swarm puts on hold the tasks that the devices are performing, and
carries out the process. This means, that for a period of time the network
is unavailable to the users and that all the normal operations are on hold.
However, by attesting only a subset of devices, the attestation process
does not have a negative impact on the entire network, but only on a
part of it. This way, the majority of network operations continue without
disruptions while the network is still available to its users.
Moreover, in SERALDEB the Brokers attest the IoT devices in the cluster
only when they try to establish a connection with the Brokers. Thus, the
normal operations of the attested devices are not aﬀected, because they
are attested when try to connect to a Broker to publish, or receive, new
data, i.e., after they have completed their tasks.
Furthermore, since the attestation lasts for Tatt time, the availability of
the cluster as a whole is not impacted in a great manner, because the IoT
devices are not attested at the same time.
• The IoT devices in the network have limited resources and energy. Every
time they perform tasks and send data through the network their bat-
tery level decreases. Thus, it is expensive for the Network Operator to
constantly change the batteries of thousands of devices.
In SERALDEB the energy consumption is limited to the devices that are
part of the attested cluster. Hence, by attesting a subset of devices during
the attestation process, the other IoT devices in the network can conserve
their energy and use it for performing their operations.
Besides the scalability feature oﬀered by SERALDEB for attesting large IoT
swarms, the protocol provides the following additional beneﬁts:
• Eﬃcient storage of the attestation results in the Broker’s memory using
Hash Tables, which have a low and constant (O(1)) time complexity for
inserting and extracting elements from the table.
• SERALDEB is able to detect mobile software adversaries because the topic
that is attested is randomly chosen by V, and so is the duration of the
attestation process. Consequently, the mobile adversary cannot predict
which devices are attested, and for how long, which implies that V will
eventually detect the adversary on some of the IoT devices in the network.
• SERALDEB is designed to work in highly dynamic networks, i.e., it allows
device mobility.
This is a necessary feature for a swarm RA protocol,
because the IoT networks constantly evolve and integrate more and more
mobile devices, e.g. autonomous cars, drones, robots, etc.
==PAGE:103==
4.9 Discussion
89
Even though SERALDEB has many important features and advantages com-
pared to other swarm RA protocols, SERALDEB also has two parts that could
be considered as downsides to the protocol:
• The protocol gradually attests the network, i.e., cluster by cluster, and the
entire network is attested only after all the topics were attested. Thus,
it takes more time to attest the whole network compared to other RA
schemes that attest the entire swarm during one attestation process.
However, the remote attestation process should be seen as a procedure
that is performed periodically. If all the devices in the swarm are proven
to be healthy after an attestation process, this does not imply that all the
devices will continue to be healthy in the future too. At some point in
time, an adversary might be able to infect some IoT devices.
In this regard, the fact that SERALDEB gradually and continuously at-
tests clusters of devices should not be considered a downside of the proto-
col.
• Another potential downside of SERALDEB is the requirement of allocat-
ing memory for the Hash Tables on the Brokers.
This might seem as
being an expensive resource on the Brokers and SERALDEB tries to help
by recommending the minimum dimension that a Hash Table should have.
However, the Brokers are edge devices, which are more powerful and have
more resources than traditional IoT devices and SERALDEB considers
that these devices have enough memory to accommodate the Hash Tables.
==PAGE:104==
90
SERALDEB: Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation Protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based Systems
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This sections provides an evaluation of SERALDEB’s scalability in large IoT
networks.
5.1
Scalability
To demonstrate that the protocol is scalable in large networks of IoT devices,
a Publish-Subscribe network that contains 100 topics is used. The IoT devices
in the network are evenly distributed among the topics. Thus, a network with
10.000 devices and 100 topics will have 100 devices associated to a topic, which
can be either Subscribers or Publishers:
10000 total IoT devices in the swarm
100 topics
= 100 devices per topic
Moreover, the number of Broker devices is ignored when showcasing SER-
ALDEB’s scalability feature, as the number of Brokers is very low compared
to the size of the swarm. For example, in a network of 1000 IoT devices there
might be between 5 and 20 Brokers to cover all the network area. This hap-
pens, because Brokers are edge devices with more resources and better wireless
==PAGE:106==
92
Evaluation
coverage then the low-end IoT devices. Consequently, one Broker can handle
hundreds of IoT devices due to its powerful hardware and also because not all
of the IoT devices are connected to the Broker at the same time.
No. of IoT devices in the network
No. of IoT devices related to a topic
10.000
100
50.000
500
100.000
1000
500.000
5000
1.000.000
10.000
Table 5.1: Scalability example: number of IoT devices in the network versus
the number of IoT devices related to a topic
To illustrate SERALDEB’s scalability feature Table 5.1 is used to show the
huge disparity between the number of IoT devices in a network compared to
the number of devices that are linked to a topic and attested by the protocol
during the attestation process. The numbers of IoT devices linked to a topic
from Table 5.1 are calculated for 100 total topics in the swarm, where each topic
encompasses the same number of IoT devices.
Figure 5.1: Scalability example graph 1
For example, a swarm with 100.000 IoT devices that are evenly distributed
among 100 topics, will have 1000 devices associated to a topic. The ﬁve examples
==PAGE:107==
5.1 Scalability
93
Figure 5.2: Scalability example graph 2
from Table 5.1 are depicted in Figure 5.1, Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 are a line graph and a bar chart of the data from
Table 5.1. Two diﬀerent graph versions are used to illustrate the high contrast
between the total number of devices in a network and the total number of IoT
devices in a cluster. Even though both graphs show a sharp rise in the size of the
networks, the sizes of the clusters that are attested one-by-one by SERALDEB
in the ﬁve examples can barely be observed on the graphs.
The fact that there is such a big disparity between the total number of devices
in the network and the total number of IoT devices in a cluster proves that SER-
ALDEB is a highly scalable RA protocol which can be used to attest extremely
large swarms.
Figure 5.2 is a line graph that depicts only the sizes of the clusters for the
ﬁve examples from Table 5.1. Even though there is a steep rise in the number
of devices linked to a topic, the increase is insigniﬁcant compared to the total
number of IoT devices in the network.
==PAGE:108==
94
Evaluation
Figure 5.3: Scalability example graph 3
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Every year the number of IoT devices connected to the Internet increases sub-
stantially and the devices are becoming more and more integrated into our
society. IoT devices can now be found monitoring critical systems in factories,
detecting pollution levels in cities, monitoring people’s health with prospects
of even more integration in our society and economic activity. The pervasive-
ness of IoT devices helps our society to continuously develop and have a better
understanding of our surroundings.
Because the IoT devices have become crucial to our lives, they need to be
protected against attackers that can disrupt the devices’ operations and force
them to perform malicious actions and even endanger human lives. However, the
IoT devices have limited resources, in terms of computational power, memory
and energy. This makes it hard to embed complex security operations in the
devices, since the cryptographic algorithms also require substantial amounts of
the same resources in order to function properly.
To overcome this aspect, the Remote Attestation ﬁeld emerged. In RA the focus
is on detecting the compromised devices in a network, instead of protecting
them. The IoT networks continued to develop across the years, and so did the
Remote Attestation protocols. In the beginning, RA protocols were designed to
attest a single IoT device. However, IoT networks continued to grow and the
single-device RA protocols could not be applied in an eﬃcient way on these new
==PAGE:110==
96
Conclusion
networks. This led to the development of swarm RA protocols, which are able
to attest entire networks of devices.
This paper has analyzed the existing state-of-the-art swarm RA protocols in
Chapter 3 to identify a research gap. Consequently, it was determined that there
are no scalable RA protocols that detect mobile software adversaries in large IoT
swarms. Moreover, there is only one existing RA protocol that was speciﬁcally
designed to work in Publish-Subscribe networks (SARA [DRC+20]). This is
problematic because the Publish-Subscribe communication paradigm is widely
adopted and used by networks of IoT devices in many diﬀerent industries. Thus,
there is a gap between the types IoT networks that exist in diﬀerent industries
and the swarm RA protocols that are designed to attest these networks.
In this sense, the thesis proposed a scalable and eﬃcient remote attestation
protocol for large distributed event-based systems, called SERALDEB, that is
designed to work in Publish-Subscribe networks.
All the four phases of the
protocol are described in detail in Chapter 4, together with the properties of
the adversary and the required security characteristics in Publish-Subscribe net-
works.
Due to the fact that SERALDEB attests a only a subset of devices during the
attestation process, the protocol is scalable for large IoT networks and does not
impact the overall network’s operations and availability to the users. Moreover,
due to the random choices made by the Veriﬁer, SERALDEB is able to detect
mobile software adversaries.
In conclusion, the SERALDEB’s protocol description is open to anyone who
wants to implement it in a large IoT swarm to start detecting the compromised
devices that might be already existing in the network and hiding in plain sight.
6.1
Future Work
Future versions of the protocol should look into the following aspects to further
improve the protocol and its eﬃciency:
• Storage: Even though SERALDEB recommends a minimum size for the
Hash Tables that are located in the Brokers’ memory, more research should
be conducted on how to decrease the size of the data structures that hold
the attestation results.
• Lightweight Cryptography: Once the NIST standardization process of
==PAGE:111==
6.1 Future Work
97
lightweight cryptographic algorithms is ﬁnished [NIS21], some of these al-
gorithms should be embedded into the IoT devices instead of the current
ones that SERALDEB relies on. The goal of lightweight cryptography is
to enable strong cryptographic operations to be performed on resource-
constrained IoT devices.
In this sense, the encryption, decryption and hashing algorithms used in
the protocol can be swapped with their lightweight counterparts.
==PAGE:112==
98
Conclusion
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[ABB+19]
Tigist
Abera,
Raad
Bahmani,
Ferdinand
Brasser,
Ahmad
Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter.
Diat:
Data integrity attestation for resilient collaboration of au-
tonomous systems. In NDSS, 2019.
[ABI+15]
Nadarajah Asokan, Ferdinand Brasser, Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-
Reza Sadeghi, Matthias Schunter, Gene Tsudik, and Christian
Wachsmann.
Seda: Scalable embedded device attestation.
In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 964–975, 2015.
[AC15]
Will Arthur and David Challener. A practical guide to TPM 2.0:
Using the new trusted platform module in the new age of security.
Springer Nature, 2015.
[ACI+16]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Ahmad Ibrahim, Gregory Neven,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter. Sana: secure and
scalable aggregate network attestation. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Se-
curity, pages 731–742, 2016.
[ACL+18]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Md Ma-
soom Rabbani, and Silvio Ranise. Pads: Practical attestation for
highly dynamic swarm topologies. In 2018 International Work-
shop on Secure Internet of Things (SIoT), pages 18–27. IEEE,
2018.
[ACL+20]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Md Ma-
soom Rabbani, and Silvio Ranise. Collective remote attestation
==PAGE:114==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
at the internet of things scale: State-of-the-art and future chal-
lenges. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 22(4):2447–
2461, 2020.
[ACT20]
Mahmoud Ammar, Bruno Crispo, and Gene Tsudik. Simple: A
remote attestation approach for resource-constrained iot devices.
In 2020 ACM/IEEE 11th International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS), pages 247–258. IEEE, 2020.
[AMQ12]
AMQP.
Oasis advanced message queuing protocol (amqp)
version 1.0,
accessed on 10 may 2021.
https://docs.oasis-
open.org/amqp/core/v1.0/os/amqp-core-overview-v1.0-os.html,
October 2012.
[AWC18]
Mahmoud Ammar, Mahdi Washha, and Bruno Crispo.
Wise:
Lightweight intelligent swarm attestation scheme for iot (the ver-
iﬁer’s perspective).
In 2018 14th International Conference on
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communica-
tions (WiMob), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
[AWRC18]
Mahmoud Ammar, Mahdi Washha, Gowri Sankar Ramabhadran,
and Bruno Crispo. slimiot: Scalable lightweight attestation pro-
tocol for the internet of things. In 2018 IEEE Conference on De-
pendable and Secure Computing (DSC), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018.
[CCC+10]
Jiming Chen, Xianghui Cao, Peng Cheng, Yang Xiao, and Youxian
Sun. Distributed collaborative control for industrial automation
with wireless sensor and actuator networks. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, 57(12):4219–4230, 2010.
[CDM19]
Mauro Conti, Edlira Dushku, and Luigi V Mancini. Radis: Re-
mote attestation of distributed iot services. In 2019 Sixth Inter-
national Conference on Software Deﬁned Systems (SDS), pages
25–32. IEEE, 2019.
[CDPG+10]
Mauro Conti, Roberto Di Pietro, Andrea Gabrielli, Luigi V
Mancini, and Alessandro Mei. The smallville eﬀect: social ties
make mobile networks more secure against node capture attack.
In Proceedings of the 8th ACM international workshop on Mobility
management and wireless access, pages 99–106, 2010.
[CDPMM08] Mauro Conti, Roberto Di Pietro, Luigi Vincenzo Mancini, and
Alessandro Mei.
Emergent properties:
detection of the node-
capture attack in mobile wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings
of the ﬁrst ACM conference on Wireless network security, pages
214–219, 2008.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
[CERT17]
Xavier Carpent, Karim ElDefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon,
and Gene Tsudik. Lightweight swarm attestation: a tale of two
lisa-s. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, pages 86–100, 2017.
[CW14]
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. {ROP} is still dangerous:
Breaking modern defenses. In 23rd {USENIX} Security Sympo-
sium ({USENIX} Security 14), pages 385–399, 2014.
[CZFB14]
Andrei Costin, Jonas Zaddach, Aurélien Francillon, and Davide
Balzarotti.
A large-scale analysis of the security of embedded
ﬁrmwares. In 23rd {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX}
Security 14), pages 95–110, 2014.
[DDDGS18]
Michele De Donno, Nicola Dragoni, Alberto Giaretta, and Angelo
Spognardi. Ddos-capable iot malwares: Comparative analysis and
mirai investigation. Security and Communication Networks, 2018,
2018.
[DR99]
Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. Aes proposal: Rijndael. AES,
1999.
[DRC+20]
Edlira Dushku, Md Masoom Rabbani, Mauro Conti, Luigi V
Mancini, and Silvio Ranise. Sara: Secure asynchronous remote
attestation for iot systems. IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, 15:3123–3136, 2020.
[DY83]
Danny Dolev and Andrew Yao.
On the security of public key
protocols. IEEE Transactions on information theory, 29(2):198–
208, 1983.
[ETFP12]
Karim Eldefrawy, Gene Tsudik, Aurélien Francillon, and Daniele
Perito. Smart: Secure and minimal architecture for (establishing
dynamic) root of trust. In Ndss, volume 12, pages 1–15, 2012.
[FCV+15]
Walter Fuertes, Diego Carrera, César Villacís, Theoﬁlos Toulk-
eridis, Fernando Galárraga, Edgar Torres, and Hernán Aules.
Distributed system as internet of things for a new low-cost, air
pollution wireless monitoring on real time. In 2015 IEEE/ACM
19th International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real
Time Applications (DS-RT), pages 58–67. IEEE, 2015.
[Fid87]
Colin J Fidge. Timestamps in message-passing systems that pre-
serve the partial ordering. Australian National University., 1987.
[FNRT12]
Aurelien Francillon, Quan Nguyen, Kasper Bonne Rasmussen, and
Gene Tsudik. Systematic treatment of remote attestation. IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2012:713, 2012.
==PAGE:116==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[IST18]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. Us-aid:
Unattended scalable attestation of iot devices. In 2018 IEEE 37th
Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS), pages 21–30.
IEEE, 2018.
[IST19]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. Healed:
Healing & attestation for low-end embedded devices. In Interna-
tional Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
pages 627–645. Springer, 2019.
[ISTZ16]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Gene Tsudik, and Shaza
Zeitouni. Darpa: Device attestation resilient to physical attacks.
In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Security & Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks, pages 171–182, 2016.
[JGMP14]
Jiong Jin, Jayavardhana Gubbi, Slaven Marusic, and Marimuthu
Palaniswami.
An information framework for creating a smart
city through internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things jour-
nal, 1(2):112–121, 2014.
[K+07]
Staﬀs Keele et al. Guidelines for performing systematic literature
reviews in software engineering. Technical report, Citeseer, 2007.
[KBGK17]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, Sebastian Gabmeyer, and
Stefan Katzenbeisser. Scapi: a scalable attestation protocol to
detect software and physical attacks. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile
Networks, pages 75–86, 2017.
[KBK18]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser.
Salad: Secure and lightweight attestation of highly dynamic and
disruptive networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security, pages 329–342,
2018.
[KBK19]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser. A
practical attestation protocol for autonomous embedded systems.
In 2019 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (Eu-
roS&P), pages 263–278. IEEE, 2019.
[KFY+19]
Boyu Kuang, Anmin Fu, Shui Yu, Guomin Yang, Mang Su, and
Yuqing Zhang. Esdra: An eﬃcient and secure distributed remote
attestation scheme for iot swarms. IEEE Internet of Things Jour-
nal, 6(5):8372–8383, 2019.
[KSA+09]
Chongkyung Kil, Emre C Sezer, Ahmed M Azab, Peng Ning, and
Xiaolan Zhang. Remote attestation to dynamic system properties:
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
Towards providing complete system integrity evidence. In 2009
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems &
Networks, pages 115–124. IEEE, 2009.
[Mil85]
V. Miller. Uses of elliptic curves in cryptography. In Lecture Notes
in Computer Science 218: Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO ’85,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin,, page 417–426, 1985.
[MQT19]
MQTT.
Mqtt
version
5.0,
accessed
on
10
may
2021.
https://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.html,
March 2019.
[NIS21]
NIST.
Lightweight
cryptography.
https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Lightweight-Cryptography,
June
2021.
[PVK15]
Kai Petersen, Sairam Vakkalanka, and Ludwik Kuzniarz. Guide-
lines for conducting systematic mapping studies in software engi-
neering: An update. Information and Software Technology, 64:1–
18, 2015.
[RSA78]
R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman. A method for obtaining
digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Communications
of the ACM,, 1978.
[RVW+19]
Md Masoom Rabbani, Jo Vliegen, Jori Winderickx, Mauro Conti,
and Nele Mentens. Shela: Scalable heterogeneous layered attesta-
tion. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(6):10240–10250, 2019.
[Sko12]
Sergei Skorobogatov.
Physical attacks and tamper resistance.
In Introduction to Hardware Security and Trust, pages 143–173.
Springer, 2012.
[SPVDK04]
Arvind Seshadri,
Adrian Perrig,
Leendert Van Doorn,
and
Pradeep Khosla. Swatt: Software-based attestation for embed-
ded devices. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2004.
Proceedings. 2004, pages 272–282. IEEE, 2004.
[THJ15]
Hailun Tan, Wen Hu, and Sanjay Jha. A remote attestation pro-
tocol with trusted platform modules (tpms) in wireless sensor net-
works. Security and Communication Networks, 8(13):2171–2188,
2015.
[Woh14]
Claes Wohlin. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature
studies and a replication in software engineering. In Proceedings
of the 18th international conference on evaluation and assessment
in software engineering, pages 1–10, 2014.
==PAGE:118==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Yiu15]
Joseph Yiu. Armv8-m architecture technical overview. ARM white
paper, 2015.
