==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Biogas Production and Optimisation
via Electrolysis and Hydrogen tech-
nology
Karan
Nilesh
Dharaiya
(s190026)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mekanik
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the techno-economic feasibility of integrating an existing medium-
scale biogas production plant with Power-to-Gas facility in Denmark, in the time frame
2022 to 2041. This was done through the goal of utilising clean, waste CO2 streams
available as output from amine-scrubbing from upgrading plants, which can be combined
with electrolytic hydrogen, to produce grid-quality SNG for gas distribution. Methods
used include process modelling in Aspen Plus and discounted cash flow analysis for
technical and economic evaluation, respectively. Commercially viable technologies were
considered for CO2 methanation and grid-connected electrolysis. The private economic
evaluation was conducted from a biogas plant owner perspective, to calculate levelised
hydrogen and SNG production costs, along with NPV calculations to assess investment
attractiveness. This was mainly facilitated in the context of base and alternative cases
formed to minimise exposure to volatile electricity prices, by running the facility at differ-
ent capacity factors during occurrence of lowest elspot prices and using on-site hydrogen
storage as a buffer solution. The work was carried out in consultation with projected
development of the energy system in Denmark from Danish Energy Agency and En-
erginet, the Danish TSO, primarily in the form of using hourly resolution forecasts for
day-ahead market in DK1 region and other forecasted fuel prices by the agency, which
has previously not been performed. An extensive sensitivity and threshold analysis re-
vealed the effect of critical parameters such as electricity prices, support levels, tariffs,
eﬀiciency of electrolysis, specific CAPEX of electrolyser system and full load hours, on
the levelised costs and profitability. The integrated PtG facility was found to be techni-
cally feasible but economically unfavourable, to pursue under the current technological,
energy market development and renewable energy support framework. SNG produced
using PtG technology faces strong competition from biomethane, which arguably has a
more strongly proven positive climate impact.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Mechanical Engineering and in
collaboration with Dansk Gasteknisk Center A/S (DGC), at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
(M.Sc.) in Engineering degree in Sustainable Energy, study-line Bioenergy. This thesis
was carried out during the period January 21st - June 21st 2021 in the Spring Semester
and is equivalent to 30 ECTS. The main supervisor is Associate Professor Lasse Røn-
gaard Clausen at DTU Mekanik, and co-supervisor is Torben Kvist, Head of Projects at
DGC.
Kongens Lyngby, June 21, 2021
Karan Nilesh Dharaiya (s190026)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
As I reflect back on the completion of this thesis and my Master’s, I would like to express
my deep gratitude to:
Lasse R. Clausen, Associate Professor at DTU Mekanik, for his continuous support,
availability, flexible approach and guidance throughout the project. Thank you for giving
me the opportunity to work within the interesting field of Power-to-X.
Torben Kvist, Head of Projects at DGC, for his continuous support, many insights into
the gas industry and teaching me the importance of biogas for meeting climate goals in
Denmark. Thank you for the multiple discussions and guidance along the way.
Rasmus Ø. Gadsbøll, Project Manager at HOFOR, for bringing me onboard this
exciting project in the first place and putting things together on stage. Thank you for
being a mentor and a source of inspiration for us up-and-coming engineers. I greatly
enjoyed our conversations on the project and otherwise.
Narendra Likhe, Senior Project Manager at Kentech Group and Dr. Girirajsinh
Jadeja, Assistant Professor at SVNIT, without whose recommendations I would not
have been here. Thank you for your continued support since the beginning of my career.
My parents and my sister, for always being there for me in every way imaginable.
It would not have been possible otherwise.
My friends, Anastasia and Enrico, for their continuous support and understanding.
Siddhant, Vishaal and Denver, for always being there and wishing the best for me.
Special thanks to:
Mak Dukan, PhD candidate at DTU Management, for the eﬀicient and fruitful discus-
sion on economic feasibility assessment. Thank you for the clarifications on the project
mid-way.
Tudor Vrabie, friend and colleague, thank you for all the sparring sessions and for
going through my thesis in the time that was available. Your critical perspective was
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
iv
always appreciated.
William and Roger, friends and colleagues, for timely support with the Excel model
and discussions on P2X.
Felix, fellow colleague, for discussions on economic feasibility methods and future of
emerging technologies in EU. Thank you for sharing your insights.
PF MSc teams, thank you for all the wonderful times, support and camaraderie during
both the Introduction Weeks.
To all the wonderful people who I studied and worked with, for inspiring me along the
way during the past 2 years.
To DTU, for a lifetime of memories.
Thank you.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Biogas Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Biogas Upgrading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Power-to-X
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
National Gas Infrastructure: Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Case study formation
22
3.1
Case Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Methodology
29
4.1
Sizing of Facility: Methane Potential Estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Process Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Economic Feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Results and Discussion
58
5.1
Technical Feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Economic Feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3
Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6
Further analysis and discussion: System Perspective
95
6.1
Comparison with benchmark facility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
6.2
Production costs: technology, co-location and economies of scale . . . . .
96
6.3
Future Danish Energy System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.4
Competition with other alternative sustainable fuels . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
6.5
Concluding discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
7
Conclusion and Recommendations
105
7.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
7.2
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
A
Appendix
108
A.1 Thermodynamic data - Process Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
Bibliography
134
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
ALK
Alkaline Water Electrolysis
BM
Biological Methanation
CAPEX
Capital Expenditures
CF
Capacity Factor
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
CNG
Compressed Natural Gas
DCF
Discounted Cash Flows
DH
District Heating
DKK
Danish Kroner
DSO
Distribution System Operator
EBIT
Earnings before Interest and Taxes
EBITDA
Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortisation
EC
European Commission
Elspot
Day-ahead Electricity Market
ENS
Energistyrelsen
EU
European Union
EUR
Euros
FB
Fixed Bed
FIP
Feed-in Premium
FIT
Feed-in Tariff
FLH
Full Load Hours
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
HHV
Higher Heating Value
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
OPEX
Operational Expenditures
LCA
Life Cycle Analysis
LCOE
Levelised Cost of Energy
LCOG
Levelised Cost of Gas
LCOH
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
viii
LHV
Lower Heating Value
LNG
Liquefied Natural Gas
LP
Low Pressure
MEA
Monoethanolamine
MDKK
Million Danish Kroner
MEUR
Million Euros
NPV
Net Present Value
PEM
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis
PtG
Power-to-Gas
PPA
Power Purchase Agreement
PtH
Power-to-Hydrogen
PtM
Power-to-Methane
PtX
Power-to-X
SOEC
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells
SNG
Synthetic Natural Gas
TRL
Technology Readiness Level
TSO
Transmission System Operator
USD
United States Dollars
VAT
Value-added Tax
VRE
Variable Renewable Energy
WI
Wobbe Index
mH2
Hydrogen mass flow rate [kg/h]
mSNG
SNG mass flow rate [kg/h]
xCH4
Methane mass fraction
xH2
Hydrogen mass fraction
EH2
LHV of hydrogen [kWh/kg]
ECH4
LHV of methane [kWh/kg]
Qs,el
Surplus heat from electrolyser [kWh]
Qs,meth
Surplus heat from methanation [kWh]
Pel
Electrolyser power consumption [kW]
Pel,comp
Compressor power consumption [kW]
ηel
Electrolyser eﬀiciency
ηmeth
Methanation eﬀiciency
ηP2G
Power-to-Gas eﬀiciency
Cann
Annualised CAPEX [DKK]
Ctotal
Total PtG system CAPEX [DKK]
Ccomp
Compressor CAPEX [DKK]
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In mid-2020, the Danish parliament adopted the latest legal framework proposed by its
government on climate policies in the form of the National Climate Act, for meeting
short-term and long-term GHG emission reduction targets, in order to reach the Paris
Agreement’s 1.5 °C objective [11]. The first major goal is to achieve 70% reduction in
GHG emissions by 2030 (relative to 1990 levels) and net zero emissions by 2050 as part
of its long-term strategy. In the strategy relating to five dimensions of the Energy Union,
two dimensions focus on decarbonisation through GHG emission reductions and increas-
ing the uptake of renewable energy to at least 55% in gross final energy consumption by
2030 [14].
In response, the AF20 set of assumptions have been prepared by the Danish Energy
Agency in close cooperation with Energinet, Denmark’s TSO to aid their ongoing en-
ergy market and security of supply analyses for the smooth functioning of the national
electricity and gas transmission systems. They describe a probable development of the
energy system in Denmark upto 2040, in light of fulfillment of GHG reduction targets
and hence, the point of departure is the Danish climate agreement and respective initia-
tives fostered until June 22, 2020 [30].
According to the background notes, the path to reduced emissions is contingent on
high electrification rates of heating, energy supply and transport sectors. This will lead
to increased electricity consumption, which upto a certain degree will have to be met
through offshore wind. In parallel, gas consumption is expected to decrease by 55%,
to 11.8 TWh in 2040.
It is envisioned that green gases will supply at least 60% of
Danish gas consumption in 2030 and completely by 2040, with the share of biomethane
forecasted to increase to a little over 7 TWh by 2023 [31].
In light of these expected developments, and a large expansion of offshore wind capacity
of 5 GW scale through the recent plans of development of energy islands in the North
and Baltic Seas [21], there’s a prognosis of upto 5 TWh of electricity consumption from
Power-to-X (PtX) plants alone by 2030. The long term goal of CO2 neutrality serves as
a benchmark for the projections and it is predicted the electrofuels produced will largely
serve industry and transport sectors.
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Motivation
2
Figure 1.1: Overview of gas consumption in Denmark, 2019 [45].
Out of the gas consumption sectors shown in figure 1.1, natural gas use in households,
district heating and manufacturing industry is expected to be phased out, with gas
boilers being replaced with electric boilers and an increase in heat production via heat
pumps. Passenger transport is expected to be electrified, with an approx. 850000 electric
cars expected to be in service by 2030. The remaining of the focus now shifts to end-use
areas which are hard to electrify: heavy transport, with a low demand of only 0.3 PJ in
2019.
With the green gas production projected to increasingly satisfy domestic gas demand,
a large volume of clean sources of CO2 streams will be available in Denmark. In 2016,
Denmark represented a potential of 0.3 Mt-CO2/year on EU level [74], from biogas pro-
duction and 49 biogas upgrading plants were connected to the grid at the end of February
2021. Out of all the carbon capture methods, capture through chemical solvents is the
most mature and is known to produce CO2 streams of highest purity. This represents a
significant CO2 valorisation potential, since amine scrubbing is the preferred choice at
majority of the biogas upgrading plants in Denmark.
Carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) is considered to play an important, complemen-
tary role in the path towards net zero emissions. Chemical conversion of CO2 through
reduction, for production of fuels such as methane, methanol, diesel and gasoline appears
as a promising pathway, in the form of electrofuels [66]. In an optimistic scenario, 50%
of the long-term gaseous fuel demand of 12 PJ is expected to be covered by PtX plants.
According to WP3 (Gas for transport) of the FutureGas project, LNG is more suited for
heavy duty vehicles in road transport [52], although CNG is primarily used on EU level.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Research Question
3
In a comparison of fuel compatibility for different types of transport and driving ranges
in the same report (listed in Table 5 [52]), it was shown that CNG and LNG both were
techno-economically feasible as drop-in fuel for heavy duty trucks operating in medium
ranges i.e. 60000 to 110000 km.
Therefore, with the potential of SNG as a drop-in fuel in the short term coupled with the
extensive gas grid in Denmark, Power-to-Gas technology could be a promising option
for optimising biogas production through an increase in output by utilising waste CO2
streams and further reducing reliance on fossil natural gas before 2030. This holds more
relevance in light of the EU Hydrogen Strategy (also announced in mid-2020) in which
the strategic objective of the 1st phase is to have a minimum of 6 GW of renewable
hydrogen electrolysers in the EU, with a correspnding production of upto 1 million tons
of H2 [15].
1.2
Research Question
On the basis of the motivational background outlined before, a core research question
to guide the investigation was developed as follows:
How can waste CO2 streams from existing biogas plants valorised through
Power-to-Gas technology?
The research question is answered in the following steps:
• First, a theoretical foundation of carbon capture & utilisation, electrolysis and
methanation concepts is established through a survey of relevant literature and
market standard technologies. Alongside, an understanding of the current state
of climate goals in Danish and EU context and corresponding effect on energy
markets is developed.
• Second, an optimal integration and performance of existing biogas plant with
Power-to-Gas facility is explored through formation of base and alternative cases
which will be assessed and compared for technical feasibility. In the case formation,
different configuration models with are assessed. Choice of electrolyser technology,
type of methanation and options for hydrogen storage are investigated and opera-
tion mode of PtG facility is defined.
• Technical feasibility of the facility to produce grid quality gas is explored through
process modelling. Mass and energy flows are mapped and analysed to explore
potential opportunities of process integration.
• Economic feasibility of the facility is assessed through levelised production costs
and investment analysis under different cases.
==PAGE:14==
1.3 Structure of Report
4
• An integrated sensitivity and threshold analysis is performed to expose critical
parameters and better understand the performance of the proposed integrated fa-
cility in the future Danish energy system. They are further analysed and placed in
context of other techno-economic and macro-level energy system scenario studies.
1.3
Structure of Report
First, a theoretical background of the concepts and systems involved is presented in
Chapter 2. The formation of cases for analysis for proposed Power-to-Gas facility is
explained in Chapter 3. The methods for sizing of the facility, analysing the cases with
respect to technical and economic feasibility along with sensitivity and scenario analyses
are elaborated in Chapter 4. The main results from methods outlined in Chapter 4, are
presented and discussed in Chapter 5. These are further analysed and discussed from a
system perspective in Chapter 6. Finally, the overall conclusions and recommendations
of the study are put forward in Chapter 7. All the supporting information can be referred
to in the Appendix.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Biogas Production
Biogas primarily consists of 50 - 75% methane (CH4), 25 - 45% carbon dioxide (CO2)
along with trace amounts of other impurities such as hydrogen sulphide (H2S), oxygen
(O2), water (H2O), nitrogen (N2) and sulfur (S). The specific composition of biogas
depends on the biomass feedstock used as organic substrate. Typically five types of
feedstocks are used: animal waste, crop straws, industrial waste, municipal waste and
aquatic plants. The process of producing biogas is termed as anaerobic digestion since
it takes place in the absence of oxygen; where the substrate is ’broken down’ or digested
by naturally-occurring, methane-producing micro-organisms. It is a sequential process
where each subsequent phase is influenced by the previous one and the slowest phase
is often the limiting step. The current model of anaerobic digestion is based on 4 key
phases: Hydrolysis, Acidogenesis, Acetogenesis and Methanogenesis [17].
A biogas process plant typically consists of 5 components [17]:
• Biomass handling unit:
Consists of collection of feedstock, handling and pre-
treatment facilities
• Biogas production unit: Consists of an anaerobic reactor, pre-heater, feeders, dis-
chargers
• Biogas cleaning/ conditioning and storage unit: Composed of de-watering, desul-
furisation and biogas upgrading unit
• Biogas utilisaton unit: This depends on the sector aimed to service by the biogas
plant. It can be composed of a sub-unit of either: power generation, supply of
biogas for vehicles or grid injection purposes.
• Digestate processing unit
An example of a typical biogas plant using anaerobic digestion technology is shown in
Figure 2.1.
In Denmark, biogas production has been in place since 1920 on sewage
treatment plants, and farm facilities have been used since 1970. 49 biogas plants were
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Biogas Production
6
connected to the gas network at the end of February 2021. Typically, CSTR plants are
used on farm-sized biogas plants and joint biogas plants [10].
Figure 2.1: Typical plant components on a biogas production facility [40].
In Denmark, livestock manure and residual biomass from agriculture and industrial
sources are mainly used as feedstock. The biomass is delivered and stored first in pre-
storage tanks and are pumped through a sanitation/ hygienisation tank on a continuous
or semi-continuous basis. The digestor is commonly composed of steel and the tempera-
ture within is maintained in the mesophilic reange i.e. around 37 °C or the thermophilic
range around 52 °C. The biomass retention time depends on the type of feedstock used.
Under mesophilic operation, the retention time is on average 20 days, around 16 days is
suﬀicient for the thermophilic route [10].
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Biogas Upgrading
7
2.2
Biogas Upgrading
Biogas upgrading processes are influenced by the respective composition of raw biogas
and is comprised of two steps. The first is concerned with the ”cleaning” of the biogas
which ensures removal of H2S along with other volatile and toxic compounds.
The
second step aims to raise its energy content to make it suitable for injection in the
national gas infrastructure according to local regulations.
The upgraded gas is now
known as ’biomethane’.
The upgrading processes can be classified broadly into 2 categories, according to the na-
ture of the process: physical and chemical. According to the Technology Data Catalogue
published by the Danish Energy Agency (ENS) [40], there are 5 available technologies
with varying degrees of commercialisation: Water Scrubbing, Amine Scrubbing, Pres-
sure swing adsoprtion (PSA), Membrane separation and Organic Physical Scrubbing.
They are discussed briefly below with a focus on Amine Scrubbing, since it is relevant
to our case and is the most widely used technology on Danish biogas plants.
Amine scrubbing
Aqueous amine solutions are used as reagents to chemically bind with CO2 present in raw
biogas for chemical absorption and hence, CO2 capture. Commonly used amines include:
monoethanolamine (MEA), diethanolamine (DEA), methyldiethanolamine (MDEA). An-
other commonly used amine solution is a mixture of MDEA and Piperazine(PZ) (also
known as aMDEA or activated MDEA) [8]. This process has the highest recovery of
CH4, reaching level upto 99%, at the same time producing CO2 streams of high purity
>99% [4], with a low methane slip around 0.2%.
An amine scrubber system typically consists of an absorber, where the cleaned biogas is
injected from the bottom and brought in contact with a counter-current flow of amine
solution flowing from the top.
The CO2 is absorbed into the liquid phase and this
reaction is exothermic in nature, heating the solution.
The product gas containing
methane exits from the top of the absorber while the CO2-rich amine solution is pumped
using a heat exchanger to a stripping column where it enters through the top. The
regeneration of CO2 takes place when the rich amine solution is boiled and contacted
with steam, resulting in a release of the greenhouse gas. The heat for regeneration is
provided through the reboiler which is located at the bottom of the column, facilitating
the release of CO2 and, generation of steam which lowers the partial pressure of the gas,
improving the desorption rate[8].
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Biogas Upgrading
8
Figure 2.2: Depiction of the amine scrubbing process, adapted from Bauer et al. [8].
Water Scrubbing
A physical process which exploits the higher solubility of CO2 in water compared to CH4
(by approx. a factor of 26 times at 25°C) for separation. Pressurised biogas is injected
into the absorption column from the bottom side of the tank while water is injected from
the top in counter-current fashion. The purified CH4 exits from the top of the scrubber
while the CO2 rich water is sent for water decompression. The CH4 can reach a level of
96 - 98% purity after drying [4].
Pressure Swing Adsorption (PSA)
PSA is based on the mechanism of aﬀinity of gas molecules under pressurised conditions,
to be selectively adsorbed onto solid surfaces depending on the molecular size. Hence,
under high pressure, selective gases will be adsorbed and a decrease in pressure will
result in a release of the same gases.
The process consists of 4 stages: adsorption,
blow-down, purge and pressurisation. Compressed biogas (4 - 10 bar) is injected into
an adsoprtion column where CO2 and other impurities are retained while CH4 flows
through and collected at the top of the column through a decrease in pressure [4].
Membrane Separation
Membrane separation works on the principle of the selective permeability of membranes
in relation to the molecular size of the components in the feed stream.
For biogas
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Biogas Upgrading
9
upgrading, CH4 is retained (retentate) while CO2 is allowed to permeate through the
membrane. 3 different types of process design configurations are in use, based on no. of
membrane separation stages and internal/ external recirculation of methane and carbon
dioxide streams to achieve high purity of both the gases [8].
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Power-to-X
10
2.3
Power-to-X
Power-to-X is a commonly used term to refer to a collection of technologies which rely
on electricity as primary energy input to produce energy carriers, with production of
hydrogen as the first process step.
The ”X” in P2X or PtX (other common terms)
can stand for any of the following value-added products: heat, fuel, chemical or power.
The produced H2 can either be the end product or used as an intermediate fuel for
production of higher energetically dense products such as methane, methanol, di-methyl
ether and ammonia, as shown in Figure 2.3. As a result, popular notations include Power-
to-Liquids (PtL), Power-to-Hydrogen (PtH), Power-to-Fuel-to-Power and Power-to-Gas
(PtG/ P2G), the latter of which will be extensively dealt with in this report.
Figure 2.3: An overview of Power-to-X pathways [79].
PtG technology emerged as an energy storage concept: a method of storing electrical
energy as chemical energy in order to mitigate the variable nature of power produced
from renewable sources [78]. A PtG value chain consists of the following key compo-
nents: electricity supply (grid or variable renewable energy source), Electrolyser and a
Methanation unit. Since the ’gas’ refers to ’methane’, then it includes also a Carbon
Capture component. In this report, the terms Power-to-Gas implies production of syn-
thetic natural gas (SNG) as the final product, and will be used interchangeably with
Power-to-Methane (PtM/ P2M).
The conversion primarily takes place through reaction of the electrolytic H2 with cap-
tured CO2 in presence of a catalyst in a methanation unit and, as the name suggests,
to produce Methane (CH4). The product gas after conditioning can be further injected
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Power-to-X
11
into the natural gas grid or be used as fuel for mobility and process heating applications,
thus enabling sector coupling of electricity and gas markets through the aforementioned
linkage. Each key component except carbon capture (which was treated in previous
section) is explained and reviewed in the following sections.
2.3.1
Hydrogen Production: Water Electrolysis
An estimated 98% of the worldwide production of H2 is through the usage of fossil fuels,
of which almost 50% is attributed to steam reforming of methane (SMR). Overall, only
the remaining 2% is produced using water as feedstock, according to the latest analysis
by IEA [81]. To accelerate production of low-carbon hydrogen, water electrolysis offers
important advantages as technology of choice due to single step conversion of electrical
energy into chemical energy, and thus reduced reliance on fossil fuel supply.
Water electrolysis is a mature technology which involves applying a direct electric current
through water for its dissociation, to produce hydrogen and oxygen as by-product. It is
the first important process step in the PtG chain and takes place in an electrolytic cell
which consists of electrodes, diaphragm and an electrolyte. A direct current is applied
between two electrodes which are corrosion-resistant and have good electric conductivity
and inert with respect to the electrolyte they’re immersed in. Negative polarisation of
the electrode takes place at the cathode, where a reduction half-reaction takes place
leading to generation of Hydrogen. The oxidation half-reaction takes place at the anode
where electrons exit to the outside circuit, positively polarising it; leading to production
of oxygen. The reaction is as follows:
H2O(l) −−−→H2(g) + 1
2O2(g)
Electrolysers differ based on their electrolyte, operating conditions and ionic agents (H+,
OH−, O2−) and, modular arrangement i.e. monopolar or bipolar stacking. This depends
on series or parallel connection of electrolysis cells. Most of the manufacturers today em-
ploy a bipolar configuration i.e. the cells are connected in series and ’stacked’ together
to form an electrolyser module, rendering each electrode with both positive and negative
polarities. This setup has the advantage of more eﬀicient use of space and lower current
for the same hydrogen production rate [85].
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Power-to-X
12
2.3.1.1
Alkaline Electrolysis (ALK)
Figure 2.4: Alkaline Electrolyser Cell [85].
In ALK, a concentrated aqueous alkaline solution (KOH or NaOH) of typically of 25 - 30
wt.% is used to improve ionic conductivity. The electrodes are immersed in this solution
and separated by a gas-tight diaphragm to prevent formation of potentially explosive
mixture of H2 and O2 (Figure 2.4).
ALK can be classified on basis of atmospheric
or pressurised operation. The latter is associated with reduced eﬀiciency (LHV) and
purity of H2 but confers the advantage of compressed hydrogen readily available for
grid-injection or storage.
2.3.1.2
Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis
Figure 2.5: PEM Electrolyser Cell [85].
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Power-to-X
13
In PEM electrolysis, water is electrochemically split into hydrogen and oxygen at the
cathode and anode, respectively. The electrolyte is a thin solid polymeric membrane,
below 0,2 mm in thickness (usually Nafion®), with the electrodes in direct contact. While
oxygen is liberated, electrons exit through the anode into the external power circuit and
the protons travel across the membrane, where they are reduced, hence producing H2.
A PEM electrolyser (figure 2.5) consists of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA),
separator plates and current collectors, of which the former is a major component [61].
2.3.1.3
Solid Oxide Electrolysis (SOE)
Figure 2.6: Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell [85].
Solid oxide electrolysis, is also known as high temperature electrolysis since it takes place
in the temperature range of 600 - 900 °C. It uses steam and recycled H2 at the cathode
to produce hydrogen, while the oxide anions generated pass through a solid electrolyte,
towards the anode to close the circuit and resulting in a release of O2 (Figure 2.6). The
reactions take place when the electrodes are in contact with a gas or vapour phase and
hence why the electrodes are also porous. The electrolyte used is commonly a thin film
of gas-tight yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) [40]. Steam electrolysis emerged with the
purpose of improving energy eﬀiciency and it is witnessed through a reduction in the
electrical energy required for the dissociation of water [85].
2.3.2
Methanation
The methanation process is the second important process step in the PtG value chain.
It relies on H2 from water electrolysis and a CO (or) CO2 source stream for conversion
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Power-to-X
14
to CH4. The catalytic methanation of CO and CO2 was discovered more than a century
ago by Sabatier and and has been heavily researched since. Its rise in popularity has
roots in the 1970s oil crisis and emergence of methanation of syngas produced from coal
gasification [58].
On the other hand in biological methanation, direct production of methane takes place
through the activity of micro-organisms under anaerobic conditions and has been known
since 1906 [51]. An overview of methanation concepts which have been used as part of
the PtG chain, are discussed in the following subsections.
2.3.2.1
Catalytic Methanation
There are two mechanisms through which methanation of CO2 takes place, in which CO
is formed as intermediate. This is a highly exothermic, two-step reaction, in which the
CO2 is first reduced to CO and H2O, followed by the methanation (or hydrogenation) of
CO to CH4. It is typically carried out at temperatures between 200 - 500 °C and within 1
- 30 bar to capitalise on maximum CO2 conversion, minimise catalyst degradation and,
formation of toxic by-products. A stoichiometric ratio of 4:1 of H2/CO2 is preferred
for the highest CO2 conversion potential, and influence of temperature and pressure
conditions on methane production is shown in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Influence of temperature and pressure conditions on CH4 and H2 yield in
product gas and CO2 conversion, at a stoichiometric ratio of 4. [51].
The overall reaction is,
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Power-to-X
15
CO2(g) + 4H2(g) ⇐⇒CH4(g) + 2H2O(g)∆Hr = −165.1kJ/mol
Due to thermodynamics of the reaction, it is important to minimise the Gibbs Free En-
ergy to shift the reaction equilibrium towards obtaining the desirable products. Methane
formation is favoured in the temperature ranges between 200 - 600 °C. The conversion
rates of CO2 and H2 are at their highest towards the lower range of temperatures and
high pressures, between 10 - 30 bar [58]. It can be seen that the formation of CH4 is
thermodynamically favourable upto a maximum temperature of 600 °C, beyond which
it starts to shift towards the formation of reactants (Figure 2.8). Further, because of
the adiabatic nature of the reaction process, the heat is absorbed by the product gases
exiting the reactor, thereby instigating the need for significant cooling in order to fur-
ther increase conversion rates and lower temperatures to gas grid requirement levels. A
cascade of reactors with intermediate cooling is typically used to alleviate the aforemen-
tioned issues [78].
Figure 2.8: Influence of Gibbs free energy as a function of temperature on competing
reactions [76].
The established concepts can be broadly segregated on the basis of operation mode and
the type of the reactors being used i.e. adiabatic fixed-bed, cooled fixed-bed, fluidised
bed and three-phase methanation. The divison further falls under classification on the
basis of the phases of reacting matter and catalyst into: two-phase (gas/solid) and three-
phase (gas/solid/liquid) [75]. Typically, the catalytic methanation reaction is operated
in a fixed-bed adiabatic reactor.
It is the most commercialised reactor concept and
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Power-to-X
16
has been traditionally used in coal gasification plants. It exhibits high conversion rates
of reactants and production rates of methane but is plagued with temperature control
issues stemming from hot spot formation around the reaction sites on the catalyst bed.
Table 2.1: Overview of catalytic (chemical) methanation concepts [75].
Reactor system
1
2
3
Mode of operation
Adiabatic
Isothermal
Polytropic
Concept(s)
Fixed-Bed
Fluidized Bed
Cooled Fixed-Bed Reactors
TRL
9
9
9
Reactor stages
2 – 7
1 - 2
1 - 2
State of catalyst
Packed
Fluidized
Packed
Temperature
range (°C)
250 - 700
300 - 400
250 - 500
Thermal stress
on catalyst
High
Low
Moderate
Mechanical stress
on catalyst
Low
High
Low
Typical setup
Cascaded process: reactors in
series for subsequent cooling
of product gas to maximise
CO2 conversion
Single reactor is
usually suﬀicient
Single reactor is usually suﬀicient
Reactor costs
Medium
Low
High
Main concern
Temperature control and
heat management
High mechanical stress on catalyst
and reactor walls leading to shorter life span
Compromised reaction rates due to
reduced operating temperatures
Generally the most expensive
2.3.2.2
Biological Methanation
Similar to chemical methanation, biological methanation (or) hydrogenation relies on
biocatalysts known as archaea. The biological reaction takes place through metabolic
pathways, where the growth of the micro-organisms is supported through anaerobic pro-
cessing of hydrogen and carbon dioxide. It takes place under mild temperatures between
20 - 70 °C and at ambient pressures. As described in the earlier sections, methane is
produced in the last step of biogas production i.e. aceticlastic and hydrogenotrophic
methanogenesis, which also experience a co-evolution of CO2 and H2. Thus, biologi-
cal methanation can be facilitated through either two modes of operation: in-situ and
ex-situ methanation using either reactors with pure or mixed cultures [78] [51]. In the
former, electrolytic H2 is directly fed to the reactor while the cleaned biogas is reacted
with H2 in a separate reactor, in the latter. Different setups are shown in Figure 2.9.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Power-to-X
17
Figure 2.9: Different biological methanation configuration modes: in-situ, ex-situ and
hybrid [4].
In-situ methanation
The electrolytic H2 is injected inside the anaerobic digester tank to convert the endoge-
nous CO2 into CH4, thereby upgrading the raw biogas within the reactor itself. As
stated by Gotz et al., high conversion of CO2 is diﬀicult to achieve due to gas-liquid
mass transfer resistance [51]. I. Angelidaki et al. in [4] further aﬀirms that solubilisation
of H2 to the liquid phase to be made available for micro-organisms is a limiting factor
due to aqueous solubility of most gases being low; as the methanation reaction takes
place in a fermentation broth. Methanogenesis is also strongly affected by pH levels,
and an increase of the value above 8.5 leads to inhibition of the process and decreases
the methane formation rate [4]. This shadows the immediate apparent advantage in-
situ mode holds over other methods: lack of requirement for an additional reactor and
equipment.
Ex-situ methanation
Ex-situ methanation also makes use of an anaerobic reactor, but in a separate one
where H2 and the CO2 are injected respectively and reacted in presence of pure (or)
enriched hydrogenotrophic culture [4]. It confers multiple advantages over the in-situ
concept through: avoided disruption of the original biogas production process, achieving
self-suﬀiciency of biomass supply and offering flexibility with regards to usage of waste
CO2, irrespective of source. Final methane content depends on the biological reaction
eﬀiciency and can be in the range of 79 - 98%.
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Power-to-X
18
Table 2.2: Overview of biological methanation concepts. Adapted from [51] [4].
Reactor
system
4
5
Mode of
operation
Ex-situ
In situ
Concept(s)
Isothermal CSTR,
Trickle-Bed Reactor
Anaerobic
Digestion
TRL
7
7
Reactor stages
1
1
State of catalyst
Biocatalyst: Archae
Methanogenic bacteria
Temperature
range (°C)
60 - 65
40 - 70
Thermal stress
on catalyst
Operational limit
up to 120°C
Temperature range limitations
for microbial activity
Mechanical stress
on catalyst
-
-
Typical setup
The CO2 stream from the upgrading unit
is directed to a bioreactor where it is reacted
with electrolytic H2 in anaerobic conditions
Electrolytic hydrogen is injected into the AD
and CO2 produced as part of methanogenesis
is simultaneously converted to CH4,
thereby improving the biogas content to
equal that of biomethane
Reactor costs
Medium
Medium
Main concern
Low reaction rate, gas-liquid
mass transfer resistance
Low methane productivity, complex
process engineering control required
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Power-to-X
19
2.3.3
Hydrogen Storage
Hydrogen exists as a gas at ambient conditions (25ºC, atmospheric pressure), with 1 kg
of H2 occupying 11 m3. It has the highest amount of chemical energy on mass basis
(LHV = 33.3 kWh/kg) [89], but a low energy density on volume basis (3.03 kWh/m3).
This stark difference in volumetric and gravimetric energy density lend huge influence
on the choice and selection of H2 storage technology. Hydrogen storage systems address
two crucial areas to improve storage capabilities: thermodynamic properties of hydrogen
(phase change) and reversibility of loading/ unloading of the gas.
This leads to an
assessment of technologies in terms of their physical and chemical routes [41].
In order to improve the hydrogen storage density in a system, three modes of action are
available: application of work (compression and confinement), removal of thermal energy
through cooling of gas below critical temperature (liquefaction) and finally, reduction
of repulsive interaction between hydrogen molecules through sorption. Purely physical
methods include storage as a compressed gas at pressures ranging from 200 - 700 bar,
which require usage of materials with suﬀicient tensile strength. This is the preferred
state-of-art technology for storing H2 and is further considered as the preferred storage
option in the case study.
2.3.4
Overview of Power-to-Gas projects
As reported by Thema et al. [82], 153 total PtH and PtM plants have been completed or
planned since 1988 upto 2050, across a varied range of production capacities. Majority
of the projects are found to be in Germany, followed by Denmark and the Netherlands.
Around 57% of the projects focus solely on producing hydrogen, while the remaining
have SNG as the main product. There were 38 projects active which fed SNG to the
grid in 2019, with a mean eﬀiciency of 41%, which is lower than the theoretical range of
49 - 79%. A possible explanation is due to waste heat not being used during operation. A
brief overview of projects is provided in Table 2.3, which focuses on currently operating
and planned facilities for grid-injection of CH4.
==PAGE:30==
2.4 National Gas Infrastructure: Denmark
20
Table 2.3: Overview of Power-to-Gas projects in EU purposed for grid injection of
SNG.
Project name
Location
Electrolyser size
(MW_el)
Electrolyser
type
Methanation
type
Reactor type
Origin of
electricity
Start year
Audi-e-Gas
Werlte,
Germany
6
ALK
Chemical
Isothermal
fixed-bed
2013
Energipark Mainz
Mainz,
Germany
6
PEM
Chemical
-
Onshore wind farm
2015
Biocat 2 Project
Avedore,
Denmark
1
ALK
Biological
Liquid phase
bioreactor
Wind
2013
MeGa-stoRE 2
Heden,
Denmark
0.25
ALK
Chemical
Air-cooled
VRE
2018
Energy Valley
Delfzijl
Netherlands
12
-
-
-
-
2020 (planned)
W2P2G
Netherlands
0.4
-
-
-
-
2013
Store&Go-Project,
Hybridwerk Aarmatt
Solothurn,
Switzerland
0.35
PEM
Biological
-
-
2016
2.4
National Gas Infrastructure: Denmark
The national gas infrastructure in Denmark was established in the 1980s and consists
of transmission, distribution and storage. For the transportation of gas, the network is
is segregated into 3 levels: Transmission, Main Distribution and Service Lines; on the
basis of different levels in gas pressure and geographical coverage, as shown in Figure
2.10.
Figure 2.10: Danish Gas Infrastructure [28].
==PAGE:31==
2.4 National Gas Infrastructure: Denmark
21
Transmission: The overall transmission network spans approx. 925 km of steel pipelines
where the gas is transmitted at a pressure of 80 bar, the highest in the network. There
are 5 entry/ exit ports for natural gas and is connected to 43 metering and regulation
(M/R) stations, which are responsible for reducing the pressure for distribution pipeline
systems [37].
Distribution: The gas distribution network is owned and operated by 3 distribution
companies: Dansk Gas Distribution A/S, NGF Nature Energy Distribution A/S and
HMN Gasnet A/S; spread over the regions of North and South Jutland, Fynen and
North and South of Zealand. It has a geographical coverage of approx. 17000 km of
steel pipelines in total and is connected to more than 400.000 customers. The maximum
pressure in the main distribution grid varies between 16 - 40 bar whereas in the service
lines it can be found at 4 bar [37].
Storage: There are 2 underground storage facilities in Denmark, operated by state-
owned Gas Storage Denmark A/S. The larger of the two facilities is located in central
Zealand at Stenlille and is an aquifer storage facility with a capacity of 513 mio. Nm3
(5.855 GWh). The other facility is a cylindrical salt dome housing 7 salt caverns with
a combined capacity of 435 mio. Nm3 (4.965 GWh); located at Lille Torup in Northern
Jutland [6].
2.4.1
Gas Quality
The term ’gas quality’ usually refers to properties of the product in gas transmission and
distribution systems. According to EN437, gases are segregated into three categories:
Town Gas, Natural Gas and LPG, of which the former two are distributed through
respective networks. Natural gas consists of Methane (CH4) as the main constituent,
and is further divided into 2 groups based on respective Wobbe Index levels.
Pipeline natural gas of quality H is distributed in Denmark. ’H’ refers to the highest
calorific value of natural gas and it’s Wobbe Index is compared to that of pure methane.
The current acceptable range of WI at entry points for injection-ready product gas is:
48.16 to 52.93 MJ/m3 at STP and 50.76 to 55.8 MJ/m3 at NTP [62].
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3
Case study formation
For formation of cases for analysis, a literature survey of biogas upgrading plants and
respective technologies involved in a Power-to-Methane system was carried out. They
were screened on the basis of a min.
cut-off criteria of technology readiness level 8
and suitability based for scale of application determined by the availability and purity
of CO2.
The cases aim to investigate technologies which can function eﬀiciently as
an energy system for production of SNG, which can implemented for grid injection at
commercial scale in the time frame of 2022 - 2041.
3.1
Case Definition
3.1.1
Technology selection
A TRL level of 8 corresponds to a technology being proven to operate in its final form
under expected conditions. The highest TRL achievable is 9, in which successful opera-
tion of actual technology in real-time has been proven, thus indicating highest maturity
[47].
3.1.1.1
Water electrolysis
Alkaline and PEM Electrolysers are currently fully commercialized water electrolysis
technologies. Large-scale manufacturers of electrolyser equipment include: NEL Hydro-
gen, McPhy, Siemens Energy, Hydrogenics, Thyssenkrup, ITM Power and Cummins;
which specialise in compact and large-scale solutions. Haldor Topsøe also manufactures
electrolysers, focusing solely on SOEC.
Stoichiometric requirement of H2 at the methanation reactor can be satisfied to a great
extent by large-scale electrolysis systems. Commercial electrolysers capable of producing
large amount of H2 (min. 1000 Nm3/h) were surveyed and 3 manufacturers’ products
were chosen as reference: NEL, Thyssenkrup and Sunfire GmBh. Important specifica-
tions include: H2 production rates, power consumption rating and respective eﬀiciencies,
as detailed in Table 3.1.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Case Definition
23
Table 3.1: Commercial Alkaline Electrolysers Product Specifications.
Company
NEL
Thyssenkrup
Sunfire GmBh
Model
A3880
-
HyLink Alkaline
Power consumption (kWh/Nm3)
3.8 - 4.4
4.3
4.6 - 4.7
Operation pressure (bar)
1 - 200
-
1 - 30
Operation temperature (ºC)
80
upto 90
upto 90
Rated H2 purity (%)
99.99 - 99.999
>99.95
Upto 99.999
Rated H2 production rate (Nm3/h)
2400 - 3880
4000
1065 - 1090
Water consumption (l/Nm3-H2)
0.9
<1
-
Plant footprint (m2)
770
-
350
Dynamic load range (%)
3.75 - 100
10 - 100
15 - 100
Eﬀiciency (% LHV)
68 - 79
69.7
64.5
Source
[54]
[83]
[49]
It was more diﬀicult to find commercial product information for PEM Electrolysers,
which could be due to the technology still being comparatively less commercially mature
relative to ALK. NEL Hydrogen and Siemens currently offer large-scale PEM electrolysis
systems as shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Commercial PEM Electrolyser product specification.
Company
NEL
Model
M4000
Power consumption (kWh/Nm3)
4.53
Delivery pressure (barg)
30
Operating temperature (deg C)
80
H2 Purity (%)
99.9998
H2 Production rate (Nm3/h)
4000
Water consumption (l/Nm3)
0.9
Plant footprint, m2
540
Dynamic load range (%)
10 - 100
Eﬀiciency (% LHV)
66.09
Source
[54]
By comparison, the Siemens Silyzer 300 model is capable of producing H2 in a range of
1112.5 to 22250 Nm3 (100 to 2000 kg/h-H2) at an eﬀiciency of 75% HHV (measured at
ambient temperature). The LHV-eﬀiciency will be lower and the system configuration
is a collection of 24 modules to build a complete array [60].
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Case Definition
24
3.1.1.2
Methanation
Different process concepts have been developed with the primary objective of maximising
conversion of carbon present in the feed gas and methane yield at each reactor stage;
particularly intermediate gas cooling and recycling requirements.
The no. of reactors in series can range from having 1 - 2 (Lurgi/ Linde) to as much as 7;
for instance in the process developed by Ralph M. Parsons, which avoids gas recycling
and internal cooling of reactors. Methanation concepts which have achieved moderate
to high levels of commercialisation are primarily grounded in CO methanation with an
average of 3 - 4 reactor stages, and the majority being fixed-bed methanation. Market
standard technologies available for CO2 and CO methanation are listed in Table 3.3 and
3.4, adapted from [75].
Table 3.3: Market standard CO2 Methanation technologies.
Technology
Concept
Supplier
Outotec methanation
Staged FB reactor with intermediate cooling
Outotec
Etogas methanation
FB reactor or plate reactor with steam cooling
Etogas
MAN methanation
Isothermal FB reactor with molten salt cooling
MAN
Table 3.4: Market standard technologies for CO methanation.
Technology
Concept
Supplier
Lurgi
2 adiabatic FB reactors with gas recycle
and intermediate cooling
Air Liquide
TREMP
3 - 4 adiabatic FB reactors in series
with gas recycle and intermediate cooling
Haldor Topsøe
Vesta
3 FB reactors with steam addition, no gas recycle
Clariant and Foster Wheeler
HICOM
3 adiabatic FB reactors with gas recycle
and intermediate cooling
Davy Technologies
Linde
1 isothermal FB reactor with internal
coil-wound heat exchanger
Linde
In [51], biological and chemical methanation systems are compared from the perspective
of required reactor volumes (indicated by GHSV), to achieve a min. optimal level of
methane content in product gas i.e. >90%. GHSV is the ratio of feed gas to reactor vol-
ume. A low GHSV indicates that large reactor volumes are required to achieve required
methane yields at smaller flowrates and vice-versa. The min. value in the range of GHSV
achievable by fixed-bed methanation is 20 times the max. value under optimistic con-
ditions for BM. Since catalytic methanation proceeds at much higher temperatures and
pressures (300 - 550 °C compared to 20 - 70 °C, ambient to 5 - 30 bar), FB methanation
offers much faster conversion rates and is adaptable to different plant size levels.
Due to a greater degree of implementation and operational experience of catalytic metha-
nation technologies, the TREMP and Linde technologies are chosen as basis for further
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Case Definition
25
process modelling, which will be explained in the next chapter. They can be further
referred to in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The TREMP process [84] is shown on the left and Linde isothermal reactor
[43] on the right in this figure.
3.1.2
Case Formation
An outcome of the technology selection process has been a synthesis of technical concepts
to facilitate formation of cases for analysis.
Since the fundamental concern is with integrating the Power-to-Gas facility with an al-
ready operating biogas plant, existing conditions have a considerable influence. Majority
of Power-to-X projects have focused on using a variable renewable energy resource such
as either connection to a wind or PV park to power electrolysis [86], underlining the
importance of co-location to power production sites. The report on potential of PtX in
Denmark by the TSO Energinet [27], states two general connection configurations for
such facilities: Onsite and Offsite (Figure 3.2).
• Offsite: Electrolysis is powered entirely by the electricity grid. The PtX facility
is co-located with CO2 source, storage capacity and demand for by-products such
as oxygen and waste heat. Most flexible option due to the power grid being the
most extensively developed infrastructure for electricity in the country. Caveats
include diﬀiculty of verifying ’greenness’ of the final product due to it being subject
to settlement of electricity markets and grid connection tariffs which escalate the
final electricity price.
• Onsite: VRE Facility holds the focal point with a PtX plant as a supplement.
Electrolysis consumes electricity ’behind-the-meter’ i.e. directly from the onsite
wind/ PV production, thereby saving tariffs. Within this, the Upstream model
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Case Definition
26
Figure 3.2: Two broadly applicable PtX connection configurations [27]. Offsite con-
nection configuration used in this paper, excl. shaded grey region.
is presented in which no power is consumed from the public grid. This grants the
operator additional flexibility with regards to revenue maximisation and ensuring
’greenness’ of the e-fuel i.e. hydrogen or chemicals further up the value chain.
As shown in Figure 3.3, the biogas plant in question is not situated near any suﬀiciently
sized wind or PV park. In order to match the CO2 supply profile to ensure complete
utilisation i.e. continuous basis without CO2 storage, grid-connected electrolysis is in-
vestigated from both an operational and economic viewpoint. Therefore, the primary
configuration is the conservative version of the ’Offsite’ model i.e. no renewable power
is directly sourced in times of high electricity prices or surplus production as shown in
Figure 3.2. Without any form of energy storage, variability is inherent in Power-to-X
facilities either in the form of electricity prices, electricity profile or both. For the cases
treated in this thesis, the variability stems from the volatility of electricity prices.
Therefore, the cases are defined based on operation modes of the plant with respect to
3 configurations:
• Case 1A: Continuous operation of PtG facility without hydrogen storage
• Case 1B: Partial operation of PtG facility at 60% of annual hours with lowest
Elspot prices, without hydrogen storage
• Case 2: Partial operation of electrolyser at 60% of annual hours with lowest
Elspot prices, continuous operation of methanation facility using on-site hydrogen
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Case Definition
27
Figure 3.3: Location of biogas facility and proximity to wind farms. Interactive map
from Danish Energy Agency [34].
storage in the form of high pressure steel tanks. Large-scale underground storage
is possible at the two gas storage sites in Denmark but is not considered due to
scale of operation.
The guiding principle for Case 2 is to achieve the same level of SNG output (mass and
energy basis) for injection into the gas grid while operating on a narrower operation
window to exploit lower electricity prices and study its effect on the economic feasibility
of the project. The operation of the methanation section is governed by the CO2 supply
profile and hence, reactor cycles and ramping constraints are not considered to be able
to assume a continuous output of e-biomethane. The choice of electrolyser technology
will be evaluated based on energy eﬀiciency, cost reduction potential and commercial
maturity levels with respect to Year 2020.
Before delving into each subsystem, it is important for the reader to attain a high-level
view of the PtG process through a block flow diagram. First, the block flow diagram of
the biogas plant with its thermal and energy flows is presented (Figure 3.4), followed by
a diagram of the proposed integrated facility, in Figure 3.5. For the biogas plant, this
was the only information available and thus, does not provide a complete picture for a
medium-scale biogas plant.
==PAGE:38==
3.1 Case Definition
28
Figure 3.4: Block Flow Diagram - Biogas plant [5].
Figure 3.5: Conceptual Block Flow Diagram - Biogas plant and Power-to-Gas facility.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
Chapter 4 outlines and explains the methodology used to solve the cases defined in
Chapter 3. First, mass and energy output of the existing biogas plant were mapped and
analysed to estimate available CO2 and calculate SNG production potential. Process
models for relevant cases are implemented in Aspen Plus V11 to achieve the targeted
SNG production and verify its technical feasibility. A techno-economic assessment is
conducted through calculating levelised costs of Hydrogen and SNG; further augmented
with a discounted cash flow analysis to verify the respective case’s investment attractive-
ness.
4.1
Sizing of Facility: Methane Potential
Estimate
The sizing of the PtG facility refers to the estimation of CO2 availability, H2 requirement
and electrolyser capacity, which serves as input for process modelling. The PtG facility
is proposed to be setup in conjunction with an existing biogas production and upgrading
plant located in the Horsens region of Western Denmark. The available amount of CO2
from the upgrading section is estimated on the basis of biomethane output, which also
dictates the H2 requirement for the base case according to stoichiometry of the Sabatier
reaction. The reference for purity of CO2 stream available is assumed to be >99.5%,
since amine scrubbing is used.
According to retrieved plant data, the current biomethane (”upgraded biogas”) produc-
tion is estimated to be 27 MW (LHV). Assuming an annual operational profile of 8400
h/year (350 days), we arrive at 816480 GJ of corresponding annual energetic output.
This gives a CF of around 96%, which also matches the common availability rate of
most upgrading plants (95 - 96%). The corresponding amount of available CO2 and H2
were calculated to estimate the amount of SNG possible to be produced on hourly basis.
The eﬀiciency (LHV) for the resulting process is estimated to be approx. 82%. The
assumptions and calculations are detailed in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Process Modelling
30
Table 4.1: Estimation of methane potential for proposed PtG facility.
Methanation type
Chemical (catalytic)
Raw biogas composition
63% CH4, 35% CO2
2% impurities
Biomethane Output, MW
27
Max. flowrate available of CO2, m3/ h (kg/h)
1500 (2710)
Molar flowrate of CO2, kmol/ h
61
Stoichiometric molar flowrate requirement of H2, kmol/h
244
Required volumetric and mass flow rate of H2, m3/ h (kg/h)
5827 (488)
Molar mass ratio of CH4/ CO2
0,36
Potential e-biomethane output (98% CO2 conversion), kg/h
956
Chemical energy eﬀiciency (LHV), %
81.78
The proposed facility is assessed to be able to produce approx. 8030.4 tonne/year of SNG.
To achieve the estimated amount of production, state-of-art technologies are screened
for each major component section i.e. Electrolysis and Methanation in Chapter 3, will
be used as basis for process modelling.
4.2
Process Modelling
The process configurations defined in following subsections are modelled in the commer-
cial process modelling and simulation software, Aspen Plus V11. It is a popular tool
used in the process industry for simulation, testing and optimisation of various chemical
processes.
The aim of this activity is to design and simulate a technically feasible PtG facility
through integration of electrolysis and methanation subsystems. Individual components
are modelled within each subsystem and connected to each other to facilitate sequential
operation of the complete flowsheet once each subsystem has been verified for operation,
according to the so-called ’onion’ model of process design.
The thermodynamic property methods used are:
• ELECNRTL: It is better suited for water dissociation in electrolysis subsystem,
as it is the most adaptable electrolyte property method.
• PENG-ROB: Uses Peng-Robinson equations of state and is recommended for
gas-processing applications; hence, it is used for the methanation subsystem.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Process Modelling
31
4.2.1
Electrolysis
To simulate water electrolysis in Aspen Plus, the core component ’stack’ was modelled
using the RStoic block for the dissociation of water into H2 and O2, with separate
formations modelled using a Sep1 block. Aspen also does not allow for a direct input of
electricity and hence, the power consumption is calculated manually based on an average
eﬀiciency rating of the chosen electrolyser system i.e. from NEL Hydrogen.
’RStoic’ is useful when the stoichiometry of the reaction and fractional conversion of the
component(s) is known. In this case, complete dissociation of water is assumed and the
separation of H2 and O2 is specified on the basis of split fractions for 2 outlet streams.
The stoichiometric reaction of the water electrolysis process input in RStoic is,
2H2O(l) −−−→2H2(g) + O2(g)
Figure 4.1: Process flow diagram of Electrolysis subsystem in Aspen Plus.
The process flow diagram of the electrolyser subsystem, with the H2 output to the
methanation subsystem is depicted in Figure 4.1. Assumptions for the electrolysis model:
• Operating conditions: 75ºC, 30 bar
• Calculated water consumption = 4400 kg/h
• H2 purity: 99.95%
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Process Modelling
32
• Power consumption, ALK (kWh/Nm3-H2): 4.3
• Power consumption, PEM (kWh/Nm3-H2): 4.53
From a modelling perspective, the above assumptions and corresponding process setup
were considered relevant and hence, the same model is used for to reflect both the ALK
and PEM systems. This does not implicate a similar operation in real conditions, but
is done so in the case study to achieve the desired output of H2 to facilitate methana-
tion. Electrolyser power consumption (MWel) and eﬀiciency (%) are calculated as key
performance indicators.
The modelled system is included as a separate hierarchy block on the main flowsheet and
will be common for both the Power-to-Gas configurations. It is not a part of the main
fuel synthesis process and thus, a distinction is made through the respective calculated
power consumption/ eﬀiciency.
4.2.2
Methanation
Methanation is the heart of the Power-to-Gas process. In this section, the modelling
and process configuration of key components is described.
The subystem is mainly
composed of ’methanators’ i.e. reactors where the feed gas mixture containing hydrogen
and carbon dioxide is injected and converted to methane. Auxiliary components include
compressor for the CO2 stream, heat exchangers responsible for heating and cooling of
process streams and mixer equipment. TREMPTM and Linde process configurations are
used as references for modelling the reactor sequences, for System 1 and 2 respectively.
Methanation reactor
For modelling the reactor, ’REquil’ in Aspen Plus is used, since the reaction stoichiom-
etry of the CO2 methanation reactions is known and it calculates equilibrium at the
product stream. The product formation is calculated using equilibrium constants from
Gibbs Free Energy.
The CO2 methanation reaction is assumed to be a linear combination of a 2-step reaction
i.e. the water gas shift and CO methanation [76]. For modelling purposes, the CO2
stream to be used for methanation reaction is assumed to have 99.9% purity. First, CO2
and H2 are converted into carbon monoxide and water,
CO2 + H2 −−⇀
↽−−CO + H2O Δr H0 = 41 kJ/mol
{1}
In the following reaction, hydrogenation of CO produces methane and another mole of
water. The overall reaction is highly exothermic.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Process Modelling
33
CO + 3 H2 −−⇀
↽−−CH4 + H2O Δr H0 = −206 kJ/mol
{2}
Isothermal reactor: Isothermal operation is simulated by specifying both temperature
and pressure conditions. A heat stream is connected as outlet to indicate the release
of heat from the reaction, as shown in Figure 4.2. In the Linde process, the isothermal
reactor is the first and the main reactor where maximum conversion of CO2 to CH4 takes
place. A smaller adiabatic reactor is used downstream to convert the remaining H2 and
CO2 present in the product gas to improve the methane yield and bring it closer to gas
grid injection quality.
Figure 4.2: Isothermal reactor in Aspen.
Adiabatic reactor: To simulate adiabatic operation, only pressure specification is
necessary. The duty is set to ’0’ Watt since the heat generated from the reaction will be
transferred to the product gas at equilibrium, at the outlet of the reactor (Figure 4.3). It
is a secondary reactor in the Linde process, however, it is the only type used in a series of
reactors in System 1 which operates purely in adiabatic mode; with intermediate cooling
and a high initial gas recycle.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Process Modelling
34
Figure 4.3: Adiabatic reactor in Aspen.
A key consideration is the heating of the feed gas mixtures to a minimum temperature
level of 220 °C before injecting it into the reactors to align with catalyst requirements.
The catalyst is assumed to be nickel, Base case operating conditions of System 1 and 2
are:
• System 1: 350ºC, 15 bar at the 1st isothermal reactor and 15 bar at the 2nd
adiabatic reactor.
• System 2: 15 bar at the adiabatic reactors. Temperature is maintained between
220ºC to 700ºC at all reactors.
4.2.3
Process integration
It is expected that a significant amount of surplus heat and water will be available from
the methanation section, which could be used to satisfy heating demands in the biogas
plant and water feedstock requirements at the electrolysis subsystem, respectively.
Heat integration
The surplus heat could be used for regeneration of the rich amine solvent in the stripper,
as is also mentioned by Bailera et al. in [7], where steam is used as a heat source. The
temperature is limited to 120 °C to avoid degradation, but this level is slightly higher in
the system available in this thesis, where it is supplied at 141 °C (figure 4.4). However,
this does conform to the specific energy requirements of the reboilers used in conventional
amine-based carbon capture units, as mentioned in Technology Data Catalogue by ENS
for ”Industrial Process Heat and Carbon Capture” [38]; they are further detailed in
Table 4.2.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Process Modelling
35
Table 4.2: Estimated energy demands for amine-based CO2 capture. Solvent assumed
to be 30% MEA.
Parameter
Range
Unit
Note
Source
Reboiler
demand
0.7 - 1.0
MWh/tCO2
output
LP Steam at 3 - 5 bara
and 130 - 150 ºC
[38]
Figure 4.4: Block flow diagram of biogas upgrading section. Source: [5].
As shown in Figure 4.4, the reboiler duty for the stripper column, is 2.5 MW. It is
assumed that the amine solvent being used is MEA 30% wt. solution, since it is a highly
mature amine absoprtion technology [87].
4.2.4
Eﬀiciency
It is important to evaluate the energetic eﬀiciency of different subsystems involved, as
well as for the overall PtG facility.
Electrolysis eﬀiciency
The electrolyser eﬀiciency on a system level can be calculated as shown in equations 4.1
(with no heat integration) and 4.2 (with heat integration).
ηel = mH2 ∗EH2
Pel
(4.1)
ηel,h = (mH2 ∗EH2) + Qs,el
Pel
(4.2)
In the above equations, mH2 stands for mass flowrate of hydrogen output from the
electrolyser, EH2 is for the chemical energy content (gravimetric) on LHV basis of H2
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
36
and Pel is for the electrical energy input. It is assumed that the surplus heat from the
electrolyser is available as 13% of the power input at 75 °C, which is further used for
sales to the district heating network; thus, Qs,el stands for surplus heat.
Methanation eﬀiciency
The energetic eﬀiciency of the methanation system is different from its conversion eﬀi-
ciency. The former is calculated as a ratio of chemical energy content of the product gas
(SNG) to the chemical energy content of the hydrogen stream injected at the first reactor
stage, as shown in Equation 4.3. In the case waste heat is used internally/ externally,
the amount of surplus heat used is added to the numerator as shown in equation 4.4
ηmeth = (xH2 ∗mSNG ∗EH2) + (xCH4 ∗mSNG ∗ECH4)
mH2 ∗EH2
(4.3)
ηmeth,h = (xH2 ∗mSNG ∗EH2) + (xCH4 ∗mSNG ∗ECH4) + Qs,meth
mH2 ∗EH2
(4.4)
In the above equations, xH2 and xCH4 are the mass fractions in the final product gas of
flow rate, mSNG. EH2 and ECH4 are the chemical energy content of both hydrogen and
methane present in the final product, respectively. Qs,meth is the surplus heat being used
in the methanation section.
PtG eﬀiciency
The overall eﬀiciency of the PtG facility takes into account the system boundaries at
the energy input into the system at the electrolyser (electrical energy) and the energy
output in the form of chemical energy of the product gas ready for grid-injection, as
shown in equation 4.5.
ηP2G = (xH2 ∗mSNG ∗EH2) + (xCH4 ∗mSNG ∗ECH4) + Qs,el + Qs,meth
Pel + Pcomp
(4.5)
The above equation also takes into consideration, the utilisation of surplus heat from
either of the subsystems involved. In case there is no heat utilised, the surplus heat
terms Qs,el and/ or Qs,meth can be set to zero.
4.3
Economic Feasibility
After establishing the technical feasibility of the integrated biogas plant and Power-to-
Gas facility, it is important to assess the economic feasibility of the proposed concept.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
37
This is carried out through a techno-economic assessment in the form of plant-level
levelised cost calculations and investment analysis.
A project can be considered economically feasible if it manages to generate enough in-
come to recover the incurred expenses during its planned time horizon (lifetime). In
other words, the monetary benefits generated due to a project must outweigh its costs.
Therefore, the case outlined will be treated as a potential investment opportunity from
the perspective of the firm responsible for operating the existing biogas plant i.e. a pri-
vate economic perspective. Key indicators and parameters widely deployed for economic
evaluation are used and briefly described later:
• Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
• Net Present Value (NPV)
• Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
The successful use of above instruments depends on a set of underlying parameters which
include:
• Economies of Scale (EoS)
• Discount rate (or) Cost of Capital
• Capital Expenditures (CAPEX)
• Operational Expenditures (OPEX)
4.3.1
Component Cost Estimation
PtG is a dynamic system consisting of each technology at a different level of maturity and
learning rate, interacting; hence it is necessary to take the phenomenon of Economies of
Scale (EoS) into account to estimate the costs of respective components.
Often referred to as the ”six-tenth factor rule” or ”scale factor” method, equipment costs
at a chosen size/ scale can be estimated using a logarithmic relationship [71]. It describes
the cost reduction which takes place due to an increase in size of the equipment, given
by equation 4.6:
Cb = Ca ∗
(Sb
Sa
)f
(4.6)
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
38
where Cb refers to the questioned component costs at a respective scale Sb, while Ca and
Sa refer to the cost and scale of the base/ reference component and f is the scale factor
of questioned technology, influenced by its respective learning rates.
A modular approach is described in the final deliverables [1] and [2] of the Store&Go
Project, to investigate the effect of EoS on individual components within each technol-
ogy to arrive at a more accurate estimation of costs. Since both the electrolysis and
methanation systems are made up of several components, individual scaling factors for
each component is used to arrive at costs for scaled-up electrolyser and methanation
facilities. The reference equipment’s specific investment costs and the contribution of
each component to the overall investment cost are given in Tables 4.3 and 4.4 below.
Table 4.3: Contribution of individual components to overall cost. Reference size of
Alkaline Electrolyser = 5 MWel at specific investment cost of 1060000
EUR2017/MWel for Cases 1A and 1B.
System Component (ALK)
Share of investment cost
(%)
Overall reference investment
cost breakdown, Ca
(EUR2020)
Scaling factor, f
Total
100%
5512000
Stack
50%
2756000
0.88
Structural rings
15%
413400
0.5
Sealings
4%
110240
0.5
Membrane
7%
192920
1
Anode
26%
716560
1
Cathode
26%
716560
1
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
7%
192920
0.95
Pressure plates/ flanges
4%
110240
0.95
Tie Rods
3%
82680
0.5
Pre-electrode/ current distributor
8%
220480
1
Power electronics
15%
826800
0.75
Gas Conditioning
15%
826800
0.6
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
1102400
0.68
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
39
Table 4.4: Contribution of individual components to overall cost.
Reference size
of PEM Electrolyser = 5 MWel at specific investment cost of 970000
EUR2017/MWel for Cases 1A and 1B.
Electrolysis system component (PEM)
Share of investment cost
Overall reference investment
cost breakdown (EUR2020)
Scaling factor
Total
100
4850000
Stack
55%
2667500
0,89
Membrane
5%
133375
1
Catalyst Anode
7%
186725
1
Catalyst Cathode
2%
53350
1
Current Collector Anode (PtL)
7%
186725
0,95
Current Collector Cathode (PtL)
8%
213400
0,95
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
48%
1280400
0,95
End Plates
1%
26675
0,95
Pressure Plates
4%
106700
0,95
Small parts/ sealings
4%
106700
0,5
Stack assembling
2%
53350
0,5
MEA Manufacturing
12%
320100
0,5
Power Electronics
15%
727500
0,75
Gas Conditioning
10%
485000
0,6
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
970000
0,73
For similar levels of nominal capacities, the PEM electrolyser system costs 12% less
overall. This is due to improvement in projected learning rates for the technology and
is expected to become cost-competitive with ALK within the next 5 years.
Table 4.5: Cost breakdown for chemical (catalytic) methanation system at nom-
inal capacity of 5 MWSNG and specific investment cost of 579000
EUR2017/MWSNG.
Chemical methanation
system component
Share of investment cost
Overall reference investment
cost breakdown (EUR2020)
Scale Factor
Total
100%
3010800
Reactor
21%
632268
0,68
Reactor
57%
360392,76
0,56
Catalyst
26%
164389,68
1
Heat Management
17%
107485,56
0,59
Electric installation
20%
602160
0,75
Gas Conditioning
12%
361296
0,6
Balance of Plant (BoP)
47%
1415076
0,67
The reactor component shares the least investment cost in the overall methanation
system but it is the BoP which accounts for almost half the investment cost.
The
BoP is assumed to include: thermal and fluid management, heat exchangers, valves,
compressors and other peripheral equipment.
To obtain the scaled investment costs for the system across cases 1A and 1B, the above
reference costs, nominal scale and respective scaling factors are input into equation 4.6
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
40
from Tables 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5. Since the size of the electrolyser is different in Case 2,
calculations have been performed using the same reference investment costs and scaling
factors and detailed in Table A.6 for ALK and Table A.8 for PEM system. Thus, costs for
each respective component according to the given share at appropriate scale are obtained.
These are subsequently summed to obtain the overall total and specific investment costs.
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
The evaluation of the aforementioned costs and benefits is carried out through a dis-
counted cash flow analysis, which is a standard framework. According to Kitzing et al.
(2020), there are typically 3 types of cash flows occurring in a project: Investments, Op-
erations and Financing. The former two are considered relevant for this project. These
will be treated as Free Cash Flows, since the cash flows pertaining to financing and
bankability analysis of the project are excluded.
1. Cash flow from investments: These are the initial and intermittent capital
expenditures incurred with respect to acquisition of proposed plant equipment
and for intangible assets (engineering and project services) i.e. at the valuation
date and during the time horizon.
2. Cash flow from operations: These are flows into and out of our project stem-
ming from:
• Revenue from grid injection of SNG
• OPEX: Fixed and Variable (Fuel & maintenance costs)
• Corporate and energy taxes
Therefore, Free Cash Flow Analysis is executed in the following sequence:
1. Calculation of Earnings before Interests, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortisation
(EBITDA)
• This is determined by the difference of Revenues and OPEX
2. Calculation of Earnings before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) i.e. Taxable Income
• This is determined by taking into account the depreciation of an asset over the
project’s lifetime. In Denmark, it is common to assume linear, straight-line
depreciation of assets.
EBIT = EBITDA - Depreciated Asset Value
3. Determination of payable taxes i.e. EBIT x Tax Rate
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
41
4. Adjustment for capital expenditures (CAPEX)
5. Free Cash Flows
A brief description of the key economic parameters and indicators entails.
Discount rate
In private economic evaluation, the discount rate represents the opportunity cost of
capital for a particular project. It is used for discounting future cash flows into present
cash flows in the process of deriving the net present value. Therefore, it is an important
metric and for PE evaluation, it reflects inflation and industry-specific risks. For instance,
projects employing mature technologies often have discount rates in the range of 3 to
5% whereas technologies approaching commercial maturity can have discount rates in
the range of 7 to 10%.
A discount rate of 8.5% was deemed suitable for use for discounting of free cash flows in
this assessment, upon consultation with similar studies [79] [72].
Levelised Cost of Energy (LCOE)
The LCOE is a key metric which represents the average cost of a single unit of the final
product over its lifetime. It is often used to evaluate electricity produced from different
energy technologies but is quite versatile in its use and hence, can be adapted to other
forms as well. The original unit of LCOE measures the unit cost of production per MWh
but it has been adapted in various studies to unit cost per kg (mass basis), especially in
the case of Hydrogen due to its energetic density. It takes into account the time value of
money and therefore, the levelised cost depends on annual energy production, discount
rate, planned lifetime and total project costs (CAPEX and OPEX).
Since our proposed plant is a chemical process plant, the appropriate method of estima-
tion would be both on mass and chemical energy basis, pertaining to the final products
produced at the battery limits of the subsystems. Therefore, there will be 2 key sub-
indicators used for comparison and analysis:
1. Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH):
LCOH1 =
T
∑
t=0
TCt
(1+d)T
qH,t
(1+d)T
(4.7)
LCOH2 =
T
∑
t=0
TCt
(1+d)T
mH,t
(1+d)T
(4.8)
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
42
2. Levelised Cost of Gas (LCOG):
LCOG1 =
T
∑
t=0
TCt
(1+d)T
qSNG,t
(1+d)T
(4.9)
LCOG2 =
T
∑
t=0
TCt
(1+d)T
mSNG,t
(1+d)T
(4.10)
In equations 4.7 - 4.10, TCt are the total costs for period t, q is for the chemical energy
content of the product (MWh) and m is the mass flow rate of the product. The units
for levelised cost on mass basis will be in DKK/kg and on energy basis will be in
DKK/MWh.
Net Present Value (NPV)
It is a central investment metric in economic feasibility assessment. By discounting all
future cash inflows and outflows into their respective present value, the movement of
money in a project can be summed to reflect its net worth (or) value, today. It is given
by the equation 4.11:
NPV = −CFo +
T
∑
t=0
CFt
(1 + r)T
(4.11)
A positive NPV (NPV > 0) indicates the project is worth undertaking, while a nega-
tive NPV (NPV < 0) implies it is unfavourable and investment should be avoided. A
project is said to ”break-even” in its lifetime at the moment when it generates suﬀicient
revenue to cover the costs, rendering its NPV to be 0 or slightly above it. Unfavourable
projects either need longer lifetimes or may not manage to break-even if they’re highly
unfavourable.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
The IRR is the effective rate at which a project is expected to yield ’returns’ i.e. at the
discount rate at which the NPV would yield zero. It is given by the equation 4.12:
0 = −CFo +
T
∑
t=0
(CFt) · (1 + IRR)−T
(4.12)
If the IRR of a project is greater than its discount rate, that means the investment is
favourable. If the IRR < Discount rate, the project should not be pursued. A com-
bination of a positive NPV and IRR > Discount rate indicate a potentially attractive
investment opportunity.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
43
Loss Carry Forward
Tax cannot be claimed by the authorities on corporate income if there is no income i.e.
if a company incurs losses (which is typical during initial years), ’negative’ tax is not
possible to be accounted for. Hence, companies often ’carry forward’ the losses from
preceding financial years until there is no loss accounted for at the end of the year,
thereby acting as a ’tax shield’. In Denmark, the corporate tax rate is 22% [59] and
losses can be carried forward virtually, indefinitely [18].
Summary of Private Economic Evaluation Principles
A private economic evaluation is essentially an investment analysis which seeks to opti-
mally allocate the available investment capital. The result of the analysis will determine
if investment in PtG facility is worth undertaking i.e. whether it is economically feasible.
Guiding principles of a PE evaluation are provided in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Private Economic Evaluation principles at a glance [42].
Specification
Private Economic Evaluation
Lifetime
Economic lifetime
Prices
Nominal prices i.e. including inflation
Payments
Discounted payments,
Payment schedules are important
Surrounding conditions
Taxes and depreciation taken into account
Discount rate
Required rate of return by investor
Market determined, nominal terms
Externalities
Not considered
Adjustment factor
Not considered
4.3.2
Annualised costs
Although the discounted cash flow analysis method is used for all the major primary
calculations in the project, annuities due on system CAPEX are calculated in order to
compare the annual payments resulting from capital costs, to the operational costs of
the PtG facility. It is calculated according to the equation 4.13 [80]:
Cann = Ctotal ∗
r
((1 + r) ∗(1 −(1 + r)−T)
(4.13)
where Cann is the annual payment, Ctotal is the system CAPEX excluding engineering,
design and services cost, r is the discount rate and T is the lifetime of the plant.
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
44
4.3.3
Economic Feasibility Model Description
An economic evaluation model was built in Excel, according to standard practices for
discounted cash flow analysis. The model relies on technical and economic inputs under
a set of key assumptions; both of which are described in this subsection.
4.3.3.1
Model inputs
This section describes the inputs used for the economic feasibility calculations.
Technical Parameters
Technical inputs pertain to process and equipment data which are relevant for revenue
or cost calculations. They are described in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Technical inputs to economic feasibility model.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Source
Note
Hourly mass flowrate
output, Hydrogen
492.11
kg/h
Electrolyser system, Aspen model
Used in LCOH calculations for all 3 cases
NPV calculations for Case 2
Hourly mass flowrate
output, SNG
992.33
kg/h
Aspen main model
Mass fraction in
product gas, CH4
98.3
%
Aspen main model
Mass fraction in
product gas, H2
0.2
%
Aspen main model
Gravimetric energy
content, CH4
13.9
kWh/kg
[67]
Lower heating value
Gravimetric energy
content, H2
33.3
kWh/kg
[67]
Lower heating value
Oxygen-to-H2 ratio
7.94
kg-O2/kg-H2
Electrolyser Aspen sub-model
Used to estimate annual O2 production
for revenue calculation from oxygen sales
Recoverable heat from
electrolyser system
13
%
[40]
Percentage of power input to electrolyser.
Power consumption, ALK
47.79
kWh/kg-H2
[54]
Converted from kWh/Nm3-H2
Power consumption, PEM
54.12
kWh/kg-H2
[54]
Converted from kWh/Nm3-H2
Carbon intensity of displaced gas
0.196
tCO2/MWh
[16]
CO2 emission factor calculated for gas measured in Egtved East.
Gives the amount of CO2 emission in kg when
1 GJ (LHV) of gas is burned.
Notable assumptions on technical inputs:
• Waste heat: Recoverable heat from the electrolyser is lower than 16% due to
higher eﬀiciency of hydrogen production resulting from technological advancements.
This is factored when fixing a value of 13%. The recoverable heat is also considered
when calculating the eﬀiciency of the PtG facility.
• Avoided emissions: SNG produced displaces fossil natural gas in the gas grid
and hence, carbon intensity of the same is assumed to estimate annual avoided
emissions.
Economic Parameters
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
45
Economic inputs into the model are split into 4 categories: revenues, costs, taxes and
macro-economic. They are discussed in the order mentioned.
Table 4.8: Revenue sources for PtG facility.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Source
Note
Gas spot prices
Year 2022 - 2041
DKK/MWh
[33]
Forecasted prices used. Assumed
for ”At Central Power Plant”
from dataset
Renewable energy
support
Basic supplement and
Natural Gas surcharge
DKK/MWh
[36]
Support for biogas upgrading
CO2 quota price
Year 2022 - 2041
DKK/tCO2
[33]
Forecasted prices
District heating price
371.3
DKK/MWh
[35]
Excl. 25% VAT
Oxygen price
372.5
DKK/kg-O2
[1]
Notable assumptions for revenues:
• Renewable energy support: PtG facility receives the same level of support
granted for injection of biomethane in the gas grid, since the production of SNG
uses biogenic CO2 as a source and is integrated with an existing biogas plant
which is assumed to be connected to the grid prior to Year 2020. This is based
on green biomethane certificates registered by Energinet for Danish biogas and
biomethane producers.
Each certificate represents 1 MWh of green gas which
has been injected into their transmission/ distribution system [24]. At the time
of writing of the report, financial support for upgraded biogas has been repealed
according to Section 35c of the Natural Gas Supply Act [46] for new biogas plants.
New levels are set to be announced in Year 2022 and are rumoured to be lower
than previous amounts. The assumed level of support is at its highest for the base
case and will be debated against in the scenario and sensitivity analysis sections.
Also, the SNG produced would not be eligible for the bioticket scheme since it is
a gaseous fuel and the scheme is valid only for advanced biofuels in the transport
sector.
• Gas spot price: The product gas (SNG) displaces natural gas as fuel in cen-
tralised gas-fired power plants and hence, the respective gas spot price is chosen
from the dataset.
• CO2 Quota prices: CO2 prices are volatile and diﬀicult to predict. ENS assumes
a linear growth in 3% every year and reflects the bare minimum price guaranteed
according to EU ETS. The final price depends on the respective carbon market in
which the green certificate is sold.
• District heating price: District heating prices are diﬀicult to predict and vary re-
gionally in Denmark. Hence, the price for the Horsens region is selected, excluding
VAT since the facility is a net producer and therefore, seller of heat.
==PAGE:56==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
46
Costs comprise of CAPEX and OPEX. The breakdown is detailed in Table 4.9 and Table
4.10.
Table 4.9: Investment costs on final evaluation date of project.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Source
Note
Electrolyser and
Methanation systems
Calculated based on method
outlined in subsection
MDKK
[1] [2]
Based on nominal specific
investment costs
Hydrogen storage
509.6
EUR2020/kg-H2
High pressure steel tank [50]
CO2 Compressor
Equation 4.14
USD
[19]
Original cost calculated in USD
converted to DKK2020 levels
Engineering design and services
28
%
[2]
Assumed as percentage of CAPEX
Table 4.10: Fixed and Variable OPEX.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Source
Note
Fixed OPEX
Electrolyser systems
3.5
%
[2]
ALK & PEM
Methanation system
10
%
[2]
CO2 Compressor
6
%
[2]
Assuming servicing every
2000 hrs of operation
Hydrogen storage
1
%
[50]
Variable OPEX
Final electricity price
Raw elspot price + tariffs
+ consumption tax
DKK/MWh
See Table 4.11
Calculated on hourly basis for
electrolyser and compressor
Notable assumptions on CAPEX and OPEX estimates:
• Compressor cost: The following equation is used for CAPEX estimation, ac-
cording to the source mentioned in Table 4.9:
Ccompressor = 5840 ∗(Pel,comp)0.82
(4.14)
In equation 4.14, Pel,comp stands for power consumption of the compressor in kilo-
watts. For example, the CAPEX is calculated to be 954043.66 USD (or) 6254710.25
DKK2020 for a power consumption of 0.5 MW.
• Fixed OPEX: It is assumed as percentages of CAPEX for different systems and
equipment and are calculated in MDKK.
• Stack replacement cost: The stack replacement cost is assumed to be 50% of
the system CAPEX for ALK and 60% for PEM. It is accounted under fixed OPEX
and is only incurred if it occurs before the 15th operating year of the facility. If
the calculated stack lifetime is greater than this threshold amount, it is assumed
the electrolyser system can function normally for the remainder of the lifetime.
• Variable OPEX: It is typically reserved for fuel costs. Since electricity is the
major energy input for the PtG facility, it is subject to consumption tariffs and
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
47
taxes according to Danish legislation. The final electricity price thus is a sum of
the raw elspot price, the consumption tariffs and the minimum level of process tax
levied on electricity consumption.
• Water costs: Water costs are relatively insignificant compared to electricity costs
for the system and hence, they are not taken into account for calculations. Ex-
ample: If water costs are assumed to be 0.01233 EUR/kg-H2 [2], it brings the
annual water feedstock costs to 379717.69 DKK/year, according to reported water
consumption from technical brochure of ALK electrolyser [54].
Table 4.11: Variable OPEX: Final electricity price calculation.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Source
Note
Raw electricity price
Hourly forecast for
period 2022 to 2041
DKK/MWh
[33]
Forecasted prices from 2030 are carried forward until
2034 and from 2035 to 2039; 2040 to 2041
Transmission
network tariff
49
DKK/MWh
[29]
2021 levels
System tariff
61
DKK/MWh
[29]
Balance tariff
2.29
DKK/MWh
[29]
Consumption tariff, total
112.29
DKK/MWh
DSO
40
DKK/MWh
[27]
Electricity tax,
process consumption
4.02
DKK/MWh
[77]
Total additional charges
156.31
DKK/MWh
Transmission network tariff: Operational and maintenance costs for overall
electricity grid (132/150 and 400 kV) grid incl. international connections.
System tariff: Costs for security and quality of electricity supply incl. reserve
capacity and system operations.
Balance tariff: Levied on consumption and covers Energinet’s costs for system
services and handling of balance sheet market.
DSO: Distribution Service Obligation fee for operation and maintenance costs of
the distribution grid (60/10 kV and 20/0.4 kV). This is particularly relevant since
the electrolysis facility falls within the medium bandwidth of power consumption
and is located up the higher end on the distribution grid.
The Public Service Obligation (PSO) has been entirely phased out by the end of
2020 and is hence not included in the final electricity price.
• Taxes: Apart from the corporate tax rate of 22%, a tax of 33% on district heating
revenues from sales of surplus heat is levied according to Danish legislation [77].
• Capacity expansion: The biogas plant is assumed to have planned for capacity
expansions for increase in biomethane output. Hence, existing connection to the
distribution gas grid is considered adequate for handling the SNG output from the
PtG facility and grid connection costs are not taken into account.
==PAGE:58==
4.3 Economic Feasibility
48
Macro-economic inputs
A discount rate of 8.5% is used across all the 3 cases. All cash flows are converted
to nominal values using an inflation rate of 2% which is fixed for the entire evaluation
period. Two separate inflation indices are created with respect to the year data was
found from. Biogas upgrading support levels are subject to inflation index from year
2016 whereas electricity, gas spot, CO2 quota and district heating prices are subject to
inflation from 2020 onwards.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
49
4.4
Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
The economic feasibility assessment relies on several inputs which are subject to high
uncertainty. Therefore, a local sensitivity analysis along with an integrated threshold
analysis is carried out to assess the impact of the most critical parameters on the feasi-
bility and levelised costs of production across the individual cases. This section details
the chosen parameters and methodology behind the analysis.
First, the economic performance of the facility under historical development of commod-
ity prices is evaluated. This is followed by a local sensitivity analysis based on possible
development trajectories of the technologies and energy system in Denmark. Thirdly, a
feasible case scenario with a direct wind park connection is explored.
4.4.1
Historic performance
Energy markets operate according to the laws of supply and demand and market prices
are subject to several influencing factors. In the past years, the penetration of renewable
energy both in primary energy supply and final energy consumption bolstered by EU
Renewable Energy directives and a continent-wide shift has contributed to changes in
price levels of various commodities such as natural gas, electricity and CO2 (with the
introduction of the EU ETS in 2008). The historic developments of all 3 market prices
from the past 5 years are presented in Figures 4.5 and 4.6.
Figure 4.5: Historic development of CO2 prices from 2016 onwards. Data source: Em-
ber [20].
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
50
Figure 4.6: Historic development of day-ahead elspot and gas spot prices over 5-year
period. Data obtained from Nord Pool [68] and Energinet public downloads
[26].
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
51
All 3 prices were further analysed within the same period and relevant descriptive statis-
tics are detailed in Table 4.12.
Table 4.12: Descriptive statistics of historic prices. Equally-weighted hourly average
for Elspot prices, daily average for Gas Spot and weekly average for CO2
prices.
Year
CO2 Price
(DKK/ton-CO2)
Day-ahead electricity price - DK1
(DKK/MWh)
Gas spot price
(DKK/MWh)
Average
Standard
deviation
Average
Standard
deviation
Average
Standard
deviation
2016
39.89
5.71
163.25
69.71
101.51
15.83
2017
43.49
8.33
222.76
64.61
122.94
14.23
2018
119.44
34.72
261.05
92.16
165.28
27.78
2019
185.41
15.53
316.25
126.68
98.72
28.68
2020
184.79
27.76
153.40
90.59
73.16
26.86
As can be seen in the table above, the volatility of prices (measured by normal standard
deviation) has been increasing in general since 2016. Although electricity and gas spot
prices were the most volatile in 2019, CO2 prices were the most volatile in 2018.
Since future development of prices is expected to follow this trend with a greater pen-
etration of renewable energy, the above 3 average prices from Year 2018 are chosen as
input for economic feasibility and levelised cost calculations.
4.4.2
Local sensitivity analysis
A localised sensitivity analysis is carried out for economic feasibility and levelised cost
calculations across all 3 cases. A single parameter is varied over a pre-defined range
according to expected uncertainty and values reported in literature to assess the impact
on profitability and production costs.
Parameters
1. Electricity price level
2. Gas spot price level
3. CO2 price level
4. Electricity tariffs
5. Renewable energy support
6. Specific CAPEX of technologies: Alkaline Electrolyser, Methanation and Hydro-
gen Storage (only for Case 2)
==PAGE:62==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
52
7. Fixed OPEX - Electrolyser and Methanation
8. District heating price
9. Discount rate
10. Technology development: Eﬀiciency of electrolyser
11. Full load hours
Parameters 1 - 10 are varied for assessing sensitivity on NPV whereas only parameters
1, 4, 6, 9 - 11 are used for sensitivity on levelised costs.
4.4.2.1
Energy market price levels
Day-ahead electricity market price, gas spot price and CO2 prices are varied within a
range of -50% to +50% due to the high uncertainty associated with forecasts, which are
based on underlying assumptions which will be discussed later.
4.4.2.2
Electricity tariffs
The transmission network tariff prices are subject to uncertainty as 3 possible scenarios
of development are expected by the TSO Energinet [25]. In this regard, the tariff levels
are varied at 0 DKK/MWh, 85 DKK/MWh (Low scenario) and 125 DKK/MWh (High
scenario) as shown in Figure 4.7, with reference to year 2022.
Figure 4.7: Expected development in tariffs by Energinet [25].
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
53
4.4.2.3
Renewable energy support
One of the main notable assumptions in the feasibility assessment include the eligibility
of the PtG facility for the biogas upgrading and injection support received, since it is
from the perspective of the biogas plant owner. It is one of the main sources of revenue
and a decrease in support levels could severely affect the profitability of the case.
From an avoided emissions perspective, the biogas plant has a net positive impact with
regards to CO2 emissions (insert ref). Upon utilising the freely available CO2 stream from
the biogas upgrading section, the net amount of CO2 is decreased since the electricity is
sourced from the grid, which does not experience 100% penetration of VRE at all times
thus affecting the share of renewable energy in gross final electricity consumption.
Therefore, support levels are varied from 0 DKK/ MWh (both supplements included)
to 1.7 times the current amount of support available to biogas plants prior to 2020. The
case for no support could be possible as no renewable energy support for PtX facilities
currently exists.
4.4.2.4
Specific CAPEX of technologies - Electrolysis, Methanation
and Hydrogen storage
The specific investment costs of the various subsystems in PtG facility are fraught with
uncertainty due to the great range of data available in literature. Therefore, a sensitivity
analysis is conducted by using reported costs from key sources to assess the economic
performance in the time frame of 2022 to 2041.
Electrolysers
The following specific investment costs for alkaline electrolysers are used as input:
Table 4.13: Specific investment costs of alkaline electrolysers from different sources for
sensitivity input - as mentioned in report on strategy for PtX by consultant
Ea Energianalyse [23].
Specific Investment
Cost (EUR/MW)
Source
Note
479000
ICCT [12]
500000
IEA [81]
600000
ENS [39]
Specific investment costs for 10 MW
used from 2020 version instead of costs
for 1 MW plant from 2021 version [40]
840000
IRENA
1200000
Bloomberg
2900000
EC
==PAGE:64==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
54
Methanation
The specific CAPEX estimates of catalytic methanation technologies is subject to even
more uncertainty than electrolysis technologies. The data is often kept as trade-secrets
and real costs are diﬀicult to obtain. Nevertheless, several sources surveyed in [2] indicate
estimates for plant sizes from 5 MWSNG to 30 MWSNG. These are detailed in Table
4.14 and used as input for sensitivity analysis.
Table 4.14: Different specific investment cost estimates of catalytic methanation ob-
tained from a thorough literature survey in Deliverable..
Specific CAPEX,
Catalytic Methanation
(EUR/MW-SNG)
110000
160000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
450000
500000
720000
Hydrogen storage
Investment data on hydrogen storage faces a similar situation partly due to varied end-
uses, leading to different storage pressures and sizes. Thus, estimates for similar pressure
level (30 bar) serve as ranges for input in sensitivity analysis from [88] [2]. Values are
only decreased from the base case value of 490 EUR/kg-H2 stored. They are detailed in
Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Specific investment costs of hydrogen storage using high-pressure steel
tanks.
Sp. CAPEX, hydrogen
storage (EUR/kg-H2)
250.27
300
350
400
422.7
450
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
55
4.4.2.5
Full load hours
Since cases 1B and 2 are set to operate during the hours with the lowest electricity prices
in a year, the capacity factor is varied between 10% and 96%, where each 10% increment
corresponds to a block of 876 hours. The upper bound of the variation is tied to the
max. run time of the methanation facility.
4.4.2.6
District heating price
District heating prices are often diﬀicult to predict and vary regionally in Denmark. If
potential earnings from PtG are to be maximized, siting of the facility plays a key role
in exploiting revenues from selling surplus heat, stemming from electrolysis facility.
Therefore, the district heating price is varied at 10% steps between the minimum and
maximum prices observed in 2020, excl. VAT i.e. 187.5 DKK/MWh and 735 DKK/MWh
respectively.
4.4.2.7
Discount rate
As mentioned earlier, the discount rate is an indicator of perceived risk from investors and
is dependent on the technology and respective commercial maturity. Further, different
values have been reported in literature for discount rates of PtG and PtX facilities.
Therefore, the discount rate is varied from 3% (optimistic) to 15% (highly risky endeav-
our) to assess the impact on levelised costs and profitability.
4.4.2.8
Technology development of electrolysis
Electrolysers are poised to experience gains in eﬀiciency in the coming decade, and have
experienced continuous technological development. As a result, wide ranges of power
consumption ratings and eﬀiciencies are reported in literature. Therefore, it is expected
that the power consumption rating and thus, eﬀiciency will have a significant impact on
the nominal size, CAPEX, Variable OPEX and ultimately the profitability of the cases.
Therefore, the impact of eﬀiciency gains as an indicator of technology development is
explored. The power consumption is varied to give eﬀiciencies between 67 - 79% and
the influence on NPV and levelised costs is analysed.
4.4.3
Direct wind park connection
The final electricity price level can be raised anywhere between 30 - 60% of the raw
elspot price due to additional tariff, as shown in Figure 4.8. Hence, implementation of
the ’upstream’ model under ’offsite’ configuration proposed in [27] is explored.
==PAGE:66==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
56
Figure 4.8: Sample final elspot price breakdown using annual average raw elspot price
from ENS forecast. Value = 493.9 DKK/MWh.
This is carried out through a direct connection between the PtG facility and a wind
farm with suﬀicient capacity installation, to be able to satisfy the power demand at the
electrolysis facility; in order to mitigate tariff costs.
Thus, from a preliminary siting assessment, a connection to a hypothetical wind farm
located nearby Samsø is proposed. A straight-line distance of 50 km is taken as average
as shown in Figure 4.9. An average CF 40% from an online simulation run at the location
with the same wind turbine model as the one used by the currently operating wind farm.
This capacity factor is set equal to the yearly runtime of the PtG facility and is thus
a variation of Case 1B. However, additional CAPEX and OPEX are incurred from the
establishment of a transmission cable, 25 MW in capacity and a type 1 transformer
stations, according to the Technology Data Catalogue on Energy Transport by ENS.
The model inputs for this ”feasible” scenario are detailed in Table 4.16.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
57
Figure 4.9: Distance of biogas plant from hypothetical offshore wind park, measured
using Google Maps [65].
Table 4.16: Direct Wind Park Connection Scenario: Model input details.
Parameter
Unit
Value
Source
Note
Cable length
km
50
Google
Equal to distance from proposed
offshore wind farm.
Transmission line
(0 - 50 MW), CAPEX
44.7
DKK2020/MW-m
ENS
Transformer station
(Type 1), CAPEX
566200
DKK2020/MW-m
ENS
Cable size
25
MW
Sized according to power
consumption of PEM
A power purchase agreement (PPA) price of 41.7 EUR/MWh (or) 310.66 DKK/MWh
is assumed for the entire lifetime i.e. 20 years. This PPA price is based on a composite
index of technology-specific PPA development for Offshore Wind according to Pexapark
[73]; it was the highest observed level in 2020. The exact prices are usually trade secrets
and diﬀicult to obtain, hence the value used here is assumed to reflect current trends
within the industry.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
This chapter documents the results from the technical and economic feasibility investi-
gations in the thesis. Further, the economic feasibility results are presented for each of
the 3 cases developed with respective sensitivity analysis results and discussion.
5.1
Technical Feasibility
This section is divided into two subsections: System 1 and System 2. The technical
performance, process flow diagrams and stream summaries for both the methanation
systems are presented, followed by a discussion on both. First, overall results of the
process modelling phase are presented.
5.1.1
Process Modelling
An overview of the technical performance of the Power-to-Gas system is provided in
Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Technical performance of PtG System.
Specification
Value
Unit
Note
Specific energy content of SNG
13.62
MW
LHV Basis
Wobbe Index
52.8
MJ/Nm3
At 0 °C, Reference 0 °C - given by Aspen software
Electrolyser power
consumption
23.54
MWel
ALK
24.79
MWel
PEM
Power-to-Gas Eﬀiciency
70.24%
Eﬀiciency calculated on basis of ALK system and utilisation
of surplus heat for DH. It is slightly lower for PEM due to higher power consumption
Hourly hydrogen output
from electrolyser system
492.11
kg/hr
Maximum SNG Output
from PtG plant
992.33
kg/hr
Obtained at highest CO2 conversion rate
with stoichiometric ratio of 4
Annual operation time of PtG plant
8400
h
Annual SNG production
8336.41
ton-SNG
Annual energy output of SNG
for grid injection
114.46
GWh
The quality of the final product SNG is the same for both Systems 1 and 2, with a
minor difference in eﬀiciency, with it being lower for System 1. The difference can be
owed to accounting of surplus heat internally from the methanation section with the
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
59
biogas plant. The integrated facility is shown in Figure 5.1. As can be seen, the total
output to the gas grid has been increased by 50% to 40.6 MW, with an energy input
in the form of electricity corresponding to approx.
87% of the original biomethane
output. The eﬀiciency of ALK and PEM electrolysis is 69.62% and 66.09% without
heat integration. On consideration of surplus heat being used for district heating at
75 °C, the eﬀiciencies are: 82.62% and 79.09% for ALK and PEM, respectively. The
methanation subsystem eﬀiciency is found to be 83.11% and, that of the overall PtG
system without using surplus heat from ALK is 57.36%.
Figure 5.1: Overview of integrated biogas and PtG facility: a block flow diagram.
Green = biogenic CO2. Blue = electricity. Red = heat. ALK power input
is represented. For PEM, power consumption = 24.79 MWel.
5.1.1.1
System 1
System 1 has been modelled using reactors in adiabatic operation mode, similar to
TREMPTM process.
The detailed flowsheet is shown in Fig.
5.2.
The process ex-
clusively utilises a series of fixed-bed adiabatic reactors, where the no. of reactors is
influenced by the increasing maximal content of CH4 in the product gas at equilibrium
and subsequently, lower formation of water as by-product. The initial battery limits are
drawn at the entry of energy into the system in the form of electricity at the electrolyser
and hot CO2 stream exiting from the biogas upgrading section. The final battery limits
end after the final product stream is cooled to ambient and H2O content is brought to
desirable levels. The stream composition at select nodes in the system is detailed in
Table 5.2. The detailed stream summary of the entire system is provided in Tables A.1
and A.2.
==PAGE:70==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
60
Table 5.2: Stream summary at different reactor stages for System 1.
Entry into
Methanation
subsystem
Inlet
Outlet
Outlet
Final Product Stream
Reactor Stage
-
1
2
3
4
-
Stream no.
1
3
4
9
14
19
22
Mass flow rate (kg/hr)
3176.70
5353.33
5353.33
1451.08
1189.50
1050.35
992.23
Molar flowrate (kmol/h)
305.11
485.69
396.75
101.21
76.40
65.48
62.25
Temperature (ºC)
140.58
230
686.42
626.47
494.2
320.95
40
Enthalpy (kJ/kg)
-7219.81
-6084.94
-6084.67
-4831.19
-4600.66
-4442.79
-4735.38
Recycle ratio
-
0.6
-
-
-
-
-
Stream Composition,
mol%
H2O
0
0.33
24.82
15.13
10.95
5.47
0.57
H2
80.01
68.27
36.74
24.60
9.20
1.37
1,44
O2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
CO2
19.99
15.22
5.42
3.91
2.01
0.30
0.31
CH4
0
13.73
28.02
53.42
77.50
92.87
97.68
CO
0
2.45
4.99
2.94
0.34
0
0
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
The electrolytic hydrogen is produced at a pressure of 30 bar, thus avoiding the need for
further compression before being sent to the methanation section. The CO2 stream is
cooled to ambient and further compressed before being mixed with the hydrogen stream
in a mixer, at which the mixed feed stream settles to the pressure level of the stream at
the lower pressure of the two i.e. 15 bar. The feed is pre-heated to a min. level of 220ºC
before it is injected into the 1st fixed-bed reactor. This is due to temperature constraints
on catalysts used in methanation by Haldor Topsøe [56] and to avoid formation of toxic
compounds such as nickel carbonyl.
The temperature level of all streams for Figure 5.2 is detailed in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Temperature data on streams in System 1.
Stream
Temperature
(°C)
Stream
Temperature
(°C)
BIO-CO2
105
10
478
BIO-CO2A
25
11
50
BIO-CO2B
309.50
12
50
H2
75.45
13
230
1
140.58
14
494.2
2
105.45
15
345.8
3
230
16
50
4
686.42
17
50
5
50
18
230
6
50
19
320.95
R1
51.03
20
155.7
7
51.03
21
40
8
230
22
40
9
626.47
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
61
Figure 5.2: System 1: Process flow diagram. The power input to the electroylser block is for the ALK system. Respective
power consumption for PEM = 24.79 MW. Colour description: blue = electricity, red = heat.
==PAGE:72==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
62
Since System 1 is operated in adiabatic conditions, the pressure of the system is set
at 15 bar including the reactors and heat exchangers. The first pass of the pre-heated
feed through the 1st stage reactor results in a low CH4 yield and an excessively high
temperature >750ºC, due to the exothermic nature of the reaction. This was deemed
unfeasible in order to avoid catalyst sintering and hence, a recycle stream was introduced.
A ratio of 0.6 was found to be optimal as new temperature levels of the product stream
after the 1st stage remained below 700ºC due to the presence of steam in the recycle
stream.
Compared to the CO methanation reaction, CO2 methanation results in formation of
twice the no. of moles of water as by-product at every stage. This increases the cooling
demands on the system and necessitates use of intermediate cooling between each reactor
stage to improve CO2 and H2 conversion rates to achieve high methane yield in the gas
stream. The final product gas quality and subsequent temperature levels result in a total
of 4 operating stages. As is evident in Figure 5.2, the amount of heat released at the
coolers decreases with each stage due to lower amounts of water present in the streams.
The equilibrium temperature at the outlet of the fourth reactor is around 321ºC and the
final product gas stream is found to meet gas grid injection-level quality, composition
and energy content-wise.
5.1.1.2
System 2
System 2 has been modelled using a 2-stage reactor system, with the first reactor being a
cooled fixed-bed reactor operated isothermally followed by a smaller fixed-bed adiabatic
reactor, based on the process developed by Linde [57] [64]. The detailed flowsheet is
shown in Fig. 5.3. As can be immediately noticed, the no. of stages and complexity of
operation appears alleviated with process modelling for System 2. The battery limits
imposed on System 1 continue to apply here and the stream composition at select nodes
is detailed in Table 5.4.
Similar to System 1, only the CO2 stream is compressed. The mixed feed is pre-heated
to a min. temperature of 220ºC prior to injection into the reactors. The isothermal
reactor operates at 350ºC and 15 bar, keeping in line with thermodynamic equilibrium
requirements for the methanation reaction, achieving a CO2 conversion rate of 95% at
the first pass. Due to the exothermic reaction, 2.62 MW of thermal heat is produced
as a result. The product gas stream is saturated with steam and hence requires cooling
to ambient to condense out the water and increase the CH4 content, where further
waste heat is produced. The cooled gas stream is again heated up to min. temperature
level requirements and injected into a smaller, fixed-bed adiabatic reactor to react the
remaining amount of H2 and CO2 to improve the CH4 yield. The product gas stream
from the reactor is passed through the upstream heat exchanger to pre-heat the feed
before being cooled to ambient to condense out the remaining water. The CH4 content
of the final SNG is now 97.66 mol% with low water content (0.57 mol%). It can be
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
63
further dried in a dehydration unit through contact with solvents such as TEG, before
being injected into the gas grid.
Table 5.4: Stream summary at different reactor stages for System 2.
Entry into
Methanation
subsytem
Inlet
Outlet
Outlet
Final Product Stream
Reactor stage
-
1
2
-
Stream no.
1
2
3
8
11
Mass flow rate (kg/hr)
3176.70
3176.70
3176.70
1056.02
992.33
Molar flowrate (kmol/h)
305.11
305.11
186.76
65.79
62.26
Temperature (ºC)
140.58
225
350
319
40
Enthalpy (kJ/kg)
-7219.81
-6959.98
-9930.36
-4493.68
-4735.82
Stream Composition,
mol%
H2O
0
0
63.38
5.91
0.57
H2
80.01
80
3.96
1.37
1.45
O2
0
0
0
0
0
CO2
19.99
19.99
0.97
0.30
0.31
CH4
0
0
31.69
92.41
97.66
CO
0
0
0
0
0
C
0
0
0
0
0
The temperature level of all the streams in System 2 (Figure 5.3) is detailed in Table
5.5.
Table 5.5: Temperature data on streams in System 2.
Stream
Temperature
(°C)
Stream
Temperature
(°C)
BIO-CO2
105
4
50
BIO-CO2A
25
5
50
BIO-CO2B
309.5
6
230
H2
75.5
7
40
1
140.6
8
319.05
2
225
9
153.23
3
350
10
40
==PAGE:74==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
64
5.1.1.3
Discussion
System 1 and 2 are both shown to be technically feasible with respect to CO2 conver-
sion rates and final product gas quality available for grid injection. The overall energy
eﬀiciency without heat integration remains similar, where each system does not hold
marginal advantage over the other. However, from a practical perspective, System 2
would be preferred for implementation since the original biogas plant and CO2 source
correspond to medium-scale in output. The implementation is similar to the synthesis
reactor block for syngas methanation in [13]. The TREMPTM process has been tradi-
tionally used on large-scale coal-fired power plants whereby large quantities of syngas
are processed. Since System 1 is also based on the same, it would only be favourable
if large-scale biogas plants or a symposium of several small-to-medium scale plants, for
point-sources of CO2 are considered.
Process integration
There is a significant amount of water and surplus heat available for utilisation, from
process modelling of System 1 and System 2.
Since System 2 is chosen for further
implementation, the respective water mass flowrates and surplus heat values obtained
from Aspen Plus are considered.
Water requirement: The stoichiometric requirement of water for electrolysis was cal-
culated to be 4400 kg/h (or) 8.94 kg-H2O/kg-H2. The actual water requirement reported
from the electrolyser catalogue is 0.9 l/Nm3-H2, thus bringing the specific water feedstock
requirement to 10.01 kg-H2O/kg-H2 (or) 4926.57 kg/h.
The total amount of water available for usage is 2184.38 kg/h (from stream no. 4 &
7). One of the ways in which water can be re-used is by potentially supplying 44.34%
of the actual feedstock H2O requirement at the electrolysis system. It can be remarked
here that System 1 has greater water use potential due to multiple cooling of reactor
outlet streams (4 stages) as compared to the screened System 1 (2 stages with minimal
condensation at the second stage).
Another way of re-using the excess water would be for production of steam at different
pressure levels, since it is available at 50 °C and 15 bar.
Energy Flows
The energy flows in System 2 are mapped and presented in a Sankey diagram, in Figure
5.4. The PtG system battery limits are defined as follows: the energy enters the system
at the electrolyser (ALK) as and CO2 compressor in the form of electricity and exits
the system in the form of chemical energy (energy content of SNG) and thermal energy,
recoverable and non-recoverable.
Energy flows from the biogas plant are not taken
into consideration here due to lack of concrete data, which also affected the depth of
==PAGE:75==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
65
Figure 5.3: System 2: Process flow diagram. The power input to the electroylser block is for the ALK system. Respective
power consumption for PEM = 24.79 MW. Colour description: blue = electricity, red = heat.
==PAGE:76==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
66
investigation into heat integration.
Figure 5.4: Energy flows in PtG facility with System 2, with electrical energy entering
the system through the electrolyser.
The chemical energy of the hydrogen output is 16387.13 kW, and the 3059.92 kW of
energy required to evaporate the water is denoted as ’HHV - LHV’ on figure 5.4. The
recoverable form of heat is mainly from the isothermal reactor at a high temperature level
of 350 °C (depicted as High T. reactor surplus heat of 2611.88 kW in the above figure),
which can be used to satisfy the reboiler energy demand for CO2 regeneration. Low T.
surplus heat amounts to a total of 1880 kW and is mainly heat from the condensation
of water from cooling of the product gas after each reactor stage.
Surplus heat at
a temperature level of 75 °C from the ALK system is assumed delivered to a district
heating network, in the amount of 3059.92 kW, thereby increasing the electrolysis system
and PtG eﬀiciency, overall. The energy flows from the Methanation node onwards are
at a maximum possible amount, as a result of the stoichiometric ratio of 4 of H2:CO2,
and would decrease if the molar flowrate of hydrogen either exceeds or falls short of 244
kmol/h.
Heat integration: The product gas stream at the outlet of each reactor stage is used
to pre-heat the incoming feed gas to required temperature levels. Thus, the heating
==PAGE:77==
5.1 Technical Feasibility
67
requirements are matched without using external hot utilities during regular operation.
The specific energy demand of the reboiler for LP steam production in our case is
calculated to be 0.93 MWh/tCO2 output, based on an hourly flowrate of 2684.6 kg-
CO2/h. This conforms to the specific reboiler demand mentioned in ENS Technology
Data Catalogue [38], falling within the upper range of 0.7 - 1 MWh/tCO2 output. No
losses are assumed to occur in the transfer of CO2 from the biogas upgrading unit to
the methanation system.
The total amount of surplus heat available for usage from the reactor at 350 °C is
2.61 MW, which can easily satisfy the energy demand for regeneration of CO2 in the
stripper column. This has positive benefits in displacement of 2.8 MW of natural gas
consumption at Boiler 2. Since this is high-level process heat, there will still be excess
available which can be further used for satisfying the heating demand of the incoming
raw biomass feedstock at 0.55 MW, as it proceeds for the hygienisation section. This
could additionally displace 1 MW of natural gas consumption at Boiler 1.
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
68
5.2
Economic Feasibility
This section presents the results of the economic feasibility analysis, followed by respec-
tive integrated sensitivity and threshold analyses. A summary of results from all 3 cases
is presented first (Figure 5.5) before treating each case individually, in Table 5.6 and fol-
lowing subsections. All 3 cases within the investigated operational strategies and future
time frames are economically infeasible with the base case 1A having the most negative
NPV (-356.59 MDKK) and a negative average EBITDA (-15.6 MDKK), implying it is
highly unprofitable to run a PtG facility with the expected development of technologies,
costs, energy markets and present renewable energy support framework conditions. The
specific investment costs of ALK, PEM, Methanation and overall PtG facility of the
base case were found to be: 816.84 EUR/kWel, 727.24 EUR/kWel, 438.98 EUR/kWSNG
and 1880.66 EUR/kWSNG respectively.
Figure 5.5: Profitability and production costs summary of all 3 cases.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
69
Table 5.6: Summary of techno-economic feasibility assessment.
Case
Metric
Unit
1A
1B
2
Note
Full load hours (CF)
h
(%)
8400
(95.9)
5256
(60)
(5256)
60
Annual SNG Output
GWh
114.46
71.61
114.45
Desired energy
output
Annual power consumption,
Electrolyser
GWh
197.74
123.73
197.57
Energy input - PtG
NPV
MDKK
-356.59
-236.17
-305
Avg. annual income from
gas sales
MDKK
103.78
64.93
103.78
Avg. gas price (including support):
906.65 DKK/MWh
Avg. annual electricity cost
MDKK
105.25
68.09
108.86
Avg. final elspot price
(incl. tariffs and taxes)
509.52 DKK/MWh (period 2022 to 2041)
LCOG1
DKK/MWh
1223.06
1277.72
1216.26
Incl. ALK system
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
901.16
878.92
958.15
ALK system
Avg. annual EBITDA
MDKK
-15.60
4.27
10.81
System CAPEX
MDKK
244.26
244.26
353.93
Incl. engineering, design and services cost
As is evident in Figure 5.5, it is most expensive to produce SNG in the conditions set out
in Case 1B despite compromised operation of the entire PtG facility during 60% of annual
hours with lowest electricity prices. This is because the amount of hydrogen produced
directly affects the SNG output and is not able to fully utilise the waste CO2 stream,
thereby reducing the annual energy output. The costs of producing hydrogen however,
are cheapest in Case 1A and 1B; but most expensive in Case 2 due to inclusion of
hydrogen storage. Cases were found to fare better economically with less negative NPVs
experienced with ALK subsystem as electrolysis compared to PEM due to relatively
infrequent stack replacement expenditures. Thus, only the ALK system was included in
the execution of cases and main body of the report. Economic evaluation results with
PEM system are included in A.2.3.
The CAPEX and OPEX breakdown across all 3 cases is shown in Figure 5.6. Case 1A
and 1B have similar levels of CAPEX albeit the latter ends up with lower costs due
to partial operation of the facility, thereby implying the power consumption costs for
the electrolyser have a significant impact. Due to the additional cost element of high
pressure steel tanks in Case 2, the overall CAPEX is 20% higher at 294.1 MDKK. The
compressor CAPEX remains unchanged but the engineering design and services cost
increases since it has access to a greater share of the system CAPEX.
The lion’s share of operational costs continues to belong to power consumption at the
electrolysis facility, due to higher electricity prices and additional tariffs which raise the
final electricity price in the range of 30 - 60%. The domination of electricity costs as part
of overall plant costs is further elaborated through a comparison of annualised payments
due to CAPEX against average annual electricity cost (without inflation) across all 3
cases, in Figure 5.7.
The annuities remain at the same level for Cases 1A and 1B at 18.59 MDKK, but is
==PAGE:80==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
70
Figure 5.6: System CAPEX, annual fixed OPEX and average variable OPEX during
plant lifetime for PtG facility across all cases. Values are tabulated in
A.2.2.
increased by almost 45% due to the addition of high pressure steel tanks i.e. from 18.59
to 26.93 MDKK, going from 1A/ 1B to Case 2. However, the effect of hydrogen storage
as a buffer solution and economies of scale on ALK CAPEX can be seen through a
reduction in electricity costs of 13.66 MDKK, from 100.54 down to 86.88 MDKK, going
from Case 1A to 2.
Component-wise, the electrolyser stack accounts for 50% of the overall ALK sub-system
cost whereas the reactors account for only 21% of the methanation subsystem, with
the majority stemming from the Balance of Plant (BoP) as shown in Figure 5.8. The
electrolysis subsystem is the most capital intensive element of the PtG plant, and also
the source of the highest OPEX. This is further reflected in the annualised payments,
where the annuities due on ALK system are 13.95 MDKK, followed by the methanation
system at 4.34 MDKK and CO2 compressor being the least significant in comparison,
at 0.3 MDKK in Case 1A. Annuities due to electricity cost as part of fuel cost were not
calculated due to the hourly resolution of electricity prices being used as input instead
of a single price, over the investigated time period of 20 years.
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
71
Figure 5.7: For the comparison, only plant component CAPEX is considered, excl.
engineering, design and services cost. The total average annual electricity
cost (electrolyser + compressor) is shown in the figure..
Figure 5.8: Estimated cost of 23.54 MW Alkaline Electrolysis and 13.62 MW Metha-
nation subsystems is 143.25 MDKK and 44.54 MDKK respectively.
==PAGE:82==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
72
5.2.1
Base Case: Case 1A
The base case of the PtG facility operating at a CF of 95.9% is economically infeasible in
the next 20 years, with the highest levelised costs of production for the final product as
well as electrolytic hydrogen. Annual hydrogen production stands at 137.65 GWh (41.34
ktons) and SNG at 83.35 ktons with 114.46 GWh of energy injected in the grid, from
8400 hours of operation. The annual power consumption (and energy input into the
system) is a staggering 197.74 GWh, through the electrolyser. The results are detailed
in the Table 5.7 below.
Table 5.7: Case 1A: Key economic metrics.
Metric
Unit
Value
Note
NPV
MDKK
(MEUR)
-356.59
(-47.87)
LCOG1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
1223.06
(164.17)
With ALK system
LCOG2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
16.79
(2.25)
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
901.16
(120.96)
ALK
LCOH2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
30.01
(4.03)
ALK
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
924.05
(124.03)
PEM
LCOH2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
30.77
(4.13)
PEM
Ít is 2.5% more expensive to produce a unit of chemical energy from hydrogen using
PEM system compared to ALK, even though the specific investment costs at 2020 level
are projected to be lower for the former. This can be attributed to higher eﬀiciency and
thus, lower power consumption of the ALK which contribute to lower variable OPEX of
electricity over the operational lifetime. Further, a stack replacement every 3 years of
operational lifetime further worsens the profitability of the case if PEM is chosen as the
electrolysis technology, since it would result in incurring 55% of the electrolyser system
CAPEX five times i.e. 73.87 MDKK, during the plant lifetime. Hence, ALK is the
chosen electrolyser system for providing hydrogen for SNG production as part of PtG.
The average annual revenue of the PtG facility is decomposed in Figure 5.9.
As is
evident, the facility is heavily reliant on renewable energy support which accounts for
more than 50% of the avg. revenue at 76.4 MDKK. The second highest share stems
from gas spot market at 27.38 MDKK, since the SNG is indistinguishable from the fossil
gas once it is injected in the gas grid. Surprisingly, the role of earnings from CO2 is less
pronounced, with it accounting for only around 5% of the revenues at 7.23 MDKK. This
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
73
Figure 5.9: Revenue breakdown for annual SNG injection into the gas grid. Average
annual revenue = 111.01 MDKK.
could be attributed to less intensive displacement of fossil natural gas, as an emission
factor of 0.196 tCO2/MWh is used, resulting in 22.48 ktons of CO2 displaced annually.
This is further trumped by secondary sources of revenue streams i.e. district heating
and oxygen sales which account for 20% of the overall revenue - 8.4 MDKK and 15.43
MDKK, respectively. This underlines the importance of these sources for success of the
PtG facility, even though the case does not manage to break-even during it’s lifetime.
The heat revenues shown in the above figure are post-tax, and therefore the net revenue
decreases by a level of at least 67%. The accounting is based on the assumption that
minimal heat transport losses occur and our facility is located near to a district heating
network for the off-take of 25708.25 MWh of surplus heat annually, at 75 °C. This also
leads to an increased energy eﬀiciency of electroylsis system and the overall PtG facility
The electrolysis system has the largest shares in both CAPEX & OPEX areas with
40.34% (143.25 MDKK) and 28.32% of the overall system cost, proving to be the most
costly element in the PtG facility. In comparison, methanation system costs are much
lower, contributing to only 12.54% of the CAPEX at 44.54 MDKK, which is expected
with an output of 13.62 MW SNG. The fixed OPEX from Methanation mainly stems
from the electric installations and BoP. Despite an impressive sum of annual revenue of
111 MDKK on average , it is still proven to be insuﬀicient to overcome the electricity
cost from electrolyser operation at an annual average level of 100.54 MDKK, further
==PAGE:84==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
74
sunk by an intermediate stack replacement cost (nominal) of 92.65 MDKK in year 12
of its operation. Due to this, the facility does not incur any payable taxes in the period
of 2022 - 2041 because of negative earnings. The OPEX for Case 1A is decomposed in
Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: OPEX decomposition of Case 1A.
The electricity prices have a monumental impact on the feasibility of the case due to
the continuous power consumption of the electrolyser. The tariff levels have a decisive
influence as they can raise the price upto 60% of the final price which is passed through
to the industrial consumer. Since they are assumed throughout the assessment period
and industrial consumption bandwidth allotment is disregarded, this amounts to 30.91
MDKK annually, in additional costs on top of the raw electricity price alone.
This is unavoidable under the objective of complete utilisation of CO2 in grid-connected
electrolysis. A mass flowrate of any less than 492.11 kg/h of H2 would result in a sub-
optimal production of SNG, which would directly affect the income and thus, the overall
revenues would be dwarfed by the CAPEX and Variable OPEX.
5.2.2
Case 1B: Partial operation
Based on the results of the base case 1A, it is clear that the unprofitability of the system
is primarily due to complete exposure to electricity prices juxtaposed by the objective of
maximal SNG output. As part of the strategy to reduce this vulnerability to electricity
prices, it was decided to operate the PtG facility for 60% of the annual hours with the
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
75
cheapest electricity prices (Figure 5.11). The annual energy input into the system now
stands as 123.73 GWh, a reduction of almost 37% compared to Case 1A at 197.74 GWh.
Figure 5.11: Price duration curve of average hourly forecasted prices by ENS for the
next 20 years.
Each line at 10% interval represents 876 hours.
Cut-
off point at 60% corresponding to an average price level of around 400
DKK/MWh and below.
This strategy resulted in an annual operation period of 5256 hours with a less nega-
tive NPV, albeit still being economically infeasible. The compromised operation under
cheapest prices of the year resulted in a decrease of the annual electricity cost at 53.87
MDKK, but on the other hand this results in a higher levelised cost of production for
SNG at 1277.72 DKK/MWh. Production costs are off-set by a lower amount of chemical
energy produced at 71.61 GWh and thus, results in a higher production cost per unit
over the plant lifetime. The results of Case 1B are detailed in Table 5.8
==PAGE:86==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
76
Table 5.8: Case 1B: Key economic metrics.
Metric
Unit
Value
Note
NPV
MDKK
(MEUR)
-236.17
(-31.7)
LCOG1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
1277.72
(171.51)
With ALK system
LCOG2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
17.54
(2.35)
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
878.92
(117.98)
ALK
LCOH2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
29.27
(3.93)
ALK
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
908.26
(121.91)
PEM
LCOH2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
30.24
(4.06)
PEM
The average annual EBITDA improves upon the base case with a new value of 4.27
MDKK. However, due to a reduction in the revenues from gas spot market and decreased
renewable energy support as a result of lower SNG output (Table 5.9), the unprofitability
of the case is further clarified with a negative IRR of -12%.
Table 5.9: Revenues - Case 1B.
Revenue metric
Unit
Value
Note
Avg. EBITDA
MDKK
4.27
Gas spot revenues
MDKK
17.13
Annual average
Renewable energy support
MDKK
47.80
Annual average
CO2 Quota scheme, revenue
MDKK
4.53
Annual average
Net district heating sales
MDKK
5.06
Annual heat production: 20539.87 MWh
at 75 deg C
Oxygen sales
MDKK
10.05
As a consequence of reduced operational hours, there is reduced displacement of CO2 of
14066.83 tCO2, thus leading to lower revenues from the CO2 quota scheme annually, at
4.525 MDKK on average. The same applies to the amount of surplus heat available for
the district heating network and oxygen sales as they are a direct consequence of the
operation of the electrolyser. The reduced costs are detailed in Table 5.10.
Table 5.10: Reduced operational costs, Electrolyser.
Cost
Unit
Value
Note
Fixed OPEX, Electrolyser
MDKK
5.014
ALK
Fixed OPEX, Methanation
MDKK
4.454
Fixed OPEX, Compressor
MDKK
0.182
Variable OPEX, Compressor
MDKK
0.474
Average annual value
Variable OPEX, Electrolyser
MDKK
53.87
Average annual value
==PAGE:87==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
77
5.2.3
Case 2: Partial operation with hydrogen storage
Case 2 aimed at mitigating the unprofitable operation of Cases 1A and 1B through
a combination of reduced operation within hours with lowest electricity prices and in-
clusion of hydrogen storage as a buffer, to enable longer operation of the methanation
facility.
Thus, a max. capacity factor of 60% was placed as an operational constraint on the
electrolyser facility while the methanation facility operated at the original CF of 95.9%.
The narrow exposure window to electricity prices of the electrolyser leads to an increase
in the nominal size of the ALK system from 23.54 MWel to 37.59 MWel due to higher
hydrogen output as shown in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Influence of yearly runtimes on nominal size of electrolyser with the in-
clusion of hydrogen storage and exposure to average electricity price.
The difference in H2 demand at the facility due to misalignment of operational hours
equates the amount of hydrogen storage requirement. It is assumed that the increased
nominal flowrate of hydrogen output will be split into two streams: the base case sto-
ichiometric requirement of 492.11 kg/h for methanation and the remaining for storage.
In Case 2, the nominal flowrate value is calculated to be 786.5 kg/h-H2. Hydrogen com-
pression is considered to be avoided due to the pressurised output of the electrolyser.
==PAGE:88==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
78
Further, it is important to note that the day-ahead electricity prices are volatile and
diﬀicult to predict over the duration of the year. Therefore, the price duration curve is
used as a tool to facilitate the feasibility assessment. Dynamic operational constraints of
ramp-up, start-up and shut down times are not taken into consideration although these
would be incumbent in real-time operation. Case 2 operational conditions, electrolyser
sizing and storage details are listed in Table 5.11
Table 5.11: Case 2: Électrolyser size and hydrogen storage requirement.
Parameter
Unit
Value
Note
Capacity Factor
%
60
Annual operation hours
of electrolyser facility
h
5256
Annual operation hours
of methanation facility
h
8400
Daily operation window
of electrolyser
h
15
Exact: 15.02
No. of hours with
storage requirement
h
9
Daily total H2 requirement
at methanation facility
kg-H2
11810.64
Daily storage
requirement of H2
kg-H2
4420.6
Calculated from the product of
stoichiometric mass flowrate of H2
and hours with storage requirement
Additional hourly H2 flowrate
from electrolyser
kg-H2/h
294.4
Nominal size of electrolyser
MWel
37.59
Only for ALK
The resulting case confers an improvement over the base case (1A) but still remains
highly unprofitable with a negative NPV, even though the level of revenues remained
similar and higher district heating & oxygen sales were experienced due to a higher
nominal size of the new electrolyser. Despite these gains in revenue and supposed cost-
savings, the costly addition of on-site hydrogen storage is still diﬀicult to overcome.
The economic feasibility and levelised cost results are detailed in Table 5.12. An overview
of revenues is provided in Table 5.13. The case experiences a higher EBITDA on av-
erage, indicating that there are more years with positive cash flows before taxes and
depreciation during the plant’s lifetime. However, the project still has a high negative
IRR of 10%, indicating it is not worth pursuing, combined with an NPV of -305 million
DKK. This is due to an increase in CAPEX by 109.66 MDKK, which translates to a
44.89% increase.
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Economic Feasibility
79
Table 5.12: Case 2: Key economic metrics.
Metric
Unit
Value
Note
NPV
MDKK
(MEUR)
-305
(-40.94)
LCOG1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
1216.26
(163.26)
ALK
LCOG2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
16.70
(2.24)
LCOH1
DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
958.15
(128.61)
ALK
LCOH2
DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
31.91
(4.28)
ALK
Table 5.13: Revenues - Case 2.
Revenue metric
Unit
Value
Note
Avg. EBITDA
MDKK
10.81
Earnings from gas
spot price, average
MDKK
27.38
Earnings from renewable
energy support, average
MDKK
76.39
Earnings from CO2
quota scheme, average
MDKK
7.23
Net district heating
revenues, average
MDKK
8.07
Annual heat production:
25681.59 MWh at 75 deg C
Revenues from oxygen sales
MDKK
16.05
An overview of operational costs for Case 2 is provided in Table 5.14. The fixed OPEX
of the ALK system are higher due to the increased nominal size of the electrolysis system.
The fixed OPEX of methanation system and compressors remain the same due to the
same level of operation as in the base case and are hence not detailed here. However,
there is an improvement in the Variable OPEX of the electrolyser by almost 15% of
the base case; but still remain higher than Case 1B where almost 50% reduction was
observed.
Table 5.14: OPEX: Case 2.
Cost
Unit
Value
Note
Fixed OPEX, Electrolyser
MDKK
5.01
ALK
Fixed OPEX. H2 storage
MDKK
0.17
Variable OPEX, Compressor
MDKK
0.87
Variable OPEX, Electrolyser
MDKK
86.01
==PAGE:90==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
80
5.3
Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
This section presents the results of the sensitivity analysis according to the methods
outlined earlier. First, an overview of the results is presented for each case followed
by respective treatment of the local parametric variation for NPV and levelised costs
calculations.
Case-wise results are presented in the subsections for each parameter,
followed by an integrated sensitivity and threshold analysis, finally ending with results
from the feasible scenario investigation.
5.3.1
Historic performance
The economic feasibility of the PtG cases and respective levelised costs were assessed
by using historical elspot, gas spot and CO2 prices from Year 2018, for the base case
scenario, in 2 ways:
• Scenario HE1: Using historical data for the 3 commodities
• Scenario HE2: Using historical data only for elspot price while keeping other
future developments in fuel prices as per ENS forecasts
The base case was found to be unprofitable in both the scenarios. The results are shown
in Table 5.15.
Table 5.15: Historical economic performance of base case.
Metric
Unit
Base Case
HE1
HE2
NPV
MDKK
-374.52
-223.83
-181.76
The break-even raw elspot prices were found by performing goal seek analysis in Excel;
listed in Table 5.16
Table 5.16: Raw day-ahead electricity price for the historical scenarios to break-even.
Metric
Unit
HE1
HE2
Elspot price
DKK/MWh
145.78
166.11
The results indicate that projected future developments by ENS in gas and carbon
market prices are more favourable, albeit requiring very low electricity price levels.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
81
5.3.2
Overview of local sensitivity analysis results
An overview of local sensitivity analysis results on the economic feasibility assessment
are presented in Figures 5.13, 5.14 and 5.15. The figures can be understood as: the
horizontal axis bears the input parameter varied within a pre-defined range, to assess
the final value in NPV which is depicted on the vertical axis. Base case values begin at a
value of 1. For instance, a 1.2 change in input on the x-axis corresponds to a 20% increase
from the base (original) value. Similarly, a value of 0.6 on the same axis corresponds
to the original value being reduced by 40%. All the 3 cases fail to break-even within
the upper and lower bounds of the parameters within their lifetime. Detailed case-wise
results are available in Section A.2.4.
Figure 5.13: Sensitivity analysis results for Case 1A.
Certain parameters are found to be in common, to have the greatest impact on the
profitability of the cases, as can also be judged from the slope of the respective lines
in the figures. Electricity prices and CAPEX of the electrolysis system produce the
most drastic effect on NPV, followed by CAPEX of the methanation unit from the costs,
requiring significant decreases in overall levels to mitigate negative NPV levels. From
the revenues perspective, they are improved to the largest extent from gas spot prices,
renewable energy support and district heating sales. CO2 prices were not found to have
a huge effect on the profitability of the cases within reasonable increases.
Despite the addition of costly hydrogen storage element in Case 2, it is not found to
==PAGE:92==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
82
Figure 5.14: Sensitivity analysis results for Case 1B.
have a significant impact on the NPV level and remains overshadowed by electrolysis
and methanation system CAPEX. A slight improvement is seen through the reduction
of Elspot prices to 50% of their original value i.e. from an avg. raw elspot price of 353.2
DKK/MWh to 176.6 DKK/MWh, with the NPV reaching a level of -22.8 MDKK. It is
the lowest observed result within localised parametric variation and further underlines
the influence of electricity prices.
The results from the variation on discount rate are not as expected in Case 1A, where
the NPV actually becomes less negative with an increase in discount rate. A possible
explanation could be that discounting of highly negative free cash flows, reduces the
amount of net negative discounted free cash flows available for summation in the NPV
calculation, thus producing a less negative final result. The occurrence of highly negative
cash flows in 1A is further backed by it being the only case in this thesis having a negative
EBITDA on average.
The impact of full-load hours/ capacity factor, renewable energy support levels and
tariffs are treated separately in the forthcoming sections.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
83
Figure 5.15: Sensitivity analysis results for Case 2.
5.3.3
Integrated sensitivity and threshold analysis
As summarised in the preceding section, the influence of day-ahead electricity prices
on the profitability of the cases is paramount. Therefore, an integrated sensitivity and
threshold analysis was conducted by varying electricity price levels and a second critical
parameter, to analyse possible conditions which facilitate a break-even scenario. The
secondary critical parameters considered include: Specific CAPEX of ALK system, Gas
Spot Prices, CO2 prices and transmission network tariff levels.
The plots presented have a common way of interpretation: the level of electricity price
forecasts are reduced upto 50% from the original level, with decrements of 10% (hor-
izontal axis) and the NPV of the case (vertical axis) is calculated for each respective
input parameter. The solid lines in each case represent the secondary critical parameter
variation. Detailed results of all the variations performed in the forthcoming sections
can be found in A.2.8.
First, a single parameter threshold analysis is conducted to investigate the level of elec-
tricity prices required for the cases to break-even is depicted through an average price
duration curve constructed on hourly resolution of the ENS forecast. This is carried out
by using goal seek to determine the level at which electricity prices have to be for NPV
==PAGE:94==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
84
to equal zero.
5.3.3.1
Threshold analysis: electricity price level
Figure 5.16: Average price duration curve of 5-year historic elspot prices is contrasted
with the average PDC of ENS forecast. These are further plotted against
the avg. level of electricity prices required in each case when they break-
even.
The required level of average electricity prices on hourly basis for each case to break-even
is presented in the form of a price duration curve in Figure 5.16. As is evident, the PtG
facility in either of the operational strategies explored through Cases 1A, 1B and 2 is
not economically feasible at the forecasted level of electricity prices for the DK1 region,
within the next 20 years.
For a PtG facility to operate without any form of intermediate storage between the
electrolysis and the methanation system, the prices would have to drop by a level of
58% for the produced SNG to be considered competitive i.e. to 148.34 DKK/MWh
without additional tariffs and taxes.
In case on-site hydrogen storage is involved, a
slightly less significant reduction is required i.e. 54%, giving an avg. raw price of 162.47
DKK/MWh. If the facility is operated for a reduced no. of FLH in a year, it is severely
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
85
disfavoured at the forecasted level of prices, where a steep 67% decrease is called for,
giving an avg. raw price of 116.55 DKK/MWh.
5.3.3.2
Specific CAPEX of ALK system
The results from all 3 cases from using different specific investment cost estimates for
ALK are presented in Figure 5.17.
For example, the plot for Case 1A can be interpreted as: for an optimistic estimate of
479 EUR/kW of ALK, the case manages to break-even with an electricity price reduction
of almost 36%, which translates to an average yearly price of 380.67 DKK/MWh (51.1
€/MWh) (incl. tariffs and taxes) (or) 224.35 DKK/MWh as the raw elspot price.
Figure 5.17: Performance of PtG facility across all 3 cases at different specific CAPEX
estimates under reduced electricity price levels.
Base case specific
CAPEX across all cases = 1060€/kW.
For cases 1A and 1B, the difference between NPV values with estimates of 479 and
500 EUR/kW are minimal and hence cannot be easily distinguished in the figure. On
==PAGE:96==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
86
the other hand, there is a considerable difference in the break-even level for Case 2,
indicating a greater sensitivity to level of CAPEX under the electricity profile. As is
evident, the feasible space region is the most restricted for Case 1B, represented by the
region upwards of the solid blue line for the most optimistic estimate. Above a specific
investment cost of 600 EUR/kW, none of the cases manage to break-even despite a
reduction of the price level upto 50%.
5.3.3.3
Gas Spot Price
Revenues from gas spot market contribute greatly to the profitability of the case, and
the forecast level is hence varied with 10% increments to analyse break-even conditions,
as shown in Figure 5.18.
Figure 5.18: Performance of PtG facility across all 3 cases at increasing gas spot price
levels under reduced electricity price levels.
Cases 1A and 2 manage to break-even with price level increases of 30% and above, but
1B breaks through only with a 50% increase in the overall gas spot price profile. For
instance in Case 1A, a 30% increase in the price level has an average gas spot price
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
87
(nominal) of 310.95 DKK/MWh, with a max. of 420.81 DKK/MWh. This leads to
an NPV of 11.4 MDKK provided the elspot price level is reduced to 50% i.e. 176.6
DKK/MWh (raw price). Under the same conditions for 1B, the NPV remains negative
at -20.23 MDKK but a near tripling of Case 1A is observed for Case 2, at 32.22 MDKK.
This shows that restricted operation of the facility directly affects the SNG output and
thus the revenues from the gas spot market.
5.3.3.4
CO2 Prices
As shown in the subsection on historic performance, CO2 levels are following an overall
increasing trend since the inception of EU ETS. Since it is one of the secondary rev-
enue streams and corresponding levels are projected to increase, a variation with 20%
increments with reduction elspot price levels is conducted; results shown in Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19: Performance of PtG facility across all 3 cases at increasing CO2 price
levels under reduced electricity price levels.
CO2 prices (nominal) need to increase by twice the amount i.e an avg. level of 643.43
DKK/t-CO2 (86.36 €/t-CO2) to facilitate the break-even of cases 1A and 2, with price
==PAGE:98==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
88
reductions greater than 45% i.e.
lower than 194.26 DKK/MWh without additional
tariffs/ taxes. 1B does not manage to become competitive under both extreme conditions
imposed. The infeasible space is vast, with a narrow region of feasibility compared to
gas spot price levels, indicating less of an influence of CO2 prices on the profitability of
the cases.
5.3.3.5
Tariff levels
Electricity tariffs were shown to raise the level of the final elspot price anywhere between
30 - 60% from the raw price received in the day-ahead market. From all the levied
charges, the transmission network tariff holds the largest share and would thus have
the greatest influence on the final price level. Therefore, different transmission network
levels (including a scenario with no tariff) were varied under reducing price profiles to
assess the impact on profitability of the PtG facility, as shown in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20: Performance of PtG facility across all 3 cases with no transmission net-
work tariff, reduced tariff and projected developments from Danish TSO,
under reduced electricity price levels.
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
89
As is evident, a regime with no transmission network tariffs is highly favourable from
a profitability perspective, requiring much less reduced elspot levels compared to other
sensitivity analyses. Case 1A breaks-even at around 25% price reduction i.e an avg.
raw price of 264.9 DKK/MWh (35.56 €/MWh) while Case 2 does the same quite earlier,
around the 17% mark which translates to an avg. raw elspot price of 293.16 DKK/MWh
(39.35 €/MWh). In contrast, there is disparity in the feasible regions between no tariffs
and level of tariff similar to the ones experienced currently; with elspot price reductions
greater than 40% required across all cases for them to break-even. In the situation where
high tariff development is expected, none of the cases break-even at the -50% mark of
elspot prices.
5.3.4
Support levels
The impact of renewable energy support levels on the profitability of the cases is ex-
plored. The results are presented in Figure 5.21, where the main support level 1 and
supplementary support level 2 is varied from 0 DKK/MWh to 70% the current value at
326.64 DKK/MWh, and the NPV outcome is denoted on the vertical axis.
The plot can be interpreted in the following way: for Case 1A, when both support levels
are at one-third of their original amount (198 and 128.73 DKK/MWh resp.), the NPV is
highly negative with a value of -595.25 MDKK. However, when both the support levels
are at their maximum at 502.71 and 326.64 DKK/MWh, the case finally yields a positive
NPV of 33.45 MDKK, underlining the influence of support on the profitability of the
case.
==PAGE:100==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
90
Figure 5.21: Performance of PtG facility across all 3 cases under different RE support
scenarios.
5.3.5
Full load hours
The yearly run times of the PtG facility are varied for both cases 1B and 2 to assess the
effect on levelised costs through reduction of exposure to electricity prices. The results
are shown in Figure 5.22.
LCOG and LCOH both have a similar to response to the variation in full load hours:
they stabilise after a yearly run time of 60% (5256 h) but increase exponentially as the
operation window narrows towards 10%. LCOG in Case 1B experiences a pre-mature
and early increase, from the 55% mark, corresponding to 4818 hours. It is the most
expensive to produce either hydrogen and SNG at a CF less than 40%, at 1464.35
DKK/MWh and 945.66 DKK/MWh, respectively. At first glance, it may seem contrary
because the variable OPEX is at its lowest points between 15% (1314 hours) and 40%
(3504 h)in Figure 5.23. However, the nominal size of the electrolyser increases and thus,
the hydrogen storage requirement increases steeply between the same range of full load
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
91
Figure 5.22: Effect of full load hours on levelised costs of hydrogen and SNG. Each
10% increment represents 876 hours.
hours.
Figure 5.23: Effect of full load hours on nominal size, system CAPEX and variable
OPEX (electricity) at ALK in Case 2.
==PAGE:102==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
92
Therefore, even though the same level of SNG is produced at lower capacity factors, the
CAPEX of the system due to increase in size is simply too high to overcome, as is shown
in the plot on the right in the same figure (Fig. 5.23). Detailed results of this sensitivity
analysis can be found in tables A.56 (Case 1B) and A.57 (Case 2) in the Appendix.
5.3.6
Eﬀiciency of electrolysis
The results of the sensitivity analysis on eﬀiciency of the ALK system are presented
for both levelised costs and NPV in Figures 5.24 and 5.25. As can be seen, a greater
eﬀiciency of the electroylser system leads to a significant reduction in costs, although not
enough to break-even. At 67% eﬀiciency, the ALK system consumes 4.5 kWh/Nm3-H2
whereas it uses only 3.8 kWh/Nm3-H2 at max. eﬀiciency of 79%. At the highest level,
1A experiences an NPV of -222.07 MDKK, a level experienced by Case 2 earlier around
the 72% mark.
A similar trend is seen for levelised costs, with decreasing levels with respect to an
increase in electrolyser eﬀiciency. This is due to less power being consumed to produce
the same amount of hydrogen. It is assumed that the power consumption ratings and
eﬀiciencies remain the same at 100% nominal load of the electrolyser, and that a lower
power consumption does not correspond to a lower hydrogen output.
Figure 5.24: Profitability of the cases under different ALK eﬀiciencies, calculated from
power consumption ratings and nominal H2 output. The base case eﬀi-
ciency remained the same across all 3 cases at 69.62% LHV.
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
93
Figure 5.25: Levelised costs of SNG and hydrogen at different eﬀiciency levels for pro-
jected developement of alkaline electrolysis until 2030.
5.3.7
Direct wind park connection
A direct wind park connection scenario was proposed to mitigate the additional tariff
costs pertaining to electricity consumption. Despite a reduction in the final electricity
price, the base case fails to break-even with a fixed PPA for the entirety of its lifetime.
The results are shown in Table 5.17
Table 5.17: Profitability and levelised costs of PtG facility with a direct wind park
connection. LCOH calculated for ALK system.
Metric
NPV, MDKK
(MEUR)
LCOG1, DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
LCOG2 DKK/kg-SNG
(EUR/kg-SNG)
LCOH1, DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
LCOH2, DKK/kg-H2
(EUR/kg-H2)
Value
-293.13
(-39.35)
1546.44
(207.58)
21.23
(2.85)
829.39
(111.33)
27.62
(3.71)
The unprofitability of the case is due to a reduction in the overall yearly run time of
the PtG facility since it is dependent on the CF of the wind park.
The fixed PPA
price of 310.66 DKK/MWh is only 12% lower than the average raw elspot price of 353.2
DKK/MWh, in the ENS forecast. According to Figure 5.16, this level of elspot price
is expected to occur only less than 30% of the year (i.e. around 2600 FLH), implying
that it would still be expensive to run the plant for the remaining hours pertaining to
10% of the CF decided by the wind park. This is despite the assumption that the wind
power will be entirely used for supplying power for electrolysis as the case is from the
perspective of the biogas plant operator.
While the case benefits from cost-savings of 0.55 MDKK annually and 10.95 MDKK
over its lifetime from avoiding additional tariffs, it is still not enough to overcome the
==PAGE:104==
5.3 Sensitivity & Scenario Analysis
94
CAPEX. The additional transmission cable and transformer stations costs are incurred
by the biogas plant owner of the amount 55.88 MDKK and 14.16 MDKK respectively;
and are not the responsibility of the wind park owner. This brings the total to 333.89
MDKK, which is an increase of 89.64 MDKK (by 36.7%) from Case 1A and is clearly
not being offset by tariff savings. Even with a reduction in the cable to a length of 20
km, considering an onshore wind farm of a similar CF, the case still fails to break-even
with an NPV of -248.83 MDKK.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 6
Further analysis and
discussion: System
Perspective
This chapter aims to adopt a broader perspective on the future of power-to-gas technol-
ogy from a system level. The development of the energy system in Denmark, fuel prices,
technologies involved and competition between green fuels is analysed while treating the
primary results and the outcome of sensitivity & scenario analyses as a starting point.
6.1
Comparison with benchmark facility
The Audi e-gas P2G facility in Werlte, Germany was chosen as a benchmark for compari-
son, since it is the only facility successfully operated on industrial scale. The performance
data are obtained from a state-of-the art review of Power-to-Methane by Ghaib et al.
[48].
Table 6.1: Comparison of performance data of base case 1A (using System 2) with
benchmark P2G facility.
Parameter
Unit
Audi e-gas
System 2
Energy content of SNG
kWh
13.85
13612
Annual electricity consumption, average
GWh/year
27.5
197.74
PtG Eﬀiciency (w/o heat integration)
%
54
57.86
Max. hydrogen output from electrolysis
Nm3/h
1300
5473.93
Max. H2 storage time
h
1
-
Annual full load hours
h
4000
8400
Annual SNG production
tons/year
1000
8335.57
In the above table, base case 1A utilising System 2 for methanation, is used for compar-
ison. The PtG plant in this paper consumes almost 7.2 times the amount of electricity
used by the benchmark facility. This is also reflected in the full load hours which are
less than half to the system proposed in this paper (4000 FLH vs 8400 FLH), which
==PAGE:106==
6.2 Production costs: technology, co-location and economies of scale
96
could be due to the plant in Werlte using offshore wind power. This is also reflected
in the inclusion of H2 storage as a buffer solution, which is absent in Case 1A due to
access to electricity from the grid. The eﬀiciencies (without heat integration) both lie
in a similar range (57.86% for System 2 compared to 54%), although it could drop lower
once a detailed operation concept is envisioned, due to flexible operation and start-up,
shut-down and ramping costs which can entail more energy losses during those activi-
ties. The Audi e-gas facility uses a plant setup of 3 x 2 MW alkaline electrolysers, and a
similar modular approach would also have to adopted for the native PtG facility of size
23.54 MW (on plant scale), since the largest commercial ALK system was found to be
offered at 20 MW scale (disregarding modularity).
6.2
Production costs: technology,
co-location and economies of scale
6.2.1
Comparison with other studies
Nordic Energy Research [9]
The Nordic Energy Research (NER) group has explored the future of P2X fuels for
sustainable transport in the Nordic region.
The project dealt with identification of
suitable locations within the region for e-fuels production for servicing road transport,
upto Year 2045 [9]. Similar to the analysis by Energinet, on-site and off-site hydrogen
production are contrasted where either H2 or CO2 is transported for fuel synthesis.
In one of their case studies on co-location of such facilities on biogas plants, the pro-
duction costs for respective e-methane potential were calculated. Danish biogas plants
located in price area DK1 with a min. threshold output of 50 GWh/year were con-
sidered; where increasing accumulated fuel production (biomethane + e-methane) was
contrasted against the production potential of the cement plant in Aalborg.
Since the output of the integrated PtG facility in this paper is 341 GWh/year (base
case), the LCOG is compared to a corresponding value on Figure 4.7 in [9]
Table 6.2: Comparison of production costs of e-methane on Danish biogas plants .
Total methane output
(GWh/year)
Production cost
(EUR/MWh)
Note
300
112.5
341
164.17
Case 1A
400
119
==PAGE:107==
6.2 Production costs: technology, co-location and economies of scale
97
The result obtained in this thesis is almost 38% more than the highest value calculated
in Table 6.2 and could be explained through the differences in underlying assumptions.
The nominal size of the electrolyser used is 8 times the size of the ALK system in this
project, utilising 200 ktonnes of CO2 annually. Thus, the converted CO2 is 10 times
the amount available on the hypothetical biogas facility i.e. 1 kWhel/tCO2 rating of
electrical energy to tonne-CO2. In comparison, the respective rating is 1.17 kWhel/tCO2
in the project. It is not explicit if the volume of CO2 from ten Danish biogas plants each
with a capacity of 50 GWh/year is assumed, for processing. In addition, no economies
of scale effects were taken into account for sizing of the electrolyser. While their project
assumed a plant lifetime of 25 years with a discount rate of 5% and CF of 80% , Case
1A takes a more conservative stance with a 20-year lifetime, 8.5% discount rate and CF
of 95.9%.
On the other hand, Case 1A takes more liberties with carbon capture CAPEX/ OPEX
assumed to be zero and the power demand of ALK being 47.79 kWh/kg-H2 whereas the
NER report assumes 51 kWh per kg of hydrogen produced. Further, they have assumed
a specific CAPEX of 600 EUR/kW for alkaline electrolyser, which is nearly half the value
used in this thesis (1060 EUR2017/kW). This, combined with an inclusion of oxygen and
heat revenues in total production costs, leads to a more optimistic value for large scale
biogas plants as opposed to medium-scale plants in this paper.
The report also concluded that as there are few Danish point-source CO2 emission sites
with more than 100 ktonne/ year available; combined with high power prices in DK1
area from a Nordic perspective, make it diﬀicult to attain effective carbon utilisation
despite the well-developed gas grid and district heating networks in Denmark [9].
Ea Energi Analyse - Report on integration of thermal gasification [3]
The consultant Ea Energi Analyse has developed a report exploring the potential of ther-
mal gasification as a technology to produce competitive biofuels, in the energy system
of the future which will be dominated by renewables. In their analysis, the production
costs of SNG are calculated under a set of single-point estimates of raw elspot prices,
since it is carried out as part of socio-economic optimisation.
The same electricity price estimates were used as input for the economic feasibility model
developed in this project to compare the costs of production. Results are presented in
Figure 6.1.
The SNG produced as part of the system in this paper is significantly more expensive
than the values provided in the report, even at the lowest electricity price level. The
difference can be explained through highlighting several factors. The Ea Energi Analyse
report uses SOEC as the main electrolysis technology, which is at present commercially
immature. Therefore, the cost estimates are subject to optimism with regards to de-
velopment towards 2050. Further, the hydrogen storage is assumed to be equivalent to
==PAGE:108==
6.2 Production costs: technology, co-location and economies of scale
98
Figure 6.1: A comparison of SNG production costs between the estimates obtained in
this thesis, with the report on thermal gasification in the future Danish
energy system. Single elspot price, with and without additional tariffs/
taxes is used as input, as explained in the methodology section..
24 h of production. In contrast, this project assumes H2 storage requirement in Case
2 only for a duration of 9 hours and at a much lower pressure level - 30 bar instead
of 175 bar, thus requiring less storage space on mass basis. It is not clear if hydrogen
compression costs are taken into account. The report also uses a much lower specific
investment cost estimate for storage at 212.62 EUR/kg-H2 (converted from DKK/MWh,
LHV basis), which is less than half the amount used for projections in the thesis i.e. 490
EUR2017/kg-H2. This just shows how sensitive the final gas production costs are with
respect to the technology and methodology used for estimations.
DGC Report
In a report by Dansk Gasteknisk Center (DGC), biogas, biomethane and electro-methane
production costs were estimated and analysed for Denmark.
The study found that
the electrolysis section had the highest contribution to final production costs, where
electricity prices and eﬀiciency of the technologies were crucial factors [55].
The base case production cost of e-methane was found to be 1223 DKK/MWh using
ALK, which is the same as the one estimated in this thesis, despite significant differences
==PAGE:109==
6.3 Future Danish Energy System
99
in underlying assumptions. The e-methane facility in the DGC report runs for 6000 FLH,
having a CF 27.39% less than base case 1A, running for 8400 FLH. Their methanation
facility is 36.7% of the size in this paper, at 5 MW of SNG output and therefore, there will
be markedly different final CAPEX estimates for the subsystems involved (electrolysis
and methanation). The technical lifetime assumed in the thesis is 20 compared to 25
years in the technical report, which makes sense as none of the cases break-even during
the lifetime, thus indicating a much higher payback period for PtG facilities. Further,
CO2 capture costs have also been taken into account which were neglected in this thesis.
Also, in their analysis, dynamic operation of the plant was considered according to cheap
electricity prices, taking start-ups and stops of the electrolysis facility into account, while
the same has not been considered in this thesis, although as mentioned earlier, will have
to be realised as part of a detailed operation philosophy.
The key factor which could explain differences in cost is the single-point electricity price
considered in their report versus the hourly forecast used in this paper. The report
uses a final elspot price of 293 DKK/MWh, which is lower than the final average price
calculated in this thesis, at 509.52 DKK/MWh or 353.2 DKK/MWh raw price (excl.
additional tariffs and taxes).
The cost of cleaned biogas (not upgraded) is reported to lie within the range of 400 - 490
DKK/MWh and biomethane (upgraded biogas) to be between 460 - 550 DKK/MWh.
The same was shown in another report [53], where medium scale optimised biogas plants
using amine scrubbing have production costs of 468.46 DKK/MWh. This shows that
majority of the competition faced by e-methane in Denmark is from biomethane, and is
nowhere near competitive levels as it is higher by a factor of at least 2.2.
6.3
Future Danish Energy System
In the latest electricity price outlook published by Dansk Energi in 2021, electricity
prices are expected to substantially increase in two of the scenarios they have envisioned
for the future Danish energy system [22]. In the Black scenario, elspot prices increase
after 2030 due to lifetime of existing conventional power plants being extended and
investments in VRE being postponed for the remainder of the decade. This primarily
diverts funds to cheap onshore wind, and due to low CO2 prices, coal and gas-fired power
plants continue to be scheduled in day-ahead electricity markets.
On an positive note, the Green scenario expects an accelerated electrification rate in
Denmark and EU within the next decade. Since the AF20 assumptions strongly rest on
achieving GHG reduction goals, this scenario is chosen as a departure point for further
discussion. A high initial spike in the level of elspot prices is expected followed by a
steady decline after 2030. It is worth nothing that Denmark is a price-taker in the EU
integrated electricity market. Thus, the electricity prices experienced in DK1 region
==PAGE:110==
6.3 Future Danish Energy System
100
will be significantly influenced by developments in new interconnections (for e.g., Viking
Link connection to Great Britain) and energy systems of neighbouring countries such as
Norway and Germany.
This implies that DK could be more closely linked to price developments in the Nordics or
be affected by the trends in Central Europe, and this would be determined by expansion
in large offshore wind capacities, which could help DK position itself as either a net
exporter or importer of green electricity. If the connections to the south are constrained,
then Denmark will not be able to exploit high electricity prices. It will instead be subject
to lower prices in the Nordics due to the influence of vast amount of hydro-power and
wind, facilitating easier integration of VRE. Thus, there is considerable uncertainty with
regards to the development of electricity prices.
Figure 6.2: Forecasted electricity production by technology and development of day-
ahead electricity prices in Green Scenario, using Balmorel. Source: Dansk
Energi [22].
The electricity prices are forecasted to peak between 2025 - 2030, within a range of 450
- 550 DKK/MWh (real prices) and the avg. level of prices is forecasted to remain above
the level experienced in the past 5 years (figure 6.2). The data from the first 5 months
of 2021 also seem to suggest a similar development, as shown in Figure 6.3. Prices have
been highly volatile with several outliers, and only around 75 hours were recorded to
experience negative prices, with some hours down to -300 DKK/MWh, co-inciding with
high wind power production and lower than average demand. These trends seem to
indicate a more costly development in the energy system, as a collateral of achieving
70% reduction in GHG emissions and net zero by 2050 in Denmark.
==PAGE:111==
6.3 Future Danish Energy System
101
Figure 6.3: The spread of hourly resolution forecast by ENS is contrasted against ac-
tual settlement hourly elspot prices for DK1 from January to 15 June 2021.
The y-axis holds the elspot prices (real) while the x-axis denotes the hours.
Observed data obtained from Nordpool [68].
The elspot projections are nevertheless, affected with great uncertainty, for instance
with relation to the effect of offshore wind power production from the proposed energy
islands on electricity prices and PtX development, according to ENS [32]. This is also
addressed in the elpris outlook, where one of the sensitivity analyses explored the capac-
ity expansion of electrolysis systems driven by offshore wind. According to the report
[22], the electricity and settlement prices remain largely unaffected, even though it is
expected that majority of the green hydrogen production will be powered by offshore
wind farms. However, from another sensitivity scenario, it is expected that the LCOE
of offshore wind (around 340 DKK/MWh in 2025) and PV (around 300 DKK/MWh)
will be lower than settlement prices at 400 DKK/MWh and 310 DKK/MWh for wind
and PV respectively, thus implying that these technologies will be able to cover their
operational costs and will facilitate the uptake of VREs in DK.
But the effect on CO2 prices is not clear although a decoupling from electricity price
developments is expected, where they fall to a medium level. If this happens, we end
up in a conflicting scenario where the decline in gas and coal prices act as incentive to
traditional thermal power plants to produce and bid more electricity on one hand along
with low CO2 prices, but the declining costs of wind and solar along with higher demand
for CO2 certificates squeeze out the same conventional power generators on the other
hand.
==PAGE:112==
6.4 Competition with other alternative sustainable fuels
102
Further, since both the offshore VRE facility and electrolysis will be connected to the
electricity grid, the perspective of operation tends to focus on that of the wind farm
operator. It leads to the possibility of optimisation of revenues through either powering
the electrolysis facility, selling electricity to the grid or allowing hydrogen production to
be powered by the grid, a similar operational scenario outlined by Energinet [27]. This
is expected to place a greater strain on the transmission network and thus, an increase
in the level of transmission network tariffs seems more likely. In both instances, ’flexible’
or dynamic operation of electrolysis both could push electricity prices higher.
6.4
Competition with other alternative
sustainable fuels
While the discussion in the previous section was from the perspective of electrification
and electricity prices, the outlook did not take into account the role of future development
in the production of biofuels and competition between biofuels and e-fuels, which is
addressed by M.S. Lester et al. in [63]. The authors also use the energy system modelling
tool, Balmorel, to analyse the role of electrofuels in an economically-optimised and fossil
fuel-independent future Danish energy system in 2050. This is further discussed since
the main product in this thesis is considered to be e-biomethane, due to its reliance on
electricity and biogenic CO2 for synthesis.
The key finding was that electrofuels produced using biomass where found to be more
economically attractive compared to fuels synthesised using carbon capture technologies;
with 57% of the Danish transport sector reliant on biofuels and the remaining on e-
biofuels. The main drivers for the competition were found to be electricity prices, fuel
demands, import/ export of biomass and its native cost. Restriction on biomass imports
in one of the main scenarios led to a high penetration of electrofuels in the transport
sector, as opposed to the base scenario in which the entire domestic straw and wood
supply is utilised for biofuel production, with an additional import of 128 PJ of wood
chips.
The current report has explored the feasibility of PtG in the next 20 years with the
main product as SNG, and thus it is important to analyse the possibility of methane as
a drop-in fuel in the transport sector. As highlighted in the section on production costs,
lower cost estimates for both traditional biomethane and electro-methane produced us-
ing thermal gasification, can outcompete SNG produced via the catalytic Power-to-Gas
route, not considering that it also faces competition from biodiesel for heavy duty ve-
hicles.
Further, the costs do not include compression and/ or liquefaction.
Even if
methane was to be seriously considered as a fuel for decarbonisation, the data appears
unpromising. Despite the availability of a well-developed gas grid in DK, there exist
only 17 operational filling stations [69]: 10 in Jutland, 6 in Zealand and 1 on the island
==PAGE:113==
6.5 Concluding discussion
103
of Fyn according to [44]. While there was a positive development in the total no. total
of trucks running on CNG in DK, from 17 in 2012 to 156 in 2020 [69], there were no
trucks using LNG in 2020. The average no. of NGVs is 9.17 per filling station, which is
much lower than the lower range of 200 - 800 vehicles per filling stations, according to
NGV deployment in successful countries [52].
6.5
Concluding discussion
A few, possibly relevant conclusions can be drawn from the above comparisons. The
final gas production costs are primarily dependent on power prices and the respective
power price area it is located in. Energy system developments with regards to electricity
supply is critical, not only in the host country but neighbouring countries with whom
interconnections exist, such as with Norway and Germany in the case of West Denmark.
Siting is crucial to capitalise on additional revenues from by-products such as district
heating and oxygen sales. High CAPEX and OPEX can be avoided through co-location
of facilities with CO2 sources of significant scale to exploit benefit of economies of scale
in electrolysis capacities.
The future state of gas prices is paramount to the success of alternative fuels. SNG
produced from CO2 methanation can be competitive only if natural gas prices increase
to twice their current level at high CO2 prices. The uptake of e-fuels appears promis-
ing for meeting emission reduction targets for heavy transport through production of
gaseous fuels, as it is one of the subsectors which remain diﬀicult to electrify. However,
electrofuels face stiff competition from ”traditional” technologies such as biomethane in
Denmark and actual demand for CNG is quite low in DK according to data from 2020.
For meeting climate goals, the report [70] sheds more light on proving the positive
climate impacts of biogas production and upgrading facilities, which are absent from
grid-powered electrofuels. Five model biogas plants were analysed for their respective
climate effects through production of biogas, and it was found to be positively affect-
ing 7 areas: substitution of fossil natural gas, methane leakage, reduction of methane
through biomass storage (esp. livestock manure and degassed biomass), carbon storage
of biomass for biogas, nitrous oxide from cultivation of energy crops and nitrate leach-
ing/ ammonia evaporation. A positive climate effect was found to range between 54.7 to
77.5 kg-CO2-eq/GJ of gas. It thus contributes to reduction of emissions in agriculture
and forms a strong basis for justification of support levels. Out of the 7 areas, only
the substitution of fossil gas aspect can be quantified for electrofuel produced in this
paper but the remainder is absent; unless the biogas is directly upgraded using in-situ
hydrogenation of raw biogas or through direct catalytic methanation.
Thus, the feasibility of the investigated PtG system in this thesis in a Danish context,
stands sharply opposed to the surrounding conditions expected. Through the integrated
==PAGE:114==
6.5 Concluding discussion
104
sensitivity and threshold analysis, it was seen that the break-even conditions of the cases
lied within regions with reduced electricity price levels of at least below 250 DKK/MWh
(real price), increased gas spot market prices of at least 358.79 DKK/MWh (nominal)
and CO2 prices hovering around 645 DKK/MWh (nominal) and transmission network
tariff levels below 85 DKK/MWh; which are in stark contrast to the future development
expected.
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and
Recommendations
7.1
Conclusion
The project investigated the techno-economic feasibility of CO2 valorisation on inte-
grated biogas and Power-to-Gas plants in Denmark, through process modelling, levelised
cost assessment and investment analysis. According to the Danish TSO’s recommenda-
tions on PtX configuration models, 2 cases (1B & 2) with operation strategies aiming
at mitigating exposure to fluctuating day-ahead electricity prices were investigated, in
addition to a steady-state base case within the time frame of 2022 to 2041. The work
builds upon the forecasted development by the Danish Energy Agency with respect to
electricity prices, fuel prices, PtX, gas and transport sectors.
Catalytic P2G was found to be a technically feasible solution to produce grid-quality
SNG with a WI of 52.8 MJ/Nm3 with 8334 tons of annual output, using either methana-
tion system operating in adiabatic or isothermal/ adiabatic mode, based on commercially
mature technologies. The latter (System 2) was chosen due to less process complexity
and more suitability for medium-scale biomethane output; whereas the former is more
suited for very large scale biogas plants, owing to its operational experience on coal gasi-
fication plants. There is great process integration potential as heat from the reactors
can be easily used to satisfy the reboiler demand in the upgrading section, and the water
can be used for meeting nearly half the demand at the electrolysis system. The chemical
energy density of the final gas strongly depends on the amount of H2 present, with it
negatively affecting the LHV of the SNG at high levels and vice-versa. In addition, this
is influenced by the quality of the CO2 stream and H2 output from the electrolyser.
From the economic feasibility analysis, all 3 cases were found to be highly unprofitable
within the next 20 years, from a biogas plant owner’s perspective.
The profits are
constrained by thermodynamic limitations imposed by the methanation reaction, as it is
not worthwhile to exploit economies of scale in water electrolysis through establishment
of large systems. A stoichiometric ratio of higher than 4 will result in less CO2 conversion,
leading to lower SNG yield and ultimately, more negative NPVs and higher levelised
costs.
==PAGE:116==
7.2 Recommendations
106
The electrolysis system is shown to be the most costly element with electricity prices
dominating the overall project costs. On one hand, the inclusion of on-site hydrogen
storage in high pressure steel tanks does help mitigate the impact of electricity costs,
witnessed with an improvement from the base case to Case 2, with the latter having a
less negative NPV. On the other hand, only a slight improvement in levelised costs of
production were seen due to the costly addition of storage. Case 1B experienced the
most improvement in its final worth, with the least negative NPV, but the same was
not witnessed in levelised costs where it was most expensive to produce SNG, despite
having a lower levelised cost of hydrogen in the same case.
An extensive sensitivity and scenario analysis revealed the most uncertain and critical
parameters to the performance of the cases. The success of PtG facilities in the en-
ergy system of the future in Denmark will largely be determined by adequate support
levels at 7 times the previously awarded value to biogas upgrading, significantly lower
developments in tariff levels, increased gas demand and low PPA prices with large-scale
offshore wind, followed by well-investigated siting close to either H2/ CO2 sources and
district heating networks. However, the support levels will be hard to justify in the
same fashion as for biogas, since its net positive climate impacts are not clearly jus-
tifiable presently. Revenues from heating and oxygen sales were found to, if not the
same but possibly, have a higher influence on the profitability of the facility. This is
also in part determined by the technological development of electrolysers, whereby an
increase in eﬀiciency according to projections will lead to less availability of surplus heat.
An increase in overall eﬀiciency of electrolysers was found to significantly improve the
economic performance of the cases, due to a reduction in nominal size and electricity
consumption costs. However, they were still not adequate to make the cases break-even.
7.2
Recommendations
This section is inspired by the limitations of this study and results in recommendations
for possible future work.
From a profitability perspective, PtG’s success is dependent on access to renewable
electricity from large-scale wind/PV sources to exploit savings from additional tariffs and
support levels and have the possibility to optimise revenues from either fuel production
or selling electricity to the grid. The perspective needs to shift to an operator with a
portfolio of VRE power generation and fuel production facilities, rather than a restricted
view from biogas and/ or wind park owners. In this context, economies of scale with
electrolysers can also be exploited if large-scale hydrogen production is realised so as
to have access to underground storage, taking into account the seasonal effect of VRE
production and gas demand.
From a GHG reduction perspective, grid-connected electrolysis does not offer marginal
==PAGE:117==
7.2 Recommendations
107
benefit compared to biogas plants since the carbon intensity of hydrogen is largely de-
termined by the electricity mix. It does not alleviate overall climate impact in the same
regard as biogas production does, according to the discussion earlier. Thus, it does not
seem reasonable to divert negative CO2 emissions from upgrading facilities back into
the energy system, only for it to be released again through combustion, regardless of
the final product (gaseous or liquid fuel). In this regard, it is recommended to power
electrolysis through renewable electricity sources and use it for the different biological
methanation configurations suggested in the background section. Extensive life cycle
assessment studies are required to accurately assess the role of Power-to-X as a decar-
bonisation technology and its role in CO2 utilisation.
Extensive heat integration is crucial for improving the overall eﬀiciency of PtX technolo-
gies. This can be done using pinch analysis if more energetically dense chemicals such
as methanol and Fischer-Tropsch fuels are produced and/ or if detailed information of
the complete biogas plant is available.
In the context of technologies for upgrading biogas, amine scrubbing remains the pre-
ferred option for carbon capture. While it is less capital intensive than other methanation
systems alone, it is highly energy intensive. The feasibility of direct catalytic methana-
tion of raw biogas or hybrid model of biological methanation could be considered in
future modelling studies, based on chemical reaction kinetics. Based on the limitations
of this study, this would be especially relevant when included in a delta analysis for
private economic feasibility study i.e. if a biogas plant owner had to decide between
investment in amine capture solutions or the other aforementioned technologies, for grid
injection.
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
The appendix includes all supplementary data which support the main contributions in
the thesis.
A.1
Thermodynamic data - Process Modelling
A.1.1
Stream Summary for System 1
Table A.1: Detailed stream summary for System 1.
Stream
BIO-CO2
BIO-CO2A
BIO-CO2B
H2
1
2
3
4
5
6
R1
7
8
9
10
Mass flowrate
(kg/h)
2684.60
2684.60
2684.60
492.11
3176.70
5353.33
5353.33
5353.33
1725.61
3627.72
2176.63
1451.09
1451.09
1451.08
1451.08
Molar flowrate
(kmol/hr)
61.00
61.00
61.00
244.11
305.11
485.69
485.69
396.75
95.79
300.96
180.58
120.38
120.38
101.21
101.21
Temperature
(deg C)
105.00
25.00
309.50
75.45
140.58
105.45
230.00
686.42
50.00
50.00
51.03
51.03
230.00
626.47
478.00
Pressure
(bar)
1
1
15
30
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
Enthalpy
(kJ/kg)
-8877.28
-8948.23
-8676.46
726.69
-7219.81
-6461.50
-6084.94
-6084.67
-15770074.72
-5354.78
-5354.78
-5354.78
-4830.99
-4831.19
-5354.98
Composition.
mole%
H2O
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.33
24.82
100.00
24.82
0.90
0.90
0.90
15.13
15.13
H2
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00
80.01
68.27
68.27
36.74
0.00
36.74
48.43
48.43
48.43
24.60
24.60
O2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CO2
100.00
100.00
100.00
0.00
19.99
15.22
15.22
5.42
0.00
5.42
7.15
7.15
7.15
3.91
3.91
CH4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
13.73
13.73
28.02
0.00
28.02
36.94
36.94
36.94
53.42
53.42
CO
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.45
2.45
4.99
0.00
4.99
6.58
6.58
6.58
2.94
2.94
C
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.2: Detailed stream summary for System 1 - continued.
Stream
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Mass flowrate
(kg/h)
261.58
1189.50
1189.50
1189.50
1189.50
139.14
1050.35
1050.35
1050.35
1050.35
58.13
992.23
Molar flowrate
(kmol/hr)
14.52
86.69
86.69
76.40
76.40
7.72
68.67
68.67
65.48
65.48
3.23
62.25
Temperature
(°C)
50.00
50.00
230.00
494.20
345.80
50.00
50.00
230.00
320.95
155.70
40.00
40.00
Pressure
(bar)
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
Enthalpy
(kJ/kg)
-15770074.72
-5101.91
-4600.52
-4600.66
-5102.04
-15770074.72
-4927.88
-4442.79
-4442.79
-4927.88
-15811830.04
-4735.38
Composition.
mole%
H2O
100.00
0.92
0.92
10.95
10.95
100.00
0.93
0.93
5.47
5.47
100.00
0.57
H2
0.00
28.72
28.72
9.20
9.20
0.00
10.24
10.24
1.37
1.37
0.00
1.44
O2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CO2
0.00
4.57
4.57
2.01
2.01
0.00
2.23
2.23
0.30
0.30
0.00
0.31
CH4
0.00
62.36
62.36
77.50
77.50
0.00
86.22
86.22
92.87
92.87
0.00
97.68
CO
0.00
3.44
3.44
0.34
0.34
0.00
0.38
0.38
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
C
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:119==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
109
A.1.2
Stream summary for System 2
Table A.3: Detailed stream summary for System 2.
Stream
BIO-CO2
BIO-CO2A
BIO-CO2B
H2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Mass flowrate
(kg/h)
2684.60
2684.60
2684.60
492.11
3176.70
3176.70
3176.70
2120.69
1056.02
1056.02
63.69
1056.02
1056.02
992.33
Molar flowrate
(kmol/hr)
61.00
61.00
61.00
244.11
305.11
305.11
186.76
117.72
69.04
69.04
3.54
65.79
65.79
62.26
Temperature
(°C)
105.00
25.00
309.50
75.45
140.58
225.00
350.00
50.00
50.00
230.00
40.00
319.05
153.23
40.00
Pressure
(bar)
1.00
1.00
15.00
30.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
15.00
Enthalpy
(kJ/kg)
-8877.28
-8948.23
-8676.46
726.69
-7219.81
-6959.98
-9930.36
-15770.07
-4978.55
-4493.68
-15811.83
-4493.68
-4978.55
-4735.82
Composition.
mole%
H2O
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
63.38
100.00
0.93
0.93
100.00
5.91
5.91
0.57
H2
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00
80.01
80.01
3.96
0.00
10.72
10.72
0.00
1.37
1.37
1.45
O2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
CO2
100.00
100.00
100.00
0.00
19.99
19.99
0.97
0.00
2.63
2.63
0.00
0.30
0.30
0.31
CH4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
31.69
0.00
85.71
85.71
0.00
92.41
92.41
97.66
CO
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
C
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
A.2
Economic Feasibility Assessment
A.2.1
Detailed cost estimates
The detailed breakdown of scaled investment costs for electrolyser systems (ALK &
PEM) and Methanation system is provided in the following tables.
Table A.4: Overview of final scaled investment costs for different PtG components.
System component
Cost
Unit
Note
Electrolyser. ALK
143251542.79
DKK
Case 1A and 1B
Electrolyser. PEM
134309819.73
DKK
Case 1A and 1B
Stack. ALK
71625771.4
DKK
Case 1A and 1B
Stack. PEM
80585891.84
DKK
Case 1A and 1B
Methanation Unit
44542373.64
DKK
Common for all cases
Compressor
3034921.59
DKK
Common for all cases
H2 Storage
16782721.02
DKK
Case 2 only
Case 2 Electrolyser. ALK
212145579
DKK
Case 2 Electrolyser. PEM
158183113
DKK
Case 2. ALK Stack
106072789.7
DKK
Case 2. PEM Stack
94909867.78
DKK
==PAGE:120==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
110
Table A.5: Breakdown of final investment cost. ALK system. Nominal size of system:
23.54 MWel in Case 1A and 1B.
System component.
ALK
Share of investment cost
(%)
Scaled Investment Costs
(EUR2020)
Stack
50%
11329894.45
Structural rings
15%
896992.27
Sealings
4%
239197.938
Membrane
7%
908267.36
Anode
26%
3373564.48
Cathode
26%
3373564.48
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
7%
840566.127
Pressure plates/ flanges
4%
480323.501
Tie Rods
3%
179398.4536
Pre-electrode/ current distributor
8%
1038019.84
Power electronics
15%
2642577.96
Gas conditioning
15%
2094605.987
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
3161316.61
Table A.6: Detailed reference and scaled investment cost breakdown for Case 2 ALK
system of nominal size 37.59 MWel.
System component
ALK
Share of investment cost
(%)
Overall reference investment cost
breakdown (EUR2020)
Scaling factor
Scaled Investment Costs
(EUR2020)
Stack
50%
2756000
0.88
17603200.2
Structural rings
15%
413400
0.5
1133436.11
Sealings
4%
110240
0.5
302249.63
Membrane
7%
192920
1
1450208.34
Anode
26%
716560
1
5386488.13
Cathode
26%
716560
1
5386488.13
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
7%
192920
0.95
1311075.62
Pressure plates/ flanges
4%
110240
0.95
749186.069
Tie Rods
3%
82680
0.5
226687.222
Pre-electrode/ current distributor
8%
220480
1
1657380.96
Power Electronics
15%
826800
0.75
3753533.77
Gas Conditioning
15%
826800
0.6
2773526.73
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
1102400
0.68
4345655.99
==PAGE:121==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
111
Table A.7: Breakdown of final investment cost. PEM system. Nominal size of system:
24.79 MWel in Case 1A and 1B.
System component.
PEM
Share of investment cost
(%)
Scaled Investment Costs
(EUR2020)
Stack
55%
11222155.41
Membrane
5%
661273.25
Catalyst - Anode
7%
925782.55
Catalyst - Cathode
2%
264509.3
Current Collector Anode (PtL)
7%
854562.172
Current Collector Cathode (PtL)
8%
976642.482
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
48%
5859854.893
End Plates
1%
122080.31
Pressure Plates
4%
488321.24
Small parts/ sealings
4%
237584.268
Stack assembling
2%
118792.134
MEA Manufacturing
12%
712752.805
Power Electronics
15%
2417201.691
Gas Conditioning
10%
1267434.872
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
3121371.751
Table A.8: Detailed reference and scaled investment cost breakdown for Case 2 PEM
system of nominal size 42.57 MWel.
System component. PEM
Share of investment cost
(%)
Overall reference investment cost
breakdown (EUR2020)
Scaling factor
Scaled Investment
Costs (EUR2020)
Stack
55%
2667500
0.89
11222155.4
Membrane
5%
133375
1
661273.25
Catalyst - Anode
7%
186725
1
925782.55
Catalyst - Cathode
2%
53350
1
264509.3
Current Collector Anode (PtL)
7%
186725
0.95
854562.172
Current Collector Cathode (PtL)
8%
213400
0.95
976642.482
Bipolar plates (incl. Flowfield)
48%
1280400
0.95
5859854.89
End Plates
1%
26675
0.95
122080.31
Pressure Plates
4%
106700
0.95
488321.241
Small parts/ sealings
4%
106700
0.5
237584.268
Stack assembling
2%
53350
0.5
118792.134
MEA Manufacturing
12%
320100
0.5
712752.805
Power Electronics
15%
727500
0.75
3625764.92
Gas Conditioning
10%
485000
0.6
1753053.03
Balance of Plant (BoP)
20%
970000
0.73
4631659.26
==PAGE:122==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
112
Table A.9: Detailed final investment cost breakdown for Methanation system. Nomi-
nal size: 13.62 MWSNG across all 3 cases.
Methanation system component
Share of investment cost
(%)
Scaled Costs
(EUR2020)
Reactor
21%
1273613.342
Reactor
57%
631672.595
Catalyst
26%
447797.488
Heat Management
17%
194143.258
Electric installation
20%
1276783.408
Gas conditioning
12%
659154.794
Balance of Plant (BoP)
47%
2769290.555
A.2.2
Overall CAPEX & OPEX comparison
Table A.10: CAPEX and OPEX comparison for all cases. All values are in MDKK..
Parameter
Case 1A
Case 1B
Case 2
Electrolyser CAPEX
143.25
143.25
212.15
Methanation CAPEX
44.54
44.54
44.54
Compressor CAPEX
3.03
3.03
3.03
H2 storage
0
0
16.78
Engineering design
and services
53.43
53.43
77.42
Total CAPEX
244.26
244,26
353.93
Fixed OPEX
9.65
9.65
12.23
Electricity cost,
(Variable OPEX), Electrolyser
100.54
53.87
86.01
Electricity cost (Variable OPEX),
Compressor
0.62
0.47
0.87
A.2.3
Economic feasibility assessment using PEM
technology
Since ALK system was chosen as the final electrolysis technology for inclusion in the
main report, the case-wise levelised cost and investment analysis using PEM technology
within the same investigated time frame are mentioned here. Annual SNG production
remains the same at 114.45 GWh for cases 1A/ 2 (83.35 kton-SNG) and 71.61 GWh
(52.15 kton-SNG).
==PAGE:123==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
113
Table A.11: Overview of economic feasibility assessment, using PEM technology in-
stead of ALK in the time frame: 2022 to 2041.
Case
NPV, MDKK
(MEUR)
LCOG1, DKK/MWh
(EUR/MWh)
LCOG2, DKK/kg
(EUR/kg)
System CAPEX, MDKK
(MEUR)
Avg. annual electricity cost,
MDKK (MEUR)
Avg. EBITDA, MDKK
(MEUR)
1A
-419,51
(-56.31)
1285,06
(172.49)
17,64
(2.37)
232,82
(31.25)
101,59
(13.64)
-18,55
(-2.49)
1B
-268,36
(36.02)
1353,64
(181.7)
18,59
(2.49)
232,82
(31.25)
57,2
(7.68)
-0,86
(-0.115)
2
-311,42
(-41.8)
1237,26
(130.98)
16,99
(2.28)
284,86
(38.24)
98,27
(13.19)
-1,22
(-0.16)
A.2.4
Sensitivity Analysis results - Case 1A
This subsection details the results of the local sensitivity analysis conducted for Case
1A.
Table A.12: Impact on NPV with variation in electricity price level.
Electricity Price level
NPV
(MDKK)
Change in NPV
(%)
Note
0.5
-46.1011
87.69%
0.6
-104.851
72.00%
0.7
-163.628
56.31%
0.8
-226.94
39.40%
0.9
-300.728
19.70%
1
-374.516
0.00%
Original Case
1.1
-448.304
-19.70%
1.2
-522.091
-39.40%
1.3
-595.879
-59.11%
1.4
-669.667
-78.81%
1.5
-743.455
-98.51%
Table A.13: Impact on NPV with change in gas spot price level - Case 1A.
Gas spot price level
NPV
(MDKK)
Change in NPV
(%)
Note
0.5
-492.324
-31.46%
0.6
-468.763
-25.16%
0.7
-445.201
-18.87%
0.8
-421.639
-12.58%
0.9
-398.077
-6.29%
1
-374.516
0.00%
Original case
1.1
-350.954
6.29%
1.2
-327.392
12.58%
1.3
-303.831
18.87%
1.4
-280.269
25.16%
1.5
-256.707
31.46%
==PAGE:124==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
114
Table A.14: Impact on NPV with a change in forecasted level of CO2 prices.
CO2 Forecast price level
NPV
0.5
-404.492
0.6
-398.497
0.7
-392.502
0.8
-386.506
0.9
-380.511
1
-374.516
1.1
-368.52
1.2
-362.525
1.3
-356.53
1.4
-350.534
1.5
-344.539
==PAGE:125==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
115
Table A.15: Impact of discount rate on profitability - Case 1A.
Discount
rate (%)
NPV
(MDKK)
3.00%
-466.069
3.50%
-454.583
4.00%
-443.893
4.50%
-433.934
5.00%
-424.647
5.50%
-415.978
6.00%
-407.880
6.50%
-400.307
7.00%
-393.220
7.50%
-386.581
8.00%
-380.356
8.50%
-374.516
9.00%
-369.031
9.50%
-363.875
10.00%
-359.025
10.50%
-354.459
11.00%
-350.156
11.50%
-346.099
12.00%
-342.270
12.50%
-338.654
13.00%
-335.236
13.50%
-332.003
14.00%
-328.943
14.50%
-326.044
15.00%
-323.297
Table A.17: Impact of specific CAPEX of methanation system on NPV.
Specific CAPEX
Methanation (EUR/MW-SNG)
NPV
(MDKK)
110000
-287.37
160000
-296.66
200000
-304.093
250000
-313.383
300000
-322.674
350000
-331.965
400000
-341.255
450000
-350.546
500000
-359.837
579000
-374.516
720000
-400.715
==PAGE:126==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
116
Table A.16: Impact of specific CAPEX on NPV - Alkaline Electrolysis.
Specific CAPEX -
ALK
(EUR/MW)
NPV
(MDKK)
479000
-218.129
500000
-223.782
600000
-250.698
840000
-315.299
1060000
-374.516
1200000
-412.199
2900000
-869.785
Table A.18: Impact of change in district heating price on NPV.
District heating
price (DKK/MWh)
NPV
(MDKK)
187.5
-411.779
206.25
-407.977
226.875
-403.794
249.5625
-399.193
274.51875
-394.132
301.970625
-388.565
332.1676875
-382.441
365.3844563
-375.705
371.25
-374.516
401.9229019
-368.296
442.1151921
-360.145
486.3267113
-351.179
534.9593824
-341.317
588.4553206
-330.468
647.3008527
-318.535
712.030938
-305.408
735
-300.75
==PAGE:127==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
117
A.2.5
Sensitivity Analysis results - Case 1B
Table A.19: Impact of electricity prices on NPV - Case 1B.
Electricity
price level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-53.783
0.6
-85.569
0.7
-119.238
0.8
-155.342
0.9
-195.471
1
-236.175
1.1
-276.879
1.2
-317.582
1.3
-358.373
1.4
-398.989
1.5
-439.693
Table A.20: Impact of gas spot prices on NPV - Case 1B.
Gas spot
price level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-307.615
0.6
-293.327
0.7
-279.039
0.8
-264.751
0.9
-250.463
1
-236.175
1.1
-221.887
1.2
-207.599
1.3
-193.311
1.4
-179.023
1.5
-165.311
==PAGE:128==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
118
Table A.21: Impact of CO2 prices on NPV - Case 1B.
CO2
price level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-254.93
0.6
-251.179
0.7
-247.428
0.8
-243.677
0.9
-239.926
1
-236.175
1.1
-232.424
1.2
-228.673
1.3
-224.922
1.4
-221.171
1.5
-217.42
==PAGE:129==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
119
Table A.22: Impact of discount rate on NPV - Case 1B.
Discount
rate (%)
NPV
(MDKK)
3.00%
-200.744
3.50%
-205.681
4.00%
-210.173
4.50%
-214.26
5.00%
-217.98
5.50%
-221.365
6.00%
-224.447
6.50%
-227.253
7.00%
-229.807
7.50%
-232.132
8.00%
-234.248
8.50%
-236.175
9.00%
-237.928
9.50%
-239.523
10.00%
-240.974
10.50%
-242.294
11.00%
-243.493
11.50%
-244.583
12.00%
-245.573
12.50%
-246.471
13.00%
-247.285
13.50%
-248.023
14.00%
-248.691
14.50%
-249.295
15.00%
-249.841
Table A.23: Impact of specific investment cost of ALK system on NPV - Case 1B.
Specific CAPEX.
ALK
(EUR/MW)
NPV
(MDKK)
479000
-106.712
500000
-111.604
600000
-133.191
840000
-186.304
1060000
-236.175
1200000
-267.911
2900000
-653.276
==PAGE:130==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
120
Table A.24: Impact of specific investment cost of CAPEX system on NPV - Case 1B.
Specific CAPEX.
Methanation
(EUR/MW)
NPV
(MDKK)
110000
-149.624
160000
-158.819
200000
-165.839
250000
-175.077
300000
-184.333
350000
-193.644
400000
-202.914
450000
-212.205
500000
-221.496
579000
-236.175
720000
-262.375
==PAGE:131==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
121
Table A.25: Impact of district heating price on NPV - Case 1B.
District heating
price (DKK/MWh)
NPV
(MDKK)
187.50
-258.657
206.25
-256.363
226.88
-253.84
249.56
-251.064
274.52
-248.01
301.97
-244.651
332.17
-240.957
365.38
-236.893
371.25
-236.175
401.92
-232.422
442.12
-227.504
486.33
-222.095
534.96
-216.145
588.46
-209.599
647.30
-202.399
712.03
-194.48
735.00
-191.669
A.2.6
Sensitivity Analysis results - Case 2
Table A.26: Effect of specific H2 storage CAPEX on NPV.
Specific CAPEX,
H2 storage
(EUR/kg-H2)
NPV
(MDKK)
250.27
-293.555
300
-295.929
350
-298.315
400
-300.702
422.7
-301.785
450
-303.088
490
-304.998
==PAGE:132==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
122
Table A.27: Impact of electricity prices on NPV - Case 2.
Electricity price
level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-22.7968
0.6
-74.0213
0.7
-125.493
0.8
-180.663
0.9
-240.139
1
-304.998
1.1
-370.67
1.2
-436.342
1.3
-502.015
1.4
-567.852
1.5
-633.36
Table A.28: Impact of gas spot prices on NPV - Case 2.
Gas spot
price level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-422.794
0.6
-399.235
0.7
-375.676
0.8
-352.116
0.9
-328.557
1
-304.998
1.1
-281.438
1.2
-258.413
1.3
-237.126
1.4
-214.41
1.5
-193.696
==PAGE:133==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
123
Table A.29: Impact of CO2 prices on NPV - Case 2.
Gas spot
price level
NPV
(MDKK)
0.5
-334.971
0.6
-328.976
0.7
-322.982
0.8
-316.987
0.9
-310.992
1
-304.998
1.1
-299.003
1.2
-293.008
1.3
-287.013
1.4
-281.143
1.5
-275.686
Table A.30: Impact of specific CAPEX of methanation on NPV - Case 2.
Specific CAPEX,
Methanation
(EUR/MW-SNG)
NPV
(MDKK)
110000
-219,415
160000
-228,823
200000
-235,799
250000
-244,546
300000
-254,004
350000
-262,779
400000
-271,737
450000
-281,068
500000
-290,318
579000
-304,998
720000
-331,197
==PAGE:134==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
124
Table A.31: Impact of district heating price on NPV - Case 2.
Specific CAPEX,
Methanation
(EUR/MW-SNG)
NPV
(MDKK)
187,50
-340,894
206,25
-337,231
226,88
-333,202
249,56
-328,77
274,52
-323,895
301,97
-318,532
332,17
-312,633
365,38
-306,143
371,25
-304,998
401,92
-299,005
442,12
-291,154
486,33
-282,517
534,96
-273,016
588,46
-262,565
647,30
-251,97
712,03
-239,673
735
-235,61
A.2.7
Sensitivity Analysis on Levelised Costs
Table A.32: Impact of electricity price level on LCOG and LCOH - Case 1A.
Electricity
price level
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. PEM
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 PEM
(DKK/kg)
0.5
942.483
12.941
670.112
22.315
692.996
23.077
0.6
998.598
13.711
716.323
23.854
739.207
24.616
0.7
1054.714
14.482
762.533
25.392
785.418
26.154
0.8
1110.830
15.252
808.744
26.931
831.628
27.693
0.9
1166.945
16.023
854.954
28.470
877.839
29.232
1
1223.061
16.793
901.165
30.009
924.049
30.771
1.1
1279.176
17.563
947.375
31.548
970.260
32.310
1.2
1335.292
18.334
993.586
33.086
1016.470
33.848
1.3
1391.407
19.104
1039.796
34.625
1062.681
35.387
1.4
1447.523
19.875
1086.007
36.164
1108.891
36.926
1.5
1503.639
20.645
1132.217
37.703
1155.102
38.465
==PAGE:135==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
125
Table A.33: Impact of electricity price level on LCOG and LCOH - Case 1B.
Electricity
price level
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. PEM
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 PEM
(DKK/kg)
0.5
1022.678
14.042
668.717
22.268
698.049
23.245
0.6
1073.687
14.742
710.759
23.668
740.090
24.645
0.7
1124.696
15.442
752.800
25.068
782.132
26.045
0.8
1175.706
16.143
794.841
26.468
824.173
27.445
0.9
1226.715
16.843
836.883
27.868
866.214
28.845
1
1277.724
17.544
878.924
29.268
908.256
30.245
1.1
1328.734
18.244
920.965
30.668
950.297
31.645
1.2
1379.743
18.944
963.007
32.068
992.339
33.045
1.3
1430.752
19.645
1005.048
33.468
1034.380
34.445
1.4
1481.762
20.345
1047.090
34.868
1076.421
35.845
1.5
1532.771
21.045
1089.131
36.268
1118.463
37.245
Table A.34: Impact of electricity price level on LCOG and LCOH - Case 2.
Electricity
price level
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/kg)
0.5
961.044
13.195
748.137
24.913
0.6
1012.088
13.896
790.139
26.312
0.7
1063.131
14.597
832.141
27.710
0.8
1114.174
15.298
874.143
29.109
0.9
1165.217
15.999
916.145
30.508
1
1216.261
16.700
958.147
31.906
1.1
1267.304
17.400
1000.149
33.305
1.2
1318.347
18.101
1042.151
34.704
1.3
1369.391
18.802
1084.153
36.102
1.4
1420.434
19.503
1126.155
37.501
1.5
1471.477
20.204
1168.157
38.900
Table A.35: Impact of specific investment cost of ALK system on LCOG and LCOH -
1A.
Specific CAPEX. ALK
(EUR/MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
479000
1092.637
15.002
809.602
26.960
500000
1097.351
15.067
812.912
27.070
600000
1119.799
15.375
828.671
27.595
840000
1173.675
16.115
866.494
28.854
1060000
1223.061
16.793
901.165
30.009
1200000
1254.488
17.224
923.228
30.743
2900000
1636.107
22.464
1191.138
39.665
==PAGE:136==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
126
Table A.36: Impact of specific investment cost of ALK system on LCOG and LCOH -
1B.
Specific CAPEX. ALK
(EUR/MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
479000
1091.049
14.980
750.687
24.998
500000
1097.796
15.073
755.322
25.152
600000
1129.926
15.514
777.394
25.887
840000
1207.038
16.573
830.366
27.651
1060000
1277.724
17.544
878.924
29.268
1200000
1277.724
17.544
878.924
29.268
2900000
1322.706
18.161
909.824
30.297
Table A.37: Impact of specific investment cost of ALK system on LCOG and LCOH -
Case 2.
Specific CAPEX. ALK
(EUR/MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
479000
1109.328
15.231
869.239
28.946
500000
1113.193
15.284
872.452
29.053
600000
1131.598
15.537
887.755
29.562
840000
1175.770
16.144
924.481
30.785
1060000
1216.261
16.700
958.147
31.906
1200000
1242.028
17.053
979.571
32.620
2900000
1554.913
21.349
1239.715
41.283
Table A.38: Impact of transmission network tariff level on levelised costs - Case 1A.
Transmission network
tariff level
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1 PEM
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 PEM
(DKK/kg)
0
1029.056
14.129
739.862
24.637
762.747
25.399
85
1175.912
16.146
861.963
28.703
884.847
29.465
102
1205.283
16.549
886.383
29.517
909.268
30.279
112.29
1223.061
16.793
901.165
30.009
924.049
30.771
125
1245.020
17.094
919.422
30.617
942.307
31.379
Table A.39: Impact of transmission network tariff level on levelised costs - Case 1B.
Transmission network
tariff level
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1 PEM
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 PEM
(DKK/kg)
0
1082.014
14.856
717.622
23.897
746.953
24.874
85
1230.161
16.890
839.723
27.963
869.054
28.940
102
1259.790
17.297
864.143
28.776
893.474
29.753
112.29
1277.724
17.544
878.924
29.268
908.256
30.245
125
1299.877
17.848
897.182
29.876
926.513
30.853
==PAGE:137==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
127
Table A.40: Impact of transmission network tariff level on levelised costs - Case 2.
Transmission network
tariff level
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1. ALK
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2 ALK
(DKK/kg)
0
1020.732
14.015
796.996
26.540
85
1168.741
16.047
918.982
30.602
102
1198.343
16.454
943.380
31.415
112.29
1216.261
16.700
958.147
31.906
125
1238.392
17.003
976.388
32.514
A.2.8
Integrated sensitivity and threshold analysis
results
This section details the integrated sensitivity and threshold analysis results on variation
of select parameters along with electricity prices.
A.2.8.1
Specific CAPEX of ALK
Table A.41: Performance of PtG facility - Elpris vs Specific CAPEX (ALK) - Case
1A.
NPV (MDKK) under differing
specific investment cost. ALK (EUR/MW)
Change in
Elspot level (%)
479000
500000
600000
840000
1060000
1200000
2900000
0%
-218.129
-223.782
-250.698
-315.299
-374.516
-412.199
-869.785
-10%
-145.204
-150.637
-176.911
-241.511
-300.728
-338.411
-795.997
-20%
-80.617
-85.762
-110.361
-170.603
-226.94
-264.624
-722.209
-30%
-21.8381
-26.962
-51.362
-109.922
-163.628
-198.111
-648.421
-40%
36.912
31.788
7.388
-51.171
-104.851
-139.011
-574.633
-50%
95.662
90.538
66.13865
7.578
-46.101
-80.261
-500.845
Table A.42: Performance of PtG facility - Elpris vs Specific CAPEX (ALK) - Case
1B.
NPV (MDKK) under differing specific investment cost. ALK (EUR/MW)
Change in
Elspot price (%)
479000
500000
600000
840000
1060000
1200000
2900000
0%
-106.712
-111.604
-133.191
-186.304
-236.175
-267.911
-653.276
-10%
-68.6722
-73.0575
-94.0547
-146.171
-195.441
-227.177
-612.542
-20%
-34.7202
-38.9005
-59.0116
-108.637
-155.284
-186.443
-571.808
-30%
-2.83142
-6.96556
-26.6519
-74.151
-119.153
-148.463
-531.074
-40%
28.94117
24.80702
5.120637
-42.1267
-85.4741
-113.517
-490.34
-50%
60.71375
56.57961
36.89322
-10.3541
-53.6642
-81.2251
-449.606
==PAGE:138==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
128
Table A.43: Performance of PtG facility - Elpris vs Specific CAPEX (ALK) - Case 2.
NPV (MDKK) under differing specific investment cost ALK (EUR/MW)
Change in
Elspot price (%)
479000
500000
600000
840000
1060000
1200000
2900000
0%
-187.39
-191.524
-211.882
-260.063
-304.998
-334.051
-686.845
-10%
-126.713
-130.728
-149.889
-196.349
-240.139
-268.379
-621.172
-20%
-71.9463
-75.769
-94.1009
-138.842
-180.663
-207.556
-555.5
-30%
-20.5352
-24.3199
-42.3424
-85.5991
-125.493
-151.285
-489.828
-40%
30.68934
26.90462
8.882137
-34.3718
-74.0213
-99.2528
-424.155
-50%
81.91387
78.12915
60.10667
16.85271
-22.7968
-48.0282
-361.41
A.2.8.2
Gas spot price
Table A.44: Performance of PtG facility under increasing gas spot price and reducing
elpris levels - Case 1A.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing gas spot price level
Change in
Elspot price level
(%)
Base Case
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0%
-374.516
-350.954
-327.392
-303.831
-280.269
-256.707
-10%
-300.728
-277.166
-253.604
-230.043
-207.55
-186.661
-20%
-226.94
-205.736
-185.098
-165.113
-144.166
-124.948
-30%
-163.628
-144.434
-125.267
-106.099
-84.8776
-66.0438
-40%
-104.851
-85.6839
-66.5163
-47.3487
-26.1065
-7.30446
-50%
-46.1011
-26.9335
-7.76596
11.4016
32.63279
51.43484
Table A.45: Performance of PtG facility under increasing gas spot price and reducing
elpris levels - Case 1B.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing gas spot price levels (%)
Change in
elspot price level
(%)
1
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0%
-236.175
-221.887
-207.599
-193.311
-179.023
-165.311
-10%
-195.441
-181.153
-166.865
-153.598
-140.868
-128.378
-20%
-155.284
-142.485
-129.934
-117.629
-105.557
-93.769
-30%
-119.153
-107.076
-95.3087
-83.8521
-72.6324
-61.4862
-40%
-85.4741
-74.2921
-63.1475
-52.0029
-40.8583
-29.7137
-50%
-53.6642
-42.5195
-31.3749
-20.2303
-9.08569
2.058925
==PAGE:139==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
129
Table A.46: Performance of PtG facility under increasing gas spot price and reducing
elpris levels - Case 2.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing gas spot price levels (%)
Change in
elspot price level
(%)
1
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0%
-304.998
-281.438
-258.413
-237.126
-214.410
-193.696
-10%
-240.139
-218.249
-197.420
-177.000
-156.920
-137.250
-20%
-180.663
-160.558
-140.914
-121.752
-103.052
-84.589
-30%
-125.493
-106.899
-88.493
-70.117
-51.741
-33.364
-40%
-74.021
-55.645
-37.269
-18.892
-0.516
17.860
-50%
-22.797
-4.420
13.956
32.332
50.708
69.085
A.2.9
CO2 Prices
Table A.47: Performance of PtG facility under increasing CO2 price levels and reduc-
ing elpris levels - Case 1A.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing CO2 price levels (%)
Change in
elspot price level
(%)
Base case
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
-374.516
-368.520
-362.525
-356.530
-350.534
-344.539
-338.544
-332.548
-326.553
-320.558
-314.563
-10%
-300.728
-294.733
-288.737
-282.742
-276.747
-270.751
-264.756
-258.761
-252.765
-246.770
-240.775
-20%
-226.940
-221.501
-216.109
-210.760
-205.451
-200.177
-194.931
-189.718
-184.538
-179.404
-174.320
-30%
-163.628
-158.734
-153.857
-148.984
-144.111
-139.239
-134.366
-129.494
-124.621
-119.749
-114.876
-40%
-104.851
-99.979
-95.106
-90.234
-85.361
-80.489
-75.616
-70.743
-65.871
-60.998
-56.126
-50%
-46.101
-41.228
-36.356
-31.483
-26.611
-21.738
-16.866
-11.993
-7.120
-2.248
2.625
Table A.48: Performance of PtG facility under increasing CO2 price levels and reduc-
ing elpris levels - Case 1B.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing CO2 price levels (%)
Change in
elspot price level
(%)
Base case
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
-236.175
-232.424
-228.673
-224.922
-221.171
-217.420
-213.669
-209.918
-206.167
-202.416
-198.665
-10%
-195.441
-191.690
-187.939
-184.188
-180.437
-176.686
-172.935
-169.310
-165.433
-162.058
-158.697
-20%
-155.284
-151.931
-148.600
-145.269
-141.963
-138.668
-135.398
-132.141
-128.902
-125.677
-122.467
-30%
-119.153
-115.973
-112.817
-109.680
-106.559
-103.463
-100.381
-97.311
-94.262
-91.217
-88.195
-40%
-85.474
-82.529
-79.592
-76.659
-73.734
-70.808
-67.882
-64.956
-62.031
-59.105
-56.179
-50%
-53.664
-50.738
-47.813
-44.887
-41.961
-39.035
-36.110
-33.184
-30.258
-27.332
-24.406
Table A.49: Performance of PtG facility under increasing CO2 price levels and reduc-
ing elpris levels - Case 2.
NPV (MDKK) under increasing CO2 price levels (%)
Change in
elspot price level
(%)
Base case
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0%
-304.998
-299.003
-293.008
-287.013
-281.143
-275.686
-269.479
-264.042
-257.863
-252.449
-247.069
-10%
-240.139
-234.004
-228.632
-223.295
-217.972
-212.650
-207.376
-202.118
-196.892
-191.691
-186.514
-20%
-180.663
-175.533
-170.438
-165.355
-160.302
-155.276
-150.285
-145.326
-140.383
-135.477
-130.584
-30%
-125.493
-120.732
-115.997
-111.285
-106.577
-101.882
-97.191
-92.515
-87.839
-83.163
-78.487
-40%
-74.021
-69.345
-64.670
-59.994
-55.318
-50.642
-45.966
-41.290
-36.614
-31.938
-27.262
-50%
-22.797
-18.121
-13.445
-8.769
-4.093
0.583
5.259
9.934
14.610
19.286
23.962
==PAGE:140==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
130
A.2.10
Tariff levels
Table A.50: Performance of PtG facility under different tariff levels - Case 1A.
NPV (MDKK) under different transmission network
tariff levels (DKK/MWh)
Change in
elspot price level (%)
0
85
102
112.29
125
0%
-135.530
-313.250
-351.415
-374.516
-403.050
-10%
-76.775
-239.462
-277.627
-300.728
-329.262
-20%
-18.037
-172.874
-206.052
-226.940
-255.474
-30%
40.702
-113.747
-144.803
-163.628
-187.461
-40%
99.440
-54.996
-86.053
-104.851
-128.071
-50%
158.178
3.754
-27.303
-46.101
-69.320
Table A.51: Performance of PtG facility under different tariff levels - Case 1B.
NPV (MDKK) under different transmission network
tariff levels (DKK/MWh)
Change in
elspot price level (%)
0
85
102
112.29
125
0%
-88.8357
-197.503
-221.593
-236.175
-254.186
-10%
-56.6374
-157.345
-180.859
-195.441
-213.452
-20%
-24.8648
-121.12
-142.204
-155.284
-172.718
-30%
6.907777
-87.1526
-106.799
-119.153
-134.789
-40%
38.68036
-55.2724
-74.0629
-85.4741
-99.9213
-50%
70.45295
-23.4998
-42.2904
-53.6642
-67.7129
Table A.52: Performance of PtG facility under different tariff levels - Case 2.
NPV (MDKK) under different transmission network
tariff levels (DKK/MWh)
Change in
elspot price level (%)
0
85
102
112.29
125
0%
-80.747
-244.845
-281.715
-304.998
-333.756
-10%
-29.518
-184.392
-218.392
-240.139
-268.083
-20%
21.706
-128.795
-160.687
-180.663
-205.880
-30%
72.931
-77.083
-107.109
-125.493
-148.970
-40%
124.155
-25.858
-55.861
-74.021
-96.453
-50%
175.380
25.366
-4.636
-22.797
-45.228
==PAGE:141==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
131
A.2.11
Support levels
Table A.53: Performance of PtG facility under different renewable support levels - 1A.
NPV (MDKK) under different support levels (support no. 2) (DKK/MWh)
Support level 1
(DKK/MWh)
326.638
307.424
288.210
268.996
249.782
230.568
211.354
192.140
128.730
96.070
0.000
502.707
33.452
12.667
-8.119
-28.904
-49.690
-70.476
-91.261
-112.047
-182.165
-222.563
-354.172
473.136
1.463
-19.323
-40.109
-60.894
-81.680
-102.465
-123.251
-144.071
-218.331
-263.073
-394.683
443.565
-30.527
-51.313
-72.098
-92.884
-113.670
-134.457
-155.425
-177.125
-258.842
-303.584
-435.193
413.994
-62.517
-83.303
-104.088
-124.874
-145.709
-166.993
-189.423
-212.851
-299.352
-344.094
-475.703
384.423
-94.507
-115.292
-136.082
-157.082
-178.891
-201.945
-226.673
-252.995
-339.862
-384.604
-516.214
354.852
-126.496
-147.346
-168.691
-191.220
-214.711
-240.861
-267.183
-293.505
-380.372
-425.114
-556.724
325.281
-158.738
-180.659
-203.774
-228.728
-255.050
-281.371
-307.693
-334.015
-420.883
-465.625
-597.234
295.710
-193.021
-216.594
-242.916
-269.238
-295.560
-321.882
-348.204
-374.526
-461.393
-506.135
-637.745
198.000
-324.128
-350.450
-376.772
-403.094
-429.416
-455.738
-482.060
-508.382
-595.249
-639.991
-771.601
147.855
-392.824
-419.146
-445.468
-471.789
-498.111
-524.433
-550.755
-577.077
-663.944
-708.687
-840.296
0.000
-595.375
-621.697
-648.019
-674.341
-700.663
-726.985
-753.307
-779.629
-866.496
-911.238
-1042.847
Table A.54: Performance of PtG facility under different renewable support levels - 1B.
NPV (MDKK) under different support levels (support no. 2) (DKK/MWh)
Support level 1
(DKK/MWh)
326.638
307.424
288.210
268.996
249.782
230.568
211.354
192.140
128.730
96.070
0.000
502.707
21.893
8.703
-4.487
-17.677
-30.866
-44.056
-57.246
-70.488
-116.185
-141.232
-223.106
473.136
1.593
-11.597
-24.786
-37.976
-51.166
-64.368
-77.677
-91.247
-138.822
-164.605
-249.131
443.565
-18.706
-31.896
-45.086
-58.276
-71.527
-84.954
-98.735
-112.967
-162.147
-190.606
-275.156
413.994
-39.006
-52.196
-65.402
-78.722
-92.315
-106.357
-120.788
-135.513
-187.887
-216.631
-301.181
384.423
-59.305
-72.566
-86.014
-99.835
-114.098
-128.689
-143.578
-158.751
-213.912
-242.656
-327.206
354.852
-79.766
-93.387
-107.467
-121.929
-136.676
-151.735
-167.523
-184.131
-239.937
-268.681
-353.231
325.281
-100.934
-115.229
-129.841
-144.752
-159.945
-176.346
-193.246
-210.156
-265.962
-294.706
-379.256
295.710
-123.071
-137.839
-152.919
-168.723
-185.451
-202.361
-219.271
-236.181
-291.987
-320.731
-405.281
198.000
-203.805
-220.715
-237.625
-254.534
-271.444
-288.354
-305.264
-322.174
-377.980
-406.724
-491.274
147.855
-247.936
-264.846
-281.756
-298.666
-315.576
-332.486
-349.396
-366.306
-422.112
-450.856
-535.405
0.000
-378.061
-394.971
-411.881
-428.791
-445.701
-462.611
-479.521
-496.431
-552.237
-580.980
-665.530
Table A.55: Performance of PtG facility under different renewable support levels - 2.
NPV (MDKK) under different support levels (support no. 2) (DKK/MWh)
Support level 1
(DKK/MWh)
326.638
307.424
288.210
268.996
249.782
230.568
211.354
192.140
128.730
96.070
0.000
502.707
95.724
74.644
53.565
32.485
11.406
-9.674
-30.753
-51.833
-121.998
-160.102
-284.111
473.136
63.282
42.202
21.123
0.043
-21.036
-42.116
-63.195
-84.289
-156.414
-196.098
-325.703
443.565
30.840
9.760
-11.319
-32.399
-53.478
-74.558
-95.727
-117.165
-192.282
-234.019
-367.296
413.994
-1.602
-22.682
-43.761
-64.841
-85.942
-107.221
-128.926
-151.340
-229.291
-273.763
-408.888
384.423
-34.045
-55.124
-76.204
-97.387
-118.859
-140.917
-163.714
-187.043
-269.484
-315.355
-450.480
354.852
-66.487
-87.596
-108.891
-130.635
-153.114
-176.234
-199.815
-223.902
-311.011
-356.948
-492.073
325.281
-99.048
-120.555
-142.675
-165.522
-188.884
-212.734
-237.826
-263.415
-352.603
-398.540
-533.665
295.710
-132.357
-154.900
-178.058
-201.673
-225.794
-251.868
-277.983
-305.008
-394.195
-440.133
-575.258
198.000
-253.973
-280.289
-307.314
-334.339
-361.364
-388.389
-415.414
-442.439
-531.627
-577.564
-712.689
147.855
-323.795
-350.820
-377.845
-404.870
-431.895
-458.920
-485.945
-512.970
-602.157
-648.095
-783.220
0.000
-531.757
-558.782
-585.807
-612.832
-639.857
-666.882
-693.907
-720.932
-810.119
-856.057
-991.182
==PAGE:142==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
132
A.2.12
Full load hours
Table A.56: Effect of capacity factor on profitability and levelised costs of hydrogen
and SNG - Case 1B.
Capacity
factor
Annual full
load hours
NPV
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh).
ALK
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
ALK
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh)
PEM
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
PEM
10%
876.000
-303.129
3529.407
48.460
1863.920
62.069
2039.911
67.929
15%
1314.000
-286.971
2584.174
35.481
1433.196
47.725
1550.523
51.632
20%
1752.000
-274.243
2122.999
29.149
1227.263
40.868
1315.259
43.798
25%
2190.000
-263.552
1852.073
25.430
1108.467
36.912
1178.864
39.256
30%
2628.000
-254.293
1675.033
22.999
1032.219
34.373
1090.882
36.326
35%
3066.000
-247.373
1553.317
21.328
981.662
32.689
1031.945
34.364
40%
3504.000
-241.655
1464.355
20.106
945.661
31.491
989.659
32.956
45%
3942.000
-237.382
1397.514
19.188
919.599
30.623
958.708
31.925
50%
4380.000
-234.957
1346.709
18.491
900.948
30.002
936.146
31.174
55%
4818.000
-234.518
1307.735
17.956
887.825
29.565
919.823
30.630
60%
5256.000
-236.175
1277.724
17.544
878.924
29.268
908.256
30.245
65%
5694.000
-239.967
1254.578
17.226
873.244
29.079
900.320
29.981
70%
6132.000
-245.849
1236.762
16.981
870.044
28.972
895.185
29.810
75%
6570.000
-253.062
1222.529
16.786
868.265
28.913
891.731
29.695
80%
7008.000
-1074.149
1240.435
17.032
867.187
28.877
889.186
29.610
85%
7446.000
-1082.755
1228.854
16.873
866.769
28.863
887.474
29.553
90%
7884.000
-1092.314
1219.330
16.742
867.033
28.872
886.587
29.523
95%
8322.000
-1103.054
1211.705
16.637
868.008
28.905
886.533
29.522
96%
8409.600
-1105.333
1210.377
16.619
868.274
28.914
886.607
29.524
Table A.57: Effect of capacity factor on profitability. levelised costs of hydrogen and
SNG. System CAPEX. hydrogen storage requirement and average annual
electricity cost of electrolysis - Case 2.
Capacity
factor (%)
Annual full
load hours
NPV
(MDKK)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh).
ALK
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
ALK
Nominal size
ALK
(MW)
H2 storage
requirement
(kg)
System CAPEX
(MDKK)
Avg. annual
electricity cost
(MDKK)
10%
876
-1384.404
2214.105
30.400
1787.792
59.533
225.514
10578.959
1407.966
123.969
15%
1314
-924.588
1799.321
24.705
1442.925
48.049
150.343
9963.118
1012.177
116.615
20%
1752
-701.566
1594.885
21.898
1272.949
42.389
112.757
9347.278
806.857
115.346
25%
2190
-570.421
1473.420
20.230
1171.959
39.026
90.206
8731.437
679.594
115.501
30%
2628
-484.299
1393.097
19.128
1105.175
36.802
75.171
8115.597
592.119
116.041
35%
3066
-426.846
1338.375
18.376
1059.677
35.287
64.433
7499.756
527.754
117.299
40%
3504
-384.889
1298.087
17.823
1026.181
34.172
56.379
6883.916
478.037
118.476
45%
3942
-353.932
1267.849
17.408
1001.039
33.335
50.114
6268.075
438.210
119.700
50%
4380
-331.549
1245.283
17.098
982.278
32.710
45.103
5652.235
405.386
121.074
55%
4818
-315.709
1228.527
16.868
968.346
32.246
41.003
5036.394
377.708
122.607
60%
5256
-304.998
1216.261
16.700
958.147
31.906
37.586
4420.554
353.927
124.316
65%
5694
-298.325
1207.449
16.579
950.821
31.662
34.695
3804.713
333.171
126.234
70%
6132
-294.792
1201.312
16.494
945.719
31.492
32.216
3188.873
314.812
128.305
75%
6570
-292.828
1196.659
16.430
941.850
31.364
30.069
2573.032
298.385
130.341
80%
7008
-291.366
1192.678
16.376
938.540
31.253
28.189
1957.192
283.541
132.232
85%
7446
-290.398
1189.362
16.330
935.782
31.162
26.531
1341.351
270.008
133.976
90%
7884
-290.087
1186.767
16.295
933.625
31.090
25.057
725.511
257.577
135.636
95%
8322
-290.569
1184.950
16.270
932.114
31.039
23.738
109.670
246.078
137.261
==PAGE:143==
A.2 Economic Feasibility Assessment
133
A.2.13
Eﬀiciency of ALK system
Table A.58: Effect of eﬀiciency on levelised costs. nominal size and profitability of
Case 1A.
Power
consumption
(kWh/Nm3-H2)
Eﬀiciency
(%)
Nominal size of
electrolyser (MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
NPV
(MDKK)
3.8
79%
20.80
1097.11
15.06
799.45
26.62
-222.073
3.9
77%
21.35
1122.31
15.41
819.80
27.30
-252.575
4
75%
21.90
1147.50
15.76
840.13
27.98
-283.058
4.1
73%
22.44
1172.67
16.10
860.46
28.65
-313.522
4.2
71%
22.99
1197.82
16.45
880.78
29.33
-343.969
4.3
70%
23.54
1222.96
16.79
901.09
30.01
-374.398
4.4
68%
24.09
1248.09
17.14
921.38
30.68
-404.811
4.5
67%
24.63
1273.21
17.48
941.67
31.36
-435.207
Table A.59: Effect of eﬀiciency on levelised costs. nominal size and profitability of
Case 1B.
Power
consumption
(kWh/Nm3-H2)
Eﬀiciency
(%)
Nominal size of
electrolyser (MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
NPV
(MDKK)
3.8
79%
20.80
1154.24
15.85
781.05
26.01
-145.824
3.9
77%
21.35
1178.96
16.19
800.64
26.66
-163.56
4
75%
21.90
1203.66
16.53
820.22
27.31
-181.551
4.1
73%
22.44
1228.34
16.87
839.77
27.96
-199.75
4.2
71%
22.99
1252.99
17.20
859.32
28.62
-217.935
4.3
70%
23.54
1277.63
17.54
878.85
29.27
-236.105
4.4
68%
24.09
1302.25
17.88
898.37
29.92
-254.261
4.5
67%
24.63
1326.84
18.22
917.87
30.57
-272.403
Table A.60: Effect of eﬀiciency on levelised costs. nominal size and profitability of
Case 2.
Power
consumption
(kWh/Nm3-H2)
Eﬀiciency
(%)
Nominal size of
electrolyser (MW)
LCOG1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOG2
(DKK/kg)
LCOH1
(DKK/MWh)
LCOH2
(DKK/kg)
NPV
(MDKK)
3.8
79%
33.22
1094.96
15.03
857.29
28.55
-168.815
3.9
77%
34.09
1119.28
15.37
877.51
29.22
-194.441
4
75%
34.97
1143.58
15.70
897.72
29.89
-220.492
4.1
73%
35.84
1167.86
16.04
917.91
30.57
-248.387
4.2
71%
36.72
1192.13
16.37
938.08
31.24
-276.530
4.3
70%
37.59
1216.37
16.70
958.24
31.91
-305.129
4.4
68%
38.46
1240.60
17.03
978.38
32.58
-333.708
4.5
67%
39.34
1264.81
17.37
998.52
33.25
-362.269
==PAGE:144==
Bibliography
[1]
Andreas Zauner et al. Deliverable 7.7 Analysis on future technology options and
on techno-economic optimization, Store&Go. , accessed 2021-04-10.
[2]
Charlotte van Leeuwen et al. Deliverable 8.3 Report on the costs involved with PtG
technologies and their potentials across the EU, Store&Go. , accessed 2021-04-10.
[3]
Ea Energy Analyses. Integration af termisk forgasning i det danske energisystem
(Integration of thermal gasification in the Danish energy system). Technical report.
Tech. rep, 2017.
[4]
Irini Angelidaki et al. “Biogas upgrading and utilization: Current status and per-
spectives.” In: Biotechnology advances 36.2 (2018), pages 452–466.
[5]
Anonymous. Biogas plant block flow diagram - temperature and energy flows. Ac-
cessed 2021-02-10.
[6]
Gas Storage Denmark A/S. Our history. https://gasstorage.dk/Our-storage,
accessed 2021-02-10.
[7]
Manuel Bailera et al. “The Role of Energy Storage and Carbon Capture in Elec-
tricity Markets.” In: Energy Storage (2020), pages 1–37.
[8]
Fredric Bauer et al. “Biogas upgrading–technology overview, comparison and per-
spectives for the future.” In: Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining 7.5 (2013),
pages 499–511.
[9]
Pontus Bokinge et al. “Nordic Power2X for Sustainable Road Transport.” In:
(2020).
[10]
Sirid Sif Bundgaard et al. “Experiences with biogas in Denmark.” In: DTU Man-
agement Engineering (2014).
[11]
UN Climate Change. Key aspects of the Paris Agreement. https://unfccc.int/
process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement/key-
aspects-of-the-paris-agreement, accessed 2021-02-09.
[12]
Adam Christensen. “Assessment of hydrogen production costs from electrolysis:
United States and Europe.” In: Retrieved from the International Council on Clean
Transportation: https://theicct. org/publications/assessment-hydrogen-production-
costs-electrolysis-united-states-and-europe (2020).
==PAGE:145==
Bibliography
135
[13]
Lasse R Clausen. “Energy eﬀicient thermochemical conversion of very wet biomass
to biofuels by integration of steam drying, steam electrolysis and gasification.” In:
Energy 125 (2017), pages 327–336.
[14]
Energy Danish Ministry of Climate and Utilities. Denmark’s Integrated National
Energy and Climate Plan. https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/energy-
climate - politics / eu - energy - union - denmarks - national - energy - and -
climate, accessed 2021-02-09.
[15]
European Commission. A hydrogen strategy for climate-neutral Europe. https://
ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/hydrogen_strategy.pdf, accessed
2021-02-25.
[16]
Energinet DataService. Gas System Right Now. https://www.energidataservice.
dk/tso-gas/gassystemrightnow, accessed 2021-05-08.
[17]
Liangwei Deng, Yi Liu, and Wenguo Wang. Biogas technology. Springer, 2020.
[18]
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. ”Facts about taxation in Denmark - 2019”.
https://investindk.com/our- services/taxation- in- denmark, accessed
2021-05-01 [Online].
[19]
M James Douglas. Conceptual design of chemical processes. McGrawHill, 1988.
[20]
Ember. Daily EU ETS Prices. https://ember- climate.org/data/carbon-
price-viewer/, accessed 2021-06-05.
[21]
Enegistyrelsen. Denmark’s Energy Islands. https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/
wind-power/energy-islands/denmarks-energy-islands, accessed 2021-04-05.
[22]
Dansk Energi. Elpris Outlook 2021. https://www.danskenergi.dk/udgivelser/
elpris-outlook-2021-vil-groen-efterspoergsel-betyde-hoejere-elpriser,
accessed 2021-06-08.
[23]
Ea Energianalyse and Dansk Energi. Brint og PtX i fremtidens energisystem.
https : // www . ea - energianalyse .dk /en / cases/ power- to- x- strategy -
for-dansk-energi/, accessed 2021-06-01.
[24]
Energinet. Biomethane Certificates. https://en.energinet.dk/Gas/Biomethane/
Biomethane-Certificates, accessed 2021-05-05.
[25]
Energinet. Forventet udvikling i Energinets eltariffer. https://energinet.dk/
El/Elmarkedet/Tariffer, accessed 2021-05-20.
[26]
Energinet. Gas Spot Index Prices, Public Download. https://online.energinet.
dk/data/Pages/Public-download.aspx, accessed 2021-06-05.
[27]
Energinet. PtX in Denmark before 2030. , accessed 2021-03-10.
[28]
Energinet. Security of Gas Supply 2020. , accessed 2021-03-10.
[29]
Energinet. Tariffs and Fees. https://energinet.dk/El/Elmarkedet/Tariffer,
accessed 2021-05-15.
==PAGE:146==
Bibliography
136
[30]
Energistyrelsen. Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2020. https://ens.dk/
service / fremskrivninger - analyser - modeller / analyseforudsaetninger -
til-energinet, accessed 2021-06-09.
[31]
Energistyrelsen. Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2020 - Ledningsgas og gasstrømme.
https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/analyseforudsaetninger-
til-energinet, accessed 2021-06-09.
[32]
Energistyrelsen. Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2020 - Power-to-X (PtX).
https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/analyseforudsaetninger-
til-energinet, accessed 2021-06-09.
[33]
Energistyrelsen. Analysis prerequisites for Energinet. https://ens.dk/service/
fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/analyseforudsaetninger-til-energinet,
accessed 2021-05-05.
[34]
Energistyrelsen. ”Interactive Maps - Wind power plants in Denmark”. l-og-kort/
interaktive-kort, accessed 2021-05-14 [Online].
[35]
Energistyrelsen. Prices for electricity and gas, 2020. https://ens.dk/service/
statistik-data-noegletal-og-kort/priser-paa-el-og-gas, accessed 2021-
05-05.
[36]
Energistyrelsen. Support for upgrading and purification of biogas. https://ens.
dk/ansvarsomraader/stoette- til- vedvarende- energi/biogas/stoette-
til-opgradering-og-rensning-af-biogas, accessed 2021-05-05.
[37]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data Catalogue for Energy Transport 2020. https:
//ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/
technology-catalogue-transport-energy-co2, accessed 2021-02-10.
[38]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data Catalogue for Industrial Process Heat and Carbon
Capture 2020. https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/
technology-data/technology-data-renewable-fuels, accessed 2021-06-01.
[39]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data Catalogue for Renewable Fuels 2020. https :
//ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/
technology-data-renewable-fuels, accessed 2021-05-20.
[40]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data Catalogue for Renewable Fuels 2021. https :
//ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/
technology-data-renewable-fuels, accessed 2021-02-10.
[41]
U.S Department of Energy. Hydrogen Storage, Oﬀice of Energy Eﬀiciency and
Renewable Energy. https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-
storage, accessed 2021-03-15.
[42]
Course 42004 Feasibility Studies of Energy Projects. Lecture notes. Accessed 2021-
03-18.
[43]
Linde Engineering. Isothermal reactor. https://www.linde-engineering.com/
en/process-plants/hydrogen_and_synthesis_gas_plants/gas_generation/
isothermal_reactor/index.html, accessed 2021-02-26.
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
137
[44]
CNG Europe. CNG Filling Stations Map - Denmark. http://cngeurope.com/
countries/denmark/, accessed 2021-06-15.
[45]
Gas Fakta. Gas Consumption. https://www.gasfakta.dk/gas-i-danmark/
gasanvendelse, accessed 2021-06-07.
[46]
Klima Energi-og Forsyningsministeriet. The Natural Gas Supply Act. https://
www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2020/126, accessed 2021-05-05.
[47]
Annex G. Work Programme 2016/17, Horizon 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/
research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/wp/2016-2017/annexes/
h2020-wp1617-annex-ga_en.pdf, accessed 2021-02-10.
[48]
Karim Ghaib and Fatima-Zahrae Ben-Fares. “Power-to-Methane: A state-of-the-
art review.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 81 (2018), pages 433–
446.
[49]
Sunfire GmBh. Sunfire - HyLink Alkaline Electrolyser. https://www.sunfire.de/
files/sunfire/images/content/Sunfire.de%20(neu)/Sunfire-Factsheet-
HyLink-Alkaline-20210111.pdf, accessed 2021-02-10.
[50]
Jachin Gorre et al. “Cost benefits of optimizing hydrogen storage and methanation
capacities for Power-to-Gas plants in dynamic operation.” In: Applied Energy 257
(2020), page 113967.
[51]
Manuel Götz et al. “Renewable Power-to-Gas: A technological and economic re-
view.” In: Renewable energy 85 (2016), pages 1371–1390.
[52]
Dejene A Hagos and Erik Ahlgren. “A state-of-the art review on the development
of CNG/LNG infrastructure and natural gas vehicles (NGVs).” In: Chalmers Univ.
Technol (2017).
[53]
Thomas Hernø. “Production of upgraded biogas - optimization of costs and climate
impact.” In: (2019).
[54]
NEL Hydrogen. Electrolysers Brochure Rev C. https://nelhydrogen.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/Electrolysers-Brochure-Rev-C.pdf, accessed
2021-02-10.
[55]
Henrik Iskov, Torben Kvist, and Johan Bruun. “Biogas, Biomethane and Electro-
methane cost comparison.” In: (2019).
[56]
JH Jensen, JM Poulsen, and NU Andersen. “From coal to clean energy.” In: Nitro-
gen+ syngas 310 (2011), pages 34–38.
[57]
Jan Kopyscinski. “Production of synthetic natural gas in a fluidized bed reactor:
Understanding the hydrodynamic, mass transfer, and kinetic effects.” PhD thesis.
ETH Zurich, 2010.
[58]
Jan Kopyscinski, Tilman J Schildhauer, and Serge MA Biollaz. “Production of
synthetic natural gas (SNG) from coal and dry biomass–A technology review from
1950 to 2009.” In: Fuel 89.8 (2010), pages 1763–1783.
==PAGE:148==
Bibliography
138
[59]
KPMG. ”Corporate tax rates table”. https://home.kpmg/dk/en/home/insights/
2016/11/tax- rates- online/corporate- tax- rates- table.html, accessed
2021-05-01 [Online].
[60]
Karl-Josef Kuhn. Electrolysis/ eFuels, Pathways to synthetic fuels. https://www.
wko.at/site/OEGEW/Veranstaltungen/co-electrolysis-and-synthesis.pdf,
accessed 2021-03-10.
[61]
S Shiva Kumar and V Himabindu. “Hydrogen production by PEM water electrolysis–
A review.” In: Materials Science for Energy Technologies 2.3 (2019), pages 442–
454.
[62]
The Danish Gas Legislation. Bekendtgørelse om gaskvalitet. https://www.retsinformation.
dk/eli/lta/2018/230, accessed 2021-05-26.
[63]
Mason Scott Lester, Rasmus Bramstoft, and Marie Münster. “Analysis on elec-
trofuels in future energy systems: a 2050 case study.” In: Energy 199 (2020),
page 117408.
[64]
R Lohmüller. “Methansynthese mit kombinierten isothermen und adiabaten Reak-
toren.” In: Berichte aus Technik und Wissenschaft (1977).
[65]
Google Maps. Hypothetical Offshore Wind Farm Location. https://www.google.
com/maps/@55.7833591,10.5054395,10.25z, accessed 2021-06-07.
[66]
Hrvoje Mikulčić et al. “Flexible Carbon Capture and Utilization technologies in fu-
ture energy systems and the utilization pathways of captured CO2.” In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 114 (2019), page 109338.
[67]
NIST. NIST Chemistry WebBook. https://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/,
accessed 2021-02-27.
[68]
NordPool. Historical Market Data. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/historical-
market-data/, accessed 2021-06-05.
[69]
European Fuels Observatory. Country detail - Denmark. https://www.eafo.eu/
countries/denmark/1730/summary, accessed 2021-06-15.
[70]
JØRGEN E Olesen et al. “Bæredygtig Biogas: Klima-og Miljøeffekter af Biogaspro-
duktion.” In: DCA—Nationalt Center for Fødevarer og Jordbrug, Aarhus Univer-
sitet: Tjele, Denmark (2020).
[71]
Max S Peters, Klaus D Timmerhaus, et al. Plant design and economics for chemical
engineers. 1980.
[72]
Ralf Peters et al. “A techno economic analysis of the power to gas route.” In:
Journal of CO2 utilization 34 (2019), pages 616–634.
[73]
Pexapark. European PPA Market: 2020/21 Outlook. https://pexapark.com/
european-ppa-market/, accessed 2021-06-07.
[74]
Valerie Rodin et al. “Assessing the potential of carbon dioxide valorisation in
Europe with focus on biogenic CO2.” In: Journal of CO2 Utilization 41 (2020),
page 101219.
==PAGE:149==
Bibliography
139
[75]
Stefan Rönsch et al. “Review on methanation–From fundamentals to current projects.”
In: Fuel 166 (2016), pages 276–296.
[76]
Tanja Schaaf et al. “Methanation of CO 2-storage of renewable energy in a gas
distribution system.” In: Energy, Sustainability and Society 4.1 (2014), pages 1–14.
[77]
Skat. E.A.4.6.3.2 Godtgørelse af afgift af elektricitet. https://skat.dk/skat.
aspx?oid=2062223, accessed 2021-05-15.
[78]
Michael Sterner and Ingo Stadler. Handbook of energy storage: Demand, technolo-
gies, integration. Springer, 2019.
[79]
METIS Studies. The role and potential of Power-to-X in 2050. Study S8. https:
//ec.europa.eu/energy/studies/role-and-potential-power-x_en, accessed
2021-03-15.
[80]
Course 42002 Modelling & Analysis of Sustainable Energy Systems. Mathematical
programming models for energy systems analysis: An introduction. Accessed 2021-
06-18.
[81]
“The Future of Hydrogen, IEA, Paris.” In: IEA (2019).
[82]
Martin Thema, Franz Bauer, and Michael Sterner. “Power-to-Gas: Electrolysis
and methanation status review.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
112 (2019), pages 775–787.
[83]
Thyssenkrup. Alkaline Water Electrolysis Catalogue. https://ucpcdn.thyssenkrupp.
com / _binary / UCPthyssenkruppBAISUhdeChlorineEngineers / en / products /
water-electrolysis-hydrogen-production/alkaline-water-electrolysis/
link-thyssenkrupp_Hydrogen_Water_Electrolysis_and_green_chemicals.
pdf, accessed 2021-02-10 [Online].
[84]
Haldor Topsøe. From coal to clean energy. 2011.
[85]
Alfredo Ursua, Luis M Gandia, and Pablo Sanchis. “Hydrogen production from
water electrolysis: current status and future trends.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
100.2 (2011), pages 410–426.
[86]
Christina Wulf and Petra Zapp. “Review and analysis of Power-to-X demonstration
projects in Europe.” In: Frontiers in Energy Research 8 (2020), page 191.
[87]
Wenbin Zhang et al. “Parametric study on the regeneration heat requirement of
an amine-based solid adsorbent process for post-combustion carbon capture.” In:
Applied energy 168 (2016), pages 394–405.
[88]
EI Zoulias and N Lymberopoulos. “Techno-economic analysis of the integration
of hydrogen energy technologies in renewable energy-based stand-alone power sys-
tems.” In: Renewable energy 32.4 (2007), pages 680–696.
[89]
Andreas Züttel. “Hydrogen storage methods.” In: Naturwissenschaften 91.4 (2004),
pages 157–172.
==PAGE:150==
