==PAGE:1==
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
kV
kN
ky
kx
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Karl Andrias Petersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared in the period January 25th to June 21st at the Department
of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The supervisor of the project is Professor Jeppe Jönsson to whom great appreciation is
extended for his involvement and guidance.
Karl Andrias Petersen - s160022
Signature
Date
ii
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis, a model for estimating the load-displacement curve for an in-plane bolted
connection, such as a gusset plate, is developed. The strength and stiffness of the connec-
tions are initially only dependant on the strength and stiffness of each bolt in bearing. The
model is later expanded to include the effects of block tearing where the entire connections
rotates as a rigid block. This can happen for connections with large eccentric loads and
is modelled by assuming a yield band around the connection.
To get an understanding of the strength and stiffness of bolts in bearing, a large literature
review is done on these topics. From this review, it was decided not to use the Eurocode
3 bearing strength expression, but instead use the strength as expressed in Može (2018),
which produces more accurate strength estimates and which will be adopted by the next
generation Eurocode 3 (Može, 2018). The stiffness of the bolts will be obtained from the
expression for stiffness of bolts in bearing component in Eurocode 3.
The connection is modelled by establishing an elastic stiffness matrix which is assembled
from the stiffnesses of each bolt.
The non-linear behaviour of the connection will be
governed by the non-linear behaviour of the bolts. Therefore, a tri-linear stiffness curve
is established for each bolt based on the initial stiffness and strength of the bolt. This
system is then discretized and solved in small steps. In each step, the current stiffness
of each bolt is determined, and the stiffness matrix is reassembled using the reduced bolt
stiffnesses.
This model is verified against analytical solutions and similar models in the literature.
When the model works as intended, it is expanded to include the effects of block tearing
to get a more representative picture of the actual mechanism.
The effects of block tearing are obtained by assuming a width of the yield band, bY , around
the connection cut-out and deriving an elastic stiffness matrix from the material properties
of the yield-bands. The non-linear behaviour of the effects of block tearing are obtained
by assuming a displacement threshold that when exceeded causes the entire cut-out to
”yield” by reducing stiffness by a factor
1
100. A small stiffness is kept after yield to account
for strain hardening.
In this model, the parameter bY is a tuning parameter that has to be established in the
basis of experiments. In this thesis this parameter is used to fit the model to a sub-set of
the experiments it’s compared to. Because of this free parameter, it is possible to get very
good fits to experimental data, although the generality of the chosen value is of question,
since all the experiments are of the same type. It is recommended that this parameter be
revisited and chosen on the basis of a larger amount of experiments.
Finally, an alternative approach to solving this system is developed. This new method is
termed the β-method and it foregoes the need to discretize the system by instead solving
for the load required to reach yield of the first bolt, and then advancing the procedure to
solve for the load required for the next bolt to yield. The entire load-displacement curve
of the system is then constructed from these points.
This method is developed for connections with bolts alone (no influence from block tearing)
and is able to reproduce the results from the numerical calculations.
It is possible to partially implement the effects from block tearing into the β-method,
although the method is not able to predict the point when the cut-out yields, resulting in
a one-time error. A provision is proposed to assure that the error is conservative.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of symbols
General
σ
Stress
τ
Shear stress
ϵ
Strain
γ
Shear strain
σE
Equivalent Von Mises stress
fy
Yield stress
fu
Ultimate stress
fub
Ultimate bolt stress
E
Young’s modulus
G
Shear modulus
ν
Poisson ratio
F
Force
M
Moment
V
Shear force
u
Displacement
kI
Initial stiffness
Bolt bearing
Fbs
Bearing strength for hole elongation
Fbk
Charecteristic bearing strength
Fbd
Design bearing strength
Fb,Rk
Charecteristic bearing strength
Fexp,1.5
Experimental resistance at 1.5 mm displacement
Fexp,conv
Conventional experimental resistance (defined in section 2.2.2)
Fexp,ult
Ultimate experimental resistance
d
Bolt diameter
d0
Bolt hole diameter
t
Plate thickness
e1, p1
Edge and pitch distance in the direction of loading
e2, p2
Edge and pitch distance perpendicular to loading
α
Strength reduction factor or angle
α′ = α/3
αb
Strength reduction factor
k1
Strength reduction factor
αd
Strength reduction factor
kb
Strength reduction factor
γM
Partial safety factor
Ap
Pile cross sectional area
qp
Resistance per unit area
w
Width
σult
Ultimate stress
ϕ
Angle between slip lines
H
Height
α
Angle
β
Angle
WE
External work
WI
Internal work
wI
Rate of energy dissipation
un
Normal displacement
iv
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:7==
us
Shear displacement
Ls
Length of shear plane
Component method
Sj,ini
Initial rotational stiffness
Sj
Rotational stiffness
z
Lever arm
zeq
Equivalent lever arm
ki
Stiffness coeﬀicient of component i
keff
Effective stiffness coeﬀicient
keq
Equivalent stiffness coeﬀicient
Mj,Ed
Design moment acting on joint
Mj,Rd
Joint moment resistance
ϕEd
Elastic rotation limit
ϕχd
Rotation limit where the component method governs
ϕd
Maximum rotation capacity of joint
Fi
Force on component i
ui
Deformation of component i
β
Transformation parameter
AV C
Area subject to shear
ue
End plate deformation
ucf
Column flange deformation
ki,e
Stiffness coeﬀicient of end plate
ki,cf
Stiffness coeﬀicient of column flange
Ze
Geometric properties of end-plate T-stub
αe
Geometric properties of end-plate T-stub
ℓe
Length of end-plate
we
Width of end-plate
ℓeff
Effective length
ℓeff,ini
Initial effective length
be
Breadth of end-plate
n
Length meassure of T-stub
m
Length meassure of T-stub
B
Bolt force
q
Geometric parameter
Fel
Maximum force in the elastic range
FRd
Design resistance
Mpl,1,Rd
Moment resistance for T-stub failure in Mode 1
As
Cross sectional area of bolt shank
Lb
Length of bolt
twc
Thickness of column web
dc
Column depth
ξ
Geometric/material parameter
beff
Effective breadth
ϵel
Elastic strain
d16
Nominal diamter of M16 bolt
nb
Number of bolts
α
Material property
ar
Width of rigid plate
Ar
Area of rigid plate
Ec
Young’s modulus of concrete
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
v
==PAGE:8==
cfl
Flexible flange length
cr
Rigid flange length
tw
Thickness of web
fj
Design compressive strength of concrete
c
Equivalent flange length
In-plane bolted connection
xi
x-coordinate of bolt i
yi
y-coordinate of bolt i
x0
x-coordinate of the elastic center
y0
y-coordinate of the elastic center
ux
Displacement in the x-direction
uy
Displacement in the y-direction
ux,i
Displacement of bolt i in the x-direction
uy,i
Displacement of bolt i in the y-direction
ux,0
Displacement of the elastic center in the x-direction
uy,0
Displacement of the elastic center in the y-direction
ϕ
Rotation of the elastic center
Fx,i
Force in the x-direction of bolt i
Fy,i
Force in the y-direction of bolt i
kx,i
Stiffness in the x-direction of bolt i
ky,i
Stiffness in the y-direction of bolt i
Vx
Force acting on the connection in the x-direction
Vy
Force acting on the connection in the y-direction
M
Moment acting on the connection
Kx
Summed stiffnesses in the x-direction
Ky
Summed stiffnesses in the y-direction
Sx
First moment of area in the x-direction
Sy
First moment of area in the y-direction
Ix
Moment of inertia in the x-direction
Iy
Moment of inertia in the y-direction
Ip
Polar moment of inertia
kI
Initial bolt stiffness
kb
Bolt stiffness
Fult
Ultimate bolt force
u0
Threshold for ”initial” yield of bolt
uult
Threshold for ultimate yield of bolt
Fb0
”Initial” yield strength of bolt
Fb,Rk
Bolt bearing capacity
F
Force vector
K
Stiffness matrix
u
Displacement vector
∆F
Force increment or Proportional load
∆u
Displacement increment
j
Load step
nstep
Number of steps
ub,i
Magnitude of displacement of bolt i
EC
Elastic Center
CR
Center of rotation
kV
Shear stiffness
kN
Normal stiffness
vi
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:9==
h
Height
fm
Mean stress
ϵy
Yield strain
ϵu
Ultimate strain
ϵm
Mean strain
um
Displacement treshold
An
Net cross-section area
Ag
Gross cross-section area
teq
Equivalent thickness
Fi
Force vector for bolt i
ki
Stiffness matrix for bolt i
β
Proportionality factor
A, B
β-method coeﬀicients
Eep
Elasto-plastic stiffness
ϵp
Plastic strain
dϵp
Plastic strain increment
dλp
Plastic multiplier
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
General Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review on Bolt Bearing
3
2.1
General Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Bolt Bearing as Defined in the Eurocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
The Definition from Eurocode 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.2
Resistance Definition in Eurocode 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Bearing Strength, Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Standardizing the Bearing Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Bolt Bearing Data from the Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
New Bolt Bearing Formulation
11
3.1
Theoretical Basis for Bearing Strength of Bolted Connections . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Geotechnic Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Metal Forming Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
New Bolt Bearing Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Final Choice of Bolt Bearing Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Litterature Review of the Component Method
21
4.1
General Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Derivation and References of the Stiffness Coeﬀicients
. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Column Web Panel in Shear, k1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
Plates in Bending, k4, k5 and k6 (and k15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Bolts in Tension, k10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.4
Column Web in Compression and Tension, k2 and k3 . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.5
Bolts in Shear, k11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.6
Bolts in Bearing, k12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.7
Concrete in Compression, k13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.8
Base Plate in Bending under Tension, k15 and Anchor Bolts in Ten-
sion, k16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
In-plane Bolted Connection
37
5.1
Elastic Response of Bolt Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Bolt Stiffness Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
MATLAB Implementation - Bolts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3.1
Direction of the Bolt Force after Yielding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Stiffness from Block Tearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.1
Derivation of Rigid Block Displacement in the Elastic Range
. . . .
47
5.4.2
Yielding of the Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.3
Combining Stiffnesses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
MATLAB Implementation - Bolts and Block Tearing Combined . . . . . . . .
53
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
ix
==PAGE:12==
5.5.1
Tuning of the Parameter bY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.6
Comparisons with Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.7
A Novel Approach to In-plane Bolted Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.7.1
The β-Method for Bolts Alone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.7.2
The β-Method with Effects from Block-Tearing . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
72
A Supplementary Hand-in
75
B MATLAB script road-map
76
x
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:13==
1
General Introduction
The field of steel joints has evolved a lot in the last decades. Since around the 1980s,
research into the deformability of steel joints has accelerated. The purpose of this research
is to get a more precise representation of the global response of steel frame structures. It
is common in steel design to assume either rigid or pinned joints. In practice, this is never
the case, and both pinned and rigid connections are idealizations.
The Eurocode (EN 1993-1-8, henceforth being referred to as Eurocode 3 or simply the
Eurocode) provides classification methods for determining whether a joint can be classified
as nominally rigid or pinned. The boundaries are schematically shown in figure 1.1 , where
it can be inferred that semi-rigidity is to be assumed unless great effort is taken to design
the connection to be either rigid or pinned.
RIGID
PINNED
SEMI-RIGID
φ
Mj
Figure 1.1: Stiffness classification boundaries
The proponents of semi-rigid connections often cite economic arguments, e.g., semi-rigid
instead of pinned connections can help reduce member sizes and the that the work on site
to produce rigid joints is too time consuming.
Jaspart (1997) chronicles the contributions to the field of semi-rigid connections and groups
the approaches into 4 distinct methodologies:
1. Curve fitting;
2. Simplified analytical models;
3. Mechanical models;
4. Finite element analysis;
These all have their strengths and weaknesses but as a stand alone approach, only the
finite element analysis can model arbitrary connections adequately. Altough in order to
obtain adequate results from finite element analyses requires complicated 3D models and
is a specialized field of its own that is mostly reserved for research activity. It is unlikely
to be used in practical design.
The other 3 approaches, Curve fitting, Simplified analytical models, and Mechanical mod-
els are combined in the so called Component Method, which will be described later.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
1
==PAGE:14==
One of the most common types of structural connections in steel structures is the gusset-
plate connection. It requires minimal augmentation of the structural members and it is
easy to assemble on site.
Figure 1.2: Gusset plate connection
The gusset plate connection, as shown in figure 1.2 is typically calculated as a pinned
connection, although this assumption can not be satisfied in many cases, and significant
moment can develop in the connection (Richard et al. 1980).
The Component Method mentioned earlier is unable to asses the deformation of a connec-
tion such as the gusset plate connection with rotations in the plane. Given the widespread
use of this type of connection it would be of great benefit to be able to estimate moment
and deformations of it.
1.1
Problem Statement
The object of this thesis is to develop a model to estimate the moment and rotation of
in-plane bolted connections, such as gusset-plate connections.
The stiffness of this connection will primarily depend on the deformations of the bolt
holes, and a large literature study is therefore undertaken to figure out what influences
the strength and stiffness of bolts in bearing.
The stiffness of the bolts will be obtained from the expression in the Component Method.
A literature study into the origins of this method and how the stiffnesses it uses are derived
is also undertaken.
Finally, another thesis is running in parallel to this one, and it focuses mainly on the effects
of block tearing on gusset and fin plate connections. For a more complete moment-rotation
connection model, a stiffness formulation of the material yielding around the cut-out in
the block tearing will be derived and implemented into the moment-rotation expression.
2
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review on Bolt Bearing
2.1
General Introduction
This section of the thesis will review how Eurocode 3 formulates bolt bearing and will
attempt to find the background documentation for the formulations.
Furthermore, a
thorough literature review on minimum distances (edge distances, e1 and e2) and pitch
(p1 and p2) will be conducted.
The purpose of this exercises is to figure out what influences the bearing strength of bolts
and how to define the strength of the moment-rotation connection being developed in
Chapter 5.
2.2
Bolt Bearing as Defined in the Eurocode
2.2.1
The Definition from Eurocode 3
The ultimate bearing strength of steel plates according to the Eurocode may be taken as
3fy. This strength is not strictly speaking a limit state, but has been chosen to control de-
formations (ECCS, 1978). This can be thought of as the bearing stress for hole elongation.
The strength function is then
Fbs = 3 fytd
(2.1)
Where d is the diameter of the bolt and t is the thickness of the plate. The value of
3fy is adopted by Eurocode 3 as an upper limit for the bearing resistance of a single
bolt connection provided that the edge distance is large enough. Although, it has been
proposed by many researchers, that the bearing strength is better represented by the
ultimate stress, fu rather than the yield stress (e.g Kim and Yura (1996 and 1999). This
is especially true for high strength steel.
In case of lower edge distances, shearing failure may occur as shown in figure 2.1 a)
a) Shear failure
e1
b) Hole elongation
c) Simpliﬁed model
Figure 2.1: Bearing resistance - Definition sketch
The Eurocode adopts a simplified model, as shown in figure 2.1 c), to estimate the bearing
capacity of a single bolt. The derivation of the general bearing formula, which takes into
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
3
==PAGE:16==
account the shear failure mode, is derived in Snijder et al. (1988). The derivation is as
follows:
The two shear planes shown in figure 2.1 c) are approximately 0.9 times the edge dis-
tance e1. The Von Mises yield criterion for pure shear is τy =
fy
√
3 ≈0.6fy. From these
assumptions, the strength function is
Fbk = 2 · 0.9e1 · t · 0.6fy
⇓
Fbk = 1.1e1
d fytd
⇓
Fbk = 1.1e1
d
d
dn fytd
⇓
Fbk = αfytd
(2.2)
The expression in (2.2) is principally equal to (2.1), and an upper for the α ≤3 is intro-
duced. A new modified value α′ = α/3 is introduced, most likely so that the expression
reflects the upper bound established in (2.1). The design expression is now provided.
Fbd = 3α′fytd
(2.3)
This strength expression is evaluated using the procedure for determining design resis-
tances as described in Bijlaard et al. (1988). Therefore, Fbd is a design formula, and the
safety factor γM is implicit in the formulation as per definition of this evaluation formula.
Writing the formula explicitly, the expression becomes
Fbd = 3.75α′fydnt
γM
,
γM = 1.25
(2.4)
It is stated, in the background material (Snijder et al. 1988), that the steel plate material
in Eurocode 3 has the following ratio between ultimate and yield strength
fu = 1.5fy
(2.5)
Which is at best an approximation. When you compute the ratios in Eurocode 3, you do
get fu ≈1.5fy, but this does principally exclude the expression from being used on some
high strength steels, where the ratio can be as low as 1.05 (Može and Beg 2011).
Inserting (2.5) into (2.4) and disregarding the safety factor, γM the almost familiar ex-
pression
Fbs = 2.5α′futd
(2.6)
Is obtained. This is the expression in the 1988 revision of Eurocode 3. The parameter α′
is defined as
α′ = min
(
1, e1
3d0
, p1
3d0
−1
4, fub
fu
)
(2.7)
In the later editions of the Eurocode, (2.6) is expressed as
4
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:17==
Fb,Rk = k1αbfutd
(2.8)
Where αb is defined as α′ above, and k1 is a reduction factor which takes into account the
edge and pitch distances perpendicular to the loading (e2 and p1 respectively) as follows:
For edge bolts:
k1 = min
(
2.8 e2
d0 −1.7 , 2.5
)
For inner bolts:
k1 = min
(
1.4 p2
d0 −1.7 , 2.5
)
(2.9)
It is noted in Snijder et al. (1988), that only a large number of tests was available for
plates of material FeE235 connected through one bolt and angles of materials FeE235
and FeE355, and that the validation of (2.8) is dominated by these tests.
It is also noted, in Snijder et al. (1988), that because of the lack of available tests that
there is no statistical evaluation made on the strength reduction from k1 < 2.5, and the
few tests that were included gave conservative strength estimates. The reduction is still
included because of the low amount of tests, so as to be on the safe side.
The reduction from αb = fub/fu, which governs the reduction in case of a weaker bolt
material than plate material has also not been statistically verified either and is practically
never observed.
From these considerations, there is potentially a large uncertainty regarding
• The ratio fu
fy of the plate material
• The pitch and end distance perpendicular to the loading (e2 and p2) and
• And the pitch distance in the direction of the loading, p1
2.2.2
Resistance Definition in Eurocode 3
The literature defines three experimental resistance measures for plate bearing bolted
connections; Fexp,1.5, Fexp,conv and Fexp,ult, which are illustrated in figure 2.2
Fexp
Fexp,ult
Fexp,conv
Fexp,1.5
kI
kI/10
u
Figure 2.2: Eurocode experimental strength definitions
Fexp,1.5 is the measured force on the bolt at 1.5mm displacement, Fexp,ult is the largest
measured load, and Fexp,conv is defined as the intersection between a straight line with a
slope equal to the initial stiffness and of a straight line with 1/10 of the slope, which is
tangent to the load-deformation curve. This definition is mentioned in Moore and Wald
(2003), which references Piraprez (2000) and Wald et al. (2004).
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
5
==PAGE:18==
It can only be assumed, that this is the definition of the resistance in (2.8), which does
pose a problem: The strength definition of a joint, while chosen to limit hole elongation,
does not correspond to a specific deformation. This does make comparisons with other
standards, such as the American Standard (AISC, 1993), where a specific deformation
limit is assumed, diﬀicult.
2.3
Bearing Strength, Literature Review
The fu/fy-ratio has been examined by Kim and Yura (1999), where the bearing strength
of two steel materials of differing ultimate to yield stress ratios was examined. One steel
material measured a fu/fy-ratio of 1.61 and the other had a fu/fy-ratio of 1.13. Various
geometries were tested, including single and two-bolt connections, and the strength of the
connections was measured at 6.35mm displacement of the bolts, as prescribed by AISC
(1993), and at ultimate, defined as Fexp,ult in figure (2.2). The authors concluded that
the ultimate to yield strength ratio did not influence the strength at 6.35mm and they
reconfirmed that the strength of a bolted connection is best represented by the ultimate
stress, fu, rather than the yield stress, fy.
d0
p1
e1
e2
d0
e1
e2
Figure 2.3: Test specimen - Kim and Yura (1999)
Bolted connection using high strength steels have been analyzed by Može and Beg (2010
and 2011). In the first article, 38 double shear connections with a single row of either
one or two bolts were tested using steel grade S690 and in the latter 26 double shear
connections with multiple rows of a single bolt were analyzed also using steel grade S690.
These results were compared to the bearing resistance formula (2.8) from Eurocode 3.
The definition of the theoretical bearing resistance is in these papers is the recorded force
in the bolt, Fu, at the displacement u = d0/6 where d0 is the diameter of the bolt hole, as
this limit may correspond to an acceptable hole elongation in SLS (Može and Beg, 2011).
e2
e2
e1
d0
e2
e2
e1
d0
p2
d0
Figure 2.4: Test specimen - Može and Beg (2010 and 2014)
For the single bolt connections in Može and Beg (2010), it was concluded, that the Eu-
rocode bearing resistance was conservative as well as poorly controlled by hole elongation,
which results in a high scatter of results. The conservatism of the results is a consequence
of the reduction in for small edge distances e2 < 1.5d0. The authors proposed a new re-
sistance formulation where the reduction factor corresponding to αb in (2.8) is a function
of the ratio e1/e2, which was able to successfully control the different failure mechanisms
and did show much better agreement with the test results.
6
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:19==
The investigation into the influence of the edge distance and pitch distance perpendicular
to the loading, e2 and p2, was further investigated in Može and Beg (2014), where connec-
tions with steel plates of grade S235 were tested with a single row of one or two bolts. Here
it was concluded that the distances perpendicular to the loading (e2 and p2) had no (or
very little) influence on the bearing strength of the connection. The authors postulated,
that these distances were most likely introduced into the Eurocode to indirectly control
the net cross-section and block shear failure. Although, as also suggested by the authors,
in the cases where e2 or p2 reduce the bearing capacity enough, net cross-section or shear
failure should be the critical checks. The authors proposed a revised bearing resistance
formula, that is conceptually similar to (2.8)
Fb = kbαd tdfu
(2.10)
Where αd and kb consider material grade, bolt position and the geometrical parameters.
For edge bolts:
αd = e1
d0
For inner bolts:
αd = p1
d0 −3
4
(2.11)
and
kb =
{1.0
for
S235
0.9
for
S690
(2.12)
Where it can be seen that the reduction factors are independent of the perpendicular
distances (e2 and p2) and where a higher ultimate strength, 3fu, is assumed based on the
tests.
The research into bearing strength was furthered by Može (2018), where the influence on
the pitch, p1, was examined and the bearing resistance model from Može and Beg (2014)
was further developed. Furthermore, the theoretical max bearing, which the Eurocode
sets to 2.5 fu, was analyzed (In Može (2018), the factor 2.5 is replaced with k1,max). The
article included several tests with one bolt and two bolts in a row. The specimens had
varying end and pitch distances, (e1,p1 and e2). The tests reconfirmed the conclusion
from Može and Beg (2014), that the edge distance perpendicular to the loading, e2, did
not influence the strength of the connection.
Furthermore, it was observed, that the
maximum theoretical bearing factor, k1,max, could get as high as 5, but this result was
deemed unreliable, as it came about because of the friction developed from the out of
plane deformations of the plate. A reliable max was set to k1,max = 3, as adopted by
e.g. the American standard (AISC, 1993). The researchers further concluded, that the
reduction from the pitch distance should be reduced and the reduction factor based on
steel grade, kb was further generalized:
For edge bolts:
αd = e1
d0
For inner bolts:
αd = p1
d0 −1
4
(2.13)
and
kb =
{1.0
for steel up to S460
0.9
for steel ≥S460
(2.14)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
7
==PAGE:20==
2.3.1
Standardizing the Bearing Test
There is no standardized bolt bearing experimental setup, as there exists for e.g. tension
specimen. Depending on the setup, friction between bolted lap-plates can account for a
significant increase in the strength of the connection. This can be ameliorated by only
loosely tightening the bolts. For large deflections, however, the out of plane deformations
under the bolt head can be significant and create friction between the plates (see e.g.
Može 2018). This can be completely avoided by not using bolts at all, but instead a pin
through the hole of a single plate, although this has been shown to produced a curling
failure, where the edge of the plate buckles, greatly reducing the bearing capacity (Rex
and Easterling, 2003).
It is alleged in Rogers and Hancock (1998), that several standards misidentify failure modes
for thin sheet steels, and therefore inaccurately predict the bearing capacity. Tilting of
single shear connections due to eccentricity induced by only having two plates bolted
together is also a well-known failure mechanism, and it has been further demonstrated in
Teh and Mehmet (2015), that the alignment of the bolt head has great influence on the
capacity of such connections, since a sharp edge of the bolt can be pressed into the plate
when it tilts causing localized tearing.
a) Tilting failure
b) Curling failure
F
F
F
F
Figure 2.5: Alternative failure modes from the literature
Bolt bearing is in class of its own when it comes to estimating the strength of connections,
as it is the only strength check that is practically purely based on empirical grounds. Bolts
in tension, net cross-section and block tearing are based on cross-sectional analyses based
on the Von Mises yield criterion with slight modifications based on statistical analyses.
2.3.2
Bolt Bearing Data from the Literature
A large effort has been made to collect as much data from the literature as possible. All the
measurements from the different papers are tabulated in a standardized document together
with all the parameters governing the bearing resistance. Some of the measurements are
changed so that they fit with the measurements from the other papers. E.g. Kim and
Yura (1999) utilize the distance between bolt hole edges whereas the rest of the papers
use the distance from the center of the bolt hole e1, p1 etc. This has been changed such
that the measurements are taken from the center of the bolt hole. None of the changes
made have any influence on the results and are purely done so that comparisons can be
made.
8
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:21==
Only bolts that failed in bearing are of interest. The data is therefore sorted by failure type
before being further analysed. The failure type is indicated by each paper respectively.
If a paper indicated a failure type that is a mix of bearing and something else, that too
is included. The data set does include all failure types, so it it possible to analyse other
failures such as bolt shear, splitting failure, shear failure etc. A lot of the connections failed
by net-cross section failure, although the cross sectional area of the test specimen are not
included in the data set, so this failure type can not be compared to analytical solution.
It is not a major task to add this data, though.
From the review of the literature, the bearing resistance of a single bolt is assumed to be
a function of
FbRk = f(d, d0, t, fu, e1)
(2.15)
From dimensional grounds and from contemplation’s of whether a given parameter in-
creases or decreases the resistance, the normalized bearing resistance is assumed to be a
function of
FbRk
dtfu
= f
(e1
d0
)
(2.16)
To get as good a fit to the data as possible, the function, f, is assumed to be
f = c1
(e1
d0
)c2
(2.17)
Where c1 and c2 are regression parameters. This function was fit to the data by a least
squares regression using the inbuilt Solver in Excel. The regression parameters were sur-
prisingly linear with both c1 and c2 approximating unity. By assuming that the relation
is linear, the expression was expanded to include and arbitrary number of bolts as shown
below
FbRk
dtfu
= e1
d0
+
∑
all
p1
d0
(2.18)
The results are very linear.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
9
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.6: Normalized bearing strength results from the literature
The x-axis on figure 2.6 has n multiplied with the normalized distance on the second term.
That is because the only results with more than two bolts in a row is from Može and Beg
(2011) where all the bolts are equally spaced.
The scatter is quite large. One of the reasons for this could be the difference in test setup
as mentioned earlier. Some test setups allowed for friction to developed, leading to larger
recorded forces.
10
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:23==
3
New Bolt Bearing Formulation
It is good practice to have the resistance formulations of structural members reflect the
collapse mechanism. The bolt bearing formulation in Eurocode 3 has been found to give
conservative estimates of the bearing resistance by several authors (Kim and Yura (1999),
Može and Beg (2010, 2014)).
An attempt will be made to estimate the theoretical upper value of the bearing strength,
usually set to between 2.5fu and 3fu.
The value is based on empirical research and
therefore not grounded in any theory. It would be nice to have a theoretical basis for
this value to compare to the empirical value. This pursuit is ultimately unfruitful, but
the contemplation is well worth it and some headway is made. This could be a topic for
future research.
Secondly, a new bolt bearing expression will be developed on the basis of the theory of
virtual work. The predictions of this new expression will then be compared to that of the
expression in Eurocode 3, i.e. equation (2.8) and the expression from Može (2018) from
equation (2.10).
3.1
Theoretical Basis for Bearing Strength of Bolted
Connections
The failure mechanism of the bolt in bearing is assumed to exhibit plane strain deforma-
tions, especially right under the bolt head due to the deformation restrictions imposed by
the bolt head, washer and connected plates in a typical bolt bearing connection.
The failure mechanism is demonstrated to be a complex 3-dimensional problem with out
of plane deformations imposing a friction between the connected plates and possibly in-
creasing the strength of the connection (Može, 2018). This does demonstrate that the
problem is neither plane stress of plane strain, but somewhere in between. It is assumed,
though, for limited deformations, as would be expected in practice, that the deformations
are plane strain deformations.
3.1.1
Geotechnic Approach
The investigation into the mechanical failure model of a bolt in bearing has led us to
geotechnical models for bearing capacity of foundations, as these models exhibit a lot of
the same characteristics as bolts in bearing.
The deformations of bolts in bearing is furthermore a non-linear problem, and there are
practically no elastic deformations. This type of problem lends itself best to the theory of
plasticity.
The largest class of solutions to such plastic problems utilizes slip line field theory. In this
theory, a material is assumed to fail in shear along pre-defined slip lines.
A common problem solved with these slip lines is the aforementioned foundations with
slip lines defined as shown in figure 3.1
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
11
==PAGE:24==
F
φ
Slip lines
w
Figure 3.1: Slip lines for a foundation
Although the case of a bolted connection there is no free surface but rather the bolt is
encased in the surrounding material. By again borrowing from geotechnics, the case of
piled foundations in a frictionless soil as showed in figure 3.2 from Das (2016), does share
more similarities with bolted connections.
a)
FE
Fp
Fs
Fs
Pile Tip
Zone 1
Zone 2
b)
Figure 3.2: Pile foundation
By neglecting the friction, the entire capacity of the foundation is governed by the end
bearing
Fp = Apqp
(3.1)
Where Ap is the area of the pile tip and qp is the resistance per unit area derived from the
slip theory of a Mohr-Coloumb material as well as some form factors. What is of interest
is that the expression for the bearing capacity of this piled foundation is the same for
the shallow foundation show in figure 3.1. From this, it is reasonable to assume, that
an estimate of the ultimate bearing capacity of a bolt bearing connection with a single
bolt can be estimated from this theory. It is also noted in Das (2016) that significant
deformation is required to reach maximum capacity of the end bearing, Fp, which is the
case of bolts in bearing too. The failure mode of such a foundation is a punching failure
where a triangluar zone as in Zone 1 on figure 3.2 is pushed downward without producing
any other visible slip line.
12
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:25==
The bearing capacity per unit length of a punch on a rigid surface, as shown in figure 3.1,
but for a Mises material is derived in Bower (2009) Chapter 6.1 as
F = w (2 + π) fy
√
3
(3.2)
Where w is the width of the punch/indenter. By setting w = d, multiplying the right-hand
side with t and normalizing with dt, the ultimate stress is found to be
σULT = 3.63 fy
(3.3)
Which is reasonably close to the often experimentally found 3 fu. By assuming, as the
Eurocode does, that the ratio fu/fy = 1.5, the ultimate stress, σULT is found to be ≈2.4fu,
which is also the capacity as defined in the American standard (AISC, 1993) for connection
were deformation are to be limited. It is imaginable, that this method, if refined properly,
could provide good estimation of the bearing capacity of bolted connection.
It would
have the added benefit of having a rigorous underlying theory, as opposed to the current
strength estimates, which are mainly based on experimental data.
Keep in mind, that in this example, the bolt is estimated as being a square punch with
its entire diameter as the width of the punch. The analogy to the pile foundation is also
a rough estimate, and there is doubt about the validity of the slip lines as drawn in figure
3.2, or at the very least, if they can be generalized to the bolt example.
It is imaginable, though, that a circular indenter onto a curved surface could provide more
accurate results
The problem with this model is still that the material may be expected to pile up on
the side of the indenter. Attempts have been made to find a solution to a “submerged”
foundation. The literature has been scoured and a professor in geotechnics has been asked,
but this problem does not seem to have a solution.
F
Slip lines
F
Slip lines?
∞
∞
Figure 3.3: ”Submerged” foundation
3.1.2
Metal Forming Approach
The search for a more pertinent theory has led to the field of metal forming, where slip
line field theory is being used to solve problem of complex geometry. As before, a solution
to the exact problem of a bolt in bearing does not seem to exist, although some examples
have been found that seem to point in the direction of a possible solution.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
13
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4: Indentation of a thick plate
Figure 3.4 is from Hosford and Caddell (2011) and shows the strength of a plate subject
to mutual indentation. The expression plotted in this figure is
P = 2k + (4k/H)
∫H/2
0
2∆ϕdy
(3.4)
The upper bound for the strength of this problem is the solution to the indenter on an
infinite depth as shown in (3.2, although, by not allowing the material to pile up, it might
be that the strength would then follow the dotted line on figure 3.4. The problem with
this formulation is that the expression is integrated over half the height of the plate and
this bound becomes unclear when the problem goes from being one of mutual indentation
to being an indenter onto an infinitely high plate.
3.2
New Bolt Bearing Formulation
A new bolt bearing capacity expression should be as simple as possible and also reflect
the failure mechanism of the system. The governing parameters are chosen on the basis
of the the review of the literature.
14
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:27==
The edge distances perpendicular to the loading have been excluded from the analysis, as
it was demonstrated that the contribution from the edge distance, e2, could be neglected,
and this neglection only reduced the bearing in the worst case by ≈10%. It was also
shown, that when p2 was not considered, the critical check for when this reduction should
take effect is taken care of by either the net cross-section failure or block shear failure
(Može and Beg, 2014).
The effect of the ultimate to yield stress ratio, fu/fy, does not have any influence on the
bearing strength and the bearing strength is best represented using the ultimate strength,
fu (Kim and Yura, 1999).
The upper limit of the bearing strength, i.e. for large edge distances, is demonstrated to
be at least 3fu. This is the value adopted in the American standard (AISC, 1993, ) for
connections where deformations are not of concern.
The often-adopted failure mechanism of a bolt bearing connection is the parallel shear line
failure mode as shown in 2.1, although from the literature, the reported failure is always
one with inclined shear planes, which would impose some tension forces, as can be seen in
the numerical analyses in e.g. Može and Beg (2011) and Može (2018).
The proposed new failure mechanism is one with inclined shear planes with an inclination
angle α.
α
Ls
β
I
II
II
Ls
d
u
n
s
α
β
σ
Figure 3.5: New failure mechanism
Figure (3.5) shows the simplified sketch of the failure mechanism with inclined shear
planes. The bearing capacity of the connection is evaluated using virtual work (Energy
dissipation). Plate I moves rigidly away from plate II. The force is in the direction of the
displacement, so the external work is
WE = σdtu
(3.5)
Where u is the virtual displacement. The internal work is derived from the energy dissi-
pation of a von Mises material where the ultimate strength is utilized instead of the yield
strength.
wI =
2
√
3fut
√
u2n + 1
4u2s
(3.6)
Here un and us are the displacement rates normal to- and along a point on the shear
plane. These displacement rates are assumed to be constant wrt. s and are related to the
displacement rate of the rigid plate by
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
15
==PAGE:28==
un = u sin (α)
and
us = u cos (α).
(3.7)
The internal work is for both shear planes found from
WI = 2 2
√
3fut
∫Ls/cos (α)
0
√
u2
(
sin2 (α) + 1
4 cos
2
(α)
)
ds
(3.8)
The integrand in (3.8) is constant wrt. to s and the expression becomes
WI =
4
√
3fut u
√(
sin2 (α) + 1
4 cos
2
(α)
)
Ls
cos (α)
(3.9)
By equating WE = WI and utilizing that σdt = Fb,Rk and simplifying, the bearing resis-
tance can be expressed as a function of the angle α
Fb,Rk = 2
√
3futLs
√
−3 cos2 (α) + 4
3 cos(α)
(3.10)
Normal procedure would now be to minimize this function wrt. α to get the lowest upper
bound solution, but this does unsurprisingly recover the pure shear solution with α = 0,
and it is clear that this would produce conservative estimates. The approach followed
herein is to estimate the angle from the actual failures observed by previous researchers,
e.g. Može (2018).
Figure 3.6: Angle of fracture line - Može (2018)
Utilizing α = 15◦, the bearing resistance becomes
Fb,Rk = 1.31futLs
(3.11)
By assuming that the length of the shear plane is Ls = e1 −d0/2, (3.11) can be plotted
against the experimental bearing strengths from the literature
16
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:29==
(a) Fb,Rk New
(b) Fb,Rk EC3
Figure 3.7: Theoretical vs. experimental values for single bolts
Figure 3.10 a) shows the theoretical value of the new bearing resistance plotted against
the experimental values from the literature and figure 3.10 b) shows the theoretical values
of the Eurocode formulation plotted against the same data. The figure only shows single
bolt connections that failed in bearing. The figure shows that the new formulation does
make better predictions for higher strength steels, although the scatter is also larger.
To obtain a general expression for the bolt bearing resistance of any given connection, the
formula has to be able to take into account multiple rows of bolts.
For this, the same expression as for the outer bolts will be used, i.e. (3.10), although by
looking at failure mechanisms in the literature, it is clear that the angle of the shear planes
is much shallower for failure of inner bolts.
Figure 3.8: Angle of fracture line for inner bolts - Može (2018)
The model chosen to represent this failure mechanism is the familiar double shear plane
as seen in the Eurocode, (or (3.10) with α = 0) but still utilizing the active shear length,
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
17
==PAGE:30==
Ls.
Ls
p1
d
Figure 3.9: Failure mechanism of inner bolt
The bearing resistance of inner bolts is
Fb,Rk =
2
√
3futLs
(3.12)
With Ls = p1 −d0. The bearing resistance is plotted vs. the experimental resistance from
the literature. To reduce clutter, only results from the literature with two or more bolt
rows are compared. As before, these results are compared to the bearing resistance from
Eurocode 3.
(a) Fb,Rk New
(b) Fb,Rk EC3
Figure 3.10: Theoretical vs. experimental values for multiple bolts
The resistance formula from the Eurocode is not statistically tested on higher strength
steels and is known to produce conservative estimates. The steel grade from Može and
Beg (2011) is S690. Nevertheless, the fit for the new formulation does seen to correspond
well with the experimental results.
18
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:31==
The final expression for the bearing resistance is now
Fb,Rk =
{ 1.31futLe
for edge bolts
2/
√
3 futLp
for inner bolts
(3.13)
Where Le is the active shear length of the edge bolt and Lp is the active shear length of
inner bolts. These are defined as
Le = e1 −d0/2
and
Lp = p1 −d0
(3.14)
Although an upper limit of the bearing stress corresponding to 3fu should still be used.
3.2.1
Final Choice of Bolt Bearing Formulation
While the new bolt bearing prediction does make better prediction for higher strength
steels and approximately as good predictions for lower strength steels, the spread is larger
overall. Statistical analysis on the variance has not been conducted; mainly because its
value is not of great importance, and it would merely serve to show that one method had
a larger variance than the other, which is clear by visual inspection.
The new method has also been compared to methods from the literature. Može and Beg
(2011, 2014, 2010) and Može (2018) have done a great deal of experimental tests on various
connection with bolts in bearing and have devised the very simple expression in (2.10),
(2.13) and (2.14) which has proven hard to beat.
Figure 3.11: Theoretical vs. experimental prediction for expression in Može (2018)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
19
==PAGE:32==
The results in figure 3.11 are for single bolt and multi-bolt connection and the results are
very good. This model has also been adopted in the final draft of the second generation of
Eurocode 3 (Može, 2018), and will be used as the strength model going in the modelling
of the moment-rotation connection in Chapter 5.
20
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:33==
4
Litterature Review of the Component
Method
4.1
General Introduction
The component method is Eurocode 3’s method for modelling semi-rigid joints. The com-
ponent method decomposes a connection into its basic components, and each of the basic
component has a stiffness. The component method methodology consists of these following
steps:
• Identify each basic component
• Compute the stiffness,ki, of each basic component
• Obtain an initial stiffness by ‘assembling’ the joint using
Sj,ini = Ez2
∑
i
1
ki
(4.1)
Where z is the lever arm between the tension and compression resultants in the connection
and ki is the stiffness of component i. The assembly of the joint is not of concern in this
thesis, so the full assembly method will not be explained, but the reader should be aware,
that there are provision for estimating an equivalent moment arm, zeq and effective and
equivalent stiffnesses, keff,i and keq for connections with several bolt rows. These are
schematically shown on figure 4.1.
h1 h2
k3,2 k4,2 k5,2 k10,2
k3,1
k4,1 k5,1 k10,1
k1
k2
k1
k2
keff,1
keff,2
keq
zeq
φj
Mj,Ed
Mj,Ed
φj
Mj,Ed
φj
k1
k2
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.1: Spring model for a Component method joint
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
21
==PAGE:34==
There is also a provision for estimating the rotational stiffness beyond the ”elastic” initial
stiffness, Sj,ini by multiplying (4.1) with a factor 1/µ where µ is unity when Mj,Ed <
2/3Mj,Rd and decreasing to 0 when the moment capacity is reached.
This decrease is a function of the actual acting moment which results in a non-linear
decrease of the stiffness.
Mj
Mj,Rd
Mj,Ed
2
3Mj,Rd
φ
φχd
φEd
Sj,ini
Sj
φCd
Figure 4.2: Non-linear response of joint
Figure 4.2 shows the non-linear response of a joint. ϕχd represents the upper limit where
the response can be estimated using Sj,ini and ϕCd is the maximum design rotation capacity
obtained from Eurocode 3.
The motivation for this section of the thesis is to de-mystify the stiffness coeﬀicients, ki,
used in (4.1). Here the word ‘coeﬀicient’ is used, because these are not strictly speaking
stiffnesses, since the material stiffness, E, is taken into account in (4.1). The force acting
on each componenent is obtained from
Fi = ki · E · ui
(4.2)
Where ui is the deformation of component i’s equivalent spring.
This does lead to some weird normalizations of some of the stiffness coeﬀicients.
Each basic component and its corresponding stiffness coeﬀicient are shown in table 4.1
On table 4.1 there is a gap from stiffness coeﬀicient k6 to k10. These missing coeﬀicients
are defined in the background literature (Weynand et al., 1996) as beam flange and web
in compression (k7), beam web in tension (k8) and plate in tension or compression (k9).
The deformation of these components contribute to the bending of the beam, and not the
joint, and are therefore directly accounted for in the beam stiffness (Jaspart and Weynand
2016). Jaspart and Weynand also explain, that if premature yielding of these components
leads to plastic deformations not considered through the bending stiffness of the beam,
that these would be negligible.
The component method and the derivation of the stiffnesses of the basic components orig-
inated from the work of Zoetemeijer (1974), who developed the T-stub model for deter-
mining the tensile resistance of plated components. Jaspart (1991) later used the T-stub
22
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:35==
Basic Component
Stiffness coeﬀicient
Column web panel in shear
k1
Column web in transverse compression
k2
Column web in transverse tension
k3
Column flange in bending
k4
End-plate in bending
k5
Flange clear in bending
k6
Bolts in tension
k10
Bolts in shear
k11
Bolts in bearing
k12
Concrete in compression including grout
k13
Base plate in bending under compression
k14
Base plate in bending under tension
k15
Anchor bolts in tension
k16
Table 4.1: Basic components and corresponding stiffness coeﬀicient
model as a reference for determining the stiffnesses of plated components and cleats and
further extended it in Jaspart (1997) where a generalized model was developed to predict
the stiffness of any plated component.
A lot of the work on developing the stiffness coeﬀicients is presented in Jaspart (1991),
which poses a problem, because the paper is a Ph.d.
thesis in french.
Luckily, some
of the methods and derivations are found in other literature, such as Weynand et al.
(1996), which is the background documentation for the component method in Eurocode 3
and Jaspart (1997), which is summary of the work on semi-rigid connections. Although
for some of the coeﬀicients, it was essential to refer to Jaspart (1991) directly, since the
alternative literature simply referred to this one.
To overcome this, a tedious process of using optical character recognition (OCR) to trans-
form the scanned PDF to a searchable PDF and then converting it to a word-document and
finally translating the document to English and re-exporting it to a PDF was undertaken.
To further complicate matters, OCR methods are known to be unreliable when scanning
formulas and figures, so the only way to read this translated document was to keep the
original French version open simultaneously, such that it was possible to read the English
version and refer to the French version for the mathematical expressions and figures.
Finally it should be mentioned, that the component method was further elaborated with
stiffness coeﬀicients for column bases by Wald et al. (1996) and the concrete in compression
under the column base by Steenhuis et al. (2008).
There are, in EN 1995 methods for estimating the stiffness coeﬀicients of composite struc-
tures, although composite structures are not of interest in this report.
4.2
Derivation and References of the Stiffness Coeﬀicients
The stiffness coeﬀicients are largely compiled and verified Jaspart (1991), in which several
other works, by e.g. Yee and Melchers (1986) and Karmalin and Pavlov (1989), being
referenced, verified and in some cases modified. Some of the expression in Jaspart (1997)
and (1991) have been simplified further before being incorporated into Eurocode 3. The
derivations herein are for the expressions as given in Eurocode 3 and may have been
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
23
==PAGE:36==
condensed a bit, although ample citations are provided for the reader to be able to go
through the full derivation if need be.
4.2.1
Column Web Panel in Shear, k1
V
V
u
M
F
F
z
Figure 4.3: Column web panel in shear
It has been demonstrated in Jaspart (1991), that the shear stresses in the column web
are more or less uniformly distributed. The shear forces in the web can, according to
Eurocode 3, be expressed as
V = F
β
(4.3)
Where β is a transformation parameter which depends on the joint configuration and F is
a statically admissible transformation of the moment, M as illustrated on figure 4.3. For
members subject to uniform shear, V can be expressed as
V = AV C τ
(4.4)
Where AV C is the web area subject to shear. The shear stress is related, by Hooke’s
law, to the shear strain through the shear modulus (τ = Gγ).
The shear strain, or
angle of rotation, can be expressed by γ = u/z, and the shear modulus is defined as
G = E/2 (1 + ν). From these definitions, the force, F, from 4.3) can be expressed as
F =
EAV C
2 (1 + ν) βz u
(4.5)
The stiffness is found by normalizing with the displacement u. The stiffness coeﬀicient, as
defined in Eurocode 3, is found by further normalizing with E. By also assuming ν = 0.3
and evaluating, the stiffness coeﬀicient becomes
k1 = 0.38AV C
βz
(4.6)
24
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:37==
4.2.2
Plates in Bending, k4, k5 and k6 (and k15)
The derivation of k4, k5 and k6 happens before the derivation of k2 and k3, as some of the
simplifications used to derive k2 and k3 are introduced in these derivations.
The stiffness coeﬀicients from column flange in bending (k4), end plate in bending (k5)
and flange cleat in bending (k6) are all derived as equivalent T-stubs and are therefore all
explained here. The cleat is treated as a T-stub by imagining it as shown in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Cleat T-stub transformation
The elastic response of this system was studied by Yee and Melchers (1986) and refined
by Jaspart (1991). This derivation is as shown in Weynand et al. (1996).
The elastic deformation of this system is obtained as two T-stubs bolted together, i.e., the
end-plate of the beam and the flange of the column form a joint. The elastic deformations
of this system are given in Jaspart (1997, Appendix 3) as
ue =
F
Eki,e
(4.7)
ucf =
F
Eki,cf
(4.8)
Where ue and ucf are the deformations of the end-plate of the beam and the column flange
respectively. ki,e and ki,cf are stiffness coeﬀicients given by
ki,e =
(
Ze
(1
8 −1
4qαe
))−1
(4.9)
These coeﬀicients are obtained from the same equations, so for brevity, only the expression
for the stiffness of the end-plate is shown. Ze, αe and q are geometric properties where
the first two are given by
Ze = ℓ3
e/wet3
,
αe = n/ℓe.
(4.10)
And q is a long expression which is dependent on the stiffness of the bolts and the inter-
action between the beam end-plate and the column flange. ℓe is the length of the T-stub
approximated by ℓe = 2n + 2m, t is the thickness of the T-stub flange and we = 1
2be is an
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
25
==PAGE:38==
imaginary breadth which corresponds to approximately the distance between the bolts,
although this breadth with be substituted by the initial effective length, ℓeff,ini, later.
q is greatly simplified by decomposing the the deformation of the T-stub and shown on
figure 4.5 and assuming a rigid foundation, thereby eliminating any interaction between
T-stubs.
2B
2B
Q
Q
m
n
m
n
F
F
0.63F
m
m 1.25m
0.13F
0.63F
1.25m
F
0.63F
0.63F
a) Actual deformation
b) T-stub alone
0.13F
c) Bolts alone
A
A
Figure 4.5: Elastic Deformation of T-stub
Figure 4.5 shows the decomposition of the actual deformations of a T-stub. The stiffness
of the T-stub in bending can now be obtained on its own and the deformation of the bolts
can be taken into account separately. The length n in figure 4.5 a) is assumed to be 1.25m;
a simplification introduced in the Eurocode. From all of these assumption, q becomes
q = 1.282
(4.11)
By utilizing these values and we = 1
2be = 1
2ℓeff,ini and subtituting these into (4.10), this
evaluates to
ki,e = 193, 64
Ze
= 193, 64t3
eℓeff,ini,e
2 (4.5me)3
= 1, 063ℓeff,ini,et3
e
m3e
≈ℓeff,ini,et3
e
m3e
(4.12)
This derivation generalizes to all plated components and is therefore the starting point for
the stiffness coeﬀicients k4, k5 and k6
k4,5,6 = ℓeff,init3
m3
(4.13)
As opposed to the resistance given from the T-stub model, the elastic response requires
a different effective length, ℓeff,ini, to represent only the elastic response of this system.
The task at hand is then to derive this initial effective length:
26
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:39==
The maximum moment in the T-stub is found in point A on figure 4.5 b) to be
Mmax = 0.322 Fm
(4.14)
From this, the maximum elastic load required to create a plastic hinge on point A on the
T-stub is found to be
Fel = 4ℓeff,ini
1.288 m
t2fy
4
= ℓeff,init2
1.288 m fy
(4.15)
The Eurocode defines the ratio between the elastic load and the design resistance of each
component to be equal to 3/2 (Weynand et al., 1996) which provides the expression for
the design resistance of the system:
FRd = 3
2Fel = ℓeff,init2
0.859 m fy
(4.16)
This can be compared to the design resistance given by the Eurocode.
The bolts are
assumed rigid as a requirement since any effect of bolt deflection is taken into account by
k10. This means that the only failure mechanism that can happen is by Mode 1 given by
FRd = 4Mpl,1,Rd
m
(4.17)
Where Mpl,1,Rd is given by
Mpl,1,Rd = 1
4ℓefft2fy
(4.18)
Combining (4.18) and (4.17) and equating it with (4.16) gives
FRd = ℓefft2
m
fy = ℓeff,init2
0.859 m fy
(4.19)
Many things cancel and the initial effective length, ℓeff,ini, can be expressed as
ℓeff,ini = 0.859 ℓeff ≈0.85 ℓeff
(4.20)
Inserting this into (4.13) provides the stiffness coeﬀicients from the Eurocode (almost)
k4,5,6 = 0.85 ℓefft3
m3
(4.21)
Now let us address k15 (Base plate in bending under compression). There was no stand-
alone reference found where this coeﬀicient was derived, although it is mentioned in Jaspart
and Weynand (2016) to be derived in the same manner as k4,5,6, although it is the only
one of these 4 coeﬀicients with the value as given in (4.21)
k15 = 0.85 ℓefft3
m3
(4.22)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
27
==PAGE:40==
Whereas in the Eurocode
k4,5,6 = 0.9 ℓefft3
m3
(4.23)
According to Jaspart and Weynand (2016, p. 231), there is no explanation for this dis-
crepancy other than a lack of consistency.
4.2.3
Bolts in Tension, k10
The stiffness of a bolt in tension is simply evaluated as a beam element in tension, where
force is given from the deflection as
F = EAs
Lb
u
(4.24)
Where As is the cross-sectional area of the shank of the bolt, Lb is the length of the bolt
and u is the elongation of the bolt.
In the Eurocode, a bolted component always consists of bolt rows, i.e., 2 bolts, therefore
a factor 2 would be expected in the stiffness coeﬀicient, but this is not the case as
k10 = 1.6As
Lb
(4.25)
The factor 1.6 in this case is due to the overload from the prying force from the T-stub,
as seen in figure 4.5 c) where each bolt is loaded with 0.63 (1.25/2 exactly), resulting in
a decreased stiffness of 1/1.25 = 0.8 per bolt. This value is always used, even though for
T-stubs failing in Mode 3, it is technically not necessary.
The effect of pre-tensioning, has been demonstrated to increase the stiffness of the com-
ponent (Jaspart, 1991), although the Eurocode does not permit changing this coeﬀicient.
4.2.4
Column Web in Compression and Tension, k2 and k3
The elastic relationship between tension and compression of the column web and the
deformation hereof, as shown in figure 4.6 is expressed in Jaspart (1991) as
F = Etwc
dc
ξu
(4.26)
Where dc is the column depth and twc is the thickness of the web. ξ is a rather complicated
expression taking into account the relative stiffnesses of the column flanges in bending and
the web in tension and differs for welded or bolted joints. Simplification have been made
to this expression in Weynand et al. (1996).
28
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:41==
F
u
Figure 4.6: Column web in tension or compression
The resistance of a web in tension or compression is given in EC3 as
FRd = befftwcfy
(4.27)
beff is the effective breath defined in Eurocode 3 section 4.10. The simplifications to (4.26)
are based on the T-stub simplifications used in section 4.2.2, where the elastic resistance
is taken as 2/3 of the design resistance.
By recognizing that
u
dc = ϵel, (4.26) can be simplified as
Fel = Etwcξϵel = Etwcξ fy
E = twcξfy
(4.28)
From the ratio
FRd = 3
2Fel
(4.29)
An approximate value of ξ = 2/3beff is derived. Inserting this into (4.26) and normalizing
with E and u, the stiffness coeﬀicients for column webs in compression and tension are
found to be
k2,3 = 0.667befftwc
dc
≈0.7befftwc
dc
(4.30)
4.2.5
Bolts in Shear, k11
The expression for the stiffness coeﬀicient for bolts in shear is based on shear tests per-
formed by Karmalin and Pavlov (1989), in which 120 bolts of varying diameter and grade
where tested. The tests included bolts M16, M20 and M24 of grade 5.8, 8.8, 10.9 and
what is in the paper referred to as high strength bolts, with a minimum tensile strength
of 1100 MPa. Ten bolts of each diameter and grade were tested.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
29
==PAGE:42==
F
Figure 4.7: Shear test scheme from Karmalin and Pavlov (1989)
The test setup was as shown in figure 5.1. In order to only consider shear deformations, all
the parts in the test setup were made up of very high strength steel with a tensile strength
of 2000 MPa and a hardness of 60 HRC.
This paper did not provide an expression
for the stiffness of the system, but rather published tabulated values of the strength and
deformation of the test aswell as graphs of the load-displacement curves like the one shown
in figure 4.8
F,
kN
u, mm
1
2
3
4
40
80
120
160
M24
M20
M16
200
Figure 4.8: Shear force-displacement curves for bolts of grade 5.8 - (Karmalin and Pavlov
1989)
These values and graphs were used by Jaspart (1991) to create an expression for the load
as a function of the displacement:
Fs = 0.93Asfubu
(4.31)
30
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:43==
This expression only covers the linear part of the curve, as this is what is used in the
component method. By normalizing this, as we are now used to, by the displacement, u,
and the young’s modulus, E. By also replacing As with ≈0.78d2 the expression becomes
k = 0.73d2fub
E
(4.32)
The dimensions in this expression are not correct, so in the Eurocode the expression seems
to be multiplied with 16/d16 = 16/16mm = mm−1. Evaluating (4.32) with this in mind
yields
k = 0.73 · 16 · d2fub
Ed16
(4.33)
The reason for the gap from this expression to the expression in the Eurocode is unknown.
The component method always deals with rows of 2 bolts whereas the tests by Karmalin
and Pavlov (1989) were done on single bolts.
I was unable to find any reference for
dealing with the conversion from the expression in Jaspart (1991) to the expression in the
Eurocode.
k11 = 16nbd2fub
Ed16
(4.34)
By assuming 2 bolts in expression (4.33) and comparing it with (4.34), the stiffness in the
Eurocode seems to be ≈70% of the stiffness from Karmalin and Pavlov (1989).
4.2.6
Bolts in Bearing, k12
As for bolts subject to shear, the stiffness for the bolts in bearing is also based on experi-
ments by Karmalin and Pavlov (1989). Two types of connections were tested: A two-shear
connection and a one-shear connection.
t
25mm
t
25mm
d
t
e1
e1
p1
F
F
F
F
a) Two-shear connection
b) One-shear connection
d
t
Figure 4.9: Experimental setup for bearing tests - (Karmalin and Pavlov 1989)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
31
==PAGE:44==
The two-shear connection was setup such that no deformation occurred in the cover plates.
This was done by using two 25mm plates of with a tensile strength of 2000MPa and a
hardness of 60HRC, the same material used for the shear tests.
The one-shear connection used the same material and thickness for both lap-plates.
The parameters of the test specimens varied in thickness (t = 4 - 20 mm), tensile strength
(fy = 370 - 610 MPa), bolt diameter (d = [16, 20, 24] mm) and edge distances (e1 and p1).
592 tests were conducted in all.
An expression for the force as a function of the displacement was fitted to the data by
regressive analysis to obtain the expression
F = kdtdfuuα
(4.35)
Where kd is the coeﬀicient which takes into account the edge distances and is equal to
kd =
{0.25e1
d + 0.5
for
1.5d ≤e1 < 3d
1.25
for
e1 ≥3d
(4.36)
And uα is a function of the displacement given by
uα =
{
α0u
for
0 < u ≤0.8 mm
α1 + α2u −α3u2
for
0.8 < u ≤3.5 mm
(4.37)
Where u is the actual bearing deformation of the bolts and α0, α1, α2 and α3 are regression
parameters. The component method only uses the linear part of the stiffness, as the non-
linear part is accounted for on a system level, therefore, uα can be replaced by α0u and
α0 takes the value 1.25. By normalizing (4.35) by E and u, the expression becomes
k = 1.25kdtdfu
E
(4.38)
The expression in the Eurocode is
k12 = 24nbkdktdfu
E
(4.39)
Where kt = 1.5t/d16. By inserting this into (4.39) and assuming one bolt row, we get.
k12 = 1.5 · 24
16
kdtdfu
E
= 2.25kdtdfu
E
(4.40)
By assuming a two-bolt row and utilizing (4.38), the expression evaluates to
k = 2.5kdtdfu
E
(4.41)
Once again it can be seen that the stiffness coeﬀicient as expressed in the Eurocode is lower
than that obtained in the original studies. Again I was unable to find any explanation for
this, and I am therefore unclear whether this is done on the back of experimental results
or if it is a conservative approximation.
32
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:45==
4.2.7
Concrete in Compression, k13
The derivation of the stiffness of concrete under compression is done by Steenhuis et al.
(2008) and is based on finding the deflections of a rigid plate on an elastic half space and
then deriving an equivalent width of a flexible plate such that these two forces are the
same.
ar
u
F
Figure 4.10: Rigid plate on elastic half space
The deformations of a rectangular rigid plate on an elastic half space can be estimated
with the simplified formula
u = Fαar
EcAr
(4.42)
Where Ec is the young’s modulus of concrete, ar is the width of the rigid plate, Ar is the
area of the rigid plate given by Ar = L · ar and α is a value that is dependent on the
poisson ratio. For poisson ratios of ≈0.15, which is common for concrete, this α value
can be approximated by
α = 0.85
√
L/ar
(4.43)
With this is mind, (4.42) can be rewritten as
u =
0.85F
Ec
√Lar
(4.44)
By isolating F and normalizing with ur and E, an initial expression for the stiffness
coeﬀicient can be found
k13,ini = Ec
√Lar
0.85E
(4.45)
The task at hand is now to define an equivalent rigid width, ar, of a flexible plate such
that the forces in each scenario is the same. In Steenhuis et al. (2008), this is done by
assuming a sinusoidal deflection shape of the flexible plate.
u (x) = u sin
( 1
2πx
cfl
)
(4.46)
And differentiating it 4 times and multiplying by the bending stiffness per unit length,
EI, where I = t3
12 to get the stress distribution under the flexible plate.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
33
==PAGE:46==
F
cfl
cr
F
Figure 4.11: Comparison of rigid and flexible plates deforming into concrete
This culminates in a rather long expression for cfl and the idea is then to find a value for
cr such that the force on figure 4.12 (right) is equal to the force on figure 4.12 (left), which
turns out to be cr = cfl 2
π. The equivalent rigid width, ar, would then be
ar = 2cr + tw
(4.47)
Where tw is the thickness of the web. This is not the approach adopted by the Eurocode,
which adopts a simpler approach utilizing the effective breadth, beff, of a T-stub under
compression. This breadth is also developed in Steenhuis et al. (2008) to estimate the
capacity of the connection, and it goes like this.
c
fj
tw
Figure 4.12: Comparison of rigid and flexible plates deforming into concrete
The flange on the T-stub is treated as a cantilever beam with a moment-resistance per
unit length of
MRd = 1
6t2 fy
γM0
(4.48)
The T-stub is assumed to be uniformly loaded by fj which is the design compressive
strength of the concrete block. The moment acting on the flange at the web is then
MEd = 1
2c2fj
(4.49)
(4.48) and (4.49) can then be combined to solve for the equivalent length, c
c = t
√
fy
3fjγM0
(4.50)
34
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:47==
Which is the expression also used in the Eurocode.
The effective breadth is then
beff = 2c + tw
(4.51)
The length, L, in (4.46) is replaced by ℓeff in the Eurocode and is found by
ℓeff = 2c + ℓ
(4.52)
Where ℓis the length of the flange.
A final modification to (4.46) is to reduce the stiffness by dividing it with 1.5. As explained
in Steenhuis et al. (2008), experiments have shown that the surface of the concrete and
the grout quality have a tendency to reduce the stiffness of the component.
The stiffness of concrete under compression then becomes
k13 = Ec
√ℓeffbeff
1.5 · 0.85E
= Ec
√ℓeffbeff
1.275E
(4.53)
4.2.8
Base Plate in Bending under Tension, k15 and Anchor Bolts in
Tension, k16
These stiffness coeﬀicients are derived earlier, although since the base plate of a column
is often relatively thick, the failure mode of the equivalent T-stub will often be a Mode
3 failure where the flanges don’t bend and the failure happens in the bolts alone. The
Eurocode allows for a change the stiffnesses if prying forces don’t occur.
Onset of prying occurs when
Lb ≤8.8m3As
ℓefft3
(4.54)
Where Lb is the length of the bolt. If this criterion is not met, the stiffnesses may be
altered to
k15 = 0.425ℓefft3
p
m3
(4.55)
and
k16 = 2As
Lb
(4.56)
4.3
Remarks
Especially the stiffness coeﬀicients k11 (bolts in shear) and k12 (bolts in bearing) are of great
importance going further with this thesis, as these can be used to model the stiffnesses
of the bolts in the in-plane moment-rotation connection. In actuality, only the bearing
stiffness, k12 is used. This will be justified in section 5.2.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
35
==PAGE:48==
36
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:49==
5
In-plane Bolted Connection
Gusset plate connections are very prevalent in the industry and are mostly treated as
pinned connections, which in many cases is not a valid assumption, as large moments can
develop. These large moments can cause unaccounted for deformations of the connection.
The component method is unable to estimate these in-plane deformations.
Figure 5.1: Example of gusset plate connections
Given the widespread use of this type of connection, they have big impact on the global
response of the structures they are a part of. It would therefore be of great value to be
able to estimate the moment-rotation response of these types of bolted connections.
In this chapter, a method for modelling in-plane bolted connections, such as gusset plate
connections, will be developed.
The stiffness of the connection will initially depend on the stiffness of bolts in bearing,
and will later be expanded to include effects of block tearing, which can occur for gusset
plate connection subject to large moments.
5.1
Elastic Response of Bolt Group
The system is modelled as a relative movement of a rigid bolt-group.
A coordinate system is introduced as reference for the relative movement of the bolts in
the connection.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
37
==PAGE:50==
(xi, yi)
uy
ux
φ
x
y
(ux,i, uy,i)
Vy
Vx
M
Center of rotation
(x0, y0)
Figure 5.2: Relative displacement of rigid bolt group
By considering, as a first measure, an elastic system, the change in relative displacement
of bolt i can be expressed as
ux,i = ux,0 −(yi −y0) ϕ
and
uy,i = uy,0 + (xi −x0) ϕ.
(5.1)
Where xi and yi are the coordinates of the i’th bolt and ϕ is the rotation of the elastic
center of the bolt group.
The forces in each bolt is found from
Fx,i = kx,iux,i
and
Fy,i = ky,iuy,i.
(5.2)
By inserting (5.1) into (5.2), this can be expressed as
Fx,i = kx,i(ux,0 −(yi −y0) ϕ)
and
Fy,i = ky,i(uy,0 + (xi −x0) ϕ).
(5.3)
Or, alternatively, in matrix form as
[Fx,i
Fy,i
]
=
[kx,i
0
−kx,i (yi −y0)
0
kx,i
ky,i (xi −x0)
] 

ux
uy
ϕ


(5.4)
Where the subscript 0 has been omitted from the displacement of the elastic center.
By summing the forces of all the bolts obtained from (5.4), the internal forces in the
system can be expressed by
Vx =
N
∑
i=1
Fx,i =
N
∑
i=1
kx,i(ux −(yi −y0) ϕ)
(5.5)
Vy =
N
∑
i=1
Fy,i =
N
∑
i=1
ky,i(uy −(xi −x0) ϕ)
(5.6)
38
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:51==
and
M =
N
∑
i=1
Fy,i(xi −x0) −Fx,i(yi −y0) =
N
∑
i=1
ky,i(uy −(xi −x0) ϕ)(xi −x0) −kx,i(ux −(yi −y0) ϕ)(yi −y0)
(5.7)
These expression can be simplified by introducing the following definitions
Kx =
N
∑
i=1
kx,i, Ky =
N
∑
i=1
ky,i, Sx =
N
∑
i=1
kx,i(yi −y0), Sy =
N
∑
i=1
ky,i(xi −x0)
Ix =
N
∑
i=1
kx,i (yi −y0)2 , Iy =
N
∑
i=1
ky,i (xi −x0)2 and Ip = Ix + Iy
(5.8)
which simplifies (5.5),(5.6) and (5.7) to
Vx = Kxux −Sxϕ
(5.9)
Vy = Kyuy + Syϕ
(5.10)
M = Syuy −Sxux + Ipϕ
(5.11)
Or in matrix form as


Vx
Vy
M

=


Kx
0
−Sx
0
Ky
Sy
−Sx
Sy
Ip




ux
uy
ϕ


(5.12)
This expression can be used to solve an elastic problem, although we are interested in
analyzing the non-linear response of a bolt group. The non-linearity of the response is
a consequence of the non-linear response of bolts in bearing, which will require a full
load-displacement curve for each bolt. This will be developed in the next section.
As is common in non-linear finite element analyses, a time stepping approach will be
adopted to solve this system. Originally, a Newton-Raphson method was implemented
which was able to solve arbitrary non-linear functions using an iterative approach. How-
ever, after settling for a tri-linear stiffness curve (as presented in section 5.2) the need
for equilibrium iterations became unnecessary and the MATLAB code was simplified by
removing these, as no error accumulate over time except at the point where the slope
changes. Potentially large errors can occur at these points for small step sizes, although
with only multi-linear stiffness curves, the code is very eﬀicient, and it is easier to just use
more steps.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
39
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Bolt Stiffness Formulation
The accuracy of this model will depend largely on the stiffness formulation for the bolts.
The load-displacement relationship for bolts in bearing is notoriously non-linear and a
simple bi-linear curve would produce too large inaccuracy at intermediate displacements.
The idea for the stiffness curve formulation comes from figure 2.2 in which the load-
displacement curve is simplified as a bi-linear curve where the second linear curve has 1/10
of the slope of the first and is tangent to the actual load-displacement curve. Although for
this approach to be used would require full load-displacement curves for the bolts being
used in the connection, which we do not have. The idea is to estimate this curve from the
theoretical stiffness and strength of a given bolt.
An early idea was to use the displacement at ultimate load u(Fmax), which has been
recorded by e.g.
Može and Beg (2011, 2014) and attempt to generalize a function to
predict displacement at ultimate for arbitrary bolts. The reduced stiffness line could then
run through this point. This was dropped, as the displacement at ultimate load depends on
so many variables and it was not possible to create a function that adequately represented
this.
Finally, it was decided to take inspiration from how the component method handles the
non-linear response of joints.
F
u
Fult
2/3Fult
Typical load-diplacement curve
for bolt in bearing
kI
kI/10
k = 0
u0
uult
Figure 5.3: Simplified tri-linear stiffness curve
The stiffness of a bolt in bearing is assumed to be linear up untill 2/3Fult at which point
the stiffness is reduced to 1/10 of the initial stiffness until Fult.
The ultimate load Fult will be obtained from the expression in Može (2018) (equations
(2.10), (2.13) and (2.14)), as it shows better results than the expression in the Eurocode
and the expression for the initial stiffness will be obtained from the Eurocode (equation
(4.39)). One has to remember, that the expression for stiffness in the Eurocode is valid for
a bolt row, i.e. two bolts in parallel. The stiffness for a single bolt can only be assumed
to be half of this stiffness then. The initial stiffness of a bolt in bearing is then
kI = k12
2 E = 12kdktdfu
(5.13)
40
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:53==
From this, the tri-linear stiffness formulation, as visualized in figure 5.3 is formulated as
kb =



kI
for
F < 2/3Fb,Rk
kI/10
for
F < Fb,Rk
0
for
F > Fb,Rk
(5.14)
Where F is the force om the bolt. The point of intersection between the first and second
line in the tri-linear stiffness formulation will be termed the point of initial yield denoted
by the point (u0, Fb0), which is defined as
u0 = Fb0/kI
(5.15)
where Fb0 = 2/3Fb,Rk
The second intersection, (uult, Fb,Rk) is found by linear interpolation to be
uult = 10(Fb,Rk −Fb0)
kI
+ u0;
(5.16)
The stiffness of the bolts are approximated to only depend on the stiffness of a single
plate in bearing even though the plate that the deforming plate is connected to and the
bolts deforming in shear also reduce the stiffness of the connection. This approximation
is made because the experiment that the method will be estimating is design such that
the stiffness of the deforming plate is much less than anything else, and approximating
the other stiffnesses to be infinity is acceptable.
The use of the Word ’Yield’
The term yield is used fairly loosely in this thesis for when the the stiffness of the bolt or
the system changes. The point, as mentioned above, (u0, Fb0), is referred to as the initial
yield of the bolt and, (uult, Fb,Rk), is referred to as ultimate yield.
5.3
MATLAB Implementation - Bolts
Equation (5.12) can be written in compact notation as
F = Ku
(5.17)
The stiffness matrix, K, will be an indirect function of the displacement u because the
stiffnesses, kx,i and ky,i are a function of ux,i and uy,i.
The displacement of the bolt group will be solved by discretizing the system and solving
it in steps. The discretized expression is then
∆F = K(uj−1)∆u
(5.18)
Where subscript j indicates the j’th loadstep and where the stiffness matrix, K, is a
function of the displacement from the last load step. The displacement increments can be
computed from
∆u = K−1∆F
(5.19)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
41
==PAGE:54==
The displacement at load step j is then obtained from
uj = uj−1 + ∆u
(5.20)
This procedure is illustrated in pseudo-code in algorithm 1
Algorithm 1: Compute displacements
Result: Load and displacement history
∆F = load increment
nstep = number of steps
u1 = 0; F1 = 0
for j = 2 to nstep do
Kj = K(uj−1, ...) % See Box 1
∆u = K−1
j ∆F
Fj = Fj−1 + ∆F
uj = uj−1 + ∆u
end
As can be seen, the general structure of the algorithm is very simple. The intricate part is
in the definition of the stiffness matrix, Kj, for each load step. The idea is to re-compute
the stiffness matrix in each step with the reduced bolt-stiffnesses as governed by (5.14).
From the displacement of the elastic center, u, the displacement of each bolt (ux,i, uy,i)
can be found from equation (5.1). The stiffness of a bolt depends on the magnitude of its
displacement, denoted ub,i, given by
ub,i =
√
u2
x,i + u2
y,i
(5.21)
From this measure, the bolt stiffness, kb, at the current load step, j, can be obtained from
(5.14). There is no difference between directional stiffness, therefore kx,i = ky,i = kb,i.
The new reduced stiffness matrix, Kj, can now be constructed from the relations in (5.8)
and (5.12). This procedure is shown schematically in the box below
Box 1: Procedure for computing the reduced stiffness matrix, Kj, at load-step j.
1. Obtain bolt displacements, ux,i and uy,i, from the displacement at the elastic
center, uj, by using equation (5.1)
2. Compute the thresholds, u0,i and uult,i, for initial and ultimate yield of each bolt
from equations (5.15) and (5.16)
3. Compute the magnitude of the bolt displacement, ub,i, from equation (5.21)
4. Check
if
the
bolt
stiffness
should
be
reduced
using
a
simple
for-
loop:
for each bolt do
if ub,i < u0,i then
kb,i = kI,i
else if ub,i < umax,i then
kb,i = kI,i/10
else
42
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:55==
kb,i = 0
end if
end for
5. The stiffness of each bolt is non-directional. The bolt stiffness in each direction
is therefore the same
kx,i = kb,i
ky,i = kb,i
6. The stiffnesses are then summed according to (5.8)
Kx = ∑nb
i=1 kx,i
Ky = ∑nb
i=1 ky,i
Sx = ∑nb
i=1 kx,i(yi −y0)
Sy = ∑nb
i=1 ky,i(xi −x0)
Ix = ∑nb
i=1 kx,i (yi −y0)2
Iy = ∑nb
i=1 ky,i (xi −x0)2
Ip = Ix + Iy
7. Finally the stiffness matrix is constructed using the reduced bolt stiffnesses
Kj =


Kx
0
−Sx
0
Ky
Sy
−Sx
Sy
Ip


8. This procedure is repeated for each load step, j.
This scheme is tested for a 4-bolt connection loaded uni-axially. The stiffness formulation
used is the tri-linear stiffness formulation described in section (5.2) and the 4-bolt has the
parameters shown in table 5.1
Bolt
e1 [mm]
d [mm]
d0 [mm]
t [mm]
fu [MPa]
1
61.8
27
30
10
885
2
61.8
27
30
10
885
3
61.8
27
30
10
885
4
61.8
27
30
10
885
Table 5.1: Connection parameters
50
50
Fy = 4Fb,Rk
x
y
Figure 5.4: 4 bolt connections subject to uni-axial load
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
43
==PAGE:56==
The distance e1 is arbitrarily chosen and doesn’t represent any physical property. It was
merely chosen early on in the writing of the code to be able to compare it to some known
results.
The connection is loaded in the y-direction by a little over 4Fb,Rk to see the full deflection
curve and the analytical solution is superimposed. The numerical solution is discretized
into 100 steps in this case.
Figure 5.5: Uni-axially loaded connection - Verification of numerical solution
As expected, the results match very well. By looking at a very close up of the second kink
in the curve, a very slight discrepancy is seen between the two methods.
Figure 5.6: Uni-axially loaded connection - Zoom
This is the error caused by the over-shoot at each kink in the curve and is therefore at
most Kj∆u.
44
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:57==
To further verify the method, a comparison will be made to Su and Siu (2007) using the
layout and stiffnesses used in that paper and comparing their results with the one obtained
using this method.
The bolt group geometry in Su and Siu (2007) is as shown in the figure below
100
100
90
90
90
y
x
a)
Fy=350 kN
Fx=380 kN
M=131 kNm
b)
Figure 5.7: Bolted connection from Su and Siu (2007)
The resulting deflections are the deflections of the center of the bolt group while the
applied forces are added 100 mm off center of the bolt group. In the method developed
for this report, the forces are added in the center of the bolt group, therefore, to make the
comparison, the force vector will have an added moment resulting from the Fy force
F =


Fx
Fy
M + Fy · 100mm


(5.22)
The stiffness curves from Su and Siu (2007) are bi-linear elastic perfectly plastic curves
with an initial stiffness of kI = 103.000 N/mm and strength of Fb,Rk = 260 kN
Figure 5.8: Load-displacement from the method in this report with the parameters from
Su and Siu (2007)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
45
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.9: Load-displacement from Su and Siu (2007)
Figure 5.8 shows the curves calculated using the parameters from Su and Siu (2007) and
figure 5.9 shows the curves from that paper itself. The dotted line in figure 5.9 are not
of interest. The comparisons are made to verify that the model produces correct results.
These graphs match perfectly even though the methods of obtaining them are completely
different.
The method used in Su and Siu (2007) estimates the center of rotation by
using a steepest decent method and calculates the forces in each bolt from the center of
rotation. To my understanding, the stiffness curve has to be bi-linear with a perfectly
plastic response at yielding and the method is not able to handle multi-linear stiffness
curves.
The method in this report on the other hand handles the non-linear response by reducing
the stiffness of the stiffness matrix directly.
5.3.1
Direction of the Bolt Force after Yielding
The direction of the force on a yielded bolt has to be established. From the theory of
plasticity, it follows that the direction of the strain of a yielding material is normal to the
yield surface.
σ1, ǫ1,
σ2, ǫ2,
σY
σY
σY
σY
ǫp
f(σ) = 0
σ
Figure 5.10: Von Mises yield criterion for plane stress
For a Von Mises material, such as steel, the yield surface is given by the Von Mises yield
criterion, which for plane stress, is
f (σ1, σ2) =
√
σ2
1 + σ2
2 −σ1σ2 −σE
(5.23)
46
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:59==
The yield surface is given by f (σ1, σ2) = 0 and the plastic strain increment is given by
the flow rule
dϵp = dλp ∂f(σ)
∂σ
(5.24)
Where σ is the primary stresses in vectorial form and dλp is the so called plastic multiplier
governing the magnitude of the strain.
Although establishing the direction of the force from the theory of plasticity is proving
complicated because of the complexity of the actual stress state of the material yielding
behind the bolt. On a macroscopic level, the yielding of the bolt, as defined in this report
by the tri-linear stiffness formulation is not governed by the Von Mises yield criterion.
Several approaches to defining the direction of the bolt force at yield have been looked
at whereof two have been seriously considered; 1: Fixing the direction of the bolt force
to its direction at the time of yielding and 2: Only fixing the magnitude of the force but
allowing it to change direction depending on the position of the center of rotation.
Of these considerations, the second has been chosen and implemented, as it does not
require any additional adjustment to the method and is taken care of automatically when
the stiffness matrix is altered.
This approach was also chosen by Su and Siu (2007).
Whether this is the correct approach would require further research and comparison with
experimental data.
5.4
Stiffness from Block Tearing
To get a more representative picture of the deformations of the gusset plate connection,
the stiffness from block tearing will have to be incorporated. For large enough forces, the
entire block will displace or rotate depending on the load on the connection. This has
been shown experimentally in Jönsson (2015) in which the strength of such a connection
is estimated by assuming a plastic distribution of forces.
Figure 5.11: Example of yield line developing around L cut-out
5.4.1
Derivation of Rigid Block Displacement in the Elastic Range
The stiffness will be obtained by assuming rigid body displacement of the block and by
assuming a width of the yield band, bY . This width of the yield band will then ultimately
be a tuning parameter that will have to be experimentally obtained.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
47
==PAGE:60==
V
N
M
EC
kV
kN
bY
x
y
Figure 5.12: Principle sketch - Stiffness from block tearing
The displacement along the yield line is obtained, similarly to how the bolt displacements
are obtained. For this derivation, the displacement along the vertical yield band will serve
as an example, although this generalizes to e.g., the horizontal yield band or the would be
top yield band in case of a C-cut out.
bY
ux,0
uy,0
y
x
φ
ux(y)
uy
h
(x0, y0)
Figure 5.13: Displacement of vertical yield band
Figure 5.13 shows the vertical yield band being displaced. The displacements are obtained
from
ux = ux,0 −(y −y0) ϕ
(5.25)
And
uy = uy,0 + (x −x0) ϕ
(5.26)
Where x and y coordinates along the yield band and (x0, y0) is the elastic center of the
yield band. These displacements are functions of y and x respectively. As such, for the
vertical yield band, ux is a linear function in y and uy is a constant and vice versa for the
horizontal yield band.
48
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:61==
By assuming varying stress along the yield line, the forces on a small length dy are
dFx = σtdy
(5.27)
The force, Fx, from the vertical yield band is obtained by integrating over the height, h.
Fx =
∫h
0
σtdy
(5.28)
The normal stresses are found from Hooke’s law
σx = ϵxE = dux
dx E
(5.29)
The width of the yield band as defined earlier becomes useful now. Figure 5.14 shows a
strain element with a unit height in the yield-band. The strain element in decomposed to
illustrate normal strain and shear strain in the yield-band as I is displaced relative to II.
bY
1
ux
bY
1
uy
γ
bY
I
II
Figure 5.14: Definition sketch - Strains in yield band
The normal strain can be approximated using the width of the yield band and assuming
uniform elongation along the length bY
ϵx = ux
bY
(5.30)
By defining the stress in terms of this strain definition, and inserting the expression into
(5.28) we get
Fx =
∫h
0
ux
bY
Et dy
(5.31)
And by replacing ux with the expression in (5.25) and evaluating, the force Fx can be
expressed as
Fx = Et
bY
(
ux,0h + y0h −h2
2 ϕ
)
(5.32)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
49
==PAGE:62==
This expression can be rearranged to split the displacement function from the stiffness
coeﬀicient
Fx =
(
ux,0 −
(h
2 −y0
)
ϕ
)
E th
bY
(5.33)
The expression in (5.33) implicitly defines the spring stiffness, E th
bY , for the displacements
of the yield band along the x-axis.
The derivation of the forces in the y-dircetion, Fy, are derived in a similar manner by
utilizing
Fy =
∫h
0
τtdy
(5.34)
and
τ = uy
bY
G
(5.35)
Where the shear-strain, γ, is approximated from the definition in figure 5.14
To obtain the force, Fy, the main difference is that uy is a constant with respect to y,
resulting in
Fy = (uy,0 −(0 −x0) ϕ) G th
bY
(5.36)
Where x = 0 is the position of the yield band in the x-direction. It can now be seen, that
the forces have a resultant in the elastic center of the yield band
(
0, h
2
)
and it turns out
that this generalizes to all the yield bands.
The forces resulting from the yield bands can be summarized as
Fx,i = (ux,0 −(yi −y0) ϕ) Ei
tℓi
bY
= ux,ikx,i
(5.37)
and
Fy,i = (uy,0 −(xi −x0) ϕ) Ei
tℓi
bY
= uy,iky,i
(5.38)
Where (xi, yi) is the elastic center of yield band i, ℓi is the length of yield band i and Ei
is either E or G depending on whether the yield band is horizontal or vertical.
The forces in the connection from the rigid displacements of the block are then
Vx =
N
∑
i=1
Fx,i =
N
∑
i=1
(ux,0 −(yi −y0) ϕ) kx,i
(5.39)
Vy =
N
∑
i=1
Fy,i =
N
∑
i=1
(uy,0 −(xi −x0) ϕ) ky,i
(5.40)
and
50
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:63==
M =
N
∑
i=1
Fy,i (xi −x0) −Fx,i (yi −y0) =
N
∑
i=1
((uy,0 −(xi −x0) ϕ) ky,i) (xi −x0) −((ux,0 −(yi −y0) ϕ) kx,i) (yi −y0)
(5.41)
By utilizing the stiffness definitions in (5.8), these can be written in matrix form analogues
to the bolt stiffness matrix


Vx
Vy
M

=


Kc,x
0
−Sc,x
0
Kc,y
Sc,y
−Sc,x
Sc,y
Ic,p




uc,x
uc,y
ϕc


(5.42)
Or in compact notation as
F = Kcuc
(5.43)
Here subscript c is used to indicate that this is the stiffnesses from the cut-out.
5.4.2
Yielding of the Material
The stiffness of the yield-band is governed by the stress-strain relation for the material
being used. In the elastic range that is the materials Young’s modulus, E. In the plastic
range the stress-strain relation is for most steels very non-linear and diﬀicult to model.
In this thesis, the stress-strain relation will be simplified as a bi-linear curve with an
elasto-plastic stiffness Eep = E/100 to account for strain hardening.
σ
ǫ
fy
ǫy
ǫu
Eep
E
Figure 5.15: Stress-straim curve for mild steel with the simplified curve superimposed
Since each yield-band is defined as a single point with a stiffness obtained from the yield-
band geometry and material properties, the entire yield-band has to yield at the same
time. This is not a problem for uni-axially loaded cut-outs, as the stress along the yield
line would be constant, although for cut-outs subject to moments, the stress along the
yield band will vary linearly and should start yielding at the edge.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
51
==PAGE:64==
Onset of yield will be depend on the strain at the outer fiber of a yield-band and when
yield happens, the entire band yields. Because of this, the yield strain can not be ϵy, since
this would mean yield occurs at far too low forces.
Inspiration for a solution to this problem comes from Jönsson (2015), in which the strength
of a block is estimated by assuming a plastic distribution of forces around the yield bands
but where the strength used for the material was a mean strength, fm = fy+fu
2
, was used
to take into account strain hardening. The material will yield when the strain at the outer
fiber of a yield band becomes ϵm = ϵy+ϵu
2
. This will be approximated to ϵm ≈ϵu
2 since
ϵy ≪ϵu
ϵm ≈ϵu
2
(5.44)
The displacement of the edge of the yield band is obtained by plugging the edge coordinate
into (5.25) and (5.26) and the strain required for yielding is
um = ϵmbY
(5.45)
Where bY is the as of yet unknown width of the yield-band.
Dealing with Bolt Holes in the Cross-Section
The yield-band is assumed to go through the bolt holes and therefore the net cross-
sectional area should be used to define the stiffness. This is handled in the same way as
in Jönsson (2015) by utilizing an equivalent thickness, teq, of the cross-section by reducing
the thickness by the ratio of net-to-gross cross-sectional area.
teq = tAn
Ag
(5.46)
Where An and Ag are the net and gross cross-sectional areas respectively.
5.4.3
Combining Stiffnesses
The stiffness of cut-out contributes to the deformation of the entire connection. The forces
on the bolts are also transferred to the cut-out. The total deformations of the connection
is then
utot = uc + ub
(5.47)
And the forces are the same
F = Fc = Fb
(5.48)
The force on the connection is therefore expressed as
F =
(
K−1
c
+ K−1
b
)−1 utot
(5.49)
52
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:65==
5.5
MATLAB Implementation - Bolts and Block Tearing
Combined
The method for modelling the deformation of a connection with the effects of block tearing
being taken into account is at its core the same.
The system is discretized and solved in steps but using the combined stiffnesses of the
bolts and the effects of block tearing as shown in (5.49)
∆u = (K−1
c
+ K−1
b )∆F
(5.50)
The displacement increment is then added to the displacement from the previous step as
shown in (5.20).
The yielding of the material in the yield-band will be achieved by reducing the Young’s
modulus, E, in case the displacement of any edge of the cut-out exceeds the maximum
allowable deformation prescribed by (5.45). In practice this is achieved by only checking
for the longest side of the cut-out, since it will have then largest deflections at its edges,
and assuming the entire yield-band around the cut out yields if the threshold is met. This
approximation is not assumed to produce very different results than if the sides yielded
at separate times.
Another approximation is that the equivalent thickness of each side of the cut-out, teq, is
the same and is obtained from (5.46). Again, this could have been a distinct thickness for
each side, but the difference is assumed to be minimal.
The new procedure is illustrated in algorithm 2
Algorithm 2: Compute displacements
Result: Load and displacement history
∆F = load increment
nstep = number of steps
u1 = 0; F1 = 0
for j = 2 to nstep do
Kc,j = Kc(uj−1, ...) % See Box 2
Kb,j = Kb(uj−1, ...) % See Box 1
∆u = (K−1
b,j + K−1
c,j )∆F
Fj = Fj−1 + ∆F
uj = uj−1 + ∆u
end
Where the only difference is that the stiffness matrix for the cut-out has to be assembled
in each step. This assembly is illustrated in box 2
Box 2: Procedure for computing the stiffness contribution from the effects of block
tearing, Kc
1. Obtain the displacement at the edge of each yield-band, ux and uy from equations
(5.25) and (5.26)
2. Compute the displacement yield threshold, um, from (5.45)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
53
==PAGE:66==
3. Check if any edge displacement, ux or uy, exceeds the displacement threshold,
um.
4. Reduce E to E/100 if the displacement treshold is reached.
5. Reassemble stiffness matrix, Kc, with reduced stiffness.
5.5.1
Tuning of the Parameter bY
The width of the yield bands, bY is a tuning parameter and will be obtained by hand-fitting
the theoretical results to some experimental results.
This will not be a definitive value for the width, bY , because of the relatively low number
of experimental tests to compare it to, and because the parameter is fitted using a subset
of the tests it will be compared to.
Furthermore, the method for handling yield is thought to be greatly improvable. As it is
incorporated now, it is designed to work on these tests and it would require some minor
tweaking to be usable generally.
The strain required for onset of yielding is also ultimately a tuning parameter, and the
value chosen in (5.44) might not be definitive. The displacement,um, required for onset
of yield is furthermore a function of the width, bY . This is to say that there is great
uncertainty regarding the values chosen herein, but there is also great flexibility built into
the model and it should be possible to choose there parameters on the basis of a parametric
study.
5.6
Comparisons with Experimental Results
The experimental results are obtained from Nissen (2014) in which gusset plate connections
subject to large moments were tested.
Test plate
(a) Plane concept
(b) 3D concept
Figure 5.16: Test setup from Nissen (2014)
Figure 5.16 shows the test setup. The setup is designed such that only the test plate is
supposed to deform. The other components in the setup are made up of stronger steel
grades and thicker plates.
The design of the setup allows for flexibility when applying the load by changing which
hole the test setup is hung from and by varying the size of the test plate itself. This allows
54
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:67==
for a varying eccentricity.
The different test specimen are shown in table 5.2.
No.
Name
etest
B plate
Pin hole
Pretension
[mm]
[Nm]
1
B1-H1-1 (f)
400
B1
1
125
2
B1-H1-2 (f)
400
B1
1
125
3
B1-H1-3 (f)
400
B1
1
125
4
B1-H1-4
400
B1
1
57
5
B1-H1-5
400
B1
1
57
6
B1-H1-6
400
B1
1
57
7
B4-H1-1
274
B4
1
57
8
B4-H1-2
274
B4
1
57
9
B4-H1-3
274
B4
1
57
10
B4-H4-1
204
B4
4
57
11
B4-H4-2
204
B4
4
57
12
B4-H4-3
204
B4
4
57
Table 5.2: Test specimen from Nissen (2014)
The first three specimen in table 5.2 will not be included in the comparison as the bolts
in those experiments have been pretensioned which caused some initial slip to occur. The
model developed in this thesis derives its stiffness from the bearing deformation around the
bolts and is not able to model initial slip when the friction capacity of the pre-tensioned
bolts is reached.
The coeﬀicient etest is the eccentricity of the load measured from the application of the
load to the elastic center of the bolt group.
B plate refers to the type of test plate being used. There are two types: A longer one,
B1, and a shorter one, B4. The Pin hole refers to the hole where the specimen is hung
from. Specimen B4-H4-[1,2,3] are hung from pin hole 4, shortening the eccentricity but
also introducing a normal force component because the specimen now hangs at an angle.
The tuning parameter, bY , will be obtained by hand-fitting the curve to match the defor-
mation curve from specimen B1-H1-4. A suitable value is found to be
bY = 0.6d0
(5.51)
The strength and stiffness of the test plate is obtained from Winterskov-Andersen (2014),
in which two tensile tests of each test specimen in table 5.2 were performed. From these
tests, the tensile strength, fy, ultimate strength, fu, Young’s modulus, E and ultimate
strain, ϵult of each specimen were obtained.
For the remaining parts of the test setup, the nominal values were used.
For an in
depth overview of the experiments the reader is referred to Nissen (2014) and Winterskov-
Andersen (2014).
Figure 5.17 shows the experimental results with the theoretical results superimposed. The
x-axis is the rotation of the test plate in degrees and the y-axis is the load applied as
indicated by the arrows in figure 5.16 (a).
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
55
==PAGE:68==
The numerical results match very well with the experimental results. Perhaps too well in
some cases. The reader has to keep in mind that the model has been fitted to a subset of
the experiments that it is compared to; namely specimen B1-H1-4. This specimen is not
illustrated in figure 5.17 because of this, although there are specimen with an even better
fit that B1-H1-4.
56
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.17: Comparison between experimental and theoretical results
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
57
==PAGE:70==
The influence of the effect of block tearing are illustrated in figure 5.18, where the response
of specimen B1-H1-4 is calculated with and without the effects of block tearing, i.e. the
stiffness is influenced by the bolts in bearing alone.
(a) with the effects of block tearing
(b) without the effects of block tearing
Figure 5.18: Influence of the effects of block tearing
The initial stiffness in both cases are virtually the same. The onset of yield of the yield
bands is at about 1◦rotation. The effects of block tearing thus has influence over the
stiffness after initial yield and on the strength of the connection. The flexibility is large
with this model. The base of the model is based on the rigid deformation of the bolts,
which provides a principally accurate response of in plane bolted connections. The effect
of block tearing can then be used to achieve the more intricate phenomenon that occur in
complex connections.
The parameters in the block tearing stiffness formulations are not final as represented in
this report and should be the subject of some sort of parametric study to assign general
values. These parameters are the width of the yield bands, bY and the strain required for
onset of yielding, ϵm.
5.7
A Novel Approach to In-plane Bolted Connections
In the following, an analytical solution to the relative movement of rigid parts joined by
multi-linear springs is developed. The method will in this thesis be termed the β-method
which has been the colloquial term used for this method during the writing of the thesis.
5.7.1
The β-Method for Bolts Alone
The relative movement of rigid parts joined by multi-linear springs was demonstrated in
the previous sections, and solved using a time-stepping approach.
The time steps have to be small to obtain relatively accurate results at the point of yielding.
Too large time-steps will underestimate the deflection at around yielding. It is of interest
in this regard to solve this problem without time-stepping instead predicting the the exact
point of yield.
In this section, a method for obtaining the solution at the point of first yield of the
connections is developed. The idea is to identify the first point of yielding of the first
yielding bolt in the connection. The first yielding bolt will be the bolt furthest from the
58
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:71==
center of rotation, which is a geometric problem which should be easily solved, and will
be discussed again after this derivation.
The point of initial yield of the first bolt is obtained from the multi-linear spring expression
of the bolt, as shown in figure 5.3 and equation (5.14)
The forces in the connection are found from (5.12). Which is written in compact matrix
form as
F = Ku
(5.52)
From a known force, F, the displacement vector can be isolated as
u = K−1F
(5.53)
The force in each bolt is obtained from (5.2). This can be written more compactly by
defining the middle matrix as ki
Fi = kiu
(5.54)
By inserting u from (5.53) into (5.54), the force acting on bolt i can be found from from
Fi = kiK−1F
(5.55)
The force on bolt i can now be found by knowing the force acting on the connection. To
eliminate unknown variables in this expression, proportional loading will be assumed. The
force vector will be defined as
F = β∆F = β


∆Vx
∆Vy
∆M


(5.56)
Where β is a proportionality factor and ∆Vx, ∆Vy and ∆M are known forces acting on
the connection.
The yield criterion for bolt i is reached when the absolute value of the force vector, Fi,
has reached initial yield, Fb0. This is to say, that the yield is reached when the euclidean
length of the bolt force vector reaches the point of yielding or
|Fi| ≤Fb0
(5.57)
Which can be thought of as a circular yield function
f (Fi) = |Fi| −Fb0 = 0
(5.58)
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
59
==PAGE:72==
Fb0
Fb0
Fb0
Fb0
Fx,i
Fy,i
f(Fi) = 0
Figure 5.19: Pseudo yield function for bolts in bearing
For 2-dimensional vectors, (5.57) can be rewritten as
√
F 2
x,i + F 2
y,i ≤Fb0
(5.59)
By squaring the expression and normalizing by Fb0, the interaction formula
(Fx,i
Fb0
)2
+
(Fy,i
Fb0
)2
≤1
(5.60)
Is obtained. By inserting the expanded expression from (5.55) into (5.60) and utilizing
the proportional loading introduced in (5.56), the interaction can be expressed as
([
kx,i
0
−kx,i (yi −y0)
]
K−1β∆F
Fb0
)2
+
([
0
ky,i
ky,i (xi −x0)
]
K−1β∆F
Fb0
)2
≤1
(5.61)
By factoring out the proportionality factor, β, and simplifying, this becomes
β2
([
kx,i
0
−kx,i (yi −y0)
]
K−1∆F
)2 +
([
0
ky,i
ky,i (xi −x0)
]
K−1∆F
)2
F 2
b0
≤1
(5.62)
Since both expressions in the numerator are known, the expression will be simplified to
reduce clutter by defining
A =
[
kx,i
0
−kx,i (yi −y0)
]
K−1∆F
and
B =
[
0
ky,i
ky,i (xi −x0)
]
K−1∆F
(5.63)
Isolating β now produces this simple expression for obtained the value of the proportional
loading factor at initial yield of the first yielding bolt
β =
√
F 2
b0
A2 + B2
(5.64)
60
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:73==
To get the right solution, we now have to identify the first yielding bolt. As hinted at
before, the geometric properties of the connection have to be analysed.
The center of rotation of the connection is found by forcing the expressions of relative
displacement, (5.1), to be 0 and isolating for the coordinate where this is true
ux,0 −(yCR −y0) ϕ = 0 ⇒yCR = y0 + ux,0
ϕ
(5.65)
and
uy,0 + (xCR −x0) ϕ = 0 ⇒xCR = x0 −uy,0
ϕ
(5.66)
The longest distance from the center of rotation to any bolt determines which bolt will yield
first. The bolt can be identified visually or computationally by computing the distances
from each bolt to the center of rotation.
The second iteration of this procedure becomes more complicated. Identifying the second
bolt to yield is no longer purely a geometric problem, because the already yielded bolt can
reach it’s ultimate bearing capacity. The current stiffness of each bolt is therefore required
to identify the point of second yield for the system
F1
F2
F4
F3
F
u
u4
u3
u1
u2
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
(a) Local response
(b) Global response
Figure 5.20: Local vs. global response
Figure 5.20 represents a connection with 4 bolts loaded by some arbitrary load. Figure 5.20
(a) shows the local response of each bolt and (b) is the global response of the connection.
The red numbers represent load steps. The first result, 1, on figure (b), is obtained when
bolt 1 yields. Each number 1 represents the state of each bolt at load step 1. 2 is obtained
when bolt 2 yields.
The stiffness of the connection is now softer, as indicated by the
reduced slope between 1 and 2 on figure (b). This is repeated until all the bolts have
yielded.
The stiffness functions for the bolts on figure 5.20 (a) are shown as bi-linear to simplify
the figure. The actual curves are tri-linear.
In this case, because computational eﬀiciency is not of concern, β will be computed for
each bolt and the lowest value will be used. This sidesteps the issue of explicitly identifying
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
61
==PAGE:74==
the second bolt to yield, although care has to be taken to use the right value for Fb0 when
computing the β value the next bolt to yield. The value to be used should be the difference
between the actual state of the bolt and the value at yield.
The coeﬀiceint, Fb0 will be replaced by
F j
b,i = |Fi|j −Fb,i
(5.67)
Where |Fi|j is the force in bolt i at load step j and Fb,i is the initial or ultimate yield of
the bolt as defined in figure 5.3, given by
Fb,i =
{Fb0 = 2
3Fb,Rk
for
|Fi|j ≤2
3Fb,Rk
Fb,Rk
for
|Fi|j > 2
3Fb,Rk
(5.68)
β is thus the load factor required to obtain the displacement increment from load-step j
to j + 1. The displacement increment is found from
∆u = Kj∆Fβj
(5.69)
The displacement at load step j is
uj = uj−1 + ∆u
(5.70)
This procedure is implemented in MATLAB as shown in algorithm 3. The method requires
the number of desired solutions, nsol, as an input, as no solution is found when all the
bolts have yielded, nsol tells the program when to stop looking for solutions.
The program loops over the desired number of solutions. First step is to compute the
stiffness matrix at load-step j, then an inner loop is initiated in which the current stiffness
and load required for yield of each bolt is obtained. This is used to compute the propor-
tionality factor, β. The lowest value of β is used to compute the displacement increment,
∆u, as this β value corresponds to the next yielding bolt. The total displacement, uj is
62
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:75==
then obtained, and will be used to reduce the stiffnesses of the bolts in the next iteration.
Algorithm 3: β-method
Result: Load and displacement history
∆F = load proportions
nsol = number of desired solutions
u1 = 0; F1 = 0
for j = 2 to nsol do
Kj = K(uj−1) % See Box 1
for i = 1 to nb do
[kx,i, ky,i, Fb,i] = kb(kI,i, Fb,Rk,i, uj−1)
A =
[
kx,i
0
−kx,i (yi −y0)
]
K−1
j ∆F
B =
[
0
ky,i
ky,i (xi −x0)
]
K−1
j ∆F
βi =
√
F 2
b,i
A2+B2
end
βj = min(βi)
∆u = K−1
j ∆Fβj
Fj = Fj−1 + ∆Fβj
uj = uj−1 + ∆u
end
This procedure has been tested on a 4 bolt connection subject to a uni-axial load as in
section 5.3. This should return the tri-linear deflection curve.
The results are overlayed over the results from the time-stepping procedure. The table
below shows the parameters chosen for the bolts and plate in the test. These values are
the same as in table 5.1.
Bolt
e1 [mm]
d [mm]
d0 [mm]
t [mm]
fu [MPa]
1
61.8
27
30
10
885
2
61.8
27
30
10
885
3
61.8
27
30
10
885
4
61.8
27
30
10
885
Table 5.3: Connection parameters
As before, these values are arbitrarily chosen and do not represent physical properties.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
63
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.21: Results from the β-method superimposed on the numerical results
The results match relatively well, although there is consistently a slight mismatch with
the results from the β-method and the numerical method which is most likely due to an
error in discretization.
The test is rerun with a much smaller discretization to be more certain that it is a numerical
error, and the error vanishes completely.
Figure 5.22: Results from the β-method superimposed on the numerical results with more
steps
Figure 5.21 is purposely solved with a low amount of steps to showcase the numerical error
that can occur and to highlight that the β-method produces exact solutions.
The beta method should be able to correctly predict all the points on the full load dis-
placement curve when a bolt yields for arbitrary loads.
This will be tested by adding a moment to the same connection. The proportional load
factor is in this case
64
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:77==
∆F =


0
∆F
∆F/3 · 100mm


(5.71)
Figure 5.4 shows the layout of this connection.
50
50
Fy = ∆F
x
y
M = ∆F/3 · 100mm
Figure 5.23: 4 bolt connection with subject to a moment and axial load
Figure 5.24: β-method Vs. numerical with applied moment
The β-method is able to correctly predict each kink in the curve. To keep comparing
it to something known, the comparison is made to the results obtained from using the
parameters in Su and Siu (2007) in section 5.3 in which the bolt stiffness is defined as a
bi-linear curve.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
65
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.25: β-method compared with results from Su and Siu (2007)
Again the method is able to reproduce the desired results.
Finally, test the robustness of the method, it is compared to the complex connections
being modelled in section 5.6. As an example, the numerical results from specimen B1-
H1-4 without the effects of block-tearing, as shown in figure 5.18 b), will be compared to
the results obtained from the β-method.
Figure 5.26: β-method with complex connection
The β-method seems to be capable of producing correct curves even for complex problems.
The method of computing the β-value for each bolt and choosing the lowest value, as
explained algorithm 3, has proven to be a suitable approach.
This makes the model
simple to use and implement.
5.7.2
The β-Method with Effects from Block-Tearing
It turns out, that incorporating the effects of block tearing into the β-method can be done
rather simply, although the simple implementation will produce some errors. These errors
will be discussed and partially rectified.
66
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:79==
In the expression for the β-value in equation (5.64), only the coeﬀicients A and B are
functions of the stiffness matrix, Kb,j. It turns out, that by replacing this matrix with
Kj =
(
K−1
c,j + K−1
b,j
)−1
(5.72)
in which subscripts c and b represent the cut-out and bolt stiffness matrices respectively, is
almost enough. Using this stiffness matrix (5.72) in algorithm 3, the results will match the
numerical results except for when the the yield-bands around the cut-out yield, at which
point a one time error will occur, as the β-method is not capable of predicting when the
cut-out yields, but it is able to use the reduces stiffness from the effects of block tearing
when yield has occurred.
This error can be rectified through numerical methods with some iteration procedure to
check if the cut-out has yielded, but that would defeat the purpose of the method as the
advantage of the β-method is that discretization is not necessary.
Another idea is to include a check that could be incorporated in the procedure in algorithm
3, although this has not been done because I am, as mentioned before, not quite satisfied
with how yielding of the cut-out has been implemented.
I would prefer a solution, where each yield line is treated as a bolt but with their distinct
stiffness curves, such that they could be incorporated into the derivation of the β-method.
This could be done, but the stiffness curve for the yield-bands could be diﬀicult to obtain
and might require many experimental comparisons.
The work around that is suggested in this thesis is to run the algorithm until the cut-out
has yielded and the stiffness matrix for the cut-out has been reduced, and then go one step
back and re-compute the last step with the reduces stiffness matrix and then continue as
normally. This would still produce and error, but it would now be a conservative estimate
instead.
Figure 5.27: Response highlighting β-method work-around when incorporating effects from
block-tearing
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
67
==PAGE:80==
On figure 5.27, the yield-bands yield between load-step 3 and 4. The work-around corrects
the over-shoot by going back to load-step 3 with a reduced stiffness matrix and recalcu-
lating the force at that displacement. In this example, the corrected curve is very close to
the numerical, which will not be the case always.
The connection being modelled in figure 5.27 is constructed to highlight this correction.
The actual properties of the model being calculated in this example are therefore not
necessarily meaningful.
68
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:81==
6
Conclusion
Literature Review on Bolt Bearing and New Bolt Bearing Formulation
The literature review on the state-of-the-art in bolt bearing capacity has revealed that the
capacity as defined in Eurocode 3 produces too conservative results. This has been pointed
out by most of the papers on the topic. This is partially due to the Eurocode adopting the
value 2.5fu as the upper limit for bearing strength, whereas e.g. the American Standard
uses 3fu.
The strength of bolts with too low pitch distances, p1, in the direction of load and too
low edge and pitch distances, e2 and p2, perpendicular to the load have their resistance
penalized too harshly.
Because of an implicit definition in the Eurocode, its bearing strength formulation is
unable to account for high strength steels, as an ultimate to yield strength ratio, fu/fy,
of 1.5, is assumed.
This area has been thoroughly investigated by Može and Beg (2010, 2011, 2014) and Može
(2018) who have developed a new and improved bolt bearing formulation where all of the
issues with the Eurocode 3 formulation have been addressed and their formulation has
been accepted in the final draft of the next generation Eurocode 3.
In the formulation found in Može (2018), the strength reduction caused by the pitch, p1,
has been greatly reduced and the expression is no longer a function of the perpendicular
distances, e2 and p2, as the cases where these reductions would govern, the net cross-
section failure of block shear would be the critical checks. The upper limit of the bearing
strength is also set to 3fu.
Because of this, the expression in Može (2018) is used in this thesis.
An attempt was made to develop a new bolt bearing formulation and compare it to the
results from the literature.
This resulted in a fairly large compilation of bolt bearing
results from the literature saved in a standardized Excel table for easy comparison. The
bolt bearing formulation developed in this thesis produced insuﬀicient results, especially
compared to the formulation in Može (2018). But test data can be used by future research
of this sort.
Literature Review on the Component Method
The main motivation for this literature study was to figure out how Eurocode 3 handles
semi-rigid connections and how it obtained the stiffness coeﬀicients. The stiffness for bolts
in bearing used in this thesis was obtained from Eurocode 3.
A successful investigation of the origins of the coeﬀicients was conducted, and this section
can serve as a look-up when future research into this subject is conducted.
In-plane Bolted connection Model Developed in this Thesis
A method for modelling the non-linear response of in-plane bolted connections subject to
arbitrary loads was developed in this thesis. The model is based on relative movement of
rigid parts joined by multi-linear springs.
Model with Bolts alone
An elastic stiffness matrix is developed to predict the elastic displacement of a bolted
connection. The non-linearity of the connection is governed by a multi-linear stiffness
curve for each bolt in the connection. The system can be solved by discretization where
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
69
==PAGE:82==
the system is solved in small steps. In each step a displacement increment, ∆u is computed
and the current stiffness of each bolt is assessed. If any bolt has had their stiffnesses
reduced, the stiffness matrix is recomputed with the reduced bolt stiffness before the next
displacement increment is calculated.
This procedure is implemented in MATLAB and tested on progressively more complicated
systems to verify that it produces correct results. At first a connection is loaded uni-axially
and compared to an analytical solution and then it is compared to a similar method in
the literature and is able to replicate the results.
The models ability to predict experimental results hinges largely on the formulation of the
bolt stiffness curve. It was decided that the curve should be tri-linear to better represent
typical bolt bearing displacement curves with an initial stiffness, kI until it reaches 2/3
capacity, i.e. 2/3Fb,Rk after which the stiffness is reduced to kI/10 until capacity is reached
and the stiffness becomes 0.
It was decided not to include equilibrium iterations in the MATLAB implementation because
it was deemed unnecessary as the bolt stiffnesses are tri-linear functions and the only error
to occur is when the stiffness of the bolts changes. This error is ameliorated by using
smaller step sizes, although for very complex connections as the ones in section 5.6, a very
high amount of steps are needed. Iterations would be to prefer is cases like these. This is
an easy fix and should be implemented in the program.
Effects of Block-Tearing
The effects of block tearing is implemented in the model to take into account the effects
of yielding around the cut-out. This results in a stiffness matrix of the same form as for
the bolts alone. These stiffnesses are added in series such that the effects of block tearing
reduces the overall stiffness of the connection.
The stiffness expression from block tearing includes a parameter for the width of the yield
band, bY . This width is not a geometric property, but rather an equivalent width used
to represent the more complex mechanisms and has to be obtained experimentally. The
value chosen for bY in this thesis is obtained by hand-fitting the model to a subset of the
experimental results. As such, there is uncertainty in the value chosen.
There is in general uncertainty in the implementation of the effects of block tearing. The
handling of onset of yielding is handled very simplistically by choosing a displacement
threshold, um from eq.
(5.45), for the edge of the longest yield band, and when this
threshold is met, the entire cut-out yields. It is recommended that this aspect of the
model is revisited.
It is recommended that a thorough parametric study is conducted to determine the most
general values for the width of the yield band, bY
It is possible to get very good results with this model because of the tuning parameter,
bY ,
Comparison with Results
Even though there are some problems with the implementation of the effects from block
tearing, the rest of the implementation is solid. It is possible to get very good results.
Although the generality of the model as implemented has to be further verified through
more experimental comparisons, this does serve as a proof of concept, that the model is
able to predict the response of complex in-plane bolted connections.
70
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:83==
The β-Method
The β-method has been compared to the results from the numerical method to verify that
it produces correct results.
The β-method has many advantages over the numerical methods. It it computationally
cheaper to produce a full displacement curve.
More importantly, it doesn’t require discretization and as such can be rather straightfor-
wardly implemented in symbolic algebra systems such as Mathcad or Maple. Also, as a
first approximation, the initial response (i.e. first yield of first bolt) can, without too much
trouble, be obtained via hand calculations.
A method to incorporate the effects of block tearing is introduced, although it does produce
some error, albeit conservative. It is recommended that this area is revisited and improved.
Some minor issues exist in the implementation. Sometimes the stiffness of a bolt isn’t
reduced after an iteration of the β-method.
This is thought to have something to do
with numerical accuracy in MATLAB. This has been fixed by artificially increasing the
deformations by a small fraction when computing the stiffness matrix.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
71
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Može, P. (2018). “Bearing strength at bolt holes in connections with large end distance
and bolt pitch”. eng. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 147, pp. 132–144.
issn: 18735983, 0143974x. doi: 10.1016/j.jcsr.2018.04.006.
EN 1993-1-8 (2005). Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures - Part 1-8: Design of joints.
Jaspart, J. P. (1997). “Contributions to recent advances in the field of steel joints. Column
bases and further configurations for beam-to-column joints and column bases”. PhD
thesis. Universitè de Liège, Belgique.
Richard, R. M. et al. (1980). “The analysis and design of single plate framing connections”.
eng. In: Engineering Journal-american Institute of Steel Construction Inc 17.2, pp. 38–
52. issn: 00138029.
ECCS (1978). European recommendations for steel construction. 2.ed. eng, 355 s.
Kim, H. J. and J. A. Yura (1996). “The effect of end distance on the bearing strength of
bolted connections”. eng. MA thesis. University of Texas at Austin.
– (1999). “The effect of ultimate-to-yield ratio on the bearing strength of bolted con-
nections”. eng. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 49.3, pp. 255–269. issn:
18735983, 0143974x. doi: 10.1016/S0143-974X(98)00220-X.
Snijder, H. et al. (1988). “Evaluation of test results on bolted connections in order to
obtain strength functions and suitable model factors - PART A: RESULTS”. eng. In:
Eurocode No. 3 - part 1 - background documentation.
Bijlaard, F. S. K., G. Sedlacek, and J. W. B. Stark (1988). “Procedure for the determina-
tion of design resistance from tests”. In: Background report to Eurocode 3.
Može, P. and D. Beg (2011). “Investigation of high strength steel connections with several
bolts in double shear”. eng. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 67.3, pp. 333–
347. issn: 18735983, 0143974x. doi: 10.1016/j.jcsr.2010.10.007.
Moore, D. B. and Wald (2003). Desing of structural connection to Eurocode 3 - Frequently
asked questions. eng.
Piraprez, E. (2000). “Behaviour of plates with slotted holes”. eng. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Steel Structures of the 2000’s, pp. 71–75.
Wald, Z. Sokol, M. Moal, et al. (2004). “Stiffness of cover plate connections with slotted
holes”. eng. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 60.3-5, pp. 621–634. issn:
18735983, 0143974x. doi: 10.1016/S0143-974X(03)00133-0.
AISC (1993). “American Institute of Steel Construction”. In: Load and resistance factor
design specifications for structural steel buildings, 2nd ed.
Može, P. and D. Beg (2010). “High strength steel tension splices with one or two bolts”.
eng. In: Journal of Constructional Steel Research 66.8-9, pp. 1000–1010. issn: 0143974x.
doi: 10.1016/j.jcsr.2010.03.009.
– (2014). “A complete study of bearing stress in single bolt connections”. eng. In: Journal
of Constructional Steel Research 95, pp. 126–140. issn: 18735983, 0143974x. doi: 10.
1016/j.jcsr.2013.12.002.
Rex, C. O. and W. S. Easterling (2003). “Behavior and modeling of a bolt bearing on
a single plate”. eng. In: Journal of Structural Engineering 129.6, pp. 792–800. issn:
1943541x, 07339445. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9445(2003)129:6(792).
Rogers, C. A. and G. J. Hancock (1998). “Failure modes of bolted sheet steel connections
loaded in shear”. eng. In: Research Report - University of Sydney, Department of Civil
Engineering 772.
72
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:85==
Teh, L. H. and E. U. Mehmet (2015). “Ultimate shear-out capacities of structural-steel
bolted connections”. eng. In: Journal of Structural Engineering (united States) 141.6,
p. 04014152. issn: 1943541x, 07339445. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ST.1943-541X.0001105.
Das, B. M. (2016). Principles of foundation engineering. eng. Cengage Learning, xx, 919
s. : ill. isbn: 1305081560, 9781305081567.
Bower, A. F. (2009). Applied Mechanics of Solids. CRC Press. isbn: 9781439802489.
Hosford, W. F. and R. M. Caddell (2011). Metal Forming: Mechanics and Metallurgy.
Cambridge University Press. isbn: 9781139497435.
Weynand, K., J. P. Jaspart, and M. Steenhuis (1996). “The stiffness model of revised
Annex J of Eurocode 3”. eng. In: Connections in Steel Structures Iii, pp. 441–452.
Jaspart, J. P. and K. Weynand (2016). Design of joints in steel and composite structures.
eng. wiley, pp. 1–388. isbn: 3433604762, 9783433604762, 9783433029855, 1523115149,
3433604797, 3433604789, 3433029857. doi: 10.1002/9783433604762.
Zoetemeijer, P. (1974). “Design method for the tension side of statically loaded, bolted
beam-to-column connections”. und. In: Heron 20.1. issn: 15744078, 00467316.
Jaspart, J. P. (1991). “Etude de la semi-rigidité des noeuds poutre-colonne et son influence
sur la résistance et la stabilité des ossatures en acier”. fr. PhD thesis. Universitè de Liège,
Belgique.
Wald, Z. Sokol, and M. Steenhuis (1996). “Proposal of the stiffness design model of the
column bases”. In: Connections in Steel Structures III. Ed. by Reidar Bjorhovde, An-
dré Colson, and Riccardo Zandonini. Oxford: Pergamon, pp. 249–258. isbn: 978-0-08-
042821-5. doi: 10.1016/B978-008042821-5/50082-1.
Steenhuis, M. et al. (2008). “Concrete in compression and base plate in bending”. eng. In:
Heron 53.1-2, pp. 51–67. issn: 15744078, 00467316.
EN 1995 (2004). EN 1994: Design of composite steel and concrete structures.
Yee, Y. L. and R. E. Melchers (1986). “Moment-Rotation Curves for Bolted Connections”.
In: Journal of Structural Engineering 112.3, pp. 615–635. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9445(1986)112:3(615).
Karmalin, V. V and A. B Pavlov (1989). “Load capacity and deformability of bearing and
frictionbearing connections”. In: Proceedings of the International Colloquium on Bolted
and Special Structural Connections, USSR, Moscow, pp. 52–60.
Su, R. K. L. and W. H. Siu (2007). “Nonlinear response of bolt groups under in-plane
loading”. eng. In: Engineering Structures 29.4, pp. 626–634. issn: 18737323, 01410296.
doi: 10.1016/j.engstruct.2006.06.003.
Jönsson, J. (2015). “Generalized Block Failure”. eng. In: Proceedings of Nordic Steel Con-
struction Conference 2015.
Nissen, J. S. (2014). “Test of gusset plate connections”. eng. B.Eng. Thesis, Department
of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
Winterskov-Andersen, S. (2014). “Tensile Test of Steel Subjects”. eng. Department of Civil
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, DTU. MA thesis.
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
73
==PAGE:86==
74
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:87==
A
Supplementary Hand-in
The list of bolt bearing results from the literature and the scripts developed to model the
connections in the report are listed below and submitted via digital hand-in.
MATLAB files for the In-plane connection model:
Main script
Mphi.m
Functions
kI.m
kb.m
FbRk.m
Kbt.m
Kct.m
Ered.m
plotTop.m
propLoad.m
MATLAB files for plotting bolt bearing results from literature
resultsFromLiterature.m
Excel files containing bolt bearing results from literature.
ResultsFromLiterature.xlsx
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
75
==PAGE:88==
B
MATLAB script road-map
76
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
==PAGE:89==
Modelling of In-plane Bolted Connections
77
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
