==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Design and Operation of an
Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
Poul Kirkegaard Stig - s164115
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
PREFACE
This MSc thesis was submitted to the Technical University of Denmark on the 25th of
June, 2021, and it was initiated on the 24th of January, 2021. The thesis was produced
under the guidance and supervision of Jens Abildskov, Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom, and
Isuru Sampath Bandara Abeykoon Udugama. I am thankful for their guidance and help
throughout the thesis, and I look forward to the possibility of working together when
them at a later stage in my career. Furthermore, I would like to thank my sister, Mette
Stig-Wolﬀ, for extensive proofreading throughout.
Poul Kirkegaard Stig
25th of June, 2021
i
==PAGE:3==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
ABSTRACT
This thesis proposes an iterative method to design a cyclic distillation column for ternary
systems. The method relaxes the currently needed assumptions of stream magnitudes
and compositions, and iterates over all the outgoing streams, e.g. bottoms, distillate,
and a possible side draw, in a systematic manner, yielding satisﬁed mass balances. The
method is based on the model proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al. [P˘atrut¸ et al., 2014, Sep. Pur.
Technol., 125:326-336], which is extended to ternary systems.
The model was expanded to handle additional outgoing streams, e.g. a side draw, to
further the knowledge within cyclic distillation design. The iterative method was applied
with both an ideal vapor phase model and non-ideal vapor phase models together with
the Wilson activity coeﬃcient model for the liquid phase. Furthermore, little work has
been produced considering high purity separation, thus the system considered in this
thesis was separated to single digit ppm purity.
The method was tested with the ternary system consisting of methanol, ethanol, and
water, where ethanol was a trace compound.
This was compared to a conventional
column design using similar assumptions, with both designs having one side draw. For a
column size of 90 stages, the results showed a reduction of utility usage between 8.65 %
and 10.8 %, depending on which model was applied, using a constant column pressure of
1 [atm], and upwards of ≈12.65 % reduction when applying a 1.9 [bar] reboiler pressure
with 0.0075 [bar] pressure drop per stage. This is an extremely notable reduction, and
constitutes a signiﬁcant achievement within the realm of cyclic distillation design, since
it adds to the evidence pointing towards improving a well known separation technology.
Lastly, if the utility usage was increased to match the required value for the conventional
column design at 90 stages, the cyclic column required just short of half the amount of
stages.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
RESUM´E
Denne afhandling har fokus p˚a at udvikle en metode til at designe en cyklisk destillations-
kolonne til trekomponentssystemer.
Metoden afviger fra nuværende metoder, da den
ikke har samme strikse antagelser vedr. størrelse og komposition af udgangsstrømme.
Metoden er iterativ, og itererer over bund-, sideudtags-, og destillatkomposition, samt
begge produktstrømme, ved deﬁnition af variable, der ville bestemmes i en industriel
proces. Modellen, der bliver brugt i metoden, er en udvidet version af en model foresl˚aet
af P˘atrut¸ et al. til design af cykliske destillationskolonner [P˘atrut¸ et al., 2014, Sep. Pur.
Technol., 125:326-336].
Udviklingen indebærer at modellen nu kan h˚andtere trekomponentssystemer i en kolonne
med sideudtag. Den iterative metode er blevet anvendt sammen med tre forskellige væske-
dampfase modeller, der alle anvender Wilsons aktivitetskoeﬃcient-model til væskefasen,
og anvender variende grad af kompleksitet til dampfasen. Metoden blev anvendt til at
separere en methanol-ethanol-vand blanding, der separeres til høj renhed.
Det cykliske design blev herefter holdt op imod en konventionel kolonne, der ogs˚a havde
´et sideudtag.
For en kolonnestørrelse p˚a 90 trin, var der en reduktion af nødvendig
dampstrøm mellem 8.64 % og 10.8 % for den cykliske kolonne sammenlignet med den
konventionelle kolonne, n˚ar kolonnerne havde et konstant atmosfærisk tryk. En anden
trykproﬁl blev implementeret, hvor opdamperen havde et tryk p˚a 1.9 bar, samt et tryktab
p˚a 0.0075 bar per bund. Her var dampstrømsreduktionen op imod ≈12.65 % alt efter
hvilke model, der blev anvendt. Denne reduktion er enormt interessant, og disse resultater
er en tiltrængt tilføjelse til det cykliske kolonnedesign. Derudover, hvis dampstrømmen
blev hævet til den størrelse krævet for en konventionel kolonne, s˚a kunne separationen
gennemføres med lige knap halvt s˚a mange trin i det cykliske design.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
Units
V FP: Vapor ﬂow period
LFP: Liquid ﬂow period
CD: Cyclic distillation
ACM: Activity coeﬃcient model
V LE: Vapor liquid equilibrium
B: Bottoms
[kmol/cycle]
D: Distillate
[kmol/cycle]
F: Feed
[kmol/cycle]
L: Liquid ﬂow rate
[kmol/cycle]
S: Side draw ﬂow rate
[kmol/cycle]
M: Hold-up
[kmol]
NF: Feed stage
NT: Total number of stages
P: Pressure
[atm or bar]
V : Vapor ﬂow rate
[kmol/min]
tvap: Duration of the vapor-ﬂow period
[min]
x: Mole fraction in liquid phase
y: Mole fraction in vapor phase
t: Time
[min]
H: Hold-up (Rivas)
[-]
φ: Fraction of liquid hold up moved (Rivas)
φ: Fugacity coeﬃcient
K: Equilibrium constant
An: Constant (Rivas)
Cn: Constant (Rivas)
τ: Dimensionless time
θ: Location variable (T&J)
T: Duration of the VFP (T&J)
[time]
f: Dimensionless feed magnitude (T&J)
κ: Fraction of liquid staying at tray (T&J)
f v
i : Pure component fugacity of vapor phase
ˆf v
i : Fugacity of vapor phase in a mixture
f l
i: Pure component fugacity of liquid phase
ˆf l
i: Fugacity of liquid phase in a mixture
γ: Wilson activity coeﬃcient
P sat: Saturated vapor pressure
[bar]
iv
==PAGE:6==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Λi,j: Volume fraction
λi,j: Binary interaction parameter
[J/mol]
Vi: Molar volume (Wilson)
[m3/mol]
A: Antoine parameter
[-]
B: Antoine parameter
[-]
C: Antoine parameter
[-]
Mi: Molar mass
[g/mol]
ρ: Density
[kg/m3]
n: Amount of moles (eq. (67))
[mol
R: Gas constant
[J/mol/K]
∆S: Entropy
[J/K]
Y : Vapor ﬂow constant for the cyclic design
PF: Poynting correction factor
Bi,j: Second virial coeﬃcient
[mol/m3]
ET: Tray eﬃciency
EP: Point eﬃciency
uf: Flooding velocity
[m/s]
DT: Tower diameter
[m]
C: Empirical constant (eq. (96))
σ: Surface tension
[N/m]
α: Constant relative volatility
Superscripts
(V ): End of the VFP
(L): End of the LFP
*: Equilibrium concentration
sat: Saturated vapor pressure
Subscripts
B: Bottoms
D: Distillate
S: Side draw
F: Feed
HK: Heavy key
LK: Light key
n: Stage number
j: Component index
i: Component index
k: Component index
v
==PAGE:7==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Contents
1
Introduction to the Signiﬁcance of Methanol and its Separation
1
1.1
Conventional distillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Statement
5
3
Industry standard of Conventional Distillation
8
3.1
Methanol separation and results by Udugama et al. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Side draw column . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Petlyuk inspired column . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Divided wall column
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
Cut wall column
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Historic Review of Cyclic Distillation
16
4.1
Cannon (1961)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Sommerfeld et al. (1966) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Robinson and Engel (1967) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Rivas (1977) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen (1987-1989) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
P˘atrut¸ et al. (2014) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.7
Rasmussen et al. (2020)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.8
Modern equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.9
Current limitations of the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Binary System: Design and Simulation
28
5.1
Wilson ACM and VLE in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Estimation of binary interaction parameters for the Wilson ACM
. . . .
31
5.3
Structure of the code for binary use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.1
Mass balance model code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.2
VLE model code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3.3
Call script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.4
Overall mass balances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Binary results compared with P˘atrut¸ et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
vi
==PAGE:8==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
6
Expansion to Ternary Systems
46
6.1
Proposed design procedure for a ternary system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Veriﬁcation of the ternary code and variable testing . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Conclusion on the method for ternary systems without a side draw
. . .
57
7
Side Draw Implementation
59
7.1
Key design considerations prior to model development . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Mass balances for the side draw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Structure and explanation of the simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Current limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.5
Solver precision and implications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.6
Starting values of unknown variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.7
Distillate composition and how to handle it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.8
Results of the simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.9
Structure of conventional distillation design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.10 Cyclic versus conventional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.11 Conclusion on the side draw implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8
Inﬂuence of VLE Model on Simulation Results
90
8.1
Second virial coeﬃcient model by Hayden/O’Connell
. . . . . . . . . . .
90
8.2
Pure component virials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
8.2.1
Veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
8.2.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
8.3
Complete Haydon/O’Connell model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
8.3.1
Veriﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
8.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
8.4
Conclusion and discussion of the VLE model considerations . . . . . . . .
102
9
Discussion
104
10 Conclusion
109
References
110
vii
==PAGE:9==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
11 Appendix A: Tables
113
12 Appendix B: Matlab code
116
12.1 Binary code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
12.2 Mass balance model code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
12.3 Call script for the conventional column . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
12.4 Function to call VLE models for the conventional column design . . . . .
125
12.5 Saturated vapor pressure function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
12.6 Call script to simulate a cyclic column
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
12.7 Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + ideal gas model . . . . . . . .
134
12.8 Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + pure comp. virial coefs.
. . .
135
12.9 Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + complete Hayden/O’Connell
model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
viii
==PAGE:10==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
1
Introduction to the Signiﬁcance of Methanol and its Sep-
aration
With an ever increasing population in today’s society, many petrochemicals are predicted
to have a signiﬁcant compound annual growth rate in the coming decade [1, 2, 3]. In
2019, the bulk chemicals sector, including petrochemicals, accounted for 29 % of the in-
dustrial energy consumption in the U.S. [4]. The U.S. chemical sector is the largest in
the world, hence energy eﬃciency improvements are of extreme economical and environ-
mental importance. Reducing the required utility usage (i.e. the energy expenditure)
for the separation and puriﬁcation of chemicals will improve the process, a so-called pro-
cess intensiﬁcation (PI). The 2009 book Sustainable Industrial Chemistry by Centi and
Perathoner claimed that PI alone can account for a 20 % energy reduction in the process
industry by 2050 [5].
Energy intensiveness greatly varies within diﬀerent separation technologies, but as dis-
tillation is the most commonly used technology, especially for methanol separation, and
accounts for 40 % of worldwide operational plant costs, optimizing this process is of
utmost importance [6, 7].
The desire for simple bulk chemicals, like methanol, at high purities magniﬁes the eco-
nomical and environmental burden of thermal separations, such as distillation [8]. During
the next decade, methanol production is expected to double in production capacity from
approximately 148 million tonnes in 2019 to 311 million tonnes by 2030, based on 136
planned and announced methanol plants [2]. This growth rate is attributed to the fact
that oil and natural gas approximately consists of 57 % of the energy consumption world-
wide [9], against the main competitors today of hydrogen and methanol [10]. Hydrogen
has the highest energy content of any known fuel of 142 kJ/g and is environmentally safe.
However, with today’s knowledge, hydrogen has major issues related to the puriﬁcation
cost, as well as storage and transportation limitations [10].
In contrast, methanol is
without these limitations and is considered the main competitor. Approximately 65 % of
the produced methanol in 2018 was consumed in the production of other chemicals, e.g.
acetic acid, methyl and vinyl acetates, and fuel additives, with the remaining part used in
plastic production. This increases with population growth, which argues for the expected
increase in methanol production. Today, most methanol fueled vehicles run well on 85
% methanol fuel mixed with 15 % unleaded gasoline, already a signiﬁcant improvement
compared to regular fuel [11].
It is possible to produce methanol from several carbon containing feedstocks, e.g. nat-
ural gas, biomass, coal and CO2. In 2014, approximately 90 % of methanol production
occurred from natural gas [12], an issue in itself because of its fossil fuel origin, but this
problem will not be addressed in this thesis.
1
==PAGE:11==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The current industry standard of methanol production is in three steps [13, 14]:
• Production of syngas (H2, CO, and CO2)
• Syngas conversion into crude methanol
• Distillation of the crude methanol to achieve the desired purity
The production of syngas is most often produced through autothermal reforming and
steam reforming. The syngas conversion into crude methanol is a process that occurs
at high pressures (50-100 bar) and medium range temperatures of 200-300◦C. A hydro-
genation, which is an addition of hydrogen atoms to some carbon containing molecule, of
CO and CO2 is then completed. Other methods exists e.g. the BASF (Badische Anilin-
und SodaFabrik) process, a high pressure process (250-300 bar), and the ICI (Impirical
Chemical Industries) process, a low pressure method (35-54 bar) [10]. Key for this thesis
is that in all cases, methanol production ends with puriﬁcation through distillation of
crude methanol.
Crude methanol from the synthesis is an aqueous solution (liquid phase, but more than
one component), and it contains several trace compounds of inter alia heavy organic com-
pounds such as dimethyl ether, as well as dissolved gasses (H2, N2, CO, CO2, etc.) [15].
Puriﬁcation is an exceedingly necessary step to achieve a sellable product, which is the
reason to why so vast separation technology research is performed world-wide. However,
other separations exists, e.g. pervaporation using membranes [10], which is a technology
where molecules in a liquid phase are separated using partial vaporization through a non-
porous membrane. Qua the above introduction, it is important to understand the current
industry standard of distillation, thus a brief introduction to this will be presented.
1.1
Conventional distillation
Considering the heavy economical burden distillation carries in a plant, any improve-
ments to the cost is beneﬁcial, especially on a large scale. It is a continuous (constant
ﬂow of liquid and vapor in both directions) process that separates the components of a
homogeneous ﬂuid through selective evaporation or boiling throughout the column.
The boiling point temperature varies as the composition changes, but by controlling
the temperature and pressure throughout the column, boiling point is achievable on all
stages. The driving force behind the separation is the diﬀerence in volatility (roughly
explained as the tendency to boil at a certain temperature), causing the ﬂuid to separate
by evaporation and condensation.
Figure 1 shows a basic schematic of a distillation
column.
2
==PAGE:12==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 1: Basic schematic of a distillation col-
umn. The dashed lines indicate a an arbitrary
amount of trays.
As the liquid ﬂows down the trays, the
most volatile part of the mixture evapo-
rates and the vapor rises creating an up-
wards ﬂow of gas and downwards ﬂow of
liquid. The feed usually consists of any-
thing between supercooled liquid to super-
heated vapor, often decided by where the
feedstock comes from; e.g. if the feedstock
is crude oil, it will always be a liquid feed
given its characteristics, whereas a more
volatile ﬂuid might be partial vapor and
partial liquid.
As the liquid reaches the
bottom it passes through a reboiler, where
some of it vaporizes and returns to the col-
umn, and the remaining part exits as bot-
tom product, which may or may not be the
desired product depending on the separa-
tion. The reverse happens at the top end
of the column; the gas condenses and some
of it returns to the column as reﬂux, and
some of it exits the coulmn as top prod-
uct. This type of distillation is known as conventional distillation. The upsides to this
operation is the wide range of use: as long as the volatilities of the components in the
mixture are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, and no heat sensitive molecules are present, distillation
is often viable. However, a strong downside is the utility usage, since operating at boiling
temperature of a given mixture might require high temperatures. An example of a large
bulk-product being separated in a broad market is the separation of crude oil, operated
at > 300◦C.
Conventional distillation has been used for centuries, and is generally considered a mature
separation technology [16]. Nonetheless, new variants of distillation are under develop-
ment voiding the maturity of the technology, as the main idea behind the technology
changes to some extent. A key development, which is still under development, is the
technology called cyclic distillation. This is in some ways similar to conventional distil-
lation, but a few key changes are apparent. The process diﬀers from the conventional
distillation as the ﬂows are periodical, thus when liquid ﬂows, vapor stops, and vice versa.
The main advantage is a signiﬁcant decrease in the utility cost.
To distinguish the processes, the subsequent sections provide a technical introduction to
conventional- and cyclic distillation. This involves a historic display of the development
3
==PAGE:13==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
of the cyclic design to display the diﬀerent ideas and how the process has matured.
This is the foundation of this thesis, which focuses on further improving the theoretical
knowledge of the cyclic operation.
4
==PAGE:14==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
2
Problem Statement
This masters thesis is purely a theoretical study attempting to design a separation method
that improves upon the conventional distillation column to separate methanol in a ternary
saturated liquid consisting of methanol, ethanol and water. Ethanol is a trace compound
and the mixture contains around 90 ppm [mol/mol] in the feedstock, methanol being the
main component of roughly 72 mol %.
As presented in the introduction, the energy consumption of the conventional distilla-
tion column is extraordinarily large, and improvements in this ﬁeld will have signiﬁcant
economical advantages through utility cost savings or capital cost savings from smaller
columns, thus also an environmental advantage.
It is done through the use of cyclic distillation, initially designing the system to work in
a binary conﬁguration, which has been done extensively in the literature. To further the
theoretical knowledge, a method to calculate ternary systems without using simplifying
assumptions, such as constant relative volatility, is developed, since it is not something
that has been presented much in literature currently. In addition, a method to include a
side draw is proposed and explained, which is the main challenge of this thesis, adding
to the theoretical understanding of cyclic distillation. Developing a method that makes
it possible to calculate ternary systems in more complex column designs is very valuable.
The main challenges in the design process is how to implement the side draw in the
simulation process, and how the mass balances should be handled, as this is entirely
non-trivial. An evaluation of the implementation is also needed, and is done through
comparing the required vapor ﬂow as a function of column size with a conventional column
build in MATLAB using similar assumptions. Furthermore, initializing the model when
applied to a ternary system requires the bottoms speciﬁcations and since the symmetry
is not available as with the binary system, a method needs to be ideated and developed.
To compare the design, the current state of the art research is studied and presented,
indicating how well the cyclic distillation with side draw should perform to be useful.
Only methanol separation is considered in this thesis, however the method is useful for
any separation as long as the initiation considered is speciﬁc. It primarily applies to
deciding on initial guesses and accuracy of the simulation. In order to achieve the closest
to a 1:1 comparison, a conventional distillation column with a side draw is simulated in
MATLAB to be used as the direct comparison with the cyclic design, which will then be
extrapolated to a paper by Udugama et. al [17].
To maintain a proper work-ﬂow, a Gantt chart is presented in Figure 2. It shows how
each segment of the thesis is created, and aids towards planning everything in advance.
5
==PAGE:15==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 2: Gannt chart showing the working schedule throughout the allotted period.
During the initial 3-4 weeks, the main focus is the literature study and pre-planning of the
overall structure, and considering what essential parts should be prioritized throughout.
The period ends with a ﬁrst draft hand-in. This will include the introduction, as well as
the problem statement and some deeper introduction to cyclic distillation.
The following week is spent setting up the foundation for the main code, which is the
binary design. The initial code is written in a way where it is easy to expand to ternary
systems and this part is not expected to cause much issue.
The ternary design is then created and thoroughly described, including how the mole
fractions should be estimated, setting the precedent for any future work attempting to de-
scribe the use of cyclic distillation with multicomponent mixtures. Following the ternary
design, the main challenge of the thesis is approached by expanding the model to include
a side draw. This furthers the development with another aspect that is not currently
available in the literature.
It is then examined whether the results might diﬀer slightly, if the VLE models allevi-
ate some of the assumptions by introducing more complex models. This adds to the
understanding of the issue and provides a picture of the degree of complexity needed.
A comparison between the modelled cyclic column and the conventional distillation is
proposed, including coding a conventional simulation using similar assumptions compared
to the cyclic design. It is not estimated to be a long process, but it is an important one.
The primary part of the thesis should be available for transcript by mid May, and three
weeks is planned to focus strictly on transcribing. Everything afterwards is a discussion
of further improvements and possible theoretical advances, open to future research.
Lastly, some time is allocated to catch up on any work that might not have been completed
or has been delayed, as well as general ﬁnishing touches and proofreading.
6
==PAGE:16==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
This would constitute the full work schedule for this thesis, hopefully providing the
literature with some much needed new information on how to rigorously design a ternary
system.
7
==PAGE:17==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
3
Industry standard of Conventional Distillation
Figure
3:
Conventional distillation trays,
where vapor rises and passes through holes or
valves in the trays. Here stages are equivalent
to trays.
Distillation is of large interest from an eco-
nomical point of view, and to properly un-
derstand the process, a detailed presenta-
tion of the conventional distillation is ini-
tially provided. It will become evident why
the process is so energy intensive, laying
the foundation for the following presenta-
tion of cyclic distillation - a method pre-
sented by Cannon in 1961 [18].
Approximately
half
of
the
distillation
columns worldwide contain trays, whereas
the other half contain packings, both ran-
dom and structured [19].
In this thesis,
only the trays will be covered since pack-
ings are not directly relevant to the pro-
posed design procedure. In a distillation
column, a series of trays exist, which are of-
ten numbered from the top down as shown
in Figure 3. The normal procedure used
to solve a multicomponent conventional distillation column is the MESH (material bal-
ance, equilibria, summation and energy balances) balance equations stage-by-stage, but
other methods do exist. These include, but are not limited to: a shortcut method [20],
a driving-force method [21], and an optimization based method [22].
For distillation
columns with a side draw, a shortcut method is useful towards estimation of the side
draw composition, the amount of trays, and the vapor rate, and are primarely used for
ideal or nearly ideal mixtures [20]. The driving force method used by Bek-Pedersen and
Gani [21] simultaneously ﬁnds the location of the feed and side draw which yields the
lowest utility exchange, but it has not been used for ternary systems with trace concen-
trations of middle boiling components. Lastly, the optimization based method is able to
handle complex designs. For all cases, the initial guesses of the conﬁguration are gener-
ally either useful or required to reduce the eﬀectiveness of the mathematical optimization
[22].
The oldest and most used tray type is the one shown in Figure 3. It is a single pass cross-
ﬂow tray, where the liquid moves in alternate directions. Once it reaches the outlet weir
of each tray, the liquid ﬂows into the downcomer and moves onto the next tray through
the downcomer clearance. All the while, the gas ﬂows through the decks. Historically,
8
==PAGE:18==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
it has often been simple perforated metal pans called sieve trays, but bubble cap trays
yield a vast improvement to some of the issues, e.g. liquid drips from tray to tray. The
ﬂows are continuous, generally creating an assumed steady state operation of the column,
albeit the reality is slightly diﬀerent. Most simple designs of conventional columns are
made using an assumption of equilibrium stages, i.e. each stage has reached chemical
equilibrium, which is also applied to the conventional column design in this thesis. The
terms are illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Terms in the most used tray in conventional distillation. Figure taken from Distil-
lation: Equipment and Processes [19].
A distillation column is divided into two sections split by the feed ﬂow: the rectifying
and the stripping section [23]. The rectifying section is where the upwards ﬂow of vapor
is enriched in the lighter component by contact of the liquid containing a higher concen-
tration of the volatile component. The reverse is true for the stripping section, where
the volatile component is removed from the downﬂowing liquid by being stripped of the
more volatile component from contact with the vapor, having a lower concentration of
the more volatile component. In other words, vapor rises throughout the column where it
condenses on each tray, and evaporation occurs simultaneously to circumvent accumula-
tion, thus the more volatile component is shifted upwards and the less volatile component
is shifted downwards. The evaporation happens partially due to the energy released from
the latent heat of vaporization due to condensation and partly from added heat to the
column.
Prior to designing a distillation column, modelling is always considered before the build-
ing process begins, to ensure, to some degree, an optimal construction of the column.
Historically, activity coeﬃcient models (ACM), such as the Wilson ACM, have been used
to describe non-ideality of mixtures, assuming the vapor phase to be ideal or non-ideal
9
==PAGE:19==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
as described by a virial equation or an equation of state (EoS). With increased comput-
ing power and recent advances in developments of EoS’, φ-φ-models have become more
applied in later decades. Nevertheless, such EoS’ still often require quite substantial com-
putation times when applied in simulation tools, such as Pro II or similar. Regardless
of the model used, design parameters have to be deﬁned and used for the calculations.
The parameters are often purities or recoveries and controllable characteristics such as
the vapor ﬂow, reﬂux rate or similar.
Since simulation tools are readily available, the in-depth knowledge of diﬀerent models
becomes less important for the every-day engineer, and the required knowledge is which
model to apply for certain mixtures and why.
The ability to solve complex models
is usually of less importance, but for this thesis, as cyclic distillation is not available
for simulation in any software, the model complexities become much more of an issue
compared to conventional columns.
A major issue with conventional distillation is liquid mixing between trays, called axial
dispersion or backmixing. This occurs because of non-complete mixing of the liquid phase
at each tray, causing undesired components to move downwards with the liquid, shifting
the equilibrium, which results in a lower overall eﬃciency. Improving on this issue is one
of the key ideas behind why cyclic distillation in theory should be more eﬃcient, due to
the large energy waste in conventional distillation from vaporizing/condensing the same
molecule more times than needed.
3.1
Methanol separation and results by Udugama et al.
Udugama et al. [17] investigated implementation of four diﬀerent intensiﬁed distillation
column designs to reﬁne crude methanol into high purity grade AA standard product
methanol and compared these to the direct synthesis method, which is a setup consisting
of two regular columns with three streams each (feed, top, and bottoms) where the
product ﬂow from the bottoms is the feed to the second column [17]. The chosen designs
were: side draw, recovery, divided wall, and cut wall columns. To present the results
properly, each column design will be brieﬂy presented along with the results. As the
results are all based on some assumptions, it is important to note that:
• The amount of trays is ﬁxed at 89 for all conﬁgurations
• The feed ﬂow was ﬁxed at actual plant operating conditions [17]
• Only the ethanol trace compound is considered, thus, the feed stream is a ternary
mixture
• The product ﬂow rate of methanol should have a minimum recovery of 98.75 %
10
==PAGE:20==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
• Product mass fractions have been predeﬁned and are equal for all cases
• The side draw has a maximum and a minimum ﬂow rate of 4 and 2 t/hr, respectively
• The feed ﬂow is ﬁxed at 142.5 t/hr
• < 10 wt-ppm limit of methanol in the bottoms stream
• < 5 wt-ppm limit of ethanol in the distillate
With the set assumption, the four cases were simulated in Aspen-HYSIS and concluded
upon, and the results are presented in the following subsections.
3.1.1
Side draw column
The side draw column has a very self-explanatory name, since it is the same design as a
conventional distillation column. The diﬀerence is adding a side draw, which is an addi-
tional product stream outgoing from some tray to remove middle boiling compounds. At
some middle tray, a relatively large mole fraction of the trace compound has accumulated,
e.g. ethanol in the methanol synthesis process, and removing this middle boiling compo-
nent at the given tray signiﬁcantly improves the overall separation, while minimizing the
loss of valuable product [24].
They claim that the changeable design variables to optimize the energy usage is limited
to: the feed stage, the side draw location, and the side draw ﬂow rate. They performed a
series of simulations for side draw ﬂow rates of 2, 3 and 4 t/hr, and varying the side draw
and feed location. The results were very similar for all three side draw ﬂow rates, thus
the side draw ﬂow rate was deemed mostly irrelevant - this could be reasoned by the fact
that the magnitude of the side draw was large enough for all three cases. However, the
reboiler duty increased with a higher side draw location, but decreased with a higher feed
tray location. At a feed tray location of 45, the side draw location became irrelevant for
the reboiler duty. Whereas, for the lowest feed tray location of 27, the side draw greatly
impacted the reboiler duty. Furthermore, it was found that if the side draw location
became too low, < 9, it would result in too much methanol appearing in the bottoms,
breaching the requirements of the system.
3.1.2
Petlyuk inspired column
Udugama et al. calls the Petlyuk inspired column a recovery column, which is two mass
integrated columns [25, 26]. It is essentially a step further, compared to the side draw
column, as it takes the product stream from the side draw, puriﬁes the light boiling
compound and recycles the top product, e.g.
methanol, of the second column back
11
==PAGE:21==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
into the main column. The idea behind this conﬁguration is an improvement in overall
recovery, since a lot less product will be wasted from loss of the side draw. The original
Petlyuk conﬁguration uses the ﬁrst column as the pre-fractionator and the second column
as the main tower. However, the column conﬁguration investigated by Udugama et al.
was the opposite case, thus being a Petlyuk inspired design. The main advantage behind
this operation, is that the side draw separation of the trace compound (ethanol in this
case) does not need to be very precise, since any excess methanol is simply recycled
back into the main column, albeit if more material needs to be distilled, more energy is
required.
The recovery column has even more design variables that can be altered in the design:
1. Side draw location in the main tower
2. Side draw ﬂow rate from the main tower
3. Amount of trays in the second tower
4. Side draw location in the second tower
5. Side draw ﬂow rate in the second tower
6. Purity and ﬂow of methanol in the recycling from the second tower re-entering the
main tower
7. Location (feed tray of the recycle ﬂuid) of recycled ﬂow from the second tower to the
main tower
They kept the impurity of the recycled methanol at a constant 25 wt-ppm, and the ﬂow
rate of the product methanol (from the main tower) was kept at 2 t/hr. Furthermore,
they assume that the operation of the second column does not inﬂuence the main tower,
since the ﬂow rate here is only about 5 % of the ﬂow rate in the main tower.
Similarly to the side draw, lowering the side draw location yields a lower energy consump-
tion. However, opposite of the side draw column, lowering the feed tray in the main tower
decreases the duty. In addition, it was also found that, as the side draw location was
elevated, the feed tray could be lowered, which overall improved the reboiler duty. It is
clear from the results that the feed tray location and side draw location are of signiﬁcant
importance, but the ﬂow rates have less inﬂuence.
3.1.3
Divided wall column
The divided wall column is a way of fusing two distillation columns into one by adding
a physical separator, typically a wall.
Thus, a section of the column is divided into
12
==PAGE:22==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
two separate areas by a wall forming two parallel ﬂuid ﬂows, of which an independent
separation occur simultaneously on each side of the wall. In the section separated by the
wall, a side draw without a recycling stream is added. The parallel ﬂows then meet and
mix above the divided wall. This conﬁguration could be implemented together with e.g.
a Putlyuk conﬁguration. The conﬁguration is shown in Figure 5a.
For the divided wall column, there are also several design variables that can be changed:
1. Main feed location (to the main tower)
2. Size of the wall, i.e. how many trays it should cover
3. Location of the wall
4. Liquid ﬂow rate to the divided wall section (which has the side draw)
5. Location of the side draw relative to the divided wall location
6. Side draw ﬂow rate
They concluded that the side draw location has minimal eﬀect on the duty, whereas the
feed location had clear eﬀect. Another interesting result was that a low gas and liquid ﬂow
rate in the divided wall section lead to a decrease in energy usage, which could indicate
that even for small improvements, the requirements can be met. This could indicate
easily achievable requirements that could be intensiﬁed. Additionally, it was found that
the optimum wall height was around 50 trays tall. In addition, the wall needed to start
at tray 8 or higher, otherwise too much methanol would appear in the bottoms.
3.1.4
Cut wall column
The cut wall column conﬁguration is very similar to the divided wall column, albeit with
one key diﬀerence: instead of having the two separate ﬂows mix after the wall, there is
a roof attached to the divided wall, which essentially creates another distillation column
within the main column, where the ﬂuids mix at the bottom of the wall. Furthermore,
the top draw in the inner column (column side draw) has a certain reﬂux back into the top
of the inner column, similar to a reﬂux at the distillate, which furthers the concept by
increasing the eﬃciency of the removed ﬂuid through the top draw of the inner column. The
conﬁguration is shown in Figure 5b.
The cut wall has the following 5 design variables that can be changed:
1. Feed location
2. Cut wall size (how many trays long)
13
==PAGE:23==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
3. Vapor ﬂow rate to the divided wall section
4. Side draw location (the top draw in inner column)
5. Side draw ﬂow rate (the top draw in inner column)
Similarly to the divided wall column, as the ﬂow to the cut wall section decreases, so does
the reboiler duty, and changing the ﬂow rate from 5 t/hr to 3.5 t/hr reduces the reboiler
duty by slightly more than 1 %. In addition, it was found that reducing the side draw
location reduced the reboiler duty.
Lastly, a general conclusion was made stating that the side draw, the divided wall, and
the recovery column all performed at equal levels in terms of utility usage (≈87 MW),
and they performed slightly (≈3 %) better than the direct synthesis conﬁguration (≈90
MW) and the cut wall column (≈89 MW). Hence, the comparison made in this thesis
will be a conventional column with a side draw versus a cyclic column with a side draw.
Any improvement from this comparison will be an overall improvement compared to all
the column designs.
(a) Divided wall column design
(b) Cut wall column design
Figure 5: Design of the two selected design, that are not entirely intuitive. The green dashed
arrows indicate vapor ﬂow, and the red dashed lines indicate liquid ﬂow.
Considering the results of Udugama et al., it is clear that the side draw location and
feed tray location are of utmost importance when designing the system to be as energy
14
==PAGE:24==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
eﬃcient as possible. An optimization of these will not be performed in this thesis, but it
is clear that further studies could include an optimization of the feed and the side draw
location.
15
==PAGE:25==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
4
Historic Review of Cyclic Distillation
To introduce how cyclic distillation diﬀerentiates itself from conventional distillation,
a very brief introduction to the idea behind the operation is presented, followed by a
historical review from the initiation of the idea to the present day.
As opposed to the continuous conventional distillation, cyclic distillation is based on
separate movement of phases, initially caused by discontinuing the vapor ﬂow, and has
since been enhanced vastly by improving the mechanical parts, primarily the trays, to
support the unusual movement. Having movement in phases yields signiﬁcant advantages
to key aspects of the operation, where mainly the column eﬃciency and the throughput
can be increased remarkably [27].
The initial models were developed before any real computing power existed and thus
employed extremely simplifying assumptions, such as inﬁnite reboiler- and negligible
condenser hold up, as well as linear equilibrium. For the later models, as computing
power increased, these assumptions were relaxed.
4.1
Cannon (1961)
In 1961, Cannon published a very brief paper stating that cycling processes would increase
eﬃciency in many cases [18]. He stated that distillation, liquid-liquid extraction, and
particle separation as cyclic processes had been proved to work. The ideation of cyclic
processes started in 1952, but was continuously worked on over the years, leading up to the
publication in 1961. Gaska made his MSc thesis and his PhD focusing on extensive testing
of sieve and screen plate distillation columns, and McWhirter tested the performance of
packed plates in a cyclic setup, which both aided to the publication by Cannon.
One key aspect was that the liquid ﬂow would initialize by stopping the vapor ﬂow when
it was above the weeping rate. When the vapor ﬂow period (VFP) stopped, i.e. when
the liquid ﬂow period (LFP) started, the liquid would drip through the holes in the trays,
often causing a signiﬁcant fraction of the liquid on a given stage to drop several stages,
which decreased the eﬃciency signiﬁcantly. It has since then been improved signiﬁcantly
by changing how the trays operate, as will be discussed in Section 4.8.
The fact that Cannon concluded that a higher capacity is possible, as well as better
ﬂexibility, including controlling the ﬂexibility of the ﬂow periods, was a key development
of cyclic distillation.
16
==PAGE:26==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
4.2
Sommerfeld et al. (1966)
Sommerfeld et al. were the ﬁrst to attempt computer simulations in the cyclic regime,
and they performed analogous simulations of a controlled rectiﬁcation to determine the
theoretical eﬀects of local point eﬃciency, the slopes of the operating and equilibrium
lines, the amount of liquid dropped during the LFP, as well as other parameters [28].
The model they used was based on the model presented by McWhirter and Lloyd [29],
which is similar to the model presented by Rivas in 1977.
The main point to take
from Sommerfeld et al. is that the eﬀective plate eﬃciency was found to (usually) be
signiﬁcantly greater than the point eﬃciency, which leads to an improved separation using
the cyclic distillation setup.
4.3
Robinson and Engel (1967)
Robinson and Engel [30] presented a theoretical reason behind the experimental papers
concluding an increased performance of cyclic/periodic distillation compared to conven-
tional equipment. They based their model on the famous Lewis cases, which summarizes
the three main ﬂow types of a distillation column:
1. Lewis Case I: Vapor ﬂowing to the tray, has a uniform composition at all points,
and the liquid ﬂows in alternate direction on the trays.
2. Lewis Case II: Vapor laterally unmixed ﬂowing between stages, liquid ﬂows in same
direction on successive trays, with partially mixed liquid on each tray.
3. Lewis Case III: Vapor laterally unmixed ﬂowing between stages, liquid ﬂows in
alternate directions on successive trays, the liquid is partially mixed.
Most conventional distillation columns, both then and now, are Lewis Case III except
for inﬁnite reboiler and bottom tray of absorber/stripper, and the transition to a mix
of these Lewis Cases is what Robinson and Engel proposed as a model for the cyclic
distillation column. They also used trays with weirs (see Figure 4) to reduce unwanted
liquid mixing between the stages, as well as using bubble cap trays. It is important to
mention that they assumed an inﬁnite number of trays, thus the model is mainly to prove
the increased eﬃciency as the experimental data show.
To develop the model, some key assumptions were made. Initially, the concentration
proﬁles were discussed, and they claimed that if the time constraint on each VFP is the
same as in conventional distillation, and the LFP is as long as the residence time in the
downcomers of a conventional column, the concentration/time history will be identical
in both cases.
17
==PAGE:27==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
They point out that this is only possible if the liquid ﬂow is assumed to be plug ﬂow. This
assumption is certainly debatable as with most plug ﬂow assumptions, albeit it is often a
reasonable approach for ﬂows that are not turbulent. Also, it was assumed that no mass
transfer occur during the LFP, but this assumption is equivalent to the assumption of no
mass transfer in the downcomers in a conventional setup.
Now, as the model is setup, a mixture of the Lewis Cases were assumed on diﬀerent
stages as mentioned. The tray directly above the reboiler is equivalent to a Lewis Case
I, as the vapor ﬂow from the reboiler is assumed to be at a constant concentration. The
other trays in the column are equivalent to Lewis Case II.
The model is based on a material balance design, where they included a variable, φ,
which takes into account the amount of liquid ﬂowing from one stage to another during
the LFP. This was taken into account due to the tray design of perforated plate, which
caused ineﬃcient liquid transfer from one tray to the next. This factor indicates how large
a fraction of the liquid on a tray that ﬂows to the below tray during the LFP. The model
is then described mathematically from the material balance, and some assumptions are
then laid as the foundation for the applicability of the model:
1. The vapor ﬂow experiences no axial mixing
2. The equilibrium is linearly described over a range of several trays
3. The operating line is linear over several trays
4. Plug ﬂow during the LFP
They presented the results of the model, where they also studied the eﬀect of the liquid
hold up factor, φ, and they concluded that mathematically, the most eﬃcient values were
integers. This would equal to a liquid ﬂow, including all the liquid on a given tray, moving
φ trays down. This means that the most eﬃcient separation happens when all the liquid
on a given tray moves, and no mixing occurs.
Lastly, Robinson and Engel concluded that the data by McWhirter resembled the model
prediction they made. Although some of the assumptions made are questionable in an
actual column, the results were concluded to be reasonable.
4.4
Rivas (1977)
Rivas was the ﬁrst person to go through the theoretical design process of a cyclic distilla-
tion column [31], whereas the previous works by Cannon, and Robinson and Engel were
mainly to prove the validity of the cyclic processes. The modelling by Rivas was described
as a short cut method for the preliminary design of ideal cyclic distillation columns, thus
18
==PAGE:28==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
does not take into account the non-ideality of the system at hand.
From this, some
assumptions follow to start the modelling process:
1. Column vapor holdup is negligible when being compared to the liquid hold up
2. The vapor ﬂow rate is constant during the VFP
3. The liquid hold ups in both the stripper and the rectifying section are equal at all
times
4. Binary mixture
5. Each tray reaches equilibrium
6. The equilibrium is described linearly
7. Plug ﬂow during the LFP
Assumptions 1-5 are the same as for the McCabe Thiele method, thus very similar to how
a preliminary design of a conventional distillation column was made back then. Initially,
the ﬂow rates are described mathematically, which are similar to that of Robinson and
Engel, and as with that presentation, it will not be shown here.
The main interest
however, is the concentration proﬁle modelling presented in the paper, which will brieﬂy
be presented and discussed.
The ﬁrst step was to generate a mass balance around stage n during the VFP, and was
presented as eq. (1).
H dxn
dt = Vi(yn−1 −yn) ,
(1)
where n denotes the stage number, i denotes the component, H denotes the liquid hold
up, x denotes the liquid mole fraction, y denotes the vapor mole fraction, and V denotes
the vapor ﬂow rate. As with most mathematical models, a dimensionless form is also
presented as eq. (2), using τ = t/tv, where H = Ltc/φ, with tc being the total cycle time,
tv denotes vapor ﬂow duration, tl denotes liquid ﬂow duration, where tc = tv + tl, and φ
denotes the fraction of liquid hold up being moved during a LFP.
dxn
dτ + V
L φ(yn −yn−1) = 0 ,
(2)
where yn and yn−1 are both unknown functions, thus a non-trivial solution is needed.
The solution is assumed to have a faster mass transfer at the beginning of the cycle, i.e.
decaying mass transfer over time of the most volatile component. For the tray above the
reboiler, the diﬀerential equation is solvable since the vapor ﬂow concentration from the
19
==PAGE:29==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
reboiler is assumed constant, thus yn−1 is known for the ﬁrst tray. Now, the equilibrium
curve is described linearly from eq. (3).
y = Kx + b ,
(3)
which yields for tray 1,
dx1
dτ + φV
L Kx1 = constant ,
with the general solution being,
x1 = A1 + C1 exp(−λτ) ,
(4)
where,
λ = K V
L .
Following this, another assumption is needed: if a very large column is build, as the tray
numbers increase (n =⇒∞), the concentration proﬁles between the last plates must
approach a linear proﬁle, since the changes in concentration would be almost 0. This
yields,
x∞= A∞+ B∞τ .
(5)
Combining eqs. (4) and (5) provides the full solution as eq. (6),
xn = An + Bnτ + Cn exp(−λτ) .
(6)
Now, only the constants A, B, and C needs to be calculated, which was done through
initial conditions (IC) as well as an average condition. The solutions are as follows,
x′
n = An + Cn
(7)
x′′
n = An + Bn + Cn exp(−λ)
(8)
¯xn = An + 1
2Bn + 1
λ(1 −exp(−λ))Cn ,
(9)
where x′
n is the concentration at the beginning of the VFP (e.g. τ = 0), x′′
n is the con-
centration at the end of the VFP (e.g. τ = 1), and ¯xn is the average (an integration).
Solving these leads to a possible design of a cyclic column, which theoretically calcu-
lates the ideal number of stages, as well as the feed location from the feed stream mole
fraction, zf. Lastly, the modelling ended in an example, calculating the benzene-toluene
system, where it was estimated that 5.3 stages were needed, which was later disproven
by Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen.
Rivas was quite successful in creating the ﬁrst theoretical design of a cyclic distillation
column for his time.
20
==PAGE:30==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
4.5
Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen (1987-1989)
In 1987, Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen developed a more advanced model, which relaxed the
linear equilibrium assumption, however it was only demonstrated for binary mixtures.
The goal of the model was the same as the goal Rivas presented: Being able to design a
column theoretically, calculating the amount of trays, as well as the feed location. They
introduced the idea still being used today, which is a set of diﬀerential equations that
are solved by backwards integration. They proposed, similarly to Rivas, that the design
process starts from the bottom by selecting a desired liquid concentration in the reboiler
at the end of the VFP, and thus no inﬁnite reboiler, making it possible to calculate the
liquid concentration at the beginning of the VFP. This yields the necessary information
to calculate the ﬁrst tray, which in turn makes it possible to calculate the second tray,
etc. The dimensionless model proposed for the VFP was given as eq. (10), with θ given
as eq. (11), where i is the tray number, t is the time proceeded during a given VFP cycle,
and T is the total VFP time, which combined yields a dimensionless time.
dx(θ)
dθ
= T(y(θ) −x(θ))
b0 + (θ −1)T
(10)
θ =

1 −t
T

+ i .
(11)
With the IC of x(0) = xb being valid for 0 ≤θ ≤1−, where the negative sign denotes
resulting values just before the LFP. Furthermore, b0 denotes the dimensionless reboiler
hold-up at θ = 0, and hi is the dimensionless hold-up of tray i. It is clear from the
θ interval, that this equation is only valid for the reboiler. For the trays, eq. (12) was
proposed.
dx(θ)
dθ
= T(y(θ) −y(θ −1))
hi
.
(12)
Which is valid for the VFP. For the LFP, the superscript + is used to indicate the end
of the VFP, which is equivalent to the beginning of the LFP. Similarly to the VFP, the
reboiler is calculated uniquely as eq. (13), whereas the trays are calculated as eq. (14).
x(1+) = x(1−) −(b0 −1 −f + κ)x(0)
1 + f −κ
(13)
x(θ+) = hix(θ−−κx((θ −1)+) −fxf
hi+1
,
(14)
where f denotes the dimensionless feed magnitude and for all trays except the feed tray,
f = 0, and κ denotes the fraction of liquid staying at the tray at the end of the LFP.
Through establishing the ICs, the column can be designed from the bottom-up starting
with the reboiler. The relative volatility α, also needs to be assumed a constant value,
which is similar to the newer models, as will be shown.
This model excelled for its
21
==PAGE:31==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
time since it was non-iterative, and designs the column without the assumption of linear
equilibrium. Lastly, Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen concluded that the linear equilibrium as-
sumption in certain systems are ﬂawed, as the design through their algorithms showed
8 stages for the separation of benzene-toluene, compared to the mentioned 5.3 stages by
Rivas.
In 1989, Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen expanded on their cyclic column research through
simulation. The simulation was based on an integration method by Petzold [32], who
proposed a solution to oscillatory diﬀerential equations such as the ones presented by
Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen two years prior. These will not be presented in this thesis since
this type of computing is obsolete today, but it is mentioned to further the timeline of
the cyclic distillation development.
4.6
P˘atrut¸ et al. (2014)
In 2014, P˘atrut¸ et al. expanded the model presented by Lit¸˘a et al. [33] in 2012, which is
a generalized model similar to the model of Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen [34]. However, this
generalized model, as with Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen’s model, was only valid for binary
mixtures. The model P˘atrut¸ et al. presented was a non-dimensionless model, and no
longer included extreme assumptions of the reboiler and condenser hold-up. P˘atrut¸ et
al. then further developed this model to be valid for multicomponent systems, which is
what the design of the cyclic column in this thesis will be based upon.
Initially, it is key to realize that previously the nomenclature for the trays were counted
from the bottom up, naming the reboiler as 0, the ﬁrst tray as 1, etc. However, P˘atrut¸ et
al. had opposite nomenclature, thus the reboiler was denoted NT, the bottom tray was
denoted NT −1, all the way up to the last tray denoted 2, with the condenser numbered
as 1. The main solution-method is similar to that of Tofteg˚ard and Jørgensen with an
expansion of the column from the results of the previous tray, as illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Illustration of the ﬁrst steps of the design method for cyclic distillation proposed by
P˘atrut¸ et al.
22
==PAGE:32==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The modelling will be presented by dividing the equations into VFP and LFP segments.
For this, some initial considerations need to be made.
A mass balance for both phases is produced from a general mass balance as eq. (15), and
produces eqs. (16) and (17) at the end of one cycle for the condenser and reboiler.
in −out + generated = accumulated .
(15)
Which leads to,
V tvap = D + L
(16)
L + F = V tvap + B ,
(17)
where V is the vapor ﬂow, tvap is the duration of the VFP, D is the magnitude of the
distillate, and B is the magnitude of the bottoms. Here, the in term is equivalent to the
out term of the previous tray, and the out term must be equal to the in term of the next
tray. The generated term is zero, since there is no reaction, and the accumulated term
is equal to the amount of substance being transferred to the liquid during a given time
period. Due to the backwards integration, the equations come out as explained below.
Modelling for the VFP
The time dependent mass balances can be written as follows,
(V yk+1,j −V yk,j)∆t = Mk,j|t+∆t −Mk,j|t
⇒
(18)
Mk,j|t+∆t −Mk,j|t
∆t
= V (yk+1,j −yk,j) .
(19)
Letting ∆t →0 yields the expression for all the trays as eq. (20)
dMk,j
dt
= V (yk+1,j −yk,j) ,
(20)
which for the reboiler equates to eq. (21)
dMNT,j
dt
= −V yNT,j ,
(21)
and for the condenser eq. (22)
dM1,j
dt
= V y2,j ,
(22)
which can be written in a matrix form:
d
dt


M1,j
M2,j
...
...
MNT−1,j
MNT,j


=


V · y2,j
V · (y3,j −y2,j)
...
...
V · (yNT,j −yNT−1,j)
−V · yNT


=


V
−V
V
−V
V
−V
V
−V
V
−V


·


y2,j
y3,j
...
...
yNT−1,j
yNT,j


.
(23)
23
==PAGE:33==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Modelling for the LFP
Similarly the liquid ﬂow period can be derived, but it is even more trivial than for the
VFP, since the mass balances are not time dependent during the LFP as P˘atrut¸ et al.
assumed that no mass transfer occurs during this phase, and therefore the results are
simply presented.
Due to the feed introducing saturated liquid somewhere in the column, the equations are
divided into the rectifying and the stripper section, as well as single equations for the
condenser and the reboiler. Furthermore, a single equation is needed for the tray just
below the feed to incorporate the change in hold-ups. Here, the superscripts (L) and (V )
denotes the end of the liquid and vapor phase, respectively.
For the reboiler:
M (L)
NT,j = M (V )
NT,j −Bx(V )
NT,j + M (V )
NT−1,j .
(24)
For the stripper section:
M (L)
k,j = M (V )
k−1,j .
(25)
Tray below the feed, i.e. tray NF + 1:
M (L)
NF+1,j = M (V )
NF,j + FxF,j .
(26)
For the rectifying section, the top tray also needs a unique equation since the ﬂow is from
the condenser:
M (L)
2,j = Lx(V )
1,j
(27)
M (L)
k,j = M (V )
k−1,j .
(28)
This system of equations should then be integrated backwards in time to achieve the
desired results. This requires the bottoms concentrations to be deﬁned as mentioned
previously, since these are the ICs that make the solution possible. The mole fraction
can be calculated from the molar hold-up as eq. (29).
xk,j =
Mk,j
P
j Mk,j
,
(29)
where the total molar holdup (i.e. P
j Mk,j) needs to be speciﬁed for the reboiler. The
signiﬁcance of this speciﬁcation was also investigated and P˘atrut¸ et al. concluded that
it is of minor importance as long as it is relatively large, so it does not come close to
being empty during any given period. It is key to point out that they have developed the
model to work for multicomponent systems, but have completely neglected considering
that the mole fraction of the bottoms, which is the IC, is no longer trivial to determine
for multicomponent systems as it was with a binary system.
24
==PAGE:34==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
For a binary pair, some purity is simply chosen, and the mole fraction of the other
component is given, but for e.g. a ternary system, a similar purity requirement of one of
the components needs to be deﬁned, but how the other two components should be found
is entirely left out, side draws, multifeed situations, etc. are still not treated. This paves
the way for this thesis, as the former two options are the main focus.
4.7
Rasmussen et al. (2020)
In 2020, Rasmussen et al. published an article that further develops the model presented
by P˘atrut¸ et al. by reducing the amount of assumptions. As shown, P˘atrut¸ et al. did
not consider energy balances, which is done by Rasmussen et al., as well as removing the
constant vapor ﬂow assumption. Lastly, the proposed model includes the possibility of
multiple feeds and side draws, however they only theorized it, and did not implement a
side draw or multiple feeds, which is a major challenge in itself.
The model is not presented here, since it is not implemented due to being unnecessary
for the purpose of this thesis. The important thing to take away from this article is
the fact that more advanced theoretical modelling has been made, albeit without any
implementation.
Furthermore, these changes are implemented in the diﬀerential model code, i.e. the func-
tion that contains the diﬀerential equations to be solved by an ODE solver in MATLAB.
This makes it relatively straight forward to implement in the simulation proposed in this
thesis, but is very time consuming, hence why it is not chosen to use this more complex
model.
4.8
Modern equipment
Maleta is a company that focuses on specialized equipment for distillation, and they
propose using a sluice-type tray system for cyclic distillation. Such trays are essentially
equipped with a space that will contain the liquid for a short period of time to ensure that
no mixing occurs between stages, as Figure 7 shows. As discussed previously, the main
issue with conventional distillation compared to cyclic distillation is the backmixing that
occurs, and with the nature of cyclic distillation, having such a sluice system is extremely
eﬃcient. However, such trays are not very eﬀective for very volatile liquids such as crude
oil or similar, since the LFP would simply take too long. Thus, other options should be
investigated, but for low volatile systems such as the one handled in this thesis, it works
excellently. In 2016, Tofteg˚ard et al. suggested a setup that allows a constant vapor
ﬂow compared to the previous suggestion of using a periodic vapor ﬂow [35]. The setup
consists of using trays that allow for sequential drainage, thus only one tray will be empty
at any given time; which is a diﬀerent tray every drainage. The setup is similar to that
25
==PAGE:35==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
shown in Figure 7, but for the Maleta case, the sluices are opened and closed by the vapor,
and it is therefore required to have a periodic ﬂow. For the suggestion by Tofteg˚ard et
al. some mechanical control of the sluices needs to be implemented, which adds to the
complexity of the system, and adds an item that needs maintenance and can possibly
break, but in turn comes with several advantages, such as increased throughput from
the increased vapor ﬂow, and reduced pressure ﬂuctuations. The suggested sequential
drainage is shown in Figure 8.
(a) Vapor ﬂow period
(b) Liquid ﬂow period
Figure 7: A suggested sluice-system for cyclic distillation, where (a) showcases liquid placement
during the VFP, and (b) showcases the liquid placement during the LFP. Naturally, during a
full LFP the pistons that open and close the sluices will move up to let the liquid drop down to
the tray below. The colors indicate concentration of the most volatile component, e.g. darker
color equals richer in concentration.
Figure 8: Sequential tray drainage with three trays, showing a full rotation starting at position
(a), ending at position (e). The ﬁgure is reprinted from [35].
26
==PAGE:36==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
4.9
Current limitations of the literature
The current theory is limited to binary systems and it is mostly handled for simple cases
such as a using constant relative volatility.
This has been the case, since the model
calculates liquid mole fractions directly from the solved molar hold-ups, and if using
a simple constant relative volatility vapor model, the vapor mole fractions are directly
calculated from the liquid mole fractions.
P˘atrut¸ et al.
expressed that the modiﬁed
Raoult’s law can be used with a γ-model such as the Wilson ACM, but the results they
present use constant relative volatility. However, in the literature there are records of
proper γ-model implementations e.g. both the BSc and MSc thesis by Rasmus F. Nielsen
[36, 37]. What is missing in the literature, is handling ternary systems with complex
models, since the assumptions are no longer trivial to handle. Furthermore, more complex
designs are also not present in the literature, e.g. adding a side draw to the column, a
case only relevant for multicomponent systems, except for the theoretical work done by
Rasmussen et al [38]. Introducing the Wilson ACM for the liquid phase in combination
with a more complex EoS or virial coeﬃcient model for the vapor phase, the bubble
temperature calculations become non-linear, and thus non-trivial. These limitations are
challenged in this thesis.
27
==PAGE:37==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
5
Binary System: Design and Simulation
The simple binary case should be considered and explained initially to expand beyond
two components. To get a thorough understanding of how the solution will behave as
the complexity increases, initially the binary system with constant relative volatility will
be discussed, moving on to using activity coeﬃcient models, and then moving on to the
ternary system.
In order to really appreciate the simplicity of the constant relative volatility case, the
mathematics behind a binary system using this assumption will be explained. Using
eq. (29) and the deﬁnition of relative volatility given as eq. (30) for the binary case, the
vapor mole fraction can be found.
α = Ki
Kj
=
yk,i
xk,i
yk,j
xk,j
=
yk,LK
xk,LK
yk,HK
xk,HK
,
(30)
where HK denotes heavy key, i.e. the least volatile component, and LK denotes the light
key. Using the same notation, the mole fractions can be written as follows:
xk,LK =
Mk,LK
Mk,LK + Mk,HK
,
(31)
with
xk,HK = 1 −xk,LK .
(32)
Isolating the vapor mole fraction of each component can be calculated from the relative
volatility coeﬃcient using:
yk,HK = 1 −yk,LK .
(33)
Combining these in eq. (30) yields:
yk,LK =
α xk,LK
1 + (α −1)xk,LK
(34)
yk,HK =
xk,HK
xk,HK + α(1 −xk,HK) ,
(35)
for the light key and heavy key, respectively. These expression are directly calculated
from the liquid mole fractions when the relative volatility has been deﬁned. Some results
presented by P˘atrut¸ et al. will be presented along with a description of how the plots
should be read, as this is not entirely trivial. In these results, constant relative volatility
was applied, which is why the results will not directly be replicated. Prior to this, a
thorough description of the Wilson activity model and VLE in general will be presented.
28
==PAGE:38==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
5.1
Wilson ACM and VLE in general
To describe the cyclic distillation process in full, the VLE needs to be considered. A
mathematical representation of the VLE will be given using the simple case of an ACM
e.g. Wilson, and the modiﬁed Raoult’s law.
The following mathematics have been shown in several thermodynamic books, but in this
work it is based on the book: Thermodynamic Models for Industrial Applications: from
classical and advanced mixing rules to association theories by Georgios Kontogeorgis and
Georgios Folas [39].
The vapor liquid equilibrium is deﬁned by being reached when the fugacities of each phase
are equal, stated as eq. (36),
ˆf l
i = ˆf v
i ,
(36)
where i denotes the component, l and v denotes liquid and vapor respectively, and the ˆ
denotes that it is the fugacity of component i in the mixture, whereas f l
i or f v
i denotes
the fugacities of the pure components.
For an ideal solution the general expression can be rewritten as eq. (37), where the activity
coeﬃcient is unity:
ˆfi(T, P, x) = xifi(T, P) .
(37)
For a non-ideal liquid the fugacity can be written as eq. (38), including the activity
coeﬃcient:
ˆf l
i(T, P, xi) = xiγif l
i(T, P) .
(38)
And for the vapor phase,
ˆf v
i (T, P, yi) = yiγif v
i (T, P) ,
(39)
where it is often accepted to assume ideality at low pressures, thus ˆφ = 1, which yields
eq. (40):
ˆf v
i (T, P, yi) = yif v
i (T, P) .
(40)
At low pressures the following equations are useful approximations:
f v
i (T, P) ≈P
(41)
f l
i(T, P) ≈P sat
i
(T) .
(42)
Combining eqs. (38) and (40) yields eq. (43),
xiγif l
i(T, P) = yif v
i (T, P) ,
(43)
which can further be rewritten using the low pressure approximations, which is called the
modiﬁed Raoult’s law:
xiγiP sat
i
(T) = yiP .
(44)
29
==PAGE:39==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
This expression yields a correlation between the mole fraction of component i in each
phase. This only requires calculating the partial pressures of the components as well
as obtaining an expression for the activity coeﬃcient, γi. Initially, the modelling of the
process will be done using the Wilson ACM, since this is what Udugama et al. [17] used,
and the results of this thesis will be indirectly compared to the results presented by them.
More complex models will be investigated and simulated to be compared to the simple
Wilson ACM with ideal gas assumption. This will result in a better understanding of how
important the models are, and if the models vary signiﬁcantly in predictions. Naturally,
to verify any of these models, experimental data will be needed, which is beyond the
scope of this thesis, but opens the door for others to do the experimental comparison.
The Wilson ACM deﬁned the activity coeﬃcient as eq. (45):
ln(γi) = 1 −ln

X
j
xjΛij

−
X
k
xkΛki
P
j xjΛkj
,
(45)
with the Λ denoting the local volume fractions given as eq. (46).
Λij = Vj
Vi
exp
 
−∆λij
RT
!
,
(46)
where λij is the interaction energy between molecule i and j, and V is the molar volume,
R is the gas constant and T is the temperature. The model is not fully developed theoret-
ically for multicomponent systems, since for ternary systems, only 5 of the 6 parameters
are freely chosen, and for 4-component mixtures only 9 of 12 are freely chosen, etc. How-
ever, by forgetting the assumption made in the derivation of the model and considering the
interaction parameters as independent, the practical results of the model are excellent,
but one should remember the theoretical limits.
Since the pressure will be ﬁxed in the column, the boiling temperature needs to be
calculated. As the total pressure is given by the sum of all the individual component
pressures, i.e. partial pressures, the boiling temperature can be calculated from eq. (47):
P =
X
i
xiγiP sat
i
(Tb) ,
(47)
where Tb is the boiling temperature. The saturated vapor pressure is then found from
the Antoine equation, given as eq. (48):
log10 P sat
i
= A −
B
C + T .
(48)
Here, the coeﬃcients A, B, and C are the Antoine parameters, which are found experi-
mentally. These can easily be found from several sources such as the NIST WebBook or
Engineering Toolbox.
30
==PAGE:40==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
To calculate the binary interaction parameters needed for eq. (46), the energy parameters
as well as the molar volumes needs to be calculated or speciﬁed. For the molar volumes,
a basic linear approach using the formula Vm = M/ρ(T), with ρ denoting liquid density
as a function of temperature, and M denoting the molar mass is used. Since the molar
volumes deviate very little over the relevant temperature range, a linear approach is
chosen for simplicity [40]. For the energy parameters, λij, an estimation is done through
the use of the modiﬁed Raoult’s law and the Wilson equations on experimental VLE data
from the literature. It is commonly accepted that the energy parameters are temperature
dependent, and Kobuchi [41] has presented a method to calculate the energy parameters
as a function of temperature, but the method requires speciﬁc binary experimental values,
and no success was achieved in ﬁnding these for the three binary combinations of the
methanol-ethanol-water system.
Udugama et al. used a pressure of 190 kPa with a ﬁxed pressure drop of 0.75 kPa/tray. For
the preliminary results, the pressure used for the system will be constant at 1 atmosphere,
but the pressure structure used by Udugama et al. will be considered at a later stage.
It follows from this, that the binary interaction parameters found through VLE data are
assumed to be valid at the relevant pressure and temperature range, albeit the VLE data
used to estimate the binary interaction parameters is at atmospheric pressure.
5.2
Estimation of binary interaction parameters for the Wil-
son ACM
Initially, the molar volumes are determined from eq. (49), where the liquid densities are
found from Engineering Toolbox [40]:
Vm,i =
Mi
ρi(T) .
(49)
The density of the components in each binary VLE system (e.g. methanol-ethanol) will be
varying as the temperature changes, and within the relevant temperature range, roughly
65-100◦C, the densities can be expressed as a linear relation [40]. The values used, and
the a and b variables calculated, are shown in Table 9 in Appendix A: Tables.
Now, with expressions for the molar volumes, the Wilson equations can be calculated
based on the VLE data presented, using some random initial guesses of the binary inter-
action parameters. However, a method needs to be chosen for the estimation, since the
VLE data used is T-xy data, thus using a constant pressure for all the compositions. In
1995, Hendrick Van Ness published his ﬁndings on what he concluded as the most solid
theoretical method when regressing VLE data to obtain model parameters. He concluded
that using pressure calculations and minimizing the sums of squared pressure residuals,
P(δP)2, is viable for most situations [42]. Thus, the method used for this thesis will
31
==PAGE:41==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
be calculating a pressure diﬀerence between the experimentally measured and calculated
pressure. The pressures are calculated with the methods described in Section 5.1. For
the Wilson equations, the Antoine equation was used to calculate the saturated vapor
pressures. This is then used in Equation (47), which is subtracted from the total pressure.
When the pressure diﬀerence has been calculated for all compositions, the least squares
method was used to estimate the binary parameters, by taken the squared diﬀerence of
the pressure at all compositions, summarizing these and minimizing this sum by changing
the binary energy parameters, ∆λij. For the methanol-water system, experimental T-x
data was used, i.e. no vapor composition was given, since this was the most reliable of
the found experimental data.
The relevant values for the binary energy parameters are given in Table 2, and the
calculations for all three combinations are shown in Appendix A: Tables.
Table 2: Binary energy parameters for all three combinations of the ternary methanol-ethanol-
water system.
∆λew
∆λwe
∆λmw
∆λwm
∆λme
∆λem
270.655
480.107
87.070
246.145
-163.088
368.287
To ensure these values are estimated well, the boiling point temperature was calculated
for the three systems and compared to the experimental data. Initially, the boiling points
of all three combinations are calculated at compositions between [1, 0] and [0, 1], as shown
in Figure 9. The model prediction works well, thus the values are accepted. The data
was all found in the literature, and is cited in the captions of the tables.
All the tools are now available to use the model proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al. However,
one key aspect to keep in mind when structuring the simulations is the fact that a more
complex model means a more complex calculation, and from a time eﬃciency aspect, it
is entirely possible to run into problems when simulating a complex cyclic distillation
column. This is especially relevant for the ternary system with a side draw as will be
clear later.
32
==PAGE:42==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 9: Boiling points of the three binary systems in the methanol-ethanol-water system.
All the extremities match the boilings points of the pure components, as well as the shapes of
the curves. The mole fractions are of methanol for the M-W and M-E systems, and of ethanol
for the ethanol-water system. The pressure of the experimental data was 1 [atm], hence the
calculations used the same pressure.
5.3
Structure of the code for binary use
A thorough MATLAB code has been created to simulate and analyze the system. As
mentioned, the design of the system in is based on the method proposed by P˘atrut¸ et
al., who exhibited two diﬀerent solution methods when designing a column: a Eulerian
approach, and a Lagrangian approach. The simplest method of the two is the Eulerian
approach and is therefore used throughout. It is a method that gradually builds the
column upwards starting from the reboiler and adding trays one at a time, as Figure 6
shows. Trays are added to the solution until the feed solution is reached, where the feed
is introduced. Then, additional trays are added until the solution satisﬁes the distillation
requirements. The following describes the method in detail:
• The reboiler hold-up at the beginning of the VFP, M (L)
reboiler,j, is found through
backwards integration of eq. (21) from t = tvap to t = 0. Thus, ICs are the molar
33
==PAGE:43==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
hold-up at the end of the VFP. This was deemed of minor importance as long as it
was larger enough, which will be shown later (Table 3).
• The state of the bottom tray is found through eq. (24), although rearranged to ﬁt
the backwards integration solution as eq. (50).
M (V )
NT−1,j = M (L)
NT,j −M (V )
NT,j + Bx(V )
NT,j ,
(50)
where both B and x(V )
NT,j are variables that needs to be either deﬁned or estimated.
The solution to this equation is the IC for the above tray. B will be found from a
simple overall mass balance from eqs. (16) and (17), which when eliminating V tvap
and L leaves two equations to ﬁnd D and B, when including the component mass
balance as eq. (51), since F is also deﬁned.
FxF = DxD + BxB .
(51)
• The IC for both the reboiler and the bottom tray is now available, making the
solution for the tray above the bottom tray possible using the same method of
backwards integration, but using eq. (20) rearranged to eq. (52):
M (V )
NT−2,j = M (L)
NT−1,j .
(52)
• With the solution found for stage 3 (tray 2), the IC for stage 4 (tray 3) is available.
The ICs are used to solve the backwards integration of the above tray. This method
is the repeated until the composition of the liquid reaches the feed composition. This
tray is then chosen to be the tray below the feed.
• For the feed tray, the state at the end of the VFP is found through rearranging
eq. (26) to eq. (53):
M (V )
NF,j = M (L)
NF+1,j −FxF,j .
(53)
• The process is continued by adding trays and solving them in the same way until the
distillate composition has been reached. This tray is the tray before the condenser.
A work ﬂow deagram is shown in Figure 10.
34
==PAGE:44==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 10: Systematic procedure to solve the binary system. MB is short for mass balance.
The expansion of the IC vector through the MB of the feed stage is eq. (53).
This method is implemented in MATLAB, however, since the column is built from the
bottom up, the numeration is much easier to follow if the opposite as the method proposed
by P˘atrut¸ et al. is used, i.e. the reboiler is denoted 1, the tray above the reboiler is denoted
2, the feed tray is denoted NF, and the tray below the condenser is denoted NT −1,
and the condenser is denoted NT. Thus, when referring to NF + 1 in the method above,
it is actually NF −1 in the MATLAB code, since it refers to the tray below the feed
tray. The same goes for e.g. eq. (52), where NT −2 refers to the tray above the bottom
tray, and NT −1 refers to the bottom tray. These trays are denoted N = 3 and N = 2
in the code, respectively, since the reboiler is N = 1. This is only relevant when looking
through the code, as the ﬁgures have been created to match the method proposed to
reduce confusion, thus the largest tray number will be equal to the reboiler in all the
results presented throughout. In addition, the code has been written using a feed ﬂow of
35
==PAGE:45==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
1, which makes all the results as a percentage of the feed ﬂow, albeit the code is written
in a way where the feed can be changed to a given number.
The assumptions used throughout the thesis for the cyclic design is:
• Constant heat of vaporization
• Equilibrium stages
• Negligible vapor hold-ups
• Complete mixing on all stages
• Complete condensation on all stages
• Point eﬃciency of unity
• The temperature is assumed to be at boiling point at all times on all stages (which
changes during the VFP)
As described above, for each added tray the system is an expanded set of ordinary dif-
ferential equations (ODE), having 1 ODE per stage per component per time step, e.g.
20 stages with 3 components equals 60 diﬀerential equations, which will then further be
multiplied by the number of time steps during each integration MATLAB decides upon.
Usually this number is about 50, thus the actual number is 300 for the described column.
The solver used in this thesis is the ODE45, a non-stiﬀODE solver. The ODE solver
then returns a row vector of the solution per time step, which results in a matrix, where
each component is described at each time step for each stage. It was proposed by Ras-
mus Fjordbak Nielsen that such a solution in MATLAB is solved the easiest using an ID
system [36], and such a system is implemented in this thesis as well. It is implemented
by having the time dependent variable M(t) on the form of eq. (54):
M(t) = [M(id = 1]
M(id = 2)
...
M(id = N · Ncomp] ,
(54)
where N is the number of stages for the current calculation, as this number changes along
with building the column, and Ncomp is the amount of components in the system. The
ID system follows as eq. (55), with all components on a given stage given as eq. (56).
id = (N −1)Ncomp + i
(55)
idall = ((N −1)Ncomp + 1) : (N · Ncomp) ,
(56)
where i denotes the component and N denotes the relevant stage. The component vari-
able, i, is structured by prioritizing the components based on volatility, thus the most
volatile component will be the lowest i, and the least volatile component will be the
36
==PAGE:46==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
largest i. This is changeable, as long as all the relevant variables are changed to match,
e.g. Antoine parameters or binary energy parameters.
The code is divided into three parts: the mass balance model code, which is the function
to be solved in the ODE solver; the ACM used in the mass balance model code, which is
a function being called in the mass balance model function; and the call script, which is
the main structure that designs the column through solving the other named functions.
Each of these will be described in detail below.
5.3.1
Mass balance model code
The mass balance model code is the ﬁrst code to write, and it is a relatively simple code.
Initially the code calculates the liquid mole fractions of all components on all stages up
to stage N, which is possible since the input to the function is the IC of each stage up to
stage N. This is performed through a for loop, that loops over N stages (which changes
as the column is being build), and in each stage iteration a for loop over i components is
created. This makes eq. (57) the right equation to be implemented, using the id system
explained previously.
x(id) =
M(id)
PN·Ncomp
k=((N−1)Ncomp+1) M(k)
.
(57)
When the liquid mole fractions are known, a new loop over all stages is created, where the
ACM code is called for every iteration. The ACM is written to yield all three component
vapor fractions from one calculation, where the input is the complete liquid composition
(as well as pressure and amount of components).
When the vapor mole fraction for
stage N is calculated, a new for loop (inside the ﬁrst for loop) is created, which sets up
the diﬀerential equations for all components. This model code uses the mass balances
presented previously as a tool for calculation. Furthermore, the model code is written
with if-statements to ﬁgure out which model type is needed for the given calculation -
thus the model type will be predeﬁned before running the simulation, thus any given
simulation uses the same model, but the model can be changed for another simulation.
The inputs for the mass balance code are the amount of stages to calculate, N, which
changes as the column is build, the ﬁxed vapor ﬂow, V , the amount of components,
Ncomp, and the model type, modeltype, and then when solving it using ODE45 as
mentioned, it should be given a time span to integrate over, tspan = [tvap, 0], as well as
ICs, M0. The output is the the time steps, as well as the liquid hold-ups of each of
the calculated stages. This is the basic schematic of the code, and more outputs/inputs
is added for several diﬀerent reasons, which are mostly unimportant, and will only be
mentioned in the aspect of reasoning. The code is shown in Appendix B: Matlab code
(Section 12.2).
37
==PAGE:47==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
5.3.2
VLE model code
The next code to complete is the VLE model code. This will be slightly diﬀerent for each
model setup used in the thesis, but will be similarly structured.
The Wilson equation using ideal gas assumption is the ﬁrst code written. The input
of the Wilson equation is, as mentioned, the complete liquid composition, the pressure
and the amount of components. Within the function, the Antoine parameters for each
component are deﬁned in row vectors (1xNcomp), and the binary energy parameters esti-
mated previously are given in a matrix on the form of eq. (58), which is given for three
components (this matrix is called Aij in the code).
∆λi,j =


λ1,1 λ1,2 λ1,3
λ2,1 λ2,2 λ2,3
λ3,1 λ3,2 λ3,3

,
(58)
where all λi,i = 0, causing the binary interaction parameter for the same molecules to
be Λi,i = 1.
Here, as mentioned, the lower numbers are used for the most volatile
components, thus 1 refers to methanol, 2 refers to ethanol, and 3 refers to water.
Within the function, a new function is created, which creates a set of equations with
the temperature as the unknown variable. Initially, the molar volumes as a function
of temperature is calculated in a row vector, followed by a for loop which produces a
Ncomp ×Ncomp matrix of binary interaction parameters, Λi,j from eq. (46). To do this two
for loops (one inside the other) that runs from 1:Ncomp is created.
A new for loop is created that produces the two sums of eq. (45), which is done through
eqs. (59) to (61):
S1,j = xjΛi,j
(59)
Stemp = xjΛk,j
(60)
S2,k = xk
Λk,i
Stemp
,
(61)
where the indices j and k indicate for loops, with S1(j) being calculated in its own for
loop, and S2(j) being calculated in its own for loop, which contains the for loop with k,
that produces Stemp.
For each component, the activity coeﬃcient, γi, and the pressure contribution for said
component, pcalc, are calculated. Then, to end the internal function, the sum of pcalc
substracted the chosen column pressure, P, is calculated.
The VLE model function then ends by calculation of the boiling point temperature by
ﬁnding a given temperature where the sum of the calculated pressured substracted the
column pressure equals 0, by using the function called fzero(@function,IC). Lastly, the
38
==PAGE:48==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
vapor pressures are calculated from the modiﬁed Raoult’s law (eq. (44) in a for loop that
runs from 1:Ncomp.
The inputs of any of the VLE models are the liquid composition, x, the pressure of the
tray, P, and the amount of components, Ncomp. The output is the vapor mole fractions,
y - other information could be added to the output, e.g. the boiling point temperature
if desired, but for the solution it is important that the vapor mole fraction is one of the
outputs. The code is shown in Appendix B: Matlab code (Section 12.7).
5.3.3
Call script
The call script is initiated by deﬁning all the variables needed, such as feed ﬂow, vapor
ﬂow, molar fractions of feed, distillate, bottoms etc. The model is then solved for the
reboiler using N = 1 and ODE45. The ICs for the ﬁrst tray have been produced, called
M0, and a for loop that runs up to the total deﬁned stages, NT, but breaks once the feed
composition is reached. In this for loop, the IC vector is expanded for each iteration by
the results of the previous iteration for all components. The expanded IC vector is used
as the input for the model for the next iteration. The liquid composition is calculated
for all components, controlling when the for loop breaks with respect to the predeﬁned
requirement(s).
Once this criteria has been reached, the for loop breaks and the feed stage is calculated,
by using eq. (53) as the next ICs. Following this, the model is then solved again, thus
producing results including the feed tray.
Then, a for loop is created for the remaining stages where the IC vector is expanded
for each iteration, and the model is solved up to some stage Nfinal, which is found in
a similar fashion to the feed tray, where the liquid mole fractions are held up against
distillate mole fraction by some criteria. It is important to point out that the criteria
used in this thesis is that the distillate composition should simply be reached at some
point during the VFP, thus it might happen immediately after the VFP has begun, and
the last tray is almost not needed, which will be investigated later. Therefore, it is not
important if the composition is met early or late during the VFP, as long as it is met
before the VFP ends. Once this is reached, the for loop breaks (unless the predetermined
amount of stages are too low to reach the criteria), and the results are visualized.
All of the above is the main structure of the call script. For the binary system nothing
else is needed, but as will be shown, for the ternary system some iterative behavior needs
to be incorporated into the script to ﬁnd the actual mole fraction of the bottoms and
distillate.
The above walk-through is created twice: once for the binary system, where iteration is
not needed in the same fashion, and once for the ternary system including a side draw.
39
==PAGE:49==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The ternary system code is written to be able to handle setting the side draw = 0, thus
behaving as a ternary system without a side draw, and when given a value for S > 0, it
behaves as if a side draw is present. The code for the binary system is shown in Appendix
B: Matlab code (Section 12.1).
5.3.4
Overall mass balances
The mass balance is calculated symbolically, which works from a time eﬃciency point of
view, since the main contributor to the run time of the code is the VLE model calculations,
as these are done an enormous amount of times compared to the symbolic solution. In
addition, for the binary system, the symbolic solution is only used once, thus making the
consideration of even less importance. The code is setup for three components, with the
intention of deﬁning the mole fractions in the feed, distillate and bottoms having only two
components ̸= 0, with the third = 0, thus eﬀectively only having a binary system. This
allows to easily simulate all three binary systems within the same code, using the same
VLE model codes as for the ternary system. The mass balances are given as eqs. (62)
and (63):
F = D + B
(62)
FxF = DxD + BxB .
(63)
5.4
Binary results compared with P˘atrut¸ et al.
Prior to showing the preliminary results, the visualization needs to be explained. As the
distillation occurs in two phases, the LFP and VFP, it is possible to make several diﬀerent
visualizations of the results. One way is to plot the concentration or molar hold-up of
one component as a function of time, and since the model is a pseudo steady state model,
the curve would be repetitive as the periods repeat, as shown in Figure 11. However, it is
key to point out that the plots made here (only this ﬁgure) by P˘atrut¸ et al. actually have
a minor inaccuracy, since they claim to plot a change in mole fraction as a function of
time, which means the curve should not change with respect to the y-axis as time passes
during the LFP. The mole fraction should instantly jump to the mole fraction of the next
repetition (which is equal to the mole fraction at t = 0), followed by a ﬂat portion until
the VFP begins again. Figure 11 shows how the molar hold-up would be plotted, since
this would include a linear curve during the LFP. The error of plotting the LFP having a
linear change as a function of time most likely occurred because they plotted the solution
to a given stage repetitively, where they connected the end and beginning of the VFP,
which is how a molar hold-up plot should be produced.
40
==PAGE:50==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 11: The ﬁrst type of visualization where any given stage is plotted individually with
mole fraction as a function of time. It is clear that the plots are repeating, since the solutions
would be the same for every cycle. Reprinted from P˘atrut¸ et al. [34].
Another method is to follow the gradients over the entire column as a function of time,
which would show both phases. This is a diﬃcult plot to read, as the concentration
proﬁles have to show both phases, as shown in Figure 12. The idea behind this is to
illustrate how the separation occurs at a given stage, but it lacks some degree of clarity.
Figure 12: The second type of visualization, where the same portion of liquid is followed
down through the stages. This shows the development of the separation. The diﬀerent lines
are simply diﬀerent concentrations at the starting point to illustrate behavior. Reprinted from
P˘atrut¸ et al. [34].
41
==PAGE:51==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The last discussed option consists of plotting the concentration gradients as a function of
stages, since this shows the concentration development throughout the column as well as
the position in the column. As this type of plot consists of mole fractions as a function
of stages, the LFP is included, since the mole fractions are unchanged during the LFP.
This means that the curve is unchanged when moving from one stage to another, since
the concentration of adjacent trays are the same at the end and beginning of the LFP.
For instance, when the liquid moves from tray 10 to the sluice below and further down to
tray 11, the concentration at tray 10 at the start of the LFP is equal to the concentration
of tray 11 at the start of the next VFP as explained in the modelling process previously,
which is shown in Figure 13. This type of plot is the one mainly used in this thesis, since
this is the most clear visualization, and illustrates the design in the best manner.
Figure 13: A ternary and three diﬀerent binary systems solved by P˘atrut¸ et al. shows how the
mole fractions develop throughout the system. Here N = NT −τ/tvap is equal to the number
of stages. Reprinted from P˘atrut¸ et al. [34].
Additionally, the reason these plots are continuous compared to discrete, despite the
solution being discrete (the solvers in programs such as MATLAB solves diﬀerential
equations like the ones proposed here discrete) is due to the large number of time steps
used for each stage, which is not a feasible way to plot the results.
The structure behind the solution method, and how to show the results have now been
clariﬁed, which leaves the application of the code. It needs to be shown at this stage
42
==PAGE:52==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
that the code and the modelling can handle the binary systems. To do this, diﬀerent
calculations of the binary systems needs to be made.
Initially, the cyclic column design of the methanol-water system will be shown, as this
can be directly compared to the results in Figure 13. The system is solved under the
constraint of 0.005 [mol/mol] methanol in the bottoms and 0.005 [mol/mol] water in the
distillate. Figure 14 show the results.
Figure 14: Methanol-water binary system with a vapor ﬂow of V = 1
F
tvap [kmol/min], equimo-
lar feed, mole fraction of methanol in the bottoms as xB(MeOH) = 0.005, mole fraction of water
in the distillate as xD(W) = 0.005, and a constant column pressure of 1 [atm]. The feed stage
is at stage 9, with 12 total stages.
The results are very similar, but it is diﬃcult to compare exactly, as the speciﬁcations
of vapor ﬂow and mole fractions etc. are not given, thus this might have been reached
at a diﬀerent initial conditions or vapor ﬂow compared to the simple case. However, the
results are similar, and the code seems to work within reason, which is the ﬁrst mile stone
of the thesis.
The most interesting binary system is ethanol-water, since this system is well known to
have an azeotrope, and it is important to verify if the modelling is in agreement with
this. The cyclic column is calculated using eﬀectively an inﬁnite reﬂux ratio, which is
done by setting V = 106
F
tvap.
Figure 15a show the results, and the azeotrope is found at approximately 85.75 % [mol/-
mol] of ethanol, using the Wilson ACM and assuming the gas phase to be ideal. To
43
==PAGE:53==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
double check these results, the VLE of the system is found using the same model, shown
in Figure 15b. The results are the same, and the simulation is deemed to work well.
(a) Eﬀectively inﬁtnite reﬂux
(b) Ethanol-water VLE
Figure 15: VLE of ethanol and water, showing an azeotrope at ≈85.75 %. The boiling point of
the azeotrope is found to be below the boiling point of ethanol. Calculations are done at 1 [atm].
Figure 15a was produced with mole fractions of: xB(EOH) = 0.005 and xD(EOH) = 0.005, a
vapor ﬂow of V = 106 F/tvap [kmol/min], and a column pressure of 1 [atm].
Figure 16: Methanol-ethanol binary system with V = 2
F
tvap [kmol/min], xB(MeOH) = 0.005,
xD(EOH) = 0.005, equimolar feed, and at a column pressure of 1 [atm].
The binary system of the methanol-ethanol was calculated using the cyclic design proce-
dure. The system chosen to show is a symmetrical system, e.g. having purity requirements
44
==PAGE:54==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
of x = 0.005 [mol/mol] in both the bottoms and distillate, and using a equimolar feed.
The results are shown in Figure 16, and will not be compared directly with any other
results, but intuitively they make sense due to the symmetry of the design, and the fact
that the molecules are very similar. The vapor ﬂow used for these results was V = 2
F
tvap
[kmol/min].
The results and the coding is a good foundation to expand the work into ternary systems.
The following section will go in depth with what considerations should be made in order
to properly simulate a ternary system, and making a foundation for further improvements
towards the side draw as well. For the further simulations, the same mass balance model
code as well as the VLE will be used, which will be expanded upon at a later stage.
45
==PAGE:55==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
6
Expansion to Ternary Systems
The next step in the design procedure is to expand the model to handle ternary sys-
tems, which contributes to the understanding of the behavior of the cyclic design. To
understand the motivation behind this section, a brief introduction is given below.
The current standard when applying the model proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al. is usually to
choose the bottoms and distillate composition based on some knowledge of the system
prior to calculation.
This is often achieved through a black box mass balance (only
considering overall in and out streams, i.e. feed stream, distillate, and bottoms), which
is used in this thesis.
Another possible non-iterative method is to use a known bottoms composition from an-
other similar setup, e.g. a conventional column, but this is ﬂawed in several ways, espe-
cially for more complex column designs. For the ternary system without the side draw,
both methods may give decent results due to the low level of design complexity from only
having 3 streams: the feed, the bottoms, and the distillate, but as the column complexity
increases, the results are rapidly worsened.
Almost no research has been published on high purity separation in the cyclic regime,
where the mass balance issues will have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the solution.
Pre-
cision becomes increasingly important for the solution when working with high purity
separation, since the relevant values become very small, as will be shown later.
The purpose is hereby clear: to increase the validity of the calculation for high purity
systems, a higher precision is desired.
In order to achieve this, the current method
needs to be reconsidered for ternary systems, especially for further development, e.g.
implementing a side draw.
As has been shown, the binary system is a relatively simple system due to the symmetrical
structure of the column. This symmetry rapidly vanishes as a third component is added
to the separation.
If the system should be solvable in the same manner as with the
binary system, the complete liquid composition of the distillate and bottoms needs to be
deﬁned. However, it should be clear from the way the column is built that the distillate
composition will change depending on the deﬁned bottoms composition, due to the nature
of the VLE calculations and the fact that the reboiler composition is the starting point
for the design.
From a mass balance point of view, only one solution at a given set of parameters, e.g.
vapor ﬂow, and purity requirements, exists which fulﬁlls the equations. Thus, only one
bottoms and distillate composition, and one set of ﬂow magnitudes will be true at a given
vapor ﬂow.
The question then arises: how should the mole fraction be deﬁned or calculated? From
46
==PAGE:56==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
the general mass balances given as eqs. (62) and (63), three equations can be written, one
for the overall (eq. (62)), and two equations, each using two of the the three components
(if all three are used, the system will be overdetermined from a mathematical point of
view). It makes the most sense using methanol and ethanol, since no constraints are given
for the water mole fractions, which would yield another unknown, as shown in eqs. (64)
to (66).
F = D + B
(64)
FxF(MeOH) = DxD(MeOH) + BxB(MeOH)
(65)
FxF(EOH) = DxD(EOH) + BxB(EOH) .
(66)
However, these three equations have four unknown variables, D, B, xD(MeOH), and
xB(EOH), which means the system of equations is underdetermined. This is the main
challenge of expanding the model towards multicomponent systems. In addition, if the
amount of components increases, the same challenge becomes increasingly complex, as
now more components have to be determined from some method that cannot be a black
box mass balance.
Due to the design method proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al., it is not possible to make a setup
that solves the full design simultaneously, thus another method needs to be proposed. It
seems clear from the proposed model that the easiest implementation (and perhaps the
only) when coding the simulation in a program such as MATLAB, is iteration. However,
the structure of such an iteration is not entirely trivial and the variables need to be
prioritized.
6.1
Proposed design procedure for a ternary system
The proposed iterative method is to change the bottoms mole fraction ﬁrst for the case
without side draw, then iterate over the bottoms mole fraction of ethanol, and then over
the distillate composition. It is important to point out that the calculations should iterate
continuously over the variables until a full conversion is found. The process is as follows:
1. Deﬁne xB(MeOH), xD(EOH), V , F, tvap, and M0
2. Guess xB(EOH) (and therefore also xB(W)), and xD(MeOH) (and therefore xD(W))
3. Calculate full column as shown in Figure 10
4. Calculate xB(EOH) from eq. (63) using ethanol as the relevant component
– If the calculated xB(EOH) is larger than the previous iteration, increase the
guess of xB(EOH) and go back to 3
47
==PAGE:57==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
– If the calculated xB(EOH) is smaller than the previous iteration, decrease the
guess of xB(EOH) and go back to 3
– If equal (within accuracy), move on
5. Find the actual time step in which the closest value to xD(EOH) exists, and perform
linear extrapolation of the value above and below to ﬁnd the composition at exactly
the deﬁned value of xD(EOH)
– If any values (usually the water mole fraction) is negative, change the guess of
xD to an average of the current guess and a composition without water (e.g.
[(1 −xD(EOH)), xD(EOH), 0]), and go back to 3
– If all values are positive, check if the values have converged, and if not change
xD to an average between the current values and the values of the previous
iteration and go back to 3
6. If xD has converged, simulation is complete
It is chosen to change xB(EOH) by 10 % per iteration, until the value becomes either
smaller or larger than the true value, e.g. if the true value is xB(EOH) = 3.2 · 10−4,
and the initial guess is xB(EOH)initial = 4 · 10−4, the value is lowered by 10 % until it
is below 3.2 · 10−4. When it becomes lower, the precision is increased by a factor of 10,
hence the changes are [10 %, 1 %, 0.1 %, ...]. For the distillate composition, it is chosen
to take the average value of the currently calculated result at xD(EOH) = 5 · 10−6, thus,
the methanol and water concentration are changed between the iterations.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 17.
48
==PAGE:58==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 17: Iterative procedure of the ternary system without a side draw.
It is now possible to perform simulations of the ternary system for the system of methanol-
ethanol-water with ethanol as a trace compound in the feed. For preliminary results,
a bottoms mole fraction of methanol is chosen as xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm [mol/mol],
using the same feed from Udugama et al., but calculated in mole fractions as xF =
[0.7225, 9.165 · 10−5, 0.2774], a vapor ﬂow of V = 10
F
tvap [kmol/min], the VFP duration
of tvap = 0.2 [min/cycle], a mole fraction of ethanol in the distillate of xD(EOH) = 5
ppm [mol/mol], and a molar hold-up in the reboiler of M0 = 1F [kmol] (the unit is not
the same as F, since it is a ﬁxed hold-up, but F acts as a scalar in the code), which is
arbitrarily chosen to show the code works. The initial guesses for the iteration are:
• xB(EOH)initial = 3 · 10−4
• xS = [0.65, 10−2, (1 −0.65 −10−2)]
• xD = [(1 −xD(EOH) −0), xD(EOH), 0]
49
==PAGE:59==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The convergence criteria for all the iterated variables are chosen at xB(EOH) · 10−9,
which is chosen from the knowledge of the true value of xB(EOH) after running some
trial simulations. This means the convergence will be in the 10−13 order of magnitude,
as the true value of xB(EOH) is in the 10−4 order of magnitude.
The results are shown in Figure 18. In addition, the feed ﬂow is the same in all simulations,
therefore will not be mentioned again.
Figure 18: Simulation without side draw with the following characteristics: xB(MeOH) = 10
ppm, xD(EOH) = 5 ppm, tvap = 0.2 [min/cycle], V = 10
F
tvap [kmol/min], reboiler molar
hold-up of M0 = 1 · xB · F, and a column pressure of 1 [atm]. The bottom mole fraction was
found at xB(EOH) ≈3.172 · 10−4 [mol/mol].
With the convergence pattern of xB(EOH) shown in Figure 19, the values become hard
to distinguish from eachother after iteration 6 or so, since the changes between iterations
become extremely small. The convergence of the methanol and water mole fractions in
the distillate are shown in Figure 20, and as expected, the values behave with opposite
eﬀect, as the ethanol mole fraction is ﬁxed at xD(EOH) = 5 · 10−6. For this case, the
value for xB(EOH) was still deemed as converged between any iterations of the distillate
composition. This occurs, since the true value of the water mole fraction in the distillate
is extremely close to 0.
50
==PAGE:60==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 19:
Convergence of xB(EOH) in Figure 18, showing the change for the ﬁrst two
iterations.
(a) xD(MeOH)
(b) xD(W)
Figure 20: Convergence of methanol and water in the distillate in the simulation that produced
Figure 18.
For any case, the ethanol is accumulating heavily in the bottom of the column, as expected
when a middle boiling compound is present in a ternary mixture. Figure 21 shows the
results for a lower vapor ﬂow of V = 2.3
F
tvap, where a much larger column of 69 stages is
51
==PAGE:61==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
needed.
Figure 21: Simulation without side draw with the following characteristics: xB(MeOH) = 10
ppm, xD(EOH) = 5 ppm, tvap = 0.2 [min/cycle], V = 2.3
F
tvap [kmol/min], column pressure of
1 [atm]. The bottom mole fraction was found at xB(EOH) ≈3.172 · 10−4 [mol/mol].
An accuracy, which is deﬁned as the diﬀerence of the solution of a given variable between
two adjacent iterations, was chosen as xB(EOH)·10−9, which ensures a high convergence
rate, but this value among other things will be investigated in the following section(s).
6.2
Veriﬁcation of the ternary code and variable testing
Initially, variable testing should be performed to ensure that any diﬀerence between
calculations are not due to a poor initiation of the code. M0 is the ﬁrst variable chosen
to consider, and a series of simulations were run with the following ﬁxed values:
• V = 2.3
F
tvap [kmol/min]
• tvap = 0.2 [min]
• xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm
• xB(EOH) = 317.22 ppm
52
==PAGE:62==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The value of xB(EOH) is ﬁxed close to the value which is known to be true from the
initial simulations. Since no side draw is present, the value for xB(EOH) will always be
the same to satisfy the mass balances for high purity systems, since xD(W) is extremely
small for all cases, as long as the other ﬁxed variables are the same. The reboiler hold-up,
M0, is then changed in a systematic way to see the behavior of the overall solution. Here,
NT denotes the total amount of stages, NF denotes the feed stage, and NS denotes the
stage where the peak of ethanol occurs. The results are shown in Table 3.
Table 3:
Reboiler molar hold-up testing with V = 2.3
F
tvap [kmol/min], tvap = 0.2 [min],
xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm, and xB(EOH) = 317.22 ppm. X denotes the number in the relevant
column for M0.
M0 = X xB F
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
25
50
500
NT
69
68
68
70
69
69
69
69
69
69
68
68
68
NF
16
17
17
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
NS
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
The results show that for small values of M0, the overall solution changes signiﬁcantly.
However, as M0 becomes very large, the solution becomes the same for all values of M0.
This is explained best visually, and as Figures 18 and 21 show, the reboiler essentially
acts as a stage, where the mole fractions change drastically over the VFP duration. This
is usually not desired, as the reboiler is there to make reﬂux possible, not to act as a tray.
For the solution of M0 = 25 xB F, the concentration proﬁle in the reboiler is almost the
same throughout the VFP, as shown in Figure 22. In the industry, it is not unusual to use
a reboiler molar hold-up 3-5 times the reﬂux ratio, therefore, for any future simulations,
the molar hold-up will be ﬁxed at M0 = 5 xB V , hence 5 times larger than the vapor
ﬂow.
53
==PAGE:63==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 22: Same initiation as Figure 21, but with M0 = 25 xB F, clearly depicting a close to
constant concentration in the reboiler throughout the VFP at a column pressure of 1 [atm].
To thoroughly compare the reboiler molar hold-ups, the reboiler hold-ups are plotted as
a function of time, where it is assumed that the liquid ﬂow duration is tliq = 0.05 [min]
compared to the vapor ﬂow duration of tvap = 0.2 [min]. Figure 23 shows the results,
and for the case of M0 = 1 · xB · F, the molar hold-up of ethanol varies from almost 0 to
≈1 [kmol], when the total hold-up varies from 1 to ≈3.5 [kmol], hence the ethanol mole
fraction is large. For the case of M0 = 25 · xB · F, the mole fractions of both ethanol and
methanol ﬂuctuates signiﬁcantly less.
(a) M0 = 1 · xB · F
(b) M0 = 25 · xB · F
Figure 23: Reboiler hold-up as a function of time over several cycles at 1 [atm]. Assumed to
have a liquid ﬂow duration of tliq = 0.05 [min]. The arrows in the legend indicate which axis
the curves are connected to.
54
==PAGE:64==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The next variable to test is the duration of the VFP. Since the vapor ﬂow is given in units
[kmol/min], it is strongly believed that tvap will have no inﬂuence, since the vapor ﬂow is
related to it from the deﬁnition of V = X
F
tvap, where X denotes some value chosen. Thus,
as tvap changes, so does V , therefore the change should cancel out. The results varying
tvap from 0.1 minutes to 1 minute are shown in table 4, and as expected the inﬂuence is
not apparent. However, the irrelevance is only for the purpose of producing concentration
proﬁles, as both the variables (tvap and V ) do matter when the column diameter varies, as
the hold-up height, and the vapor ﬂow in [m/s] changes, which changes the characteristics.
Albeit, the value chosen for any future simulations will remain as tvap = 0.2, as it is the
concentration proﬁles that are the focus of this thesis.
Table 4: Testing the full solution against diﬀerences in tvap.
No diﬀerences are found, as
expected. The variables used were: V = 2.3
F
tvap , M0 = 5 xb V , xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm, and
xB(EOH) = 317.22 ppm.
tvap [min]
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
NT
68
68
68
68
68
68
NF
16
16
16
16
16
16
NS
6
6
6
6
6
6
The methods chosen for veriﬁcation of the accuracy is ﬁxing the bottoms mole fraction
of ethanol at diﬀerent values close to the true value and keeping track of how the mass
balances behave as well as the overall solution: feed stage, total stages, and peak ethanol
stage. Here, the distillate composition is found as per usual, and is the only variable to
be iterated over. Hence, the distillate mole fraction will be diﬀerent depending on the
chosen value of xB(EOH), which is the idea behind the method: testing what happens
to the overall solution if the accuracy of one of the variables is too low.
Figure 24 shows the component mass balances (eq. (63)) set equal to 0, as the bottoms
mole fraction of ethanol changes. It is evident that as the value converges towards the
true value, the mass balances all converge towards 0 - this is supposed to happen if the
calculations are correct. The methanol mass balance will always equal 0 as this is the
component used to calculate B and D initially. In addition, the values on the y-axis
should be related to the magnitude of the feed stream and as this is deﬁned as unity, the
values act as percentages. The gray dotted lines indicate where the shift from 68 stages
occur. The exact values tested are shown in Table 13, in Appendix A: Tables.
55
==PAGE:65==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 24: Mass balance behavior of all components as the value of the ethanol mole fraction
deviates from the true value at a column pressure of 1 [atm]. For all tested cases the feed
location was at stage 16 and the peak ethanol concentration was at stage 6. It is evident that
a range occur where the error of the used value is indiﬀerent to the overall solution. The ﬁxed
values for the simulations were: V = 2.3
F
tvap [kmol/min], tvap = 0.2 [min], M0 = 5 xB V [kmol],
and xD(EOH) = 5 ppm.
To improve on the testing, the same test is repeated with a vapor ﬂow of V = 2.4
F
tvap, and
the results are shown in Figure 25. From both tests it is evident that if the the values
of xB(EOH) between two iterations are equal on the 3rd signiﬁcant digit, the overall
solution is unchanged. Hence, the accuracy used should at least be 10−3 smaller than
then value of xB(EOH). To keep the duration of the simulation at a respectable level,
the accuracy for all the iterated variables are set at xB(EOH)·10−3, which should ensure
a negligible deviance. Here, the value of xB(EOH) is used as a guideline, since this will
most likely be the smallest number in the simulation, but arguably the most important
number.
56
==PAGE:66==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 25: Mass balance behavior of all components as the value of the ethanol mole fraction
deviates from the true value at a column pressure of 1 [atm]. For all tested cases the feed
location was at stage 16 and the peak ethanol concentration was at stage 5. It is evident that
a range occur where the error of the used value is indiﬀerent to the overall solution. The ﬁxed
values for the simulations were: V = 2.4
F
tvap [kmol/min], tvap = 0.2 [min], M0 = 5 xB V [kmol],
and xD(EOH) = 5 ppm.
However, one key issue with this test is the fact that it is extremely dependant on the
point during the VFP where the desired purity is reached within the last stage. This is
discussed more in detail in Section 7.7, where the main point is the following: if the purity
requirement, which is used as the distillate composition, is reached during the ﬁrst or last
time steps in the solution of the last stage, then a diﬀerence in bottoms mole fraction
of ethanol will cause a stage shift almost immediately. This is visualized by comparing
Figures 24 and 25, where the former is very unsymmetrical, due to the purity requirement
being met closer to one of the edges of the time steps in the solution of the last stage,
whereas the solution is found closer to the middle in the latter.
6.3
Conclusion on the method for ternary systems without
a side draw
The iterative method proposed in this section works well for ternary systems, and is vital
for the continued development of increased column complexity, such as adding a side
draw. The proposed iterative method is inﬁnitely scalable for three components in terms
of adding more product ﬂows or feed ﬂows. The main issue with the solution for ternary
systems is the duration of the simulation caused by the high precision required, but it
was possible to produce solutions where all the mass balances were fulﬁlled.
57
==PAGE:67==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
However, the proposed iterative method requires for there to only be two unknown com-
ponents for any given multicomponent system, which makes it less applicable for systems
with more than three components. Albeit the method lacks proﬁciency in such systems, it
is extremely applicable for ternary systems, and is used to further develop the complexity
of the cyclic column by adding a side draw in the follow section.
58
==PAGE:68==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
7
Side Draw Implementation
Further expansion of the ternary model to include a side draw is an important develop-
ment in the theoretical application of the cyclic distillation. The only related development
found in the literature is work proposed by Rasmussen et al. [38], which extends the gen-
eral model proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al. to include variable vapor ﬂow, energy balances, and
the possibility for side draws. However, what is not addressed in the article is how to
consider any of the ﬂow compositions and magnitudes beyond the simple method initially
proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al.
This work develops the general method of how to consider all compositions and ﬂow
magnitudes that has never been addressed, which leaves room to further implement the
proposed method with a more complex variation of the P˘atrut¸ et al. model, such as the
one proposed by Rasmussen et al.
7.1
Key design considerations prior to model development
Prior to considering the technical aspect of the system, a few design aspects have to be
reviewed. The immediate questions that arise are:
• Location of the side draw - what is the logical approach and what is the alternative?
• Mole fraction of ethanol in the bottoms - how should this be chosen, and is it a
degree of freedom?
• Feed location precision - is mixing of the liquids at the feed stage any issue?
• Magnitude of the side draw - is this a degree of freedom or will it be ﬁxated based
on the mass balances?
Location of the side draw
The logical placement is at the peak of ethanol concentration [24]. As has been shown,
a signiﬁcant peak occurs during the separation as ethanol accumulates, but the question
then becomes where exactly, and during which period, should the side draw be placed.
It is, in principle, possible to either place it as a vapor side draw during the VFP or a
liquid side draw during the LFP. It seems obvious that having a vapor ﬂow side draw
would be complicated, both in terms of the modelling as well as the practical solution
during operation. Therefore it is chosen to have the side draw as a liquid side draw,
which means a new mass balance has to be incorporated during the LFP of the side draw
stage. On top of this, it makes the most sense locating the stage where ethanol peaks
in terms of mole fraction at the beginning of the LFP (i.e. at the end of the VFP),
59
==PAGE:69==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
since this is the concentration at which the extraction occurs. If the side draw would be
placed elsewhere, the methanol recovery would be directly impacted. If the side draw is
moved up in the column, more methanol would be present in the stream, hence a lower
overall recovery would occur. Since the ethanol concentration decreases when choosing
another stage compared to the peak of ethanol, the side draw magnitude would have to
be increased as well. This further decreases the overall recovery. For the opposite case
where the side draw is lowered, the magnitude would also have to be increased, but the
amount of methanol in the stream signiﬁcantly decreases, thus possibly making it a better
choice. However, the optimization is not of importance for the purpose of this thesis, but
it is important to mention the possible outcomes of certain changes.
Mole fraction of ethanol in the bottoms
Deciding how to split the bottoms mole fractions is a pretty signiﬁcant choice. There is
nearly no research published on this topic in terms of cyclic distillation, and since it is
crucial to the solution, it is equally crucial to consider thoroughly.
The chosen method for this thesis is to consider it a degree of freedom that is ﬁtted to
the speciﬁed values. It is expected that at inﬁnite dilution, the ethanol concentration is
signiﬁcantly lower than the methanol concentration, which is due to further repulsion of
the larger hydrocarbon from the polar water molecules [39], which is conﬁrmed from the
results presented later. This leaves the possibility of ﬁxating the side draw magnitude
and calculating the bottoms mole fraction of ethanol under the constraint to satisfy the
mass balances. Comparing to how an industrial column is run, the magnitudes of the feed
stream, side draw stream, and vapor ﬂow are all ﬂows that are chosen in a real plant,
thus it seems logical to structure the simulation in a similar manner. Hence, the side
draw magnitude will be ﬁxed at a chosen value, similar to the vapor and feed ﬂows.
Another choice is to use the numbers from a conventional distillation. If a distillation
with a side draw of the same ternary system occurs, then some ratio of methanol/ethanol
will occur in the bottoms during the very diluted bottoms streams. Another choice is to
apply this ratio and choose methanol as a requirement, from an environmental point of
view or similar, and apply the ratio to ﬁnd how much ethanol would be present. However,
an issue using this method is that this removes a degree of freedom, which means another
ﬁxed variable has to be changed to a degree of freedom. This would most likely be the
side draw magnitude, and as will be explained, this is not ideal. In addition, as will be
shown during simulation of a conventional column with a side draw, the ethanol mole
fractions in the bottoms are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the two designs, which summarizes
why the ﬁrst method is preferred.
Feed location precision
The feed location is found by locating the stage at which the methanol concentration
exceeds the concentration in the feed stream, then placing the feed stream on the above
60
==PAGE:70==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
stage exactly as P˘atrut¸ et al. suggested. This solution completely negates considering
the concentrations of the other two components at that stage. However, as for the case
considered, methanol is the majority of the feed stream (roughly 72 % [mol/mol]), the
degree of possible mixing is rather small, unless there is a signiﬁcant amount of ethanol
present, which is most likely not the case, due to the side draw implementation. From
Figure 18 it is clear that without the side draw, a signiﬁcant concentration diﬀerence
occurs for water at the feed stage, but before any vast considerations should go into this
idea, the results of the side draw implementation needs to be investigated, to evaluate if
it is an issue or if the mixing is negligible. However, if it was of interest to use a very low
side draw magnitude, the mixing on the feed stage would increase, as the accumulation
of ethanol increases. A possible short-cut method would be to consider minimizing the
entropy of mixing on the feed tray. This would be possible by minimizing eq. (67).
min = ∆Smix(feed stream + feed tray)−∆Smix(feed stream)−∆Smix(feed tray) , (67)
where each of the entropies are given as eq. (68)
∆Smix = −nR
Ncomp
X
i=1
(xi · ln(xi)) .
(68)
However, this is not deemed necessary for the purpose of this thesis, but would be an
idea, if optimization was of interest.
Additionally, Udugama et al. suggested optimizing the feed stage location by minimizing
the reboiler duty, which seems logical and is entirely possible for this design as well, but
it requires time intensive simulations, which Udugama et al. did manually through the
use of Aspen-HYSIS, hence it will not be pursued in this thesis.
Magnitude of the side draw
Udugama et al. proposed using between 2 and 4 tonne/hr ﬂow (roughly equivalent to
1.4 - 2.8 % on a mole basis), and argued that less than 2 tonne/hr would cause other
separation issues, and more than 4 tonne/hr would extract too much water, which makes
the recycle stream of the side draw back to the reformer contain too much water, lowering
the carbon recycling. As will be discussed later, to implement this idea, the structure
of the code is written in an iterative way, where parameters which cannot be speciﬁed
are found. The solution makes it a dynamic simulation, where the side draw magnitude
is ﬁxed, and the mole fraction of ethanol in the bottoms product is one of the iterated
variables. Structuring the simulation this way, makes the comparison to the work of
Udugama et al. much easier. However, the magnitude limitations will diﬀer slightly for
the cyclic design, since the VLE is diﬀerent.
61
==PAGE:71==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
7.2
Mass balances for the side draw
As discussed, it is simpler to implement the side draw in the LFP, and the placement will
be the stage with the largest mole fraction at the end of the VFP.
In order to implement a side draw, a few modiﬁcations to the black box mass balances
have to be made. The relevant ones to consider are eqs. (62) and (63), since these are
implemented in the code. Furthermore, a mass balance over the side draw needs to be
considered as well, which will be similar to eq. (24), thus altering the ICs for the next
calculations, as done with the feed and reboiler. The overall mass balances will be given
as eq. (69):
F = D + B + S .
(69)
And the equivalent of eq. (63) is given as eq. (70):
Fxf = DxD + BxB + SxS .
(70)
In order for this mass balance to be satisﬁed, S and xS has to be determined, which is
far from trivial to accomplish. Furthermore, as S is chosen as a variable to ﬁxate, then
xB(E) has to be determined, since it removes a degree of freedom to ﬁxate a variable,
and xB(EOH) is the clear cut choice for a degree of freedom. For the simple solution
not including the side draw, it was possible to determine D and B from solving the
equations symbolic in MATLAB, which was possible since the bottoms and distillate
composition were speciﬁed. But now, as the mole fraction of the side draw is no longer
speciﬁed (it changes with changing variables), a solution has to be produced that is able
to handle these uncertainties. It is also not possible to produce three equations with
three unknowns using two components (e.g. FxF(1) = DxD(1) + BxB(1) + SxS(1) and
FxF(2) = DxD(2)+...), since it adds unknowns in terms of xS(i), similarly to how it was
not possible for the ternary system without a side draw. This is the main reason behind
choosing an iterative procedure, which is thoroughly explained below.
Implementing the mass balance for the side draw in a similar fashion as eqs. (50) and (53),
the mass balance for the side draw is given as eq. (71):
M (V )
NS,j = M (L)
NS+1,j + SxS,j .
(71)
It is still key to realize that the code written in this thesis uses opposite nomenclature
in terms of numbering the stages, as NS + 1 means the stage below, i.e. NS −1 in the
code (but not in the visualizations produced).
7.3
Structure and explanation of the simulation
Prior to explaining the code behind the simulation in detail, it is important to consider
the overall structure. A set of variables needs to be evaluated and split into two groups:
62
==PAGE:72==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
variables to be ﬁxed during the simulation; and variables to be changed during the simu-
lation. As shown in the overall mass balance (eq. (70)), when a side draw is introduced,
additional variables, S and xS, have to be determined.
However, as discussed during magnitude of the side draw, S will be speciﬁed and ﬁxed in
order to compare with Udugama et al. From this, the values to be determined are the
composition of the side draw stream, xS, the mole fraction of ethanol in the bottoms,
xB(EOH), and the distillate composition, xD (therefore also xB(W) and xD(W)). The
following variables are predetermined: the vapor ﬂow rate, V , the feed composition, xF,
the mole fraction of methanol in the bottoms stream, xB(MeOH), the duration of the
VFP, tvap, the reboiler molar hold-up, M0, and, as explained previously, the magnitude of
the feed stream is be ﬁxed at 1, making the results percentages, albeit the code is setup
to make it possible to simulate with a chosen feed ﬂow diﬀerent from 1.
A ﬂow chart of the structure of the simulation is presented in Figure 26. Calculations
are done up to a point that makes sense for the three changing variables, e.g. up to
the side draw when calculating xS. The variables are changed, and the calculations are
repeated until convergence occurs. When the second variable has converged using the
same method, the iterations start over using the new, converged values as initial guesses, until
all the variables have converged. Thus, every time a variable is changed, the iteration
starts over and ﬁnds a new value for xS, then xB(EOH) etc. This is continued until a full
convergence of all the three variables has been reached. It is a fully iterative procedure,
which relies on the intermediate calculations to somehow be nearer to the actual result
compared to the initial guesses. Hence, it is quite important that the initial guesses are
not poorly chosen.
When creating a simulation in such a manner, it is of utmost importance to consider
possible limitations as well as possible errors that could occur.
The main structure
of the simulation is written with a variable amount of components, but some of the
limits (i.e. when the simulation should consider a variable to have converged), unique
solutions to three components have been implemented, using the most volatile component
as component 1. Furthermore, for a ternary system it is viable to calculate the mass
balances during each iteration using one component in the component mass balance,
and calculating the mole fraction of the bottoms with another component mass balance.
This ensures a full convergence of the mass balances as shown in Figures 24 and 25.
This procedure would not be replicable for systems with more than three components,
hence another idea needs to be developed. It is implemented by using methanol as the
component when calculating the mass balances, but using ethanol in the mass balance
when checking if the system has converged.
The main limitation is the speed of calculation due to the iterative nature. This primarily
comes in play when the vapor ﬂow is low, as when the total amount of stages increases,
63
==PAGE:73==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
so does the required calculations. The time aspect is of major importance during most
of the preliminary testing, but not as important when the ﬁnal product is displayed, as
running a simulation yielding results within a longer time frame is no problem. For the
purpose of the thesis the code works well, and it is irrelevant if the code is not written
to be fully time eﬃcient, as this is beyond the scope of this thesis.
When trying to ﬁnd the proper distillate composition, the corresponding mole fractions of
methanol and water should be found exactly at the chosen requirement of ethanol in the
distillate (for the preliminary testing: 5 ppm [mol/mol]). This is not possible directly from
the results, as the computation is discrete, therefore it is practically impossible for the
system to continuously calculate a distillate mole fraction of exactly 5 ppm at some point
during the last tray. The system checks if the mole fraction of ethanol in the distillate
has been met at some point during the VFP, and to circumvent this issue, the time point
during the backwards integration that has the mole fraction of ethanol as the closest value
compared to the chosen value (of 5 ppm) is located. Then, the point above and below
(to ensure that there will be at least one point above 5 ppm and one point below) are
extracted and a linear interpolation of these three points are found for both methanol and
water, then calculating the mole fractions of these at exactly xD(EOH) = 5 ppm. The
system checks if the value for water is negative, and if so, values for methanol and water
are chosen from the previous solution, but adding a little more methanol and removing
some water to get closer to the proper values. The structure is given in Figure 26.
The code will now be explained thoroughly.
64
==PAGE:74==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 26: Structure of the simulation, where the black boxes are initialization, where the guess of xS is all three components.
65
==PAGE:75==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The main structure of the simulation is exactly the same as previously and is therefore
not explained in detail. What is explained is the addition to produce a simulation. Due
to the iterative nature, each variable that is changed is done by utilizing loops. Since the
system needs to fully converge, all of the variables looped over are contained within loops
of the next variable.
As shown in Figure 26, the ﬁrst variable to be iterated over is the side draw mole fraction.
This is implemented by calculating stages until the peak of ethanol is reached, which
is found by comparing the current stage solution to the previous. If the value at the
beginning of the VFP of ethanol is smaller than the solution of the previous stage, the peak
is at the previous stage. Hence, the liquid mole fractions are compared from stage to stage
to locate the peak. If the side draw is be placed during the VFP, this procedure should
be changed. The last stage calculated, which is the stage after the peak, is the side draw
stage. To understand why this is the case, it is important to fully understand the dynamic
of the solution proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al. - as the solution is a backwards integration, the
peak of ethanol (liquid composition) found, will be located at the beginning of a VFP (i.e.
at the end of a LFP), thus the liquid at this point has just moved from the stage above to
the current stage. Therefore, the withdrawal occurs during the LFP at the stage above
the peak. Hence, the mole fraction used in eq. (71) is the mole fraction at the beginning
of the VFP of the stage below the side draw stage (the stage of the peak), similar to
how the feed and reboiler equations are introduced as ICs for the next stage. The found
mole fraction then replaces the previous guess of xS, the calculation then restarts with
the new value, and the system calculates up to the side draw once more, and extracts a
new xS value etc. Once the value for xS has converged, the next variable is looped over.
Lastly, it is important to mention that during each of the iterations, the mass balances
are calculated to recalculate the bottoms and distillate magnitudes.
The next variable is the bottoms mole fraction of ethanol, xB(EOH). It is done by using
a vector called changematrix; essentially a vector used to introduce increased precision.
When the value for xS has converged, the required value of xB(EOH) is calculated from
the mass balance. However, here it is not possible to simply use this value as a tool to
reach convergence, as this value is most often really far from the actual value until the
true value is almost reached. Hence, the method used is to check if the calculated value
is smaller or larger than the current value, and then change the guess accordingly. For
all the simulations produced in this chapter, the initiation is given as follows, and only
changes to these will be mentioned:
• xB(MeOH) = 10 · 10−6
• xD(EOH) = 5 · 10−6
• S = 0.01 · F
66
==PAGE:76==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
• V = 6
F
tvap
• P = 1 [atm]
And the initial guesses are:
• xS = [0.65, 10−2, (1 −0.65 −10−2)]
• xB(EOH) = 5 · 10−11
• xD = [(1 −xD(EOH), xD(EOH), 0]
With a convergence criteria of xB(EOH) · 10−3, which makes the convergence criteria in
10−14 order of magnitude. A lot of signiﬁcant digits are required for the calculations, but
for the sake of showing the example, 6 signiﬁcant digits are enough to show the trend:
1.0 Using initial guess of xB(EOH) = 5 · 10−6
1.1 xS changed to [0.632910, 0.00868658, 0.358404]
...
1.5 xS changed to [0.632947, 0.00868666, 0.358367] and has now converged
2.0 xB(EOH) increased by 10 % to xB(EOH) = 5.5 · 10−6
2.1 xS changed to [0.632105, 0.00951379, 0.358381]
...
2.4 xS changed to [0.632107, 0.00951380, 0.358379] and has now converged
3.0 xB(EOH) decreased by 1 % to xB(EOH) = 5.445 · 10−11
Here, every time xS is changed, the system is calculated up to the side draw again,
as Figure 26 indicate.
This would continue until xB(EOH) also converts, where the
remaining column is then calculated, which summarizes the ﬁrst few iterations of the
side draw and bottoms mole fraction of ethanol.
An implementation is incorporated that checks if the last calculation had the same result
(in terms of being smaller or larger than the calculated) as the previous iteration. This
is implemented using the decinc vector in the code, which essentially keeps track of
every time xB(EOH) is either decreased or increased by adding a 0 or 1 to the vector,
respectively. Every time the calculated value moves past the guessed value (goes from
being larger to being smaller or vice versa), the precision is increased when changing
xB(EOH) for the next iteration. This ensures that the next iteration will become closer
67
==PAGE:77==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
to the true value. As the value has converged within accuracy, xS is iterated over again.
Here, the initial guess of xS is the value found from the previous solution, as a tool to
increase the speed of the simulation, compared to using the same initial guess every time
the value is iterated over again.
Once both xS and xB(EOH) has converged, the distillate composition is changed similarly
to how xS was changed. One of the major challenges occur when the distillate composition
needs to be found. When the mass balances are not fulﬁlled, it is entirely possible for
the molar hold-ups to become negative on the last tray(s), which is not feasible. Hence,
the code needs to be be capable of handling this error. When xS was found, the iteration
occurred as a normal iteration, where the found value was chosen as the guess for the
next iteration, but similar to xB(EOH), the values used for the next iteration are not
directly taken from the calculation, but rather changed depending on the result. If any
mole fractions are negative due to unsatisﬁed mass balances, xD changes based on the
previous xD by lowering the water mole fraction. If the values are positive, the value
chosen for the next iteration is an average of the calculated and the previous value, which
was found to increase the duration of the simulation. The call script is shown in Appendix
B: Matlab code (Section 12.6).
To illustrate the iterative behavior, the example from above is continued, and the results
are shown in Figure 27. The convergence of xB(EOH) only required two iterations of
xD, despite xD not having fully converged yet, as Figure 28 show. Furthermore, between
each iteration of xB(EOH) the side draw composition is fully iterated over, but this is
not shown as it becomes diﬃcult to visualize properly.
Figure 27: Continued example from above. Iterations required of xB(EOH). The dashed
lines and new colors indicate changes of xD, thus the value of xB(EOH) converges, and the full
column is calculated.
68
==PAGE:78==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) xD(MeOH)
(b) xD(W)
Figure 28: Iterative procedure of xD. Similar results as produced in Figure 20 in terms of the
behavior.
In addition, for low vapor ﬂow simulations when the exact, within accuracy, compositions
has been found for the bottoms and side draw mole fractions, the water hold-up during the
last tray(s) becomes negative, but when reducing the bottoms mole fraction of ethanol by
approximately 0.5 % (e.g. from 5.30·10−11 to 5.27·10−11) the hold-ups for all components
makes sense on all trays.
This issue will be thoroughly investigated, as this is perhaps the main challenge to com-
pleting the development of a method with fewer assumptions to describe ternary systems
in a cyclic setup. Furthermore, it is fundamental to realize that for each change in any of
the outer loops (xB(EOH) or xD), the full iteration of the inner loop(s) occurs again. Thus,
every time the distillate composition is changed, xS and xB(EOH) will be calculated
again as described. Thus, for each variable being iterated over, the solution becomes
signiﬁcantly slower.
7.4
Current limitations
The main challenge of the coding process and the theoretical application, is the mentioned
issue with the mass balances. The simulation is always initiated using a guess of xD =
[(1 −xD(EOH)), xD(EOH), 0], as any solution found ﬁnds a value larger than 0 for
the water composition in the distillate, since the molar hold-ups will never be less than
0. However, using this or any other distillate composition as an initial guess, the molar
hold-up (often of water) becomes negative for low vapor ﬂows, even after the bottoms-
and side draw composition have converged. The behavior of the mole fractions of the
other two components are interfered with when this happens, as the sum is still equal to
1, even with the negative mole fraction of water. This is of course not a viable solution.
This will be thoroughly investigated in the section 7.7.
69
==PAGE:79==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
7.5
Solver precision and implications
A thorough investigation of the issue will occur prior to showing the results of the simu-
lation. The investigation will be structured as follows:
• Figure out if the mass balances makes more sense if a more exact value is found for
xB(EOH) where the hold-up of water is always positive.
• Incorporate more time steps in the solution to verify that the overall solution is not
limited by the automatically chosen value.
• Increase the feed to have molar hold-ups much further from 0.
• Set the molar hold-up of water equal to 0 when it is suﬃciently small.
• Use other ODE solvers.
Exact value
The value of xB(EOH) has been changed manually, where each simulation comes closer
to the exact value that provides a solution with M > 0 on all stages. Figure 29 shows
that the value does not come close to the order of magnitude of 10−14. In addition, if a
linear interpolation is made of the data points and solving for this equation to be equal
to 0, the value is equal to the value found prior to reducing the ethanol concentration to
get a meaningful solution. Hence, it is equal to the value that fulﬁlls the mass balances
prior to changing the distillate composition. This method proved to be irrelevant, as this
did not solve the issue at hand.
Figure 29: Mass balance behavior as the solution comes closer to a mole fraction of xB(EOH)
where negative molar hold-ups of water occur during the last tray(s). Using a vapor ﬂow of
V = 2.3 F/tvap [kmol/min].
70
==PAGE:80==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The preliminary conclusion is that the mass balance will be approximately 0 within 10−7
order of magnitude no matter how precise the solution becomes, if a physically meaningful
solution is found.
Higher precision when solving the ODE’s
Several diﬀerent vapor ﬂows are chosen to produce simulations with a varying amount
of time steps when solving the ODE’s. Table 5 shows the results when letting MATLAB
describe the amount of time steps versus a larger amount. The ﬁnal solution is only
compared with the meaningful solutions which reveals how big a diﬀerence it makes to
further increase precision. The table should be read as a percentage diﬀerence in water
mole fraction in the distillate compared to the value simulated with the most time steps.
For the smaller vapor ﬂows the simulation was not run up to 100.000 time steps, as the
deviation was negligible. In addition, it is clear that the values for the smaller vapor ﬂows
are extremely small, therefore it is expected to see larger percentage deviations compared
to the larger vapor ﬂows. Lastly, for all the meaningful simulations, the overall solution
was the same.
Table 5: Index numbers of the water mole fraction in the distillate where the simulation run
with the most time steps is chosen as index 100. The ﬁrst column with approximately 50 steps
is chosen by MATLAB, the rest are speciﬁed at the given numbers. Y denotes the number given
in the column.
Amount of time steps
V = Y · F/tvap
≈50
100
500
1000
5000
10000
50000
100000
6
647.52
100.00
100.00
100.00
1.32E-08
-
-
-
4.5
122.80
100.00
100.00
100.00
3.60E-09
-
-
-
3
<0
100.03
100.07
100.31
100.14
2.30E-11
-
-
2.5
<0
90.32
88.17
<0
120.43
95.70
69.89
9.3E-14
2.2
<0
173.44
<0
100.00
170.31
135.94
104.69
6.4E-14
It is evident that as the amount of stages increase, the precision needs to increase along
side it to achieve a meaningful solution. This seems reasonable, as a small error during the
ﬁrst stages causes issues for larger columns, as the error has more stages to accumulate.
For the smaller vapor ﬂows, some amount of time steps ﬁnds a solution, whereas a larger
amount of time steps did not (e.g. 1000 at V = 2.5 F/tvap compared to 100 and 500). This
indicates the relevance to further increase the amount, as the solution should always be
replicable. Furthermore, when solving the system with: xD(EOH) = 5 ppm [mol/mol],
xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm [mol/mol], S = 0.01·F, and the remaining variables as concluded
previously, using a vapor ﬂow of V = 2.05
F
tvap, the solution produced was 142 stages, but
required more than 50000 time steps compared to MATLAB’s chosen of roughly 50.
71
==PAGE:81==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
It is concluded that, generally, 10.000 time steps would produce meaningful results for a
reasonable sized column, but if issues appear for larger columns (smaller vapor ﬂows), a
larger amount of time steps should simply be applied to ﬁnd a meaningful solution.
Increasing magnitude of the feed stream
So far the magnitude of the feed stream was ﬁxed at 1, making all the results act as
percentages. However, the negative side of this, is that the molar hold-ups (of water
primarily) comes really close to 0 on the last stages. Due to the precision issues when
the values become extremely small, it is investigated if the feed magnitude plays a role.
Hence, the feed magnitude is increased and tested.
Prior to testing, it is important to consider the values currently produced. For the lowest
vapor ﬂow of V = 2.05
F
tvap, the water mole fraction was roughly 10−14, hence this is
what needs to be upped signiﬁcantly.
Feed magnitudes of F = 105, F = 1010, and
F = 1020 are investigated further. Evidently, for some solutions, it had an impact, but
for other solutions, it had none, and no clear results presented itself using any of these
feed magnitudes. Preliminary testing was performed and the results were not acceptable
to move towards more thorough investigation. During the simulations using F = 1020,
the water mole fraction was roughly equal to 106, and then suddenly became negative in a
similar manner as previous solutions. Thus, it can be concluded that the lack of precision
causes the negative molar hold-up, as the solution from the previous stage when solving
eq. (20) has issues. This is possibly explained by the fact that the water concentration
barely changes from stage to stage during the top of the column, but ethanol and methanol
does. Perhaps the mole fraction changes just enough for the vapor mole fraction of the
previous stage to be larger than the mole fraction at the current stage, which would occur
from imprecise calculations.
Moving forward, a feed magnitude of F = 1, using a minimum of 104 time steps are still
used.
Setting the water molar hold-up equal to 0
Another option is to simply set the water molar hold-up equal to 0 when it is suﬃciently
small.
If the water amount is less than ppb when the ethanol has yet to reach the
requirement of 5 ppm, it is estimated that the molar hold-up can be set as 0, and the
overall solution would stay the same. This limit only works when the requirement of
ethanol in the distillate is much larger, e.g. in ppm range.
It is investigated by running simulations with the initiation used in Figure 32, but using
V = [2.05, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.75, 3, 4.5, 6] F
tvap, comparing the results in several
diﬀerent manners. Initially, the overall solution is compared (i.e. total stages, feed stage,
and side draw stage), and then the methanol loss is compared. Clearly, the distillate
compositions are slightly diﬀerent, as it is deﬁned as 0 if the solution becomes suﬃciently
72
==PAGE:82==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
small. From manually going through all the solutions, it was determined that the solution
was precise to at least 10−11 for all simulations using 104 time steps. It is estimated that
for values below 1 ppb, the diﬀerence in the results would be negligible compared to
setting the water hold-up equal to 0 below this threshold. It is implemented by checking
after each stage if the water molar hold-up has gone below 10−9, and if so change the
IC for the next stage to have 0 water instead of whatever value it reached below 10−9.
Furthermore, for the mass balance model, another equation was added: if the stage where
the water mole fraction limit has been reached, eq. (20) changes to be equal to 0 for all
the diﬀerential equations calculating the change in water hold-up, thus no change occurs
as a function of time, and all the subsequent values will be equal to 0.
The overall results were the same and the diﬀerence in methanol loss was 0.00 % for all
cases, showing a clear trend of no diﬀerence for any of the column sizes. Therefore, for
any future solutions it is implemented to set the water hold-up/mole fraction equal to 0
when it accounts for less than 10−9 percent of the liquid solution. This was implemented
to improve time as well as reduce unnecessary complexity for later developments in this
thesis.
Using this method instead of the regular method reduced the time of simulation signiﬁ-
cantly, as Table 6 shows.
Table 6: Duration of the simulation using a minimum of 104 time steps. 1) denoting the
regular solution, and 2) denoting the solution proposed setting the water hold up equal to 0
below ppb values. All solutions in the new method used 104 time steps.
V = Y·F/tvap
2.05
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.75
3
4.5
6
Time [min], 1)
251
51
25
20
20
17
16
15
14
12
Time [min], 2)
38
20
10
9
7
6
5
5
5
8
This simpliﬁcation is applied to any future simulations, except the remaining tests in this
section.
Using other ODE solvers
Several diﬀerent ODE solvers were used, and all the results were worse than using ode45
in MATLAB. From the ODE explanations provided by MATLAB, ode15s and ode113
were deemed as reasonable choices other than ode45. Initially, ode15s was tried, but
it severely increased the duration of the simulation, which is not acceptable, since the
simulations are already slow. Then, ode113 was implemented, and this simply produced
worse results in terms of precision (i.e. it needed higher time steps) and was also slower.
Thus, ode45 is kept as the ODE solver of choice.
73
==PAGE:83==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
To conclude on the tests, a feed magnitude of F = 1 [kmol/cycle], and 104 time steps
will be implemented for any future simulations, as well as forcing the water mole fraction
equal to 0 when it is below ppb. However, forcing the water mole fraction to be equal
to 0 is only done to decrease the duration of the simulation, and if the method would
be used for an actual design, this is ill-advised. Albeit, as it was shown to not make a
diﬀerence in terms of the overall solution, it is acceptable for the purpose of this thesis.
7.6
Starting values of unknown variables
The simulation structure has been shown, but a clariﬁcation of the ICs used to initiate
the ﬁrst iteration has yet to be described. The chosen values have signiﬁcant inﬂuence
- not on the ﬁnal solution, but on the ability to run the simulation. The code relies on
being able to ﬁnd partial solutions, and if an error occurs, the simulation breaks down.
If the initial guesses are far oﬀthe true value, it is possible that the overall solution
initially produced does not make sense, and the simulation is unable to complete. In
addition, if mole fractions were to be deﬁned in a manner that does not make physical
sense, e.g. summarizing to more than 1, the simulation would also run into issues. This is
pretty easily handled by considering the ICs prior to simulation. For all the simulations
containing a side draw the initial guesses are as shown in the example previously:
• xB(EOH) = 5 · 10−11
• xS = [0.65, 10 · 10−3, (1 −0.65 −10 · 10−3)]
• xD(W) = 0
These guesses are simply random guesses, and any similar values would work for most
simulations. However, it is much more time eﬃcient to estimate the bottoms mole fraction
close to the true value, since the simulation is set up to change the value by a maximum
of 10 % per iteration.
7.7
Distillate composition and how to handle it
In the design method proposed by P˘atrut¸ et al., the last tray is found by adding trays
after the feed location until the distillate composition is found at some point during the
VFP. However, for the true mass balances, the distillate composition is found as the last
value of the backwards integration on the last tray. It comes from the molar hold-up at
the beginning of the VFP, equivalent to the end of the LFP, which infers that the molar
hold-up composition at that value is the molar hold-up that has been reﬂuxed from the
condenser and thus is the composition of the distillate.
74
==PAGE:84==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The idea behind the design is that some column size follows from ﬁxing the vapor ﬂow
and the purity requirements and from assuming that the purity requirement is the distil-
late composition. However, due to the model design mentioned above, the ethanol mole
fraction will most often be lower than the purity requirement, thus making this assump-
tion questionable. It is estimated that by lowering the vapor ﬂow slightly, the solution
will eventually be found as the last value of the molar hold-up during the VFP, which is
equal to the actual distillate composition, and then the true solution is found. This will
now be investigated.
To conduct this investigation, some random solution of a reasonably sized column is
simulated and the vapor ﬂow is changed until the last value of the backwards integration
is equal to the ﬁrst value that is below the speciﬁed ethanol requirement. This is done
manually, and Figure 30 shows the results. Full simulations are run, and each marker
shows the solution to a full simulation using the corresponding vapor ﬂow.
Figure 30 illustrates that, as the vapor ﬂow is changed towards the true value, the speciﬁed
distillate composition is found closer and closer to the beginning of the VFP. Hence, at
some vapor ﬂow, the exact beginning of the VFP will have precisely the desired distillate
composition, which is the purity requirement.
When the purity requirement is reached during the VFP (i.e. not at the beginning of the
VFP), the actual distillate composition is lower than the purity requirement, which is
indicated by the VFP continuing for some time. The conclusion is, that using the speciﬁed
purity requirements as the distillate composition, regardless of when the requirement is
met during the VFP, will produce a pseudo-true solution, which is close to the true
solution for large columns. The vapor ﬂow can be manipulated slightly and the overall
solution would be the same, but the true solution would have slightly diﬀerent mole
fractions of xS and xB, to ensure the mass balances are satisﬁed. For large vapor ﬂows,
this has a greater inﬂuence, but as the main comparison is going to be at approximately
90 stages, it does not matter. If extreme precision is desired, the vapor ﬂow can be either
manually manipulated or iterated over.
The methanol loss will be discussed later, but is also brieﬂy shown here to establish
that the diﬀerences are negligible. Figure 31 shows the methanol loss for the solutions
produced at 48 stages with diﬀerent vapor ﬂows, all using the same ﬁxed xD value of
the speciﬁed requirement. Thus, it is concluded that any solution found using the ﬁxed
distillate composition would be an acceptable solution to use for the analysis of the
column design.
75
==PAGE:85==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 30: Time during the VFP where the desired distillate composition is reached as a
function of vapor ﬂow. As the vapor ﬂow changes, the distillate composition is found closer and
closer to the beginning of the VFP.
Figure 31: Vapor ﬂow as a function of methanol loss, showing negligible diﬀerence in the loss
for the other solutions of NT = 48.
76
==PAGE:86==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
7.8
Results of the simulation
When simulating the ternary system with a feasible side draw magnitude for use in the
industry, it is evident that the accumulation of ethanol is vastly diﬀerent in the system
compared to the ternary system without a side draw. The mass balances have to be
fulﬁlled, thus the fraction of ethanol in the bottoms will decrease signiﬁcantly, which
changes the VLE signiﬁcantly. For a vapor ﬂow of 6
F
tvap, using requirements of 10 ppm
methanol in the bottoms, and 5 ppm ethanol in the distillate, Figure 32 is produced.
Here, the peak of ethanol is lower than 1 % [mol/mol], compared to around 63 % in
the ternary system without a side draw. Furthermore, the mixing at the feed stage is
signiﬁcantly reduced, as the VLE is eﬀectively similar to a pure methanol/water system
in terms of mole fractions.
Furthermore, for all the results shown in this chapter, the purity requirements are:
xB(MeOH) = 10 ppm, and xD(EOH) = 5 ppm.
Figure 32: V = 6
F
tvap , resulting in a mole fraction of ethanol in the bottoms as xB(EOH) =
5.07 · 10−11 at a column pressure of 1 [atm].
If the vapor ﬂow is increased to V = 3
F
tvap, and V = 2.1
F
tvap respectively, the produced
simulations are shown in Figure 33. As the vapor ﬂow decreases, the number of required
stages to fulﬁll the requirements increases, but the location of the side draw and feed
77
==PAGE:87==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
stage are always the same. Thus, the diﬀerence in separation occurs when ethanol is
diluted in methanol.
(a) V = 3
F
tvap [kmol/min]
(b) V = 2.1
F
tvap [kmol/min]
Figure 33: Simulated results using two diﬀerent vapor ﬂows causing a vast diﬀerence in column
size.
To illustrate the ethanol accumulation, the simulation is run using four diﬀerent val-
ues of side draw magnitude, and plotting the results on two y-axes: one for water and
methanol, and one for ethanol. The accumulation is similar for all vapor ﬂows, hence all
the simulations will be performed with a relatively large vapor ﬂow of V = 3
F
tvap, for
simplicity. Figure 34 shows the results, and as the side draw magnitude is increased, the
accumulation decreases, which is expected, since more material is removed. Furthermore,
the side draw placement does not change relative to the reboiler, and the methanol con-
centration at the side draw stays roughly the same, hence the methanol loss is expected
to be increased as well.
It is also interesting to compare the number of stages needed to perform the separation
at the diﬀerent side draw magnitudes, as it is evident that even at a relatively large vapor
ﬂow of V = 3
F
tvap [kmol/min], the total stages varies from 26 to 21, when comparing
S = 0.01 · F with S = 0.04 · F, respectively.
78
==PAGE:88==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) S = 0.01 · F
(b) S = 0.02 · F
(c) S = 0.03 · F
(d) S = 0.04 · F
Figure 34: Comparison of diﬀerent side draw magnitudes with the same vapor ﬂow of V =
3 F/tvap [kmol/min]. The ethanol concentration is connected to the right y-axis, and the two
other components are connected to the left y-axis.
The methanol loss is considered, which is calculated as eq. (72).
Loss = B · xB(MeOH) + S · xS(MeOH)
F · xF(MeOH)
.
(72)
The results are shown for S = [0.01, 0.02, 0.03] F in Figure 35. As the side draw magni-
tude increases, so does the loss of methanol. The methanol loss decreases with increasing
vapor ﬂow, but increases with increasing side draw magnitude - at least when using the
same method to ﬁnd the side draw location. If a recovery of 98.75 % of methanol is the
limit, a side draw magnitude of ≈1.65 % of the feed magnitude would be applicable, when
the side draw location is found as is. Another option is to manually change the side draw
location and ﬁnd an optimal value, which would most likely be a lower value than the
current one, but this also comes with an increase in side draw magnitude and an increase
in accumulation of ethanol - the latter causing an increase in required stages as shown.
However, this is not directly important for this thesis, and will not be investigated.
79
==PAGE:89==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 35:
Loss of methanol calculated from eq. (72), showing a decrease in loss as the
vapor ﬂow decreases, as the liquid composition of the side draw contained less methanol.
The marks are the simulated values, and the lines are linear lines between each mark to
show the behavior.
The simulated values all use the following vapor ﬂow values:
V
=
[2.05, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.75, 3, 4.5, 6] · F/tvap.
Figure 36 shows the required stages at a given vapor ﬂow for S = [0.01, 0.02, 0.03] · F.
As the side draw magnitude increases, the number of required stages decrease, which is
expected qua Figure 34. For V = 2.1
F
tvap, the stages required were: 95, 80, and 70, for
the lowest to the highest side draw magnitude, respectively.
80
==PAGE:90==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 36: Vapor ﬂow as a function of stages at diﬀerent side draw magnitudes. An increase in
side draw magnitude causes a decrease in the number of required stages. Y denotes the number
on the y-axis in the formula on the y-axis label.
Udugama et al. used a reboiler pressure of 1.9 bar with a ﬁxed pressure drop of 0.0075 bar
per tray. If this is implemented into the simulation, the required vapor ﬂow to perform the
separation increases slightly. Figure 37 shows the diﬀerence between a constant column
pressure of 1.01325 [bar] and the pressure structure used by Udugama et al. The curve
is almost the same, just shifted right. Less than 50 stages is required to perform the
separation at constant column pressure compared to the equivalent at 90 stages of the
Udugama et al. pressure structure, clearly indicating that it is of vital importance to be
aware of the column speciﬁcations prior to initiating the building process.
81
==PAGE:91==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 37: Diﬀerence between the required vapor ﬂows at a given column size of the Udugama
et al. pressure structure and a constant column pressure of 1 [atm].
Since the simulation is working as intended, it is vital to compare it with one of the designs
presented by Udugama et al., and in order to make an apples to apples comparison, it
is decided to simulate the conventional column in MATLAB using, the same or similar
assumptions.
7.9
Structure of conventional distillation design
Udugama et al. concluded that of the diﬀerent conﬁgurations tested, the side draw was
among the best solutions. Hence, the direct comparison of this thesis will be with a
conventional column using a side draw. However, it is not possible to directly use the
results presented by Udugama et al., since the assumptions are not comparable to the
cyclic set up, and the model used is not strictly the same. Thus, a MATLAB simulation
is setup to match the setup of the cyclic column. The assumptions are going to be as
similar as possible:
• Constant heat of vaporization
• Complete mixing on all stages
82
==PAGE:92==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
• Complete condensation between stages
• Boiling point temperature on all stages
• Constant vapor ﬂow on all stages
• Equilibrium stages
• Tray eﬃciency of 1
With the last assumption being unique for the conventional compared to the cyclic design,
which assumed a point eﬃciency of unity. In addition, the assumption of constant vapor
ﬂow, which is generally not used in conventional designs anymore, is applied, but the
liquid ﬂow is diﬀerent below the side draw, between the side draw and feed stage, and
above the feed stage.
The overall mass balances are the same as in the cyclic setup, and are given as eqs. (63)
and (69). The stage mass balances are given as follows:
Stage 1, reboiler:
Lbotx2 = V yB + BxB .
(73)
Stage 2 to stage below side draw:
Lbotxn+1 + V yn−1 = Lbotxn + V yn .
(74)
Stage NS, side draw stage:
LmidxNS+1 + V yNS−1 = (S + Lbot)xNS + V yNS .
(75)
Stages NS + 1 to NF −1:
Lmidxn+1 + V yn−1 = Lmidxn + V yn .
(76)
Stage NF, feed stream stage:
FxF + LtopxNF+1 + V yNF−1 = LmidxNF + V yNF .
(77)
Stages NF + 1 to NT −1:
Ltopxn+1 + V yn−1 = Ltopxn + V yn .
(78)
Stage NT, condenser:
V yNT−1 = (D + Ltop)xD .
(79)
83
==PAGE:93==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 38: Conventional column design
All the equations are used in the calcula-
tions except the condenser equation, since
the solved liquid mole fraction of the last
stage is the distillate composition, xD.
The mass balances are exempliﬁed in Fig-
ure 38 for 6 total stages; not enough for
the separation, but showed just for clari-
ﬁcation. The simulation is set up in ex-
actly the same manner as the cyclic dis-
tillation to achieve the best possible com-
parison.
Hence, the simulation is an it-
erative simulation, where the side draw is
found by ﬁnding the peak of ethanol con-
centration, then the feed stage is found
by checking if the methanol mole fraction
has been reached - exactly as the cyclic
setup. Following this, the remaining stages
are calculated until the liquid composition
has reached the ethanol requirement. The
same ideas implemented in the cyclic col-
umn are also implemented here: setting
water equal to 0 when below ppb range;
using the distillate composition as the re-
quirement, albeit the last stage might have a composition with less ethanol.
This is
acceptable due to exactly the same reasons as explained in Section 7.7, and Figure 30.
For the overall comparison, it makes a negligible diﬀerence to optimize the vapor ﬂow
values, as it is only when the ﬂows are large that it has inﬂuence, and the comparison
lies primarily around 90 stages. The call script for the conventional column is shown in
Appendix B: Matlab code (Section 12.3).
7.10
Cyclic versus conventional
To properly compare the two designs, Figures 35 and 36 will be recreated for both columns
and compared. Furthermore, it is possible to calculate the energy spent evaporating the
content of the reboiler with respect to the vapor ﬂow.
However, these numbers are
greatly aﬀected by the molar hold-up in the reboiler, as the composition of vapor diﬀers,
as Figure 23 shows. Thus, the only presented comparison is the vapor ﬂows.
It is vital to perform the comparison in a theoretical acceptable manner. For the cyclic
column, the vapor ﬂow used in the mass balances has the units [kmol/time], where the
84
==PAGE:94==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
time unit has to coincide with the time unit of tvap. The calculations are performed over
a full VFP, hence the vapor ﬂow needs to be corrected with the duration. The correction
needs to be performed using the duration of the VFP, tvap, not including the LFP, tliq,
since the relevant vapor ﬂow is the active vapor ﬂow, not an average over some arbitrary
duration including the liquid ﬂow period. Therefore, the number being compared is the
Y value in eq. (80):
V = Ycyclic · F
tvap
"kmol
time
#
,
(80)
which is why all the relevant ﬁgures have this y-axis.
For the conventional column, the vapor ﬂow is given as eq. (81):
V = Yconventional · F
"kmol
time
#
.
(81)
The vapor ﬂow magnitude, side draw magnitude, and the column pressure structure
are the only variables varied in the following results. Figure 39 shows the results when
comparing constant column pressure of 1 [atm], using a side draw magnitude of S =
0.01 · F [-], where the units diﬀer design to design, but is directly comparable, as they
have the same units as their respective feed ﬂows. It is evident that the cyclic column
performance is signiﬁcantly improved compared to the conventional column. At 90 stages
the Y values were found as:
Conventional:
V = 2.30759 · F
Cyclic:
V = 2.10840 F
tvap
With the reduction of required vapor ﬂow compared to the conventional column calculated
as eq. (82).
Reduction =
Ycyclic −Yconventional
Yconventional

· 100
[%]
(82)
85
==PAGE:95==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 39: Conventional column versus the cyclic column. The dashed black line is a horizontal
line comparing the columns sizes, if the vapor ﬂow was the same. Markers are simulated values,
lines are linear lines between markers to given an indication of overall behavior.
At 90 stages, the cyclic design uses 8.63 % less vapor ﬂow, which is a signiﬁcant improve-
ment and warrants more research into this design method. Furthermore, if using the same
vapor ﬂows, the separation can be performed with a cyclic column size of approximately
48 stages, compared to 90 stages for the conventional column.
The methanol loss is compared in Figure 40, where it can be seen that the cyclic design
yields a superior separation with respect to the recovery, which means the cyclic design
is better in both the vapor ﬂow and the recovery aspect. However, as mentioned, it
is possible to optimize the placement of the side draw and the feed location to reduce
the vapor ﬂow or methanol loss, but this is not within the purpose of this thesis. Most
likely, the side draw stage placement could be optimized by being lowered and having the
magnitude increased, thus more water and less methanol would be removed.
86
==PAGE:96==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 40: Methanol loss in % for the conventional and cyclic columns.
Figure 41 shows the diﬀerence in methanol loss as a function of column size, using two
diﬀerent side draw magnitudes of S = 1 % and S = 2 % of the feed ﬂow. It is estimated
that a side draw magnitude of roughly 1.33 % will achieve ≈1.25 % methanol loss for
the conventional column, and it is found that V = 2.281 · F and S = 0.0134 · F yields
≈1.25 % methanol loss. A similar analysis is made from Figure 35, and it is found
that a vapor ﬂow of 2.09 and a side draw magnitude of 1.685 % of the feed magnitude
yields ≈1.25 % methanol loss. This is an improvement of roughly 8.5 % compared to the
conventional column at 98.75 % recovery, but only an improvement of 0.9 % compared
to the cyclic column with 1 % side draw magnitude, which comes at the cost of 0.5 %
additional methanol loss.
87
==PAGE:97==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 41: Methanol loss as a function of column size for the conventional design with two
diﬀerent side draw magnitudes.
Furthermore, if the pressure structure of Udugama et al.
is implemented, the cyclic
column performs even better compared to the constant column pressure.
Figure 42
shows the results, and at 90 stages, a vapor ﬂow reduction of ≈10.4 % is found. Hence,
the increased pressure combined with the pressure drop seems to be favoring the cyclic
column even more.
Figure 42: Pressure structure of Udugama et al. implemented, comparing the conventional
column with the cyclic column. At 90 stages there is a ≈10.4 % reduction in vapor ﬂow to
perform the separation using the cyclic column.
88
==PAGE:98==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The Vreboiler/F ratio proposed by Udugama et al. for the conventional column using a side
draw is approximately 1.67 at 90 stages for one of their simulations, which is signiﬁcantly
lower than the proposed ≈2.55 value shown in Figure 42. However, comparing the exact
values are of little interest, since several simplifying assumptions have been applied in
the conventional column structure in this thesis.
From these results it is evident that cyclic distillation outperforms the conventional dis-
tillation column with a side draw by a large margin for the ternary system of methanol,
ethanol, and water. To further cement this claim, the model used will be investigated
and the complexity will be increased.
7.11
Conclusion on the side draw implementation
A side draw has successfully been implemented into the P˘atrut¸ et al. model without
assuming the bottom composition or the ﬂow magnitudes beyond the feed, vapor, and
side draw for a ternary system. This development is a valuable method development for
the cyclic design, and the method is usable for any amount of components if only two
components in both the distillate and bottoms are unknown, and it does not have to be
the same two components.
Comparing with the results proposed by Udugama et al., the vapor ﬂows does not match
well, which is most likely due to the simpliﬁed assumptions used in this thesis, e.g.
constant vapor ﬂow, constant liquid ﬂow below the side draw, between the side draw
and feed, and above the feed, negligence of the energy balances etc. However, what is
important is the (almost) 1:1 comparison using similar assumptions and using the same
models with the same parameters.
The main theoretical limitation is the fact that it is an iteration, which is an acceptable
method, but poses limitations when the system becomes to complex. In terms of com-
puting limitations, any complex iteration is a slow process, and the amount of calculation
needed is rather extreme for high purity separations due to the needed precision, which
only exacerbates the computing issue.
Furthermore, the cyclic column with a side draw proved to be a signiﬁcant improvement
compared to the conventional column with a side draw, and a similar analysis should be
performed with the complex model proposed by Rasmussen et al. to fully cement the
improvement, but the work proposed here is the ﬁrst step.
89
==PAGE:99==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
8
Inﬂuence of VLE Model on Simulation Results
Several diﬀerent models can be applied to increase the models range of validity, such as the
Peng-Robinson (PR) EoS, the Soave-Redlich-Kwong (SRK) EoS, the Hayden/O’Connell
EoS, or more recent models such as CPA EoS [39]. The increased complexity will add to
the duration of the simulation, hence it should only be applied to the necessary extent.
Initially, the relatively simple model proposed by Hayden/O’Connell will be applied and
compared with the simple Wilson/ideal gas combination used so far.
The increased complexity can be achieved by two methods: using a φ-φ approach, where
the fugacity coeﬃcients of both phases are calculated through the use of some EoS, or
a γ-φ approach, where the liquid phase activity coeﬃcient is calculated from an activity
coeﬃcient model, e.g.
Wilson, and the vapor phase fugacity coeﬃcient is calculated
from an EoS, such as PR, SRK or similar. For this thesis, the only considered model
structure is the γ-φ approach, as this is simpler and should illustrate that even with more
complex models, the cyclic column still outperforms the conventional column. Thus, the
assumption of ideality used in eq. (40) are alleviated, and the combined phase equilibrium
equation becomes:
xiγif l
i(T, P) = yiΦi(T, P sat
i
)f v
i (T, P) ,
(83)
where Φi is a function of temperature and saturated vapor pressure, described as:
Φi(T, P sat
i
) =
ˆφi
φsat
i PFi
,
(84)
where PFi is the Poynting correction factor, which is approximated by:
PFi = exp
 (P −P sat
i
)V sat
i
RT
!
.
(85)
The Poynting correction factor is often neglected at low pressures, and since this thesis
only considers low pressure columns, it is neglected for all purposes.
8.1
Second virial coeﬃcient model by Hayden/O’Connell
Most EoS’ relate the compressibility factor, Z, to the intensive state variables of compo-
sition, temperature, and pressure. Suitable manipulation is then performed on the EoS
to achieve the vapor phase fugacity coeﬃcient, φ. For the Hayden/O’Connell [43] model,
the EoS is given as eq. (86):
Z ≡PV
RT = 1 + BP
RT ,
(86)
where V is the molar volume, P is the pressure, R is the gas constant, and T is the
temperature. In a mixture of N components, B is described as:
B =
N
X
i=1
N
X
j=1
yiyjBi,j(T) ,
(87)
90
==PAGE:100==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
where Bi,j is the second virial coeﬃcient describing the interaction between molecules i
and j.
The Hayden/O’Connell approach will be investigated in two diﬀerent ways:
1. Assuming the cross virial coeﬃcients, Bi,j for i ̸= j, equal to 0, thus only using the
pure component virial coeﬃcient, Bi,j for i = j (i.e. Bi,i).
2. Including the cross virial coeﬃcients.
The virial coeﬃcients are used in eq. (83), where ˆφi and φsat
i
are deﬁned as:
ln
ˆφi

=

2
N
X
j
yjBi,j −B

P
RT
(88)
ln

φsat
i

= Bii(T)P sat
i
RT
,
(89)
where eq. (88) simpliﬁes to eq. (90) for an ideal pure component system.
ln
ˆφi

=













B11P
RT
for i = 1
B22P
RT
for i = 2
B33P
RT
for i = 3
.
(90)
To use the model, the virial coeﬃcients are required. Hayden and O’Connell has described
the procedure, which will not be rewritten in this thesis [43]. The virial coeﬃcients are
calculated from a ForTran code provided by O’Connell, and the results are shown in
Figure 43, with the input variables given in Table 7.
(a) Pure component virial coeﬃcients
(b) Cross component virial coeﬃcients
Figure 43: Virial coeﬃcients as a function of temperature.
91
==PAGE:101==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Table 7: Physical constants used in the calculation of the virial coeﬃcients. The value of η12
was 1.55 for all components. All of these values are from [43].
Tc [K]
Pc [atm]
R [˚A]
µ [D]
η
MeOH
513.2
78.5
1.536
1.66
1.63
EOH
516.3
63
2.25
1.69
1.4
Water
647.3
218.3
0.615
1.83
1.7
The virial coeﬃcients are implemented in the code by altering the wilsonyNUMBER.m
code. The diﬀerence compared to the previous model code occurs from implementing the
Φi in eq. (86), with Φi from eqs. (84), (88) and (89). The code will not be explained, as
it is very similar to the previous phase model code, but is shown in Section 12.
8.2
Pure component virials
Initially, the pure component virials are only considered. Prior to simulating any columns,
the code needs to be veriﬁed. The function for this VLE calculation is shown in Appendix
B: Matlab code (Section 12.8).
8.2.1
Veriﬁcation
For the case of a γ-φ model, the φ values needs to be evaluated to make sure the values
are reasonable. Initially, the VLE will be calculated as previously, and Figure 44 shows
the results for the pure component Hayden/O’Connell model. The results are reason-
able, which leaves considering the φ-values. Additionally, all the testing is performed at
atmospheric pressure.
92
==PAGE:102==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 44:
Boiling point temperature of the three binary systems, depicting good results
compared to the experimental data. The experimental data is the same as proposed when the
ideal gas model was developed, and the references are given in Tables 10 to 12.
For the Φi-values, the VLE is calculated again, but the Φi values are extracted. It is
expected that the values become unity when it is pure components, and that the values
otherwise diﬀer from unity when it is mixed with another component. Figure 45 shows
the results, and they seem reasonable.
93
==PAGE:103==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) MeOH-EOH
(b) MeOH-water
(c) EOH-water
Figure 45: Φi-values for all three binary systems.
For all cases, the Φi-values of the pure components are unity, and they diﬀer as it is
mixed. Furthermore, the values indicate only a small diﬀerence from ideality, as the
Φi-values are close to unity even in diluted solutions for all components.
8.2.2
Results
The results that will be shown are the vapor ﬂow as a function of stages at a side draw
magnitude of S = 1 % of the feed magnitude, and the methanol loss as a function of
stages at S = 1 %.
Initially, Figure 46 shows the results of the required vapor ﬂow at diﬀerent column sizes.
The overall structure is very similar to the ideal gas model used in Figure 36, however
the minimum required vapor ﬂow is increased, and the values at 90 stages, using linear
extrapolation of the two surrounding simulated values, were Vcyclic = 2.1879 [kmol/s] and
Vconventional = 2.4308 [kmol/s]. This yields an increase of 9.99 %.
94
==PAGE:104==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 46: Vapor ﬂow required at a given column size.
Figure 47 shows the results when using the pressure structure of Udugama et al., and the
energy required to perform the separation at a given column size increases, which is as
expected. However, an extremely interesting result is the fact that the diﬀerence in vapor
ﬂow increases when the pressure structure of Udugama et al. is applied. A decrease of
≈11.7 % in vapor ﬂow is found at 90 stages compared to ≈10.4 % found for the constant
column pressure.
95
==PAGE:105==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 47: Pressure structure of Udugama et al. implemented, and the overall structure is
similar to the constant column pressure, albeit the required vapor ﬂow increases for all column
sizes.
8.3
Complete Haydon/O’Connell model
Instead of using the ideal fugacity coeﬃcients from eq. (90), the full treatment of the
fugacity coeﬃcient is implemented from eq. (88). A similar analysis is made as in Sec-
tion 8.2. The code is shown in Appendix B: Matlab code (Section 12.9).
8.3.1
Veriﬁcation
The binary VLE’s are shown in Figure 48, and similar results is seen as previously, which
are acceptable.
96
==PAGE:106==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 48: Calculated VLE of the binary systems compared to experimental data at 1 [atm].
Acceptable results. The experimental data is the same as proposed when the ideal gas model
was developed, and the references are given in Tables 10 to 12.
For the Φ-values, Figure 49 shows the results, and compared to the pure component
assumption, the primary diﬀerence is seen in the MeOH-water binary system, where the
water Φ value rises above one as the mixture moves towards pure methanol, which is
opposite of what was seen in Figure 45b. However, the scales are all roughly the same,
thus the Φ values for the complex model are also deemed acceptable.
97
==PAGE:107==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) MeOH-EOH
(b) MeOH-water
(c) EOH-water
Figure 49: Φi-values for all three binary systems.
8.3.2
Results
The results are displayed in the same manner as section 8.2.2, with the exception of
including all three models to easily compare them. Figure 50 shows the cyclic versus
conventional design solutions, and it is evident that the overall solution is very similar
to the previous solutions. However, the diﬀerence at 90 stages is suggested to be even
better compared to the previous solutions at a ≈10.8 % reduction in vapor ﬂow.
98
==PAGE:108==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 50: Vapor ﬂow required at a given column size.
Figure 51 shows the results with the pressure structure proposed by Udugama et al., and
it is evident that a similar conclusion can be made from these results as were made in
the previous models. The cyclic column shows a reduction of vapor ﬂow of ≈12.65 %,
which is the largest reduction of all the situations. This is expected, as the complete
Hayden/O’Connell model also suggested the largest reduction for the constant column
pressure of 1 [atm].
99
==PAGE:109==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 51: Pressure structure of Udugama et al. implemented, and the overall structure is
similar to the constant column pressure, albeit the required vapor ﬂow increases for all column
sizes.
Comparing all three models are done in Figure 52, and it is evident that the Hay-
den/O’Connell models perform in a similar manner to the ideal gas model. The ideal
gas model underpredicts the required vapor ﬂow for all cases. This is most likely because
most of the separation occurs with very diluted concentrations of ethanol and water in
the rectifying section of the column, which is where the Φi values were the furthest from
unity in general. However, comparing the three models, it is important to note that the
structure of all three are the same. There are no signiﬁcant curve diﬀerences, which sug-
gests that the results are good and the models are not a limiting factor to the comparison.
In addition, it shows that if simulations are used for designing a cyclic column, the model
complexity is important, especially for smaller columns.
100
==PAGE:110==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) Cyclic design
(b) Conventional design
Figure 52: All three proposed models compared in both designs, and for all cases the ideal
vapor model underpredicts the required vapor ﬂow compared to the Hayden/O’Connell models.
Figure 53 shows the results when comparing the diﬀerent models using the pressure
structure of Udugama et al. The most important results of this ﬁgure is the fact that
the spread between the models has been widened. Thus, as the pressure increases in the
column, the model choice becomes increasingly important. However, as mentioned when
describing the models, the binary interaction parameters of the Wilson EoS was found
at 1 [atm], which might inﬂuence the spread. Although, it is common knowledge that as
a system moves further from low pressure (i.e. atmospheric pressure), the system moves
further from ideality, thus the results seem reasonable.
(a) Cyclic design
(b) Conventional design
Figure 53: Implementing the pressure structure of Udugama et al., all three proposed models
are compared in both designs, and for all cases the ideal vapor model underpredicts the required
vapor ﬂow compared to the Hayden/O’Connell models.
101
==PAGE:111==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
8.4
Conclusion and discussion of the VLE model considera-
tions
When using the Hayden/O’Connell VLE model, the separation becomes harder to per-
form for both the simpliﬁed pure component model, and the complete Hayden/O’Connell
model. Albeit, the diﬀerences between these models and the ideal gas model initially ap-
plied, are not extreme. However, it would be interesting to consider the binary relative
volatility changes between the three models. The relative volatility for binary pairs is
deﬁned as eq. (30), and the results for all three pairs are given in Figure 54. A few
conclusions can be made from these results:
1. The results of the simulations show that the initial part of the separation is almost
the same for each VLE model, and Figure 54c indicate that the separation of ethanol
and water is almost identical between the three models for all compositions. Thus,
these results indicate the same as the simulation results.
2. The majority of stages was found to be needed to separate ethanol from methanol,
where ethanol was diluted. Figure 54a show that the ideal gas relative volatility is
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for all compositions. This means the separation will become
harder, when using the non-ideal vapor phase models, which is the same conclusion
as proposed by the simulations.
3. Figure 54b suggests that for methanol in water compositions, the separation be-
comes slightly harder, but as it turns to water in methanol, the separation is almost
the same for the three proposed VLE models. In concolusion, the relative volatil-
ity of the binary pairs conﬁrms the results found from the simulations: using the
non-ideal VLE models makes the separation harder, i.e. requiring more trays.
102
==PAGE:112==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
(a) MeOH-EOH
(b) MeOH-water
(c) EOH-water
Figure 54: αi,j-values for all three binary systems.
103
==PAGE:113==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
9
Discussion
The solution proposed in this thesis to simulate a cyclic distillation column with a side
draw for ternary systems comes with some advantages and some limitations. The pro-
posed iteration method is theoretically sound, since it is set up to be founded on the
mass balances. The proposed method when using the purity requirement as the distillate
composition irregardless of when it appears during the VFP on the last stage essentially
provides a slightly too large vapor ﬂow, which is of little inﬂuence considering the pro-
posed method is a development towards more rigorous solutions.
Due to the models
proposed and used being relatively simple, the method is primarily useful to compare the
diﬀerent designs, since it is possible to use similar assumptions and the same models. It
is still desired to continue development towards a even more rigorous design compared
to the one proposed in this thesis, e.g. by implementing the complex model proposed by
Rasmussen et al. in the simulation setup proposed here.
A great advantage from the proposed method is the fact that the models are easily
interchangeable due to the given code structure, and more complex models can be imple-
mented. However, due to the duration of the simulation, the code would most likely need
to be optimized, if further studies were to be done using the same method as this thesis,
since adding complexity to the models greatly adds to the duration of the simulation.
Furthermore, when comparing smaller columns, Figure 30 should be reconsidered. The
conclusion during the investigation of this ﬁgure was that the diﬀerence in vapor ﬂows
were negligible, and as the column sizes would decrease, this interval would increase and
become larger. For the overall structure, it is irrelevant to optimize the vapor ﬂow value
for the smaller columns, as the main desire was to compare with the results of Udugama
et al. who considered 89 stages plus the condenser. However, in order to be thorough,
Figure 52a is recreated where all simulations below 45 stages are optimized. As Figure 30
showed clear linearity between the solutions, each size is simulated for two diﬀerent vapor
ﬂow values that solves for the same amount of stages, and then the vapor ﬂow values
corresponding to the ﬁrst and last time step (1 and 10.000) are calculated from the linear
extrapolation, which produces an interval of which any given vapor ﬂow produces the
same column size.
The ﬁgure is only recreated for the ideal gas model, since it is a
matter of understanding the implications, not the actual results. Figure 55 shows the
intervals at diﬀerent column sizes, and as the column size moves towards the minimum
column size, the interval increases signiﬁcantly, but for column sizes larger than 35, there
is practically no diﬀerence, i.e. the given vapor ﬂow acts as the true vapor ﬂow irregardless
of when the purity requirement is met during the VFP of the last stage. Thus, if one
desires to investigate small columns, it is vital to consider ﬁnding the minimum vapor
ﬂow value.
104
==PAGE:114==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Figure 55: Vapor ﬂow interval of the cyclic column simulations where the column size is the
same. The bottom value is the true value where the mass balances are exactly fulﬁlled and the
distillate composition is reached the requirement of ethanol. The ideal gas model was used.
Additionally, it is entirely possible to optimize the vapor ﬂow values by considering the
feed and side draw placement, which paves the way for further developments of the
proposed simulation. It would be easier to predetermine the feed and side draw stage
and complete the simulation with ﬁxed values, which would be necessary to optimize the
system.
Furthermore, it is not very useful to directly compare the reboiler duty of the results
proposed in this thesis with the reboiler duty of the results presented by Udugama et
al., as it would essentially be an apples to oranges comparison. This is why the results
are presented as vapor ﬂows, comparing one of the best performing distillation designs
proposed by Udugama et al. simulated using the same models and similar assumptions
as use in the cyclic design.
For all the results, the wt. ppm used by Udugama et al. was used as mol ppm without
converting it to the actual numbers in mol ppm, as the numbers are extremely close.
Converting 10 wt. ppm methanol in water yields ≈5.6 mol ppm, and converting 5 wt.
ppm ethanol in methanol yields ≈3.5 mol ppm. Using the proper values, the vapor
ﬂow corresponding to a column size of 90 stages with the ideal gas model, is found at
105
==PAGE:115==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
V ≈2.317
F
tvap, which is not far oﬀV ≈2.305
F
tvap found using the initial estimation of
wt. ppm = mol ppm. Clearly the diﬀerence is negligible in the grand scheme, and the
results speak for themselves.
For future developments, the proposed method is useful for initial estimation of column
size and VLE expression. If the system considered contains more than three components,
the method is no longer useful unless it is possible to determine enough components of
the distillate and bottoms composition to leave two unknowns in each, as was done with
the ternary system. Another option is to change the proposed method by P˘atrut¸ et al. by
developing the column from the feed stage instead of the reboiler, which would negate the
need for any iteration, but this might warrant other issues and would require theoretical
development as well.
As mentioned previously, the conventional column design used for the comparison builds
on a design using a tray eﬃciency of unity. Tray eﬃciency is deﬁned as:
ET = ¯yi −¯yi−1
y∗
i −¯yi−1
,
(91)
with the bars denoting the spatial average concentration, and the star denoting the
equilibrium vapor concentration at the given liquid concentration. Hence, if ¯yi = y∗
i , the
tray eﬃciency becomes unity. For the cyclic distillation, the deﬁned assumption was a
point eﬃciency of unity, which is given as:
EP = yi −yi−1
y∗
i −yi−1
,
(92)
with the same nomenclature as the tray eﬃciency. Here, the bars are not present, which
indicates that the vapor composition is the same at all points on the tray, hence the
name. For the conventional design it is possible to have a tray eﬃciency of unity but
a point eﬃciency lower than unity due to the spatial diﬀerence of concentration, which
makes the assumptions diﬃcult to compare. Although, due to the design of the cyclic
column where the liquid moves as a unit and not in a string formation as the conventional
column, the point eﬃciency assumption is not a bad assumption. If it was desired to
implement a lower point eﬃciency than unity for the cyclic design, the mass balances can
be tweaked using eq. (92). Comparing to eq. (20), the expression in the parenthesis is
equal to the parenthesis in the numerator of eq. (92), which makes it possible to rewrite
the mass balance equation as:
dMk,j
dt
= V EP(y∗
k+1,k −yk,j) ,
(93)
which is essentially the same as implementing some EP value in the existing mass bal-
ances, as the current method uses the equilibrium vapor composition. A thorough inves-
tigation of this implementation comparing the experimental data would be an extremely
useful progression for the theoretical work of cyclic distillation.
106
==PAGE:116==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
The last idea to be discussed is how the vapor ﬂow aﬀects the possible ﬂooding or weeping
from the trays. In Separation Process Principles by Seader, Henley, and Roper [23], a
thorough description of how to calculate the diameter of a conventional distillation column
from the physical characteristics is given. However, the purpose here is to give a back
of the envelope calculation to brieﬂy show that a cyclic distillation column reduces the
capital expenses from a smaller column diameter. The equations to be used are eqs. (94)
and (95):
uf = C
s
ρL −ρV
ρV
(94)
DT =
s
4V MV
fufπ (1 −Ad/A) ρV
,
(95)
where uf is the ﬂooding velocity, C is an empirical constant, ρ is the density, f is the
fraction of ﬂooding, typically set at f = 0.8, and the product V MV is the mass ﬂow. The
empirical constant, C, is given from eq. (96):
C = FSTFFFHACF ,
(96)
where FST = (σ/20)0.2, FF = foaming factor, and FHA = 1.0 for AH/Aa, which is a ratio
of vapor hole area to tray active area. All of these are assumed to be equal to 1, which
means C = CF. Seader, Henley and Roper show that CF varies between 0.4 and 0.2
roughly, so it is assumed to be equal to 0.3. Furthermore, AD/A in eq. (95) is always
between 0.1 and 0.2, thus 0.15 is used. The vapor density, ρV is calculated from the ideal
gas law, and the liquid density is found from Engineering Toolbox. In a real system,
the vapor ﬂow is often the largest at the top of the column, and to follow this idea, the
calculations here use pure methanol for the diﬀerent physical values. This means that at
the boiling temperature of methanol, which will be close to the temperature in the top
part of the column, the values are ρV ≈1.15 kg/m3, and ρL ≈750 kg/m3. Lastly, the
fraction of ﬂooding, f, is set at the typical value of 0.8 for the conventional column, but
set at 0.95 for the cyclic column, since downcomers do not exist in a cyclic design, leaving
more room in the total tower diameter, DT, for tray area. The results of the calculations
at diﬀerent vapor ﬂows for the two designs are shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Diﬀerence of column diameter at a series of vapor ﬂows, where the vapor ﬂows are
set at 10 % larger for the conventional compared to the cyclic column.
V [kmol/s]
DT [m]
V [kmol/s]
DT [m]
∆DT [m]
∆AT [m2]
2.31
3.97
2.1
3.64
0.33
1.95
2.42
4.06
2.2
3.73
0.33
2.05
Conventional
2.53
4.15
Cyclic
2.3
3.81
0.34
2.14
2.64
4.24
2.4
3.89
0.35
2.23
2.75
4.33
2.5
3.97
0.36
2.32
107
==PAGE:117==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
It is evident that the estimation indicates a signiﬁcant reduction of the capital expenses,
as each tray becomes signiﬁcantly smaller, and if a column is built at approximately 90
stages, this sums up to a large area. The vapor ﬂows of the conventional column was
chosen as 10 % larger than the vapor ﬂows of the cyclic column due to the results found
when comparing the two diﬀerent designs in the simulations.
Lastly, as the simulation is set up to ﬁnd the side draw prior to the feed stage, and
only at the peak of ethanol, the feed stage tends to always be the stage after the side
draw stage. This happens since the peak of ethanol concentration occurs close to the
stage where the methanol concentration is equal to the feed concentration. As mentioned
earlier, an optimization of the placement of the side draw and feed stage is one of the
next steps in terms of further development, but for this thesis, the placements are not
entirely important.
It is clear that the cyclic distillation performs better than the conventional distillation in
both capital expense, even for the same column height, and utility expense.
108
==PAGE:118==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
10
Conclusion
In this thesis, a method has been proposed that simulates and designs a ternary system
in a cyclic distillation process. In the literature, no methods have been presented on how
to decide or calculate the following design variables: composition in the bottoms and
distillate in combination with the bottoms and distillate ﬂow magnitudes. Historically,
these values have just been decided and accepted with no critical consideration.
A systematic iteration has been proposed, which allows relaxing the assumptions of com-
position, and instead simulates the system through iteration. The method ﬁnds the true
composition and ﬂow magnitudes based on mass balances, and the method was found
to perform well. Thorough testing of the code and method has been presented, and a
certain accuracy is required, especially as the column becomes larger.
The method has been investigated using the mass balance model proposed by P˘atrut¸ et
al. [34], and it was compared to a conventional design using the same VLE model(s)
and similar assumptions. It was found that for the case of constant column pressure
and the simplest VLE model, which was using the Wilson ACM for the liquid phase and
assuming ideal gas, the cyclic column could achieve the same separation at an ≈8.65
% reduced vapor ﬂow. The pressure structure proposed by Udugama et al., which was
a reboiler pressure of 1.9 bar with a constant pressure drop of 0.0075 bar per stage, has
been simulated, and the setup increased the vapor ﬂow reduction to ≈10.4 %.
The ideal gas assumption used in the VLE model was then relaxed and the Hayden/O’Connell
second virial coeﬃcient model was implemented for the vapor phase [43]. It was found
that the simple VLE model underpredicted the required vapor ﬂow, but not by much.
Figure 52 shows the diﬀerence, which was most notable for the conventional column.
The diﬀerence between the models became more signiﬁcant when the pressure structure
of Udugama et al. was used, but the overall structure was the same.
The relaxed ideal gas phase assumption showed an even larger vapor ﬂow reduction com-
pared to the conventional column of up to ≈12.65 %, further emphasizing the importance
of further studies on this subject.
Thus, the work presented in this thesis shows a clear advantage from using a cyclic distil-
lation column compared to a conventional distillation column when separating methanol,
ethanol, and water, but the method should be applied to a design model with relaxed
assumptions, such as the one proposed by Rasmussen et al. in 2020 [38], and further
experimental work needs to be performed to be able to estimate the true point eﬃciency.
When such work is done, this method is fully usable for ternary systems to fully under-
stand the complex cyclic design, but the work in this thesis paves the way to reach a
more complete understanding.
109
==PAGE:119==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
References
[1] IHS Market, chemical economics handbook. URL, 2020.
[2] Statista, production capacity of methanol worldwide from 2018 to 2030. URL, 2020.
[3] Grand View Research,
petrochemicals market size, share
trends analysis report
by product (ethylene, propylene, butadiene, benzene, xylene, toluene, methanol), by
region, and segment forecasts, 2020 - 2027. URL, 2020.
[4] Energy Information Administration, use of energy explained: Energy use in industry.
URL, 2019.
[5] Gabriele Centi and Siglinda Perathoner. Sustainable Industrial Chemistry. 2009.
[6] Mohamed Salaheldin, Ahmed Farouk Abdul Moneim, and M. Nashat Fors. Energy
eﬃciency evaluation in petrochemicals industry.
Proceedings of the International
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, 2017.
[7] Anton A. Kiss, Servando J. Flores Landaeta, and Edwin Zondervan. Cyclic dis-
tillation - towards energy eﬃcient binary distillation.
Computer Aided Chemical
Engineering, 2012.
[8] I. A. Udugama, R. Kirkpatrick, W. Yu, and B. Young.
High purity distillation
column: Simulation and optimization. Chemeca 2013: challenging tomorrow, 2013.
[9] Robert Rapier. Forbes, fossil fuels still supply 84 percent of world energy — and
other eye openers from bp’s annual review. URL, 2020.
[10] Francesco Dalena, Alessandro Senatore, Alessia Marino, Amalia Gordano, Marco
Basile, and Angelo Basile. Methanol Production and Applications: An Overview.
2018.
[11] Francesco Dalena, Alessandro Senatore, Marco Basile, Sarra Knani, Angelo Basile,
and Adolfo Iulianelli. Advances in methanol production and utilization, with partic-
ular emphasis toward hydrogen generation via membrane reactor technology. Mem-
branes, 8 (4), 2018.
[12] Matthias Blug, Jens Leker, Ludolf Plass, and Armin G¨unther. Methanol generation
economics. 2014.
[13] P. J.A. Tijm, F. J. Waller, and D. M. Brown. Methanol technology developments
for the new millennium. Applied Catalysis A: General, 2001.
[14] J. Fletcher, V.P. Roan, and D. Betts. An investigation of the feasibility of coal-based
methanol for application in transportation fuel cell systems. Collection of Technical
Papers - 3rd International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, 2, 2004.
[15] Jafar Sadeghi and Mansureh Ahangar. The study of methanol separation columns
control. Oriental Journal of Chemistry, 28 (1), 2012.
[16] Zhigang Lei and Biaohua Chen. Separation and puriﬁcation technologies in biore-
ﬁneries. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, 2013.
110
==PAGE:120==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
[17] Isuru A. Udugama, Robert Kirkpatrick, Wei Yu, Krist V. Gernaey, Brent R. Young,
and Christoph Bayer. Separation of middle boiling trace compounds by distilla-
tion: An investigation of practical implications of complex column arrangements
on an industrial methanol distillation case study. Asia-paciﬁc Journal of Chemical
Engineering, 2020.
[18] M.R. Cannon. Controlled cycling improves various processes. Industrial and Engi-
neering Chemistry, 53 (8), 1961.
[19] Michael Resetarits. Distillation: Equipment and Processes. 2014.
[20] K. N. Glinos and M. F. MALONE. Design of sidestream distillation columns. In-
dustrial and Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development, 24 (3), 1985.
[21] Erik Bek-Pedersen and Raﬁqul Gani. Design and synthesis of distillation systems
using a driving force based approach. Chemical Engineering and Processing, 43 (3),
2004.
[22] Vida Meidanshahi and Thomas A. Adams. Integrated design and control of semicon-
tinuous distillation systems utilizing mixed integer dynamic optimization. Computers
and Chemical Engineering, 89, 2004.
[23] J. D. Seader, Ernest J. Henley, and D. Keith Roper. Separation process principles.
2016.
[24] Nazemzadeh N., Udugama I.A., Karcz A.P., Andersson M.P., Abildskov J., and Man-
souri S.S. Molecular tracking: A concept for side-draw distillation column design.
Aiche Journal, 67 (1), 2021.
[25] Anton A. Kiss. Distillation technology - still young and full of breakthrough oppor-
tunities. Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology, 89 (4), 2014.
[26] Massimiliano Errico, Pietro Pirellas, Ben-Guang Rong, and Juan Gabriel Segovia-
Hernandez. Design and optimization of intensiﬁed quaternary petlyuk conﬁguration.
Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 37, 2015.
[27] Costin Sorin Bˆıldea, C˘at˘alin P˘atrut¸, Sten Bay Jørgensen, Jens Abildskov, and An-
ton A. Kiss. Cyclic distillation technology - a mini-review. John Wiley and Sons,
Ltd, 2016.
[28] Jude T. Sommerfeld, Verle N. Schrodt, Paul E. Parisot, and Henry H. Chien. Stud-
ies of controlled cyclic distillation: I. computer simulations and the analogy with
conventional operation. Separation Science, 1 (2-3), 1966.
[29] J.R. McWhirter and W.A. Lloyd. New look at distillation – 5. controlled cycling in
distillation and extraction. Chemical Engineering Progress, 59 (6), 1963.
[30] R.G. Robinson and A.J. Engel.
An analysis of controlled cycling mass transfer
operations. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 59 (3), 1967.
[31] O.R. Rivas. An analytical solution of cyclic mass transfer operations. Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development, 16 (3), 1977.
111
==PAGE:121==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
[32] J.R. Petzold. An eﬃcient numerical method for highly oscillatory ordinary diﬀeren-
tial equations. Siam Journal on Numerical Analysis, 18 (3), 1981.
[33] I. Lit¸ˇa, C. Sorin Bˆılde, and A. A. Kiss.
Modeling, design and control of cyclic
distillation systems. Procedia Engineering, 42, 2012.
[34] Cˇatˇalin Pˇatrut¸, Costin Sorin Bˆıldea, Ionela Lit¸ˇa, and Anton A. Kiss. Cyclic distilla-
tion - design, control and applications. Separation and Puriﬁcation Technology, 125,
2014.
[35] Bjarne Toftegard, Charlotte H. Clausen, Sten B. Jørgensen, and Jens Abildskov.
Design of cyclic distillation units. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research,
55 (6), 2016.
[36] Rasmus Fjordbak Nielsen. Design of cyclic distillation units. Bachelor’s Thesis,
2016.
[37] Rasmus Fjordbak Nielsen. Periodic reactive separation. Master’s Thesis, 2018.
[38] Jess Bjørn Rasmussen, Seyed Soheil Mansouri, Xiangping5 Zhang, Jens Abildskov,
and Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom. A mass and energy balance stage model for cyclic
distillation. Aiche Journal, 66 (8), 2020.
[39] Georgios M. Kontogeorgis and Goergios K. Folas. Thermodynamic Models for Indus-
trial Applications: from classical and advanced mixing rules to association theories.
2010.
[40] Engineering Toolbox, density and speciﬁc weight. Methanol, Ethanol, Water, 2021.
Accessed: 02/03/2021.
[41] Shigetoshi Kobuchi. Correlation of vapor-liquid equilibria for polar mixtures using
wilson equation with parameters estimated from solubility parameters and molar
volumes. Journal of Chemical Engineering of Japan, 44 (4), 2011.
[42] Hendrick C. Van Ness. Thermodynamics in the treatment of (vapor + liquid) equi-
libria. Journal of Chemical Thermodynamics, 1995.
[43] J. George Hayden and John P. O’Connell.
A generalized method for predicting
second virial coeﬃcients. Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 14 (3), 1975.
[44] A. Vicent Orchill´es, Pablo J. Miguel, Ernesto Vercher, and Antoni Mart´ınez-Andreu.
Using 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium triﬂuoromethanesulfonate as an entrainer for the
extractive distillation of ethanol + water mixtures. Journal of Chemical and Engi-
neering Data, 55 (4), 2010.
[45] Amer
H.H.,
Paxton
R.R.,
and
van
Winkle
M.
Vapor-liquid
equilibria.
Ind.Eng.Chem., 48, 1956.
112
==PAGE:122==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
11
Appendix A: Tables
Table 9: Values used to calculate the molar volumes from linear regression of two density
values from Engineering Toolbox, expressing the densities as a linear expression in the form of
y = ax + b.
Tb [◦C]
M [g/mol]
ρlow [kg/m3]
ρhigh [kg/m3]
Tlow [K]
Thigh [K]
a
b
Methanol
64.7
32.04
762.3
748.8
323.15
337.15
-0.96429
1073.909
Ethanol
78.3
46.07
749.7
740.1
338.15
348.15
-0.96000
1074.324
Water
100
18.02
980.53
958.37
338.15
373.15
-0.63314
1194.627
Table 10: Estimating binary energy parameters of ethanol-water system, ﬁnding delta lambda
ew = 270.66, and delta lambda we = 480.11. The experimental pressure was 760 mmHg =
1.01325 bar, and the data was from [44].
T [K]
xexp
yexp
∆Λ11
∆Λ12
∆Λ21
∆Λ22
ln(γe)
ln(γw)
γe
γw
P sat
e
[bar]
P sat
w
[bar]
Pcalc [bar]
∆P [mmHg]
ye,calc
372.81
0
0
1
0.14
0.94
1.00
2.01
0.00
7.48
1.00
2.23
0.99
0.99
20.61
0.00
371.86
0.002
0.035
1
0.14
0.94
1.00
1.99
0.00
7.34
1.00
2.16
0.95
0.98
22.41
0.03
370.68
0.005
0.08
1
0.14
0.94
1.00
1.96
0.00
7.12
1.00
2.07
0.91
0.98
21.83
0.07
368.88
0.014
0.149
1
0.14
0.93
1.00
1.87
0.00
6.49
1.00
1.95
0.86
1.02
-7.98
0.17
366.61
0.021
0.234
1
0.14
0.92
1.00
1.81
0.00
6.10
1.00
1.79
0.79
1.01
5.54
0.23
363.82
0.038
0.325
1
0.14
0.91
1.00
1.66
0.01
5.26
1.01
1.62
0.71
1.02
-2.01
0.32
360.95
0.067
0.402
1
0.14
0.90
1.00
1.44
0.02
4.23
1.02
1.46
0.64
1.02
-7.87
0.40
358.62
0.103
0.468
1
0.14
0.89
1.00
1.22
0.04
3.39
1.04
1.34
0.59
1.02
-2.05
0.46
356.92
0.152
0.515
1
0.14
0.88
1.00
0.99
0.08
2.68
1.08
1.25
0.55
1.01
-0.49
0.50
355.65
0.214
0.553
1
0.14
0.88
1.00
0.76
0.13
2.14
1.14
1.19
0.52
1.01
-0.32
0.54
354.89
0.266
0.573
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.61
0.17
1.85
1.19
1.16
0.51
1.01
-0.25
0.56
354.29
0.314
0.594
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.50
0.22
1.65
1.25
1.13
0.50
1.01
0.48
0.58
353.83
0.354
0.608
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.43
0.26
1.53
1.30
1.11
0.49
1.01
1.61
0.60
353.39
0.403
0.624
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.35
0.31
1.41
1.36
1.09
0.48
1.01
0.94
0.62
353.03
0.449
0.639
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.28
0.36
1.32
1.43
1.08
0.47
1.01
-0.03
0.63
352.67
0.498
0.661
1
0.14
0.87
1.00
0.22
0.41
1.25
1.51
1.06
0.47
1.01
-0.64
0.65
352.34
0.543
0.678
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.18
0.46
1.20
1.58
1.05
0.46
1.01
-0.27
0.67
352.05
0.587
0.699
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.14
0.51
1.15
1.66
1.04
0.45
1.01
0.02
0.69
351.81
0.63
0.716
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.11
0.56
1.12
1.75
1.03
0.45
1.01
-0.09
0.71
351.58
0.676
0.744
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.08
0.61
1.09
1.84
1.02
0.45
1.01
0.04
0.74
351.42
0.724
0.772
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.06
0.67
1.06
1.95
1.01
0.44
1.01
-0.93
0.76
351.24
0.77
0.799
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.04
0.72
1.04
2.06
1.00
0.44
1.01
0.26
0.79
351.13
0.816
0.831
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.02
0.78
1.02
2.18
1.00
0.44
1.01
0.85
0.83
351.05
0.853
0.86
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.02
0.83
1.02
2.29
1.00
0.44
1.01
2.29
0.85
351.04
0.892
0.893
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.01
0.88
1.01
2.40
1.00
0.44
1.01
2.92
0.89
351.04
0.923
0.92
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.00
0.92
1.00
2.50
1.00
0.44
1.01
4.25
0.92
351.06
0.939
0.937
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.00
0.94
1.00
2.55
1.00
0.44
1.01
4.75
0.93
351.1
0.962
0.96
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.00
0.97
1.00
2.63
1.00
0.44
1.01
5.64
0.96
351.14
0.977
0.976
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.00
0.98
1.00
2.68
1.00
0.44
1.01
6.16
0.97
351.19
1
1
1
0.14
0.86
1.00
0.00
1.01
1.00
2.76
1.00
0.44
1.00
7.87
1.00
Sum:
1760.3
113
==PAGE:123==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Table 11:
Estimating binary energy parameters of methanol-water system, ﬁnding delta
lambda mw = 87.070, and delta lambda wm = 246.145. The experimental pressure was 760
mmHg = 1.01325 bar. Data from [45].
T [K]
xexp
yexp
∆Λ11
∆Λ12
∆Λ21
∆Λ22
ln(γm)
ln(γw)
γm
γw
P sat
m
[bar]
P sat
w
[bar]
Pcalc [bar]
∆P [mmHg]
ym,calc
373.15
0
1
0.33
1.23
1.00
0.87
0.00
2.39
1.00
3.53
1.00
1.00
11.81
0.00
366
0.0484
1
0.33
1.21
1.00
0.74
0.00
2.09
1.00
2.81
0.77
1.02
-6.62
0.28
365.05
0.0539
1
0.33
1.21
1.00
0.72
0.00
2.06
1.00
2.72
0.75
1.01
1.11
0.30
364.4
0.0607
1
0.33
1.21
1.00
0.70
0.01
2.02
1.01
2.66
0.73
1.02
-2.02
0.32
363.5
0.0696
1
0.33
1.20
1.00
0.68
0.01
1.98
1.01
2.58
0.71
1.02
-2.96
0.35
362.25
0.0806
1
0.33
1.20
1.00
0.66
0.01
1.93
1.01
2.48
0.67
1.01
2.09
0.38
361.35
0.0911
1
0.33
1.20
1.00
0.63
0.01
1.88
1.01
2.40
0.65
1.01
1.41
0.41
360.05
0.1056
1
0.33
1.19
1.00
0.60
0.02
1.82
1.02
2.30
0.62
1.01
5.13
0.44
359.05
0.1197
1
0.33
1.19
1.00
0.57
0.02
1.77
1.02
2.22
0.60
1.01
4.69
0.47
358.6
0.1354
1
0.33
1.19
1.00
0.54
0.03
1.71
1.03
2.19
0.59
1.03
-10.80
0.49
358
0.1436
1
0.33
1.19
1.00
0.52
0.03
1.69
1.03
2.14
0.57
1.02
-7.99
0.51
356.95
0.1586
1
0.33
1.18
1.00
0.50
0.03
1.64
1.03
2.07
0.55
1.02
-2.53
0.53
355.55
0.1815
1
0.33
1.18
1.00
0.46
0.04
1.58
1.04
1.97
0.52
1.01
3.76
0.56
354.35
0.2092
1
0.33
1.18
1.00
0.41
0.05
1.51
1.06
1.89
0.50
1.01
2.50
0.59
354.1
0.2202
1
0.33
1.18
1.00
0.39
0.06
1.48
1.06
1.87
0.49
1.02
-3.08
0.60
353.25
0.238
1
0.33
1.17
1.00
0.37
0.07
1.45
1.07
1.81
0.48
1.01
1.20
0.62
352.05
0.2648
1
0.33
1.17
1.00
0.33
0.08
1.39
1.08
1.74
0.45
1.00
7.76
0.64
351.35
0.2918
1
0.33
1.17
1.00
0.30
0.09
1.35
1.10
1.69
0.44
1.01
2.70
0.66
350.3
0.3166
1
0.33
1.16
1.00
0.27
0.11
1.31
1.11
1.63
0.42
1.00
10.90
0.68
349.05
0.3442
1
0.33
1.16
1.00
0.24
0.12
1.27
1.13
1.56
0.40
0.98
23.75
0.70
347.95
0.4015
1
0.33
1.16
1.00
0.19
0.15
1.21
1.17
1.50
0.38
1.00
13.55
0.73
347.9
0.4282
1
0.33
1.16
1.00
0.17
0.17
1.18
1.18
1.49
0.38
1.02
-2.82
0.74
347.2
0.4644
1
0.33
1.15
1.00
0.14
0.19
1.15
1.21
1.46
0.37
1.02
-6.18
0.76
346.2
0.524
1
0.33
1.15
1.00
0.11
0.23
1.11
1.26
1.40
0.36
1.03
-13.67
0.79
344.8
0.6091
1
0.33
1.15
1.00
0.07
0.28
1.07
1.33
1.33
0.34
1.04
-21.23
0.83
343.31
0.6899
1
0.33
1.14
1.00
0.04
0.34
1.04
1.40
1.26
0.32
1.04
-20.32
0.87
341.2
0.8213
1
0.33
1.14
1.00
0.01
0.42
1.01
1.53
1.16
0.29
1.04
-23.00
0.92
338.1
1
1
0.33
1.13
1.00
0.00
0.55
1.00
1.73
1.03
0.25
1.03
-12.06
1.00
Sum:
3175.50
Table 12: Estimating binary energy parameters of methanol-ethanol system, ﬁnding delta
lambda me = -163.088, and delta lambda em = 368.287. The experimental pressure was 1.0133
bar. Data from [45].
T [K]
xexp
yexp
∆Λ11
∆Λ12
∆Λ21
∆Λ22
ln(γm)
ln(γe)
γm
γe
P sat
m
[bar]
P sat
e
[bar]
Pcalc [bar]
∆P [mmHg]
ym,calc
351.45
0.00
0.00
1
2.28
0.24
1.00
-0.07
0.00
0.93
1.00
1.70
1.01
1.01
0.13
0.00
349.75
0.13
0.18
1
2.29
0.24
1.00
-0.05
0.00
0.95
1.00
1.60
0.95
1.02
-7.36
0.20
348.15
0.24
0.33
1
2.29
0.24
1.00
-0.03
-0.01
0.97
0.99
1.51
0.89
1.02
-7.57
0.35
346.75
0.32
0.43
1
2.30
0.24
1.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.98
0.99
1.43
0.84
1.01
-0.75
0.44
345.45
0.401
0.529
1
2.30
0.24
1.00
-0.01
-0.02
0.99
0.98
1.36
0.80
1.01
1.60
0.54
344.85
0.435
0.566
1
2.30
0.24
1.00
0.00
-0.02
1.00
0.98
1.33
0.78
1.01
4.24
0.57
343.15
0.542
0.676
1
2.31
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.03
1.01
0.97
1.25
0.72
1.00
7.44
0.67
341.75
0.652
0.759
1
2.31
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.04
1.01
0.96
1.19
0.68
1.01
2.01
0.77
340.85
0.728
0.813
1
2.31
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.04
1.01
0.96
1.15
0.66
1.02
-2.12
0.83
340.05
0.79
0.858
1
2.32
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.04
1.01
0.96
1.11
0.63
1.02
-2.12
0.88
339.75
0.814
0.875
1
2.32
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.03
1.01
0.97
1.10
0.63
1.02
-1.99
0.89
338.95
0.873
0.919
1
2.32
0.24
1.00
0.01
-0.02
1.01
0.98
1.06
0.60
1.01
1.28
0.92
338.75
0.91
0.937
1
2.32
0.24
1.00
0.00
0.01
1.00
1.01
1.06
0.60
1.02
-4.85
0.95
337.75
1
1
1
2.32
0.23
1.00
0.00
0.13
1.00
1.13
1.02
0.57
1.02
-1.48
1.00
Sum:
232.42
114
==PAGE:124==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
Table 13: Accuracy test of bottoms mole fraction.
xB(EOH)
MB(MeOH)
MB(EOH)
MB(W)
NT
NS
NF
3.2000E-04
0
-7.677E-07
7.677E-07
60
6
16
3.1900E-04
0
-4.901E-07
4.901E-07
60
6
16
3.1800E-04
0
-2.126E-07
2.126E-07
59
6
16
3.1730E-04
0
-1.834E-08
1.834E-08
59
6
16
3.1722E-04
0
3.863E-09
-3.863E-09
59
6
16
3.1720E-04
0
9.414E-09
-9.414E-09
59
6
16
3.171339E-04
0
2.776E-08
-2.776E-08
59
6
16
3.1650E-04
0
2.037E-07
-2.037E-07
59
6
16
3.1625E-04
0
2.731E-07
-2.731E-07
59
6
16
3.1600E-04
0
3.425E-07
-3.425E-07
58
6
16
3.1500E-04
0
6.201E-07
-6.201E-07
58
6
16
3.1400E-04
0
8.977E-07
-8.977E-07
57
6
16
115
==PAGE:125==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12
Appendix B: Matlab code
The overall code structure is shown in Figure 56, where the call script is the script that
is run, and then each new box is a function that is called within the previous function.
Figure 56: Code structure for the cyclic design. Call script calls the mass balance model
function, which then calls either of the three VLE functions, which then calls the Antoine
equation function.
12.1
Binary code
1
clear
2
clc
3
close
all
4
% Specifications
5
6
format
long
7
tic
8
9
%% Specified
values
10
tvap =0.2;
%[min]
11
tspan =[ tvap
0]; % integrated
backwards
in time
12
modeltype = 1; % between 1 and 3
13
Ncomp = 3; % always
define as 3
14
Pinitial = 1.01325; % reboiler
pressure
15
Pdrop = 0.00; % pressure
drop
per
stage
16
NT = 60; % maximum
stages
17
18
xbm = 0.005; % mole
fraction
of
methanol
in the
bottoms
19
xbe = 1 - xbm; % mole
fraction
of
ethanol
20
% either
one can be
defined
as 0 if e.g. MeOH -W system is
21
% desired
22
% below is water
mole
fraction
depending
on the
other
two
23
if xbm == 0 || xbe == 0
24
xbw = 1 - xbm - xbe;
25
else
26
xbw = 0;
27
end
28
xb = [xbm xbe xbw ]; % full
bottoms
mole
fraction
29
%define
feed
mole
fraction
as above
116
==PAGE:126==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
30
xf = [0.5
0.5 0];
31
xd = [(1 - xbm) (1 - xbe) 0]; %this is only
used to find
the
32
%last tray , so it does
not
need to be unique
for the
different
conjunctions
33
xd (3) = 1 - xd (1) - xd (2);
34
F = 1; %kmol/cycle
35
V = 2*F/tvap; % kmol/min
36
37
%% Simulation
38
% solve
mass
balances
to find B, D
39
syms B
40
syms D
41
eqD1 = F - B;
42
if xf(1) ˜= 0
43
eqD2 = (F*xf (1) - B*xb (1))/ xd (1);
44
else
45
eqD2 = (F*xf (2) - B*xb (2))/ xd (2);
46
end
47
B = double(vpasolve(eqD1 == eqD2 ,B));
48
D = F - B;
49
50
M0 = [5* xb*F]; % initial
holdup in
reboiler (in this
case 1 kmol/cycle)
51
52
%Reboiler
calculations
53
N = 1;
54
[t, M] = ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,0,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0); %calling
the
model
function
55
%Initial
holdup
values
for
stage NT -1
56
57
%Stages 2 to NF -1
58
for N=2: NT
59
N
60
if N == 2
61
for j = 1: Ncomp
62
M0 = [M0 , M(size(M,1),j)-M0(j)+B*xb(j)];
63
end
64
else
65
M0 = [M0 ,M(size(M,1), size(M,2) -( Ncomp - 1): size(M ,2))];
66
end
67
[t,M]= ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,0,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
68
69
%calculate
mole
fractions
of all
components
at all
stages to see if
70
%feed
stage
mole
fraction
is
reached
71
x = [];
72
for j=1:N*Ncomp
73
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
74
for i=1: size(M,1)
75
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
76
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
77
end
78
end
79
end
80
end
81
if xf(1) ˜= 0
82
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 1) > xf (1)
83
84
break
85
end
86
else
87
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 2) > xf (2)
88
89
break
90
end
91
end
92
if N == NT
93
Nfinal = N;
94
end
95
end
96
97
%Feed
stage
98
if N < NT
99
NF = N + 1;
100
N = NF;
101
for i = 1: Ncomp
102
MNF(i) = M(size(M,1), size(M,2) - Ncomp + i) - F*xf(i);
103
end
104
M0 = [M0 , MNF ];
105
106
[t,M]= ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,NF ,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,0,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
107
end
108
117
==PAGE:127==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
109
%Stages NF+1 to stage
below
condenser
110
%new if N < NT since it is
possible
for NF to be = NT in theory
111
if N < NT
112
for N=NF +1: NT %to stage
below
condenser
113
M0 = [M0 ,M(size(M,1), size(M,2) -( Ncomp - 1): size(M ,2))];
114
[t,M] = ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,0,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
115
for j=1:N*Ncomp
116
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
117
for i=1: size(M,1)
118
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
119
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
120
end
121
end
122
end
123
end
124
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 2) > xd (2) && xf(2) ˜= 0 && xd(1) == 0
125
Nfinal = N;
126
break
127
elseif x(end ,end - Ncomp + 1) > xd (1) && xf(1) ˜= 0
128
Nfinal = N;
129
break
130
elseif N == NT
131
Nfinal = N;
132
end
133
end
134
end
135
136
% Determining x-values
for
each
tray
137
for j=1: Nfinal*Ncomp % Ncomp % to stage
below
condenser
138
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
139
for i=1: size(M,1)
140
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
141
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
142
end
143
end
144
end
145
end
146
% Determining
tray
number
147
for N=1: Nfinal %to stage
below
condenser
148
for i=1: length(t)
149
Nplot(i,N)=N-t(i)/ tvap;
150
end
151
end
152
% composition
profile
plot
153
%empty
vectors
to fill
154
x_firstpriority = [];
155
x_secondpriority = [];
156
x_thirdpriority = [];
157
xAXIS = [];
158
for i=1: Nfinal*Ncomp %- Ncomp
159
if rem(i,Ncomp) == 0 %to get all
uneven
160
x_firstpriority = [ x_firstpriority ;x(:,i - Ncomp + 1)];
161
x_secondpriority = [ x_secondpriority ;x(:,i - Ncomp + 2)];
162
if
Ncomp == 3
163
x_thirdpriority = [ x_thirdpriority ;x(:,i)];
164
end
165
end
166
167
end
168
%plotting
all the
stages
except
the
condenser
169
test = Nfinal
- Nplot;
170
for i=1: Nfinal
171
xAXIS = [xAXIS;test(:,i)];
172
end
173
xAXIS = xAXIS + 1;
174
%plot
175
176
figure (1)
177
hold on
178
if xf(1) ˜= 0
179
plot(xAXIS ,x_firstpriority , ’color ’,’red ’,’LineStyle ’,’-’)
180
end
181
if xf(2) ˜= 0
182
plot(xAXIS ,x_secondpriority , ’color ’,’blue ’,’LineStyle ’,’--’)
183
end
184
if xf(3) ˜= 0
185
plot(xAXIS ,x_thirdpriority , ’color ’,’black ’,’LineStyle ’,’-.’)
186
end
187
hold
off
118
==PAGE:128==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
188
if xf(1) == 0
189
legend(’x_{ethanol}’,’x_{water}’,’Location ’,’West ’);
190
elseif
xf(2) == 0
191
legend(’x_{methanol}’,’x_{water}’,’Location ’,’West ’);
192
elseif
xf(3) == 0
193
legend(’x_{methanol}’,’x_{ethanol}’,’Location ’,’West ’);
194
end
195
%title(’Methanol/Ethanol/water
composition
profile , V = 2*F/tvap ’);
196
xlabel(’Stages ’);
197
ylabel(’Liquid
mole
fraction ’);
198
ylim ([0 1])
199
xlim ([0
Nfinal + 1])
200
grid on
201
set(gca ,’GridLineStyle ’,’--’)
202
203
timeElapsed = toc /60;
204
fprintf (’The
simulation
took %.f minutes.’,timeElapsed )
205
fprintf (’\n’)
119
==PAGE:129==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.2
Mass balance model code
1
function [dM , out] = modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop)
2
3
%calculate x values
for all
components
at all
stages
4
for n = 1:N %for
loop
over N stages
5
for i = 1: Ncomp
6
id = (n - 1) * Ncomp + i; % current
stage
7
x(id) = M(id) / sum(M((1 + Ncomp * (n - 1)) : Ncomp * n)); % mole
fraction
8
end
9
end
10
11
%Solve
the
model
using
the
activity
model
function
12
for n = 1:N %for
loop
over N stages
13
%Calculate
pressure
at all
stages
14
P = Pinitial
- Pdrop *(n -1);
15
if
modeltype
== 1
16
[ytemp] = wilsony1(x(end ,(1 + Ncomp * (n - 1)) : Ncomp * n),P,Ncomp );
17
elseif
modeltype
== 2
18
[ytemp] = wilsony2(x(end ,(1 + Ncomp * (n - 1)) : Ncomp * n),P,Ncomp );
19
elseif
modeltype
== 3
20
[ytemp] = wilsony3(x(end ,(1 + Ncomp * (n - 1)) : Ncomp * n),P,Ncomp );
21
end
22
y((1 + Ncomp * (n - 1)) : Ncomp * n) = ytemp;
23
for i = 1: Ncomp
24
id0 = (n - 1) * Ncomp + i; % current
stage
25
id1 = (n - 2) * Ncomp + i; % stage
below
current
stage
26
if n == 1 % this is only
for the
reboiler
27
dM(id0 ,1) = - V * y(id0 ); %diff
equation
to be solved
28
elseif i == Ncomp &&
waterzero
˜= 0 && n >= waterzero
29
dM(id0 ,1) = 0;
30
else
31
dM(id0 ,1) = V * (y(id1) - y(id0 )); %diff
equation
to be solved
32
end
33
end
34
end
35
36
37
end
120
==PAGE:130==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.3
Call script for the conventional column
1
clear
all
2
clc
3
close
all
4
5
%% Fixed
variables
6
7
F = 1; % feed
magnitude [kmol/time]
8
Vall = [2.5*F, 2.6*F, 2.7*F, 2.8*F, 2.9*F, 3*F, 3.5*F, 4*F, 5*F, 6*F]; % vapor flow ,
9
%define as many as want to simulate , [kmol/time]
10
modeltype = 3;
% define
between 1-3 depending
on which
model to use
11
% 1 is wilson + ideal
gas
12
% 2 is wilson + pure
comp. virial
coef. model
from
13
% Hayden/O’Connell
14
% 3 is wilson + complete
Hayden/O’Connell
model
15
Pinitial = 1.9; % reboiler
pressure [bar]
16
P = Pinitial;
17
Pdrop = 0.0075; % pressure
drop [bar]
18
Ncomp = 3; %always
define as 3
19
S = 0.01*F; % side
draw
magnitude
based on feed
magnitude [kmol/time]
20
NT = 230; % max
number of stages
21
xf = [0.7224682809
0.00009165455403
(1 - 0.7224682809
- 0.00009165455403)]; % feed
from
Udugama
et al. mole
fractions
22
xbm = 10*10ˆ( -6); % bottoms
mole
fraction
of
methanol
23
changematrix = [0.99
0.999 , 0.9999 ,
0.99999 ,
0.999999 ,
0.9999999 ,
...
24
0.99999999 ,
0.999999999 ,
0.9999999999 ,
0.99999999999 ,0.999999999999 ,
...
25
0.9999999999999 ,0.99999999999999 ,0.999999999999999 ,
...
26
0.9999999999999999 ,0.99999999999999999 ,0.999999999999999999 ,
...
27
0.9999999999999999999 ,0.99999999999999999999 ,0.999999999999999999999];
28
%% Initial
guesses
29
xbe = 2.5e -09; % bottoms
mole
fraction
of
ethanol
30
xs = [0.636049869
0.008807328
0]; % side
draw
guess
31
xs (3) = 1 - xs (1) - xs (2);% define
these
with
higher
mole
fraction
of
ethanol
with
higher
xbe
32
% roughly
do 0.075
higher
mole
fraction
per
factor 10
33
% difference
34
35
xd = [(1 - 5*10ˆ( -6) - 0*10ˆ( -8))
5*10ˆ( -6)
0*10ˆ( -8)]; % initial
guess of
distillate
comp.
36
xdinitial = xd;
37
38
xde = xd (2); % definition
of purity
requirement
of
ethanol
in
distillate
39
40
%% simulation
41
42
% matrices
to save
outputs
from
each
simulation
43
Vplot = [];
44
nplot = [];
45
xbeplot = [];
46
xdplot = [];
47
sidedrawplot = [];
48
xsplot = [];
49
NFplot = [];
50
DBplot = [];
51
diditchange = 0;
52
% outer
loop (c) is to loop
over
each
vapor
flow
value
53
for c = 1: length(Vall)
54
V = Vall(c);
55
xbechange = 0;
56
wmax = 1;
57
clear x y
58
xbevector = [];
59
xd = [(1 - 5*10ˆ( -6)) ,
5*10ˆ( -6) , 0];
60
61
% w loop is for
failsafes
62
for w = 1: wmax
63
omax = 1000;
64
if w > 1 && n < NT
65
xd2 = xd;
66
xtest = x;
67
if all(xd2 - xd < 10ˆ( -9)) && w > 2
68
if x(end ,end) > 0
69
break
70
else
71
xbe = xbe* changematrix (xbechange );
72
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
73
fprintf (’\n’);
74
omax = 1;
75
end
76
end
77
elseif w > 1 && n == NT
121
==PAGE:131==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
78
xbe = xbe *0.9;
79
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
80
fprintf (’\n’);
81
xbechange = 1;
82
end
83
if w > 1
84
xbechange = 1;
85
end
86
xbetemp = zeros (1,omax );
87
decinc = [2 2 2];
88
% o loop to find xB(EOH)
89
for o = 1: omax
90
91
if o > 2
92
x(end ,:);
93
if S == 0
94
xbe = xbetemp(o -1);
95
else
96
if
abs(xbetemp(o -1) - xbe) > xbe *10ˆ( -3)
97
if
xbetemp(o-1) < xbe
98
if
xbechange
== 0 &&
decinc(end) ˜= 1
99
if
decinc (1) == 2
100
decinc = [0 0 0];
101
else
102
decinc = [decinc , 0];
103
end
104
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
105
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
106
end
107
xbe = xbe *0.9;
108
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
109
fprintf (’\n’);
110
else
111
decinc = [decinc , 0];
112
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
113
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
114
end
115
xbe = xbe* changematrix (xbechange );
116
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
117
fprintf (’\n’);
118
end
119
else
120
if
xbechange
== 0 &&
decinc(end) ˜= 0
121
if
decinc (1) == 2
122
decinc = [1 1 1];
123
else
124
decinc = [decinc , 1];
125
end
126
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
127
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
128
end
129
xbe = xbe *1.1;
130
fprintf (’xbe
increased
to %.10e’, xbe );
131
fprintf (’\n’);
132
else
133
decinc = [decinc , 1];
134
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
135
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
136
end
137
xbe = xbe *(2 - changematrix (xbechange ));
138
fprintf (’xbe
increased
to %.10e’, xbe );
139
fprintf (’\n’);
140
141
end
142
end
143
elseif x(end ,end) < 0
144
xbe = xbe* changematrix (xbechange );
145
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
146
fprintf (’\n’);
147
break
148
else
149
break
150
end
151
end
152
end
153
% k loop is to find xS
154
for k = 1:1000
155
if k > 1
156
xs = xs2;
122
==PAGE:132==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
157
end
158
syms B D
159
eqD1 = F - B - S;
160
xbw = 1 - xbm - xbe;
161
xb = [xbm xbe xbw ];
162
eqD2 = (F*xf (1) - B*xb(1) - S*xs (1))/ xd (1);
163
B = double(vpasolve(eqD1 == eqD2 ,B));
164
D = F - B - S;
165
Lbot = V - D + F - S;
166
Lmid = V - D + F;
167
Ltop = V - D;
168
Massbalance = F*xf(2) - xd (2)*D - S*xs (2) - xb (2)*B;
169
% calculate
up to side
draw
stage
170
P = Pinitial;
171
for n = 1:NT
172
P = Pinitial
- Pdrop *(n -1);
173
if n == 1 %reboiler
174
x = xb;
175
y = convmodel(xb ,P,Ncomp ,modeltype );
176
for i = 1: Ncomp
177
x(n+1,i) = (V*y(i)+B*xb(i))/ Lbot;
178
end
179
else
180
ytemp = convmodel(x(end ,:),P,Ncomp ,modeltype );
181
y = [y;ytemp ];
182
for i = 1: Ncomp
183
x(n+1,i) = (V*(y(n,i) - y(n-1,i)) + Lbot*x(n,i))/ Lbot;
184
end
185
end
186
if n > 2
187
if x(n+1 ,2) < x(n,2)
188
xs2 = x(n ,:);
189
sidedrawstage = n;
190
x(end ,:) = [];
191
y(end ,:) = [];
192
break
193
end
194
end
195
end
196
if all(xs2 - xs < 10ˆ( -12))
197
break
198
end
199
end
200
201
% calculate
up to feed
stage
202
for n = sidedrawstage :NT
203
P = Pinitial
- Pdrop *(n -1);
204
ytemp = convmodel(x(n,:),P,Ncomp ,modeltype );
205
y = [y;ytemp ];
206
if n ==
sidedrawstage + 1
207
for i = 1: Ncomp
208
x(n+1,i) = (V*(y(n,i) - y(n-1,i)) + x(n,i)*( Lbot + S))/ Lmid;
209
end
210
else
211
for i = 1: Ncomp
212
x(n+1,i) = (V*(y(n,i) - y(n-1,i)) + x(n,i)* Lmid )/ Lmid;
213
end
214
end
215
if x(end ,1) > xf (1)
216
break
217
end
218
end
219
220
221
222
% feed
stage
223
n = n + 1;
224
P = Pinitial
- Pdrop *(n -1);
225
ytemp = convmodel(x(end ,:),P,Ncomp ,modeltype );
226
y = [y;ytemp ];
227
228
NF = n;
229
x = [x; [0 0 0]];
230
for i = 1: Ncomp
231
x(n+1,i) = (V*(y(n,i) - y(n-1,i)) + Lmid*x(n,i) - F*xf(i))/ Ltop;
232
end
233
234
% to
condenser
235
for n = n+1: NT
123
==PAGE:133==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
236
P = Pinitial
- Pdrop *(n -1);
237
ytemp = convmodel(x(n,:),P,Ncomp ,modeltype );
238
y = [y;ytemp ];
239
for i = 1: Ncomp
240
x(n+1,i) = (V*(y(n,i) - y(n-1,i)) + Ltop*x(n,i))/ Ltop;
241
end
242
if x(n+1 ,3) < 10ˆ( -10)
243
x(n+1 ,3) = 0;
244
end
245
if x(end ,2) < xde
246
Nfinal = n + 2;
247
break
248
end
249
end
250
xbetemp(o) = (F*xf(2) - S*xs (2) - D*xd (2))/B;
251
end
252
end
253
254
Vplot = [Vplot;V];
255
nplot = [nplot; Nfinal ];
256
xbeplot = [xbeplot; xbe];
257
xdplot = [xdplot;xd];
258
xsplot = [xsplot;xs];
259
sidedrawplot = [ sidedrawplot ; sidedrawstage ];
260
NFplot = [NFplot;NF];
261
DBplot = [DBplot; D B];
262
end
263
264
265
266
xAXISlength = length(x);
267
xAXIS = linspace (xAXISlength ,1, xAXISlength );
268
269
figure (1)
270
plot(xAXIS ,x(: ,1))
271
hold on
272
plot(xAXIS ,x(: ,2))
273
hold on
274
plot(xAXIS ,x(: ,3))
275
hold
off
276
277
% check
mass
balances
278
F*xf (1) - B*xb(1) - D*xd (1) - S*xs (1)
279
F*xf (2) - B*xb(2) - D*xde - S*xs(2)
280
F*xf (3) - B*xb(3) - D*xd (3) - S*xs (3)
281
282
% calculate
the
loss
283
Loss = (S*xs (1) + B*xb (1))/ xf(1) * 100
124
==PAGE:134==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.4
Function to call VLE models for the conventional col-
umn design
1
function [y] = convmodel(x,P,Ncomp ,modeltype)
2
if
modeltype
== 1
3
y = wilsony1(x,P,Ncomp );
4
elseif
modeltype
== 2
5
y = wilsony2(x,P,Ncomp );
6
elseif
modeltype
== 3
7
y = wilsony3(x,P,Ncomp );
8
elseif
modeltype
== 4
9
y = wilsony4(x,P,Ncomp );
10
elseif
modeltype
== 5
11
y = wilsony5(x,P,Ncomp );
12
end
13
end
125
==PAGE:135==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.5
Saturated vapor pressure function
1
function P = Psat(T,A,B,C)
2
3
%Antoine
equation
with
the
parameters
and the
temperature
given as input
4
P = 10ˆ(A - B / (C + T));
5
%T is in Kelvin , when
using
parameters
from
NIST
6
end
126
==PAGE:136==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.6
Call script to simulate a cyclic column
1
clear
all
2
clc
3
close
all
4
% Specifications
5
6
format
long
7
8
tic
9
tvap = 0.2;
10
tspan = linspace (tvap ,0 ,10ˆ4); % integrated
backwards
in time
11
changematrix = [0.99 , 0.999 , 0.9999 ,
0.99999 ,
0.999999 ,
0.9999999 ,
...
12
0.99999999 ,
0.999999999 ,
0.9999999999 ,
0.99999999999 ,0.999999999999 ,
...
13
0.9999999999999 ,0.99999999999999 ,0.999999999999999 ,
...
14
0.9999999999999999 ,0.99999999999999999 ,0.999999999999999999 ,
...
15
0.9999999999999999999 ,0.99999999999999999999 ,0.999999999999999999999]; %this
matrix is used as
itteration
tool
16
Ncomp = 3;
17
%Define
bottoms
mole
fraction
with
priority
methanol
-> ethanol
-> water:
18
%e.g. if M-W, the
order
would be (1)
methanol
and (2) water , whereas
if E-W
19
%order
would be (1) ethanol , (2)
water
etc.
20
%% Define
FIXED
values (will
not be
changed
during
simulation
21
22
xbm = 10*10ˆ( -6);
23
modeltype = 1; %define
model
type
between 1-3 to use the
different
models
prescibed
in the
thesis
with:
24
%1) Liquid
phase: Wilson , Vapor: ideal
gas (modified
Raoult ’s law)
25
%2) Liquid: Wilson , Vapor: ideal
solution (pure
component
virials , B_ii , e.g. from
Hayden/O’Connell ).
26
%3) Liquid: Wilson , Vapor: Hayden/O’Connell
virials (B_ij ).
27
F = 1; %kmol/cycle
28
Pinitial = 1.01325; % [bar], reboiler
pressure
29
Pdrop = 0.00; % [bar], pressure
drop
per
tray
30
31
S = 0.01*F; % side
draw
magnitude [kmol/cycle]
32
NT = 500;
33
%define
feed
mole
fraction
as above
34
xf = [0.7224682809
0.00009165455403
(1 - 0.7224682809
- 0.00009165455403)]; % feed
composition
from
Udugama
et al.
35
V = 3*F/tvap; % specified
vapor
flow
36
xde = 5*10ˆ( -6); % purity
requirement
of
ethanol
in
distillate
37
%% Define
initial
guesses (values
will be
changed
during
simulation
38
xbe = 5e -11; % initial
guess of
ethanol
in
bottoms
39
xs = [0.65 ,
10*10ˆ( -3) , (1 - 0.65 - 10*10ˆ( -3))]; % side
draw
intial
guess
40
% define
these
with
higher
mole
fraction
of
ethanol
with
higher
xbe
41
42
xd = [0, xde , 0*10ˆ( -10)]; % initial
guess of
distillate
comp.
43
xd (1) = 1 - xd (2) - xd (3);
44
45
%% Simulation
46
%define
convergence
criteria
47
convergencecriteria = xbe *10ˆ( -5); %should be 10ˆ( -9) for S = 0, and at least
10ˆ( -3) for S =/= 0
48
convC = convergencecriteria ; % to
shorten
it
49
% The
below
for
loop
finds
the
right xD values
50
omax = 1000; % max
iterations
for xB(EOH)
51
52
xbechange = 0; % variable
to
increase
precision
as
iterations
move
forward
53
54
% below
matrices
are for
some
plotting
55
xbeall = [0 0 0, xbe ,0];
56
xdall = [0 0 0, xd];
57
xsall = [0 0 0, xs];
58
59
% w loop is to find xD
60
for w = 1:1000
61
w
62
if w > 1
63
xd2 = xd;
64
%find
row
with
ethanol
mole
fraction
of last
tray
closest
to xd (2)
65
[ccc
closestvalue ] = min(abs(x(:,end - Ncomp + 2) - xde ));
66
% this
gets an
approximation
of xd (which is not
quite
right
since xd
67
% is
always
kept at the
fixed
value)
68
% trying
something
new! xd = x(closestvalue ,end - Ncomp + 1: end );
69
if
closestvalue
˜= 1 &&
closestvalue
˜=
size(x,1)
70
xd (1) = interp1 (x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 2), ...
71
x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 1), xde );
72
xd (2) = xde;
73
xd (3) = interp1 (x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 2), ...
74
x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue +1, end), xde );
75
if xd (3) > 0 && xd2 (3) > 0
76
xd(3) = (xd (3) + xd2 (3))/2;
77
xd(1) = 1 - xde - xd (3);
127
==PAGE:137==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
78
elseif
xd (3) < 0
79
xd(1) = ((1 - xde) + xd2 (1))/2;
80
xd(3) = 1 - xde - xd (1);
81
end
82
elseif
closestvalue
== 1
83
xd (1) = interp1 (x( closestvalue : closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 2), ...
84
x( closestvalue : closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 1), xde );
85
xd (2) = xde;
86
xd (3) = interp1 (x( closestvalue : closestvalue +1, end - Ncomp + 2), ...
87
x( closestvalue : closestvalue +1, end), xde );
88
if xd (3) > 0 && xd2 (3) > 0
89
xd(3) = (xd (3) + xd2 (3))/2;
90
xd(1) = 1 - xde - xd (3);
91
elseif
xd (3) < 0
92
xd(1) = ((1 - xde) + xd2 (1))/2;
93
xd(3) = 1 - xde - xd (1);
94
end
95
elseif
closestvalue
==
size(x,2)
96
xd (1) = interp1 (x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue ,end - Ncomp + 2), ...
97
x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue ,end - Ncomp + 1), xde );
98
xd (2) = xde;
99
xd (3) = interp1 (x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue ,end - Ncomp + 2), ...
100
x(closestvalue -1: closestvalue ,end), xde );
101
if xd (3) > 0 && xd2 (3) > 0
102
xd(3) = (xd (3) + xd2 (3))/2;
103
xd(1) = 1 - xde - xd (3);
104
elseif
xd (3) < 0
105
xd(1) = ((1 - xde) + xd2 (1))/2;
106
xd(3) = 1 - xde - xd (1);
107
end
108
end
109
xdall = [xdall;w, o, k, xd];
110
111
if all(abs(xd2 - xd) < convC) %to get
reasonable
accuracy
and
speed of the
simulation
112
break
113
elseif w > 1 && xd (3) < 10ˆ( -16) && xd2 (3) < 10ˆ( -16) % for the
case of
setting
water = 0 for < ppb
114
break
115
end
116
end
117
118
119
if w > 1
120
if
xbechange
> 4
121
xbechange = xbechange
- 2;
122
end
123
end
124
xbetemp = zeros (1,omax );
125
decinc = [2 2 2]; % used to
indicate
when
increased
precision
is needed
126
% o for
loop
iterates
over xB(EOH)
127
for o = 1: omax
128
if o > 2
129
if S == 0
130
if abs(xbe - xbetemp(o -1)) < convC
131
break
132
else
133
xbe = xbetemp(o -1);
134
xbeall = [xbeall; w, o, k, xbe , xbechange ];
135
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
136
fprintf (’\n’);
137
end
138
else
139
if
abs(xbetemp(o-1) - xbe) > convC ||
xbetemp(o -1) < 0
140
if
xbetemp(o-1) < xbe
141
if
xbechange
== 0 && decinc(end) ˜= 1
142
if
decinc (1) == 2
143
decinc = [0 0 0];
144
else
145
decinc = [decinc , 0];
146
end
147
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
148
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
149
end
150
xbe = xbe *0.9;
151
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
152
fprintf (’\n’);
153
else
154
decinc = [decinc , 0];
155
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
156
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
128
==PAGE:138==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
157
end
158
xbe = xbe* changematrix (xbechange );
159
fprintf (’xbe
decreased
to %.10e’, xbe );
160
fprintf (’\n’);
161
end
162
else
163
if
xbechange
== 0 && decinc(end) ˜= 0
164
if
decinc (1) == 2
165
decinc = [1 1 1];
166
else
167
decinc = [decinc , 1];
168
end
169
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
170
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
171
end
172
xbe = xbe *1.1;
173
fprintf (’xbe
increased
to %.10e’, xbe );
174
fprintf (’\n’);
175
else
176
decinc = [decinc , 1];
177
if
decinc(end -1) ˜= decinc(end)
178
xbechange = xbechange + 1;
179
end
180
xbe = xbe *(2 - changematrix (xbechange ));
181
fprintf (’xbe
increased
to %.10e’, xbe );
182
fprintf (’\n’);
183
184
end
185
end
186
xbeall = [xbeall; w, o, k, xbe , xbechange ];
187
else
188
break
189
end
190
end
191
end
192
% the
below
for
loop is to find
the
proper
mole
fraction
of
ethanol
in
193
% the
side
draw
stream
194
for k = 1:1000
195
if k > 1
196
xs = xs2;
197
end
198
syms B D
199
eqD1 = F - B - S;
200
xbw = 1 - xbm - xbe;
201
xb = [xbm xbe xbw ];
202
203
eqD2 = (F*xf (1) - B*xb(1) - S*xs (1))/ xd (1);
204
B = double(solve(eqD1 == eqD2 ,B));
205
D = F - B - S;
206
xbetemp(o) = (F*xf(2) - D*xd (2) - S*xs (2))/B;
207
208
209
210
M0 = [5* xb*V]; % initial
holdup in
reboiler
211
waterzero = 0;
212
%Reboiler
213
N = 1;
214
215
%calling
the
model
function
216
[t, M] = ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
217
% for
stage 2 to the
side
draw
stage
218
for N=2: NT
219
if N == 2
220
for j = 1: Ncomp
221
M0 = [M0 , M(size(M,1),j)-M0(j)+B*xb(j)];
222
end
223
else
224
M0 = [M0 ,M(size(M,1), size(M,2) -( Ncomp - 1): size(M ,2))];
225
end
226
[t,M]= ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
227
228
%calculate
mole
fractions
of all
components
at all
stages to see if
229
%feed
stage
mole
fraction
is
reached
230
x = [];
231
for j=1:N*Ncomp
232
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
233
for i=1: size(M,1)
234
for kk = 0:Ncomp -1
235
x(i,j+kk) = M(i,j+kk )/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
129
==PAGE:139==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
236
end
237
end
238
end
239
end
240
241
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 2) < x(end , end - 2* Ncomp + 2)
242
xs2 = x(end , end - 2* Ncomp + 1: end - Ncomp );
243
sidedrawstage = N;
244
break
245
end
246
247
end
248
xsall = [xsall; w, o, k, xs];
249
if all(xs2 - xs < convC) %to get
accuracy
of
atleast 2 decimals
more
than
mole
fraction
definition
250
M0(end -2: end) = [];
251
M(:,end -2: end) = [];
252
testifm0 = 1;
253
break
254
elseif k == 1000
255
error(’side
draw
mole
fractions
did not
converge
within
maxtries , increase
this
and try
again.’)
256
return
257
end
258
end
259
end
260
261
% From
side
draw
stage to feed
stage
262
Ns = sidedrawstage ;
263
264
for N = Ns:NT
265
if N == Ns
266
for j = 1: Ncomp
267
M0 = [M0 , M(size(M,1), end - Ncomp + j) + S*xs2(j)];
268
end
269
else
270
M0 = [M0 ,M(size(M,1), size(M,2) -( Ncomp - 1): size(M ,2))];
271
end
272
[t,M]= ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
273
%calculate
mole
fractions
of all
components
at all
stages to see if
274
%feed
stage
mole
fraction
is
reached
275
x = [];
276
for j=1:N*Ncomp
277
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
278
for i=1: size(M,1)
279
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
280
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
281
end
282
end
283
end
284
end
285
if xf(1) ˜= 0
286
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 1) > xf (1)
287
288
break
289
end
290
else
291
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 2) > xf (2)
292
293
break
294
end
295
end
296
if N == NT
297
Nfinal = N;
298
end
299
end
300
301
%Feed
stage
302
if N < NT
303
NF = N + 1;
304
N = NF;
305
for i = 1: Ncomp
306
MNF(i) = M(size(M,1), size(M,2) - Ncomp + i) - F*xf(i);
307
end
308
M0 = [M0 , MNF ];
309
310
[t,M]= ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,NF ,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
311
end
312
%Stages NF+1 to stage
below
condenser
313
%new if N < NT since it is
possible
for NF to be = NT in theory
314
if N < NT
130
==PAGE:140==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
315
for N=NF +1: NT %to stage
below
condenser
316
N
317
M0 = [M0 ,M(size(M,1), size(M,2) -( Ncomp - 1): size(M ,2))];
318
if M0(end) < 10ˆ( -09) &&
waterzero
== 0
319
M0(end) = 0;
320
waterzero = N;
321
end
322
[t,M] = ode45(@(t,M)modelo(t,M,N,V,Ncomp ,modeltype ,waterzero ,Pinitial ,Pdrop),tspan ,M0);
323
for j=1:N*Ncomp
324
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
325
for i=1: size(M,1)
326
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
327
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
328
end
329
end
330
end
331
end
332
if x(end ,end - Ncomp + 2) < xd (2)
333
Nfinal = N;
334
break
335
end
336
337
end
338
end
339
340
%this
will
give a solution
that is more
than
accurate
in terms of total
stages
341
if w > 1 && all(abs(xd2 - xd) < convC)
342
break
343
end
344
end
345
346
347
348
349
%% Below is
plotting
350
% Determining x-values
for
each
tray
351
for j=1: Nfinal*Ncomp %- Ncomp % to stage
below
condenser
352
if rem(j,Ncomp) == 1 % to get the
next
stage
353
for i=1: size(M,1)
354
for k = 0:Ncomp -1
355
x(i,j+k) = M(i,j+k)/( sum(M(i,j:j+(Ncomp -1))));
356
end
357
end
358
end
359
end
360
% Determining
tray
number
361
for N=1: Nfinal %to stage
below
condenser
362
for i=1: length(t)
363
Nplot(i,N)=N-t(i)/ tvap;
364
end
365
end
366
% composition
profile
plot
367
%empty
vectors
to fill
368
x_firstpriority = [];
369
x_secondpriority = [];
370
x_thirdpriority = [];
371
xAXIS = [];
372
for i=1: Nfinal*Ncomp %- Ncomp
373
if rem(i,Ncomp) == 0 %to get all
uneven
374
x_firstpriority = [ x_firstpriority ;x(:,i - Ncomp + 1)];
375
x_secondpriority = [ x_secondpriority ;x(:,i - Ncomp + 2)];
376
if
Ncomp == 3
377
x_thirdpriority = [ x_thirdpriority ;x(:,i)];
378
end
379
end
380
381
end
382
%plotting
all the
stages
except
the
condenser
383
test = Nfinal
- Nplot;
384
for i=1: Nfinal
385
xAXIS = [xAXIS;test(:,i)];
386
end
387
xAXIS = xAXIS + 1;
388
%plot
389
390
391
392
figure (1)
393
left_color = [1 0 0];
131
==PAGE:141==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
394
right_color = [0 0 1];
395
set(figure (1),’defaultAxesColorOrder ’,[left_color; right_color ]);
396
hold on
397
%yyaxis
left
398
%ylabel(’Liquid
mole
fraction ’)
399
% ylim ([0 1])
400
plot(xAXIS ,x_firstpriority ,’color ’,’red’, ’LineStyle ’,’-’)
401
plot(xAXIS ,x_thirdpriority , ’color ’,’black ’, ’LineStyle ’, ’-.’)
402
%yyaxis
right
403
%ylim ([0
0.015])
404
405
plot(xAXIS ,x_secondpriority , ’color ’,’blue ’, ’LineStyle ’,’--’)
406
hold
off
407
legend(’x_{methanol}’,’x_{ethanol}’,’x_{water}’,’Location ’,’West ’);
408
%title(’Methanol/Ethanol/water
composition
profile , V = 2*F/tvap ’);
409
xlabel(’Stages ’);
410
ylabel(’Liquid
mole
fraction ’);
411
412
xlim ([0
Nfinal + 1])
413
grid on
414
timeElapsed = toc /60
415
416
MeOHR = flip(M(: ,1));
417
EOHR = flip(M(: ,2));
418
WR = flip(M(: ,3));
419
MeOHRplot = [MeOHR;MeOHR;MeOHR;MeOHR;MeOHR;MeOHR;MeOHR ];
420
EOHRplot = [EOHR;EOHR;EOHR;EOHR;EOHR;EOHR;EOHR ];
421
WRplot = [WR;WR;WR;WR;WR;WR;WR];
422
tplot = transpose( linspace (0 ,0.2 ,10ˆ4));
423
timeplot = [tplot; tplot + 0.25;
tplot + 0.5;
tplot + 0.75;
tplot + 1; tplot + 1.25;
tplot + 1.5];
424
425
figure (2)
426
hold on
427
yyaxis
right
428
ylabel(’Molar hold -up’)
429
ylim ([0
0.05])
430
plot(timeplot , MeOHRplot ,’color ’,’red ’,’LineStyle ’,’-’)
431
432
yyaxis
left
433
ylim ([0
2.5])
434
plot(timeplot , EOHRplot ,’color ’,’blue ’,’LineStyle ’,’--’)
435
plot(timeplot , WRplot ,’color ’,’black ’,’LineStyle ’,’-.’)
436
legend(’EOH(t), \leftarrow ’,’W(t) \leftarrow ’,’MeOH(t), \rightarrow ’)
437
xlabel(’Time [min]’)
438
ylabel(’Molar hold -up’)
439
grid on
440
441
% arrows
for
figure (3)
442
x1 = [0.3
0.23];
% adjust
length
and
location
of arrow
443
y1 = [0.3
0.22];
% adjust
hieght
and
width of arrow
444
x2 = [0.85
0.9];
445
y2 = [0.68
0.58];
446
447
figure (3)
448
hold on
449
plot( linspace (1, length(xbeall), length(xbeall )),xbeall ,’*’,’color ’,’blue ’)
450
plot ([0,
length(xbeall )],[xbe , xbe],’color ’,’black ’,’LineStyle ’,’--’)
451
drawbrace ([1, xbeall (1)] ,[1 , xbeall (2)],8,’color ’,’black ’)
452
h = text (-1.5, 3.1*10ˆ( -4) , ’10 % change ’,’FontSize ’ ,13);
453
set(h,’Rotation ’ ,90)
454
drawbrace ([3, xbeall (2)] ,[3 , xbeall (3)],8,’color ’,’black ’)
455
text (5, 3.285*10ˆ( -4) , ’1 % change ’,’FontSize ’ ,13)
456
annotation(’textarrow ’,x1 ,y1 ,’String ’,’ Initial
guess ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
457
annotation(’textarrow ’,x2 ,y2 ,’String ’,’ Converged
value ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
458
hold
off
459
xlabel(’Iteration
number ’)
460
ylabel(’x_B(EOH)’)
461
xlim ([-3
length(xbeall )])
462
ylim ([2.95*10ˆ( -4) ,
3.35*10ˆ( -4)])
463
grid on
464
465
%arrows
for
figure (4)
466
x1 = [0.38
0.28];
467
y1 = [0.7775
0.8775];
468
x2 = [0.805
0.855];
469
y2 = [0.405
0.305];
470
471
figure (4)
472
hold on
132
==PAGE:142==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
473
plot( linspace (0, size(xdall ,1)-1, size(xdall ,1)) , xdall (:,1),’*’,’color ’,’blue ’)
474
annotation(’textarrow ’,x1 ,y1 ,’String ’,’ Initial
guess ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
475
annotation(’textarrow ’,x2 ,y2 ,’String ’,’ Converged
value ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
476
hold
off
477
xlabel(’Iteration
number ’)
478
ylabel(’x_D(MeOH)’)
479
xlim ([ -0.5 ,7.5])
480
ylim ([0.999994999825 ,0.99999500001])
481
grid on
482
483
%arrows
for
figure (5)
484
x1 = [0.295
0.195];
485
y1 = [0.28
0.18];
486
x2 = [0.745
0.845];
487
y2 = [0.565
0.665];
488
489
figure (5)
490
hold on
491
plot( linspace (0, size(xdall ,1)-1, size(xdall ,1)) , xdall (:,3),’*’,’color ’,’blue ’)
492
annotation(’textarrow ’,x1 ,y1 ,’String ’,’ Initial
guess ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
493
annotation(’textarrow ’,x2 ,y2 ,’String ’,’ Converged
value ’,’FontSize ’ ,13,’Linewidth ’ ,1)
494
hold
off
495
xlabel(’Iteration
number ’)
496
ylabel(’x_D(W)’)
497
xlim ([ -0.5 ,7.5])
498
ylim ([ -0.15*10ˆ( -10) ,2*10ˆ( -10)])
499
ax = gca;
500
ax.YAxis.Exponent =
-10;
501
grid on
502
503
forexcel = [V*tvap/F, xb(2), xd , xs , timeElapsed , Nfinal +1];
504
forexcel2 = [D, B, closestvalue ];
505
506
F*xf (1) - B*xb(1) - D*xd (1) - S*xs (1)
507
F*xf (2) - B*xb(2) - D*xd (2) - S*xs (2)
508
F*xf (3) - B*xb(3) - D*xd (3) - S*xs (3)
509
510
Loss = (S*xs (1) + B*xb (1))/ xf(1) * 100
133
==PAGE:143==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.7
Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + ideal gas
model
1
function [y, Tb] = wilsony1(x,P,Ncomp)
2
3
% THIS IS THE
CODE
FOR
SITUATION
1) Liquid: Wilson , Vapor: ideal
gas
phase
4
% (modified
Raoult ’s law)
5
6
7
%Antoine
parameters
of
methanol
(1),
ethanol
(2), water
(3)
8
A = [5.20409
5.24677
6.20963];
9
B = [1581.341
1598.673
2354.731];
10
C = [ -33.50
-46.424
7.559];
11
12
%binary
interaction
parameters
of (1), (2), (3), given as Delta
lambdaij/R,
13
%i.e. unit [K]
14
Aij = [ 0
-163.088
87.0697 ; ...
15
368.2867 0 270.66 ; ...
16
246.1449
480.11 0 ];
17
18
19
function [pressures , gamma] = sump(T)
20
%calculate
molar
volumes
as a function
of T
21
Vm = [32.04/( -0.96429*T+1073.909)*10ˆ3 ,
...
22
46.07/( -0.96*T+1074.324)*10ˆ3 ,
...
23
18.02/( -0.63314*T +1194.627)*10ˆ3];
24
25
26
%calculate
Lambdaij (local
volume
fraction)
27
28
for i = 1: Ncomp
29
for j = 1: Ncomp
30
Lambdaij(i,j) = Vm(j)/Vm(i) * exp(-Aij(i,j)/T);
31
end
32
end
33
34
%for
loop to
calculate
the
boiling
point T from
Antoine
equation
and
total
35
%predefining
sizes of
variables
for
speed
36
37
for i = 1: Ncomp
38
%calculate
first
sum in ln(gamma_i)
39
for j = 1: Ncomp
40
S1(j) = x(j)* Lambdaij(i,j);
41
end
42
%Calculate
second
sum
43
for k = 1: Ncomp
44
for j = 1: Ncomp
45
Stemp(j) = x(j) * Lambdaij(k,j);
46
end
47
48
S2(k) = x(k)*
Lambdaij(k,i) / sum(Stemp );
49
50
end
51
%Calculate
activity
coefficient
52
gamma(i) = exp (1 - log(sum(S1)) - sum(S2));
53
%Calculated
total
pressure
54
pcalc(i) = x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(T,A(i),B(i),C(i));
55
end
56
pressures = sum(pcalc) - P;
57
end
58
59
60
Tb = (fzero(@sump , 350));
61
[pressures , gamma] = sump(Tb);
62
63
for i = 1: Ncomp
64
y(i) = double(x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(Tb ,A(i),B(i),C(i))/P);
65
end
66
end
134
==PAGE:144==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.8
Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + pure comp.
virial coefs.
1
function [y, Tb ,phi] = wilsony2(x,P,Ncomp)
2
3
% THIS IS THE
CODE
FOR
SITUATION
2) Liquid: Wilson ,
4
% Vapor: ideal
solution (pure
component
virials , B_ii , e.g. from
Hayden/O’Connell)
5
6
R = 83.1446261815324;
7
%Antoine
parameters
of
methanol
(1),
ethanol
(2), water
(3)
8
A = [5.20409
5.24677
6.20963];
9
B = [1581.341
1598.673
2354.731];
10
C = [ -33.50
-46.424
7.559];
11
12
%binary
interaction
parameters
of (1), (2), (3), given as Delta
lambdaij/R,
13
%i.e. unit [K]
14
Aij = [ 0
-163.088
87.0697 ; ...
15
368.2867 0 270.66 ; ...
16
246.1449
480.11 0 ];
17
18
19
20
function [pressures , gamma] = sump(T)
21
%calculate
molar
volumes
as a function
of T
22
Vm = [32.04/( -0.96429*T+1073.909)*10ˆ3 ,
...
23
46.07/( -0.96*T+1074.324)*10ˆ3 ,
...
24
18.02/( -0.63314*T +1194.627)*10ˆ3];
25
26
27
%calculate
Lambdaij (local
volume
fraction)
28
29
for i = 1: Ncomp
30
for j = 1: Ncomp
31
Lambdaij(i,j) = Vm(j)/Vm(i) * exp(-Aij(i,j)/T);
32
end
33
end
34
35
%for
loop to
calculate
the
boiling
point T from
Antoine
equation
and
total
36
%predefining
sizes of
variables
for
speed
37
38
for i = 1: Ncomp
39
%calculate
first
sum in ln(gamma_i)
40
for j = 1: Ncomp
41
S1(j) = x(j)* Lambdaij(i,j);
42
end
43
%Calculate
second
sum
44
for k = 1: Ncomp
45
for j = 1: Ncomp
46
Stemp(j) = x(j) * Lambdaij(k,j);
47
end
48
49
S2(k) = x(k)*
Lambdaij(k,i) / sum(Stemp );
50
51
end
52
%Calculate
activity
coefficient
53
gamma(i) = exp (1 - log(sum(S1)) - sum(S2));
54
55
%calculate
the
pure
component
virial
coefficients
56
B11 (1) = 0.00242*Tˆ3 - 2.78585*Tˆ2 + 1076.04697* T - 140133.63990; %MeOH
57
B11 (2) = 0.00129*Tˆ3 - 1.50336*Tˆ2 + 589.69888*T - 78574.66481; %EOH
58
B11 (3) = 0.00182*Tˆ3 - 2.09544*Tˆ2 + 807.82283*T - 104930.64444; %H2O
59
phi(i) = exp(B11(i)*P/(R*T)) / exp(B11(i)* Psat(T,A(i),B(i),C(i))/(R * T));
60
%Calculated
partial
pressures
61
pcalc(i) = x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(T,A(i),B(i),C(i))/ phi(i);
62
end
63
pressures = sum(pcalc) - P;
64
end
65
66
67
Tb = (fzero(@sump , 350));
68
[pressures , gamma] = sump(Tb);
69
70
%pure
comp. virial
coefficients
71
B11 (1) = 0.00242* Tbˆ3 - 2.78585* Tbˆ2 + 1076.04697* Tb - 140133.63990; %MeOH
72
B11 (2) = 0.00129* Tbˆ3 - 1.50336* Tbˆ2 + 589.69888* Tb - 78574.66481; %EOH
73
B11 (3) = 0.00182* Tbˆ3 - 2.09544* Tbˆ2 + 807.82283* Tb - 104930.64444; %H2O
74
75
% calculate
vapor
phase
135
==PAGE:145==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
76
for i = 1: Ncomp
77
phi(i) = exp(B11(i)*P/(R*Tb)) / exp(B11(i)* Psat(Tb ,A(i),B(i),C(i))/(R * Tb ));
78
y(i) = double(x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(Tb ,A(i),B(i),C(i))/(P*phi(i)));
79
end
80
81
end
136
==PAGE:146==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
12.9
Function to calculate VLE using Wilson + complete
Hayden/O’Connell model
1
function [y, Tb ,phi , gamma ,Bfinal] = wilsony3(x,P,Ncomp)
2
3
% THIS IS THE
CODE
FOR
SITUATION
3) Liquid: Wilson , Vapor: Complete
4
% Hayden/O’Connell
model
5
6
R = 83.1446261815324;
7
%Antoine
parameters
of
methanol
(1),
ethanol
(2), water
(3)
8
A = [5.20409
5.24677
6.20963];
9
B = [1581.341
1598.673
2354.731];
10
C = [ -33.50
-46.424
7.559];
11
12
%binary
interaction
parameters
of (1), (2), (3), given as Delta
lambdaij/R,
13
%i.e. unit [K]
14
Aij = [ 0
-163.088
87.0697 ; ...
15
368.2867 0 270.66 ; ...
16
246.1449
480.11 0 ];
17
18
y = [x(1) x(2) x(3)];
19
20
function [pressures , gamma] = sump(T)
21
%calculate
molar
volumes
as a function
of T
22
Vm = [32.04/( -0.96429*T+1073.909)*10ˆ3 ,
...
23
46.07/( -0.96*T+1074.324)*10ˆ3 ,
...
24
18.02/( -0.63314*T +1194.627)*10ˆ3];
25
26
27
%calculate
Lambdaij (local
volume
fraction)
28
29
for i = 1: Ncomp
30
for j = 1: Ncomp
31
Lambdaij(i,j) = Vm(j)/Vm(i) * exp(-Aij(i,j)/T);
32
end
33
end
34
35
%for
loop to
calculate
the
boiling
point T from
Antoine
equation
and
total
36
%predefining
sizes of
variables
for
speed
37
38
for i = 1: Ncomp
39
%calculate
first
sum in ln(gamma_i)
40
for j = 1: Ncomp
41
S1(j) = x(j)* Lambdaij(i,j);
42
end
43
%Calculate
second
sum
44
for k = 1: Ncomp
45
for j = 1: Ncomp
46
Stemp(j) = x(j) * Lambdaij(k,j);
47
end
48
49
S2(k) = x(k)*
Lambdaij(k,i) / sum(Stemp );
50
51
end
52
%Calculate
activity
coefficient
53
gamma(i) = exp (1 - log(sum(S1)) - sum(S2));
54
55
% calculate
second
virial
coefficients
56
B11 = 0.00242*Tˆ3 - 2.78585*Tˆ2 + 1076.04697* T - 140133.63990; %MeOH
57
B22 = 0.00129*Tˆ3 - 1.50336*Tˆ2 + 589.69888*T - 78574.66481; %EOH
58
B33 = 0.00182*Tˆ3 - 2.09544*Tˆ2 + 807.82283*T - 104930.64444; %H2O
59
B12 = 0.00193*Tˆ3 - 2.23290*Tˆ2 + 866.69219*T - 113682.85947; %MeOH - EOH
60
B13 = 0.00152*Tˆ3 - 1.74911*Tˆ2 + 678.54603*T - 88887.06034; %MeOH - H2O
61
B23 = 0.00151*Tˆ3 - 1.74844*Tˆ2 + 678.74568*T - 89017.18774; %EOH - H2O
62
Bmatrix = [B11 B12 B13; B12 B22 B23; B13 B23 B33];
63
for k = 1: Ncomp
64
phihatsum(k) = y(k)* Bmatrix(i,k);
65
end
66
BB = 0;
67
for ii = 1: Ncomp
68
for jj = 1: Ncomp
69
BB = BB + y(ii)*y(jj)* Bmatrix(ii ,jj);
70
end
71
end
72
phihat(i) = exp ((2* sum(phihatsum) - BB)* P /(R * T));
73
phisat(i) = exp(Bmatrix(i,i)* Psat(T,A(i),B(i),C(i))/ (R * T));
74
phi(i) = phihat(i)/ phisat(i);
75
pcalc(i) = x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(T,A(i),B(i),C(i))/ phi(i);
137
==PAGE:147==
Design and Operation of an Intensiﬁed High-Purity Separation
June 25, 2021
76
end
77
pressures = sum(pcalc) - P;
78
end
79
80
% loop to
iterate
over
the
calculations
to find
proper y values
81
% as
second
virial
coefficients
depends
on y(i)
82
for h = 1:150
83
Tb = fzero(@sump , 350);
84
[pressures , gamma] = sump(Tb);
85
86
B11 = 0.00242* Tbˆ3 - 2.78585* Tbˆ2 + 1076.04697* Tb - 140133.63990; %MeOH
87
B22 = 0.00129* Tbˆ3 - 1.50336* Tbˆ2 + 589.69888* Tb - 78574.66481; %EOH
88
B33 = 0.00182* Tbˆ3 - 2.09544* Tbˆ2 + 807.82283* Tb - 104930.64444; %H2O
89
B12 = 0.00193* Tbˆ3 - 2.23290* Tbˆ2 + 866.69219* Tb - 113682.85947; %MeOH - EOH
90
B13 = 0.00152* Tbˆ3 - 1.74911* Tbˆ2 + 678.54603* Tb - 88887.06034; %MeOH - H2O
91
B23 = 0.00151* Tbˆ3 - 1.74844* Tbˆ2 + 678.74568* Tb - 89017.18774; %EOH - H2O
92
Bmatrix = [B11 B12 B13; B12 B22 B23; B13 B23 B33];
93
94
y2 = y;
95
for i = 1: Ncomp
96
for k = 1: Ncomp
97
phihatsum(k) = y(k)* Bmatrix(i,k);
98
end
99
BB = 0;
100
for ii = 1: Ncomp
101
for jj = 1: Ncomp
102
BB = BB + y(ii)*y(jj)* Bmatrix(ii ,jj);
103
end
104
end
105
phihat(i) = exp ((2* sum(phihatsum) - BB)* P /(R * Tb));
106
phisat(i) = exp(Bmatrix(i,i)* Psat(Tb ,A(i),B(i),C(i))/ (R * Tb ));
107
phi(i) = phihat(i)/ phisat(i);
108
y(i) = double(x(i)* gamma(i)* Psat(Tb ,A(i),B(i),C(i))/(P*phi(i)));
109
end
110
if all(abs(y2 - y) < 10ˆ( -12))
111
Bfinal = sum(BB);
112
break
113
end
114
end
115
end
138
