==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Chisel Debugger
s153498 Andreas Gramstrup Correia
Supervised by
Martin Schoeberl DTU COMPUTE
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
This project aims to write a debugger for the hardware construction language Chisel.
The debugger will not work with waveforms, but will instead visualize the circuit and
overlay the circuit state on top of it. Chisel produces FIRRTL code which is a RTL
capable of retaining high level constructs such as conditional hardware blocks and an
improved type system. These high level abstractions are used to simplify the circuit vi-
sualization thus making the resulting circuit visualization structure look similar to the
Chisel code it originated from. The graph node placement algorithm is the dot algo-
rithm from GraphViz. The debugger implemented allows one to quickly change circuit
state by scrolling through the circuit states deﬁned in a VCD ﬁle. For this purpose, this
project also implements a high performance VCD parser. The project deviates from
FIRRTL speciﬁcation by supporting 3 state values where the third state is unknown.
This is done in order to visualize how undeﬁned behavior propagates throughout the
circuit. The project puts requirements on the debugger such as requirements to the
circuit and state visualization, performance, platform support and simulator support.
Testing and discussion of these requirements end up concluding that they are all satis-
ﬁed even if there is still many improvements that can be done.
The debugger can be found on github at https://github.com/TheAIBot/
ChiselDebugger
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
4
3
Related works
5
4
Current debugging experience
5
5
Requirements
6
6
Design
6
6.1
FIRRTL circuit graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6.2
FIRRTL representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6.2.1
Circuit and Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6.2.2
Module graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.3
Circuit state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.3.1
VCD Parser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.3.2
VCD Timeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.4
Compute state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.4.1
Sink Source state transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.4.2
Computing with invalidates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.4.3
Compute order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.5
Type and width inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5.1
Fetching type information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5.2
Single pass inference algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.6
Debugger visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.6.1
UI Segments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.6.2
Circuit visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.7
Place and route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.7.1
Place
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.7.2
Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.8
Unsupported FIRRTL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Implementation
30
7.1
Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1.1
Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
FIRRTL parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.3
Legal connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.4
Compute order optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.5
VCD to FIRRTL circuit state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.6
Place and route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.7
Circuit visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.7.1
Render tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.7.2
Bottom up render . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.7.3
Place and route template system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
==PAGE:4==
8
Design veriﬁcation
36
8.1
FIRRTL Circuits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8.2
VCD Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9
Results
37
9.1
Circuit visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9.2
From FIRRTL to debugging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
10 Future work
39
11 Discussion
41
11.1 Satisfying requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
11.1.1 Chisel Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
11.1.2 State Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
11.1.3 State Timeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
11.1.4 Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
11.1.5 Platform Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
11.1.6 Simulators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
11.2 Iterative development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
11.3 3 state value simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
11.4 A good debugger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
12 Conclusion
45
13 Appendix
47
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
Hardware in this modern day is becoming cheaper and cheaper. With decreasing prices,
hardware in every form has transformed society. The future seems to only want more
hardware being able to do more things cheaper. The complexity of hardware has in-
creased dramatically over the years as the circuits within becomes ever larger. The
system that makes todays hardware possible has changed a lot over the years. Al-
though the Hardware Description Languages(HDL) may not have changed too much,
the ecosystem needed to support their usage has seen explosive growth. HDLs such as
VHDL and Verilog has seen extensions added to them[17, 24] that makes it easier to
verify the circuit designs.
The tools supporting HDLs can only go so far to simplify writing in the HDL itself.
Issues such as complex syntax and being too tightly coupled with the speciﬁc hardware
it will run on, has somewhat restricted the ease of use of the low level HDLs. Introduc-
ing Chisel[2] as an easier way to design hardware. Chisel is not itself a language, but
a library for the programming language Scala. Chisel makes it easy to not only write
specialized hardware, but also to make parameterized hardware generators. Chisel is
not a HDL but instead Hardware Construction Language(HCL). A language focused
on making it easier to reason about hardware through its support for abstract constructs
and to make it easier to reuse code between projects. Instead of writing hardware for a
speciﬁc problem, in Chisel you can write a hardware generator that makes the hardware
more ﬂexible by allowing it to change depending on parameters.
Designing a hardware circuit in Chisel results in FIRRTL[21, 18] code. FIRRTL
stands for Flexible Intermediate Representation for RTL. As it says in the name, it’s
designed to be a ﬂexible RTL. The advantage of describing hardware as an intermedi-
ate RTL representation are many. It makes it possible to make strong assumptions of
the circuit that can be used for error checking and partial circuit veriﬁcation. FIRRTL
itself can’t be directly synthesized. Instead it’s translated to another HDL that can be
synthesized. FIRRTL is not only a format, but also a hardware compiler framework.
The FIRRTL compiler is able to do many optimizations and can transpile FIRRTL into
Verilog.
Chisel and FIRRTL are relatively new introductions to the world of hardware de-
velopment. Due to that, their ecosystem of supporting tools is not comparable to the
older HDLs. There is tools for testing, verifying and simulating(see Treadle[5]), and
yet it’s still not up to par. This report present a new debugger for Chisel that’s made
to take advantage of the new capabilities that Chisel and FIRRTL provides. The basic
principle behind the debugger is its use of circuit visualization and circuit state as the
way to debug hardware. The circuit visualization will take advantage of the high level
abstract constructs that Chisel and FIRRTL provides in order to simplify the visualiza-
tion and understanding of the circuit itself. This project will introduce a debugger that
uses Chisel, FIRRTL in combination with either Treadle[5] or Verilator[28].
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Related works
Hardware debugging can refer to many types of debugging. Debugging in itself is the
exploration and discovery process from a fault to its cause. A hardware fault can be
many things. To debug hardware resource problem, the used synthesis tool is often
enough to track down the issue. What will be focused on here is debugging the execu-
tion of a hardware circuit.
The use of an IDE to simplify debugging is commonly used in hardware debugging.
One such IDE is the Vivado IDE. Vivado helps designing hardware by integrating sim-
ulation[32], design[31], debugging[33] and many more for its FPGA boards. Vivado
FPGA debugger works by integrating a Integrated Logic Analyser(ILA) into the HDL
of the project. During synthesis, Vivado adds ”debug nets” to the synthesized hard-
ware. The new nets will record the values of the hardware and send them back to
Vivado. Vivado can then display the recorded values as a waveform.
Displaying circuit state as a waveform is a common approach. GTKWave[14] is a
free waveform viewer that’s very popular as a free alternative. EasySoC[9] is an intera-
tive simulator built around using Treadle as its simulation backend. It uses a waveform
view to visualize the state of the circuit as well.
Visualizing circuit state on top of a circuit graph does not seem to be wildly used
idea. There are project are there that does it such as VSRTL[23](Visual Simulation
of Register Transfer Logic) that visualizes RTL and shows state on top of it. It can’t
visualize a speciﬁc HDL and is instead used to visualize a RISC-V simulation through
visualization.
There exists many circuit visualizations out there for both Verilog and VHDL. The
big IDEs such as Vivado and Sigasi[27] can both visualize a circuit in various ways.
FIRRTL can be transpiled to either of these HDLs and thus can also use their visual-
izations. Diagrammer[12] is a project for making visualizations from FIRRTL code. It
converts FIRRTL into ”dot” code for the Graphviz[10] dot algorithm to then make a
graph out of. The result is a hierarchical graph showing all connections between logic
components in a lowered form of FIRRTL. It cannot display the high level abstract
constructs that FIRRTL supports such as conditionals, or aggregate wire types.
4
Current debugging experience
It’s possible to debug a Chisel circuit with many of the existing tools by transpiling
FIRRTL into another HDL and then use those existing tools. In the process of doing
that, FIRRTL is lowered into a format that removes many if it high level abstractions.
Debugging this way allows use of existing tools but fails to utilize the power behind
Chisel and FIRRTL. Another way is to use the FIRRTL simulator Treadle to simulate
ones circuit. Treadle can output circuit state as a Value change Dump(VCD[17, sec-
tion 21.7]) ﬁle that can then be viewed using waveform viewer such as GTKWave[14].
5
==PAGE:7==
It’s also possible to debug by adding asserts and print statements to the FIRRTL code.
Treadle can check the asserts and print out everything.
The options explained here all fail to fully utilize the power that higher levels of ab-
stractions can provide. FIRRTL supports conditional hardware blocks but no debugger
utilizes this to make debugging easier.
5
Requirements
The debugger for this project should have some requirements attached to it that the
design will have to adhere to. The requirements are not meant to be too speciﬁc. They
are meant to convey the philosophy that the design should work with.
• Chisel Visualization: Able to visualize a circuit made in Chisel through the use
of FIRRTL. Must be able to visualize the high level abstractions that FIRRTL
provides.
• State Visualization: It must somehow be possible to observe the state of the
circuit only by looking at the circuit visualization.
• State Timeline: Possible to move back and forth in time showing the state of the
circuit at the different times.
• Speed: The purpose of a dedicated debugging tool is to ﬁnd the cause of bugs
faster. A slow debugger slows down the whole development cycle. It shouldn’t
take minutes before the debugger is ready to debug a relatively large circuit.
• Platform Support: The debugger should be available on as many platforms as
possible. This requirement would include support for both Windows and many
of the more popular Linux distributions. Hardware programming is done on
many different platforms and a debugger should be equally available. Otherwise
it may as well not exist.
• Simulators: Able to debug circuits simulated using Treadle. Support For Verila-
tor is also desirable but not a requirement.
6
Design
Before jumping into the design decisions of smaller parts of the project, an overview
of the whole design is provided. Figure 1 shows one way that the necessary debugging
information can be retrieved for both Treadle and Verilator. It’s up to the user to supply
the debugger with the necessary data and Figure 1 shows two possible ways to do just
that.
6
==PAGE:8==
Replay debugger - Treadle
Replay debugger - Verilator
Chisel
Scala
code
LoFIRRTL
code
Chisel
Debugger
FIRRTL
FIRRTL
code
VCD
Treadle
Chisel
Scala
code
LoFIRRTL
code
Chisel
Debugger
Verilog
code
FIRRTL
FIRRTL
code
VCD
Verilator
Figure 1: An overview of what types of data is needed for the debugger and what steps are
needed in order to get them. Shows the data ﬂow from Scala code to the debugger given the
Treadle and Verilator simulator.
This second overview Figure 2 shows the steps taken by the debugger in order to
visualize the FIRRTL circuit with the states from a VCD ﬁle. Speciﬁcs about the design
of these individual steps can be found in this section and the implementation section.
Chisel Debugger
VCD
Timeline
Convert to
timeline
Visualize
circuit & state
Compute
circuit state
Circuit
state
FIRRTL
Graph
FIRRTL
Graph
Compute
order
Make compute
order
FIRRTL
Graph
Type & Width
inference
VCD
stream
Parse
FIRRTL
AST
FIRRTL
AST
Convert to
graph
Convert to
graph
Parse
VCD
Parse
LoFIRRTL
code
FIRRTL
code
Figure 2: An overview of the steps taken by the debugger in order to go from FIRRTL code to
visualization.
6.1
FIRRTL circuit graph
Before doing anything else, it’s necessary to convert the FIRRTL format into a graph
capable of representing the whole circuit and all the high level information that FIR-
RTL provides. This is an important step as it will represent the basic data structure
that the whole program will work from. Steps such as type and width inference, state
compute and the visualization will use this graph. Parsing FIRRTL does not result in a
graph automatically. Parsing results in an Abstract Syntax Tree(AST). The process of
converting FIRRTL AST into a graph is a rather complicated process that includes mul-
tiple different compilation stages, passes and transformations. FIRRTL deﬁnes many
compilation stages that each ensures that only a subset of FIRRTL features are used.
FIRRTL uses this stage abstraction to convert high level FIRRTL into low level FIR-
RTL that can be synthesised. The most important stages in FIRRTL are the following.
Chirrtl form, Minimal high form, High form, Mid form and low form. Only the mid
form and low form are included in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation and they can be referred to
as MidFIRRTL and LoFIRRTL respectively. The other forms mentioned here can only
be found inside the FIRRTL compiler itself. FIRRTL compiler includes more stages
that do optimizations and other operations necessary before it can be translated into
7
==PAGE:9==
verilog and other HDLs. The stages speciﬁed here can be seen as the most important
ones and they pose a problem. Chirrtl form is used to represent FIRRTL code generated
by Chisel as it’s the highest form of FIRRTL. For this project it would be desirable to
use this form for visualization as it includes all high level components. Unfortunately
that’s not possible. The problem is caused by the fact that FIRRTL doesn’t specify
the type and width of all wires in the circuit. FIRRTL instead relies on the fact that
its speciﬁcation requires a valid FIRRTL circuit to have sufﬁcient type and width in-
formation available in order to infer that information for the rest of the circuit. Apart
from the simplest circuits, type and width inference is always a necessary step in the
compilation process.
Chirrtl form
Low form
Minimal High form
High form
Mid form
CheckScalaVersion
CleanupNamedTargets
RemoveCHIRRTL
CInferMDir
CInferTypes
CheckChirrtl
CheckWidths
CheckFlows
CheckTypes
CheckHighForm
InferResets
InferWidths
TrimIntervals
InferBinaryPoints
ResolveFlows
InferTypes
ResolveKinds
DedupModules
ZeroWidth
ConvertFixedToSInt
RemoveIntervals
ExpandWhensAndCheck
ZeroLengthVecs
RemoveAccesses
ExpandConnects
ReplaceAccesses
PullMuxes
RemoveWires
CheckResets
CheckCombLoops
RemoveReset
Legalize
LowerTypes
Figure 3: Shows the dependency relationship between the different compilation stages. Each
stage also shows a dependency graph of the transformations and checks necessary before it’s of
that form. From FIRRTL version 1.4.3
Which form should the circuit be compiled into before the necessary information is
available? That’s a good question and one that may not have an entirely correct answer.
Figure 3 shows the transformations and checks that each stage does. As the transforma-
tions InferTypes and InferWidths are in the High form stage it seems obvious
that FIRRTL need to compile its representation into that stage before before it’s usable.
It’s difﬁcult to say if FIRRTL in high form is good enough to work with in the rest of
the project. The FIRRTL spec [11] only has speciﬁc requirements to Mid form and
low form. Without speciﬁcation, the High form can be subject to change in the future.
So lets look at the requirements for MidFIRRTL according to the FIRRTL speciﬁca-
tion[11].
• All widths must be explicitly deﬁned.
• The conditional statement is not used.
• The dynamic sub-access expression is not used.
• All components are connect to exactly once.
The width requirement implies type inference as the type affects width for many
components. Width and type information is available in this stage but MidFIRRTL
also removes the use of high level abstractions such as conditionals and dynamic sub-
access. As a requirement the debugger must be able to visualize all high level FIRRTL
8
==PAGE:10==
abstractions which excludes MidFIRRTL as an options.
Higher forms are not clearly deﬁned and may change at any time and lower forms
are too restrictive and removes important high level abstractions. High form is still
an AST and have to be converted to a graph. This project will make its own graph
representation from Chirrtl form AST. Additional reasons behind this decision can be
found in subsection 7.1.
6.2
FIRRTL representation
The basic principle behind creation of the FIRRTL graph is that it should represent
the FIRRTL format in an intuitive way. It should be easy to relate parts of the FIRRTL
format into parts of the graph. It should be a directed graph where edges between nodes
are between ground types and not something more abstract as connections between
aggregate types. This distinction may have no effect on how the circuit is visualized
but many thing, including type and width inference, are easier to do when connections
are explicitly between ground types. These requirements might seem basic but one has
to consider the work needed to support it. Much of the work of converting a FIRRTL
AST from Chirrtl into MidFIRRTL has to be done in order to achieve this.
6.2.1
Circuit and Module
The top level component of FIRRTL is called a Circuit. A Circuit can contain
a number of Modules and only a Module can contain actual hardware blocks. The
concepts of Circuit and Module is only used to encapsulate hardware into smaller
reusable and self contained segments. The deﬁnition of a Module in the AST is not
the same as the module being included in the circuit. A Module has to be instantiated
within other modules which in synthesis is the same as copying the content of the
module into wherever is was instantiated. Obviously that forbids a Module from
instancing itself as it would create an inﬁnitely large circuit. Without cycles the data
structure representing the relationships between Circuit and Module can be seen
as a rooted tree. The root of tree is the module with the same name as the Circuit
component.
Module F
Module E
Module C
Module C
Module D
Module C
Module B
Module A
Circuit A
Figure 4: Rooted tree representation of a Circuit with the name A and the modules A, B, C, D,
E F. Module C is instantiated multiple times in this example circuit.
9
==PAGE:11==
Each module contains a subgraph representing the hardware components as nodes
and the connections between them as edges between them. The subgraphs are only
connected through deﬁned module ports. Module ports can be understood as the pub-
lic interface that should be used to connect modules together.
FIRRTL also deﬁnes another type of modules called external modules. These mod-
ules can’t contain hardware block. They are instead intermediaries used to specify the
interface of some hardware module that’s not described in FIRRTL. That allows FIR-
RTL to interop with other hardware description languages. From the perspective of the
FIRRTL graph creation, an external module is the same as a module that only deﬁnes
module ports.
6.2.2
Module graph
Each module contains a graph representing the connection between components. Tech-
nically it’s made as a bi-directional graph but there is a direction for each edge. Type
inference and state compute needs to go back in the graph which is why the graph can
be observed as both unidirectional and bidirectional. Figures with the graph as unidi-
rectional makes it easier to reason about the ﬂow of the graph. A pair of bidirectional
edges will from here on be referred to as a connection. A connection is understood to
only have a single direction although it’s possible to go go in the other direction as well
if necessary.
Module nodes
Before describing how the module graph is created from the FIRRTL
AST lets ﬁrst deﬁne what can be a node in this graph. This is a list of all FIRRTL
components/statements/expressions from the speciﬁcation[11] that can be a node in a
module graph: A module, external module, wire component, register, memory, condi-
tionals, stops, formatted prints, dynamic sub-access, multiplexers, conditionally valids
and all primitive operations.
Node ports
A module component has the concept of ports that’s used to deﬁne con-
nection points for incoming and outgoing connections. This concept has been extended
to all modules nodes. An add(a, b) = c node has three ports. Two inputs for its
two arguments, a, b, and one for the result c. A wire components has two ports. One
for incoming and one for outgoing connections. Each port contains a FIRRTL type and
making a connection between two nodes is done by making a connection between the
types from one port to another.
Figure 5 shows how ports are connected to three different types of nodes. The node
of a module is different both is shape and port placement. A module has an external
and internal port for each module port described in the FIRRTL AST. Nodes within
the module can only connect to its internal ports and external nodes can only connect
to external ports. An external and internal port are pairs together and intuitively repre-
sents how connections are passed from outside to inside a module.
10
==PAGE:12==
Module A
add
wire
Figure 5: From left to right is how ports can be conceptually represented for an add node,
wire node and a module node. The node of the module has a different shape so it’s easier to
distinguish.
Conditionals
Conditionals is FIRRTLs way of deﬁning hardware that’s only run con-
ditionally. It can be compared to the if else structure common in many program-
ming languages. Conditional is a statement that deﬁnes one, or two if it has an else
clause, new scopes that can contain components. Each conditional has a 1 wide condi-
tional signal. The ﬁrst scope of a conditional is enabled if the condition is high and the
second scope, if there is one, is enabled if the condition is low. The else condition is
implemented as the not of the if condition. The components themselves within a con-
ditional scope are not enabled/ disabled. The only thing enabled/disabled, are outgoing
connections from the conditional. In the FIRRTL graph, a conditional is a module with
a connection. These will be referred to as conditional modules. In order for a nested
conditional module to be enabled, its parent conditional module must also be enabled.
As conditionals are modules they are naturally part of the module tree.
FIRRTL types
FIRRTL doesn’t understand the signal going from one component
to another as a collection of bits. Instead it categorises these bits into distinct types.
A FIRRTL type can be one of two categories. First category is ground types. These
are types that deﬁnes how the collection of bits should be interpreted. Ground type
includes unsigned integer UInt, signed integer SInt, clock Clock to name a few.
Each ground type can include a width that describes how many bits it represents. For
some ground types, such as the Clock type, the width is implicit because it’s constant.
The width of a ground type is appended to the type e.g. UInt<5> is an UInt with
a width of 5. The other category of types are aggregate types. These represents a
collection of ground types in some way. There only exists two aggregate types, the
bundle and vector. Aggregate types contain ﬁelds where is a ﬁeld is deﬁned as a type
with a name. The bundle represents an ordered collection ﬁelds and a vector is an array
of a single type that’s indexable. The addition of aggregate types means a type can be
a tree of types as seen in Figure 6.
Connections
The FIRRTL format doesn’t explicitly deﬁne how all things are con-
nected together. Instead it can abstractly describe how they are connected by con-
necting aggregate types together instead of individual ground types. Going from a
11
==PAGE:13==
UInt
value
UInt
sign
Bundle
signed int
Figure 6: A bundle with the name ”signed int” containing the ﬁelds ”sign” and ”value”.
connection between aggregate types to the equivalent connections of ground types is
not a simple process. The Kind, Flow and Orientation of the type of both sides
of the connection needs to be known ﬁrst. Kind affects Flow as do Orientation.
Figuring out the Flow of each ground type is the ﬁrst step in the process. Flow rep-
resents the direction of the connection with flow going from source to sink in most
cases.Flow is determined for each ground type and it’s possible for a bundle to contain
ﬁelds with different ﬂow. Duplex ﬂow is used for components that allows for incoming
and outgoing connections for a ground type.
The Kind is determined by the type of component the type is from. Kind de-
ﬁnes the ﬂow of the root type in the type tree. Each ﬁeld in a type tree can have an
Orientation that ﬂips the ﬂow. Flipping a source gives a sink and vice versa. Flip-
ping a duplex gives duplex. The ﬂow of a ground type is found taking the ﬂow of the
root node and ﬂipping it x times where x is the number of ﬂips lying in the path from
the root to the ground type.
The type tree from the FIRRTL AST is converted to a new type tree that removes the
need for Kind and Orientation and only keeps the concept of Flow. An example
of a tree from a module port is shown in Figure 7. The Kind and Orientations
have been removed. Instead the ﬂow is explicitly stored in the ground type nodes.
The new type tree is meant to simplify the ﬂow for each ground type. It can either
be a source or sink. Duplex ﬂow is instead handled as a type in the type tree. Making
a type tree duplex means splitting the type tree up into a source and sink side. An
example of such a behavior can be found in Figure 8.
Taking the nodes and ports from Figure 5 and assigning them types could, as an
example, look like Figure 9. This way of representing a node is too verbose and a
simpliﬁed version will be used for future ﬁgures.
References and making connections
Before explaining connections, explaining how
ground types are referenced must be done. In order to make a connection from a node,
it must be possible to reference the node. It’s possible to reference a node if it has a
name. Some FIRRTL components must have a name such as a wire, register, memory,
module instance and module ports. The result of a multiplexer, conditionally valid and
all primitive operations can also be named. An example of this can be found on line 7
in Figure 10 where the result of the add operation is given the name T. Referencing a
ﬁeld in a bundle is done with a sub-ﬁeld. An example of this can be found on line 7
12
==PAGE:14==
SInt
SInt
Flip
UInt
UInt
Sink
SInt
Sink
SInt
Sink
UInt
Source
UInt
Bundle
Vector
Bundle
Output
Flip
Bundle
Vector
Bundle
Figure 7: Shows an example of what the type tree for a module port can look like. On the left
is an FIRRTL AST type tree and on the right is what it’s converted to for this project. Note that
the tree on the left has Output as it root node. It’s not part of the type tree, it’s there to signify
the Kind(module port with sink ﬂow). New tree on the right makes ﬂow explicit by retaining it
in the ground type nodes. Aggregate type nodes are square and ground type nodes have round
corners. Field names have been excluded for the sake of brevity.
Bundle
Sink
SInt
Sink
UInt
Bundle
Duplex
Sink
SInt
Source
UInt
Duplex
SInt
Duplex
UInt
Bundle
Figure 8: Example of what a FIRRTL AST type tree with duplex ﬂow is converted to.
Source
UInt
Sink
UInt
Module A
Sink
UInt
Source
UInt
Sink
UInt
add
Source
SInt
Source
UInt
Sink
SInt
Sink
UInt
wire
Bundle
Bundle
Duplex
Figure 9: Same nodes as in Figure 5 but with types this time.
where the module port ”io” is ﬁrst referenced and then its ﬁeld ”a” if speciﬁed with a
sub-ﬁeld. A constant index in a vector is referenced with a sub-indice and a dynamic
index is speciﬁed with a sub-access. A sub-access can be used to either read or write
13
==PAGE:15==
to a vector. As the FIRRTL graph will only have connections between ground types, a
connection whose source or sink is dynamic, is not possible. Instead a sub-access that
reads a value will be converted to a multiplexer with all the vectors indices as choices
and the index as the selector. A sub-access that writes to an index is converted to a node
that overrides the vectors current connections with its own and takes the new value and
index as arguments as well.
Referencing a node that in FIRRTL has a Kind with duplex Flow, such as a
register or wire component, won’t return the root node of one of its ports trees. Instead
it return a duplex type representing both the source and sink side of the node. That’s
why The type tree of a wire node, as seen in Figure 9 is the root but not connected to
any of its ports.
1 circuit A :
2
module A :
3
input clock : Clock
4
input reset : UInt<1>
5
output io : {flip a : UInt<1>, flip b : UInt<1>, out : UInt<6>}
6
7
node _T = add(io.a, io.b)
8
io.out <= _T
Figure 10: FIRRTL deﬁning a module A with the module ports clock, reset and io. The
modules does a single add operation and assigns the value to T which is then connected to
io.out.
Now with nodes, ports and type tree explained we can ﬁnally talk about how con-
nections between them work. Connections between components in the FIRRTL AST
are speciﬁed in two distinct ways. First is by deﬁning the connections to a component
as parts of the components construction. An example of this is shown on line 7 in
Figure 10 where io.a and io.b is connected to the two sink ports of add operation.
Connections deﬁned in this way can not be overridden later and they are mandatory.
The single source port is assigned the name T so it can be referenced later. The second
way to deﬁne connections is shown on line 8 where the left and right hand side of the
statement are connected together. This second way can either connect fully or partially.
Partial connections are only relevant when both sides are an aggregate type where it al-
lows two bundles to only connect ﬁelds with the same name and vectors only connect
the indexes they have in common.
Conditional connections
A single source can be connected to many sinks but a sin-
gle sink can logically only be connected to a single source. If a connection is later(i.e
further down the FIRRTL AST) made to a sink that already has a connection then the
current connection is removed and replaced with the new one. This is referred to as
”Last Connect Semantics” in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation[11].
That would be the algorithm if conditionals weren’t a thing. Conditionals makes it
possible for a sink to have multiple sources as long as at most one connection has no
14
==PAGE:16==
condition and the rest do. A sink cannot have multiple connection with the same condi-
tion. Such cases are handled with ”Last Connect Semantics” where the old connection
with the same condition is replaced with the new one.
A connection with a condition will be referred to as a conditional connection. The
condition of a conditional connection is the condition of the conditional module that
the source resides in. A sink can still only be connected to one source at a time. The
order in which conditional connections to a sink is made is preserved. The enabled
connection is the ﬁrst connection with its condition being high. The check goes from
the bottom of the list i.e the last deﬁned connection, and moves up until a connection is
enabled. If none are enabled then the unconditional connection is used. This is called
”Conditional Last Connect Semantics” in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation[11]. The algorithm
means that multiple conditional connections conditions can be high at the same time
but only one at a time can act as the connected source for a sink.
op
op
op
op
B
A
op
B
A
op
    Dep B
    Dep A
    Dep B
    Dep A
Figure 11: Example graph that includes conditional modules and when under which conditions
the conditional connections are enabled in. The orange modules are conditional modules and the
arrow going to the module name is the modules condition. Conditional connections are striped
and state what their condition is. The bottom conditional module is the else conditional module.
A green connection is an enabled conditional connection. This ﬁgure should where conditional
connections are located, what their condition is and how only one of then can be enabled at any
time. Green arrows means the conditional connection has been selected by the ”Conditional
Last Connect Semantics” algorithm. Node modules have been removed and the operation of the
nodes isn’t speciﬁed as it’s not relevant.
6.3
Circuit state
As this is intended to be a post execution debugger, the state must be stored in some
format. The most commonly known format is Value-Change-Dump(VCD) that orig-
inated from IEEE Verilog speciﬁcation[16]. VCD is a free format stored in a human
readable text format. VCD Only stores value changes for wires and not a complete
state for each time step. VCD is capable of storing both real numbers and 4-state bi-
nary values where those states are 0, 1, X, Z. The current IEEE speciﬁcation[17] has
split the VCD format up into two VCD ﬁle types. First is the previously described 4-
state VCD format. Second is an extended format that can store additional value states.
15
==PAGE:17==
There exists a plethora of other formats that take up less space and is faster to
parse. GTKWave[14] describes a number of other ﬁle formats and includes a compar-
ison[4] of different formats and their ﬁle sizes. Regardless of that, the limiting factor
is what formats Treadle supports. Currently Treadle only supports VCD which makes
the matter rather simple. Still, the VCD format has received numerous revisions and is
currently split up into two types. Treadle doesn’t speciﬁcally say which VCD format it
has implemented but considering Treadle only works with 2-state bits, it’s most likely
some revision of the 4-state VCD format.
6.3.1
VCD Parser
This project implements the complete(with one minor change) 4-state VCD format
found in IEEE 1800-2017[17]. The focus of this project does not put too much weight
how VCD is parsed so only the most notable design decisions are mentioned here.
The VCD format is designed around two command categories. First is declaration
commands. These commands deﬁne the circuit state as a structure of scopes and re-
sembles the circuit structure seen in Figure 4. Each scope can contain more scopes or
wire deﬁnitions. Each wire deﬁnition contains what type of wire it’s, the name of the
wire, its width and a identiﬁer for the wire that the VCD will use to refer to it. Next
command group is the simulation commands. The two most important commands here
is the time command that deﬁnes the simulation time and the value change command.
Value change command consists of a wire identiﬁer and its value as either a real num-
ber or as a 4-state bit depending on what type of wire it’s. The time at which these
value changes occur is deﬁned by the preceding time command. The time of each time
command must be higher than the previous one. The VCD is split up into a segment of
only declaration commands and then a segment of only simulation commands. There-
fore wires are always declared before they are used in simulation commands.
Grammar for the parser is almost identical to the VCD syntax found in the IEEE
paper but with one restriction applied to it. The following valid VCD $comment
$end $end needs backtracking in order to ﬁgure out that the comment isn’t empty
but contains the string $end. The performance penalty of backtracking is not desirable
here. Therefore the grammar has been restricted so any text in a $comment, $data
or $version is not allowed to contain the string $end.
The implemented parser is a LL(1) non backtracking streaming parser capable of
parsing a VCD ﬁle in linear time. Streaming in this context means that the parser only
loads smaller segments of a ﬁle into memory before parsing it. Streaming is important
in this case as VCD ﬁles can easily be tens of GB in size. The parser spits out a stream
of simulation commands that are only parsed as they are used in the stream. A Time
command contains the simulation time as an unsigned 64bit integer and a value change
command contains either a real value or a list of 4-state values. Each value change also
includes a list of all wire deﬁnitions that contain the same identiﬁer as the value change
command does.
16
==PAGE:18==
6.3.2
VCD Timeline
Retrieving a random time state should be fast and responsive from a users perspective.
Accessing a circuit state from a VCD ﬁle requires taking the initial circuit state and
applying all value changes until the desired simulation time is reached. Considering
a VCD ﬁle could easily contain hundreds of millions of value changes, an O(tvc)
algorithm, where tvc is the total value changes, will not be fast enough for larger VCD
ﬁles. The solution used here is very simple. If one considers the whole VCD ﬁle as
a timeline of circuit state from time t0 to ttcs, then tcs Is the number of circuit states
contained in the VCD. This timeline is split up into segments containing a sequential
part of the timeline. A single time can have anywhere from 0 to css value changes
where css is the size of the circuit state in wires. As a VCD ﬁle is parsed, the stream of
commands is split into a segment when it contains more than a certain amount of value
changes. A split can only occur when a time command is parsed so the value changes
for a state can’t lie in two different segments. Allowing otherwise would complicate
to process of creating a circuit state as the value changes for a single time step could
then span multiple segments. Each segment contains all value changes for at least
one time step. Deﬁne the number of desired value changes per segment as vcps.Each
segment hold an integer amount of time steps and the number of time steps contained
is determined by the desired size of a segment. iff css < vcps then each segment will,
at most, contains css · 2 −1 value changes. The else case css ≥vcps will have a max
of css value changes per segment. The time complexity of getting getting a random
circuit state is therefore changed to Equation 6.3.2.
O
 css
vcps

+ css

(1)
It’s still possible for O(tvc) to equal Equation 6.3.2 when the timeline ends up only
containing a single segment. Most of the time this isn’t a problem because it means
tvc ≤vcps · 2 −1 i.e. any state can be computed in an acceptable amount of time.
Only cases where the value changes for a single time step exceeds a segments desired
size, will break the desired segment time limit.
A segments max value changes and time limit are described as desired as they are
not actual upper limits set for each segment. They are instead values that are expected
to works well with all but the most extreme VCD timelines. Although it would be nice
if there was a hard upper limit, the main goal of splitting the timeline into segment
is not just to limit random access times for circuit states. IT’s also to limit memory
usage while allowing random access. The way this solution is designed makes it pos-
sible to never actually keep the whole timeline in memory at once. While accessing a
circuit state, only the segment with the correct time in it needs to be in memory, the
rest of the segments can be stored in the ﬁle system. It’s a simple system that makes
random access circuit state retrieval simple because only one segment has to ever be in
memory at any one time in order to create the circuit state. Making the timeline makes
the segments in the same order as the simulation commands are parsed in allowing for
only keeping one segment in memory while parsing the VCD ﬁle. This segment sys-
17
==PAGE:19==
tem reduces the memory requirements for random access and when creating the VCD
Timeline that creates the segments.
6.4
Compute state
The treadle simulator does not store the entire circuit state in VCD. By default any
variable starting with
is not written to the VCD ﬁle. This is solved by applying the
--tr-vcd-show-underscored-vars argument to Treadle. Still not all state is
written to the VCD ﬁle while simulating. Only names sources and sinks state is writ-
ten to VCD. They can either be named through their ﬁelds or by the node statement.
Consider this example node
T = and(or(io.a, io.b), io.b). The value
of the and expression is written to the VCD ﬁle because its source is named T but the
value of the or expression is not not written to the VCD ﬁle because its source has no
name. The circuit states recorded in a VCD can’t be relied upon to contain the entire
circuit state because it will only store the root of an expression tree instead of the state
for the entire tree.
The remaining state will instead have to be computed. The state that has to be
computed is restricted to all combinational components as FIRRTL requires names
for all sequential components. The behavior of all combinational components can be
found in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation[11]. Instead of ﬁnding parts of the FIRRTL graph
that has to be computed and then only computing those subgraphs when state changes,
the entire graph will be computed. Speciﬁcally only combinational logic nodes and the
connections to and from them will be computed. At ﬁrst glance it only seems like more
work to compute everything but there are advantages to do it this way. First is that the
order in which nodes are computed can also be used for type inference. Second point
is that it makes testing much simpler. An in dept explanation on why it makes testing
simpler can be found in section 8.
6.4.1
Sink Source state transfer
The circuit state is stored in the sinks and and sources of the FIRRTL graph. It may
sound odd that both source and sink can contain state instead of just the source. Before
FIRRTL is lowered from its higher forms, it allows connection between ground types
where the source and sink do not have the same width. FIRRTL requires that the ﬂow
always goes from smaller width, to equal or larger bit width. Therefore it’s possible
that the value of a source needs to be zero or sign extended, depending on the ground
type, before its value can be used in the nodes operation. To solve this, before a node
can do its operation, it ﬁrst ﬁnds the enabled connection with last condition connect and
then pulls the value to its sink where it’s extended appropriately. After all sinks have
been updated, then the nodes operation can do its thing with the value in the sinks as
inputs and the nodes source and output. The operation of each node is either explained
in subsubsection 6.4.3 or can be found in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation[11].
18
==PAGE:20==
6.4.2
Computing with invalidates
FIRRTL technically deﬁnes 4 different states for a value instead of only the two that
a bit can have. However during simulation FIRRTL only support the two states of a
bit. Besides 0 and 1, FIRRTL also describes an indeterminate state and undeﬁned state.
FIRRTL only allows indeterminate values in places where initialization coverage has
explicitly been turned off with the invalid statement. An example of such a scenario
could be a wire component that’s only conditionally connected to. In the cases where
the conditional connection isn’t enabled, the wires value will be indeterminate. FIR-
RTL speciﬁes that during simulation, an indeterminate value should be set to a random
value. Undeﬁned values occurs when the operations result is undeﬁned e.g. dividing
by zero. FIRRTL does not further specify the behavior of an undeﬁned value.
This project will not compute with bits but instead with 3 state values. The idea
behind the third state is to have a way to track undeﬁned behavior as it proliferates
throughout the circuit. Further explanation can be found in subsection 11.3. Besides 0
and 1, the third state will represent an unknown value similar to the value of the X state
in a 4 state value. The third state will similarly be referred to as X. Any operation that
would previously produce an indeterminate or undeﬁned value will instead be set to X.
The two VCD states X and Z is converted to the three state X. Executing a primitive
operation with the value X will result in the entire result being X. A when else clause
where the condition is X will result in neither conditional modules being enabled. If
the last conditional connect algorithm ﬁnds no enabled connection then the values of
the sink is set to X.
6.4.3
Compute order
Given as the ﬂow of information in this project FIRRTL graph always ﬂows from
source to sink, the value at the source has to be calculated/known before it can be
used to compute whatever the sink is connected to. In order to easier understand how
this works, our FIRRTL graph representation will have to change to something more
accommodating. Computing circuit state is all about compute dependencies so lets
change the representation to a graph that clearly shows all compute dependencies. This
new graph representation will be referred to as the compute graph
The sink of a node can have multiple connections due to conditional connections.
Not only is the source of all the sink connections dependencies but the connection con-
ditions are as well. This is because in order for a node to compute something it will
have to know which source it should fetch values from and to do that it needs to know
which connection is currently enabled. A connection condition is a source as previ-
ously explained so the implicit connection condition dependencies can be visualized as
explicit connections instead.
Modules and module borders can be replaced with nodes representing each module
border instead. This is necessary as the sink side of a module border can have multi-
ple connections and the enabled connection have to be found before its value can be
19
==PAGE:21==
propagated to the source side. So that’s what the border pass(bp) node does in the new
representation. It simply represents the dependencies that the source side has on its
sink side and the operation it does is simply to propagate the enabled connected to its
source. Want to remind here that a source or sink represents a ground type so a border
pass node is made for each ground type in an aggregate type. Figure 12 shows how the
FIRRTL graph changes with the changes described.
bp
bp
bp
bp
op1
op4
op2
op3
op5
op1
op4
op2
B
A
op3
op5
Dep B
Dep A
Figure 12: Shows how the representation of the FIRRTL graph(left) is translated to its equiva-
lent dependency graph(right). All op nodes represents some logical operation and the bp nodes
represents the new border pass nodes as previously described. On the left op5 has implicit de-
pendencies on the source of op2 and op4 through the two conditional modules. On the right this
dependency is made explicit and all modules have been replaced with border pass nodes.
Last thing needed for this new representation is to split up wire nodes. A wire node
is split up into as many wire pass node as there are sink and source pairs in the wire.
Each wire pass node contains one sink source pair and keeps all connections associated
with them. The operation on each sink source pairs is independent of all the others so
the behavior of the wire node as a whole is the same. This transformation is simply
meant to show how a wire node does not cause cyclic dependencies even though it’s
legal for it to connect to itself. For all intents and purposes, the wire pass and border
pass nodes are equivalent in every way.
wp
wp
op2
op1
wire
op2
op1
Figure 13: Shows how the representation of the FIRRTL graph(left) is translated to its equivalent
dependency graph(right). All op nodes represents some logical operation and the wp nodes
represents the new wire pass nodes as previously described.
The end result is a simpliﬁed graph with no module hierarchy and no implicit con-
nection dependencies.Nodes are split up into two types, sequential nodes and combi-
20
==PAGE:22==
national nodes. Sequential nodes are registers and memories and everything else is
a combinational node. FIRRTL speciﬁcation ensures that, if all sequential nodes and
their edges were removed, then the remaining graph will contain no cycles. Essentially
there is no path from any of a combinational nodes sources that goes to any of its sinks
without going through a sequential node. Given as combinational circuits are stateless
it would not be possible to compute the value of a combinational node that depended
directly on itself as its source and sink values would forever change. That completely
ignores the issues of synthesising such a circuit that would produce a deterministic re-
sult.
Clearly cyclic dependencies are not desired. As all cycles passes through a sequen-
tial node, a sequential node can be deﬁned as not included as a dependency. That breaks
up all dependency cycles in the compute graph. Besides sequential nodes sources, other
things in the graph also naturally stops the dependency search. The following lists all
possible ways a dependency search can end.
A Reaching the source of a sequential node.
B Reaching the source of a node with no sinks which only ﬁts the constant value
node.
C Reaching the source of a border pass node where the corresponding sink on the
other side has no connections.
D Reaching the source of a wire pass node where the corresponding sink has no
connections.
Figure 14: The rules deﬁning when backwards dependency search will not go further.
Apart from sequential nodes stopping dependency, then the other reasons boil down
to the fact that the node has no sinks to continue the search from. Given as these are
the stop points, they must have no dependencies in order to compute their values. The
values for A will be loaded from the incomplete circuit state given by the VCD time-
line. B is constants and thus naturally has no dependencies to calculate. C for sources
of the root module will have their values given from the incomplete circuit state given
by the VCD timeline and the rest will be set to unknown. D will also be set to unknown.
Given any combinational node in the compute graph, doing a search from all its
sinks going backwards in the graph, the search will naturally have to end at the stop
points described. Doing a backwards dependency search for a node to ﬁnd its depen-
dencies is not the goal here so lets turn things around. Lets consider the nodes that
satisﬁes either A, B, C or D conditions as start nodes for some search and lets make
new stop conditions A2, B2, C2 and D2. The deﬁnition of the new stop conditions are
the same as their alphabetical counterpart except source and sink in their explanation
is reversed. The stop condition A2 is reaching the sink of a sequential node etc. Any
search starting from A, B, C or D and stopping at A2, B2, C2 or D2 can’t have any
21
==PAGE:23==
cycles as the search is stopped at the sequential nodes. From the perspective of the
search, it’s searching through a Directed Acyclic Graph(DAG) due to the restrictions
set on where the search stops. The interesting thing about a DAG is that it guarantees
that there is at least one topological ordering of its nodes. A topological ordering of
all nodes in the graph can be used as a compute order for the nodes and given that a
backwards search from any combination node ends at the stop nodes A, B, C, D, then
all combinational nodes must be part of the topological order. As only combinational
nodes need to be computed then the topological order can be directly used as the order
that all nodes in the FIRRTL graph needs to be computed in. Breadth First Search(BFS)
can make the compute order in O(V + E) time where V is the number of nodes and
E is the number of edges in the compute graph. BFS is modiﬁed so it only adds the
sources of a nodes to its search list(and the node itself to the compute order) when it
has traversed all the edges going to the node. Pseudocode for the BFS algorithm can
be found in Figure 15.
1 def BFS(graph)
2
order = list
3
seenEdges = set
4
queue = queue
5
6
startEdges = GetEdgesForNodesSatisfyingAnyABCD(graph)
7
queue.Enqueue(startEdges)
8
9
while queue.HasItems:
10
edge = queue.Dequeue()
11
seenEdges.Add(edge)
12
13
node = edge.sink
14
if not seenAllIncommingEdges(node, seenEdges):
15
continue
16
17
if IsCombinational(node):
18
order.Add(node)
19
20
if SatisfiesAnyA2B2C2D2(node):
21
continue
22
23
for outgoingEdge in node.outgoingEdges:
24
queue.Enqueue(outgoingEdge)
25
26
return order
Figure 15
In summary computing the circuit state is split up into two parts.
1. Load values from incomplete circuit state given by the VCD Timeline.
2. Use the node order found by using Figure 15 on the FIRRTL graph to compute
the state for the remaining graph.
22
==PAGE:24==
6.5
Type and width inference
Type inference is split up into two stages. First stages does type inference for all aggre-
gate types while creating the FIRRTL graph from the FIRRTL AST. This is a necessary
step in creating the graph because the type tree of all components must be know be-
cause otherwise there can’t be made connects between ground types as it’s unknown
how many there are. For the most part inferring aggregate types is simple because it
entails forwarding the type though components. Only a memory port can contain a
type structure that’s not deﬁned in the FIRRTL AST. A memory port can either be of
type read, write or read and write. FIRRTL Allows a memory port to be deﬁned as the
type infer which means the type of the memory port has to be inferred from its usage.
6.5.1
Fetching type information
Doing complete type and width inference for the whole FIRRTL graph is actually quite
a complex task. The algorithm for width inference as described in this[18] paper de-
scribes it as a three stage process. A process of limiting the valid width bounds a type
can have by traversing the graph both forwards and backwards. One thing to remember
is that this project doesn’t need to do everything on its own. Another solution is to re-
quire the necessary information be provided. The FIRRTL compiler has done type and
width inference once it’s in the LoFIRRTL form. According to the FIRRTL speciﬁca-
tion, width inference is deﬁned as the minimum width that can contain all incoming
connections i.e. the width of a sink ground type is deﬁned by its connections. The
width and type of a source ground type is dependent on the component and a list of
how those are inferred can be found in the FIRRTL speciﬁcation. By implementing the
type and width operation for each component type as speciﬁed in the FIRRTL speci-
ﬁcation, the type and width of all unspeciﬁed sources can be found. Type and width
for each unspeciﬁed sink is dependent on each source it’s connected to. That sounds
exactly like the computation graph made in subsection 6.4. Backwards dependency
search always ends at one of the sources deﬁned in Figure 14. LoFIRRTL explicitly
deﬁnes the types for all these case(wire does not exist but the predicate that search stops
only at the described points is still true.) so the ground type and width information is
readily available in LoFIRRTL.
6.5.2
Single pass inference algorithm
Instead of implementing complete type and width inference, this project instead re-
quires a LoFIRRTL version of ones FIRRTL ﬁle in some cases. Only in some cases
because the algorithm here will only fetch the information from LoFIRRTL if neces-
sary.
Register inference
In order reduce reliance on LoFIRRTL form being available, it
will infer the type of register component as well. If the type and width of a register
source is unknown then if will infer the type of it by inferring the type on the sink side
23
==PAGE:25==
of the register. It will also attempt to infer it from the source of the registers initial
value if it has one.Type inference is implemented as a Depth First Search(DFS). With
the backwards inference search being allowed to go through register nodes, cycles are
also allowed. This is prevented by keeping track of the sources and sinks the current
search path is on and preventing inference of any source or sink if it’s already being
inferred. It must be possible to infer the type of a registers sink without allowing cycles.
Disallowing cycles means the search can only go through a registers sink-source pair
once. If it encounters none of the other stop conditions fromFigure 14 then it must
mean the register loops back on itself or that it was stopped because it would create a
cycle which again means the register loops back on itself. FIRRTL requires that it’s
possible to infer the type of a sink from its connections and if it’s not then the circuit
is not valid. Reaching a node with no incoming connection and the type and width of
any of its sources are unknown is also not allowed according to FIRRTL speciﬁcation.
Thus either it’s possible the infer the type or the circuit is invalid.
Memory port inference
The algorithm itself doesn’t attempt to infer the type of a
memory port. If a memory ports type is infer then it will directly fetch its type from
its LoFIRRTL form.
Inference algorithm
The algorithm uses the same topological order as the computer
order except it includes all nodes and not just combinational nodes. In reality the
compute order does include all nodes, it just ignores stop node when computing state.
The algorithm goes over all nodes in sequence. For each node it ﬁrst infers the type
of all the nodes sources and then it infers the type for its sinks. Inference is done with
a DFS from each source and sink but only if the type and width are unknown. If they
are known then nothing is done. The compute order guarantees that the dependencies
for all combinational nodes are type inferred ﬁrst so the time complexity of the DFS is
equal to the number of connections to the sink. The compute order doesn’t guarantee
that the dependencies of a register have their types inferred before the register does.
Worst case is that the ﬁrst node in the compute order is a register and the DFS will
have to go through and infer for the entire graph. The effect of the worst case is that
the algorithm will go over the remaining nodes but do no work as everything has been
inferred by the ﬁrst DFS. Assuming fetching type data from LoFIRRTL can be done
in constant time, the time complexity of doing type inference is the time complexity of
DFS O(V + E) where V is the number of nodes and E is the number of edges in the
compute graph.
24
==PAGE:26==
6.6
Debugger visualization
Figure 16: Screenshot of the UI visualizing the circuit for a simple register ﬁle implementation.
6.6.1
UI Segments
The UI is split up into three parts. An example of what the UI looks like can be seen in
Figure 16. First part is marked with 1. and a menu system. For now it only includes a
button for selecting FIRRTL and VCD ﬁles.
Second part is the timeline. The timeline itself is split up into two parts to make it
easier to control tile. 2. is controls where a time can be entered, and controls for going
forwards and backwards s single time step. The second part is the timeline control
itself. It consists of a slider at 3. where one can drag the shown circuit state time back
and forth. Above the slider is a part where one can select to zoom in on the selection
of times that the slider shows. The timeline can consist of millions of time steps and
selecting the right one with a slider is not feasible. Either the text box can be used to
go to the right time, or one can drag over the time segment they would like the slider
to show. To reset the slider view, double click above the slider.
Last segment is all the white space below the timeline. This space is what’s used to
display the circuit on. The circuit itself is 4. everything contained in the blue rectangle.
It’s possible to move the circuit around and zoom in/out of it.
25
==PAGE:27==
6.6.2
Circuit visualization
Figure 17: Cropped view of the circuit shown on Figure 16 and at a different time step.
Figure 17 shows the same circuit as Figure 16 but focused on the circuit at a different
time step. The outermost blue rectangle is the register ﬁle root module. All modules
have a blue background to make it easier to distinguish them. The content of a module
may be scaled down in size. The content can still be viewed by zooming in on the
module. If a module is too small on screen, then the content of it is replaced with the
name of the module itself. No point in showing the content when it’s too small to see.
The visualization and behavior of a conditional module is mostly the same as a
module. Conditional modules either have a gray or slightly green background. The
color of the background for a conditional module display whether the conditional mod-
ule is enabled or not. Green background means it’s enabled. The if and else conditional
modules are stacked on top of each other in the visualization to show that they are con-
nected. the top conditional module is always the true case while the bottom(if there is
one) is the false case. The condition of a conditional module is always the top left most
connection to the conditional module. As can be seen in Figure 17, the condition of the
else case is the inverse of the if case.
The circuit visualization for logic components is based on ”IEEE Standard Graphic
Symbols for Logic Functions”[15]. it contains speciﬁcations for the shape, size etc. of
a logic component. The standard won’t be followed completely as the intent is to show
the state of the circuit and not only the circuit graph itself. All nodes in the FIRRTL
26
==PAGE:28==
graph are represented as squares. According to the IEEE standard[15], that’s a stan-
dardized way to visualizing logic components. Apart from modules and conditional
modules, all visualized nodes contain a symbol or name describing the operation it
does. Arithmetic and logic operations shows the value of its sinks and the result in its
source within the node itself as a way to display the circuit state. The source and sinks
of a node are marked with gray circles on the node.
For all nodes, the sources are on the left side and the sinks are on the right side of
the node. The reason is that it will create an implicit ﬂow of the circuit going from left
to right. With cycles in the graph, that’s not always true, but creating a general expec-
tation of where the ﬂow is going, makes the circuit easier to understand and satisﬁes
some aesthetic criteria of the placement algorithm from Figure 18.
The Aggregate types in a type tree are visualized by clustering sources/sinks to-
gether with a colored vertical band. An example of this can be seen in Figure 17 at
2. as the registers type is a vector of 8 UInts. The source and sinks of the vector
are both clustered together with an orange colored vertical line next to the source/sinks
positions. These lines can have multiple levels which shows where these sources/sinks
are located in a type tree with nested aggregate types.
Connections are visualized as black lines showing the path it takes from its source
to its sink. Conditional connections are gray and striped when not enabled. When they
are enabled, they are visualized in the same way that non conditional connections are.
Hovering over a connection will turn it orange and display the type, name(if the wire
has one) and value of the connection. An example of this can be seen in Figure 17 1..
Scala code for the register ﬁle implementation can be found in Appendix as Fig-
ure 27. The register ﬁle is implemented using a register to store the state. It has two
read ports, a single write port and stores 8 values in its register. Without knowing the
circuit itself, by looking at the circuit in Figure 17 it should be possible to easily infer
that it’s the circuit of a register ﬁle with one write port at 3. and two read ports at 1.
and 4.. Being able to see everything at once would be too much, so the names of mod-
ule sources and sinks are only available by hovering over their connections. Although
it’s important to make as much information as possible immediately viewable to the
user, showing too much at once also clutters the visualization. Showing too much at
once can make it difﬁcult to infer the overall structure of the circuit so some things like
module sources and names are only viewable by hovering over their connections.
6.7
Place and route
Visualizing the FIRRTL graph means ﬁguring out the optimal placement of the nodes
and making routes for each connection in the graph. In the context of hardware, place
and route is a step in the synthesis process by mapping a netlist onto a FPGA. Placing
and routing can either be done together or as two separate steps in the process. Look-
ing for a solution for the place and route problem in the FPGA domain is not ideal.
[29] introduces an algorithm that ﬁnds an efﬁcient routing from a given placement. It
27
==PAGE:29==
translates parts of the problem into pseudo-boolean satisﬁability problem in order to
minimize routing delay. Minimizing routing delay is one of the main goals of an ef-
ﬁcient FPGA routing algorithm[1, 30, 29]. For larger circuits, the cost for ﬁnding an
efﬁcient routing is expensive. These two papers[1, 29] compares their algorithms with
other routing algorithms. One of the comparison points is execution time and for all
but the smallest circuits, the routing time is counted in minutes.
Looking at FPGA algorithms for place and route is not ideal. The problem that
should be solved is to make a placement and routing that is aesthetically pleasing to the
eye, easy to navigate and preferably done in seconds instead of minutes. The following
paper[3] proposes an algorithm for visualizing an integrated circuit netlist. The basic
principle behind the algorithm is to assign a vertical and horizontal rank to each logic
component. The rank determines its position in a grid. The horizontal ranking is de-
termined by a logic components longest path length to the circuits output. Horizontal
ranking is done in order to minimize crossing edges. The algorithm achieves making a
graph visualization that has a clear data ﬂow from left to right with its ranking system
while also reducing the amount of crossing edges with its vertical ranking algorithm.
The proposed algorithm unfortunately has the limitation of only working with combi-
national circuits.
Instead of looking at this place and route problem as a circuit visualization problem
it will instead be viewed more generalized as directed graph visualization problem. Be-
fore going further lets look at what makes a graph visualization aesthetically pleasing.
This paper[13] deﬁnes four aesthetic criteria for a graph visualization. The list can be
seen in Figure 18.
A1 Expose hierarchical structure in the graph. In particular, aim edges in the same
general direction if possible. This aids ﬁnding directed paths and highlights
source and sink nodes.
A2 Avoid visual anomalies that do not convey information about the underlying
graph. For example, avoid edge crossings and sharp bends.
A3 Keep edges short. This makes it easier to ﬁnd related nodes and contributes to
A2.
A4 Favor symmetry and balance.
Figure 18: List of aesthetic criteria found in this paper[13]. The list has been modiﬁed to not
include remarks regarding the algorithm found in the paper itself.
There exists many papers[13, 20, 8, 10] out there describing algorithms to place
and route directed graphs. The graph algorithm chosen here is the Graphviz dot[10] al-
gorithm. It’s based on the algorithm from the paper[13] that the above aesthetic criteria
are from. It was chosen over the others because it allows deﬁning where edges connect
to a node and then attempts to avoid crossing those edges. As the visual order of node
28
==PAGE:30==
ports is important to the understanding of a nodes connections, avoiding those edges
from crossing even though their destination is the same, helps a lot to reduce visual
clutter.
The dot algorithm uses splines for edges which is not what’s desired for this prob-
lem. Therefore only the placement of the dot algorithm i used and routing is done
afterwards.
6.7.1
Place
Place and route is done for each module graph. This splits the problem of placing
and routing the entire FIRRTL graph into the solving for the smaller subgraphs in-
stead. This is possible as all incoming and outgoing edges of a module graph will pass
through via module ports. By handling the internal module ports as nodes and not
connecting them to their external counterpart, the module graph is completely discon-
nected from the FIRRTL graph.
Before a placement can be found, the width and height of each node has to be
known. The size of a node can change depending on the type of node and the content
of a node. The size of a node is retrieved from the UI where the size of a node is its
actual size in pixels on screen. Regardless of the shape of a node on screen, for the
purpose of the dot algorithm, the shape of a node will always be rectangular.
The dot algorithm consists of four phases. First phase makes the graph into a DAG
by reversing edges according to a heuristic with a focus on the aesthetic criteria. Step
2 and 3 ranks the nodes in a way similar to what has been described previously. Last
step is making edges between nodes with splines.
6.7.2
Route
The design of routing is rather simple. A discussion on this can be found in section 11.
A routing is found by placing all nodes in a grid and then using a weighted search
algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal path according to some heuristic. The routing found ends
up as paths for all connections where the path consists of a number of 90deg turns. As
the size of a node is its physical size in pixels on screen, the size of each cell in the grid
is 10x10 pixels. Cells occupied by a node, prevents searching for a path in those cells
except for the two cells that the start and end point of the search are in.
Criteria
The path for a connection has multiple criteria that it should live up to in or-
der to reach improve upon the aesthetics of the path. Path that share no source or sink
should avoid crossing each other. Paths should only change direction when needed.
Finding a path to a point in a diagonal, should optimally only change direction once.
As a single source can have multiple connections, a apart of the start of these paths
must be shared between them. It’s preferred for the path of two connections, from the
same source, to follow each other as much as possible. The reasoning here being that
it reduces the number of separate wire paths on screen. When their paths eventually
splits off, it’s marked with a circle at that point. That way there is a distinction between
29
==PAGE:31==
crossing wires and splitting wires. Parts of the end of paths of all connections going to
the same sink will also have to be shared. Sharing a path again reduces the number of
separate wires on screen. Two connections sharing no source or sink should not follow
the same path, they are only allowed to cross each other.
Heuristic
These criteria are upheld with an intelligent heuristic and repathing in
cases where the path isn’t good enough. The heuristic calculates the cost is the fol-
lowing way. Moving to a new cell costs 1. Turning costs 5. Crossing the path of a
connection that it does not share a source or sink with costs 5. Moving to the corner of
another path that it does not share a source or sink with costs 500. Turning on a path
it does not share a source or sink with costs 50. The total heuristic costs is the sum of
these cases plus the cost of the parent cell plus the Manhattan distance to the sink.
Can a routing be made
Ideally there will be space enough in the grid to route all
the connections without two connection that share no source or sink share a signiﬁcant
porting of their path. The Placement found will ensure that there is a path between all
node ports but it does not ensure that paths don’t have to overlap in order to do that.
The current design expands the distance between node placements so there is some
minimum distance between them. Obviously the current solution is not optimal in that
regard.
When the path for a connection has been found, the path is compared to all other
paths found. If other paths signiﬁcantly overlap without sharing source or sink, then
the other connections are rerouted. In order to prevent an inﬁnite rerouting loop, each
connection can only be rerouted a set number of times. After that, it gives up does not
reroute the connection anymore.
6.8
Unsupported FIRRTL
Analog component is not supported.
FixedPoint type and its accompanying
Interval type are also not supported. They are not supported because they are not
a part of the older FIRRTL speciﬁcation[21]. During the project, the lack of detail of
the order speciﬁcation lead to switching to the newer FIRRTL speciﬁcation[11]. The
speciﬁcation hasn’t changed too much between the two and therefore most changes
were simple to implement. Only the new additions Analog and FixedPoint were
not implemented due to time constraints.
7
Implementation
7.1
Technologies
The majority of FIRRTL ecosystem is written in Scala. One would expect this too
would be written in Scala but that’s not so. Considering how much of the FIRRTL
code has to be rewritten, as described in subsection 6.1 it would not require too much
work to do everything else in another language. Still that’s not reason enough to change
30
==PAGE:32==
the environment. The other reason is related to this authors proﬁciency in the two lan-
guages. Last reason is due to to some of the other technologies this project would like
to use.
Apart from some projects written in chisel that generates tests, the whole program
is written in C# and it’s related technologies. C# is a free, opensource, cross platform
programming language that’s widely used and supported. The front end is based on
7.1.1
Frontend
Blazor[22] which is web based UI framework. It allows seamless communication be-
tween C# and Html, Css and JavaScript. Using a webpage as the frontend of the
system allows the UI to be supported on all systems that has a modern web browser.
Blazor is capable of working in two different modes. First is server side where it func-
tions like any other application on a pc except its UI is available through the browser.
Supporting this mode needs OS support for C# and a browser. The second mode is
client side Blazor. Works by compiling the entire C# program into browser executable
code which lets the program run entirely in the browser. This mode is especially in-
teresting as it allows the program to run on any device that has a web browser. Unfor-
tunately this mode is quite slow and only support single threaded applications which
makes the speed of the program quite unusable for anything more than a small circuit.
7.2
FIRRTL parsing
As this project is written in another programming language than the original FIRRTL
parser, which is written in Scala, it can’t be used to parse FIRRTL. Another way to
parse/import the FIRRTL AST has to be found. FIRRTL does support converting it’s
FIRRTL format into ProtoBuf format which can easily be imported into C#. Although
it’s a valid option it does make this project dependent on FIRRTL being available on
the system it runs on. Considering the long sighed goals presented in subsection 7.1
that would not be ideal. Another way to go about it is to reimplement FIRRTLs parser
in C# which is what ended up happening. Essentially the FIRRTL parser used in this
project is the FIRRTL compilers own parser transpiled from Scala to C#.
7.3
Legal connections
The description of FIRRTL ﬂows, as described in the design section, is not completely
honest. The truth is a lot more complex with a few unexpected cases. In FIRRTL, a
ﬂow can not only be made from source to sink, but also from source to duplex, duplex
to sink, duplex to duplex, sink to duplex and even from sink to sink. Sink to sink seems
to only be allowed(or rather work) when the right-hand side is from a module port.
That means the sink of a module port does not behave as the sink of other components.
Instead it behaves more like a wire with duplex ﬂow. From what i can tell, a sink to
sink connection is not legal. FIRRTL has four conditions that must be true in order for
a connection to be legal.
31
==PAGE:33==
1. The types of the left-hand and right-hand side expressions must be equivalent.
2. The bit widths of the two expressions must allow for data to always ﬂow from a
smaller bit width to an equal size or larger bit width.
3. The ﬂow of the left-hand side expression must be sink or duplex.
4. Either the ﬂow of the right-hand side expression is source or duplex, or the right-
hand side expression has a passive type.
Figure 19: For requirement in order for a connection to be valid. Taken from FIRRTL speciﬁca-
tion[11].
An output module port has sink Flow. If it’s not ﬂipped then a ground type of an
output module port has sink Flow. According to 4. in Figure 19, then sink Flow is
not allowed on the right-hand side of a connection. Yet the FIRRTL code in Figure 20
causes no errors in either Chisel, FIRRTL or Treadle. Line 8 has sink Flow on both
sides and should not work yet it behaves as if the right-hand side is a source.
1 circuit SinkSink :
2
module SinkSink :
3
input clock : Clock
4
input reset : UInt<1>
5
output io : {flip a : UInt<8>, b : UInt<8>, c : UInt<8>}
6
7
io.b <= io.a
8
io.c <= io.b
Figure 20
Whether the FIRRTL speciﬁcation has been misinterpreted or it’s an actual bug
doesn’t matter at this point. Debugging Chisel programs that exists right now means
supporting this case as well. The FIRRTL graph only allows source to sink connections
and changing it is not an option at this point. When this kind of case is detected in the
FIRRTL AST, instead of making a connection, a wire node is added to the graph and
the source of the wire node is used as the right-hand side instead. After the module
graph has been created, the wire node is removed and the connection to the left-hand
side is replaced with copies of the connections to the original right-hand side sink.
7.4
Compute order optimization
High level FIRRTL code does not contain much in the way of optimizations. Two
optimizations are done on the compute order. First is constant folding. For many
nodes, the value of its source will only change it the value at its sinks does. If the
nodes sinks are only connected directly(or indirectly through border or wire passes) to
a constant node then the value of the node will never change. Computing the value
once is enough to propagate the constant value from the constant nodes to the nodes
32
==PAGE:34==
sources. Constant folding is done by going over the compute order. When it encounters
a constant node, the sources of the node is added to a set. When it encounters any other
node it checks if the nodes sinks are only connected to sources found in the set. If yes
then the nodes sources are added to the set and the node itself is removed from the
compute order.
7.5
VCD to FIRRTL circuit state
The structure of scopes and wire deﬁnitions in a VCD ﬁle is used to associate a VCD
circuit state to a FIRRTL circuit state. The hierarchy of scopes in the VCD should ide-
ally equal the hierarchy of the FIRRTL module tree. Unfortunately this is not always
the case. There does not seem to be any speciﬁcation on how FIRRTL should be repre-
sented in a VCD ﬁle so it’s essentially up to the simulator. This project has attempted
to support reading VCD ﬁles from both Treadle and Verilator. The ability of the project
to relate the VCD circuit state hierarchy to the FIRRTL circuit state essentially depends
on the VCD ﬁles origin.
7.6
Place and route
The dot algorithm[10] from Graphviz is not implemented directly in this project. Graphviz,
implementation of dot algorithm, is written in C. This library[26] is used to commu-
nicate with the C API provided by Graphviz. The library only works on windows so
an alternative placement algorithm is used on other platforms. It’s a simple placement
algorithm that ranks the nodes according to their longest acyclic path to any of the root
modules internal sink ports. The ranking is used to place the nodes on the x axis and
the nodes are randomly placed on the y axis.
The routing algorithm uses a priority queue in its searching algorithm. The priority
queue is implemented as a binary heap in this library[7] that the project uses.
7.7
Circuit visualization
Visualizing a large circuit puts performance requirements on the UI framework. It
needs to be able to handle showing the whole circuit without stutters or locking up the
UI for extended periods of time. Efﬁcient use of Blazor requires careful consideration
of two main system. First is the render tree that Blazor internally uses to know what
needs to be updated. Second is making sure not to occupy the UI thread for extended
periods of time. Blazor natively supports ofﬂoading UI updates and events to other
threads asynchronously. That also means various parts of the UI logic can run and
update simultaneously.
7.7.1
Render tree
The render tree is a tree of UI nodes where each UI nodes represents some part of the
UI shown on screen. There is almost a one-to-one relationship between nodes in the
FIRRTL graph and UI nodes in the render tree. Only almost because the relationship
33
==PAGE:35==
between conditional modules(if else blocks being next to each other in the UI) needs
additional UI nodes to handle the logic.
When a part of the UI needs to be updated, the UI node informs the render tree
that it needs to be updated. The render tree then updates the Ui node that requested
it and recursively also updates all its child nodes. Clearly for a large render tree that
behavior is not wanted as too many UI updates will make the UI quite slow. To remedy
this problem, Blazor allows manual control over what parts of the render tree needs
updating. This process is done by way of layouts for this project. Each layout maintains
a subtree of the render tree where logically each subtree is equivalent to the UI nodes
representing the nodes in a single module graph. This tree will be called the layout
tree and an example of how a module tree translated to a layout tree can be seen in
Figure 21.
...
Conditional
Module
...
...
...
Conditional
Module
Module
Module
Circuit
...
Module
Layout
...
...
...
Module
Layout
Conditional
Layout
Module
Layout
Module
Layout
Circuit
Layout
Figure 21: On the left is an example circuit tree showing the nodes within each module. On the
right shows how the left tree is converted into a tree of layout controllers that the UI uses to keep
track of everything. The rounded nodes represents the nodes inside each module graph.
• The circuit layout doesn’t do anything special. It’s a simple placeholder layout
because tho root module needs a parent layout.
• There is a module layout for each module in the FIRRTL graph. Each module
layout controls the nodes of its module tree.
• Each conditional module is still a module and are controlled by module layouts.
The ”when else” module blocks are visually represented by stacking the two
conditional modules on top of each other. The conditional layout is responsible
for this placement behavior.
34
==PAGE:36==
7.7.2
Bottom up render
In order to start the placement algorithm for a module, the size of each of the nodes to
be placed must be known. Due to the way the UI works, it’s not possible to know the
size of any UI node before rendering it and reading its size. This is because the actual
size of, for example, an arithmetic UI node is dependent on a number of factors such as
the bit size of the sinks/source, the font, Dots per inch(DPI) of the screen, the screens
DPI scaling and many more minute factors. The choice of browser can also affect the
result.
The size of a module UI node is only known after the placement of the modules
nodes has been found and rendered. Meaning the module tree can be observed as a
dependency tree where all the child nodes of a module has to be placed before itself
can be placed. The way the program works is that it renders the whole render tree at
ﬁrst where everything is placed at some collective origo. After ﬁrst render, all the leaf
nodes of layout tree knows their size and reports it to their associated layout. When the
layout has detected that all its child nodes sizes are known, it will run the placement
algorithm, place the child nodes correctly and then report to its parent layout that its
size has been updated. This process continues until it a placement for all modules have
been found and rendered. After a placement has been found for a module, the routing
algorithm is run for the module.
7.7.3
Place and route template system
Placing and routing is some of the most expensive operations the program does in or-
der to render the circuit. Multiple instances of the same module will lead to the same
placement and routing as the module graphs are equivalent. Instead of running the
placement and routing algorithms for each module instance, the algorithms are only
run once for each unique module name. Each module name in the FIRRTL AST must
be unique in order to tell them apart and this can be used to ﬁgure out if two modules
are instances of the same module.
Each module layout subscribes to a placement template and a routing template.
When a module layout has received all the sizes of its child nodes, it requests a place-
ment from the template system. If a placement for a module with the same name
already exists then it simply return the template to the module layout. If a template
does not exist then it queues, running the placement algorithm, onto a work queue.
The work queue schedules the work to be done on a background thread in order to not
block the UI. When the placement algorithm has run and is converted into a template,
the template system informs all module layouts, that subscribed to this template, of the
new template. Each module layout will then use the template to place its UI nodes
at the new positions and request the render tree for an update. Routing works with a
similar template system but requests for a template is only made after it has received a
placement template. It can only be done after as routing needs to know the positions of
all nodes whereas placement only needs to know the size of all nodes.
35
==PAGE:37==
The combination of the template system and work queue reduces the amount of du-
plicate work and allows the program to utilize the whole CPU through parallelization.
8
Design veriﬁcation
The work done by the compute graph may seem excessive considering that only a few
logic components needs to be calculated. Besides the reason to calculate the whole
state given in ??, veriﬁcation is another one. The content of the VCD ﬁle contains far
more state than what is necessary for the compute graph in most cases. This is actually
a good thing in this case because that means there is a readily available way to verify
the correctness of the computed state. At any given time step, the computed state must
match up with the state from the VCD ﬁle. The correctness of the compute state is
dependent on correctness of type and width inference as they affect the behavior of
the logical components. IT also improves the conﬁdence in the graph representations
correctness.
For most circuits, the VCD ﬁle does not contains the complete search of the state
space and therefore it cannot be said that the design and implementation is ﬂawless.
That said, given a big enough variety in test circuits and VCD ﬁles, this method is ca-
pable of testing almost everything about the design that’s not UI related. As of writing
this, the project has 7491 tests testing various parts of the project. This projects testing
found a bug[6] in the way Treadle simulates dynamic shift right operations. The bug
has now been ﬁxed in Treadle.
8.1
FIRRTL Circuits
Extensive veriﬁcation requires a massive amount of different FIRRTL circuits. In order
to test the more complex design interactions, the circuit itself must be quite complex.
Smaller circuits that are intended to test small segments of the design can be manu-
ally created. Manually creating massive circuits that do actual useful work is another
matter. It’s important that the circuit does useful work, because one way to extend the
possible circuits, is to let FIRRTL spit out the same circuit in different stages of the
compilation process. The Circuit state should be the same over the different stages,
but the feature set and construct of the FIRRTL ﬁles will differ, thus testing more with
a single Chisel source program. If a circuit is not doing useful work, then the later
FIRRTL compilation steps will remove those parts of the circuit as an optimization
and therefore reducing the usefulness of testing the same circuit at different FIRRTL
stages. The solution top this problem is quite simple. There is a massive amount of
open source Chisel projects that can be used for this instead. Although there may be
potential copyright issues with including the Chisel project itself in this project, the
projects can still be used locally. This project uses FIRRTL circuits from two project.
First is [25] Which implements a neuromorphic processor in Chisel and the other is
[19] which implements a complete RISC-V processor that implements the RV32I in-
struction set.
36
==PAGE:38==
8.2
VCD Files
Other than access the FIRRTL circuits, VCD ﬁles for those circuits are also necessary,
so some state can be tested. Testing a Chisel circuit it usually done by executing the
circuit in a simulator while verifying the state of the circuit. Writing the state of the
circuit to a VCD ﬁle while it’s being tested would provide the VCD ﬁles necessary
coupled with one or more FIRRTL ﬁles depending on the stages outputted. This is
how this project is able to make such extensive testing. The test ﬁles themselves are
provided from other Chisel projects tests.
9
Results
This section will describe results from the project. Discussion of those can be found
in section 11. This section will look examples of small and large circuits and see
how they are visualized. Performance number for their visualization time and VCD
parsing time is also included. The results ran on a AMD 3800X 8 core 16 thread
CPU with 32GB of ram. GPU is a Nvidia 2070 Super. Storage medium the project
reads/writes from is an SATA6 connected SSD. The speed of the storage medium may
affect VCD parsing performance if it can’t keep up. The browser used for these results
were Chrome version 91.0.4472.114.
9.1
Circuit visualizations
The debugger is capable of visualizing large circuits. Two such examples are provided
here. Zoomed in versions of the visualizations can be found in appendix.
Figure 22: Visualization of a tile from[19].
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 23: Visualization of a Neuromorphic processor from[25].
9.2
From FIRRTL to debugging
A requirement for the debugger is that it’s fast to make a visualization of a FIRRTL
ﬁle. The time it takes to place and route the whole FIRRTL graph has measured from
loading FIRRTL to shown on screen. As Placing and routing are parallel operations,
the time it takes to place and route everything is not the same. Figure 24 Includes the
node count, wire count that’s shown on screen and the time it takes to place and route
them all.
Circuit
Node count
Wire count
Time(s) to place
Time(s) to route
RegisterFile
12
73
0.3s
0.4s
Tile[19]
2306
5970
2.6s
10.3s
NeuromorphicProcessor[25]
4386
8749
2.0s
11.5s
Figure 24: RegisterFile timed in high FIRRTL form. Tile also high FIRRTL. Neuromorphic
processors LoFIRRTL form was timed.
Another aspect of speed is parsing VCD and converting it into a VCD timeline.
Only after the VCD timeline is created, is it possible to view circuit states in the vi-
sualization. In order to measure the performance of the implemented VCD parser
conversion to VCD timeline, the 3 largest VCD test ﬁles from RISC-Mini[19] has been
used.
Size(GB)
Time(s)
Parsing speed(MB/s)
6.6GB
39.6s
166.6MB/s
5.6GB
31.9s
175.5MB/s
4.8GB
27.2s
176.5MB/s
Figure 25: Top 3 largest VCD ﬁles taken from the tests of RISC-Mini[19] parsed and timed.
38
==PAGE:40==
10
Future work
This section contains additional ideas for the project that would further improve the
usability of the debugger.
Timeline event highlights
A common task while debugging is the need to know
when some connection has a speciﬁc value. The idea here is allowing to select a con-
nection and apply a condition to its value. The times where the condition is true can
then show up in the timeline, making it easy to spot the times where the connection
satisﬁes the condition.
Timeline improvements
Currently the VCD timeline stores state that changed from
a time ti to ti+1. Say changes(ti) gives the stat changes to go from ti to ti+1. The
number of changes needed to go from one circuit state to another can observed as the
cost of doing so. If the segment contains the time range [n, m] and n ≤i < m then the
cost of going a time step forward is changes(ti). With n < i ≤m, going back a time
step from ti to ti−1 costs Pi−2
k=n changes(tk).
Instead of storing what the new value is for the next time step, the value should
be stored as the xor of the two. Going forward would be to xor the change with the
current state. Going backwards would be to xor the change again. This works because
a ⊕b ⊕a = b. Say a is some state in the circuit at ti and b is the same state bit at ti+1.
The change og going from ti to ti+1 for that state is then stored as d = a⊕b. The oper-
ation when going forward will xor to change to the current state a⊕d = a⊕a⊕b = b.
Going backwards a time step, the same operation is applied to b b ⊕d = b⊕a⊕b = a.
This change reduces the cost of going a single time step backwards to the same as
going forwards in time.
Search option
Adding a search bar where one can search for the names of compo-
nents. All components satisfying the search could the be highlighted in the UI.
Improve else if visualization
Chisel supports ”else if” cases to conditional code.
FIRRTL does not support it and it’s converted to an ”else” clause with a nested ”if”.
Writing many ”else if” conditions in Chisel will lead to a ton of nested conditions.
The ideal visualization of an ”else if” would be as yet another conditional block in the
UI. Currently the conditional UI works by having the if and else modules vertically
stacked. Adding the ”else if” case to this stack would make the visualization look more
in line with the conditional structure seen in the Chisel code.
Higher levels of abstraction
Chisel as a library includes a lot of higher level hard-
ware components. It includes a Counter component that can count, a Queue com-
ponent and other useful abstractions. Instead of showing the hardware components
that makes these high level components up, it would be better to shown them in a way
39
==PAGE:41==
that matches how we think about them. The Counter could be visualized as a reg-
ister with an additional counter ﬁeld and the Queue could be shown as a list from
left to right of the value it stores at the different indexes in the queue. Supporting this
kind specialized visual representation for high level chisel library components would
simplify the shown circuit and make it easier to relate it to the corresponding Chisel
code.
Extract data from Scala source
The Chisel code for some hardware is normally not
littered with magic variables. Instead, constant numbers are assigned to a variable or
an enum. Instead of visualizing the numeric value, it could be an interesting option if
the name of the variable/enum was shown instead. That would make it easier to read
the state of the circuit.
Custom bundle views
Some way to specify how the state of a bundle should be
shown on screen. An example could be a bundle for a ﬂoating point number containing
the ﬁeld, sign, exponent and mantissa. In addition to showing the ﬁelds, of one could
write code so the actual value of the ﬂoating point number was also shown then the
value contained in the bundle could be understood faster.
Group primitive operations
Should look into how it would look if and(and(a,
b), c) could be visualized as an and gate that takes three inputs (and(a, b, c).
Following a long chain of and gates just to understand that 27 values are anded together
could simply be expressed as a single and gate with 27 inputs. Grouping operations
together like this would simplify the circuit and express the intention of the circuit in a
simpler way.
Basic optimizations
High level FIRRTL has no optimizations applied to it. Doing
basic optimizations such as constant folding & propagation, common subexpression
elimination and dead code elimination would help simplify the circuit. Visualizing
high level FIRRTL is meant to simplify the circuit compared to LoFIRRTL, but there
can be cases where that’s not the case because some optimizations shrank the size of
the LoFIRRTL circuit signiﬁcantly. Might as well do some of the same optimizations
that reduces the circuit size without altering the order of operations or does any large
scale transformations on the circuit.
Complete simulator
A relatively little amount of work is needed in order to make
FIRRTL simulator from the current code base. It’s already capable of computing al-
most the whole state. The primary thing missing is simulating the behavior of the
Register and Memory components.
With a built in simulator it would be possible to do many more interesting things.
it would be possible allowing one to change the value of some connection and then
continue the simulation with the change. Coverage reports of the execution could be
generated because the way a state is computed already keeps track of state changes
for each connection. Changing it to see if a conditional module was ever enabled or
40
==PAGE:42==
disabled would be possible. Even going so far as being able to visualize path coverage
could be possible.
Undeﬁned behavior check
By comparing each VCD circuit state with the calculated
circuit state, it would be possible to ﬁnd discrepancies in the two changes. Differences
in the two would only occur due to undeﬁned behavior. The debugger could automat-
ically check if any veriﬁcation component would receive an unknown state at a time
where the VCD circuit state would otherwise satisfy the veriﬁcation components con-
dition. Any cases where this is true would almost certainly be a bug. The check could
also be extended to check if an unknown state was ever written to a register or mem-
ory. This check is less useful as it may be intended behavior but emitting a warning
in such cases could help discover bugs and may change the circuit to prevent it from
happening.
Mobile app
This project is built upon a technology stack that makes it relatively
simple to publish as a mobile app. The utility of doing so is probably questionable, but
the ability to do so is nonetheless interesting.
11
Discussion
This section will focus on discussing the results found in section 9 and whether they
live up to the requirements stated in section 5. it will also go into details about the good
and bad of the project during its development.
11.1
Satisfying requirements
This here will discuss the requirements in section 5 to determine how well the imple-
mented Chisel debugger lives up to them.
11.1.1
Chisel Visualization
There is no speciﬁc dependency on Chisel having made the FIRRTL code that’s vi-
sualized. The Current visualization is not only made for Chisel, but for all FIRRTL
code. Future works describes ways to incorporate Chisel more into the visualization
by abstracting idiomatic hardware out and replacing it with an easier to understand
visualization. Future works also described additional ways to tighten the connection
between Chisel and the circuit visualization. Currently there is no connection between
the two. The circuit visualization mimics the structure of the Chisel code because FIR-
RTL mimics the structure of Chisel code.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 26: FIRRTL circuit for the register ﬁle found in Appendix Figure 27. Its high FIRRTL
form visualization is on the left and its LoFIRRTL form is on the right.
The visualization is correctly able to visualize conditionals and type trees in an
intuitive way. The support for these high level abstractions makes the visualization
signiﬁcantly simpler. Figure 26 shows the same circuit visualized from high FIRRTL
and LoFIRRTL. There is a stark contrast between the two and i ﬁnd it difﬁcult to ﬁnd
any advantage in the LoFIRRTL visualization. There are still many improvements to
be made but overall the requirement is satisﬁed.
11.1.2
State Visualization
Most of the state of the circuit is part of the visualization. Some parts, such as the
values of sources and sinks of a mux, are not directly visible from the visualization.
The debugger provides another way of viewing state. By hovering over a wire or node
source/sink, the value of it, along with its name and type will be displayed next to the
mouse. With this, it’s possible to observe the while circuit state. This requirement is
satisﬁed.
11.1.3
State Timeline
The debugger gets its timeline of circuit states from a VCD ﬁle. The VCD ﬁle is parsed
and then converted to a VCD timeline. The state of the circuit can be set to any time
in the timeline through the timeline UI controls. The control allows easy movement
between circuit states by including both a slider, buttons and a text box that the time
can be speciﬁed with. This requirement is satisﬁed.
11.1.4
Speed
Many parts of the design has had a focus on optimizing for speed. The VCD parser
does violate the VCD speciﬁcation[17] a little for the sake of improving parsing speed.
The VCD parser is also very Fast. Figure 25 from the results section shows a parsing
speed of 166 to 176MB/s. The test is done from an SSD does shouldn’t limit parsing
42
==PAGE:44==
speed. Still That’s a parsing speed that most HDDs can’t keep up with. It required
signiﬁcant optimizations that are outside the scope of this report but sufﬁce to say that
VCD parsing is more than fast enough. Same can be said for making the VCD timeline
which is limited by the speed of the VCD parser. Currently the VCD timeline does use
segments but does not store them while not in use. As long as the system has enough
RAM, then it should not degrade the speed of the debugger in any way.
The time from parsing FIRRTL and to it being fully visualized in the UI has been
recorded in the results section. Even large circuits such as the Neuromorphic proces-
sor[25] or a single Tile(core) of the RISCV-Mini[19] takes an acceptable time to show
up on screen. From the results in Figure 24 it’s clear that routing takes longer than plac-
ing. Considering the fact that there is almost always more connections to route than
nodes to places, levels the playing ﬁeld a little. Although a better routing algorithm is
a good idea for aesthetic reasons. The circuits would have to be quite a bit larger than
the ones tested before here before the time to place and route everything comes close
to the time it takes to make the VCD timeline.
Speed is relative and determining if the debugger is fast enough can be difﬁcult to
judge. Expecting everything to be instant though is wishful thinking. Visualizing a
larger circuit will most often lead parsing a larger VCD ﬁle. VCD parsing being the
slowest part of the system isn’t entirely unexpected given the sheer size a VCD ﬁle can
have. VCD parsing and placing and routing are parallel processes that do not depend
on each other. Meaning that the circuit visualization can be navigated while the VCD is
parsing in the background. Place and route has been parallelized by pushing the work
onto a queue that schedules the work on background threads.
VCD parsing can by no means be said to be slow. Given that it’s still the slowest
part of the debugger, this requirement is found to be satisﬁed.
11.1.5
Platform Support
The usage of C and a browser as the UI, allows the debugger to even run on mobile
phones. Although phones are currently not supported, the diversity of supported plat-
forms is seen as satisfying this requirement.
11.1.6
Simulators
Supporting a simulator means supporting the way it speciﬁes circuit state in the VCD
ﬁle. The subject has been mentioned in subsection 7.5 where it concludes that both
Treadle and Verilator are supported. This requirement is therefore satisﬁed.
11.2
Iterative development
The project has been worked on by following the principles of agile development.
Working this way has helped making the debugger more complete but it has also left
some parts of the debugger rather lacking. Doing small and iterative improvements to
parts of the debugger at a time has helped reducing the amount of work that had to
43
==PAGE:45==
be rewritten. At the same time there has not been enough time to implement a better
routing than the original routing implementation. The agile method is not at fault for
the lack of time for some aspects of the design. Rather it was a deliberate decision to
focus on improving testing instead of routing. The current tests help verify the behavior
of a signiﬁcant part of the state space. Although the amount of tests doesn’t say much
when most of them are auto generated, it still portrays some of the work involved in
making proper tests.
11.3
3 state value simulation
In the cases where there is no clear answer on what the result of an operation should be,
FIRRTL defers to deﬁning the behavior as undeﬁned or indeterminate. Depending on
this behavior is never a good idea. The behavior isn’t speciﬁed and this differ depend-
ing on the tools used. The FIRRTL speciﬁcation knows that the user should depend on
this behavior so for indeterminate values it decides that those should be set to a random
value. The idea here being that it would be easier to discover any dependency on inde-
terminate values as the result will always change. Still there ought to be a better way
of informing the user of such mishaps. If it was somehow possible to visualize what
parts of the circuit depended on undeﬁned behavior, then it would be easier to discover
the issue and track down its cause. That’s the idea behind adding a third state to the
simulation. The third state represents both indeterminate and undeﬁned behavior as an
unknown value. The representation of this new state is the same as the representation
of an unknown value in the 4 state values used in a VCD ﬁle. Its visual representation
as X makes it easy to see if some logic depends on an unknown value.
The behavior of replacing the result of primitive operations with unknown if any of
its arguments values are unknown may be too simplistic. Using a bit select operation
to select the ﬁrst 4 values of X0101 shouldn’t result in XXXX as it does right now. The
operation doesn’t depend on undeﬁned behavior but the result of the operation make
it seem so. Ideally any operation that only selects or moves values around in a wire
shouldn’t proliferate X. Only operations that depend on the value of the bit being bi-
nary should be affected by this new behavior.
As it stands right now, the introduction of the third state can help identify depen-
dencies on undeﬁned behavior. The presence of the third state in a circuit state can not
alone prove dependency on undeﬁned behavior due to its spreading behavior not being
optimal.
11.4
A good debugger
The question of whether this debugger is usable is a simple yes. This debugger satisﬁes
all the requirements speciﬁed in the beginning and does a decent job at that. Not
whether it’s a good debugger is debatable. The visualization can still be better on
many fronts. Routing and placing can still be improved upon and there is not many
ways to navigate the circuit. Implementing Features suggested in Future works would
help quite a lot in that regard. Being able to search for node/wire names would make
44
==PAGE:46==
navigating the circuit easier and being able to ﬁlter the timeline to satisfy a condition
would help navigate the timeline. Judging the debugger by comparing it to the years
of work that can be added to it seems to be unfair in this case. The debugger is simple
to use and fast. It’s capable of showing dependencies on undeﬁned behavior and it’s
relatively easy to relate the circuit visualization to the Chisel code. Due to these reasons
i think this is a good debugger.
12
Conclusion
This project implements a debugger capable of debugging hardware written in the hard-
ware construction language Chisel. The debugger works by reading FIRRTL produced
by Chisel and visualizing it. Circuit state is parsed from a VCD ﬁle and is available as a
timeline one can scroll through in the debugger. The steps from FIRRTL to circuit visu-
alization includes parsing FIRRTL, conversion from FIRRTL AST to FIRRTL graph,
type and width inference, creating a compute order, placing and routing the FIRRTL
graph and then ﬁnally the circuit can be displayed in the UI. The project sets up six re-
quirements for the debugger. The requirements includes deﬁning what the circuit and
state visualization should look like, requirements on the performance of all operations
in the debugger as well as wide platform support and supports for speciﬁc simulators.
The advantages in supporting high level FIRRTL constructs such as aggregate types
and conditional is a big boon for the circuit visualization. The support of these features
helps simplify the visualization and makes it easier to relate the Chisel code to the
visualization. Through a discussion of the debuggers results, the debugger has been
declared to satisfy all requirements. Discussion of the usability of the debugger leads
to the conclusion that a good debugger was implemented in this project.
References
[1]
Michael J. Alexander and Gabriel Robins. “New Performance-Driven FPGA
Routing Algorithms”. In: DAC ’95 (1995), pp. 562–567. DOI: 10 . 1145 /
217474 . 217589. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 217474 .
217589.
[2]
J. Bachrach et al. “Chisel: Constructing hardware in a Scala embedded lan-
guage”. In: (June 2012), pp. 1212–1221. ISSN: 0738-100X. DOI: 10.1145/
2228360.2228584.
[3]
Dmitry Bulakh and Sergey Zhestkov. “Logic gates placement algorithm for vi-
sualization of integrated circuits netlists”. In: (2019), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/
SED.2019.8798460.
[4]
Anthony Bybell. Implementation of an Efﬁcient Method for Digital Waveform
Compression. Accessed: June 12. 2021. URL: http://gtkwave.sourceforge.
net/gtkwave.pdf.
45
==PAGE:47==
[5]
Chipsalliance. Treadle – A Chisel/Firrtl Execution Engine. Accessed: June 25.
2021. URL: https://github.com/chipsalliance/treadle.
[6]
Andreas Gramstrup Correia. dshr sometimes incorrectly computed. URL: https:
//github.com/chipsalliance/treadle/issues/321.
[7]
Andreas Gramstrup Correia. Priority Queue. URL: https://github.com/
TheAIBot/PriorityQueue.
[8]
T. Dwyer, Y. Koren, and K. Marriott. “Drawing directed graphs using quadratic
programming”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
12.4 (2006), pp. 536–548. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2006.67.
[9]
EasySoC. EasySoC Treadle. Accessed: June 25. 2021. URL: https://github.
com/easysoc/easysoc-treadle.
[10]
John Ellson et al. “Graphviz and dynagraph – static and dynamic graph drawing
tools”. In: (2003), pp. 127–148.
[11]
FIRRTL. Speciﬁcation for the FIRRTL language. Accessed: June 8. 2021. URL:
https://github.com/chipsalliance/firrtl/blob/master/
spec/spec.pdf.
[12]
freechipsproject. Chisel / FIRRTL Diagramming Project. URL: https : / /
github.com/freechipsproject/diagrammer.
[13]
E.R. Gansner et al. “A technique for drawing directed graphs”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering 19.3 (1993), pp. 214–230. DOI: 10.1109/
32.221135.
[14]
GTKWave. GTKWave 3.3 Wave Analyzer User’s Guide. Accessed: June 12.
2021. URL: http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/gtkwave.pdf.
[15]
“IEEE Graphic Symbols for Logic Functions (Includes IEEE Std 91A-1991
Supplement, and IEEE Std 91-1984)”. eng. In: Ieee Std 91a-1991 and Ieee Std
91-1984 (1991), 01. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.1991.81068.
[16]
IEEE Std 1364-1995: IEEE Standard Hardware Description Language Based on
the Verilog(R) Hardware Description Language, IEEE Standard Hardware De-
scription Language Based on the Verilog. eng. IEEE, 1996. ISBN: 0738130656,
9780738130651.
[17]
IEEE Std 1800-2017 (Revision of IEEE Std 1800-2012): IEEE Standard for
SystemVerilog–Uniﬁed Hardware Design, Speciﬁcation, and Veriﬁcation Lan-
guage, IEEE Std 1800-2017. eng. IEEE, 2018. ISBN: 1504445090, 9781504445092.
[18]
Adam Izraelevitz. “Unlocking Design Reuse with Hardware Compiler Frame-
works”. In: UCB/EECS-2019-168 (Dec. 2019). Ed. by Jonathan Bachrach et al.
URL: http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2019/
EECS-2019-168.html.
[19]
Donggyu Kim. RISCV-mini. Accessed: June 10. 2021. URL: https://github.
com/ucb-bar/riscv-mini.
[20]
Kusnadi et al. “Single phase algorithm for hierarchical graph visualization”. In:
3 (1995), 2025–2028 vol.3. DOI: 10.1109/ICSMC.1995.538076.
46
==PAGE:48==
[21]
Patrick S. Li, Adam M. Izraelevitz, and Jonathan Bachrach. “Speciﬁcation for
the FIRRTL Language”. In: UCB/EECS-2016-9 (Feb. 2016). URL: http://
www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-
9.html.
[22]
Microsoft. Blazor. Accessed: June 10. 2021. URL: https://dotnet.microsoft.
com/apps/aspnet/web-apps/blazor.
[23]
Morten Borup Petersen. VSRTL: Visual Simulation of Register Transfer Logic.
[24]
Ralf Reetz, Klaus Schneider, and Thomas Kropf. “Formal Speciﬁcation in VHDL
for Hardware Veriﬁcation”. In: (Feb. 1998).
[25]
Anthon Vincent Riber. “Power-efﬁcient hardware platform for Spiking neural
network, Energieffektiv hardwareplatform til spiking neurale netværk”. und. In:
(2020).
[26]
Rubjerg. Graphviz.NetWrapper. Accessed: June 25. 2021. URL: https://
github.com/Rubjerg/Graphviz.NetWrapper.
[27]
Sigasi. Sigasi Studio XPRT. URL: https://insights.sigasi.com/
manual/editions/#sigasi-studio-xprt.
[28]
Wilson Snyder. Verilator Manual. Accessed: June 25. 2021. URL: https://
veripool.org/ftp/verilator_doc.pdf.
[29]
Yulan Tang, Zhan Liu, and Jian-hui Chen. “Optimization of pseudo-boolean sat-
isﬁability algorithm for FPGA routing”. In: (2011), pp. 45–49. DOI: 10.1109/
ICIST.2011.5765208.
[30]
Vaishali Udar and Sanjeev Sharma. “Analysis of place and route algorithm for
ﬁeld programmable gate array (FPGA)”. In: (2013), pp. 116–119. DOI: 10.
1109/CICT.2013.6558073.
[31]
Xilinx. Vivado Design Suite Tutorial - Design Flows Overview. Accessed: June
25. 2021. URL: https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/
sw_manuals/xilinx2020_1/ug888- vivado- design- flows-
overview-tutorial.pdf.
[32]
Xilinx. Vivado Design Suite Tutorial - Logic Simulation. Accessed: June 25.
2021. URL: https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/
sw_manuals/xilinx2020_2/ug937- vivado- design- suite-
simulation-tutorial.pdf.
[33]
Xilinx. Vivado Design Suite Tutorial - Programming and Debugging. Accessed:
June 25. 2021. URL: https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/
sw_manuals/xilinx2012_4/ug936-vivado-tutorial-programming-
debugging.pdf.
13
Appendix
47
==PAGE:49==
1 class RegisterFile(addressWidth: Int, dataWidth: Int) extends Module {
2
val io = IO(new Bundle {
3
val readAddress1 = Input(UInt(addressWidth.W))
4
val readData1 = Output(UInt(dataWidth.W))
5
6
val readAddress2 = Input(UInt(addressWidth.W))
7
val readData2 = Output(UInt(dataWidth.W))
8
9
val writeAddress = Input(UInt(addressWidth.W))
10
val writeData = Input(UInt(dataWidth.W))
11
})
12
val regs = Reg(Vec(1 << addressWidth, UInt(dataWidth.W)))
13
14
//Read port 1
15
when(io.readAddress1 === 0.U) { io.readData1 := 0.U}
16
.otherwise { io.readData1 := regs(io.readAddress1) }
17
18
//Read port 2
19
when(io.readAddress2 === 0.U) { io.readData2 := 0.U}
20
.otherwise { io.readData2 := regs(io.readAddress2) }
21
22
//Write port
23
when(io.writeAddress =/= 0.U) { regs(io.writeAddress) := io.
writeData }
24 }
Figure 27: Scala code for the register ﬁle shown in Figure 16.
Figure 28: Zoomed in view of the visualization of a tile from[19].
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 29: Zoomed in view of the visualization of a Neuromorphic processor from[25].
49
