==PAGE:1==
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump
Systems
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
Master Thesis
25 June, 2021
By
Ákos László Kara
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
https://www.greenmatch.co.uk/media/2299882/ground­source­heat­
pumps.png, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 119, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Solar Heating Group, Department
of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Ákos László Kara ­ s192772
Signature
Date
ii
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
25.06.2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The main focus of this thesis is to analyse the yearly operation (2020) of a solar assisted
ground source heat pump system, that is located in Kongens Lyngby at the test facility of
Department of Civil Engineering of DTU and to experimentally investigate how the heat
transfer occurs between the ground source heat exchanger and the soil in such a system
in a newly constructed 1 m x 1m x 1 m special measurement box. The analysis results
showed, that the solar assisted heat pump system works well from used renewable en­
ergy sources point of view. However, the performance of the geothermal heat pump could
not fulfill the expectations, as its yearly SPF stayed below 3 due to several reasons. Fur­
ther investigation showed that the volume flow rate in the ground source loop was too low
and that the heat exchanger got contaminated reducing the performance of the system.
The measurement box results showed that the heat transfer processes between soil and
ground source heat exchanger (GHE) is most significant in 20 cm radius around the GHE.
Furthermore, heat exchange capacity rate is higher in soil charging mode than in soil dis­
charging mode, as the GHE PE pipe thermally expands and the thermal contact between
the pipe and soil improves.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ákos László Kara, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Elsabet Nomonde Noma Nielsen, Senior Researcher, Department of Civil Engineering,
DTU
Supervisor of this thesis.
Simon Furbo, Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Supervisor of this thesis.
iv
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Symbols
∆Qsoil,n Energy content change in nth small soil volume
Wh
∆Qsoil,tot Total energy content change in soil
Wh
∆Qwater Energy content change in water
Wh
¯Q
Vector of heat flow
W/m2
∆t
Time
s
∆Qheatloss Heat loss between the soil of the measurement box and the ambient air
Wh
˙EHP
Electrical power demand of the heat pump
W
˙ESHP Total electrical power consumption of the solar assisted heat pump system
W
˙QDHW DHW heat flow
W
˙QHP
Heat flow from the heat pump to the tank
W
˙QSH
Space heating heat flow
W
˙Qsol,gr Utilized solar energy flow to the ground
W
˙Qsol,t
Utilized solar energy flow to the storage tank
W
λ
Thermal conductivity
W/(mK)
gradT Temperature gradient
K/m
ρ
Density
kg/m3
cp
Specific heat capacity
J/(kgK)
cvol
Volumetric specific heat capacity
J/(m3K)
D
Thermal diffusitivity
m2/s
fren
Renewable heat fraction
­
fsol
Solar fraction
­
m
Weight
kg
qv
Volume flow rate
m3/s
S
Shape factor
m
SPF
Seasonal performance factor
­
T
Absolute temperature
K
G
Radiation
W/m2
H
Heat exchange capacity rate
W/K
T0,n
Temperature at the start of the measurement in nth small soil volume
K
Tambient Ambient air temperature
K
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
Ti,n
Temperature at ith time step in nth small soil volume
K
Tin
Inlet temperature
K
Tout
Outlet temperature
K
Tsoil
Soil temperature
K
Abbreviations
SAHP Solar assisted heat pump
GHE
Ground heat exchanger
DHW Domestic hot water
SH
Space heating
vi
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review on Solar Assisted Heat Pumps
5
2.1
Heat Pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Solar Collectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Solar Assisted Heat Pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Solar Assisted Heat Pump System Arrangements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Experimental Test System
13
3.1
Operation Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Results and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Literature Review on Heat Transfer Conditions Between Ground Source Heat
Exchanger and Soil
41
4.1
Soil as Porous Media
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
Heat and Mass Transfer in Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.3
Properties of Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.4
Experimental Investigations on Heat Transfer in Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.5
Simulation­based Investigations on Heat Transfer in Soil . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.6
Design Proposition of Ground Source Heat Exchangers . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.7
Summary of Research on Heat Transfer Between Soil and Ground Source
Heat Exchanger
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Experimental Investigation of Heat Transfer Between Ground Source Heat
Exchanger and Soil
49
5.1
Measurement Arrangement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Soil Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.3
Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.4
Results and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.5
Conclusions ­ Further Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Bibliography
79
A Appendix
81
A.1 Measuring Uncertainty for Heat Transfer Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.2 Assumptions of Measurement Box Energy Transfer Balance Analysis
. . . 84
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In our modern world, it is well­known that the technological development in the building
energy sector, especially usage of renewable energy sources, is an essential pillar in
order to sustain our healthy, flourishing living environment and biodiversity on Earth. The
world population has increased dramatically over the last century, from merely 1.86 billion
to over 7.9 billion (Ritchie and Roser 2019), and our modern world is not aware seriously
enough of the interaction between such highly populated human beings and the Earth,
as a finite ecosystem (Reda 2017). First and foremost, global awareness about how to
contribute in stopping this declining process individually, commonly along with reachable,
exact goals are required urgently. One of the main problems is, at present fossil fuels,
including natural gas, oil and coal, are still responsible for more than 85% of the primary
energy consumption (Ritchie and Roser 2019). Furthermore, the total primary energy
consumption increased sevenfold over less than a century (IEA 2019a), as seen in Figure
1.1.
Figure 1.1: Total energy consumption by fuels from 1925 to 2019 in the world (IEA 2019a)
1.0.1
Energy Consumption of Building Sector within European Union
Approaching the subject of buildings, it can be stated that, buildings account for around
40% of the total energy consumption in the world and the most significant part within it,
is the residential building of around 75% (OECD 2013). Within the European Union the
residential sector contributes to 24% of the final energy consumption, making it the second
most energy consuming sector after the transportation sector (IEA 2019b), as it can be
seen on the right graph of Figure 1.2. It can also be seen, that by focusing only on the
residential sector the sustainability cannot be solved, but it is one of the most important
pieces of the puzzle.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Left: Total final energy consumption in residential sector by use in EU­27
countries in 2018 (Energy consumption in households 2019)
Right: Total final energy consumption by source in EU­28 countries in 2018 (IEA 2019b)
In the EU­27 households far the most energy is used for space heating (63.6 %) and it is
followed by the water heating (14.8%), as seen on the left graph of Figure 1.2. This is the
reason why the new EU directives aims at this field, and sees a huge potential in reducing
the energy use in this field by energy efficient solutions and decreasing the CO2 emission
by usage of renewable energy sources. That is how we arrive to the importance of the
solar energy, that has an enormous energy saving potential in space and water heating
in the building sector.
1.0.2
Solar Thermal Energy in Buildings
Within the EU renewables account for 19.5% of the total energy production in the resi­
dential sectors, and most significant part is used for space heating along with domestic
hot water heating (Energy consumption in households 2019). Residential solar thermal
energy is produced by two types of system in terms of flow circulation, namely solar ther­
mosiphon system and solar heating pumped system. While the former does not need any
mechanical system to circulate the heated water between the solar collector and the tank,
as it is done naturally by the fluid density difference, in case of the latter a pump powered
by electrical energy is placed in the system to force the circulation. However, purely sun
powered thermal heating systems does not provide sufficient energy through a whole year
in most climates due to the intermittent and stochastic character of solar radiation. Most
thermal solar energy systems are not producing much heat when the heating demand is
high, especially in high­latitude regions, where the period of solar radiation during winter
is short. To overcome this issue several solutions exists. One possible method is the
usage of either long­term seasonal or short­term storages. Another solution is the solar
collector­heat pump hybrid systems, also called solar assisted heat pump systems. Com­
bining solar collector systems with heat pumps result a very energy­efficient renewable
solutions for climates with significant space heating demand. These hybrid systems are
very promising due to their low electrical energy demand, low pollutant emissions, low pri­
mary energy demand and high renewable energy share (Jean­Cristophe Hadorn 2019).
In such systems, with the help of heat pump, low­temperature solar energy produced
2
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:13==
on days with low solar irradiance can be efficiently utilized. The combination of solar
collector­heat pump system with short­term storage increases the system efficiency even
further, while facilitating more stable operation conditions by reducing the peak demands.
In this thesis such a solar assisted ground source heat pump system is investigated.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review on Solar Assisted
Heat Pumps
The invention and ongoing development of solar collectors provide a suitable renewable
energy source of thermal energy for buildings on a big scale, from single­family houses
to block of flats. However, the intermittent and stochastic characteristic of solar radiation,
that can be found both short term (daily) and long term (yearly), limit the usage of such
systems. The space heating demand is not in harmony with solar radiation, meaning
that the peak values of solar energy are quite opposite to the space heating demand
characteristic. These facts especially limit the usage of these systems in high­latitude
regions, where winters are cold with significant space heating demand, and the period
and level of solar irradiation in the coldest month is short and low respectively (Chwieduk
2012). In many high­latitude countries the energy consumed for space heating is far the
highest of the total energy consumption in the building sector, so an alternative solution
must be found in order to solve this limitation of the usage of single solar collector systems.
Solar assisted heat pump systems can cover the heat demand of buildings, such as single­
, or multi­family houses and public buildings, and even improve its system­efficiency by
short­term storage (Reda 2017). If this system is combined with a seasonal storage (e.g.
underground thermal energy storage), it can even provide sufficient thermal energy for
small city districts, communes (Chwieduk 2012).
2.1
Heat Pumps
Recently, a lot of research has been conducted in the building energy field in order to
significantly reduce the emission of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gasses, along
with high efficient systems to minimize the total energy consumption. Ground source heat
pumps are one of the main focus areas. Heat pumps are such heat machines, whose op­
eration is based on the first and second laws of thermodynamics and with electrical energy
input to the compressor, they can convert low temperature input to the evaporator to high
temperature output in the condenser. The used electrical energy is less than the typical
methods of producing heat from electricity (e.g. electrical radiator). The system can pro­
duce a relatively high constant temperature throughout the year and there is a low cost
of heat extraction, without pollution or damage to environment (Chwieduk 2012). Heat
pump can utilize the heat of several heat sources, that can be air, water and ground, and
the more stable and warmer the heat source throughout the year the better the perfor­
mance of the system. At present, the most commonly used heat sources are the outdoor
air and ground. In air source heat pumps the evaporation, in most of the cases, takes
place in an air­to­refrigerant exchanger (Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015). In 2011 a study
was conducted in Central Europe that showed, that the seasonal performance factors for
air source heat pumps are below 3, while for ground source heat pumps it is 3.7 ­ 3.9 de­
pending on whether the ground heat exchanger type is horizontal or vertical (Wemhöner
2011)(Chwieduk 2012). This is due to the more stable ground temperatures. Further­
more, the air­to­refrigerant heat pumps have worse operation conditions at low ambient
temperatures, especially at ambient temperatures below 0 ◦C, where a part of the pro­
duced energy is used for removing frost built up in the heat exchanger (defrosting mode).
(Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015). Thus, the best alternative is utilizing the heat of the
ground, that has a far more stable behaviour in term of temperature variation throughout
the year than the air. Figure 2.1 shows the main parts of the heat pump: The condenser,
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
5
==PAGE:16==
the compressor, the evaporator and the expansion valve. In the evaporator the pressure
and temperature are low. The heat source from the air or ground is used for evaporating
the refrigerant. In the compressor the vapour is compressed to a higher temperature and
pressure. Then, in the condenser the hot vapour is condensed and the released heat
during the condensation is delivered to the consumer. In the last phase of the cycle, the
thermostatic expansion valve brings back the refrigerant to its original state of pressure
and temperature. This thesis deals with ground source heat pumps in a more detailed
way.
Figure 2.1: Schematic drawing of heat pump operation
2.1.1
Ground source heat pumps
According to Reda (2017) ground source heat pump is considered to be one of the most
competitive HVAC system from performance point of view. It not only has a more sta­
ble temperature during a day and throughout a year, but in correctly sized systems the
ground temperature never reaches 0 ◦C and there is no need for defrosting mode, which
is the biggest performance reduction factor in case of air source heat pumps (Reda 2017).
Ground source heat pumps can be divided into three main categories namely, ground­
coupled heat pumps, groundwater heat pumps and surface water heat pumps. In the fol­
lowing the most widely used ground­coupled heat pumps are introduced. Ground­couple
heat pumps can be further categorized into secondary loop ground source heat pumps
(SL­GSHP) and direct exchange ground source heat pumps (DX­GSHP). In the former
systems the refrigerant interacts with heat exchanger, that is often placed within the heat
pump, with a water anti­freeze liquid mixture. This mixture circulates in the GHE and
is thermally interacting with the soil. In the latter system the refrigerant is in direct con­
tact with the ground soil through the walls of the pipes of ground source heat exchanger
(Reda 2017). By having an additional loop in SL­GSHP the system becomes more inef­
ficient due to losses at the additional heat exchanger and more expensive. On the other
hand, DX­GSHP needs a more complex and precise design, and has higher risk of ground
6
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:17==
pollution (Hakkaki­Fard et al. 2015). The design of the ground source heat exchanger is
an essential part of GSHPs, therefore in the next paragraph it is discussed.
2.1.2
Ground heat exchanger
The design of ground source heat exchanger (GHE) requires a lot of important consider­
ation, in order to facilitate a satisfying heat transfer between the soil and the pipes laid in
the ground. Two main types of ground source heat exchanger concept exist, horizontal
and vertical arrangements, as Figure 2.2 shows.
Figure 2.2: Horizontal and vertical ground heat exchangers
Borehole heat exchanger (BHE) or vertical GHE goes deeper into the ground between a
depth of 45 m and 150 m. Such exchangers can have several designs, it can be coaxial
tubes, one and two U shape pipe pairs that are laid in the borehole. These pipes have
inner diameters around 2­4 cm and made from thermoplastic material. The number of
boreholes depend on the size of the heat pump, but the boreholes in order not to influ­
ence each other must be installed 5­7 meters apart from each other. To ensure a proper
thermal connection between the pipes and soil, materials with excellent thermal properties
are used, such as bentonite grout, that are injected between the pipes and the boreholes
(Reda 2017). The most significant advantage of this exchanger design is that the ground
temperature is very stable throughout the year of 10­12 ◦C. That is a very important fea­
ture especially during winter. Moreover, it requires small surface area to prepare such
boreholes. By increasing the depth of the boreholes a higher source temperature can be
achieved due to the rising natural ground temperature (Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015).
However, drilling out these deep holes is very costly. Horizontal ground heat exchangers
are installed 1­3 meters below the surface. The lower ground temperatures during winter
in this depth requires a lot of surface area to be able to extract sufficient heat for the heat
pump. However, due to the fact that the pipes are laid close to the surface its installation
is much less expensive and the maintenance is neither critical. Instead, the disadvantage
is the ground temperature that in these depths is changing throughout the year due to it
is much more influenced by the outdoor air temperature than in case of boreholes (Reda
2017).
2.2
Solar Collectors
Solar collectors are the other main component of solar assisted heat pumps. Solar ther­
mal collectors are able to absorb the solar radiation and convert it to usable heat. Solar
collectors in combination with heat pumps are able to operate in a wider range of opera­
tion conditions, that includes periods without solar irradiation, nighttime, and low ambient
temperatures. At this time, mostly liquid­cooled, non­concentrating, thermal collectors
are used in solar assisted heat pump systems (Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015). The main
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
7
==PAGE:18==
distinguishing factor of such solar collectors is whether the absorber is given a trans­
parent cover or not, that significantly depends on the climate and operation conditions
(Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015). The so called covered and unglazed solar collectors
have different performance characteristic as Figure 2.3 shows. The important parameter
for solar collector performance is the difference between the mean solar collector fluid
temperature and the ambient air temperature. It can be stated that the covered one has
a more stable performance, whereas the unglazed one has higher heat losses and its
performance highly depends on the difference between the average solar collector fluid
and the ambient temperature, and the wind. In the absence of solar irradiance and at
nighttime the heat pumps can supply sufficient thermal energy.
Figure 2.3: Covered and unglazed solar collectors’ performance characteristic (Jean­
Christophe Hadorn 2015)
The covered solar collectors can be divided into two groups in terms of design, flat­plate
collectors and vacuum tube collectors. Their advantage due to their transparent cover is
that the thermal convective exchange (heat loss) is minimized, making them possible to
use for DHW and space heating applications even without heat pumps. (Jean­Christophe
Hadorn 2015). Unglazed collectors operates with high performance when the mean solar
collector fluid temperature is lower than the ambient air temperature, and so the collector
performance is improved compared to covered collectors significantly in these cases due
to no optical losses (Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015).
Photovoltaic­thermal (PVT) collectors have also a high potential in combination with heat
pumps. Their thermal performance is lower than the standard solar collectors, but it is be­
cause of the fact that a part of the solar irradiation is used for producing electricity and the
PV panels requires certain space taken from the solar collector area. (Jean­Christophe
Hadorn 2015). It needs to be mentioned that one of the most significant advantage of PVT
collectors is that it can produce the electrical energy for the heat pumps by the integrated
PV panels.
Two main arrangements of solar collectors exist: series and parallel. In serial configura­
tion the fluid volume flow rate is the same in the whole system, and the fluid temperature
8
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:19==
is increasing from collector to collector. In case of parallel arrangement the fluid flow is
changed in the system, so that the fluid temperatures at the end of each branch of pan­
els is similar. The pressure drop in a solar collector field with same number of collectors
is much lower in parallel arrangement than in serial (Picón­Núñez, Martínez­Rodríguez,
and Fuentes­Silva 2014). A combination of the two system arrangements is used most
commonly.
Solar heating systems are often filled up with mixture of water and glycol in order to pre­
vent freezing and damage of the pipe systems. These systems need an an additional
pump and heat exchanger to be built between the solar collector loop and the heat uti­
lizing loop (heating loop, DHW loop). The additional components increase the costs and
reduces the thermal performance. For residential application the so called drain back
systems can provide a good alternative. These systems are more eco­friendly due to the
heat transfer fluid is pure water, and has less investment costs as components such as
expansion vessel, air vents and heat exchanger are unnecessary (Botpaev, Orozaliev,
and Vajen 2014). What prevents these system to be widely popular is that it needs a very
precise installation by experts and the little experience with the system. The storage tank
is an important part of solar thermal systems in order to store the produced heat during
the day to later usage. Solar collectors can be connected either only to a buffer tank
or a buffer tank along with indoor heating distribution system (low­temperature heating
system) (Reda 2017).
2.3
Solar Assisted Heat Pumps
In recent years, many companies have entered the market in the world to offer solar
assisted heat pump systems, that gives an excellent alternative for residential heating
systems. Herkel et al. from 2012 gives the information, that the most companies entered
the market after 2008. The research also showed that most of these solar assisted heat
pump systems (SAHP) were designed for common space heating and DHW production
(94%) and only 11% and 2% were used simply for DHW and space heating production
respectively. As Figure 2.4 shows, the heat pumps in most cases of the surveyed systems
use only ground­source of 27%. The second most popular heat source of these heat
pumps is the only air­source of 25%, followed by the ground/solar (15%) and air/solar
mixed sources (15%).
Figure 2.4: Heat pumps by source and solar collector types of surveyed systems (Herkel
and Ruschenburg 2012)
Furthermore, Figure 2.4 gives the information, that 58% of the surveyed solar assisted
heat pumps that entered the market are available with only flat­plate collectors (Herkel and
Ruschenburg 2012). A similar research was conducted by Sparber et al, and concluded
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
9
==PAGE:20==
that 46 SAHP systems out of the 80 surveyed systems have parallel interconnection be­
tween the heat pump and solar collector system. SAHP configurations are discussed in
Solar Assisted Heat Pump System Arrangement section.
Moreover, it was claimed that in 41% the heat pumps used purely ground thermal source,
followed by the only air­source heat pump of 34%. Sparber et al, furthermore, monitored 6
commercially and 7 experimentally installed SAHP systems. The geothermal heat pumps
showed an average coefficient of performance (COP) of 3.9, while air­source heat pumps
had a COP of 2.9 in average. As for the seasonal performance factor (SPF) of SAHP
system, the systems operated with ground­source heat pump have a range of 2.1 to 6.6,
while for system equipped with air­source heat pumps have a SPF value between 2.8
and 4.3 (Sparber et al. 2011). While COP gives the ratio between the heat output and the
electrical energy input for a chosen period, the SFP gives the average COP over the heat­
ing season. Kjellsson et al conducted a simulation­based investigation on optimization of
combined system of ground­source heat pump and solar collectors in dwellings. It was
concluded that there are three major reasons for adding solar collectors to ground­source
(borehole) heat pump systems to enhances the yearly performance of the heat pump sys­
tem. One is to reduce the electricity consumption of the heat pump, as the heat pumps
need to be in operation for less time yearly. The second is to raise the temperature in the
borehole by charging the boreholes with excess solar heat. The last is to reduce the net
heat extraction from the ground because solar can be directly used for heating purposes.
The best energy saving option regarding the research was reached in a system where
the solar collectors produce DHW during summertime and recharge the boreholes during
wintertime. If the system is well­sized the temperature of the boreholes increases nat­
urally during summer. Recharging the boreholes during summertime would give higher
ground temperature, but it gives very little annual electrical energy savings. That is due to
the recharged heat dissipates quickly, meaning it is only beneficial if the heat extraction
occurs shortly after the recharge. Recharging during wintertime is more important as the
ground temperature reaches its minimum normally in February or March, and the heat
conducted to the boreholes from solar collectors are utilized by heat extraction in close
timing (Kjellsson, Hellström, and Perers 2010). The importance of recharging the ground
by heat produced by the solar collectors are also shown by the research of Kange et al.,
who carried out a simulation study on the performance of solar assisted ground­source
heat pump. The simulation results concluded, that as the ground temperature increased
from 13 ◦C to 17 ◦C, the heating capacity and heating COP significantly enhanced by 4.7
% and 19% respectively (Kang et al. 2011).
2.4
Solar Assisted Heat Pump System Arrangements
There are four main possible arrangements of solar assisted heat pumps: Series solar
assisted heat pump system, parallel solar assisted heat pump system, dual­source solar
assisted heat pump system and direct solar assisted heat pump system. In the followings
these four system arrangements are introduced.
2.4.1
Series solar assisted heat pump system
In this system arrangement the solar collectors and the heat pump are connected in se­
ries meaning, that the heat pump has only the solar energy as a heat source, as Figure
2.5 shows. The series SAHP has two main operation modes: Solar indirect heating via
heat pump and solar direct heating (Chwieduk 2012). The first mode is used, when the
produced solar energy is high enough to deliver it directly to the storage tank. The latter
mode is used, when the produced solar energy is not high enough, and the heat pump
has to increase the energy content of the produced solar energy, that can be transferred
to the storage tank.
10
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Series solar assisted heat pump system
2.4.2
Parallel solar assisted heat pump system
The parallel SAHP system has heat pump that uses a heat source other than solar energy
(e.g. air or ground) and has solar collectors, as Figure 2.6 shows. In case the produced
solar energy is high enough, the solar collectors can cover the necessary heat of the heat
storage. When the produced solar energy does not meet the heat demand of the storage
the heat pumps activates and extract the necessary heat from the heat source (air or
ground) and it delivers the missing energy to the storage tank (Chwieduk 2012).
Figure 2.6: Parallel solar assisted heat pump system
2.4.3
Dual­source solar assisted heat pump system
In dual­source SAHP system the heat pump has two heat sources: Solar energy and
another one, most commonly air or ground. The heat pump either has two evaporators
for the two heat sources separately or one that is supplied by two heat sources (Chwieduk
2012). This system allows three different operation modes: Solar direct heating, solar
indirect heating via heat pump, heating via heat pump using the other renewable energy
source. The schematic drawing of dual­source heat pump can be seen in Figure 2.7.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.7: Dual­source solar assisted heat pump system
2.4.4
Direct solar assisted heat pump system
In this configuration the solar energy is used directly to heat the refrigerant of the heat
pump meaning, that the solar collector and the evaporator of the heat pump is one inte­
grated unit (Chwieduk 2012). The schematic drawing of such a configuration is depicted in
Figure 2.8 In this integrated solar collector­evaporator unit the refrigerant is directly evap­
orated. This configuration makes it possible to remove the intermediate heat exchanger
that separates the solar collector loop fluid and the refrigerant. The widespread of this
arrangement is limited due to the selection of the suitable refrigerant, that can work well
at different operation conditions and due to the complex sizing of the collector­evaporator
panel that must deal with rapid temperature fluctuations (Chata, Chaturvedi, and Almog­
bel 2005). A relatively stable operation condition can be achieved by a variable speed
compressor.
Figure 2.8: Direct solar assisted heat pump system
12
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:23==
3
Experimental Test System
The experimental test system is in operation since 2014 at the solar heating test area of
the Technical University of Denmark in Kongens Lyngby at 56°N latitude. The main parts
of the system are solar collectors, a tank­in­tank storage, a heat pump and a horizontal
ground source heat exchanger. The evacuated Kingspan tubular solar collectors have a
total gross area of 12.5 m2 (total aperture area is 9.6 m2) and located on a 12° south­west
facing roof with a tilt of 45°. The rock wool insulated tank­in­tank storage has a 725 liter
volume, with 550 liter for the space heating demand and 175 liter for the DHW demand.
The inner tank is responsible for the DHW. The heat produced by the solar collector loop is
supplied to the outer tank by a polypropylene stratifier pipe that ensures a proper thermal
stratification by delivering the solar heated water at the right level in the tank. The heat
pump charges the tank­in­tank by four pipes in the storage, see Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The experimental test system’s arrangement
These four pipes have different inlet and outlet heights to facilitate a relatively hot top layer
for DHW and a less hot middle layer for space heating. Furthermore, to avoid the ruin
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
13
==PAGE:24==
of thermal stratification in the outer tank, the return from the space heating loop is led in
at the bottom of the tank below a half ball baffle plate. The heat pump can modulate its
performance between 3 kW and 12 kW by means of a frequency inverter controlling the
operation of the the heat pump’s piston compressor. The frequency is altered between
30 and 70 Hz (with a nominal frequency of 50 Hz). The horizontal ground heat exchanger
has two loops of 120 m pipes, in total 240 m. The total gross area of the heat exchanger
is 8.5 m x 30 m. The pipes are laid approximately 1 meters below surface level. Figure
3.2 shows the main system elements of the test system.
Figure 3.2: Tank­in­tank storage, Kingspan solar collectors and heat pump of the test
system.
Five circulation pumps ensure the proper operation of the system. P5 and P6 are inte­
grated in the heat pump and responsible for supplying heat from and to the heat pump,
respectively. P1 circulates the solar collector fluid, 35% propylene glycol and 65% water,
in the solar collector loop. P2 transfers the heat produced by the solar collector to the
storage tank, and P3 regenerates the soil with heat from the solar collector if that cannot
be supplied to the tank. In the horizontal ground source heat exchanger a mixture of 35%
isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and 65% water is used. Table 3.1 lists the pumps that are installed
in the system.
14
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Pumps operating in the system
No.
Name
P1
NMT PLUS 25/80­180, Imppumps
P2
UPS 25­40­180, Grundfos
P3
UPS 25­60­180, Grundfos
P5
Alfa 125­60­180, Grundfos
P6
Magna 25­60­180, Grundfos
Moreover there are two external plate heat exchanger. One of them separates the solar
collector loop from the ground heat exchanger loop, while the other one separates the
solar collector loop and the tank­in­tank loop. These are needed because of the different
fluid materials. The experimental set­up is equipped with automated draw­offs to simulate
real DHW and space heating consumption of a typical one­family residential house. Space
heating is tapped in a defined time sloth with a constant volume flow rate. Hence the
tapped energy amount for space heating varies according to the tank temperature. The
energy tapped for DHW during a hot water draw off is always the same.
3.1
Operation Modes
The system can operate in 3 modes. The first is in periods when there is sufficient solar
radiation, and the solar collectors can produce so hot water that it can heat the tank­in­
tank and cover the heat demand of DHW and space heating. The second is in periods,
when the solar collector cannot produce sufficient heat and there is heating demand. In
these cases the ground source heat pump is responsible for heating the storage to the
required temperature. Lastly, the regeneration mode in periods when the heat pump does
not have to transfer any heat, and the solar collectors can produce higher temperature
than the ground temperature, but not hot enough temperature to supply to the tank or the
tank is warm enough. In these cases the ground is heated by the heat produced by the
solar collectors. This is very beneficial as it ensures a higher ground temperature and
thereby a better heat pump efficiency both short therm and long therm.
3.2
Control
The solar collector loop, as it was mentioned, can supply thermal heat to the storage
and to the ground. To decide by the controller whether P1 and P2 or P1 and P3 pumps
should operate three measured temperatures are used, the temperature in the solar col­
lector (TA1), the temperature in the tank­in­tank storage (TA2) and the temperature in
the ground (TA3). The first priority is always the operation of solar­to­tank. To start the
solar­to­tank operation, P1 and P2 are activated by adjusting the corresponding motor­
ized valves when three conditions are met, TA1 is higher by minimum 8 K than TA2, TA1
is higher than 20 ◦C and TA2 is lower than 70 ◦C. The pumps stop in case TA1 is 2 K
lower than TA2 or TA2 is higher than 75 ◦C (restart prohibited until TA2<70 ◦C) or TA1
becomes higher than 130 ◦C (restart prohibited until TA1<110 ◦C). The second priority is
charging the horizontal ground source heat exchanger by activating P1 and P3 circulation
pumps. The loop starts when the temperature difference between TA1 and TA3 is higher
than 8 K. The ground charging must be stopped in periods when TA1 is 4 K lower than
TA3 or when TA1 becomes higher than 130 ◦C (restart prohibited until TA1<110◦C). The
flow rate in the collector loops is set to be 3 liter/min corresponding to 0.28 liter/min per
m2 solar collector area, while the flow rate in the ground loop is 20 liter/min.
The control strategy of the heat pump loop always prioritizes the charging of the domestic
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
15
==PAGE:26==
how water volume before the space heating volume. Temperature sensors are respon­
sible for keeping the sufficient temperature in the DHW volume (T3 sensor) and the SH
volume (T6 sensor) within the tank. In case T3 becomes lower by 4 K than 52 ◦C, the DHW
volume set point, the heat pump is activated along with P5 and P6 circulation pumps. The
3­way motorized valve is adjusted to charge the DHW volume. The charging stops when
T3 reaches the set point (52 ◦C). The second priority the space heating loop is activated
when T6 becomes 4 K lower than the set point temperature, that is set to be 28.5 ◦C.
3.3
Measurements
Different measurement equipments can be found all over the system. Five and three tem­
perature sensors at different heights are placed in the outer and inner tank respectively.
Figure 3.3 shows the temperature sensor placement in the ground source heat exchanger.
Temperature sensors are placed at two locations in three different heights (0.5 m, 1 m and
1.5 m below surface) in the supply and the return loops. Furthermore, soil temperature is
measured in two boreholes every meter below surface (until 10 m beow surface) at two
locations (B1 and B2).
Figure 3.3: The schematic illustration of GHE with all measurement points
16
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:27==
All the temperatures sensors are TT­type thermocouples (copper/constantan) with an ac­
curacy of 0.5 K. In each loop flow meters are installed to measure the volume flow rates,
and electricity meter measures the electrical energy consumption of different components.
A climate station is responsible for measuring the ambient conditions, along with the total
solar irradiation. All the measured values are logged every minute. Table 3.2 lists all the
sensor types used in the measurement system.
Table 3.2: Sensor types in measurement system
Equipment
Name
Placement
Accuracy
Temperature sensor
TT­type TC
System
± 0.5 K
Energy meter
Malmbergs/Kamstrup
Different loop
± 0.5 %
Flow sensor
Clorius Combimeter
DHW loop
± 2 %
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1­R0
Space heating loop
± 2 %
Flow sensor
Brunata HGS5­R4
Ground HE loop
± 1 %
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1­R0
Solar to storage
± 2 %
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1­R3
Heat pump loop
± 2 %
3.4
Analysis Method
Measurements were carried out in the system throughout the year 2020. However, due
to the necessary maintenance reparations measurement results were not available con­
tinuously in all month. Thus, for each season one typical month was analysed, January
(winter), May (spring), July (summer) and October (fall), when sufficient data was avail­
able. During the analysis the main focus was to evaluate the system performance from
different point of views, as renewable energy source usage, system performance factor
etc.
3.4.1
Renewable energy source performance
The utilized solar energy and geothermal energy contributes to the total used renewable
energy. Both energy amounts are determined by the following equations:
˙Q = ρ · qv · cp · (Tin −Tout)
(3.1)
Where ρ and cp are dynamic parameters depending on the temperature, that in case of
water can be calculated as follows (Furbo 2005):
ρwater = 1000.6 −0.0128t1.76
(3.2)
cp,water = 4209.1 −1.328t + 0.01432t2
(3.3)
Where t temperature in the density equation (3.2) must be measured as close as pos­
sible to the flow meter. Furthermore, t in the specific heat equation (3.3) is the average
temperature between inlet and outlet temperature.
For IPA mixture fluid, in the ground heat exchanger loop, constant values of ρ,IPA =
925 kg/m3 and cp,IPA = 3.71 kJ/(kgK) were applied in the calculations.
The seasonal performance factor of the solar assisted heat pump system (SPFSHP ) de­
scribes how efficiently the system works, that is the main comparison factor between the
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
17
==PAGE:28==
different heating and cooling systems, as it includes all losses in the system. It can be
determined by the following equation (Jean­Christophe Hadorn 2015):
SPFSHP =
∫
( ˙QDHW + ˙QSH)dt
∫˙ESHP dt
(3.4)
The solar fraction is one of the most important efficiency parameter of solar heating sys­
tems. The factor describes the solar energy contribution to cover the heat demand. The
solar fraction is the ratio between the utilized solar energy for heating the combi­storage
and the heating demand of the DHW and the space heating, without considering the heat
losses of the tank (ISO 9488):
fsol =
∫˙Qsol,tdt
∫
( ˙QDHW + ˙QSH)dt
(3.5)
The solar fraction, equation 3.5 does not consider the heat loss from the tank, thus the
solar fraction can be higher than 1 in some periods.
The total potential of the usage of renewable energy sources in solar assisted heat pumps
can be described with the renewable heat fraction. This factor both considers the utilized
ground heat energy, the solar energy and all the losses in the system. The definition of
the renewable heat factor is:
fren = 1 −
∫˙ESHP dt
∫
( ˙QDHW + ˙QSH)dt
(3.6)
3.4.2
Performance of solar collector and heat pump
The solar collectors and the heat pump are two main parts of the solar assisted heat pump
system. The performance of these components individually and together is essential in
order to determine how well the solar assisted heat pump system performs. For collector
performance the energy supplied to the tank and to the ground were analysed, and so was
the utilization factor of the solar energy that can be determined by the following equation:
solar energy utilization =
∫
( ˙Qsol,gr + ˙Qsol,t)dt
∫
Gtotdt
(3.7)
Equation 3.8 calculates the total radiation on solar collector (Gtot), that is the sum of the
beam radiation (Gbt), diffuse radiation (Gdt) (that is determined by the isotropic diffuse
solar radiation model) and ground reflected diffuse radiation (Ggt) on the solar collector
(Andersen 2007):
Gtot = Gbt + Gdt + Ggt
(3.8)
The total beam radiation on a tilted solar collector can be calculated by equations 3.9 and
3.10 as the product of the measured beam radiation (Gb) and the geometric factor (Rb).
The geometric factor is the ratio between the incidence angle on the tilted surface (θ) and
incidence angle on a horizontal surface, that is also called zenith angle (θz):
Gbt = Gb · Rb
(3.9)
18
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:29==
Rb = cosθ
cosθz
(3.10)
The isotropic diffuse radiation is calculated by equations 3.11 and 3.12 as the product of
the view factor to the sky (Rd) and the measured diffuse radiation on horizontal (Gd). The
view factor is the ratio between the diffuse radiation on the tilted surface and the diffuse
radiation on a horizontal surface:
Gdt = Gd · Rd
(3.11)
Rd = 1 + cosβ
2
(3.12)
Where β is the tilt angle of the surface.
The last component of the total radiation on a tilted surface is the reflected radiation. It
can be determined by equation 3.13 and 3.14 by applying the view factor to the ground
(Rr) and the reflectance of the solar radiation from the surroundings (ρg) to the measured
global radiation (G). The ratio between reflected radiation to the tilted surface and the
global radiation gives the view factor to the ground :
Gdt = G · Rr · ρg
(3.13)
Rr = 1 −cosβ
2
(3.14)
The collector efficiency can be calculated in a similar way as the solar energy utilization.
It only considers those periods when the solar collector loop is active. Thus, a higher
number is obtained than for the utilization factor:
collector efficiency =
∫solar stop
solar start( ˙Qsol,gr + ˙Qsol,t) dt
∫solar stop
solar start Gtot dt
(3.15)
Where Gtot is the total solar radiation on the solar collector gross area.
The efficiency of the heat pump can be described by the seasonal performance factor
(SPFHP ), that gives the ratio between the supplied heating energy to the tank by the heat
pump and the electrical energy input to the heat pump:
SPFHP =
∫˙QHP dt
∫˙EHP dt
(3.16)
Similarly, can be determined a system performance indicator for the solar assisted heat
pump system (SHP), the SPFSHP :
SPFSHP =
∫
( ˙QDHW + ˙QSH)dt
∫˙ESHP dt
(3.17)
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
19
==PAGE:30==
3.4.3
Accumulated ground energy
Discharging the ground energy from month to month can have a significant effect on the
SPF of the heat pump, thus it is essential to investigate the energy flows in the ground.
The accumulated ground energy gives the difference between the taken energy from the
ground by the heat pump and the supplied energy to the ground by solar energy:
accumulated ground energy = solar energy to ground −ground energy to heat pump
(3.18)
Where the heat exchange with the ambience is disregarded.
20
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:31==
3.5
Results and Discussion
3.5.1
January daily analysis
In January on all days of the month there were space heating and DHW consumption,
as Figure 3.4 shows. In total the DHW consumption was around 150 kWh, while the
space heating consumption was almost 550 kWh. The average daily thermal energy
consumption was slightly less than 22.5 kWh. The average daily outdoor air temperature
changed between 2 ◦C and 10 ◦C in the month.
Figure 3.4: Thermal energy consumption in January
Figure 3.5 shows the renewable energy usage for the tank heating in January. The ground
energy was far the most dominant renewable energy source in January. It can be ob­
served that the solar energy delivered to tank was more than 2 kWh on seven days, and
on neither of the days was the solar energy sufficient to cover the heat demand itself.
The average daily solar irradiance on the solar collector was below 15 kWh on most of
the days, and it crawled above 40 kWh only on three days. On these days, however, the
solar energy delivered to tank still could not outpower the ground energy usage, but an
almost equal distribution can be seen between them.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.5: Solar and ground energy usage for the tank heating in January
Figure 3.6 shows the solar energy utilization in January. By far the most solar energy was
supplied to the tank instead of to the ground. That means in periods when the radiation
was sufficiently high, the collectors worked efficiently to be able to heat the water enough
to supply it to the combi­storage. The solar energy utilization on days with high solar
radiation altered between 0.25 and 0.4, while the collector efficiency could increase even
above 0.4 on seven days.
Figure 3.6: Solar energy utilization in January
Figure 3.7 shows the energy flows of the heat pump in January. The main energy source
of the winter periods was the ground heat energy that was utilized by the ground source
heat pump. In cold periods, thus, it was essential to see how efficiently the heat pump
operates. The electrical power consumption was highly dependent on the solar radiation,
as the heat pump did not have to cover all the heat demand itself. On days with less solar
22
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:33==
radiation the electrical power consumption of the heat pump was even slightly higher than
10 kWh, while on days when solar collector could produce notable heat it was as low as
7 kWh. The SPFHP had a value around 2.8 on every days, with just a little altering.
Figure 3.7: Heat pump energy flows in January
Figure 3.8 gives information about the supply temperature to the ground source heat pump
in January. It can be seen that the supply temperature to heat pump from GHE was in
the range between 4.5 ◦C and 5.7 ◦C in 73% of the time when the heat pump was in
operation in January. Higher than 5.7 ◦C supply temperatures occurred in slightly less
than 15% of the time, while lower than 4.5 ◦C was around 12% of the time. There is a
significant difference in the ground temperatures in different depth. While in the depth of
1 m the average ground temperature was as low as around 5.3 ◦C, in the depth of 3 m it
was even higher than 8.5 ◦C.
Figure 3.8: Supply temperature to ground source heat pump in January
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
23
==PAGE:34==
From the heat pump analysis on 1st January (Figure 3.9) it is seen that the heat pump
supplied thermal energy for DHW 8 times and 16 times for space heating. The space
heating charging operation, however, was intermittent, that could have negative effect on
the heat pump efficiency. The intermittent operation conditions can potentially be elim­
inated by optimizing the control strategy. It can be observed that high space heating
charging temperature, more than 40 ◦C, occured right after DHW charging, that implies
due to the three­way valve quick adjusting there was a mixing between DHW and space
heating auxiliary loops. When the valve switched, heat still remained in the heat pump
from the DHW production. This heat was led into the space heating volume first before
the lower temperature which the heat pump produced for the SH volume.
Figure 3.9: Heat pump operation analysis January
24
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:35==
3.5.2
May daily analysis
Figure 3.10 shows the thermal energy consumption in May. In May the solar collector was
under maintenance for some periods, thus the data analysis is carried out on days 6­11
and 18­31. After 7th May the space heating consumption was stopped, as it can be seen
from the thermal energy consumption. The DHW demand was around 5 kWh/day, while
the space heating on day 6 was 25 kWh, it fall back below 15 kWh on day 7. The daily
average outdoor air temperature stayed above 10 ◦C on most of the days.
Figure 3.10: Thermal energy consumption in May
Figure 3.11 shows the solar and the ground energy usage for the tank heating in May.
In May the heat demand of the tank was covered mostly by solar energy. The average
monthly solar radiation on the solar collectors was 53 kWh/day. On days with high solar
radiation the solar energy delivered to the tank was between 18 and 30 kWh/day. Energy
from the ground was taken on day 6 and 7, when the tank had more heat demand because
of the active space heating loop and on days with less solar radiation. The maximum
energy taken from the ground was 5kWh on day 6. The total amount of energy taken
from the ground in May was less than 30kWh. Furthermore, it can also be seen from the
measured data, that there were days (day 20, 22, 23, 27 and 29) when the combi­storage
itself could cover the daily heat demand, without support from the solar collectors or heat
pump.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.11: Solar and ground energy usage for the tank heating in May
Figure 3.12 gives information about the solar energy utilization in May. The solar utiliza­
tion factor in May was 0.4 and on four days it got close to or even above 0.5. The collec­
tor efficiency stayed above 0.4 in the whole month and on three days it almost reached
0.6. On day 6 and 7 most of the solar energy was used to heat the tank with 25 and 30
kWh respectively, again because of the active space heating loop. On 11 days out of
20 most solar energy was used for covering the heat demand, while the rest of the days
for regenerating the ground temperature. Moreover, on days, when the combi­storage
itself supplied sufficient heat for DHW all the solar energy could be utilized to recover the
ground temperature. On average 12.1 kWh/day solar energy was supplied to the ground
with a maximum of slightly less than 35 kWh/day.
Figure 3.12: Solar energy utilization in May
26
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:37==
The heat pump energy flow analysis in May can be seen in Figure 3.13. The heat pump
was in operation on 7 days out of 21 days. The SPF of heat pump increased relative to
January and was above 3 on day 6 and 7. The total electrical energy consumed by the
heat pump was lower than 15 kWh in May. It justifies the proper control strategy that in
the period without space heating demand the heat pump was only in operation when the
solar radiation was lower than 6 kWh/m2/day.
Figure 3.13: Heat pump energy flows in May
Figure 3.14 gives information about the supply temperature to the ground source heat
pump in May. In May the average supply temperature to heat pump increased compared
to January. In 38% of the time when the heat pump was in operation, the supply tempera­
ture was between 8.8 ◦C and 9.2 ◦C. In more than 40% of the time the supply temperature
was below 8.8 ◦C and only in 10% of the time it rose above 9.2 ◦C. The ground tempera­
ture in 1 m depth was the highest in May (stayed below 10 ◦C) and showing an increasing
tendency as the supplied ground temperature increased. In the depth of 2 m and 3 m the
ground temperatures showed a similar tendency. The average temperature in 3 m stayed
below 8 ◦C, while in 2 m it was almost 1 K higher than in the depth of 2 m averagely in
the month.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.14: Supply temperature to ground source heat pump in May
A typical heat pump operation day in May is shown on Figure 3.15. The day was the 6th
of May when 25 kWh solar energy was supplied to the tank. The space heating demand
was mostly covered by solar energy. There was two periods when the heat pump supplied
heat for the space heating volume. For DHW the heat pump supplied heat five times to
the tank before 1 pm. However, after 1 pm all the heat demand was covered by solar
energy, and the temperatures in both the SH and DHW volumes increased significantly.
Figure 3.15: Heat pump operation analysis May
28
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:39==
3.5.3
July daily analysis
In July the measured data were available from 1th to 22nd. In the whole month there was
not any space heating demand and the daily average outdoor temperature was higher
than 12 ◦C every day. The DHW demand stayed between 5.2 and 4.7 kWh/day, see
Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Thermal energy consumption in July
Figure 3.17 shows the solar and the ground energy usage for tank heating in July. On
8 out of 22 days the heat pump was in operation for some shorter periods, and used in
total 8 kWh ground energy in the month. The heat pump had to operate on the days after
a day with low solar radiation. Most solar energy, 27 kWh, was delivered to the tank on
the same day (day 17) when the total solar radiation on the collectors was the highest of
around 90 kWh. In average the total solar radiation was 42.5 kWh/day. That resulted in
total 230 kWh solar energy supplied to the tank. In July on two days there was not solar
energy transferred to the tank and on one day the combi­storage could cover the heat
demand alone.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.17: Solar and ground energy usage for tank heating in July
Figure 3.18 shows the solar energy utilization in July. To some extent solar energy was
utilized on every day in July, except day 4. On eight days the solar energy to the tank
was more significant than solar energy supplied to the ground and on the rest of the days
it was the opposite. In total 181 kWh solar energy was used to heat the ground and on
every day the ground was charged. The solar utilization factor had a monthly average of
0.31, and had a maximum value of 0.43 on day 17. This is lower than the measured data
showed in May, as a consequence of lower daily solar irradiation. The collector efficiency
was 0.39 in July, with maximum values of around 0.45 on day 1, 11 and 17.
Figure 3.18: Solar energy utilization in July
The heat pump energy flow analysis in July can be seen in Figure 3.19. The electrical
energy consumption of the heat pump was totally lower than 7 kWh in July and the con­
30
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:41==
sumption was higher than 1 kWh/day only on three days. The SPF in July stayed low,
below 3. That could be due to the improper control of the heat pump and the ground heat
exchanger subsystems. As the investigation showed, despite the heat pump is able to
modulate its performance, the circulation pump in the ground exchanger loop could not
keep up the required higher flow rate.
Figure 3.19: Heat pump energy flows in July
Figure 3.20 gives information about the supply temperature to the ground source heat
pump in July. In July, due to the high solar irradiation and low heating demand, the heat
pump was barely in operation. The ground temperature in 1 m depth was around 17 ◦C
in July, while in the depth of 3 m it was lower than 14 ◦C. In most of the time, the supply
temperature to ground source heat pump was between 16.6 ◦C and 17.4 ◦C (in 70% of
the time).
Figure 3.20: Supply temperature to ground source heat pump in July
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
31
==PAGE:42==
The heat pump operation on the 5th of July is depicted in Figure 3.21. On this day the total
solar radiation on the collector was around 40 kWh that resulted in 5 kWh solar energy
supply to the tank. That is relatively low, so the heat pump had to be operated 30 minutes.
The heat pump supplied heat to the DHW volume in the tank after the three DHW tapping
periods. That implies that the solar collectors could not produce sufficiently high water
temperature for DHW.
Figure 3.21: Heat pump operation analysis July
32
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:43==
3.5.4
October daily analysis
The space heating of the test system was activated on 8th October as it can be seen in
Figure 3.22. From day 1 to day 7 the total daily average thermal energy consumption
was around 5 kWh/day, while from day 8 it was 17 kWh/day, with a maximum on day 13
and 15 of slightly less than 25 kWh/day. The average daily outdoor temperature varied
between 9 ◦C and 15 ◦C.
Figure 3.22: Thermal energy consumption in October
Figure 3.23 shows the solar and the ground energy usage for the tank heating in October.
Due to the relatively high radiation in October, averagely 19 kWh/day, more than half of the
heat demand was covered by solar energy. Totally 147 kWh solar energy was delivered
to the tank, with a maximum daily value of 16 kWh on day 15. Only on 6 out of the 31 days
was the solar radiation that low that no solar energy could be used for charging the combi­
storage. The heat pump was in operation on all days. On days with low solar radiation
(<25kWh/day) around 8 kWh/day ground energy was used as the heat source of the heat
pump. It can be also observed, that in the last third of the month, from day 20, the ground
energy was the dominant renewable heat source, while in the first 20 days it was mostly
the solar energy. That is the consequence of the decreasing total solar radiation towards
the end of the month.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.23: Solar and ground energy usage for tank heating in October
Figure 3.24 shows the solar energy utilization in October. In October most of the solar
energy was used for charging the tank instead of regenerating the ground. In total 33
kWh solar energy was supplied to the ground. Five days were without any solar energy
utilization, all of them in the last third of the month. The utilization factor altered between
0.1 and 0.36 in the month. The collector efficiency had a daily average value of 0.4 on
days when the collector loop was in operation.
Figure 3.24: Solar energy utilization in October
The heat pump energy flow analysis in October can be seen in Figure 3.25. As it was
seen, the heat pump had to operate throughout October. As going towards the end of the
month the heat pump electrical energy consumption increased, and reached a maximum
of almost 7 kWh on day 30. This is because of the activated space heating and the low
34
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:45==
solar radiation in the last third of the month. The SPF of the heat pump stayed below 3,
but above 2.5.
Figure 3.25: Heat pump energy flows in October
Figure 3.26 gives information about the supply temperature to the ground source heat
pump in October. In October there was a significant change in the ground temperature
with decreasing tendency in all the three depths. While in the previously analyzed month
the ground temperatures stayed relatively stable throughout the month, in October a tem­
perature change of approx. 3 K occurred in depth 2 m and 3 m and more than 4 K change
was in the depth of 1 m. The supply temperature to heat pump in more than half of the
month was between 12 ­ 12.7 ◦C. The supply temperature was higher than 12.7 ◦C in
40% of the time and in only 10 % of the time it was lower than 12.0 ◦C.
Figure 3.26: Supply temperature to ground source heat pump in October
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
35
==PAGE:46==
20th October is analyzed in a more detailed way from heat pump operation point of view
in Figure 3.27. The solar radiation was too low to supply solar energy to the tank on
this day, so all the heat demand of the tank was covered by the heat pump. 8 times on
the day the heat pump produced heat for the DHW volume, while only 5 times for the
space heating volume. It can be seen that between 18 and 18.8 h when space heating
tapping occurred, the space heating volume of the tank decreased below 25 ◦C, as the
heat pump first had to cover the DHW volume heat demand and then supplied heat to the
space heating volume.
Figure 3.27: Heat pump operation analysis October
3.5.5
Typical operating days
Based on the measured data the energy flows to the combi­storage have been calculated.
The heat demand of the tank was covered by solar energy and the heat pump, and the
contribution from them differed from day to day. The contribution of the different renewable
energies are grouped in five typical operating days:
• Single heat pump energy (SHE): All of the heat demand was covered by the heat
pump utilizing the ground energy
• Single solar energy (SSE): All of the heat demand was covered by the solar energy
produced by the tubular collectors
• Single storage energy (SSTE): all of the heat demand was covered by the combi­
storage without any energy needed from the heat pump or solar collectors
• Mixed energy, heat pump dominant (MHE): The heat demand was covered both by
solar and ground energy, but the energy produced by the heat pump was prevalent
• Mixed energy, solar energy dominant (MSE): The heat demand was covered both
by solar and ground energy, but the solar energy produced by the tubular collectors
was prevalent
Figure 3.28 shows the distribution of typical operating days in different months. In January
on 63% of the days only energy produced by the heat pump was used to charge the combi­
storage, and on the rest of the days both heat pump and solar collectors contributed in
covering the heat demand. In 30% of the time the heat pump was dominant energy source,
36
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:47==
while only in 7% of the time the solar energy was dominant on ”mixed energy days”. In
May there were not any SHE days. In 40% of the time the solar collector produced the
heat and 25% of the days were MSE days. On 25% of the days in May there was no
energy needed to recharge the heat of the tank, as the storage itself could cover the heat
demand. This is due to the fact that the space heating season was stopped on the 8th
of May, thus reducing the total daily heat demand. In July the SSE days significantly
increased to almost 60%. Beside that mostly mixed energy was used to supply heat to
the storage with dominant solar energy. In October almost 50% of the days were MSE
days and beside that on half of the days the heat pump was also in operation, as the
space heating season started on the 7th of October. On 7 days only the ground energy
was utilized, while in around 30% of the time, beside the heat pump, the solar collector
also supplied energy to the tank.
Figure 3.28: Distribution of typical days
3.5.6
Monthly solar fraction, renewable heat fraction and SPF of solar
assisted heat pump system
Figure 3.29 shows the monthly solar fraction, renewable heat fraction and SPF of the
solar assisted heat pump system. To evaluate the solar contribution to the total energy
output of solar assisted heat pump system, the solar fraction, described by equation 3.5,
is used. The SHP system uses two renewable energy sources, thus it is important to
investigate the potential of the total renewable energies in the system. It was evaluated by
the renewable heat fraction, that is described in equation 3.6. Furthermore, the SPFSHP
shows how efficiently the SHP system works, by comparing the useful thermal output
to the necessary electrical input, see equation 3.4. In Figure 3.29, it can be seen that
the solar fraction significantly fluctuated between the seasons, while the renewable heat
fraction is more stable, it only altered 0.3 between January and July. The solar fraction was
the lowest in January 0.1. In May, however, it increased to a value of 1.6 and it remained
the same in July. The renewable heat fraction stayed between 0.6 (January) and 0.9
(May, July), meaning that the system utilized efficiently the renewable energy sources in
the whole year. The fluctuation in case of SPFSHP was notable. While in January it had
the lowest value of 2.3 due to the relatively low solar radiation and high heat demand, it
increased significantly until May, reaching a monthly value of 7.3 and further increased to
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
37
==PAGE:48==
a peak of 8.6 in July as the heating demand became even lower.
Figure 3.29: Monthly efficiency factors
3.5.7
Accumulated ground energy
Continuously discharging the heat of the ground gradually reduce the performance of
the ground source heat pump. Thus, it is beneficial to recharge the ground actively with
excess heat to maintain a stable performance for years and years, beside passively by
radiation of the sun. The accumulated ground energy was investigated in the four months
in order to see what was the ground energy flow balance. It can be seen in Figure 3.30,
that in January the heat pump used more than 400 kWh ground energy resulting in a
significantly negative accumulated ground energy. This is the consequence of the low
total solar radiation and the high heat demand that made the heat pump operate every
day. However, in May and in July solar energy was used for charging the ground as the
solar radiation became higher than 4.5 kWh/m2 in both months, while in May only on seven
days were the space heating active and in July only DHW had heating demand throughout
the month. This resulted in a positive accumulated ground energy of approximately 220
kWh and 120 kWh respectively. In October, as the heating demand increased due to the
necessary activation of space heating, more energy was taken from the ground and due
to the low solar radiation in the last third of the month the solar energy supplied to the
ground could not compensate it. This resulted in ­160 kWh energy balance.
38
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.30: Accumulated ground energy
3.5.8
Heat pump operation analysis
The yearly SPF for ground source heat pump with horizontal ground source heat ex­
changer should be above 3.5 (Chwieduk 2012) . However the SPF of heat pump was
above 3.5 on very few days. That gives the indication, that there is a problem either
in the control strategy or in one of the subsystem of the heat pump (e.g. contaminated
heat exchanger or too low flow in the GHE loop). Figure 3.31 shows the time when the
heat pump was in operation to charge the DHW volume and space heating volume of the
combi­storage on four days from different seasons (1st January, 6th May, 5th July and
20th October). It can be observed that the SPF for space heating is significantly higher
than for DHW. It can be stated that the heat pump cannot operate efficiently when it has
to produce hot water for the DHW volume. It can be assumed that though the heat pump
modulated its compressor performance in order to be able to produce more heat, the
pump in the GHE loop could not follow up with this increased performance and could not
increase its volume flow rate enough to ensure enough heat for the evaporator of the heat
pump in DHW charging mode and probably the heat exchanger in the ground is too small
for the heat pump. The operation times of the heat pump was by far the highest in 1st
January with 120 minutes of DHW charging and 240 minutes of SH charging. Following
by 20th October (total heat pump operation of 150 minutes) and 6th May (total heat pump
operation of 100 minutes). The average charging time slightly altered on the different
days. For DHW charging the highest average charging time was in January of around 16
minutes, while the lowest in July of 10 minutes. The average SH charging time, however,
was the highest in May of almost 20 minutes and lowest in October of just around 5 min­
utes. This had a negative effect on the seasonal performance factor in periods when the
heat pump produces hot water for space heating as on 20th October it was lower than
any of the other three days.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.31: Heat pump monthly operation
40
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:51==
4
Literature Review on Heat Transfer
Conditions Between Ground Source
Heat Exchanger and Soil
To be able to design and dimension correctly the placement (depth, location), pipe length,
pipe diameter and pipe material of a ground source heat exchanger it is essential to know
how the heat transfer occurs in the soil. The calculations of the heat power, that the
GHE can transfer to and from the ground must be carried out precisely to satisfy the
requirements due to the difficulty of accessing and modifying the ground heat exchang­
ers after the installation. The heat power depends on several parameter: climate, depth
and location of GHE, GHE construction (e.g. space between pipes) and thermophysi­
cal properties of soil. Furthermore, the accumulation of heating/cooling energy contin­
uously increase/decrease the soil temperatures that has an impact on the efficiency of
the ground source heat pump over time, especially in areas with dominating heating or
cooling demand. On one hand the undersized GHE can lead to unsatisfying heat power
and eventually freezing of the ground, that can damage the heat exchanger. On the other
hand installing one size bigger GHE system than necessary has additional capital and
operating cost implications (Mironov et al. 2016). In order to get to know the heat transfer
characteristic in the ground several experimental investigations have been carried out.
4.1
Soil as Porous Media
In porous media the pores between the solid framework are filled with either liquid phase
or gas phase or liquid­gas mixture phase fluids depending on the saturation level of the
soil as Figure 4.1 shows.
Figure 4.1: Schematic diagram of different moisture level soil composition, dry, unsatu­
rated and saturated respectively (Rong Wang et al. 2020)
Their distribution is non­directional and random. In such media the heat and moisture
transfer is often coupled, that is governed by the basic rules of heat and mass conser­
vation, and the moisture transfer is dominated by the capillary flow (Chen, Shi, and Xi­
aochuan Li 2006). The heat transfer process consists of convection, heat conduction,
phase change heat transfer and radiation, while the mass transfer process consists of
capillary diffusion, osmotic diffusion and molecular diffusion (F. Zhu, Y. Zhou, and S. Zhu
2021). However, the phase change heat transfer can be neglected in case of the porous
media’s particles are less than 4 ­ 6 mm and the radiation heat transfer can be ignored in
case there is not high temperature difference between the soil particles. (F. Zhu, Y. Zhou,
and S. Zhu 2021).
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
41
==PAGE:52==
Soil is considered to be a sort of anistropic porous media, that behaves and has the basic
physical properties as a porous media. In case of soil the main driving forces that has
an effect on the heat and mass transfer are the temperature and humidity differences,
along with the water vapor content and solute concentration gradients. Furthermore, the
properties of soil are influenced by its temperature (F. Zhu, Y. Zhou, and S. Zhu 2021).
4.2
Heat and Mass Transfer in Soil
In the following section the basic principles of dominating time­dependent heat transfer in
soil are described.
4.2.1
Heat conduction
Conduction takes place in the solid phase of porous media and in fluids. The heat con­
duction occurs between the grains of soil, that are in contact with each other. Between
the grains, the pores are filled with mixture of air and water depending on the satura­
tion level. At sufficiently high water content rings of liquid water are created around the
grains, meaning that a water layer is formed between the contact points. From this par­
ticular moisture level, the thermal conductivity increases with growing moisture level. In
case of conducting medium that has isotropic and homogeneous heat conduction char­
acteristics, it is assumed that the heat conducted in a certain time (∆t), is proportional
with the temperature difference (T) and the thermal conductivity. This is described by the
Fourier’s equation (Hermansson et al. 2008):
¯Q = −λgradT
(4.1)
Where ¯Q [W/m2] is the vector of heat flow and gradT [K/m] is the temperature gradient
that describes to what extent and in which direction the temperature change occurs within
a certain length.
4.2.2
Convection
Convection heat transfer occurs when a warm fluid flows past a cool surface, or a cool
fluid flows past a warm surface. The fluid layer close to the surface slows down and
forms a region called the boundary layer. In this boundary layer the velocity of the fluid
decreases to zero, because of the so called viscous action and facilitate heat conduction
heat transfer between the two mediums. The heat, then, is carried away by the moving
fluid (Rode, Qin, and Peuhkuri 2019). The fluid is in motion due to an external force,
that may be caused by density gradient or pressure difference generated by e.g. pump,
induced differences of density or gravity.
In case of soil, most commonly, moving water molecules transport the heat. They are in
motion, typically, due to the density gradient that is caused by gradient of salt or water
content. As the water density alters with different temperatures, temperature gradient
itself result from density gradient (Hermansson et al. 2008).
4.2.3
Radiation
All bodies with a temperature higher than 0 K (absolute zero temperature) emit energy in
the form of electromagnetic radiation. Radiation is such a heat transfer process, by which
energy moves through a medium or vacuum without the movement of any molecules
and without heating the medium (Hermansson et al. 2008). The radiation is least ham­
pered in vacuum (Rode, Qin, and Peuhkuri 2019). The amount of energy radiated from
a grain surface is proportional to the 4th power of surface temperature. Neighbouring
grains enhance their temperature by absorbing this emitted radiation. Due to the fact that
grains with higher temperature emit more energy, in total the radiation energy increases
42
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:53==
the temperatures of lower­temperature grains. Typically, radiation in the soil is negligi­
ble. However, in coarse dry soil with low heat conduction properties 10­20 % of the heat
transfer can be due to radiation (Hermansson et al. 2008).
4.2.4
Vapour diffusion
Diffusion is such a molecular diffusion process in which vapour moves from high vapour
pressure towards the lower one. Conventional pressure difference is not necessary for
diffusion, it is enough if there is a concentration difference of the vapour. Furthermore,
the vapour pressure grows as the temperature increases and as the relative humidity
increases. Thus, basically, dry and cold conditions attract more vapour. In a porous
media (such as the soil), typically, water evaporates at the warm end of the pore, and it
condensates at the cooler end by transferring latent heat from one point to the other of
the pores (Hermansson et al. 2008).
4.2.5
Importance of different heat transfer in soil at different temperature
Heat conduction is the dominating heat transfer in temperature range below and above
approximately 25◦C. Below approx. 25 ◦C (but higher than 0◦C) in highly permeable soils
the forced convection, due to groundwater flow, may become more significant and so
do the natural convection if there is high temperature gradients. Above approx. 25◦C if
the moisture content is lower, vapour transport becomes more important. Reaching the
saturation level, heat conduction is far the most dominating factor in heat transfer. At
higher temperatures, in coarse soils more radiation occurs, but its importance stays still
low (Hermansson et al. 2008).
4.3
Properties of Soil
Thermal and heat transfer properties of the soil depend on several parameters. In this
section the three most important property of the soil is shown in a more detailed way, the
thermal conductivity, the thermal capacity and the thermal diffusitivity.
4.3.1
Thermal conductivity
Thermal conductivity is the most dominating factor in the heat transfer processes of soil.
Thermal conductivity in case of dry soil has a range of 0.2 to 0.4 W/(mK), while in case
of saturated soil it differs from 1 to 4 W/(mK) . Thermal conductivity depends on several
parameters. The thermal conductivity increases with decreasing porosity due to the fact
that thermal conductivity of minerals (e.g. calcium, sulfur) is much higher than in air or
water. Table 4.1 shows the thermal conductivity of different soil materials.
Moreover, the quartz mineral contents also affect the conductivity. The more quarts the
soil has, the higher the thermal conductivity is because of the high thermal conductivity
of quartz relative to other minerals. The thermal conductivity of air is negligible small, but
this is not the same with water. If the water content of the soil increases, so does the
thermal conductivity (Hermansson et al. 2008).
4.3.2
Thermal capacity
Thermal capacity is defined as the quantity of heat necessary to produce a unit change
of temperature in a unit mass of a material. Thermal capacity for water is around twice
as high as for any other minerals or ice and for air it is negligible. The volumetric heat
capacity of soil is between 1 ­ 3 MJ/m3K depending on the water content and dry density
of the soil, as Figure 4.2 shows (Lyesse Laloui 2020).
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
43
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.1: Thermal conductivity of different materials of soil (ETB 2021)
Material
Thermal conductivity [W/mK]
Water
0.606
Air
0.0262
Quartz minerals
3
Sulfur
0.2
Calcium
0.05
Clay, dry to moist
0.15 ­ 1.8
Clay, saturated
0.6 ­ 2.5
Sand, dry to moist
0.15 ­ 2
Sand, saturated
2 ­ 4
Soil with organic matter
0.15 ­ 2
Soil, saturated
0.6 ­ 4
Figure 4.2: Typical evolution of volumetric heat capacity of soils (Lyesse Laloui 2020)
4.3.3
Thermal diffusitivity
Thermal diffusitivity (D) is the ratio between the thermal conductivity and thermal capacity:
D = λ
cp
(4.2)
If the soil has large diffusitivity it responds quicker to the thermal environment, while if it
is low the soil temperature responds in delay to the changed thermal environment (Her­
mansson et al. 2008).
4.4
Experimental Investigations on Heat Transfer in Soil
In 2020, Zhu et al. carried out experimental studies on heat transfer in soil with different
moisture content to investigate the temperature distribution of it under different tempera­
ture differences between the inlet temperature of the fluid and the initial soil temperature.
The experiments were carried out in a 1.2 m x 1.2 m x 1.2 m sandbox that contained fine
grained sand. In the centre of the box a copper pipe was placed in order to release and
absorb energy from the box. On two sides of the box heat exchanger units were placed
to be able to simulate different soil temperature conditions. The experiments concluded
44
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:55==
that the moisture content had a negligible influence on the heat transfer performance of
the wet test soil sample and mainly the difference between the inlet temperature of the
fluid and the initial soil temperature, that affected the soil temperature behaviour. Further­
more, the soil temperature change was in a good logarithmic relationship with the radial
distance, the longitudinal distance and the heat transfer time, and the correlation between
them enhanced by increasing the difference between the inlet temperature of the fluid and
the initial soil temperature. It was also seen, that the temperature distribution was almost
symmetric in the process of heat storage and heat release (F. Zhu, Y. Zhou, and S. Zhu
2021).
Wang et al. (Rong Wang et al. 2020) investigated experimentally the heat transfer of soil
with different moisture levels and seepage water for GSHP. The experiments were car­
ried out in a 1.5 m x 1.5 m x 1 m well­insulated sandbox, crossing it in the middle by an
electrical heating rod (EHR) to simulate the different inlet pipe temperatures. Four soil
conditions were investigated during the experiment (1) dry, (2) unsaturated, (3) saturated
and (4) seepage water with a velocity of 549 m/year. Firstly, the relationship between the
heat realising rate and temperature distribution of the different soils were observed. The
results showed, that the higher the moisture content level was, the stronger the heat real­
ising capacity became, especially for seepage water. Moreover, at a specific temperature
the soil moisture content was in proportional relationship with the heat realising capacity.
As for the spatial temporal distribution of temperature, with increasing moisture content
the growth rate of temperature from the sandbox centre (where the EHR was placed) de­
creased and the heat transfer stabilized more quickly. Additionally, the speed of the heat
propagation was concluded to be finite and was the fastest in case of unsaturated soil
followed by the saturated and dry soil. Investigating the temperature gradients showed
that the lower temperature gradients occurred at lower moisture contents and the temper­
ature isotherms were symmetric if there was not seepage water. The thermally affected
zones were observed by keeping a constant heat realising rate in the sandbox with differ­
ent moisture levels. The thermally affected zone was the largest in case of unsaturated
soil and smallest under dry soil conditions and the size of the zone was in proportional
relationship with the thermal diffusivity of the soil. Lastly, the experiments showed that
the main form of heat transfer in the soil was heat conduction along with a small additional
increase caused by moisture transfer (Rong Wang et al. 2020).
Experimental research conducted by Gao et al. showed that heat source temperature
and soil initial moisture level had a large influence on moisture transfer in soil. The study
showed that under different initial moisture contents, the impacts on moisture transfer
were not similar even if the same driving force of temperature gradient occurred. If the
moisture content was high, the effects of moisture transfer by heating was low. Hence,
driving moisture transfer became easier under a certain driving potential in soil with high
moisture content than in soil with lower one. Furthermore, soil temperatures results gave
the information that if the moisture content of the soil was higher the thermal conductivity
was higher as well. This means, the temperature variation and heat flux at a certain point
within the soil became higher at higher initial moisture level (Gao et al. 2020).
4.5
Simulation­based Investigations on Heat Transfer in Soil
In 2016 R. E. Mironov et al. (Mironov et al. 2016) presented a mathematical model for heat
transfer between the soil and the surface of the pipes laid in the ground. Using this model,
they examined and plotted the heat transfer rates per unit length of a horizontal GHE as
functions of the distance between pipes and operating time, as it can be seen in Figure
4.3.The GHE was considered to be placed in sandy soil that has a thermal conductivity
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
45
==PAGE:56==
of 1.7 W/mK and a thermal diffusitvity of 3 · 10−3 m2/h .
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a): The heat transfer rate per unit length of GHE pipe as a function of distance
between pipes at different pipe surface temperatures in July in Moscow (t0 = 12◦C): curve
1: ts = 30◦C; curve 2: ts = 20◦C; curve 3 :ts = 15◦C; and in January (t0 = 4◦C): curve 4:
ts = –10◦C; curve 5: ts = –5◦C; curve 6: ts = 0◦C.
(b): The heat transfer rate per unit length of GHE pipe as a function of operating time at
different pipe surface temperatures in July in Moscow (t0 = 12◦C): curve 1: ts = 30◦C;
curve 2: ts = 20◦C; curve 3: ts = 15◦C; and in January (t0 = 4◦C): curve 4: ts = –10◦C;
curve 5: ts = –5◦C; curve 6: ts = 0◦C.
Where ts stands for the surface temperature of the pipe and t0 is the ground temperature
at the level where the GHE was laid. The heat transfer rates per unit decreased dramat­
ically by reducing the distance between the pipes to lower than 2 meters. Furthermore,
as the modeling shows after putting the heat pump in operation, the GHE performance
decreased in the first 20 to 30 days and then became stable (Mironov et al. 2016).
Li at al. investigated the soil temperature distribution dependence of soil parameters and
operating modes based on an inner source heat mathematical model created in Autough2
simulation program. The influence analysis of thermal conductivity and specific heat con­
cluded that the higher the thermal conductivity was, the lower the soil temperature altered
and the lower the heat capacity was, the greater the radius of influence range was (Xinguo
Li, Zhao, and Q. Zhou 2005).
Wang et al., in 2016, presented a new model to predict the soil thermal conductivity under
different temperatures, and to investigate the effect of soil type on the performance of
GHE. The variation of temperature for three soil types (loam, clay, sand) under 30 days
continuous heat extraction operation showed that the temperature of the soil decreased
with the increase of the distance from the pipe. However, while for clay and loam the
temperature decreased very fast as the distance increased from the heat extraction pipe,
for the sand, due to its relatively higher thermal conductivity, the same temperature de­
crease rate was lower. Furthermore, thermal diffusion radius was the highest in sand and
the lowest in clay under the same heat absorbing conditions. The moisture diffusion ra­
dius in sand was slightly greater than in clay, but both of them was almost twice as large
as in loam. Moreover, investigation of porosity of soil showed that soil with lower porosity
had better heat diffusion ability and smaller thermal conductivity variation. (Z. Wang et al.
2016).
4.6
Design Proposition of Ground Source Heat Exchangers
Wang et al., based on experimental investigation, proposed that ground source heat ex­
changers should be installed in areas where the soil has high moisture content. The
46
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:57==
performance and efficiency of GHE can be enhanced by selecting areas with seepage
water or underground runoff. They also claimed, that for long­term, sustainable operation
and control strategy they must be in coincidence with the energy releasing capacity of the
soil (Ruzhu Wang and Zhai 2018). R.E. Moriniv et al. gave the suggestion, based on their
mathematical model results, that the distance between the centre of the laid pipes must
be at least 2 meters, as below 2 meters the heat transfer performance dramatically falls
back (Mironov et al. 2016). Li et al. suggest, based on their mathematical model, that
the ground heat exchanger should be laid in soil that has high thermal conductivity and
specific heat properties. Furthermore, they concluded that intermittent operation mode
has obvious advantages in heat propagation and thermal recovery in the soil. Their re­
sults showed that for clay, sand and sandstone for five days heat emitting operation the
temperature increase rate in 1:1 intermittent operation mode is only 25%, 28% and 30%
of the continuous mode respectively. (Xinguo Li, Zhao, and Q. Zhou 2005). Wang et al.
proposed that in sand the buried pipe spacing can be reduced compared to loam or clay
as the thermal diffusivity is greater in sand (Z. Wang et al. 2016).
4.7
Summary of Research on Heat Transfer Between Soil and
Ground Source Heat Exchanger
From the various research the following can be concluded:
• Soil temperature change is in logarithmic relationship with the radial distance and
longitudinal distance of the heat releasing and absorbing pipe
• Temperature distribution in cube measurement box is almost symmetric in the pro­
cess of heat releasing and heat storing and the symmetry axis is vertical and inter­
sects the center GHE pipe
• The higher the moisture content in the soil, the higher the thermal conductivity of
the soil
• Higher moisture content in the soil contributes to a higher heat transfer
• At certain temperature the moisture content is proportional to the heat transfer
• The thermally affected zone in the soil is proportional to the thermal diffusivity of the
soil
• Main form of heat transfer in soil is heat conduction
• Soil with lower porosity has better heat diffusion ability and smaller thermal conduc­
tivity variation.
The former previous experimental investigations and simulation based mathematical mod­
els improved the GSHP performance significantly, but more research on the topic is nec­
essary. The main focus of these investigations must be on the ground soil where the
energy is extracted or the excess energy is deposited as well, and not just on the GHE or
GSHP, as it was mostly in the past (Rong Wang et al. 2020).
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:59==
5
Experimental Investigation of Heat
Transfer Between Ground Source Heat
Exchanger and Soil
5.1
Measurement Arrangement
The experimental investigation of the heat transfer between GHE and the soil was carried
out in a 1 m x 1 m x 1 m measurement box with temperature sensors and flow meters built­
in to analyze the heat transfer conditions. The measurement box also had the necessary
piping connections for heating and cooling power supply. After the design phase and the
construction of the wooden structured measurement box, as the first step the temperature
sensors and flow meters were calibrated following it by the implementation of the required
piping system with heating and cooling supply of the measurement box. Finally, the two
soil types, gravel and mulch were analyzed by determining their thermal properties.
5.1.1
Measurement box preparation
The main focus during the design and implementation phase of the measurement box was
to be able to reproduce the same conditions within the box as in the real test facility for the
GHE. The 1 m x 1 m x 1 m size box, constructed from wood, and has a pipe located in the
center. The pipe is the same type as the one used in the test facility. In the top and bottom
of the box, radiators are mounted to be able to condition the soil to a required temperature.
The upper radiator can also be used to simulate solar radiation on the surface. In the box
in total 29 temperature sensors are placed in concentric semicircle shape. It is assumed,
that the temperature distribution is symmetrical. Therefore, temperature sensors are only
placed in half of the volume, as Figure 5.1 shows.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.1: Construction of the measurement box and sensor placement
After the structure and the temperature sensors were ready, the box was filled up with
mulch and gravel in a similar way as the GHE in the test facility. Thus, around the center­
crossing PE pipe 20 cm radius of mulch is placed, and in the other parts gravel. During
the filling, the compression level was reached by a 55 kg person stamping the soil. Fur­
thermore, special attention was paid to the proper contact between the radiators and the
gravel to ensure a sufficient heat transfer between them. That is not critical in case of the
bottom radiator as the weight of the soil on the radiator ensures a proper thermal contact
between the heat exchanger unit and the soil. Instead, during the top radiator installation,
a fine grain material was used that has proper heat conductivity properties and easily
takes the shape of the radiator ribs. For this purpose fine sand layer is placed between
the top radiator and the top of the gravel. Figure 5.2 shows the schematic drawing of the
pipe connection of the measurement box.
50
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.2: Schematic drawing of the pipe connection of the measurement box
The next step was to make the necessary piping systems for the radiators and for the cen­
ter PE pipe. As it was seen from the test facility’s data analysis, the ground temperature
varies significantly in 1 m depth, where the GHE is placed, from lower than 4 ◦C to higher
than 18 ◦C. Hence it is necessary to have a cooling and a heating system connected to
the radiators. In the PE pipe of the GHE the temperature even varies more dramatically
from lower than 4 ◦C to even higher than 50 ◦C (in regeneration mode). The cooling is
available from the central cooling system of DTU and the cooling power is regulated by
an automatic throttle valve. The actuator of the throttle valve receives an input of 0 ­ 10
V from the controller, and adjust the extent of the throttle proportionally to this voltage.
The PI controller makes decisions based on a TT type thermocouple temperature sensor
placed in the supply cooling loop. For heating a special heating unit is connected, that
can vary its heating performance from 3 kW to 27 kW by 3 kW steps. In Figure 5.3 the
heating unit, the Danfoss throttle valve and the measurement box in uninsulated phase
can be seen.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.3: Heating unit (left), Danfoss throttle valve with electrical actuator (right) and the
measurement box without insulation (bottom)
Both the primer cooling and primer heating loop are physically separated from the se­
cundary loop, that directly supplies the center PE pipe and the radiators of the measure­
ment box with cooled or heated water, by heat exchangers. Figure 5.4 shows the main
parts of the piping set­up with the necessary safety equipment and the two manifolds.
The supply manifold (on the left side of the Figure 5.4) has two inlets, one inlet supplies
the cooling power and the other supplies the heating power. Before the inlets, in both
loops flow meters are placed. Furthermore, the supply manifold has three outlets, one
for the top radiator, one for the centering PE pipe and one for the bottom radiator. The
52
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:63==
desired operation set­up can be reached by adjusting the three 3­way­valves, that are
placed at the connection of the two inlets and one outlet. Thus, with the proper 3­way­
valve adjustments, it is possible to supply the two radiators and the PE pipe with heating
or cooling energy independently. The return manifold (on the right side of Figure 5.4) has
three inlets, from the two radiators and the centering PE pipe, logically, and two outlets,
the returns to the heat exchanger of cooling and heating.
Figure 5.4: Piping set­up with two manifolds and safety equipment
Furthermore, three 3­way­valves are similarly placed in the return manifold as in the sup­
ply manifold. During the operation special attention must be paid, that the corresponding
3­way­valves in the supply and return manifold must be in harmony with each other, so
that the returns go to the corresponding heat exchanger. In order to ensure a safe and
efficient operation of the system, air escape valves are placed at the highest points of the
piping system, in this case at the top of the manifolds. Both in the return of the heating and
cooling loop pressure gauges are installed. In the heating loop, moreover, a safety 6­bar
valve is placed. The installed expansion vessel allows the variation of temperature in the
loop without activating the safety valve. Circulation pumps of the secundary heating and
cooling loop ensures a satisfactory volume flow rate. Table 5.1 gives information about
all the sensors that are placed in the measurement set­up.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
53
==PAGE:64==
Table 5.1: Sensors equipped in the measurement set­up
Equiment
Name
Location
Accuracy
Temperature sensor
TT type thermocouple
copper/constantan
30 pcs in measurement box
6 pcs radiators/PE pipe loop
± 0.1 K
Flow sensor
Brunata HGQ1­R3
1 pc supply cooling loop
1 pc supply heating loop
± 0.5 %
Both loops are given filters to preserve the critical parts of the piping system, the pump and
the heat exchanger, from getting contaminated. The heat exchanger of the cooling and
heating and the radiators and center PE pipe are all connected to the manifolds by flexible
pipes. As Figure 5.2 shows, a by­pass loop was constructed for the centring PE pipe.
This is necessary to prevent the water flow in the PE pipe until the temperature in the loop
reaches the required constant temperature, making the experiment results more accurate
and repeatable. Temperatures are monitored in the inlet and outlet of the two radiators
and center crossing PE pipe. The TT­type thermocouple temperature sensors are placed
within the pipe and mounted in counter flow in order to ensure accurate measurements.
As the final step, the measurement box was insulated on all sides by 20 cm rockwool.
5.1.2
Temperature sensor calibration
In order to determine the temperature profile of the soil where the horizontal heat ex­
changer is laid, 29 temperature sensors were placed in the 1 m x 1 m x 1 m measurement
box. A huge variety of thermocouples are available on the market with different tempera­
ture range and accuracy properties. Bearing in mind, that accuracy is an essential aspect
for the measurement, TT­type thermocouples were used, that has copper as its positive
leg and constantan as its negative leg. Its temperature range is from ­270 °C to 400°C
with an accuracy of +/­ 0.5 K. The thermocouples were made by hand one by one with
point soldering. The junctions then, received a plastic protective cover placing it precisely
with the help of a heat gun in order to eliminate the direct influence of the other ther­
mocouples. The thermocouples were connected to a data logger that is able to convert
immediately the voltage into Celsius degree and store the data. However, both the ther­
mocouple itself and the data logger works with uncertainty and can result in a significant
measuring inaccuracy. Thus, calibration is needed in order to reduce the occurring error.
For the calibration, the AMATEK Jofracal device was used, and Figure 5.5 gives informa­
tion about the calibration arrangement. As Figure 5.5 shows, the reference sensor and
the thermocouples were placed in the proper holes of the AMATEK Jofracal calibration
device and then it was connected to a computer via USB communication port. An addi­
tional insulation layer was placed on the top of the device, in order to minimize the heat
loss from the device towards the ambience and so establish faster the proper reference
temperatures. The thermoucouples were connected to a data logger that stored in every
10 seconds the measured temperatures. To determine the calibration linear equation, five
set points were taken with 15◦C steps: ­5◦C, 10◦C, 25◦C, 40◦C and 55◦C.
54
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.5: Temperature sensor calibration arrangement with main parts of the calibration
system
Results of the temperature sensor calibration
In total 37 temperature sensors were calibrated. Due to this high number, all the results
cannot be presented in this section, so the method of getting the calibration equation is
introduced for label 1 temperature sensor.
The criterium for the temperature calibration was that the measured temperature by the
sensor should not change more than 0.01 ◦C within 5 minutes. The results of the cali­
bration of label 1 sensor can be seen in tabular form in Table 5.2 and in graphical form in
Figure 5.6.
Table 5.2: Temperature calibration result of label 1 temperature sensor
Reference sensor [°C]
Sensor 1 ­ measured [°C]
Sensor 1 ­ calibrated [°C]
­5.00
­4.46
­4.99
10.00
10.47
10.04
25.00
25.29
24.95
39.99
40.17
39.94
55.00
55.18
55.05
It can be seen, that the reference sensor set point and reference sensor true value (tem­
perature of reference sensor when the above mentioned criterium is fulfilled) are almost
in all cases the same. The label 1 temperature sensor measured slightly different tem­
peratures and the calibration equation can be obtained if the results depicted on a graph
and a linear trend line is aligned to the measured point pairs, as Figure 5.6 shows.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.6: Graphical results of the measured point pairs
The result gave the information that the linear part of the equation is very close to 1.00,
while the constant tag is around ­0.51. A similar trend can be observed generally, in case
of the other sensors. The results showed, that the calibrated temperature sensors have
an accuracy of 0.1 K.
5.1.3
Flow meter calibration
In the measurement set up two Brunata HGQ1­R3 type flow meters were placed, one in
the cooling power supply pipe and one in the heating power supply pipe. To get more
accurate measurement results, these flow meters must be calibrated first. For the cali­
bration process 4 set points were used namely, 0.5 liter/min, 1 liter/min, 3 liter/min and 10
liter/min. The measurement set up can be seen on Figure 5.7, and it can be observed,
that the set up facilitated to calibrate three flow meters simultaneously.
56
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.7: Flow meter calibration arrangement with main parts of the calibration system
The flow meters were connected to a data logger that was able to count all the pulses
during the measuring period generated by the flow meters. The totalizer mode of the
measurement card was used for this purpose. The resolutions were not the same in case
of each flow meter. There were flow meters with low resolution 1 liter/pulse and high
resolution ones with 0.1 liter/pulse. In the same time during the measurement, the total
flowed through water volume were collected in a barrel and with the help of the scale,
on which the barrel was placed, the weight of this water amount could be determined. In
order to be able to set the proper flow rates, several throttle valves were placed in the
calibration set up. The calibrations were carried out so, that the amount of water in the
barrel is sufficient enough to have an accurate result, bearing in mind to minimize the
inaccuracies caused by the scale reading and the water filling level of the pipes. The aim
of the calibrations is to get the calibration equation, that modifies the measured result, so
it measures more accurately the real volume flow rate. The results and the method of
determining the calibration equation of the calibration are described in the next section.
Results of the flow meter calibration
The results of the measurement are depicted in Figure 5.8 so, that the y­axis show the
reference volume flow rate based on the read weights, while on the x­axis the volume
flow rate calculated from the total pulses are depicted. The calibrated results are shown
in tabular form in Table 5.3. Flow rate based on the measured weight can be calculated
by the following equation:
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
57
==PAGE:68==
qv,water =
mafter −mbefore
∆tcalibration · ρwater
(5.1)
Where mafter and mbefore are the measured weight of the water filled barrel after and
before the calibration process respectively and ∆tcalibration is the calibration time. The
flow rate based on the number of pulses can be determined as follows:
qv,water = total pulses · resolution
∆tcalibration
(5.2)
Table 5.3: Flow meter calibration results
Reference [l/min]
1 ­ flow meter calibrated [l/min]
2 ­ flow meter calibrated [l/min]
0.508
0.504
0.509
1.058
1.004
1.056
2.977
2.973
2.978
10.03
10.00
10.12
Linear trend line is aligned to the point of the graph, and the equation of the trend line is
the equation that can be used to modify the measured results in a way to get a value that
estimates the real volume flow rate in a very accurate way. The results of the measured
points with depicting the calibration equation can be seen in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Flow meter calibration results
Both flow meters have a 0.1 l/pulse resolution. The results showed, that the calibrated
flow meters have an accuracy of 0.5 %.
5.2
Soil Analysis
Tempos (METER Group, Inc. USA) thermal properties analyzer measurement device was
used to investigate the thermal properties, thermal conductivity and volumetric specific
58
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:69==
heat capacity, of the mulch and gravel, that can be found both in the measurement box
and at the GHE of the test facility.
5.2.1
Sample preparation
As the first step of the analysis process the samples had to be prepared in a standardized
way, that could be reproduced later, if necessary. The soil samples were prepared in
120 ml pots made from heat resistant plastic. The volume was filled in five steps and for
compressing the soil a special piston was used. For each layer the number of the impacts
by the piston was doubled. The piston and the pots, that were used for the soil preparation
can be seen on Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Soil sample preparation with the special ”compressing” piston
The measurements were carried out with the original gravimetric water content of the
samples and in dry phase as well. The dry phase was reached by heating the samples
for 24 hours at 105 ◦C in oven. The gravimetric water content can be determined as
followings:
mgravimetric = mwet −mdry
mdry
(5.3)
Where mwet is the weight of the sample with original moisture content and mdry is the
weight of the dried sample. The gravimetric water content was anlyized for the prepared
samples, for the mulch and gravel, that were used for filling up the measurement box. As
Table 5.4 shows, the gravimetric water contents were very similar in both cases.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
59
==PAGE:70==
Table 5.4: Gravimetric moisture content of the different soil samples
Soil sample
Gravimetric water content [%]
Gravel sample
8
Mulch sample
26
Gravel in box
7
Mulch in box
22
5.2.2
Tempos soil analyzer device theory
Tempos device was connected to the dual­needle sensor, that is able to determine the
thermal conductivity and volumetric specific heat capacity at the same time. For deter­
mining the temperature drift, Tempos collects data for at least 30 s. If the drift is below
0.002 K/s, current is conducted to the heater needle for 30 s. During this time the sensing
needle monitores the temperatures. After this phase the current is shut off for the next 30
s and the temperatures are still monitored. Both the drift and the starting temperature are
subtracted from the temperatures giving the ∆T. The resulting data are to fit to Equation
5.4 and Equation 5.5 using a linear least square procedure (Tempos 2021).
∆T =
( q
4πλ
)
Ei
(−r2
4Dt
)
(5.4)
∆T =
( q
πλ
) {
Ei
[
−r2
4D (t −th)
]
−Ei
[−r2
4Dt
]}
(5.5)
Where for Equation 5.4 t ≤th and for Equation 5.5 t > th must be fulfilled and where:
• ∆T [K] is the temperature rise at the measuring needle,
• q [W/m] is the heat input at the heated needle,
• r [m] is the distance from the heated needle to the measuring needle,
• t [s] is time,
• th [s] is the heating time (s),
• D [m2/s] is the thermal diffusitivity, and
• Ei [s] is the exponential integral and is approximated using polynomials.
In the next step the value D is to be found, that minimizes the squared product of the
modeled and measured temperature. After D and λ are determined, the volumetric spe­
cific heat capacity and the density can be computed by using the equation 5.6 (Tempos
2021):
ρcvol = λ
D
(5.6)
Table 5.5 contains the accuracy values for different parameters of measurements carried
out with Tempos dual­needle (Tempos 2021).
60
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:71==
Table 5.5: Tempos dual­needle measurement accuracy for different parameters
Parameter
Range
Accuracy
Thermal conductivity
0.02 ­ 2.00 W/mK
± 10% from 0.02 ­ 2.00 W/mK
Diffusivity
0.1 ­ 1.0 mm2/s
± 10% at conductivity above 0.2 W/mK
± 0.02 W/mK from 0.10 ­ 0.20 W/mK
Specific heat capacity
5.5 ­ 4.2 MJ/m3K
± 10% at conductivities above 0.1 W/mK
An ideal needle sensor has a very small diameter and its length is around 100 times
longer than its diameter. Furthermore, the contact between the soil and sensor is intimate
for the whole measurement, and does not change during heating and cooling phase of
the needle. Inaccuracies may occur due to several reasons, that can limit the usage of
such a needle sensor:
• heating moist, unsaturated porous materials make water to move away from the
heat source, thus altering water content around the needle may occur
• as the needle is placed in the material, additional resistance may be added by air to
the contact between the sensor and the material.
5.2.3
Soil measurements
For analyzing the thermal conductivity and volumetric specific heat capacity temperature
dependence of the soil types, measurements were carried out at six temperature levels: at
5 ◦C, at 15 ◦C, at 25◦C, at 35 ◦C, at 45 ◦C and at 55 ◦C. These measurements were carried
out both with the original moisture contents and with the dried out samples. Furthermore,
measurements were carried out in the measurement box at three different heights for
gravel (up, middle and down), and at one height for the mulch (middle), as mulch can
only be found in 20 cm radius from the center PE pipe. The measurement points in the
measurement box can be seen in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Measurement points in the measurement box
The thermal properties have a dependence on the compression level of the soil. However,
the tendency of the temperature dependence of the parameters can be assumed to be the
same at different compression levels, meaning that it can be deduced, how the thermal
parameters changes in the gravel and mulch, based on the measurements in the box at
different temperature.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
61
==PAGE:72==
5.2.4
Soil measurement results
As Figure 5.11 shows, the thermal conductivity slightly increases from 1.44 W/mK to 1.64
W/mK as the temperature rises from 5 ◦C to 55 ◦C in case of the moist mulch. It can be
also observed, that the thermal conductivity of the mulch in the box at 22 ◦C is 1.14 W/mK,
that is less than the sample measurements showed at the same temperature by approxi­
mately 0.3 W/mK. That means the compression level of the mulch in the box is somewhat
lower than how the samples were prepared. The moisture level of the mulch is almost the
same in the box and the sample, as Table 5.4 showed, thus it does not have a significant
influence on the differences. Figure 5.11 gives information about the temperature depen­
dence of the volumetric specific heat capacity of the moist mulch. The results show, that
the specific heat capacity remains relatively stable of approx. 2.9 MJ/m3K from 5 ◦C to
15 ◦C. At 25 ◦C it reaches its minimum of 2.85 MJ/m3K. After that, as the temperature
increases, the specific heat capacity becomes higher and reaches its maximum at 45 ◦C
of 3.06 MJ/m3K. It can be observed from the box measurement of volumetric specific heat
capacity, that the compression level in the middle of the box is lower than the sample’s,
as it was seen in case of the thermal conductivity.
Figure 5.11: Thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of moist mulch
Figure 5.12 shows the thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity temperature depen­
dence of the moist gravel sample and the box soil analysis results. It can be seen, that the
thermal conductivity increases gradually from 1.8 W/mK to above 2.1 W/mK as the tem­
perature is increased from 5 ◦C to 55 ◦C. It can be also seen, that the thermal conductivity
significantly alters in different heights in the measurement box. This indicates, that the
compression level of the gravel increases as more soil weighs on the certain layer. While
at the top of the box the thermal conductivity is as low as 1 W/mK, at the bottom it rises
even above 1.6 W/mK. The volumetric specific heat capacity, on the other hand, stays
relatively stable of around 2.5 MJ/m3K at the different temperature levels. Furthermore,
the box measurement of the specific heat capacity indicates again, that the compression
level increases toward the bottom of the box.
62
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:73==
Figure 5.12: Thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of moist gravel
Figure 5.13 depicts the results of the temperature dependence of volumetric specific heat
capacity and thermal conductivity of the dry mulch sample. The volumetric specific heat
significantly increases from around 1 MJ/m3K to almost 1.4 MJ/m3K as the temperature
is increased from 5 ◦C to 55 ◦C. However, the thermal conductivity measurement shows
a different tendency, as it remains relatively stable of around 0.2 W/mK at the different
temperatures. Both the thermal conductivity and the specific heat capacity are much
lower in dry phase than in moist phase, as it was expected. The thermal conductivity falls
back as in the gaps between the small soil grain particles the water is eliminated and it
is replaced by air, that has much worse thermal conductivity properties than water. The
volumetric specific heat capacity in dry phase becomes lower as well, because of the fact
that water has far higher specific heat capacity than air.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.13: Thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of dry mulch
A similar tendency of specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity can be observed in
case of dry gravel as in case of dry mulch, as Figure 5.14 shows. The thermal conductiv­
ity stayed around 0.5 W/mK independently of the temperature level, while the volumetric
specific heat capacity gradually increases from 1.5 MJ/m3K to 1.9 MJ/m3K as the temper­
ature is increased from 5 ◦C to 55 ◦C. Both thermal properties are significantly lower in
dry phase than in moist phase, as it was seen in case of the mulch sample too.
Figure 5.14: Thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of dry gravel
64
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:75==
5.2.5
Soil sample size distribution
The grain size of mulch and gravel that can be found in the measurement box was ana­
lyzed by different gap sized sieves. 10 sieves were used for the analysis and their gap
size in descending order: 16 mm, 8 mm, 4 mm, 2 mm, 1 mm, 0.5 mm, 0.25 mm, 0.125
mm, 0.075 mm and 0.04 mm. Figure 5.15a gives the information, that the cumulative
grain size distribution of the mulch is similar to a normal cumulative distribution. That
means, that the biggest particles (16 mm, 8 mm) and the smallest particles (0.04 mm,
0.075 mm) can be found in less amounts than the middle­sized particles in the mulch. As
Figure 5.15b indicates, the gravel cumulative distribution is more linear, meaning that the
different sized particles can be found in similar weight amounts.
(a) Mulch grain size distribution
(b) Gravel grain size distribution
Figure 5.15: Grain size distribution of soil types (mulch and gravel) in the measurement
box
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
65
==PAGE:76==
5.3
Analysis Method
5.3.1
Soil energy content change
The soil volume in the measurement box is meshed to 29 small volumes in a way, that
each volume has a corresponding temperature sensor. Symmetry is applied in the box,
meaning that half of the volume of the box is meshed to 29 small volumes, and it is
assumed that in the other half the same soil temperature distribution occurs. Therefore
the energy content for one half of the box is simply doubled. The energy content change
of such small volume can be calculated by equation 5.7 as the product of the volume (Vn),
volumetric specific heat of soil (cvol,soil) and the temperature change from the beginning
(T0,n) to the end (Ti,n) of the time step:
∆Qsoil,n = Vn · cvol,soil · (Ti,n −T0,n) ·
1
3600
(5.7)
The total energy change of the soil volume is calculated by equation 5.8 as the sum of all
the small volumes:
∆Qsoil,tot =
29
∑
n=1
∆Qsoil,n
(5.8)
5.3.2
Water energy content change
The energy change in the soil, has to match the energy change in the water in the GHE
pipe of the box. The heat transferred by the circulating water in the pipe can be calculated
by equation 5.9:
∆Qwater = qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · (Tout −Tin) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(5.9)
Where cp,water and ρwater are determined by equation 3.2 and 3.3 respectively.
5.3.3
Heat loss of measurement box
The measurement box is insulated by 20 cm rockwool (drockwool). During the heat loss
calculation the following assumptions are used:
• The heat transfer within a time step is steady state
• The outer convective resistance and radiation are negligible
• The heat resistance of the wooden walls of the box is neglected
The heat loss of the box can be calculated based on the shape factor method. In case of
a box geometry, three shape factors (S [m]) are used (Mills 1992):
• Plane wall for the 6 sides, S =
A
drockwool
• Edge of adjoining walls for the 12 edges, S = 0.54 · W
• Corners of three adjoining walls for the 8 corners, S = 0.15 · drockwool
Where W is the inner edge length (1 m), and A is the inner side surface area ( 1 m2) of the
box. The rockwool insulation material has a thermal conductivity of 0.037 W/mK. The
heat loss can be calculated by equation 5.10 (Mills 1992):
∆Qheatloss = λ · S · (Tsoil −Tambient) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(5.10)
Where Tsoil [K] is the average soil temperature of the 1, 6, 13, 20 and 27 temperature
sensors within the timestep.
66
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:77==
5.3.4
Heat exchange capacity rate between ground source heat
exchanger and soil
The heat exchange capacity rate (H [W/K]) highly depends on the heat exchanger de­
sign, volume flow rate, soil and GHE inlet/outlet temperatures. It gives information on how
efficiently the heat exchange occurs between the soil and the GHE. It can be calculated
as follows:
H = −qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · ln(1 −Tin −Tout
Tin −Tsoil
)
(5.11)
Where Tsoil [K] is the average of the first­semi circle soil temperatures within the timestep.
5.4
Results and Discussion
The box measurements were carried out in a way to minimize the relative measuring un­
certainties. Therefore, the initial temperature difference between the water inlet and initial
soil temperature was 10 K and the volume flow rate in the center PE pipe (GHE) was set to
be as low as 0.25 liter/min. During the measurement all the measured soil temperatures,
water inlet and outlet temperatures, heat power of water and heat exchange capacity rate
were investigated. In total four measurements were carried out: 5 ◦C water inlet and 15
◦C soil temperature (discharge soil), 10 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature (dis­
charge soil), 30 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature (charge soil) and 35 ◦C water
inlet and 25 ◦C soil temperature (charge soil).
5.4.1
15 ◦C initial soil temperature and 5 ◦C inlet water temperature
Figure 5.16 shows the soil temperature changes during the measurement period. The
temperatures in the first semi­circle decreased most significantly by around 2 ­ 3 K. The
soil temperature where the temperature sensors 3, 9 and 16 were placed decreased more
significantly than the others located in the first semi­circle. This indicates that the mulch
slipped lower in the box due to the soil weight above the mulch and around these sensors
the gravel­mulch mixture has a higher thermal conductivity than pure mulch. In the second
semi­circle the soil temperature still decreased, but by less than 1 K, while in the third
semi­circle and in the corners the temperatures stayed stable.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
67
==PAGE:78==
(a) First semi­circle temperatures
(b) Second semi­circle temperatures
(c) Third semi­circle temperatures
(d) Corner temperatures
Figure 5.16: Soil temperatures change during the measurement period
Figure 5.17a depicts the water inlet and outlet temperatures over time. A temperature
difference of 2 K was between the inlet and outlet temperatures. Figure 5.17b shows
the energy balances of the measurement. The heat transfer between the box and the
ambient air was relatively low compared to the discharged energy from the soil and to
the absorbed energy of the water. After 800 minutes a satisfactory match can be seen
between the discharged energy from the soil (350 Wh) and the absorbed energy by the
water (365 Wh), also considering the heat transfer between the soil and the ambient air.
(a) Water inlet/outlet temperature of GHE
(b) Energy balance of measurement box
Figure 5.17: GHE water temperature and measurement box energy conditions
68
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:79==
5.4.2
20 ◦C initial soil temperature and 10 ◦C inlet water temperature
Figure 5.18 shows the soil temperature changes during the measurement period. The
temperatures in the first semi­circle decreased most significantly by around 1.5 ­ 3 K. In the
second semi­circle the soil temperature still decreased, but by less than 1 K, while in the
third semi­circle the temperature decreased even less than 0.5 K. The soil temperatures
in the corner stagnated.
(a) First semi­circle temperatures
(b) Second semi­circle temperatures
(c) Third semi­circle temperatures
(d) Corner temperatures
Figure 5.18: Soil temperatures change during the measurement period
Figure 5.19a depicts the water inlet and outlet temperatures over time. The initial temper­
ature difference between the inlet and outlet was around 2 K. The temperature difference
slightly decreased during the measurement period and after 800 minutes it was less than
1.5 K. Figure 5.19b shows the energy balances of the measurement. The heat transfer
between the box and the ambience was relatively low compared to the discharged energy
from the soil and to the absorbed heat by the water. After 800 minutes the energy gain
from the ambience to the soil was 10 Wh. Furthermore, the discharged energy from the
soil (approx. 400 Wh) was slightly higher than the absorbed energy by the water (350
Wh), also considering the heat transfer between the soil and the ambient air. This is due
to measuring uncertainties.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
69
==PAGE:80==
(a) Water inlet/outlet temperature of GHE
(b) Energy balance of measurement box
Figure 5.19: GHE water temperature and measurement box energy conditions
5.4.3
20 ◦C initial soil temperature and 30 ◦C inlet water temperature
Figure 5.20 shows the soil temperature changes during the measurement period. The
temperatures in the first semi­circle increased most significantly by around 1 ­ 3.5 K. In
the second semi­circle and third semi­circle the soil temperature still increased, but by
less than 1 K. The soil temperature in one corner slightly increased by less than 0.5 K,
while in the other remained stable.
(a) First semi­circle temperatures
(b) Second semi­circle temperatures
(c) Third semi­circle temperatures
(d) Corner temperatures
Figure 5.20: Soil temperatures change during the measurement period
Figure 5.21a depicts the water inlet and outlet temperatures over time. The initial temper­
ature difference between the inlet and outlet was around 2 K. The temperature difference
70
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:81==
slightly decreased over the measurement period and after 800 minutes it was approx.
1.5 K. Figure 5.21b shows the energy balances of the measurement period. The heat
exchange between the box and the ambient air was 100 Wh. After 800 minutes a good
match can be seen between the energy increase of the soil (considering also the heat ex­
change with the ambience) and the released energy by the water, both energy amounts
were around 350 Wh.
(a) Water inlet/outlet temperature of GHE
(b) Energy balance of measurement box
Figure 5.21: GHE water temperature and measurement box energy conditions
5.4.4
25 ◦C initial soil temperature and 35 ◦C inlet water temperature
Figure 5.22 shows the soil temperature changes during the measurement period. The
temperatures in the first semi­circle increased most significantly by around 1 ­ 3 K. In the
second semi­circle the soil temperature still increased by less than 1 K. The soil temper­
atures in the third semi­circle and in the corners remained stable of around 26 ◦C.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
71
==PAGE:82==
(a) First semi­circle temperatures
(b) Second semi­circle temperatures
(c) Third semi­circle temperatures
(d) Corner temperatures
Figure 5.22: Soil temperatures change during the measurement period
Figure 5.23 depicts the water inlet and outlet temperatures over time. The initial temper­
ature difference between the inlet and outlet was around 2 K, that remained stable over
the measurement period. Figure 5.21b shows the energy balances of the measurement
period. The heat exchange between the box and the ambient air was 10 Wh. After 800
minutes, in total 350 Wh energy was released to the soil and the delivered heat by the
water was 430 Wh. This mismatch is a consequence of measuring uncertainties.
(a) Water inlet/outlet temperature of GHE
(b) Energy balance of measurement box
Figure 5.23: GHE water temperature and measurement box energy conditions
72
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:83==
5.4.5
Energy balance of measurement box validation
It could be seen from the energy balance analysis that in not all cases there was a close
match between the heat transferred to/from the water and the heat change in soil with
considering the heat loss to the ambience. Thus, it is important to analyze the results
from a measurement uncertainty point of view. Figure 5.24 shows the energy balance
between GHE water and soil inclusive the measuring uncertainty. It can be seen that the
measuring uncertainty of soil + heat exchange with the ambience in all cases was higher
than the measuring uncertainty of heating/ cooling energy transferred by water. This is
due to the high uncertainty (10%) of the soil volumetric specific heat measurement device
and due to the 0.1 K uncertainty of the temperature sensors. The determination of mea­
surement uncertainties are described in a detailed way in the Appendix under Measuring
Uncertainty for Heat Transfer Measurements section. From Figure 5.24 it can be seen
that in case of all measurements the balances with measuring uncertainties match at the
end of the measurement. The assumptions applied for the energy content change step
by step can be seen in the Appendix under Assumptions of Measurement Box Energy
Transfer Balance Analysis section.
(a) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 15°C initial soil and 5°C inlet water
temperature
(b) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 10°C inlet water
temperature
(c) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 30°C inlet water
temperature
(d) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 25°C initial soil and 35°C inlet water
temperature
Figure 5.24: Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
5.4.6
Water power analysis
Figure 5.25 shows the heat power of GHE water during the four measurements. The
power decreased as the measurements proceeded. In case of the two soil charging tests
the power in the early stage of the measurement was 40 W. The heat power transferred
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
73
==PAGE:84==
by water decreased to 30 W after 800 minutes in case of 35 ◦C water inlet and 25 ◦C soil
temperature measurement, while in case of 30 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature
measurement it fell back to 27 W. During the soil discharging tests the cooling power
transferred by water was 35 W in the early stage and decreased to 26 W at 5 ◦C water
inlet and 15 ◦C soil temperature measurement and to 20 W at 10 ◦C water inlet and 20
◦C soil temperature measurement.
Figure 5.25: Power transferred by water
5.4.7
Heat exchange capacity rate analysis and comparison with the test
facility results
Figure 5.26 gives information about the heat exchange capacity rate during the box mea­
surements. The followings can be observed:
• 5 ◦C water inlet and 15 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The heat exchange ca­
pacity rate stagnated around 3.8 W/K.
• 10 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The heat exchange
capacity rate slightly decreased from 3.5 W/K to 3.3 W/K.
• 30 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The heat exchange
capacity rate slightly increased from 4.7 W/K to 5 W/K.
• 35 ◦C water inlet and 25 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The heat exchange
capacity rate slightly increased from 5.5 W/K to 6 W/K.
• In soil charging mode the heat exchange capacity rate was higher than in soil dis­
charging mode. High water temperatures in the GHE result in volume expansion of
the PE pipe due to its expansion coefficient. This could result a better contact and
better heat exchange between the PE pipe and the soil.
74
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.26: Heat exchange capacity rate during box measurements
Figure 5.27 shows the heat exchange capacity rates in different months between the GHE
and the soil of the test facility. The followings can be observed:
• In soil discharging mode the heat exchange capacity rate was higher than in soil
charging mode, as the volume flow rate was higher (12.8 to 13.3 l/min) than in soil
charging mode (3.8 to 6.4 l/min) in the GHE. The heat exchange capacity rate in soil
discharging mode was around 10­15 W/K/m in January and October. It was lower
in May of around 8 W/K/m
• In soil charging mode the heat exchange capacity stayed around 5 W/K/m. The
volume flow rate was between 3.8 and 6.4 liter/min.
• In May in soil charging mode, a higher volume flow rate (6.4 liter/min) could result
in the same heat exchange capacity rate as in July (4 liter/min) or in October (4
liter/min). This is due to the fact that in May the GHE supply temperature was lower
than in July and October.
• In October in soil discharging mode, a lower volume flow rate (5.5 liter/min) was
enough to reach a similar heat exchange capacity rate as in January (13 liter/min)
or in May (13.3 liter/min). This is due to the fact that in October the ground temper­
atures were higher than in January and May.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
75
==PAGE:86==
(a) Heat exchange capacity rate in January
(b) Heat exchange capacity rate in May
(c) Heat exchange capacity rate in July
(d) Heat exchange capacity rate in October
Figure 5.27: Heat exchange capacity rates for different months in GHE of the test facility
It can be seen from the results, that in soil charging mode the heat exchange capacity
rate for the GHE of the test facility and in the measurement box is similar for 1 m unit of
pipe. It is in the interval of 4.5 to 6 W/K/m. In soil discharging mode there is a significant
difference. In the measurement box the heat exchange capacity rate was around 3.5 to
4 W/K/m, while in the GHE of test facility it was around 10 to 15 W/K/m. The possible
reasons are:
• The volume flow rate is much higher in the GHE of the test facility (around 5.5 to 13
liter/min) than in the measurement box (around 0.22 liter/min).
• Different temperature differences between the GHE supply temperature and the soil.
• Different water content in the soil of the test facility and the soil in the measurement
box could influence the results.
The heat exchange capacity rate depends on a lot of factors including the temperature
conditions in the soil, dampness of the soil and the volume flow rate. Thus, to make certain
correlations for the heat exchange capacity rate further investigations are necessary.
5.4.8
Energy flows in the measurement box
The measurement of 35 ◦C water inlet and 25 ◦C soil temperature was repeated to inves­
tigate how similar the two measurements are. Figure 5.28a shows the energy balance
of the energy change in the water and in the soil inclusive the heat exchange between
the soil and the ambience of the first measurement with the initial assumptions (see Ap­
pendix Assumptions of Measurement Box Energy Transfer Balance Analysis section) and
Figure 5.28b shows the same for the repeated measurement. Figure 5.28c and Figure
5.28d give information about how the first­, second­, and third semi­circle contribute to
76
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:87==
the energy change in soil in case of the first and the repeated measurement respectively.
(a) Energy balance of heat transfers with
measuring uncertainties of first
measurement
(b) Energy balance of heat transfers with
measuring uncertainties of repeated
measurement
(c) Semi­circles contribution to energy content
change in soil of first measurement
(d) Semi­circles contribution to energy content
change in soil of repeated measurement
Figure 5.28: Difference in energy transfer condition of 35 ◦C water inlet and 25 ◦C soil
temperature measurements
The results show that there is difference between the two measurement despite the same
temperature and volume flow rate conditions were applied. This indicates that the water
migration in the measurement box may influence the results. The pattern and significance
of the water migration needs further investigations.
5.5
Conclusions ­ Further Improvements
• The heat transfer processes between the soil and GHE was far more significant in
20 cm radius around the GHE than further away from the GHE in both soil heating
and soil cooling cases.
• The heat power of water decreased as the heat transfer went on and as the soil and
inlet water temperature got closer to each other.
• The heat exchange capacity rate slightly increased as the heat transfer went on in
soil charge period. However, in soil discharge period it remained more stable.
• The significance of water migration in the measurement box during measurement
period needs further investigation, as it may influence the measurement results.
• The measurement box filling can be carried out more accurately considering that
the mulch could slip lower in the box due to the significant weight of gravel placed
on top of it. Furthermore, a more even compression level must be obtained in the
measurement box, as it influences the heat transfer.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
77
==PAGE:88==
• A constant supply cooling temperature to the measurement box (secondary loop)
could not be obtained by the current configuration due to the changing conditions at
the DTU central cooling system (different supply temperatures from central cooling).
Installation of a buffer tank in the secondary loop is to be considered in order to obtain
constant secondary supply cooling temperature during the measurements.
• The measurement uncertainties in case of the soil energy change were significant.
That could be reduced by more accurate temperature sensors and by more accurate
soil volumetric specific heat measurements.
• The connection pipe between the measurement box and the manifolds is to be in­
sulated as the ambient conditions have an influence on the temperature of the cir­
culating water.
• The primer supply and return cooling pipe within the building is to be insulated as
the condensed water can freeze to the outside of the pipes.
78
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
Ritchie, Hannah and Max Roser (2019). Fossil Fuels. URL: https://ourworldindata.org/
fossil-fuels.
Reda, Francesco (2017). Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Solutions. Springer.
ISBN: 9783319496962.
IEA (2019a). Global primary energy demand by fuel, 1925­2019. URL: https://www.iea.
org/data-and-statistics/charts/global-primary-energy-demand-by-fuel-1925-2019.
OECD (2013). Transition to sustainable buildings: Strategies and opportunities to 2050.
IEA (2019b). CO2 emissions by sector ­ European Union­28. URL: https://www.iea.
org / data - and - statistics ? country = EU28 & fuel = CO2 % 5C % 20emissions & indicator =
CO2BySector.
Energy consumption in households (2019). URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Energy_consumption_in_households#Energy_consumption_in_
households_by_type_of_end-use.
Hadorn, Jean­Cristophe (2019). Solar and heat pump systems IEA SHC Task 44 HPP.
URL: https://task44.iea-shc.org/Data/Sites/1/publications/2010.004.pdf.
Chwieduk, D. A. (2012). Solar­assisted heat pumps. Vol. 3. Elsevier Ltd., pp. 495–528.
ISBN: 9780080878737. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-087872-0.00321-8. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-08-087872-0.00321-8.
Hadorn, Jean­Christophe (2015). Solar and Heat Pump Systems for Residential Buildings.
ISBN: 9783433030837.
Wemhöner, C (2011). “Field monitoring. Results of field tests of heat pump systems in low
energy houses.” In: IEA HPP Annex 32. Economical heating and cooling systems for
low energy houses 2011.
Hakkaki­Fard, Ali et al. (2015). “A techno­economic comparison of a direct expansion
ground­source and an air­source heat pump system in Canadian cold climates”. In:
Energy 87, pp. 49–59. ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2015.04.093. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.04.093.
Picón­Núñez, Martín, Guillermo Martínez­Rodríguez, and Amanda L. Fuentes­Silva (2014).
“Design of solar collector networks for industrial applications”. In: Applied Thermal En­
gineering 70.2, pp. 1238–1245. ISSN: 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2014.
05.005. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2014.05.005.
Botpaev, Ruslan, Janybek Orozaliev, and Klaus Vajen (2014). “Experimental investiga­
tion of the filling and draining processes of the drainback system (Part 1)”. In: Energy
Procedia 57.561, pp. 2467–2476. ISSN: 18766102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2014.10.256.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.10.256.
Herkel, Sebastian and Jörn Ruschenburg (2012). “a Comparative Analysis of Market
Available Solar Thermal Heat Pump Systems”. In: Eurosun 2012 ­ ISES­Europe So­
lar Conference, Rijeka, Croatia.
Sparber, Wolfram et al. (2011). “Overview on solar thermal plus heat pump systems and
review of monitoring results”. In: 30th ISES Biennial Solar World Congress 2011, SWC
2011 5, pp. 4164–4175. DOI: 10.18086/swc.2011.26.17.
Kjellsson, Elisabeth, Göran Hellström, and Bengt Perers (2010). “Optimization of systems
with the combination of ground­source heat pump and solar collectors in dwellings”. In:
Energy 35.6, pp. 2667–2673. ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2009.04.011.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
79
==PAGE:90==
Kang, Byun et al. (2011). “Simulation study on the performance of solar and geothermal
hybrid R22 heat pump”. In: 30th ISES Biennial Solar World Congress 2011, SWC 2011
5, pp. 4176–4182. DOI: 10.18086/swc.2011.26.08.
Chata, F. B.Gorozabel, S. K. Chaturvedi, and A. Almogbel (2005). “Analysis of a direct
expansion solar assisted heat pump using different refrigerants”. In: Energy Conver­
sion and Management 46.15­16, pp. 2614–2624. ISSN: 01968904. DOI: 10.1016/j.
enconman.2004.12.001.
Furbo, S (2005). “Heat Storage for Solar Heating Systems”. In: 2005.
ISO (9488). “Solar energy ­ Vocabluary”. In: 1999.
Andersen, Elsa (2007). “Solar Combi Systems”. In:
Mironov, R. E. et al. (2016). “A heat transfer model of a horizontal ground heat exchanger”.
In: AIP Conference Proceedings 1727.April 2016. ISSN: 15517616. DOI: 10.1063/1.
4945970.
Wang, Rong et al. (2020). “Experimental study on heat transfer of soil with different mois­
ture contents and seepage for ground source heat pump”. In: Indoor and Built Environ­
ment 29.9, pp. 1238–1248. ISSN: 14230070. DOI: 10.1177/1420326X19894037.
Chen, Yongping, Mingheng Shi, and Xiaochuan Li (2006). “Experimental investigation on
heat , moisture and salt transfer in soil ￿”. In: 33, pp. 1122–1129. DOI: 10.1016/j.
icheatmasstransfer.2006.06.013.
Zhu, Feiyu, Yasu Zhou, and Shuiping Zhu (2021). “Experimental study on heat transfer in
soil during heat storage and release processes”. In: pp. 2–14.
Hermansson, Ake et al. (2008). Water in road structures Chapter 4 ­ Heat Transfer in
Soils. ISBN: 9781402085611.
Rode, Carsten, Menghao Qin, and Ruut Peuhkuri (2019). “Heat and Mass Transfer in
Buildings”. In: September.
ETB (Apr. 2021). Thermal Conductivity of some selected Materials and Gases. https :
//www.engineeringtoolbox.com/thermal-conductivity-d_429.html.
Lyesse Laloui, Alessandro F. Rotta Loria (2020). “Heat and mass transfers in the context
of energy geostructures”. In: 2020.
Gao, Yan et al. (2020). “E ff ect of thermal intensity and initial moisture content on heat and
moisture transfer in unsaturated soil”. In: Sustainable Cities and Society 55.December
2019, p. 102069. ISSN: 2210­6707. DOI: 10.1016/j.scs.2020.102069. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102069.
Li, Xinguo, Jun Zhao, and Qian Zhou (2005). “Inner heat source model with heat and
moisture transfer in soil around the underground heat exchanger”. In: Applied Thermal
Engineering 25.10, pp. 1565–1577. ISSN: 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.
2004.10.002.
Wang, Zhihua et al. (2016). “Research of heat and moisture transfer influence on the
characteristics of the ground heat pump exchangers in unsaturated soil”. In: Energy
and Buildings 130, pp. 140–149. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.08.043.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.08.043.
Wang, Ruzhu and Xiaoqiang Zhai (2018). Handbook of energy systems in green buildings,
pp. 1–1885. ISBN: 9783662491201. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-49120-1.
Tempos (2021). “Tempos User Manual”. In: 1992.
Mills, Anthony F. (1992). “Heat Transfer”. In: 1992.
80
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:91==
A
Appendix
A.1
Measuring Uncertainty for Heat Transfer Measurements
To evaluate the uncertainty of the measurement the general uncertainty propagation method
was used. The measuring uncertainty consists of random errors and systematic errors.
The latter can often be determined and can be efficiently minimized by calibration. All
measured quantities were measured with a measurement uncertainty and the following
measuring uncertainties were used during the calculation:
• Calibrated Brunata HGQ1­R3 flow meter: 0.5 %
• Specific heat capacity of water: 0.5 %
• Density of water: 0.5 %
• Calibrated TT­type thermocouple temperature sensor: 0.1 K
• Time: 0.1 %
• Volumetric specific heat capacity of soil: 10 %
• Volume: 1 %
• Thermal heat conductivity of rockwool insulation: 0.001 W/mK
• Shape factor: 0.1 m2
The measuring uncertainty by uncertainty propagation method can be determined:
q = f(x, .., z)
(A.1)
s(q) =
√[ ∂q
∂x · s(x)
]2
+ .. +
[∂q
∂z · s(z)
]2
(A.2)
The measured value with the measuring uncertainty can be written as:
q = ¯q ± s
(A.3)
In the next sections the partial derivatives of the used equations are to be introduced.
A.1.1
Soil energy content change
∆Qsoil,n = Vn · cvol,soil · (Ti,n −T0,n) ·
1
3600
(A.4)
∂∆Qsoil,n
∂cvol,soil
= Vn · (Ti,n −T0,n) ·
1
3600
(A.5)
∂∆Qsoil,n
∂Vn
= cvol,soil · (Ti,n −T0,n) ·
1
3600
(A.6)
∂∆Qsoil,n
∂Ti,n
= Vn · cvol,soil ·
1
3600
(A.7)
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
81
==PAGE:92==
∂∆Qsoil,n
∂T0,n
= −Vn · cvol,soil ·
1
3600
(A.8)
A.1.2
Water energy content change
∆Qwater = qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · (Tout −Tin) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.9)
∂∆Qwater
∂qv,water
= cp,water · ρwater · (Tout −Tin) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.10)
∂∆Qwater
∂cp,water
= qv,water · ρwater · (Tout −Tin) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.11)
∂∆Qwater
∂ρwater
= qv,water · cp,water · (Tout −Tin) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.12)
∂∆Qwater
∂Tout
= qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.13)
∂∆Qwater
∂Tin
= −qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.14)
∂∆Qwater
∂∆t
= qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · (Tout −Tin) ·
1
3600
(A.15)
A.1.3
Heat loss of measurement box
∆Qheatloss = λ · S · (Tsoil −Tambient) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.16)
∂∆Qheatloss
∂λ
= S · (Tsoil −Tambient) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.17)
∂∆Qheatloss
∂S
= λ · (Tsoil −Tambient) · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.18)
∂∆Qheatloss
∂Tambient
= −λ · S · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.19)
∂∆Qheatloss
∂Tsoil
= λ · S · ∆t ·
1
3600
(A.20)
∂∆Qheatloss
∂∆t
= λ · S · (Tsoil −Tambient) ·
1
3600
(A.21)
82
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:93==
A.1.4
Heat Exchange Capacity Rate Between Ground Source Heat
Exchanger and Soil
H = −qv,water · cp,water · ρwater · ln(1 −Tin −Tout
Tin −Tsoil
)
(A.22)
∂H
∂qv,water
= −cp,water · ρwater · ln(1 −Tin −Tout
Tin −Tsoil
)
(A.23)
∂H
∂cp,water
= −qv,water · ρwater · ln(1 −Tin −Tout
Tin −Tsoil
)
(A.24)
∂H
∂ρwater
= −qv,water · cp,water · ln(1 −Tin −Tout
Tin −Tsoil
)
(A.25)
∂H
∂Tin
= −qv,water · ρwater · cp,water ·
1
Tsoil −Tin
(A.26)
∂H
∂Tout
= −qv,water · ρwater · cp,water ·
1
Tout −Tsoil
(A.27)
∂H
∂Tsoil
= −qv,water · ρwater · cp,water ·
Tin −Tout
(Tin −Tsoil) −(Tsoil −Tout)
(A.28)
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
83
==PAGE:94==
A.2
Assumptions of Measurement Box Energy Transfer
Balance Analysis
The energy change in the soil, has to match the energy change in the water in the GHE
pipe of the box with consideration of the heat exchange between the ambient air and the
soil. To make the calculations of the soil energy content change, initial assumptions were
necessary. The initial assumptions were the followings:
• The volumes of the semi­circles are in an arrangement as Figure A.1 shows.
• In 20 cm radius of the PE pipe mulch can be found, while in the other parts of the
box gravel is placed. No mixing between them is assumed.
• The volumetric specific heat capacity in the mulch and in the gravel is the same in
case of all measurement, disregard water migration.
Figure A.1: Initial semi­circle volumes in half of the measurement box (symmetry is as­
sumed)
Figure A.2 shows the measurement box energy transfer balance analysis inclusive the
measuring uncertainties with the initial assumptions. It could be seen that in case of all
measurements there is a mismatch between the soil and water energy content change in
the early stage of the measurements. Thus, the initial assumptions need modifications.
84
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:95==
(a) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 15°C initial soil and 5°C inlet water
temperature ­ initial assumptions
(b) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 10°C inlet water
temperature ­ initial assumptions
(c) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 30°C inlet water
temperature ­ initial assumptions
(d) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 25°C initial soil and 35°C inlet water
temperature ­ initial assumptions
Figure A.2: Measuring uncertainties of energy balance ­ initial assumptions
From the first semi­circle temperature analysis in Results section in Experimental Investi­
gation of Heat Transfer Between Ground Source Heat Exchanger and Soil chapter could
be seen, that the temperature of sensors 3, 9 and 16 changed more quickly than the
others located in the first semi­circle. This gives the indications, that at those locations
the soil has higher thermal conductivity. As gravel has higher thermal conductivity than
mulch, it is assumed that in the small volumes of sensor 3,9 and 16, 50% gravel­ 50%
mulch mixture can be found in reality, as the soil filling was not precisely carried out. This
assumption modifies the graphs of energy transfers balance of the measurement box.
Figure A.3 shows the measurement box energy transfer balance analysis inclusive the
measuring uncertainties with the additional 50% gravel ­ 50% mulch mixture at the 3,9
and 16 temperature sensors assumption. It could be seen that the mismatch between the
soil and water energy content change decreased, but still significant. Thus, further initial
assumption modifications are needed.
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
85
==PAGE:96==
(a) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 15°C initial soil ­ 5°C inlet water
temperature ­ gravel­mulch mixture
in first semi­circle
(b) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 10°C inlet water
temperature ­ gravel­mulch mixture
in first semi­circle
(c) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 30°C inlet water
temperature ­ gravel­mulch mixture
in first semi­circle
(d) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 25°C initial soil and 35°C inlet water
temperature ­ gravel­mulch mixture in
first semi­circle
Figure A.3: Measuring uncertainties of energy balance ­ gravel­mulch mixture in first semi­
circle
The energy content change of the semi­circles is analyzed to investigate which semi­circle
cause the mismatch. Figure A.4b shows energy content change of the three semi­circles.
The first semi­circle cause the mismatch of energy transfer balance in the early stage.
In the middle of the measurement the second semi­circle is mainly responsible for the
energy content change, but it is not high enough. Thus, the initial semi­circle volume
assumption was not proper. The first­semi circle must be modified to be smaller, while
the second­semi circle to be bigger than the initial assumptions. The modified volumes
can be seen in Figure A.4a.
86
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:97==
(a) Modified semi­circle volumes
(b) Semi­circles energy content change during
the box measurement as an example of 10 ◦C
water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature (dis­
charge soil) measurement
Figure A.4: Modified semi­circle volumes and soil energy content change contribution of
the three semi­circles
(a) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 15°C initial soil and 5°C inlet water
temperature ­ modified semi­circle volumes
(b) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 10°C inlet water
temperature ­ modified semi­circle volumes
(c) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 30°C inlet water
temperature ­ modified semi­circle volumes
(d) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 25°C initial soil and 35°C inlet water
temperature ­ modified semi­circle volumes
Figure A.5: Measuring uncertainties of energy balance ­ modified semi­circle volumes
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.5 shows the measurement box energy transfer balance analysis inclusive the
measuring uncertainties with modified semi­circle volumes. The significant mismatch be­
tween the water and soil energy content change at the early stage decreased. However,
mismatch can be observed at the end of the soil charging measurement, this indicates
the water migration could not be disregarded.
The initial assumption claimed that the volumetric specific heat of mulch and gravel were
the same in case of all measurement. This assumption does not consider that water
migration occurred from hot to cool places within the measurement box. Thus, the vol­
umetric specific heat capacity must be modified in soil charging mode when in the PE
pipe 30 ◦C and 35 ◦C water circulated. The water migration occurred from the center
towards the outer side of the box meaning that the volumetric specific heat capacity of
mulch decreased, while the volumetric specific heat capacity of gravel increased. The
modifications of volumetric specific heat capacity are the followings:
• 35 ◦C water inlet and 25 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The volumetric specific
heat capacity of gravel is increased from 2.5 to 2.8 MJ/m3K. Volumetric specific
heat capacity of mulch is decreased from 2.85 to 2.4 MJ/m3K.
• 30 ◦C water inlet and 20 ◦C soil temperature measurement: The volumetric specific
heat capacity of gravel is increased from 2.5 to 2.6 MJ/m3K. Volumetric specific
heat capacity of mulch is decreased from 2.85 to 2.7 MJ/m3K.
Figure A.5 shows the measurement box energy transfers balance analysis inclusive the
measuring uncertainties with modified volumetric specific heat capacities. By applying the
modifications of the initial assumptions in case of all measurement there is a satisfactory
match between the soil and water energy content change both in the early stage and at
the end of the measurement.
88
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
==PAGE:99==
(a) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 15°C initial soil and 5°C inlet water
temperature ­ considering water migration
(b) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 10°C inlet water
temperature ­ considering water migration
(c) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 20°C initial soil and 30°C inlet water
temperature ­ considering water migration
(d) Measuring uncertainty of energy balance
of 25°C initial soil and 35°C inlet water
temperature ­ considering water migration
Figure A.6: Measuring uncertainties of energy balance ­ considering water migration
Investigations of Solar Heating/Heat Pump Systems
89
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 119
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
