==PAGE:1==
Scalable stop-location detection in large-scale
trajectory data streams
Alexandra Desypri
Supervisors:
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
Laura Alessandretti
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
Alexandra Desypri
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Alexandra Desypri
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Svend Nielsen, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Elektro­
vej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Mathematics
and Computer Science, DTU Compute, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc.
Computer Science and Engineering (Software Engineering study line).
Alexandra Desypri ­ s192661
Signature
Date
ii
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
04/07/2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The aim of this project is to create a stop location detection and clustering pipeline
whose input is large scale GPS traces in the form of a data stream, and produce a
solution that can be updated as new input points become available. The clustering
solution should also be localized, with different clusterings for different regions of the
map. To this end we employ the stop location detection methodology of Infostop [1]
that is, the ”Lahesis Project” [2] methodology, that uses spacial and temporal prox­
imity as parameters to separate the input trace into stops and trips in between them.
We diverge from the choice of conventional clustering methodologies and instead
use an adaptation of the streaming clustering algorithm DenStream [3], that creates
so­called ”micro­clusters” that are able to be updated with new points, using prox­
imity measures and thresholds. An open­source implementation of the algorithm is
provided. We show that the resulting clustering algorithm is more efficient in terms
of memory consumption and faster, given an input of several days of data, than
the clustering choice of Infostop, Infomap [4], which quickly fails to handle large
input and presents a constant increase in running time and memory. We test and
compare the two algorithms, our solution and Infomap using a dataset of approx­
imately 70GB of data (the GPS traces of 18537271 individuals) per day. We finally
compare the resulting clustering using similarity measures, showing that the simil­
arity stabilizes quickly, implying that our solution is robust and remains close to the
one produced by the state­of­the­art algorithm as more and more days of data are
added.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude towards my supervisors, Sune Lehmann
Jørgensen and Laura Alessandretti for their treasured knowledge, guidance and
never ending support. Thank you for always being present and available to answer
my questions, and for your efforts of inclusivity during the hard time of the Covid­19
pandemic.
I would also like to thank my family and friends for their valuable and continuous
encouragement and support.
Alexandra Desypri, MSc. Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
alexandra.dcpr@gmail.com / s192661@student.dtu.dk
Creator of the thesis.
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen, Professor of Complexity and Network Science, DTU
sljo@dtu.dk
Thesis supervisor.
Laura Alessandretti, Assistant Professor in Modelling Human Dynamics, DTU
lauale@dtu.dk
Thesis supervisor.
iv
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Contents
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Algorithms
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Use of GPS traces and stop locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Approaches for stop location detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Overview of algorithms
6
2.1
Stop Location Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Spatial­based methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Sequential downsampling of time consecutive geo­locations
7
2.1.3
Infostop Step 1 ­ Stop Location Detection . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Infostop Step 2 ­ Stop Location Clustering . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Data Stream Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
BIRCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
CluStream
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
DenStream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Gaps in existing approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Problems of Infostop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Problems of DenStream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
The dataset
17
4
Methodology and Pipeline
18
4.1
Data preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Detecting stops and trips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Clustering stop­locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
Micro­cluster implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.2
Clusterer implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.3
Clustering in parallel for each grid cell . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Pipeline summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results & Comparison
28
5.1
Memory consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Running time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Clustering result comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Normalized Mutual Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
Adjusted Random Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
DenStream clustering result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
5.5.1
Running time bottleneck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5.2
Uneven distribution of points across grid cells . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5.3
Geographical features are not taken into account for grid split­
ting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
44
Appendix A: Preprocess raw data into user groups
49
Appendix B: Functions and scripts for stop location detection
50
Appendix C: Implementation of the MicroCluster and DenStream classes
56
Appendix D: Functions and scripts for stop location clustering
65
vi
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
4.1
A single trajectory separated into stop locations and trips (left) and a
zoom in to a stop location and close trip points (right). We can see a
considerable difference in the distance between stop points and trip
points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Diagram to summarize the pipeline of dectecting and clustering stop
events from the raw input to the output produced. The Stop Location
Detection process is called on each user group andthe Clustering
Stop Location process is called on each grid cell. The loops are par­
allelized grouping by the user_group and grid_id attributes. . . . . .
27
5.1
The map of the USA divided into grid cells, with the pivot point being
the southest and westmost edge of the cells, and the step being 0.5
degrees in both directions. The used cells for the comparison are
highlighted using a heatmap of the stop locations each contains. It
can be seen that some grid cells have a much lower density and
number of points and that the points are sometimes located at the
edges of the cell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Number of datapoints loaded in memory per day across all grid cells
for DenStream and Infomap, when 100 and 94 grid cells are used.
As is seen in the right pane, we had to reduce the total cumulative
number of points to nearly half for Infomap to be able to handle them.
On the other hand, the points loaded into memory for DenStream is
constant across days, as only the current day’s data are needed for
the clustering. DenStream also loads cluster information, that is, the
attributes of a Micro­Cluster as defined in Section 4.3.1, however the
memory consumption of the clusters is negligent, compare to the size
of the datapoints. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Running time comparison between DenStream and Infomap on 94
grid cells. The figure depicts the median running time across all cells,
with the 1st and 3 quantiles as error bars. We chose a log scale for
the y­axis as there can be no negative values. We notice that the
running time on DenStream stays fairly similar across days when In­
fomap increases rapidly, as happens with the memory consumption.
The presence of error bars is to be expected since the running time
depends on the points of the input and the points are not evenly dis­
tributed across the cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Average running time between DenStream and Infomap on 94 grid
cells. DenStream maintains a stable average running time with a
slight increase which is to be expected since even if the number of
points is similar, the number of clusters is expected to increase. Con­
trary to Infomap whose running time keeps increasing as the number
of points also increases. We observe that for small amounts of data,
as is in the first four days, Infomap is faster. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
5.5
Mutual information average and 1st and 3rd quantiles across 94 grid
cells between DenStream and Infomap, that measures the similarity
of the two solutions as the days progress. The score is equal to 1 for
the first day as DenStream uses Infomap to initialize. With the lowest
possible score being 0, indicating no similarity, the graphs shows that
DenStream produces results very close to the Infomap equivalent, as
the score is very close to 1 in each day and the error bars are fairly
small. We observe a relatively rapid decrease on the first days as the
solution diverges from being identical and a smaller rate of change
in the score on later days. We deduce that as the solution receives
more data it stabilizes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
Adjusted random index average and 1st and 3rd quantiles across 94
grid cells between DenStream and Infomap, as the days progress.
The score measures the agreement between the two solutions based
on all the data up to each day. As expected the solutions are in full
agreement on the first day. The decrease follows the same pattern
as the NMI score, with a smaller rate of change after some days have
passed. The average score is overall higher than NMI, however the
error bars are larger, indicating a lower similarity when we account for
chance. Most importantly a quick stabilization is observed, meaning
that adding more data to the clustering each day does not distort the
result, that is, the two solutions do not diverge. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7
The stop location clustering result of our adaptation of DenStream
over 6 days of data. The clustering, with the points of each day be­
ing clustered as expected based on the previous days’ information.
Some micro­clusters absorbing the points of their neighbors, a res­
ult of the preference of potential micro­clusters to outliers. No loss
of information is observed, since there are micro­clusters seemingly
extinct that resurface after some days. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.8
The distribution of number of data points in the 100 grid cells of our
testing set for the data of one day. The graph shows a clear power
law distribution that is in accord with Zipf’s law [58], [59]. We see
that most of the cells have a small size of less than 50.000 points
while too few have a must larger size. Figure 5.1 also shows similar
results, where the heatmap of the points in some grid cells is much
more dense than in others.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.9
DenStream running times across 15 days for the initially selected 100
grid cells, with a distribution of data points as shown in Figure 5.8.
While most of the cells are processed fast, with an average running
time of 0.01 minutes and a 1 nimute threshold in 75% of the cells,
we can see that as there are a few cells that have a large size that
consequently require a much greater computation time. . . . . . . .
39
5.10 The clustering solution around the border of two adjacent grid cells.
The figure shows that points that belong to different cells are clustered
separately and that there is a discrepancy around the border, where
points north and south do not take their counterpart into account. . .
40
viii
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:10==
List of Algorithms
1
getStationaryEvents(coords): Stop Location detection with Infostop .
9
2
postprocess(T): Creation of stop event records using Infostop
. . . .
10
3
merge(p): Insert an new point into DenStream’s micro­clusters . . . .
15
4
DenStream(P, ϵ, β, µ, λ): The algorithm for fitting a set of points P into
a DenStream clusterer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
hash(username, labels): Hash the ID of an individual and each of their
stop labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
getGridIds(points, pivot, step): Assign a grid id to each of the points,
relative to specified pivot point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
discoverStopEvents(pdf): Discover stop events given the mobility data
of multiple individuals.
Proceed to assign a unique stop_id and a
grid_index to each stop event. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
8
adjust(t): A function of the MicroCluster class, that when called on an
object (mc) decays its weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
insert(p,w,t): A function of the MicroCluster class, that inserts a point
to the micro­cluster object (mc) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
10
clusterStopEvents(pdf): Cluster discovered stop events using Den­
Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
ix
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Human mobility and trajectory data analysis has become a very studied subject in
recent times, as it is a key point in understanding migrations [1], modelling transport­
ation and very importantly for our time, epidemic spreading [5]. One of the relevant
data sources for relevant studies are GPS traces, that is, sequences of geograph­
ical coordinate records (latitude, longitude) that are usually timestamped with the
time they were recorded [6].
Nowadays, GPS traces of individuals can be easily collected by media and commu­
nication companies [7], since GPS sensors are being increasingly incorporated into
everyday objects and devices, such as vehicles, smartphones, tablets etc. [1], [6],
in contrast with older times, where scientists had to rely on personal diaries, surveys
[1] or other traditional tracking devices such as fixed sensors on the road [6] to col­
lect trajectory and mobility information. These traditional collection methods suffer
from a number of limitations that modern GPS traces help to overcome. Some of
these limitations are personal biases, loss of precision or low resolution and limited
information [5] as well as poor coverage of the map and high maintenance costs of
sensors [6].
Precise as they are, GPS traces pose a number of limitations in regards to their
use in human mobility studies, usually because a trace of the trajectory of a single
individual contains millions of records that are hard to interpret and might also be
misleading due to measurement distortion [1]. For example, a GPS sensor in a mo­
bile phone might log different coordinates in time intervals even if it stands perfectly
still. In addition, because of the precision of the measurements, a sensor will also
log numerous different sets of coordinates when the individual is moving around a
single place, such as their workplace or place of residence [1]. This results in a
lot of records in the trace giving identical information. Moreover, when we think of
human mobility and describe the movement of a person throughout a day we do
not think of latitude and longitude coordinates. Instead, we describe the trajectory
using the places a person has been at (home, office, shops and other places of
interest) and the route they took to reach those places (trips). Hence, the challenge
to process GPS traces in their raw form into meaningful series of records that would
be representative of an individual’s mobility let to the evolution and the necessity of
stop location detection [1].
Stop location detection is the process of separating a raw GPS trace into stops and
trips, that is, collecting all the records in the trace that represent the stay of the
individual in a particular place into what scientists call a stop event and separating
them from recorded coordinates between these stays, the trips [1].
1.1
Use of GPS traces and stop locations
The increase in availability of GPS traces and the high resolution information they
offer deems them very useful in a number of different fields. The review in [5] divides
the fields of application of GPS traces for studies into two levels:
1. Individual: The movement of individuals regardless of the movement of other
individuals around them. The GPS trace consists of recorded coordinates of
the placement of a given person at a given time.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
2. Population: The movement of population between different places, that is, the
collective mobility of many individuals that aims to describe population flows
in between places and at given times.
This study focuses on GPS traces of individual level. Below we include some applic­
ations of said GPS traces in transportation, map refinement and epidemic spread­
ing.
A major subcategory of transportation studies that use GPS traces are studies that
focus on transport planning and traffic monitoring. Scientists have used GPS traces
to create Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs), that is, integrated systems that
aim to improve the safety and management of transportation [6]. The study in [6]
focuses on an ITS that detects congestion and incidents from a real­time analysis
of the traces of moving vehicles and can be used to regulate traffic and avoid further
implications and notify users of incidents to avoid. The study states obtaining the
GPS traces as a challenge to overcome, however it also argues, as we mention
above, that the integration of GPS sensors in vehicles and mobile phones facilitates
the availability of GPS traces for study without violating the privacy of individuals.
The proposed system combines GPS traces with maps and is able to determine
the travelling direction of each vehicle, information that a GPS trace alone does not
offer, and by analysing the number of traces and the speed of each trace is able to
define the ”traffic state” of a segment.
GPS traces are also used to infer transportation modes. They can be combined with
transportation network data such as bus locations, bus or train stop information etc.
in order to improve the accuracy of classifying the mode of transport of individu­
als [8]. This study uses average speed and acceleration together with transporta­
tion network information and is able to distinguish between motorized transportation
methods with high accuracy. Speed information directly available from the trace is
preferred due to its accuracy [9], however if it is not available, it is inferred the speed
from the consecutive points in the trace [8]. Knowledge of an individual’s mode of
transportation can be used in directed advertisement and surveys regarding trans­
portation and travel demand [8].
In continuation to travel surveys, scientists have used GPS traces to produce travel
recommendations [10]. They focus on both general and personalized travel recom­
mendations and they achieve their goal by creating a graph of the location histories
(traces) of multiple users and using hypertext search to infer their travel experience
and interest for a location. In order to make personalized recommendations of un­
visited locations they create a correlation model for locations and use it to predict a
user’s interest based on previously visited similar places.
Interestingly, several studies focus on GPS traces generated particularly by taxis,
as they produce large­scale traces they are viewed as ”pervasive sensors” [11] that
can help uncover interesting features of transportation dynamics. Relevant studies
([11], [12] and [13]) emphasise the importance of taxi GPS traces in understanding
city dynamics in a social and human behaviour context. [12] considers traffic as the
”density” of taxis and uses the traces to predict traffic density and road capacity.
To this end, the study used the speed of the vehicles and considers a road to be
congested when the ratio of vehicles of high speed to vehicles of low speed drops
below a threshold. Applications of this study include road maintenance, travel time
amelioration and traffic pollution. The study in [11] groups taxi trajectories according
to their start and destination and aims to detect anomalous trajectories in relation to
2
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
taxi fraud or traffic network changes.
So far we have seen studies that combine GPS traces with existing road network
information to achieve their goal. However, another application of GPS traces is the
generation and maintenance of road maps themselves, that is, the use of traces
to create and expand digital maps. Some studies focus on map refinement and
improvement using GPS traces on an existing road map [14], while others extend
their approach in expanding road maps to so far unknown areas [15], [16]. Together
with the general approach, the study in [17] is more specific and focuses on inferring
the number and location of traffic lanes.
Tracking of the transmission of epidemics has become a very prominent field of
study, especially in the times of the COVID­19 pandemic. This field is argued to
have great importance amongst studies of human mobility [5]. The Global Epidemic
and Mobility Model (GLEaM) [18] is one of the earliest such studies and operates
by dividing the globe into small areas and grouping them into points of attraction
usually around transportation hubs. Thus, we note the introduction of stop loca­
tions and points of interest in such studies. The combination of GPS traces and
visited locations of multiple individuals is used in [19] for contact tracing in regards
to COVID­19. The paper proposes a risk index for an individual that is derived from
the number of locations they have visited in the past 14 days and the occasional
presence of infected or suspected individuals at those locations.
1.2
Approaches for stop location detection
A number of methodologies and algorithms have been developed to infer stop loc­
ations from a raw GPS trace, exploiting the characteristics and information a trace
provides about the mobility of the individual. These methods can be categorized in
five groups [20], each using a different approach and different attributes of the trace
to operate. The categories as studied in [20] are based in the following attributes:
1. Centroids: Methods based on centroid clustering techniques like k­means [21]
that separate the trace into k clusters by calculating the mean of points until
it converges. In these methods the number of desired clusters needs to be
known a priori, which is not optimal in this field of study [20].
2. Speed: The speed of the individual or vehicle at the time of logging each set
of coordinates in the trace is used to infer their significance, however speed
information is not always available in a GPS trace [20]. Average speed and
rate of change of speed in between logs [22] and scoring functions involving
speed [23] have been used to this end.
3. Duration: This is the most popular approach in stop location detection [20].
Scientists have modified spatial­based algorithms like DBSCAN [24] to define
a minimum stop duration threshold rather than a minimum amount of points
[25] and have used the duration to map points to activities [26]. Infostop [1]
uses both a minimum number of points and a minimum duration in each stop.
[20] argues that it is not easy to define an optimal duration threshold.
4. Density: In this approach points densely close to each other are put in the
same stop location. It has been proposed to use both spatial and temporal
information to define density [27].
5. Hybrid methods: Methods that combine some of the above attributes.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Starting from methods that are based solely on geographic parameters and prox­
imity measures, DBSCAN [24] is a prominent one. The algorithm aims to cluster
together points that are densely concentrated in an area of a predefined radius.
Using the observation that location points that belong to a stop will most likely lie
close to each other in contrast to points belonging to a trip, the resulting clusters of
DBSCAN represent the stop locations and points that are deemed as noise repres­
ent the trips. However, as we stated above, a GPS trace also includes information
about the time that each geo­location was logged, that can be very useful in defining
a stop event, as it gives the opportunity to define the start and the finish times of
each stay. For this reason, C­DBSCAN [20] was developed to revisit the clusters
created by the initial approach and divide them if any abnormal time jumps are de­
tected in between the points that belong to each.
The approach above uses an existing clustering algorithm to infer stop locations. A
similar approach is presented in [28] and [21], where the k­means algorithm is used
to separate the trace into stops and trips. The paper then proposes the use of user
history data to infer the significance of each stop location.
Another approach to separating GPS traces is to use speed information, if available.
In the case that the trace includes the speed of the individual at the time of recording,
this speed is used in [29] to categorise the points, with records that have a relatively
low speed being categorised as stops or activities and records with a high speed as
trips or movement.
The most widely used approach for stop location detection [1] is the Lahesis Project
[2]. It introduces the use of the timestamps to create a threshold of the time an in­
dividual spends at an approximate location, to characterise it as a stop. That is, the
algorithm parses time consecutive records of a GPS trace and sequentially divides
them into stops and trips. In short, if two consecutive records are close to each
other both in the spacial and in the temporal sense, they are deemed as belonging
to the same stop location. A similar proposal is made in [30].
This approach is used by a number of other studies that aim to detect and charac­
terize stop locations. For example, [31] uses the inferred stop locations of Lahesis
as candidate stops, and then proceeds to further investigate whether they are loca­
tions that reflect the real­life movements of the individual. This is done by comparing
them to places that the individual frequents and merging the candidate stops if they
are found to be at the same place.
Infostop [1] is another algorithm that uses the algorithm proposed by Lahesis to
discover stop locations. Then, the algorithm further expands the analysis, aiming
to detect stop locations that are shared across individuals. In order to achieve this
goal, the detected stop locations of multiple individuals are clustered, again using
proximity measures, to discover shared destinations. Infostop argues against the
use of DBSCAN to cluster stop locations, as it would result in destinations that lie
close to each other, ie. adjacent buildings, to be merged [1]. The existing approach
uses Infomap [4], a network based clustering, that creates a network of the stop
locations, with two nodes being connected if the corresponding stop locations lie
close to each other according to a predefined proximity measure.
A more detailed analysis of existing stop location detection approaches can be found
in Section 2.1.
The existing literature around stop location detection suffers from two major limita­
tions. Firstly, the approaches cannot handle large­scale GPS traces that normally
4
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Introduction
do not fit into memory and a solution given memory constraints is not proposed. In
addition, the resulting destinations, that is, the clustering solution of stop locations
that Infostop proposes is not updatable, if new information is available. If the input
is in the form of a data stream that receives new GPS trace records in time intervals,
once new records are available, the algorithm would have to be invoked again with
all the available data as input, regardless of having already processed previously
available records.
1.3
Scope
This project aims to address the limitations outlined above. We first aim to adapt the
approach of Infostop in order to be able to handle large­scale trajectories. We will
achieve this with introducing parallelization techniques to process the GPS trace
of multiple individuals in parallel, without having to load all of them in the memory
simultaneously.
In order to address the updatability of the clustering into destinations given new
information, we will adapt the clustering part of Infostop to use a data stream clus­
tering algorithm, so that after stop locations are detected given a GPS trace, they
can be incorporated into an existing clustering of destinations. To achieve this we
present an overview of existing data stream clustering approaches in Section 2.2
and chose the one that is more relevant to clustering data that include geo­location
information, with adaptations to fit the problem of interest.
We discuss our methodology and pipeline as well as the adaptations of the existing
approaches that we adopt in Chapter 4. An open­source implementation is available
in this repository: https://github.com/alexandradec/StreamingStopLocationClustering,
and the code is included in appendices. Furthermore, we provide a detailed com­
plexity analysis of our proposed pipeline in terms of running time and memory use,
and we also compare it with the state­of­the­art approach, that is clustering with
Infomap, as Infostop proposes. Finally, we will also compare the clustering result
of our streaming clustering approach with the robust result that Infomap would pro­
duce, using clustering similarity measures, aiming to deduce if the approximation of
the clustering using streaming methods is close to the robust.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
5
==PAGE:16==
2
Overview of algorithms
In this chapter we will present an overview of algorithms and solutions for stop loc­
ation detection and for data stream clustering. The focus of the chapter and the
solutions we chose to include are closely related to and inspired the algorithms that
will form the basis of our proposed solution as well.
2.1
Stop Location Detection
Stop location detection is the procedure of detecting what is defined as ”Stop Events”,
given raw trajectory data (eg. GPS coordinates). It is a very important part of Hu­
man Mobility Data Analysis, as raw geo­spatial data rarely gives comprehensible
information in itself, given that it is usually collected by sensitive sensors that fluc­
tuate with the smallest movement [1].
Stop location detection concerns the parsing of such data, typically timestamped
1 latitude and longitude coordinates, into events that describe the stops of an indi­
vidual as follows:
Stop Event: When the location readings of an individual are close enough to one
another (over a predefined radius), persisting over a predefined time period
they are grouped together into what we will call a stop, that is defined by the
median coordinates of the readings, a start time and a finish time (the time of
the earliest and the latest readings in the group). [2]
Trip: A sequence of location readings that is not a stop event.
Some solutions take this one step further, and preform one more grouping of the
stop events this time, into destinations, that is clusters of stop events lying close
to one another.
Destination: With the term destination the literature defines a cluster of stop
events, often detected across multiple individuals.
Below we will present some of the different algorithms of stop location detection in
the literature.
2.1.1
Spatial-based methodology
We start our review from the methodology that aims to cluster geographical data
without respect to temporal information. DBSCAN [24] is an density­bases clus­
tering algorithm, widely used in this context. It has the advantage of not needing
a pre­defined parameter to define the clustering (as for example the k­means al­
gorithm does), as the number of desired clusters is not known a priori in the case of
stop location detection. The algorithm defines the ϵ­neighborhood Nϵ of a location
point p, as all the points in the dataset whose distance to p is less than ϵ. Then it
proceeds to set some density conditions, so that the resulting clusters are dense
regions of points, namely:
• Directly density­reachable points: A point p is directly density reachable from
a point q, when:
1The way geo­spatial data is timestamp can differ between inputs. The data used in this project
are UNIX timestamped [32]
6
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
1. p is in the Nϵ of q and
2. The Nϵ of q has enough points
• Density­reachable points: A point p is density reachable from a point q when
there is a chain of n points pi where p1 = p and pn = q and for each two
consecutive points in the chain it holds that pi+1 is directly density­reachable
from pi.
• Density­connected points: Two points are density connected if they are density­
reachable from the same, third point.
Hence, [24] proceeds to define a cluster of points such that
1. For each two points p and q in P if p ∈C and p is density­reachable from q,
then also q ∈C.
2. Every two points in a cluster C are density­connected.
Points that do not belong to any cluster are classified by the algorithm as noise.
Using DBSCAN as a stop location detection mechanism will result in clusters of
points that are close to one another with high density and in points in the noise clas­
sified as trips.
Temporal information, that is timestamping a person’s geographic location pays a
very important role in human mobility tracing. However, like previously stated, tem­
poral information is not considered by DBSCAN. As a solution to that, C­DBSCAN
is developed in [20], that uses DBSCAN as a base to form the initial stop locations,
and then proceeds to correct any discrepancies in respect to time by adding two
more constraints to the clusters. Firstly, points in a cluster must be temporally se­
quential, meaning that there is no abnormal time jump in between them. If this is
the case, then the cluster is divided in two. The second constraint considers the
direction of the individual between two consecutive location readings. With direc­
tion, the paper defines the angle of the segment connecting the two locations, in the
Cartesian plane. Thus, the paper claims that the directions of the individual while
in a stop should be evenly scattered, meaning that the individual has no specific
course. Thus, a second correction is performed and if there is a high number of
”abnormal points”, that is, points that lie in a course that seems to have a specific
direction, then these points are classified as a trip.
2.1.2
Sequential downsampling of time consecutive geo-locations
This section focuses on the methodology of discovering stop events by processing
consecutive geographical location data where aim is to derive stops and trips given
a single (or multiple) individuals’ trajectory. We will analyse the Lahesis Project
method presented in [2], which is widely used to the day in stop location detection
[1].
Unlike the methods of the previous section, the final result arises from clustering the
discovered stop events into destinations, rather than clustering the raw geo­spatial
data the algorithm receives as input. The idea is the grouping of raw consecutive
points that lie close to each other both spatially and temporally into a stop event.
Thus, two constraints are introduced, a roaming distance and a stay duration [2].
The roaming distance represents the maximum distance between two points to be
considered as part of the same stop, and the stay duration the minimum time dura­
tion of a stop event. The algorithm in [2] adds consecutive points to the same stop
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
event if the two constraints are met and if a point is too far away from the previous
one, a new stop event is created. The resulting stop events are (c, start, finish)
records, where c represents the center of the stop (c in [2] is calculated as the point
that minimizes the maximum distance to any other point in the stop event).
After detecting the stop events, Lahesis uses agglomerative clustering to produce
destinations. With this approach, initially each stop event defines a single destina­
tion, that is, each point is clustered alone. Then, the algorithm proceeds to identify
the two closest clusters and tries to merge them together. The merge is successful if
the resulting merged cluster has a radius that is smaller than a predefined threshold
[2]. The benefit of using this bottom­up approach that agglomerative clustering of­
fers [33] is again that the number of clusters produced, or the number of points in a
cluster (that are not a priori known) are not needed to perform the clustering.
A similar approach as the above is also used in [30].
In the remainder of this section we will focus on Infostop, an algorithm that uses the
above approach to detect stop events, but proposes the use of a network based
method for the clustering, the community detection algorithm Infomap. We will also
include pseudocode for this method, as we are going to use it first step into our
methodology as well.
2.1.3
Infostop Step 1 - Stop Location Detection
We will first focus on the first step of the algorithm, that is, the sequential down­
sampling as defined in the previous section. We will also dive into the technicalities
of the algorithm as it is the base of our solution as well.
Following the approach of Lahesis, if two consecutive entries are close enough spa­
tially (r1) and temporally (tmax) they are deemed to belong to the same stop. A stop
is completed if it either has enough points (min_size) or if it passed a minimum dur­
ation (tmin). The pseudocode of the step can be found in Algorithm 1. Regarding
the algorithm and its implementation in [34], we need to remark the following:
• The distance function used in line 6 is intentionally left abstract. The imple­
mentation supports both Eucledian and Haversine 2 distance metrics.
• Inserting the current coordinates in lines 9 and 10 keeps the arrays sorted.
• Because the arrays are sorted, the median of the coordinates of each stop
(used in getting the distance of the current point to the current stop in line 6
and appended to the stops in line 13) can be found using the usual formula of
the median of a sorted list X of size N: median(X) = X[N/2]+X[N/2+1]
2
Continuing after the separation of data into stop events and trips, the algorithm
needs to process each stop event and detect its start and finish time so that each
stop event follows the definition at the beginning of this section. We note that the
implementation does not include this in its main pipeline. Algorithm 2 presents this
phase that takes the stop labels produced by Algorithm 1 in eventMap and the
timestamp of each record and returns the earliest (start time) and the latest (fin­
ish time) of each stop label. The implementation can be found at [36]
2The Haversine formula [35] is used to calculate great­circle distances, that is, distances on the
surface of the Earth, between points with given latitude and longitude coordinates
8
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
Algorithm 1: getStationaryEvents(coords): Stop Location detection with In­
fostop
Data: coords: a series of N (lat,long,t) records
Result: stops: a series of (lat,long) records that represent the median
coordinates of each stop event
eventMap: a mapping between the input coordinates and the stop
they were added to
// Initializing of the first index of the current stop and the current stop
number
1 i0 ←0
2 stopNo ←0
// Initializing of the first group
3 latitudes ←{coords(0, 0)}
4 longitudes ←{coords(0, 1)}
5 for i ←1 to N do
// Compute the distance of the current point to the median of the current
stop
6
dist ←
distance(coords(i, 0), coords(i, 1), median(latitudes), median(longitudes))
// Compute the time difference between the current and the previous point
7
dTime ←coords(i, 2) −coords(i −1, 2)
8
if dist ≤r1 & dTime ≤tmax then
// The point belongs to the current group
9
latitudes.insert(coords(i, 0))
10
longitudes.insert(coords(i, 1))
11
else
12
if i −i0 ≥min_size & coords(i −1, 2) −coords(i0, 2) ≥tmin then
// If the stop is complete
13
stops.append({median(latitudes), median(longitudes)})
14
for k ←i0 to i −1 do
// Label all the points added to the stop with the stop number
15
eventMap[k] ←stopNo
16
end
17
stopNo + +
18
else
19
for k ←i0 to i −1 do
// Label all the points added to the stop as outliers (trip)
20
eventMap[k] ←−1
21
end
22
end
// Start a new stop
23
latitudes ←{coords(i, 0)}
24
longitudes ←{coords(i, 1)}
25
i0 ←i
26
end
27 end
28 return stops, eventMap
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
Algorithm 2: postprocess(T): Creation of stop event records using Infostop
Data: trajectory: a series of (label, t) records
Result: finalTrajectory: a series of (label, start, finish) records
1 finalTrajectory ←{}
2 previousLabel ←trajectory(0, 0)
3 start ←trajectory(0, 1)
4 end ←start
5 foreach (label, t) ∈trajectory\{trajectory(0)} do
6
if label = previousLabel then
7
end ←t
8
else
// If we encounter a new label, the previous label is finished
9
finalTrajectory.append({label, start, finish})
10
start ←t
11
end ←t
12
end
13
previousLabel ←label
14 end
// Add the last group
15 finalTrajectory.append({previousLabel, start, finish})
16 return finalTrajectory
2.1.4
Infostop Step 2 - Stop Location Clustering
Before starting the clustering process, Infostop performs another form of down­
sampling, something the literature calls spatial downsampling [1]. This downsampling
treats points too close together, that is, points that lie within a specific distance of
one another, (the implementation leaves the choice of radius to the user [34]) as one
and thus only uses one point for the clustering. After the clustering is performed and
the points are labeled, this step is reversed and all the points considered as one get
the same clustering label.
In short, this step of Infostop builds a network where the nodes are the stop events,
and a link exists between two stop events if they lie closer than a pre­defined clus­
tering radius (r2).
The clustering mechanism used here is community detection, that is, identifying loc­
ally dense and connected subgraphs [37] in the original graph. In Graph Theory, a
subgraph is a subset of the nodes in the original graph and the links between them.
A subgraph is connected when there is a path connecting every two distinct nodes
and is locally dense when the number of links is close to the maximal number of
links in a network [37], which is given by:
|E| =
(|Np|
2
)
, where E is the set of links and Np is the set of nodes in the partition.
Hence, stop events that are densely connected will be clustered into a destination.
Infostop uses Infomap [4] as a community detection algorithm. Each destination is
assigned an integer label, and trips are once again labeled as ­1.
The final part of the algorithm contains the reverse of the two downsamplings per­
formed. First, all the spatial downsampled points get the same clustering label as
the one we used for clustering, as explained above. Then, since each point in the
raw input is assigned a unique stop event label and each stop event is assigned
a unique clustering label, the algorithm maps the clustering labels to the original
10
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
raw input points and returns a list of the same shape as the input, containing the
clustering label of each input point. The implementation of this step by Aslak and
Alessandretti can be found in [38].
2.2
Data Stream Clustering
A data stream is a set of data that is updated continuously, as new data is collected
and added to it. Formally, a data stream is defined as
Data stream: An ordered sequence of (s, d) records, where s is a tuple of attributes
and d is a real timestamp.
In most cases data is collected constantly and in real time, resulting in a large volume
of data to process after a certain time has passed. Thus applying Machine Learning
techniques such as clustering to a data stream is a challenging problem, since the
volume of data can easily overcome the capacity of computational resources. To
overcome this difficulty, scientists have proposed a number of data stream clustering
algorithms, that respect the updating nature of the data and create an updatable
clustering solution. That is, as new data arrives, the algorithms can incorporate it
into the already computed clustering without having to run the whole process again
with all the available data. Some approaches also pose a one time pass constraint
[39] of the original raw data that arrive through the stream.
Taking the above into account, data stream clustering algorithms separate the pro­
cess into two phases [40]:
1. Online phase: In this phase the data is parsed once and are added into a
preliminary clustering solution, the micro­clusters.
2. Offline phase: Some of the literature defines this phase as ”clustering on
demand” [3]. Here the created micro­clusters are clustered into final macro­
clusters using conventional clustering techniques and discovering data trends.
This phase can be initiated at any time by the user and does not affect the
online solution that continues to update.
The creation, updating and maintenance of the micro­clusters is the most important
part of these algorithms and is challenging in itself, in terms of deciding what in­
formation is needed to be kept in order to be able to produce a meaningful result. A
micro­cluster is usually represented by a feature vector, keeping statistical inform­
ation about the data points that were added to it. Depending on the algorithm, this
information varies between linear sum and sum of squares of the data points, the
mean (center) of the points and the radius of the cluster (usually computed using
variance). It is important to note that the algorithms do not by default keep track of
the points that are added to each micro­cluster and thus do not consume as much
storage memory. However, this approach does not return the clustering labels of
each processed data point as the stop location detection algorithms of Section 2.1
do.
Below we briefly include some of the most referenced Data Stream Clustering al­
gorithms in the literature, for streams with a low number of dimensions.
2.2.1
BIRCH
BIRCH [41] is the first data stream clustering algorithm to introduce the feature vec­
tor (CF) as the basis of the clustering, reducing the memory needed, as the clus­
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
tering can result from knowing only the feature vector without knowledge about the
underlying data values being needed. The algorithm works as follows:
Given an input of N datapoints, their clustering feature vector is created as a tuple
CF = [N, LS, SS], representing a micro­cluster, where LS is the linear sum and SS
is the sum of squares of the datapoints. The CFs of each set of N datapoints are
kept in a tree structure with parameters B and T. That is, each non­leaf node has at
most B entries of the form [CFi, childi], where childi is a pointer to the child of this
node and CFi is the feature vector that represents the micro­cluster represented
by childi. Thus, each non­leaf node represents a cluster formed by all the clusters
represented by its children. A leaf node contains at most L CFi entries. Parameter
T is used to determine the size of the tree. These parameters are used by the al­
gorithm for performance tuning and are out of the scope of this analysis.
A new clustering feature vector CF is added to the tree in the following steps:
1. Starting from the root, recursively traverse the tree, each time choosing the
closest node to CF, where closeness is determined by an appropriate dis­
tance metric (metrics include Euclidean distance and average distance between
the points of two micro­clusters, analysed in [41]).
2. Upon reaching a leaf node, the algorithm finds the closest entry Li in that leaf
and tries to merge the incoming micro­cluster with Li. The merge is successful
if the resulting cluster satisfies a threshold condition that the diameter of the
cluster must be less than T. If this is the case, then the CF of the new cluster
is computed by the CFs of the two clusters using the following formula:
CF = CF1 + CF2 = [N1 + N2, LS1 + LS2, SS1 + SS2]
3. If the merge is not successful, a new entry is added to the leaf node.
4. After the insert, the CF vectors of the parents of the leaf are changed to reflect
it. This involves first adding a new entry to the parent if there is space, and at
all higher levels, changing the CF vectors. If the parent does not have enough
space, it is split in two.
Hence the tree structure is created to represent the micro­clusters stored at its
leaves.
The Offline phase of the algorithm consists of using existing clustering techniques
to cluster the leaves. The technique to use depends on the situation and can either
depend on the desired number of clusters or on the maximum radius (or diameter)
each resulting cluster should have.
2.2.2
CluStream
CluStream [40] defines a micro­cluster by its feature vector as introduced by BIRCH,
adding to it the linear and the sum of squares of the arrival time of the data points
added to it. It also introduces a threshold q in regards to the maximum number of
micro­clusters that can exist. The algorithm processes each data point of the stream
one­by­one, and aims to insert each into an existing micro­cluster. Each insert is
performed as follows:
1. The algorithm finds the closest micro­cluster Cp to the new point. Closeness
is defined by the distance between the center of the micro­cluster. The center
can be computed from the feature vector as the mean of its points, c = LS
N .
The distance metric to use depends on the nature of the data.
12
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
2. If the new point ”naturally belongs” to Cp it is added to it, and the feature
vector is recomputed incrementally. In order to determine that the algorithm
introduces a maximal boundary factor to be the threshold of the RMS deviation
of its points to the center. The RMS deviation (root­mean­square deviation) is
computed as follows:
r =
√∑N
i=1(xi −c)2
N
3. If the point cannot be added to Cp then a new cluster is created from it.
Here arises the problem of maintaining a set number of micro­clusters as new are
created. That is, with the addition of a new micro­cluster, the number of the already
existing ones has to be reduced by 1. The algorithm achieves this by either deleting
a micro­cluster as an outlier, or merging two micro­clusters together.
In order to determine if a micro­cluster can safely be eliminated as an outlier, the
algorithm uses the linear sum CF1t and the sum of squares CF2t of the timestamps
from the feature vector to compute the mean time of arrival of the last m data points
and then uses this mean as a measure of recency. Clusters with recency below a
threshold, meaning that they haven’t received points in a considerable time interval
can be eliminated. If no clusters can be eliminated as such, the two closest clusters
are merged into one.
We note here that the above process assumes an initial number of micro­clusters,
which the literature assumes are created using an initial number of data points and
a non­streaming clustering technique.
Regarding its offline phase, the micro­clusters are considered as ”pseudo­points”
based at the center, and are subject to a high­level, non­streaming clustering tech­
nique. The literature assumes that the technique would be one where the number
of resulting clusters would be given a priori, something not optimal for streaming
data, as we previously mention.
2.2.3
DenStream
We finally outline the concepts of DenStream [3], an algorithm that addresses the
drawback of having to determine the number of resulting clusters beforehand that
CluStream has, and proposes a new solution for eliminating outlier clusters. Den­
Stream is the basis of our solution, with some adjustments to adapt to the problem
of stop location detection and labeling data points according to their cluster.
DenStream also uses the idea of a feature vector to represent a micro cluster, keep­
ing the linear sum and the sum of squares of the data points, and introducing a
cluster weight parameter w. The aim of the weight is to give importance to clusters
who keep receiving points in relevance to clusters that do not receive points for a
considerable time. This approach is similar to the elimination process of CluStream.
In this context, DenStream introduces two types of a micro­cluster:
Potential­micro­cluster (pmc): A potential­micro­cluster (pmc) is defined as a
tuple CF 1, CF 2, w, t0, where CF 1 and CF 2 are the linear sum and the sum of
squares of the data points belonging to the micro­cluster, w is its weight and
t0 is the time the micro­cluster was created. The center of the micro­cluster is
computed by c = CF 1
w
and the radius is computed using the variance formula
r =
√
|CF 2|
w
−
(
|CF 1|
w
)2
. The weight must satisfy the condition w ≥βµ, where
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
βµ will be hereafter referred to as the weight threshold and is defined by the
user.
Outlier­micro­cluster: An outlier­micro­cluster is defined as above, with the dif­
ference that w < βµ
The basis of the above definition is that micro­clusters who have a low weight, that
is, who do not receive points for a considerable period of time, would be moved to
a separate place in the memory, called the ”outlier­buffer” by the literature.
The data points are once again processed one­by­one. For each new data point p,
the algorithm tries to insert it to its closest pmc. The insert is successful if the radius
of the resulting micro­cluster is less than a user­defined parameter ϵ. If the insert
is successful the feature vector is recomputed incrementally as {CF 1 + p, CF 2 +
p2, w+1}, the algorithm tries to insert the point into its closest omc instead, using the
same constraint. If the insert is successful, the new weight of the omc is checked,
and if it passes the weight threshold, the omc becomes a pmc. If the insert is not
successful once again, a new omc is created based on p. This process is described
in Algorithm 3.
As said before, the weight of micro­clusters who do not receive points needs to de­
crease. Therefore, for each time interval δt where a micro­cluster does not receive
any points, it is decayed by a decay factor. This factor is defined in the literature
as a ”fading function” f(t) = 2−λt, were λ is also specified by the user. Hence, the
micro­cluster would be decayed as {CF 1 × f(δt), CF ×f(δt), w × f(δt)}.
The final key point of DenStream is the maintenance of the micro­clusters, that
is moving potential micro­clusters with small weight to the outliers, deleting outlier
micro­clusters with too low weight, defining the lowest­weight threshold for elimin­
ation, and how often this has to happen. The literature proves that it is sufficient to
check the weight of the micro­clusters every Tp = 1
λ log
(
βµ
βµ−1
)
, as this is proven to
be the minimal time a micro­cluster needs to become an outlier. The lowest­weight
threshold is also defined as
ξ(tc, t0) = 2−λ(tc−t0+Tp) −1
2−λTp −1
,
where tc is the current time and t0 the creation time of the micro­cluster. At the
creation of the micro­cluster it holds that ξ = 1 and as time passes, limtc→∞ξ(tc) =
βµ. The literature claims that if the weight of a micro­cluster is lower than that
threshold, then it may never grow into a pmc. Since after inserting a point into
the solution, the current time increases by 1, the algorithm checks if it is time for
clustering maintenance after each insert, as outlined in Algorithm 4.
Similar to CluStream, the algorithm assumes an initialization of the micro­clusters,
and a final macro­clustering solution will be done by a non­streaming clustering
algorithm. The literature proposes DBSCAN in this case, to avoid having to define
the number of clusters beforehand.
14
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
Algorithm 3: merge(p): Insert an new point into DenStream’s micro­clusters
Data: p: The new point to be inserted into the clustering solution
1 Try to merge p into its closest pmc: cp
2 if rp ≤ϵ then
3
Update the feature vector of cp
4 else
5
Try to merge p into its closest omc: co
6
if ro ≤epsilon then
7
Update the feature vector of co
8
if wo ≥βµ then
9
co becomes a pmc and is moved from the outlier­buffer to the
memory
10
end
11
else
12
Create a new omc based on p
13
end
14 end
Algorithm 4: DenStream(P, ϵ, β, µ, λ): The algorithm for fitting a set of points P
into a DenStream clusterer
Data: P: The set of points to be fitted
ϵ, β, µ, λ, t: The parameters of DenStream
1 Tp ←1
λ log
(
βµ
βµ−1
)
2 foreach p ∈P do
3
Merge(p)
4
t ←t + 1
5
if tmodTp then
6
foreach pmccp do
7
if wp < βµ then
8
Move cp to outliers
9
end
10
end
11
foreach omcco do
12
xi = 2−λ(tc−t0+Tp−1
2−λTp−1
13
if wo < ξ then
14
Delete co
15
end
16
end
17
end
18 end
2.3
Gaps in existing approaches
After analysing the prominent approaches to stop location detection and data stream
clustering we discuss their gaps and limitations and focus on those that we will
adress in our pipeline.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Overview of algorithms
2.3.1
Problems of Infostop
While Infostop successfully addresses some problems of geo­spatial clustering and
creates meaningful clusters that are often too close together that other clustering
algorithms like DBSCAN or C­DBSCAN could have merged [1], is has two limitations
that we are going to address in this project.
It cannot handle massive data, as the raw input coordinates need to be loaded into
memory as a whole, something that can easily result in either the algorithm being too
slow or worse a memory overflow and it does not take advantage of parallelization
techniques. We propose a solution to this problem in Section 4.2.
The clustering solution that Infostop outputs cannot be updated. That is, if new data
arrive for the same individuals that we would like to add to the clustering, we would
have to run the algorithm with the entire data from the beginning. As a consequence,
Infostop cannot be used if the data is in the form of a data stream (see Section
2.2) where new data arrive usually daily. This project addresses this problem, and
proposes a solution that creates an initial clustering solution of stop events and is
able to update it with new data, using Data Stream Clustering. However, our solution
is able to use Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 to identify stop events every time data
arrives, as this step is independent from any previous data.
Finally, the optional postprocessing phase is slow since it needs to process the data
one by one, but this is outside the scope of this project.
2.3.2
Problems of DenStream
The aim of this project is to perform stop location detection and clustering, in order
to produce and return clustering labels for each initial data point or stop event. In
this context, DenStream as presented in the literature has some deficiencies that
we will address in our implementation.
Firstly, as also mentioned before, the aim of data stream clustering algorithms is
to detect patterns in the data, and most of them do not provide an entity relation
between the input and the output. That is, since they only keep statistical inform­
ation about the clusters they create (in the feature vectors), after the pipeline is
finished there is no way of knowing which micro­cluster each data point of the input
was added to and therefore they cannot produce clustering labels. GeoDenStream
[42], a variant of DenStream created for clustering geographical data addresses this
issue with the introduction of an index number representing each micro­cluster and
a mapping between the indices of the input and the indices of the micro­clusters. In
our method we adopt a similar approach.
Another important issue is the loss of information that might result from cluster elim­
ination, again in the context of producing clustering labels for each point of the input.
When the aim is only to detect patterns in the data, clusters that provide too little
information can safely be deleted. But if large input is provided, clusters might be
eliminated before the pipeline is finished, resulting in the loss of clustering labels.
Another variant of the algorithm, rDenStream [43] introduces a correction phase
after all the points are processed, that re­learns the outliers after a macro­clustering
is produced, based on the created macro­clusters.
16
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:27==
3
The dataset
Before outlining our proposed solution we will briefly present the dataset upon which
we developed and tested it, since the solution assumes a similar input structure, as
seen in the code scripts of the appendices.
The dataset concerns the mobility of people in the USA during February 2020. The
data is in the form of a data stream, where location information and other metadata
are logged daily, creating a folder of data per day.
An entry (row) in the dataset consists of the GPS position of a given (unidentifiable)
individual at a given time, logged using GPS tracking of mobile devices and has the
following attributes:
• Timestamp: The time (in unix) when the coordinates were logged.
• ID: A hashed and encrypted GUID for each person.
• Device_type: The OS of the device used for the logging of the position
The values are 0 for Android and 1 for iOS.
• Latitude
• Longitude
• Accuracy: The accuracy of the spatial coordinates, a radius (in meters) of the
circle around the position with a 68% probability.
• Time zone offset
• Classification type: The type of the GPS position, according to its proximity
to other identified types of locations.
The values are:
1. "PERSONAL_AREA": A point that is within 100 meters of a home or work­
place. For privacy reasons, when this is the case, noise is added to the
coordinates and the original ones are replaced with the corresponding
Census Block Group centroid coordinates.
2. "WHITELISTED": A point that is close to an identified Point of Interest.
3. "OTHER"
• Transformation type: The type of noise added to the coordinates, as ex­
plained above. The values are:
1. "KEEP": No noise added
2. "PERSONAL_AREA_CENTROID": Noise added as explained above.
From the above, the columns that concern us for this project are the ID of the user,
the Latitude and Longitude and the Timestamp of the log, which we assume is
the time a specific position was recorded by the GPS tracking. It is important to note
that the aforementioned coordinates do not refer to stop locations but raw input data
that can be parsed with a stop location detection algorithm to identify stops.
The raw data are saved in a folder for each day, and each day’s folder holds approx­
imately 70GB of data, corresponding to the GPS traces of 18537271 individuals per
day.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
17
==PAGE:28==
4
Methodology and Pipeline
In this project we aimed to create an algorithm that clusters stop events and can
be applied to a data stream, that is, can handle big data while also producing an
updateable solution, once new data is available. We will first focus on the handling
of big datasets in order to use Infostop to detect stop locations, in regards to par­
allelization techniques and data preprocessing. Then, after the stop locations are
detected, we will use the DenStream algorithm with some modifications to create a
solution that can be updated with new data on demand. Since the updating prop­
erty is what concerns this project, we will focus on the online part of the data stream
clustering and the creation and maintenance of the micro­clusters. The offline part
can happen on demand however the user chooses to.
We assume that data concerning the movement of individuals for a certain day are
available as a whole. The solution that we propose will use the first step of Infostop
as explained in Section 2.1.3, using Algorithms 1 and 2 to detect stop locations per
individual and per day. Since one day’s data is too large to load into memory at
once and use as an input for Infostop (it is explained in [1] that the input has to be in
the form of an array) we will preprocess the data so that we can parse a few users
at a time. This will also enable us to use parallelization techniques, to detect stop
locations across groups of users simultaneously. The stop events are then saved
by day and can be passed to the next step, that is clustering using DenStream. This
step will add a clustering label (that we will later call a destination id) to each stop
event, which will form the final output of our pipeline.
To summarize, the algorithm uses Infostop to detect stop locations in each day of
movement data and then it updates an existing clustering solution with these stop
locations, using a data stream clustering approach.
As a parallelization technique we will throughout this project use PySpark, an inter­
face for analysing data in a distributed environment, that in itself will separate each
task into the cores of the processor. The number of cores to be used is defined by
the user (using .setMaster('local[x]'), where x is the desired number of cores).
In order to use PySpark, we have to start a session at the beginning of our code (or
at the beginning of each script) as follows:
from pyspark import SparkContext, SparkConf
import pyspark.sql as spark
conf = SparkConf().setAppName('app').setMaster('local[5]')
sc = SparkContext(conf=conf)
ss = spark.SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()
4.1
Data preprocessing
As explained in Chapter 3, the data we are going to be using concerns the moves
of people across a country. Naturally, the size of data is too large to give to Infostop
as a single input. Since the stop location detection concerns a single individual at a
time it makes sense to divide them into groups, so that we can run Infostop on the
data of each group at a time and also process a number of user groups in parallel.
The user groups can be easily created using the UUID that describes each individual
in the dataset (the ID attribute), assigning those whose ID begins with the same two
characters into the same group. So, the data preprocessing concerns reading the
18
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
raw data, assigning each user into their user group and saving the data anew, by
day and by user group. In order to be able to handle the large amount of data we
were given, we read it using PySpark and hence the workload is distributed lazily
into cores. The script for this preprocessing can be found in Appendix A.
4.2
Detecting stops and trips
After the preprocessing we can proceed to the stop location detection part of the
algorithm. In this step, we first use Infostop to separate stops from trips into the
trajectory of an individual at a time, as explained in Algorithm 1. We load the data
of a single group of those created in the preprocessing at a time, to avoid a memory
overhead, into a dataframe. The columns are the same as the data attributes of
Chapter 3. Then, we group the data further by ID, creating small groupings that
concern a single individual each, and running Algorithm 1 of each individual. PyS­
park allows us to distribute the workload again, so that each core processed the
data of a single individual at a time, labeling it as stops and trips. By using this
technique we address the problem of handling massive data that we discussed in
Section 2.3.1.
Continuing, we use Algorithm 2 to retrieve stop events as (start time, stop time, lat,
long) records, where lat and long correspond to the median coordinates of the data
that belong to the stop event. For all the above, we use Infostop’s implementation
by Aslak and Alessandretti as found in [34] and [36], extracting the parts of the code
that concern only the first step of the algorithm.
At this point we made the following additions to Infostop’s pipeline, that we will use
later in the data stream clustering.
Firstly, we assign a unique ID (stop_id) to each stop event, by hashing its stop label
(eventMap output from Algorithm 1) and the ID of the individual it belongs to. We
chose to use the SHA­1 hash of the username and each stop label. The hashing is
done according to the following algorithm:
Algorithm 5: hash(username, labels): Hash the ID of an individual and each of
their stop labels
Data: username: The user ID
labels: An array of stop_labels
Result: stop_ids: An array of hashed stop_ids
1 stop_ids ←{}
2 foreach label ∈labels do
3
uuid ←hash(username, label)
4
stop_id ←(str)uuid
5
stop_ids.append(stop_id)
6 end
7 return stop_ids
In addition, we deem that it is not necessary to process all the stop events together
into the data stream clustering pipeline. This arises from the fact that the aim of
the clustering is to produce localised points of interest, where the stop events of
different individuals cluster. Hence, it is not necessary to process stop events from
two different cities into the same clustering solution. In order to divide the stop event
locations into what we will be calling a grid, we start from an offset point po on the
map, and using a specified step c latitude and longitude­wise, we give a grid_index
to a stop event, as follows:
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
Let s be the location point specified by the lat and long attributes of the stop event.
Then,
grid_index(s) = s −po
c
.
The pivot point and the step are specified in the algorithm to adapt in each case of
input. The grid_index attribute will enable us to group the stop events and run a
separate clustering for each grid cell, greatly reducing the computation time. This
process is summarized in Algortihm 6.
Algorithm 6: getGridIds(points, pivot, step): Assign a grid id to each of the
points, relative to specified pivot point
Data: points: A series of (lat, long) records
pivot: The pivot point
step: The step for each grid cell
Result: grid_ids: The grid cell id for each of the points
1 grid_indices ←{}
2 foreach p ∈points do
3
grid_index ←(point −pivot)/step
4
grid_indices.append(grid_index)
5 end
6 return grid_indices
In order to implement all the processes described in this section and apply them to
the input data we used PySpark’s capability of ”wrapper user defined functions” that
can be applied to one or multiple grouped rows of a dataframe. Thus, we create
such a wrapper function as in Algorithm 7, that will be applied to the records of the
same ID and will run Algorithms 1 and 2 and assign a stop_id and a grid_index to
each stop event detected. Hence, if we load the data of a group of individuals into
a dataframe df, we are able to apply the wrapper function as follows:
df.groupBy('user_id').apply(discoverStopEvents)
The code described in this section can be found in Appendix B. After the pipeline
is finished we save the result in a temporary directory partitioned by grid index, to
be able to pass the data of each grid index to the data stream clustering of the next
section, and assign a destination_id to each stop event, that is the end result of this
project.
Figure 4.1: A single trajectory separated into stop locations and trips (left) and a zoom in to a stop
location and close trip points (right). We can see a considerable difference in the distance between
stop points and trip points.
20
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
Figure 4.1 above shows a trajectory and the discovered stop locations and trips (left)
and a zoom in a stop location and its close trip points (right). On the left pane trips
are colored grey and are smaller to make the trajectory clearer as it is zoomed out.
On the right pane we zoomed in the rightmost stop location. Points are given the
same size for a clearer result. We can see from the figure how points lying close to
each other are put in the same stop location and that there is a considerably greater
distance between the points that are labeled as trips.
Algorithm 7: discoverStopEvents(pdf): Discover stop events given the mobility
data of multiple individuals. Proceed to assign a unique stop_id and a grid_index
to each stop event.
Data: pdf: A dataframe consisting of raw data as described in Chapter 3
Result: A dataframe of stop events with the following attributes (user_id,
stop_id, stop_label, start_time, end_time, med_lat, med_long,
grid_index)
// Create an array of (lat,long, t) records
1 coords ←(pdf[′Latitude′], pdf[′Longitude′], pdf[′Timestamp′]
// Since the wrapper will be applied to records of the same user, the user_id is
always the same
2 username ←pdf[′user_id′][0]
// Run Algorithm 1
3 stops, eventMap ←getStationaryEvents(coords)
// Label the raw data with the stop labels using eventMap, by horizontally
stacking the two arrays, producing an array of (lat, long, t, stop_label)
records
4 stop_labels ←stack(coords, eventMap)
5 if |stops| ≥0 then
// Get the timestamps and stop_label columns of stop_labels and run Algorithm
2, producing an array of (stop_label, start_time, end_time) records with
the start and the finish time of each stop event
6
finalTrajectory ←postprocess(stop_labels[3], stop_labels[2])
// Remove trips (labeled -1) from the trajectory
7
finalTrajectory ←rec ∈finalTrajectory where rec(0) ̸= −1
// Run Algorithm 5
8
stop_ids ←hash(username, finalTrajectory[0])
// Stack the stop_ids, the finalTrajectory and the stop_events to produce an
array with (stop_id, stop_label, start_time, end_time, med_lat, med_long)
records
9
events ←stack(stop_ids, finalTrajectory, stops)
// Assign grid indices
10
points ←{events[4], events[5]}
11
pivot ←(24.62, −125.12) /* a pivot point relevant to the dataset of this
project
*/
12
step ←(0.5, 0.5)
13
grid_ids ←getGridIds(points, pivot, step)
// Stack the events, the grid indices and the username to obtain the final
result
14
result ←stack(pdf[′user_id′], events, grid_ids)
15
return result
16 end
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
4.3
Clustering stop-locations
After we have detected stop locations, we are able to cluster them into destinations,
using the approach of DenStream. However, because of the limitations of the initial
algorithm outlined in Section 2.3.2, we need to make the following adaptations so
that the algorithm fits the purpose of stop location clustering.
4.3.1
Micro-cluster implementation
Introduction of clustering labels
Like previously stated, the purpose of DenStream as presented in [3] and other data
stream clustering algorithms is not to maintain an entity relationship between the in­
put and the output, in our case the stop locations and the destinations. We address
this problem by introducing the ID attribute of a micro­cluster, a unique ID that rep­
resents the clustering label, or destination_id. This destination_id is returned by the
algorithm upon inserting a point (stop location) into the micro­cluster. It is important
to note that the destination_id will be returned regardless of the micro­cluster we
just updated being a potential micro­cluster or an outlier, since this separation is
only introduced to separate the clusters in the memory and prevent an overload.
This enables us to label all the points in the input with the corresponding clustering
label, thus separating the labeling of input points and the maintaining of statistical
information of the clustering solution at that given point in time.
Robust and geographically adapted computation of the center and radius
In Section 2.2.3 we mentioned that the computation of the center and the radius of
the micro­cluster are using the linear sum and the sum of squares of the inserted
points. In addition, both of these quantities are being decayed together with the
weight of the micro­cluster in Tp time intervals. This is not an approach that can
be easily used for geographical data, especially when the radius comes into the
equation, since it uses a Eucledian approach, which is not suited for latitude and
longitude coordinates. Our implementation uses a more robust and geographically
adapted approach, that computes the center as the mean of the points added in
the micro­cluster and the radius is the maximal distance between them and the
center. In order to implement this we need to keep track of the number of points in
the micro­cluster, and the point that is the farthest of the center after each insert is
performed. Then, the radius is computed as the haversine distance between this
point and the center. Since the center and the radius are used as spatial features in
a geographic context, they are also not decayed when the micro­cluster is decayed,
as the purpose is to maintain robust geographic attributes that can be used to cluster
location data.
The MicroCluster class
After the above adaptations, we implemented the micro­cluster as a class with the
following attributes:
id: the unique id of the micro­cluster
n: the number of points inserted into the cluster
w: the weight of the micro­cluster
mean: the center of the micro­cluster
farthestPoint: the point that maximizes the distance to the center
t0: the creation time of the micro­cluster
22
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
tadj: the time the micro­cluster was last decayed
λ: the decay factor
The MicroCluster class offers the following operations:
center(): Returns the mean attribute
radius(): Computes the haversine distance of the mean and the farthestPoint
using the formula in [35].
adjust(t): Decays the micro­cluster. This function is called before a point is in­
serted in the micro­cluster, to update the attributes accordingly, as follows:
The decay factor is computed according to the fading function f(δt) as was
explained in Section 2.2.3. Here δt is the interval where a micro­cluster did
not receive any points, that is, δt = t −tadj, where t is the current time. Then
the weight of the micro­cluster is decayed. The above is summarised into
Algorithm 8.
Algorithm 8: adjust(t): A function of the MicroCluster class, that when called on
an object (mc) decays its weight
Data: t: the current time
1 decayFactor ←2−λ(t−mc.tadj)
2 mc.w ←mc.w × decayFactor
3 mc.tadj ←t
insert(p,w,t): Inserts a point p of weight w into the micro­cluster. t is the current
time. Before inserting the point, the weight of the micro­cluster is decayed ac­
cordingly, as described above. Then, the mean of the points must be updated.
Since the micro­cluster does not keep information about the points previously
added, and since the implementation does not use the linear sum of points,
we use the incremental mean formula in [44]:
µn = µn−1 + 1
n(xn −µn−1),
where µn is the mean of n points, xn is the point being added to the mean
and mn−1 is the mean of the previous n −1 points. The weight and the num­
ber of points of the micro­cluster are incremented accordingly and also, the
algorithm checks if the new point updates the radius, that is, if its distance to
the center is greater than the existing radius. If so, then the new point be­
comes the farthestPoint. The function returns the id of the micro­cluster
and is described by Algorithm 9.
The code for the MicroCluster class can be found in Appendix C.
4.3.2
Clusterer implementation
We will now analyse the implementation of the clusterer object, that is, the Den­
Stream class. We will first address the loss of information issue of DenStream and
then describe how it is implemented and used in the context of the grid created in
the previous step of the algorithm.
Making the elimination of outliers optional
The algorithm works as discussed in Section 2.2.3, with a single adaptation to min­
imize the loss of information issue presented in Section 2.3.2. While wanting to ad­
dress this problem without adding to the time complexity of the algorithm, as would
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
Algorithm 9: insert(p,w,t): A function of the MicroCluster class, that inserts a
point to the micro­cluster object (mc)
Data: p: the point to be added, given as an array of (lat, long) coordinates
w: the weight of the point
t: the current time
Result: id: the id of the MicroCluster object
1 mc.adjust(t)
2 mc.n ←mc.n + 1
3 mc.w ←mc.w + w
4 mc.mean ←mc.mean + p−mc.mean
mc.n
5 r ←haversine(p, mc.mean)
6 if r > mc.radius() then
7
mc.farthestPoint ←p
8 end
9 return mc.id
be the case of the correction phase introduced in rDenStream [43], we decided
to make the deprecation of the outlier micro­clusters optional. The class provides
partial_fit(P) as a main function to the user, where P is the set of points to be
inserted to the clustering solution at a time. Therefore, we introduce another para­
meter to this function, that can enable and disable the deprecation according to the
user’s needs. Thus, the user can select to eliminate outliers at any point in time, re­
gardless of what the parameter of the previous call of partial_fit was. In addition,
it is important to note that the number of micro clusters is a significant parameter of
the computation time of the algorithm, since, as we can derive from Algorithm 3, the
closest micro cluster needs to be found for every point to be inserted. That is, the
larger the number of micro­clusters, the longer it would take to find the closest, es­
pecially since the centers of the micro­clusters change constantly and thus it is hard
to maintain a structure that would return the closest in an efficient way. By making
the elimination optional we enable the user to decide which part of the computation
time and loss of information trade­off is more important for their analysis.
Initialization of the micro-clusters
Our implementation will use Infomap to cluster the first set of points that arrive, and
create a potential micro­cluster for each cluster identified by Infomap. We changed
the choice of algorithm from the proposed DBSCAN for the same reason as In­
fostop [1] argues, that is, DBSCAN may merge clusters that lie too close together.
The code of this project uses the SpatialInfomap implementation of Infomap for
geospatial data by Aslak and Alessandretti [38].
Downsampling of points
The last adaptation made to DenStream in order to facilitate the processing of large
data sets is downsampling the points of the set P to be fitted each time. We propose
that P is first clustered using Infomap, as if it was not part of a data stream. Then,
the median coordinates of each cluster are defined and fitted in DenStream. Each
median is assigned a weight equal to the number of points in its Infomap cluster.
After this procedure is done and DenStream returns the id of the micro­cluster that
the median was inserted to, all the points in the same Infomap cluster are assigned
the same destination_id. This downsampling was added for the reason that Den­
Stream has to process the points to be fitted one by one, since each insert changes
24
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
the features of the micro­clusters and might affect the fitting of the next point. Thus,
fitting a large number of points, usually lying close to each other can be very time
consuming, since for each of them the algorithm has to find the closest micro­cluster.
Hence, reducing the number of points can reduce the computation time by a sig­
nificant amount. For example, running Infomap in a grid cell of approximately 1
million points in the dataset, reduced them to around 700000 medians to be fitted
in DenStream. This process also uses the SpatialInfomap implementation in [38].
The DenStream class
The idea of this project and the point of adding the grid cell ids in the previous step
of the algorithm is to keep an instance of the clusterer, and consequently a different
clustering solution, per grid cell. Each time a set of points is fitted in the solution
using partial_fit, the clusterer object will be saved in memory, to be loaded the next
time the user wants to fit points from this particular grid cell. This will enable parallel
computing of the clusterings of each grid cell, similarly to how we detected the stop
events of users in parallel. With that in mind, the DenStream class will contain an
additional attribute to hold the grid cell it corresponds to. Hence, the attributes of
DenStream are the following:
e: The clustering radius
lambda, beta, mu: The DenStream parameters
grid: The grid cell
t: The current time
p_micro_clusters: A list of MicroCluster objects that define the potential micro­
clusters
o_micro_clusters: A list of MicroCluster objects that define the outlier micro­
clusters
isInitialized: A boolean attribute to define if the clusterer has been initialized
with Infomap yet
The main function provided by DenStream is, as discussed before, partial_fit,
and is the only function that needs to be called after creating or loading an instance
of DenStream, in order to fit a set of points to the solution. Thus, when called,
partial_fit checks if the clusterer has been initialized with micro­clusters. If not,
it performs the initialization with Infomap as discussed above. If the clusterer has
been initialized, it downsamples the points and then it fits them using Algorithm 4,
with optional elimination. The function returns the clustering label or destination_id
of each point in the input. The implementation of DenStream can be found in Ap­
pendix C.
The final clustering of the potential micro­clusters is not implemented in this project,
as the focus is the updating part of the solution. However, the centers of the micro­
clusters can be easily retrieved from the p_micro_clusters list, using the center()
function of the MicroCluster class, and then can be fitted in any clustering algorithm
the user might chose.
4.3.3
Clustering in parallel for each grid cell
After implementing the clusterer and micro­clusters, we can create another wrapper
function that will, similarly to running Infostop, group the stop events by their grid cell
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
id, and run DenStream for each group. That is, for each group, the function will call
the constructor of the DenStream class to initialize a clusterer object. Here the im­
plementation will search the memory for a preexisting clusterer for this particular cell
and load it, otherwise it will create an empty clusterer. Then, calling partial_fit,
it will fit the points of the group into the solution and append the destination_id to
the result of Algorithm 7. If we again load the result of Algorithm 7 that we have
temporarily saved into a dataframe df, we can run the wrapper function as follows:
df.groupBy('grid_id').apply(clusterStopEvents)
In our implementation we used the following values for the DenStream paramet­
ers: e=30, lambda=0.001, beta=2, mu=1. The result of the wrapper function is a
dataframe with stop events, each stop event now having a clustering label, that is,
a destination id, concluding the scope of this project. The implementation can be
found in Appendix D. A visualization of the clustering of stop events for several days
can be found in Figure 5.7.
Algorithm 10: clusterStopEvents(pdf): Cluster discovered stop events using
DenStream
Data: pdf: A dataframe of stop events with the following attributes
(user_id,stop_id, stop_label, start_time, end_time, med_lat,
med_long,grid_index), as the result of Algorithm 7
Result: A dataframe of stop events with the following attributes
(user_id,stop_id, stop_label, start_time, end_time, med_lat,
med_long,grid_index, destination_id)
// Create an array of (lat,long) records for the clustering
1 coords ←(pdf[′Latitude′], pdf[′Longitude′])
// Create or load the clusterer object
2 clusterer ←DenStream(e=30,lambda=0.001, beta=2, mu=1)
3 labels ←clusterer.partial_fit(coords) // Add the labels as a column to pdf
4 result ←stack(pdf, labels)
5 return result
4.4
Pipeline summary
To summarize the contents of this chapter, the pipeline described consists of the
steps below. Here we abstract away from specific input and output and aim to
provide an overall view of the process.
1. Preprocess the data into user groups.
2. For each user group, detect the stops and trips of each user, and assign a
stop_id and grid_id to stop events. Trips are no longer a concern.
3. For each grid cell, cluster the stop events and update the clustering solution.
Here we examine two cases:
a. If there is no clustering solution for the cell:
i. Cluster the stop events using Infomap.
ii. Create a micro­cluster to describe each Infomap cluster.
iii. Label the points of each Infomap cluster with the micro­cluster id of the
corresponding created micro­cluster
26
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Methodology and Pipeline
b. Otherwise:
i. Cluster the stop events using Infomap.
ii. Get the median coordinates of each cluster and fit it in the micro­clusters
using DenStream. The weight of the point is equal to the number of
points in the corresponding Infomap cluster.
iii. Label all the points of each Infomap cluster with the micro­cluster id
that the median was added to.
Figure 4.2: Diagram to summarize the pipeline of dectecting and clustering stop events from the raw
input to the output produced. The Stop Location Detection process is called on each user group andthe
Clustering Stop Location process is called on each grid cell. The loops are parallelized grouping by
the user_group and grid_id attributes.
The open­course implementation can be found in this repository: https://github.
com/alexandradec/StreamingStopLocationClustering.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
27
==PAGE:38==
5
Results & Comparison
We will compare our algorithm to the non­streaming solution of clustering with In­
fomap, the algorithm that our solution replaces in the Infostop pipeline. After de­
tecting stop events in the dataset, 100 grid cells were randomly selected to obtain
clustering results and compare the two algorithms, as we lacked the computation
power to run on all the data of each day. Figure 5.1 shows the division of the map
into grid cells, with a step of 0.5 degrees in both directions, and the used cells are
highlighted. We chose to produce a heatmap of the points in the selected cells in
order to show the density of points in each cell. Even at this zoom, the figure de­
picts that some cells have a considerably lower number of points than others. In
addition, the points are in some cases located at the edge of the cell, with the rest of
it being empty. We therefore should consider whether the algorithm of separation
of the stop locations into grid cells can be ameliorated. We will address the effects
of the point distribution in cells and its effects on the algorithm later in this chapter.
For our DenStream solution, we will load the stop event data of each day at a time
and run our clustering pipeline. However, in order to run Infomap, as it is non­
streaming, the data of all the previous days have to be loaded every time, and a
clustering has to be performed on all of them. On both cases we will group by the
grid cell, and each grid cell will be processed individually and in parallel, using 10
processor cores and thus being able to process 10 grid cells in parallel each time.
A first observation is made here, as we can deduce that with DenStream we are
able to see differences in the clusters between the days and as time progresses,
while the result of Infomap will have clusters from data of multiple days, and thus it
cannot be used to detect differences in destinations over time.
Figure 5.1: The map of the USA divided into grid cells, with the pivot point being the southest and
westmost edge of the cells, and the step being 0.5 degrees in both directions. The used cells for the
comparison are highlighted using a heatmap of the stop locations each contains. It can be seen that
some grid cells have a much lower density and number of points and that the points are sometimes
located at the edges of the cell.
28
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
5.1
Memory consumption
As we ran the algorithm through the first days we quickly found out that Infomap,
since it needs data loaded cumulatively, fails to run with an out of memory error.
The error first occurred on the fourth day of data, as the largest selected cell had
approximately 200.000 data points per day, adding to close to 1.000.000 points after
four days. Hence, in order to be able to get results for a number of days and compare
running times and clustering results we reduced the number of cells to 94, removing
cells that kept failing Infomap. Below is a comparison of the datapoints loaded in
memory per day over 17 days, both when 94 and 100 cells are loaded. DenStream
also needs to load the micro­cluster information to perform the clustering. However
this memory overhead is negligent compared to the memory consumption to load
the datapoints, as only scalars and statistical information are used to describe each
cluster. Thus we can see how important the choice of micro­cluster attributes is,
and why keeping information about which points are added to each cluster would
not be viable.
Figure 5.2: Number of datapoints loaded in memory per day across all grid cells for DenStream and
Infomap, when 100 and 94 grid cells are used. As is seen in the right pane, we had to reduce the
total cumulative number of points to nearly half for Infomap to be able to handle them. On the other
hand, the points loaded into memory for DenStream is constant across days, as only the current day’s
data are needed for the clustering. DenStream also loads cluster information, that is, the attributes
of a Micro­Cluster as defined in Section 4.3.1, however the memory consumption of the clusters is
negligent, compare to the size of the datapoints.
Figure 5.2 depicts the difference in memory consumption between the two solutions.
We can see that the memory load of DenStream is not related to the days passed
while Infomap loads the cumulative amount of data of all the past days. In our
testing, we had to reduce the total amount of points to almost a half for Infomap to
be able to produce a clustering with the given memory. DenStream did not have
such a memory constraint.
The out of memory error can be overcome also by reducing the size of the grid cells,
thus reducing the number of points of each cell, which increasing the total number
of cells. However that might not be always possible, and a cell can have a large
number of points regrardless. Hence, after enough days have passed, Infomap is
likely to cause a memory overload in any case.
5.2
Running time
Having reduced the cells to 94, we are now able to run both algorithms on the stop
locations of several days and compare the running times of each. For each day, the
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
processing time of each grid cell was counted for both algorithms aiming to compare
average values per algorithm and per day.
Figure 5.3: Running time comparison between DenStream and Infomap on 94 grid cells. The figure
depicts the median running time across all cells, with the 1st and 3 quantiles as error bars. We chose
a log scale for the y­axis as there can be no negative values. We notice that the running time on
DenStream stays fairly similar across days when Infomap increases rapidly, as happens with the
memory consumption. The presence of error bars is to be expected since the running time depends
on the points of the input and the points are not evenly distributed across the cells.
Figure 5.4: Average running time between DenStream and Infomap on 94 grid cells. DenStream
maintains a stable average running time with a slight increase which is to be expected since even if
the number of points is similar, the number of clusters is expected to increase. Contrary to Infomap
whose running time keeps increasing as the number of points also increases. We observe that for
small amounts of data, as is in the first four days, Infomap is faster.
Figure 5.3 shows the median running time across grid cells for each day, with the
first and third quantiles as error bars. We notice that the error bars are quite large,
being the result of the wide range of grid cell sizes in terms of the number of points
in each one as we earlier mentioned, showed in Figure 5.1. Another observation
from this comparison is that, for a small amount of days, and in this test example
for less than 4 days, Infomap has a lower running time both in average in 75% of
30
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
the cells, however its running time increases constantly, while DenStream’s results
remain stable and uniform. We deduce that, if the aim is to produce a clustering
across days without a day­to­day comparison that DenStream would offer, Infomap
is a better choice for a small amount of data. The running time comparison is better
depicted in Figure 5.4, where only average running times and in a linear scale are
included.
5.3
Clustering result comparison
Infomap being a robust solution that the state­of­the­art Infostop algorithm uses, it
makes sense to compare the clustering result it produces to the clustering result
our algorithm produces, updating existing clusters with new data as it is available.
Infomap uses all the data availabe to produce a clustering, while our solution only
uses statistical information of a pre­existing clustering to label incoming points. In
that sense, our solution is an approximation and we would like to determine how
close it is to its robust equivalent. For this purpose we are going to use two different
measures of similarity, mutual information and random index.
5.3.1
Normalized Mutual Information
Mutual information [45], [46], is a measure of mutual dependence, that is a measure
of information that one can get about a random variable, while observing another.
It is defined as follows, where X, Y are two random variables that each follow the
distributions PX and PY and P(X,Y ) is their joined distribution:
MI(X; Y ) = DKL(P(X,Y )||PX ⊗PY )
DKL is the Kullback–Leibler divergence [47], or relative entropy, and it measures
how a distribution differs from another and in this particular case, how the joined
distribution differs from the product of the marginal distributions. By its definition for
continuous distributions,
DKL(P||Q) =
∫∞
−∞
p(x) log
(p(x)
q(x)
)
dx,
it is deduced that the Kullback­Leiber divergence would be zero if the two distri­
butions coincide. In the context of this analysis, a 0 Kullback­Leiber divergence
and subsequently mutual information would imply that the joint distribution and the
product of the marginals coincide, implying that the two variables X and Y are in­
dependent.
We will use the normalized mutual information score, that is mutual information
normalized to range between 0 and 1, 0 implying no correlation, while 1 implying
a perfect correlation. Analysts use mutual information as a clustering measure of
similarity [48], [49], whith two different clusterings having a score of 1 when all the
points are clustered in the same way, that is, the groupings of points are the same for
both. Similarly to the running time comparison we took the average across the grid
cells and measured the mutual information of the clusterings as the days progress.
That is, the figure below presents the results of the comparison for the cumulative
clustering result up to each day.
Overall the mutual information score is close to one, meaning that our solution pro­
duces results very similar to their Infomap equivalent. Figure 5.5 shows a quick
decrease between day 1 and the first consecutive days, which is to be expected
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
Figure 5.5: Mutual information average and 1st and 3rd quantiles across 94 grid cells between Den­
Stream and Infomap, that measures the similarity of the two solutions as the days progress. The score
is equal to 1 for the first day as DenStream uses Infomap to initialize. With the lowest possible score
being 0, indicating no similarity, the graphs shows that DenStream produces results very close to the
Infomap equivalent, as the score is very close to 1 in each day and the error bars are fairly small. We
observe a relatively rapid decrease on the first days as the solution diverges from being identical and
a smaller rate of change in the score on later days. We deduce that as the solution receives more
data it stabilizes.
as the solution diverges from being produced by the same algorithm, since day 1
consists only of the initialization phase, to the two different solutions. After some
days have passed however we observe a stabilization. This could indicate that once
DenStream has performed enough additions the clusters become more robust. It
is not easy to spot the cause of this, but since DenStream will create new clusters
for points that do not belong to an existing one, could be that after enough days,
enough clusters are created so that most new points can be absorbed and the solu­
tion stops varying. Interestingly, the average mutual information score also seems
to increase towards the 3rd quantile in a similar fashion. The existence and size of
the error bars here depicts the difference of mutual information between grid cells.
We would explain this variation using the uncertainty of the spatial distribution of
the datapoints. That is, it can be that a cell receives new points that are easy to
add to a cluster and would be clustered by Infomap and DenStream in the same
way, or it can be that a cell receives points completely unrelated to any existing
clustering. We suspect that this could end in a difference between the solutions,
as new micro­clusters are always outliers until their weight becomes high enough,
meaning that they are not a preference of the algorithm regarding receiving new
points. However, given the scale of the graph in Figure 5.5, the error bars are very
small and the overall result is close to the best possible score.
5.3.2
Adjusted Random Index
From the above mutual information analysis we observed that the two solutions
are very similar. However, the mutual information score shown is not adjusted for
chance, meaning that it does not take into account the case where points are as­
signed in clusters in the same manner by chance. Hence we will continue the com­
32
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
parison using adjusted random index, that is random index adjusted for chance as
a measure of similarity.
Random index is defined in [50] as a measure of similarity between two clusterings.
In particular, as it explained in [51], for two clusterings C1, C2 of the same set of
data, and for each pair (x, y) of 2 datapoints, either of the following can occur:
a. x and y are put in the same cluster in both C1 and C2
b. x and y are put in different clusters in both C1 and C2
c. x and y are put in the same cluster in C1 but in different clusters in C2
d. x and y are put in different clusters in C1 but in the same cluster in C2
In cases a and b above, we say that C1 and C2 agree in regards to the clustering of
the pair, and disagree in cases c and d. Hence [50] defines the random index score
as the total number of agreements over the total number of pairs of datapoints, that
is
RI = a + b
(n
2
) .
The above score, like normalized mutual information, is 0 when the clusterings are
completely different, that is, there is no agreement and 1 when the clusterings are
identical, that is, they agree on all the combinations of pairs. However, it is still
not adjusted for chance. For adjusting, [51] proposes the use of the expected ran­
dom index and the maximum random index for two clusterings. That is, the metric
computes the similarity of the clusterings and then also computes the chance to ob­
serve the same similarity if one of them is completely random and thus informally,
the adjusted random index score is defined as follows:
ARI =
RI −E(RI)
max(RI) −E(RI)
The analysis was again performed based on the average adjusted random index
across grid cells. The equivalent of Figure 5.5 is shown below, where for each day
we show the comparison between the cumulative clusterings.
As is to be expected, the ARI score shows a greater fluctuation than the NMI score,
as is shown in the error bars of Figure 5.6. We observe that the lower bound of the
error bars decreases by approximately 0.01, from around 0.98 at the lowest in the
case of NMI to a lowest of 0.97 in the case of ARI. However, this decrease is not
very significant since the overall score is still close to 1. Here we also notice a rapid
decrease of the similarity in the first days, and we would make the same comment as
in NMI, since the clustering quickly changes from being derived in exactly the same
way in both cases, to the different algorithm approaches we compare. Given the
scale of the graph, the error bars are still very small considering that the largest has
approximate bounds around (0.970, 0.998). Another interesting observation is that
the ARI score average shows a greater and faster tendency for stabilization starting
from day 6 where the average is around 0.99 and in some cases an increase, as
is the case between day 15 and 16, whereas the NMI score continues to decrease
but with a lower rate of change as the days progress. We thus deduce that when
we adjust the measure for chance we observe a slightly lower similarity but a more
stable one.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
33
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
Figure 5.6: Adjusted random index average and 1st and 3rd quantiles across 94 grid cells between
DenStream and Infomap, as the days progress. The score measures the agreement between the two
solutions based on all the data up to each day. As expected the solutions are in full agreement on the
first day. The decrease follows the same pattern as the NMI score, with a smaller rate of change after
some days have passed. The average score is overall higher than NMI, however the error bars are
larger, indicating a lower similarity when we account for chance. Most importantly a quick stabilization
is observed, meaning that adding more data to the clustering each day does not distort the result, that
is, the two solutions do not diverge.
Overall, both the NMI and the ARI scores indicate that our solution produces very
good results in relation to what Infomap would have produced given the same data.
We try to interpret this performance by relating it to the use of Infomap itself through­
out the clustering of points in DenStream. Firstly, Infomap’s result forms the base
of DenStream’s clustering as it is used in the initialization phase and data of the
consecutive days are added to the initial Infomap clusters whenever possible. It
follows that, if the data is consistent and similar between the days, the result will not
diverge from the base. In addition, the data of each day are downsampled, in the
sense that it is first independently clustered again using Infomap, and the medians
of the resulting clusters are then fitted into the micro­clusters, as we explained in
section 4.3.2. That is, each day, Infomap clusters are created and then inserted in
a solution that originates from other Infomap clusters. This can be the cause of the
great similarity of the two solutions.
Nevertheless, we should make a note of the ARI being this high because we are
making a generous comparison when adjusting for chance. In specific, because
of spatial constraints since the clusters are compact in space, comparing with a
random partition of the points will most likely give a high score of similarity. Being
aware of this limitation we note that the ARI score might not be a very good metric
as a single score, so we are going to use its results to observe not its value, but
how the score changes as we add more days of data to the clustering solution. We
emphasise again that the score is quick to stabilize to a certain value after some
days, in contrast with NMI that continues to show a drop. We deduce thus that our
solution and the reference solution do not continue to diverge, and adding more
data to the clustering using our streaming method does not distort the results.
34
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
5.4
DenStream clustering result
After having compared our adaptation of DenStream with Infomap we are going to
show a clustering visualization of our solution over the first 6 days of data, aiming to
see whether the clustering remains stable and similar to that of the first day, and how
the spatial placement and features of the micro­clusters evolve over time. Figure
5.7a shows the initial Infomap clusters when no previous data is available. We make
the same observation as [1] regarding the use of Infomap instead of DBSCAN, as
we can see that there are clusters with overlapping convex hulls and too close to
each other, that DBSCAN could have merged.
The evolution of the clusters seems stable and it is again shown that DenStream
keeps clusters too close to each other, sometimes with overlapping convex hulls,
separated (Figure 5.7e). We also observe that some clusters disappear and resur­
face as the days progress. An explanation could be that the centers of candidate
clusters have a similar distance from the point being inserted, so that one of them ab­
sorbs more points eventually. Another cause could be the possibility of the nearest
cluster being an outlier and the simultaneous existence of a potential micro­cluster
that can also absorb the new point. If this is the case, then the potential micro­cluster
will absorb the point and if this happens continuously, the outlier micro­cluster will
decay and will be a candidate for deprecation.
We don’t observe any micro­cluster becoming unnaturally large, in the sense that
it keeps absorbing points that should belong to other micro­clusters according to
information from previous days.
We can see that some micro­clusters absorb some of the points of their neighbors,
however this is the case when one of the neighboring micro­clusters has too few
points and therefore would be moved to the outlier buffer and no longer be preferred
for insert after the first micro­cluster maintenance.
It is important to note here that the resurface of seemingly extinct clusters supports
our decision to make the deprecation optional because no information is lost this
way. The user can chose if clusters with too low weight should be eliminated with
the next function call, after enough time has passed in regards to the topic being
studied.
Finally it is shown that most of the new points of each day get inserted in existing
clusters and only points too far away from existing micro­clusters create a micro­
cluster of their own.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
(a) Day 1 clusters
(b) Day 2 clusters
(c) Day 3 clusters
(d) Day 4 clusters
(e) Day 5 clusters
(f) Day 6 clusters
Figure 5.7: The stop location clustering result of our adaptation of DenStream over 6 days of data.
The clustering, with the points of each day being clustered as expected based on the previous days’
information. Some micro­clusters absorbing the points of their neighbors, a result of the preference of
potential micro­clusters to outliers. No loss of information is observed, since there are micro­clusters
seemingly extinct that resurface after some days.
36
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
5.5
Limitations
We conclude our analysis by addressing the limitations of the implementation and
future improvements.
5.5.1
Running time bottleneck
We have already enabled two parallel computings in the pipeline, first the parallel
detection of stop locations across individuals and secondly the parallel stop location
clustering across grid cells. These techniques greatly reduce the overall computa­
tion time, as even if there is a trajectory or grid cell with a lot of points that would
take more time to process, the algorithm will use the other cores of the processor
to simultaneously process the rest of the data.
However, when stop location clustering is concerned, the points in the input, that is
the points of a grid cell, must be processed one by one as the algorithm is defined,
since each point affects the attributes of the micro­cluster it gets inserted to, which
might affect future additions to the micro­cluster solution. Thus, inserting the points
is a bottleneck for the algorithm, that by its definition cannot be addressed any fur­
ther than the grid cell division. The complexity of the clustering pipeline according to
this analysis is nO(merge), where n is the number of points, that is stop locations,
in the input and O(merge) is the time complexity of adding a point to the clustering.
Inserting a point to a micro­cluster takes constant time O(1), since all that the al­
gorithm needs to do is change the attributes of the receiving micro­cluster. How­
ever, in order to insert the point, the closest micro­cluster, first a potential and, if
the insert is not successful, an outlier, needs to be found. This process might seem
rather simple in the beginning, as it can be reduced to finding a minimum distance
between a micro­cluster center and the point, but one has to keep in mind that the
centers of the micro­clusters change constantly. Hence, we cannot use a static data
structure that would keep the centers of the micro­clusters and query the minimum
distance in constant time, as for example a min heap would. A min heap [52] is a
binary tree, that is, a tree where each node has exactly 2 children that satisfies the
min­heap property, where the key of each node is less than or equal to that of its
children. It provides a constant lookup/query time [53], meaning that it returns the
min with O(1) complexity. However, as is noted in [53], inserts and deletions from
a min­heap has O(log m) complexity, where m is the number of nodes in the heap.
In our case the minimum distance between a point and the micro­cluster centers
needs to be returned every time, hence it would seem intuitive to use a min­heap
for the distances. However, even if the micro­clusters were static we would have
to build a new min­heap for each point addition, since the point itself is different.
This would take O(m log m) time, if m is the number of existing micro­clusters each
time. We also explore the possibility of using a ball tree [54], another binary and
multidimensional tree data structure that is used for the nearest neighbor problem
[54], [55]. Ball trees support nearest neighbor queries for a lot of points, so the
problem discussed above is solved. However, there is still the issue of the ever­
changing micro­cluster centers. That is, after every insert, the ball tree would have
to be updated with the changed center deleted and re­inserted, and as stated in
[56], inserting in a ball tree is costly and the ball tree construction complexity is also
O(m log m) [54].
We conclude that keeping a data structure to query distances is not intuitive. In our
implementation, each point merge visits at most all the micro­clusters and discovers
the minimum distance. Numpy’s fast argmin implementation is used. Thus, the
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
algorithm visits at most all the m micro­clusters, resulting in an O(m) complexity
to find the mean, and by the above analysis, the resulting complexity of inserting
all the points in the input is O(nm), where n is the number of points and m is the
number of micro­clusters.
Thus, the number of points, as well as the number of micro­clusters pose a bottle­
neck to the algorithm’s running time, and since the algorithm already operates in a
parallel environment across processor cores, further parallelization to retrieve the
closest micro­cluster is not easy to achieve. A future improvement of the pipeline
would be to use the suggestion in [57] that the GPU cores can be used to compute
the distances in parallel, however, as the research suggests, a GPU scheduling
system would be required and such an implementation is outside of the scope of
this project.
5.5.2
Uneven distribution of points across grid cells
In the analysis of Figure 5.1 we already noted the difference of density across the
created grid cells and the sometimes odd placement of the points in regards to the
boundaries of the cell. Algorithm 6 does not account for this, as it splits the map area
into grid cells of equal areas size regardless of the number of points belonging in
each. Depending on the spatial placement of the stop locations, this can very easily
result in very uneven cells with some of them being very dense and populated. We
support this observation with Zipf’s law [58], which states that data in physical and
social sciences follows a power law distribution, that is, a distribution where one of
the quantities varies as the power of the other. It was first noted in [59] that the
ranking of cities by population follows Zipf’s law and hence we expect that there will
be a small number of grid cells, containing the large cities in the dataset, that will
be very populated in contrast to the others.
Figure 5.8: The distribution of number of data points in the 100 grid cells of our testing set for the
data of one day. The graph shows a clear power law distribution that is in accord with Zipf’s law [58],
[59]. We see that most of the cells have a small size of less than 50.000 points while too few have a
must larger size. Figure 5.1 also shows similar results, where the heatmap of the points in some grid
cells is much more dense than in others.
38
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
Figure 5.8 shows the distribution of the number of data points over the grid cells on
one day of data. We observe a clear power law distribution, as Zipf’s law suggests,
where most of the grid cells have a relatively small size with less than 50.000 points
and very few cells have a size of more than 100.000 points.
As we described in the previous section, the number of points is a bottleneck for
the clustering and thus, too populated grid cells are likely to greatly increase the
computation time, even after the downsampling. That is, the existence of a small
number of cells with a very large number of data points in each will slow the algorithm
considerably, since it is expected that the algorithm will finish processing the data
on cells with a small population much faster. Here we recall that from the complexity
analysis, the time complexity of the clustering is O(nm), and we expect that a larger
number of datapoints will also increase the number of micro­clusters. Hence, the
quantity of datapoints affects the complexity in a quadratic manner.
Figure 5.9: DenStream running times across 15 days for the initially selected 100 grid cells, with a
distribution of data points as shown in Figure 5.8. While most of the cells are processed fast, with an
average running time of 0.01 minutes and a 1 nimute threshold in 75% of the cells, we can see that
as there are a few cells that have a large size that consequently require a much greater computation
time.
Figure 5.9 shows a boxplot of DenStream’s running time for all the 100 cells. While
the average running time of the clustering is around 0.01 minutes for each day,
without much increase, and in 75% of the cells, below 1 minute, we observe that the
outliers reach as far as 100 minutes when only a few days have passed. Hence, the
overall running time is slowed significantly, as the graph shows that the algorithm will
have finished processing almost all the other grid cells before finishing the largest
one.
As a future improvement the logic of assigning the grid ids to the stop events could
be changed, so that grid cells are re­evaluated until a more uniform size distribution,
in term of datapoints, is achieved. Of course, depending on the data, this will add
to the overall running time of the pipeline, however it will most likely be much faster
than the running times of Figure 5.9. Instead of a complete grid re­evaluation, we
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
propose the recursive splitting of too large cells into two, or even into 4, that can
be easily achieved by calling Algorithm 6 with step = step/2 only on the grid cells
that we desire to split, so that a smaller size can be achieved in a fast manner. The
figures above suggest that 50.000 to 100.000 grid points per cell would be a good
threshold, as there are only 4 cells with a larger size and also only 4 cells with a
marginally large computation time.
5.5.3
Geographical features are not taken into account for grid
splitting
Splitting the stop locations into grid cells posed a great advantage to the algorithm,
as it enables localising the solution in specific areas and producing a different and
separate set of destinations for each area. As we mentioned before, this gives a
great advantage to memory consumption and running time, as one can load a few
grid cells at a time and also process them in parallel. However, this splitting might
result in cutting across areas of interest.
In specific, Algorithm 6 simple as it is, poses another limitation in regards to the
clustering result that is not so easy to overcome. Namely, this way of splitting the
stop locations into grid cells does not account for the geographical features of the
dataset and the way the stop locations are spatially distributed. This will result in
a non­consistent result around the border of the grid cell, since if the choice of
pivot point and step results in the border of the cell being in the middle of a shop,
building or in general, a frequented area, then this area will be split into two different
clustering solutions, the one having no connection or relation to the other.
Figure 5.10: The clustering solution around the border of two adjacent grid cells. The figure shows
that points that belong to different cells are clustered separately and that there is a discrepancy around
the border, where points north and south do not take their counterpart into account.
Figure 5.10 shows such an example, where two adjacent grid cells were processed
through the algorithm. The figure shows the Infomap clusters of the fist day, in an
area close to the border of the two grid cells, as the following days will follow this
40
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5. Results & Comparison
clustering result. As shown, the choice of pivot point and grid step indeed split a
building in half and the points in either way of the border will never take into account
the points that exist in the other grid cell. Hence, points that intuitively should belong
in the same cluster will never do so, since they are clustered in different solutions
and since the algorithm runs separately on each grid cell. Such a result is not only
counter­intuitive, but could prevent the user from extracting useful information about
destinations of multiple individuals and about the frequency of visits in particular
areas of interest.
The problem is more apparent in the highlighted area of Figure 5.10, since we ob­
serve a small number of points to the south of the border being clustered alone,
when they are in close proximity to the large cluster north of the border and would
have, most probably, been clustered as a whole if the border was not present.
It is not very easy to address this limitation without affecting the running time of the
algorithm. One could adjust the splitting algorithm so that grid cells are overlapping
around the borders. After the solution is run on adjacent cells, the clustering on
the overlapping part should be evaluated and a solution that accounts for the geo­
graphical features produced. This could be achieved by merging the clusters in the
overlaps, that is, creating destination ids that would be uniform and no cluster would
be split in half. Hence, the destination ids would be shared by all the adjacent grid
cells around their borders.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
41
==PAGE:52==
6
Conclusion
In this project we aimed to create a stop location detection and clustering pipeline
that can handle large­scale GPS trace data and is able to produce an updatable
solution, should the input be in the form of a data stream.
The pipeline works as follows. The input is divided into groups of individuals to avoid
memory overflows. Then, given an input that consists of GPS trajectories of mul­
tiple individuals over multiple days, first, using a stop location detection algorithm,
the trace of each individual is separated into stop events and trips. As each tra­
jectory is considered and processed alone, no streaming technique is needed in
this part of the pipeline. Hence, to this end we incorporated the stop location de­
tection part of the Infostop [1] algorithm. We enable the parallel computing of the
stop events of multiple users, which greatly reduces the overall computation time.
After the stop events are detected for all the individuals of a given day, the pipeline
aims to cluster them into destinations that are shared between multiple individu­
als. These destinations (clusters) need to be updated once more data is avail­
able, ie. when the trajectories of the next days come, so that the clustering solu­
tion respects historical information and shows the evolution of destinations over
time. In this second part of the pipeline, we first divide the stop events into local
grid cells, again to facilitate a faster computation time and prevent a memory over­
flow. In addition, we claimed that in real life scenarios, it makes sense to perform
localised clusterings, since two stop events at different cities or too far away from
each other would never be put into the same cluster. Instead of using a conven­
tional and non­streaming clustering algorithm like Infomap that Infostop employs,
we used the data stream clustering technique DenStream [3]. DenStream, as we
discussed in Chapter 4, uses the pre­existing clusters in order to incorporate new
points (describing the median coordinates of a stop event) into the solution. In
the event that no previous clusters are available, the algorithm initializes its solu­
tion using non­streaming clustering methods. We decided to use Infomap here,
firstly because it is the choice of the Infostop pipeline and secondly because it
tends not to merge clusters too close together as other algorithms would do. We
also made some adaptation to the DenStream pipeline, mainly to maintain spatial
information so that the resulting clusters are meaningful and we also addressed
DenStream’s limitation of not maintaining an entity relationship between the points
and the clusters they were added to. That is, as the literature defines DenStream,
there is no way of knowing which cluster a point in the input belongs to after the
insertion has been performed. Hence, we introduced clustering lables as a unique
ID per cluster, that is returned and saved once the point is inserted. Finally, sim­
ilar to stop location detection, the clustering algorithm can be applied to multiple
grid cells in parallel. We created an open­source repository containing the above:
https://github.com/alexandradec/StreamingStopLocationClustering.
We compared our adaptation of the DenStream clustering algorithm to Infomap,
aiming to find the differences in computation time and memory consumption as well
as in the resulting clustering solution. We found that for a small number of days
(below 4, as Figure 5.4 suggests) Infomap, with the data of all the 4 days as input,
runs faster than DenStream. However, as the days continue, since Infomap would
need the cumulative input to produce a solution that incorporates all the data up to
42
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
date, DenStream is preferred. This preference is more apparent in terms of memory
consumption, where the cumulative amount of points needed for Infomap would very
soon lead to a memory overflow, whereas DenStream maintains a constant memory
consumption (see Figure 5.2).
In order to compare the two resulting clusterings we employed two similarity meas­
ures, normalized mutual information (NMI) and adjusted random index (ARI), the
latter being adjusted for chance. We observed very high scores in both cases and
a similar, relatively rapid decrease in the first days. Importantly, ARI showed a sta­
bilization after that decrease and to a slightly higher score than NMI. Hence, we
are led to believe that the resulting clustering of our pipeline is similar to what In­
fomap would have produced, with the stabilization of ARI being the most important
observation, since it indicates that our solution does not continue to diverge from
Infomap’s solution as the days progress.
This pipeline creates an updatable stop location clustering for the trajectories of mul­
tiple individuals. Any study that uses a dataset of GPS traces where a separation of
the trace points into stops and trips is relevant can benefit from our work. Particularly
when the dataset is in the form of a data stream the state­of­the­art stop location
detection methods would need to be reapplied from the beginning every time new
data arrive. Even if the dataset is not a stream, the pipeline can be applied for large­
scale inputs, since the introduced parallelization will help avoid memory overflows
and result it smaller running times. Finally, the pipeline introduces the ability to see
how the resulting destinations change over time and connects present and past in­
formation, something very useful to relevant human mobility studies that aim to infer
how points of interest and destinations of individuals change over time, or by the
day, should datetime information be available in the trace.
The ability to see the evolution of the destinations over time, where the cluster­
ing labels (IDs) stay the same for pre­existing clusters, can be applied in modern
studies that focus on the change of human mobility over a given period of time.
For example, since the surfacing of COVID­19 and since it became a pandemic,
similar datasets have been used by scientists to infer changes in mobility over the
world. Relevant applications consist of providing mobility information in terms of
origin and destination [60], [61], reviewing lockdown and restriction measures em­
ployed in relation to the spread of the virus [62] and also relating the difference of
mobility during the pandemic with socioeconomic factors [63]. With the algorithm
and pipeline of this project these changes can be monitored in real time, since new
data is incorporated into the solution as it becomes available. Hence it can assist not
only scientific research but also, more importantly, government projects that benefit
greatly by information available in real time. As an example, again the COVID­19
situation comes to mind, where governments have created platforms to inform the
public about the spread [64], [65], [66] that need to be updated constantly, usually
daily.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
43
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
U. Aslak and L. Alessandretti, ‘Infostop: Scalable stop­location detection in
multi­user mobility data,’ 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/
2003.14370.pdf.
[2]
R. Hariharan and K. Toyama, ‘Project lachesis: Parsing and modeling location
histories,’ in International Conference on Geographic Information Science,
Springer, 2004, pp. 106–124.
[3]
F. Cao, M. Estert, W. Qian and A. Zhou, ‘Density­based clustering over an
evolving data stream with noise,’ in Proceedings of the 2006 SIAM interna­
tional conference on data mining, SIAM, 2006, pp. 328–339.
[4]
M. Rosvall, D. Axelsson and C. T. Bergstrom, ‘The map equation,’ The European
Physical Journal Special Topics, vol. 178, no. 1, pp. 13–23, 2009.
[5]
H. Barbosa, M. Barthelemy, G. G., C. R. James, M. Lenormand, L. T., R.
Menezes, J. J. Ramasco, F. Simini and M. Tomasini, ‘Human mobility: Models
and applications,’ Physics Report, vol. 734, 2018.
[6]
E. D’Andrea and F. Marcelloni, ‘Detection of traffic congestion and incidents
from gps trace analysis,’ Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 73, pp. 43–
56, 2017.
[7]
V. D. Blondel, M. Esch, C. Chan, F. Clérot, P. Deville, E. Huens, F. Morlot,
Z. Smoreda and C. Ziemlicki, ‘Data for development: The d4d challenge on
mobile phone data,’ arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.0137, 2012.
[8]
L. Stenneth, O. Wolfson, P. S. Yu and B. Xu, ‘Transportation mode detection
using mobile phones and gis information,’ in Proceedings of the 19th ACM
SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances in geographic information
systems, 2011, pp. 54–63.
[9]
S. Reddy, M. Mun, J. Burke, D. Estrin, M. Hansen and M. Srivastava, ‘Us­
ing mobile phones to determine transportation modes,’ ACM Transactions on
Sensor Networks (TOSN), vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2010.
[10]
Y. Zheng and X. Xie, ‘Learning travel recommendations from user­generated
gps traces,’ ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST),
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–29, 2011.
[11]
D. Zhang, N. Li, Z.­H. Zhou, C. Chen, L. Sun and S. Li, ‘Ibat: Detecting anom­
alous taxi trajectories from gps traces,’ in Proceedings of the 13th international
conference on Ubiquitous computing, 2011, pp. 99–108.
[12]
P. S. Castro, D. Zhang and S. Li, ‘Urban traffic modelling and prediction using
large scale taxi gps traces,’ in International Conference on Pervasive Com­
puting, Springer, 2012, pp. 57–72.
[13]
P. S. Castro, D. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Li and G. Pan, ‘From taxi gps traces to so­
cial and community dynamics: A survey,’ ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 1–34, 2013.
[14]
L. Zhang, F. Thiemann and M. Sester, ‘Integration of gps traces with road
map,’ in Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Computational
Transportation Science, 2010, pp. 17–22.
[15]
R. Bruntrup, S. Edelkamp, S. Jabbar and B. Scholz, ‘Incremental map gen­
eration with gps traces,’ in Proceedings. 2005 IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2005., IEEE, 2005, pp. 574–579.
44
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[16]
L. Cao and J. Krumm, ‘From gps traces to a routable road map,’ in Proceed­
ings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances in
geographic information systems, 2009, pp. 3–12.
[17]
Y. Chen and J. Krumm, ‘Probabilistic modeling of traffic lanes from gps traces,’
in Proceedings of the 18th SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances
in geographic information systems, 2010, pp. 81–88.
[18]
D. Balcan, H. Hu, B. Goncalves, P. Bajardi, C. Poletto, J. J. Ramasco, D.
Paolotti, N. Perra, M. Tizzoni, W. Van den Broeck et al., ‘Seasonal transmis­
sion potential and activity peaks of the new influenza a (h1n1): A monte carlo
likelihood analysis based on human mobility,’ BMC medicine, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 1–12, 2009.
[19]
S. Wang, S. Ding and L. Xiong, ‘A new system for surveillance and digital
contact tracing for covid­19: Spatiotemporal reporting over network and gps,’
JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 8, no. 6, e19457, 2020.
[20]
L. Gong, H. Sato, T. Yamamoto, T. Miwa and T. Morikawa, ‘Identification of
activity stop locations in gps trajectories by density­based clustering method
combined with support vector machines,’ Journal of Modern Transportation,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 202–213, 2015.
[21]
D. Ashbrook and T. Starner, ‘Using gps to learn significant locations and pre­
dict movement across multiple users,’ Personal and Ubiquitous computing,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 275–286, 2003.
[22]
K. Mizuno, R. Kanamori, S. Sano, S. Nakajima and T. Ito, ‘Identifying move
and stop in gps data with support vector machines. conference of infrastruc­
ture planning and management (cd­rom),’ JSCE, 2013.
[23]
G. Agamennoni, J. Nieto and E. Nebot, ‘Mining gps data for extracting signi­
ficant places,’ in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Auto­
mation, IEEE, 2009, pp. 855–862.
[24]
M. Ester, H.­P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu et al., ‘A density­based algorithm for
discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.,’ in Kdd, vol. 96,
1996, pp. 226–231.
[25]
A. T. Palma, V. Bogorny, B. Kuijpers and L. O. Alvares, ‘A clustering­based
approach for discovering interesting places in trajectories,’ in Proceedings of
the 2008 ACM symposium on Applied computing, 2008, pp. 863–868.
[26]
L. O. Alvares, V. Bogorny, B. Kuijpers, J. A. F. de Macedo, B. Moelans and
A. Vaisman, ‘A model for enriching trajectories with semantic geographical
information,’ in Proceedings of the 15th annual ACM international symposium
on Advances in geographic information systems, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[27]
M. Zimmermann, T. Kirste and M. Spiliopoulou, ‘Finding stops in error­prone
trajectories of moving objects with time­based clustering,’ in International con­
ference on intelligent interactive assistance and mobile multimedia comput­
ing, Springer, 2009, pp. 275–286.
[28]
X. Cao, G. Cong and C. S. Jensen, ‘Mining significant semantic locations from
gps data,’ Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 3, no. 1­2, pp. 1009–
1020, 2010.
[29]
N. Wan and G. Lin, ‘Life­space characterization from cellular telephone collec­
ted gps data,’ Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 39, pp. 63–
70, 2013.
[30]
R. Montoliu and D. Gatica­Perez, ‘Discovering human places of interest from
multimodal mobile phone data,’ in Proceedings of the 9th international con­
ference on mobile and ubiquitous multimedia, 2010, pp. 1–10.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
45
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[31]
F. Zhao, A. Ghorpade, F. C. Pereira, C. Zegras and M. Ben­Akiva, ‘Stop detec­
tion in smartphone­based travel surveys,’ Transportation research procedia,
vol. 11, pp. 218–226, 2015.
[32]
N. Matthew and R. Stones, Beginning linux programming. John Wiley & Sons,
2008.
[33]
O. Maimon and L. Rokach, ‘Data mining and knowledge discovery handbook,’
2005.
[34]
U. Aslak and L. Alessandretti. (2020). ‘Infostop step 1 ­ implementation,’ [On­
line]. Available: https://github.com/ulfaslak/infostop/blob/master/cpputils/
main.cpp.
[35]
K. Gade, ‘A non­singular horizontal position representation,’ Journal of Nav­
igation, vol. 63, pp. 395–417, 2010.
[36]
U. Aslak and L. Alessandretti. (2020). ‘Infostop postprocess ­ implementa­
tion,’ [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ulfaslak/infostop/blob/master/
infostop/postprocess.py.
[37]
A.­L. Barabási, ‘Network science,’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So­
ciety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 371, no. 1987,
p. 20 120 375, 2013.
[38]
U. Aslak and L. Alessandretti. (2020). ‘Infostop step 2 ­ implementation,’ [On­
line]. Available: https://github.com/ulfaslak/infostop/blob/master/infostop/
models.py.
[39]
S. Porto and M. G. Quiles, ‘Clustering data streams: A complex network ap­
proach,’ in International Conference on Computational Science and Its Ap­
plications, Springer, 2019, pp. 52–65.
[40]
C. C. Aggarwal, S. Y. Philip, J. Han and J. Wang, ‘A framework for cluster­
ing evolving data streams,’ in Proceedings 2003 VLDB conference, Elsevier,
2003, pp. 81–92.
[41]
T. Zhang, R. Ramakrishnan and M. Livny, ‘Birch: An efficient data clustering
method for very large databases,’ ACM sigmod record, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 103–
114, 1996.
[42]
M. Li, A. Croitoru and S. Yue, ‘Geodenstream: An improved denstream clus­
tering method for managing entity data within geographical data streams,’
Computers & Geosciences, vol. 144, p. 104 563, 2020.
[43]
L.­x. Liu, H. Huang, Y.­f. Guo and F.­c. Chen, ‘Rdenstream, a clustering al­
gorithm over an evolving data stream,’ in 2009 international conference on
information engineering and computer science, IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–4.
[44]
T. Finch, ‘Incremental calculation of weighted mean and variance,’ University
of Cambridge, vol. 4, no. 11­5, pp. 41–42, 2009.
[45]
C. E. Shannon, ‘A mathematical theory of communication,’ The Bell system
technical journal, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[46]
J. Kreer, ‘A question of terminology,’ IRE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 208–208, 1957.
[47]
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, ‘On information and sufficiency,’ The annals of
mathematical statistics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
[48]
R. Steuer, J. Kurths, C. O. Daub, J. Weise and J. Selbig, ‘The mutual inform­
ation: Detecting and evaluating dependencies between variables,’ Bioinform­
atics, vol. 18, no. suppl_2, S231–S240, 2002.
[49]
A. F. McDaid, D. Greene and N. Hurley, ‘Normalized mutual information to
evaluate overlapping community finding algorithms,’ arXiv preprint arXiv:1110.2515,
2011.
46
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[50]
W. M. Rand, ‘Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods,’ Journal
of the American Statistical association, vol. 66, no. 336, pp. 846–850, 1971.
[51]
L. Hubert and P. Arabie, ‘Comparing partitions,’ Journal of classification, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 193–218, 1985.
[52]
T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest and C. Stein, Introduction to al­
gorithms. MIT press, 2009.
[53]
M. D. Atkinson, J.­R. Sack, N. Santoro and T. Strothotte, ‘Min­max heaps and
generalized priority queues,’ Communications of the ACM, vol. 29, no. 10,
pp. 996–1000, 1986.
[54]
S. M. Omohundro, Five balltree construction algorithms. International Com­
puter Science Institute Berkeley, 1989.
[55]
T. Liu, A. W. Moore, A. Gray and C. Cardie, ‘New algorithms for efficient high­
dimensional nonparametric classification.,’ Journal of Machine Learning Re­
search, vol. 7, no. 6, 2006.
[56]
N. Bhatia et al., ‘Survey of nearest neighbor techniques,’ arXiv preprint arXiv:1007.0085,
2010.
[57]
M. Hassani, A. Tarakji, L. Georgiev and T. Seidl, ‘Parallel implementation of a
density­based stream clustering algorithm over a gpu scheduling system,’ in
Pacific­Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Springer,
2014, pp. 441–453.
[58]
K. George, Zipf. human behavior and the principle of least effort, 1949.
[59]
F. Auerbach, ‘Das gesetz der bevölkerungskonzentration.,’ Petermanns Geo­
graphische Mitteilungen, vol. 59, pp. 74–76, 1913.
[60]
E. Pepe, P. Bajardi, L. Gauvin, F. Privitera, B. Lake, C. Cattuto and M. Tizzoni,
‘Covid­19 outbreak response, a dataset to assess mobility changes in italy
following national lockdown,’ Scientific data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[61]
S. Hu, C. Xiong, M. Yang, H. Younes, W. Luo and L. Zhang, ‘A big­data
driven approach to analyzing and modeling human mobility trend under non­
pharmaceutical interventions during covid­19 pandemic,’ Transportation Re­
search Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 124, p. 102 955, 2021.
[62]
C. Santana, F. Botta, H. Barbosa, F. Privitera, R. Menezes and R. Di Clem­
ente, Analysis of human mobility in the uk during the covid­19 pandemic,
2020.
[63]
S. P. Fraiberger, P. Astudillo, L. Candeago, A. Chunet, N. K. Jones, M. F.
Khan, B. Lepri, N. L. Gracia, L. Lucchini, E. Massaro et al., ‘Uncovering so­
cioeconomic gaps in mobility reduction during the covid­19 pandemic using
location data,’ arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15195, 2020.
[64]
L. Zhang, S. Ghader, M. L. Pack, C. Xiong, A. Darzi, M. Yang, Q. Sun, A.
Kabiri and S. Hu, ‘An interactive covid­19 mobility impact and social distancing
analysis platform,’ medRxiv, 2020.
[65]
U. Aslak, L. Alessandretti, J. Juul S., A. Sapienza, P. Edsberg Møllgaard and
S. Lehmann. (2020). ‘Mobility in denmark during covid­19 lockdown,’ [Online].
Available: https://covid19.compute.dtu.dk/ (visited on 28/06/2021).
[66]
A. Vespignani, M. Chinazzi, B. Klein, T. LaRock, S. McCabe, L. Torres, D.
Lazer, T. Eliassi­Rad, S. V. Scarpino, L. Friedland, M. Kos, F. Privitera, B.
Lake, M. U. Kraemer and J. S. Brownstein. (2020). ‘Mobility, commuting,
and contact patterns across the united states during the covid­19 outbreak,’
[Online]. Available: https : / / covid19 . gleamproject . org / mobility (visited on
28/06/2021).
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
47
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[67]
I. Memari. (2020). ‘Open source denstream implementation,’ [Online]. Avail­
able: https://github.com/issamemari/DenStream.
48
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A: Preprocess raw data into
user groups
1
import pyspark.sql as spark
2
import os
3
from pyspark import SparkContext , SparkConf
4
from pyspark.sql import functions as F
5
6
conf = SparkConf().setAppName('app').setMaster('local[5]')
7
sc = SparkContext(conf=conf)
8
ss = spark.SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()
9
input_path = r'/data/raw/2020021600'
10
cd = os.getcwd()
11
output_path = cd + '/data/2020021600'
12
os.mkdir(output_path)
13
df = ss.read.option('sep', "\t").csv(input_path)
14
df = df.toDF('Timestamp', 'user_id', 'Device_type', 'Lat', '
Long', 'Accuracy', 'Time_zone_offset', '
Classification_type', 'Transformation_type')
15
df = df.withColumn('user_group', F.substring('user_id',0,2))
16
df.write.partitionBy('user_group').mode('append').format("
parquet").save(output_path)
Listing 1: Python script to preprocess raw data and partition it into user groups using PySpark
commands
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
49
==PAGE:60==
Appendix B: Functions and scripts for
stop location detection
1
def find_stat_coords(self, data):
2
if self._verbose: progress = tqdm
3
else:
progress = utils.pass_func
4
5
# Infer multiuser mode
6
self.multiuser = True
7
if type(data) != list:
8
self._data = [data]
9
self.multiuser = False
10
progress = utils.pass_func
# no need to log progress in
(1) if there's just one user
11
else:
12
self._data = data
13
if len(data) == 1:
14
progress = utils.pass_func
15
16
if self._verbose:
17
print('Multiuser input:', self.multiuser)
18
19
# Assert the input data
20
self._data_assertions(self._data)
21
22
# (1) Sequential downsampling: group time-adjacent points
23
if self._verbose:
24
avg_reduction = []
25
print("Downsampling in time: keeping medians of
stationary events")
26
27
stop_events , event_maps = [], []
28
for u, coords_u in progress(enumerate(self._data), total=
len(self._data)):
29
stop_events_u , event_map_u = cpputils.
get_stationary_events(
30
coords_u , self._r1, self._min_size , self.
_min_staying_time ,
31
self._max_time_between , self._distance_metric
32
)
33
34
if self._verbose:
35
avg_reduction.append((1 - len(stop_events_u) / len(
coords_u)) * 100)
36
37
stop_events.append(stop_events_u)
50
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
38
event_maps.append(event_map_u)
39
40
if self._verbose:
41
print("
--> %sreduction was %.1f%%" % ("average " if
self.multiuser else "", np.mean(avg_reduction)))
42
return stop_events , event_maps
Listing 2: Separation of Infostop step 1 described in Algorithm 1 from the implementation of Aslak
and Alessandretti [34]
1
import numpy as np
2
3
def compute_intervals(labels , times, max_time_between=86400)
:
4
"""Compute stop and moves intervals from the list of
labels.
5
6
Parameters
7
----------
8
labels: 1d np.array of integers
9
times: 1d np.array of integers. `len(labels) == len(
times)`.
10
Returns
11
-------
12
intervals : array-like (shape=(N_intervals , 3))
13
Columns are "label", "start_time", "end_time"
14
15
"""
16
assert len(labels) == len(times), '`labels ` and `times`
must match in length'
17
18
# Input and output sequence
19
trajectory = np.hstack([labels.reshape(-1, 1), times.
reshape(-1,1)])
20
final_trajectory = []
21
22
# Init values
23
loc_prev , t_start = trajectory[0]
24
t_end = t_start
25
26
# Loop through trajectory
27
for loc, time in trajectory[1:]:
28
29
# if the location name has not changed update the
end of the interval
30
if (loc == loc_prev):
31
32
# if the location name has changed build the
interval
33
else:
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
51
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
34
final_trajectory.append([loc_prev , t_start ,
t_end])
35
36
# and reset values
37
t_start = time
38
t_end = time
39
40
# update current values
41
loc_prev = loc
42
43
final_trajectory.append([loc_prev , t_start ,
t_end])
44
45
return final_trajectory
Listing 3: Implementation of Algorithm 2 by Aslak and Alessandretti [36]
1
def hash_stop_ids(username , trajectory):
2
stop_ids = []
3
for i, rec in enumerate(trajectory):
4
string = str(username) + str(rec[0])
5
guid = uuid.uuid5(uuid.NAMESPACE_X500 , string)
6
stop_ids.append(str(guid))
7
8
return stop_ids
9
10
def add_grid_indices(entries , final_output , grid_offset ,
grid_spacing):
11
for rec in entries:
12
point = np.array([float(rec[4]), float(rec[5])])
13
index = np.round((point - grid_offset) /
grid_spacing)
14
#creating a single grid id for easier aggregation
15
index = str(index[0]) + "_" + str(index[1])
16
final_output.append(np.hstack((rec, index)))
17
18
return final_output
Listing 4: Implementation of Algorithms 5 and 6 to assign stop_id and grid_index to the stop events
1
@pandas_udf(schema , PandasUDFType.GROUPED_MAP)
2
def discoverStopEvents(pdf):
3
final_output = []
4
model = Infostop()
5
6
#Create the numpy array for Infostop
7
coords_ = pdf[[pdf.columns[1], pdf.columns[2],pdf.
columns[3]]].values
8
coords = np.asarray(coords_)
52
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
9
coords_sort = coords[coords[:,2].argsort()]
10
username = pdf[pdf.columns[0]].values[0]
11
12
#Infostop part 1 starts
13
stop_events , event_map = model.find_stat_coords(
coords_sort)
14
15
#add stop labels to raw data
16
stop_labels = np.column_stack((coords_sort , event_map
[0]))
17
18
if len(stop_events[0]) != 0:
19
#Take the timestamps and stop labels from the raw
data and run postprocess
20
#to compute the time intervals per stop event (start
time & finish time)
21
labels = np.asarray([row[3] for row in stop_labels])
22
times = np.asarray([row[2] for row in stop_labels])
23
24
final_trajectory = post.compute_intervals(labels,
times)
25
26
#remove events labeled -1 (trips)
27
final_trajectory = [rec for rec in final_trajectory
if rec[0] != -1]
28
29
#hash the user_id + stop_label
30
stop_ids = utils.hash_stop_ids(username ,
final_trajectory)
31
32
33
entries = np.column_stack((stop_ids ,
final_trajectory , stop_events[0]))
34
35
#add indices
36
grid_offset = np.array([24.62, -125.12])
37
grid_spacing = np.array([0.5, 0.5])
38
final_output_ = utils.add_grid_indices(entries ,
final_output , grid_offset , grid_spacing)
39
40
#add the user_id
41
user_id = np.full((len(final_output_), 1), username)
42
final_output = np.column_stack((user_id ,
final_output_))
43
44
out = pd.DataFrame(final_output , columns=["user_id","
stop_id","stop_label", "Start_time", "Finish_time",
"Med_Lat", "Med_Long", "Grid_index"])
45
46
return out
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
53
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
Listing 5: Implementation of the wrapper function of Algorithm 7
1
import os
2
from pyspark import SparkContext , SparkConf
3
from pyspark.sql import functions as F
4
import pyspark.sql as spark
5
from pyspark.sql.types import DoubleType
6
from pyspark.sql.types import StringType
7
from pyspark.sql.types import StructType , StructField
8
from pyspark.sql.functions import udf
9
from pyspark.sql.functions import pandas_udf , PandasUDFType
10
import time
11
12
# Set spark environments
13
os.environ['PYSPARK_PYTHON'] = '/opt/miniconda3/bin/python'
14
os.environ['PYSPARK_DRIVER_PYTHON'] = '/opt/miniconda3/bin/
python'
15
conf = SparkConf().setAppName('app').setMaster('local[10]')
16
sc = SparkContext(conf=conf)
17
ss = spark.SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()
18
19
schema = StructType([StructField("user_id", StringType(),
True), StructField("stop_id", StringType(),True),
StructField("stop_label", StringType(),True),
StructField("Start_time", StringType(),True),
StructField("Finish_time", StringType(),True),
StructField("Med_Lat", StringType(),True), StructField("
Med_Long", StringType(),True), StructField("Grid_index",
StringType(),True)])
20
21
tic0 = time.time()
22
cd = os.getcwd()
23
path = cd + '/data/2020021700/'
24
groups = os.listdir(path)
25
groups = [group for group in groups if (group != '_SUCCESS'
and group != '._SUCCESS.crc')]
26
noOfGroups = len(groups)
27
28
for index, user_group in enumerate(groups):
29
30
tic1 = time.time()
31
32
input_path = path + user_group
33
df = ss.read.parquet(input_path)
34
df = df.sort(F.col('user_id'),F.col('Timestamp'))
35
df = df.withColumn('Timestamp', df['Timestamp'].cast(
DoubleType()))
54
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
36
df = df.withColumn('Long', df['Long'].cast(DoubleType())
)
37
df = df.withColumn('Lat', df['Lat'].cast(DoubleType()))
38
39
df_ = df.select('user_id', 'Lat', 'Long', 'Timestamp')
40
df_ = df_.sort(F.col('Timestamp').asc())
41
42
#Run 1st step of Infostop to get stop events
43
events = df_.groupBy('user_id').apply(discoverStopEvents
)
44
45
output_path = cd + '/temp_f_day17'
46
events.write.mode('append').partitionBy('Grid_index').
save(output_path)
47
48
toc1 = time.time()
49
50
print('Done for group %s out of %s, in %s mins' %((index
+1), noOfGroups , (toc1-tic1)/60))
51
52
53
toc0 = time.time()
54
print('Overall time: %s' %((toc0-tic0)/60))
Listing 6: Python script to implement the stop location detection and call the function of Listing 5 in
one group at a time
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
55
==PAGE:66==
Appendix C: Implementation of the
MicroCluster and DenStream classes
1
from copy import copy
2
3
class MicroCluster:
4
def __init__(self, lambd, creation_time):
5
self.id = str(uuid.uuid4())
6
self.lambd = lambd
7
self.decay_factor = 2 ** (-lambd)
8
self.mean = 0
9
self.variance = 0
10
self.sum_of_weights = 0
11
self.creation_time = creation_time
12
self.last_adjust_time = creation_time
13
self.farthest_point = np.asarray([0,0])
14
self.n = 0
15
16
def adjust(self, time):
17
decayBy = self.decay_factor ** (time - self.
last_adjust_time)
18
#Update sum of weights
19
self.sum_of_weights = self.sum_of_weights * decayBy
20
21
self.last_adjust_time = time
22
23
return self
24
25
def insert_sample(self, sample , count, time):
26
self.adjust(time)
27
28
if self.sum_of_weights == 0:
29
self.farthest_point = sample
30
31
self.n += 1
32
33
# Update sum of weights
34
self.sum_of_weights += count
35
36
# Update mean
37
oldmean = self.mean
38
self.mean = oldmean + (sample - oldmean) / self.n
39
40
#Update radius
41
r = haversine([sample], [self.center()], unit='m')
42
if r > self.radius():
56
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
43
self.farthest_point = sample
44
45
return self.id
46
47
def radius(self):
48
return haversine([self.farthest_point], [self.center
()], unit='m')[0]
49
50
def center(self):
51
return self.mean
52
53
def weight(self):
54
return self.sum_of_weights
55
56
def __copy__(self):
57
new_micro_cluster = MicroCluster(self.lambd, self.
creation_time)
58
59
new_micro_cluster.id = self.id
60
new_micro_cluster.decay_factor = self.decay_factor
61
new_micro_cluster.CF1 = self.CF1
62
new_micro_cluster.mean = self.mean
63
new_micro_cluster.CF2 = self.CF2
64
new_micro_cluster.variance = self.variance
65
new_micro_cluster.sum_of_weights = self.
sum_of_weights
66
new_micro_cluster.last_adjust_time = self.
last_adjust_time
67
new_micro_cluster.farthest_point = self.
farthest_point
68
new_micro_cluster.n = self.n
69
70
return new_micro_cluster
Listing 7: Implementation of the MicroCluster class
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
57
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
1
import os
2
import numpy as np
3
import pickle
4
from fasthaversine import haversine
5
from infostop import SpatialInfomap
6
from math import ceil
7
8
class DenStream:
9
10
def __init__(self, eps, grid, lambd=0.01, beta=2, mu=1,
verbose=False):
11
clusterer_path = "Clusterers/" + grid + '/DenStream'
12
try:
13
with open(clusterer_path , 'rb') as p:
14
clust = pickle.load(p)
15
self.verbose = clust.verbose
16
self.lambd = clust.lambd
17
self.eps = clust.eps
18
self.beta = clust.beta
19
self.mu = clust.mu
20
self.t = clust.t
21
self.grid = clust.grid
22
self.isInitialized = True
23
24
self.p_micro_clusters = clust.
p_micro_clusters
25
self.o_micro_clusters = clust.
o_micro_clusters
26
27
self.tp = clust.tp
28
29
if self.verbose:
30
print('Loaded already existing clusterer
')
31
32
33
except (FileNotFoundError , EOFError):
34
self.verbose = verbose
35
self.lambd = lambd
36
self.eps = eps
37
self.beta = beta
38
self.mu = mu
39
self.t = 0
40
self.min_spatial_resolution =
_min_spatial_resolution
41
self.grid = grid
42
self.isInitialized = False
43
44
self.p_micro_clusters = []
58
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
45
self.o_micro_clusters = []
46
47
if lambd > 0:
48
self.tp = ceil((1 / lambd) * np.log((beta *
mu) / (beta * mu - 1)))
49
else:
50
self.tp = sys.maxsize
51
52
def save_clusterer(self):
53
self.isInitialized = True
54
try:
55
os.mkdir("Clusterers")
56
except FileExistsError:
57
pass
58
59
clusterer_path = "Clusterers/" + self.grid
60
61
try:
62
os.mkdir(clusterer_path)
63
except FileExistsError:
64
pass
65
66
with open(clusterer_path + '/DenStream', 'wb') as p:
67
pickle.dump(self, p)
68
69
70
def partial_fit(self, X, remove_outliers=False):
71
"""
72
Online learning.
73
Parameters
74
----------
75
X : {array-like, sparse matrix}, shape (n_samples ,
n_features)
76
Data to be added to the micro clusters and
labeled.
77
ids : {array-like}, shape (n_samples ,1)
78
The unique ids of the values of X.
79
NInit : integer , optional , default=200
80
The number of samples in X that will be used to
initialize
81
the micro clusters using DBSCAN
82
remove_outliers : boolean , optional , befault=False
83
Decides whether the micro clustering maitenance
will delete
84
outlier micro clusters with too little weight
85
Returns
86
-------
87
labels : ndarray , shape (n_samples , 1)
88
The clustering labels
89
"""
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
59
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
90
91
n_samples , _ = X.shape
92
93
labels_ = []
94
95
# If the micro clusters are empty then use DBSCAN to
initialize them
96
if self.isInitialized == False:
97
if self.verbose:
98
print('Initialization')
99
100
model = SpatialInfomap(r2=self.eps)
101
infolabels = model.fit_predict(X)
102
labeled_ = np.column_stack((X, infolabels))
103
104
cluster_dictionary = {}
105
for label in set(infolabels):
106
cluster_dictionary[label] = MicroCluster(
self.lambd, self.t)
107
108
for point in labeled_:
109
l = point[2]
110
coords = np.asarray((point[0], point[1]))
111
mc = cluster_dictionary[l]
112
labels_.append(mc.insert_sample(coords, 1,
self.t))
113
114
for _, mc in cluster_dictionary.items():
115
self.p_micro_clusters.append(mc)
116
117
if self.verbose:
118
print("Initializing done")
119
else:
120
#Fit the points using Infomap , creating
intermediate labels
121
model = SpatialInfomap(r2=self.eps)
122
infolabels = model.fit_predict(X)
123
labeled_ = np.column_stack((X, infolabels))
124
if self.verbose:
125
print("Infomap done, created %s labels" %(
len(set(infolabels))))
126
127
label_dict = {}
128
for point in labeled_:
129
try:
130
label_dict[int(point[2])].append(np.
asarray([point[0], point[1]]))
131
except KeyError:
132
label_dict[int(point[2])] = [np.asarray
([point[0], point[1]])]
60
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
133
134
#Fit the median of each intermediate label into
DenStream
135
labels_map = {}
136
for label in label_dict:
137
points = label_dict[label]
138
median = np.median(points, axis=0)
139
count = len(points)
140
median_label = self._partial_fit(median,
count, remove_outliers)
141
labels_map[label] = median_label
142
143
144
for point in labeled_:
145
labels_.append(labels_map[point[2]])
146
147
if self.verbose:
148
print("Fitting done")
149
150
labels__ = np.asarray(labels_)
151
152
# Save the micro clusters to the /Clusters folder
153
self.save_clusterer()
154
155
if self.verbose:
156
print("_______")
157
print("Partial fit of %s points" %n_samples)
158
print("_______")
159
print(f"Number of p_micro_clusters is {len(self.
p_micro_clusters)}")
160
print(f"Number of o_micro_clusters is {len(self.
o_micro_clusters)}")
161
print("_______")
162
163
return labels__
164
165
def get_nearest_micro_cluster(self, sample,
micro_clusters):
166
centers = [mc.center() for mc in micro_clusters]
167
if len(centers) > 0:
168
sample_array = [sample for i in range(len(
centers))]
169
distances = haversine(sample_array , centers ,
unit='m')
170
min_index = np.argmin(distances)
171
return min_index , micro_clusters[min_index]
172
else:
173
return -1, None
174
175
def _try_merge(self, sample , count, micro_cluster):
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
61
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
176
if micro_cluster is not None:
177
#If the distance of the new sample and the
center is smaller than the radius , insert
178
if haversine([sample], [micro_cluster.center()],
unit='m') <= micro_cluster.radius():
179
label = micro_cluster.insert_sample(sample,
count, self.t)
180
return True, label
181
182
#Otherwise , check if the new radius after
inserting is below the threshold
183
micro_cluster_copy = copy(micro_cluster)
184
micro_cluster_copy.insert_sample(sample, count,
self.t)
185
new_r = micro_cluster_copy.radius()
186
if new_r <= self.eps:
187
label = micro_cluster.insert_sample(sample,
count, self.t)
188
return True, label
189
return False, 'nan'
190
191
def _merging(self, sample , count):
192
# Try to merge the sample with its nearest
p_micro_cluster
193
index, nearest_p_micro_cluster = \
194
self.get_nearest_micro_cluster(sample, self.
p_micro_clusters)
195
success , label = self._try_merge(sample, count,
nearest_p_micro_cluster)
196
if not success:
197
# Try to merge the sample into its nearest
o_micro_cluster
198
index, nearest_o_micro_cluster = \
199
self.get_nearest_micro_cluster(sample, self.
o_micro_clusters)
200
success , label = self._try_merge(sample, count,
nearest_o_micro_cluster)
201
if success:
202
if nearest_o_micro_cluster.weight() > self.
beta * self.mu:
203
del self.o_micro_clusters[index]
204
self.p_micro_clusters.append(
nearest_o_micro_cluster)
205
else:
206
# Create new o_micro_cluster
207
micro_cluster = MicroCluster(self.lambd,
self.t)
208
label = micro_cluster.insert_sample(sample,
count, self.t)
209
self.o_micro_clusters.append(micro_cluster)
62
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
210
211
return label
212
213
def _decay_function(self, t):
214
return 2 ** ((-self.lambd) * (t))
215
216
def _partial_fit(self, sample , count, remove_outliers):
217
label = self._merging(sample, count)
218
219
if self.t % self.tp == 0:
220
#Decay the clusters
221
self.p_micro_clusters = [p_micro_cluster.adjust(
self.t) for p_micro_cluster
222
in self.p_micro_clusters
]
223
224
self.o_micro_clusters = [o_micro_cluster.adjust(
self.t) for o_micro_cluster
225
in self.o_micro_clusters
]
226
self.cluster_maintenance(remove_outliers)
227
228
self.t += 1
229
return label
230
231
def cluster_maintenance(self, remove_outliers):
232
new_outliers = [p_micro_cluster for p_micro_cluster
233
in self.p_micro_clusters if
234
p_micro_cluster.weight() < self.beta
* self.mu]
235
236
self.o_micro_clusters.extend(new_outliers)
237
238
self.p_micro_clusters = [p_micro_cluster for
p_micro_cluster
239
in self.p_micro_clusters
if
240
p_micro_cluster.weight()
>= self.beta * self
.mu]
241
if remove_outliers:
242
Limits = [((self._decay_function(self.t
243
- o_micro_cluster.creation_time
244
+ self.tp) - 1) / (self._decay_function(
self.tp) - 1))
245
for o_micro_cluster in self.
o_micro_clusters]
246
self.o_micro_clusters = [o_micro_cluster for Li,
o_micro_cluster in
247
zip(Limits, self.
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
63
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
o_micro_clusters)
if
248
o_micro_cluster.weight
() >= Li]
Listing 8: Implementation of the DenStream class. Initial implementation upon which we developed
with this project can be found in [67]
64
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:75==
Appendix D: Functions and scripts for
stop location clustering
1
import pandas as pd
2
from DenStream import DenStream
3
schema = StructType([StructField("user_id", StringType(),
True),
4
StructField("stop_id", StringType(),True),
5
StructField("Start_time", StringType(),True),
6
StructField("Finish_time", StringType(),True),
7
StructField("Med_Lat", StringType(),True),
8
StructField("Med_Long", StringType(),True),
9
StructField("user_group", StringType(),True),
10
StructField("Grid_index", StringType(),True),
11
StructField("destination_id", StringType(),True)
])
12
@pandas_udf(schema , PandasUDFType.GROUPED_MAP)
13
def runDenStream(pdf):
14
grid_ = pdf['Grid_index'].values[0]
15
16
pdf = pdf.astype({'Med_Lat': 'float'})
17
pdf = pdf.astype({'Med_Long': 'float'})
18
pdf = pdf.astype({'stop_id': 'str'})
19
20
coords_ = pdf[['Med_Lat','Med_Long']]
21
ids = pdf['stop_id']
22
23
coords = np.asarray(coords_)
24
25
clusterer = DenStream(30, grid=grid_, lambd=0.001,
verbose=False)
26
labels = clusterer.partial_fit(coords)
27
28
l = np.column_stack((ids, labels))
29
dest_ = pd.DataFrame(l, columns=['stop_id', '
destination_id'])
30
31
pdf = pdf.astype({'Med_Lat': 'str'})
32
pdf = pdf.astype({'Med_Long': 'str'})
33
pdf = pdf.astype({'stop_id': 'str'})
34
35
result = pd.merge(pdf, dest_, on=['stop_id'])
36
result = result.drop(columns=['stop_label'])
37
38
return result
Listing 9: Implementation of the wrapper function of Algorithm 10
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
65
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
1
import pyspark as spark
2
import os
3
from pyspark import SparkContext , SparkConf
4
import pyspark.sql as spark
5
from pyspark.sql.types import DoubleType
6
from pyspark.sql.types import StringType
7
from pyspark.sql.types import StructType , StructField
8
from pyspark.sql.functions import udf,col,when,count
9
from pyspark.sql.functions import pandas_udf , PandasUDFType
10
from pyspark.sql.functions import lit
11
from pyspark.sql import DataFrame
12
13
# Set spark environments
14
os.environ['PYSPARK_PYTHON'] = '/opt/miniconda3/bin/python'
15
os.environ['PYSPARK_DRIVER_PYTHON'] = '/opt/miniconda3/bin/
python'
16
conf = SparkConf().setAppName('app').setMaster('local[10]')
17
sc = SparkContext(conf=conf)
18
ss = spark.SparkSession.builder.getOrCreate()
19
20
cd = os.getcwd()
21
22
path = cd + '/temp_f_day17'
23
df = ss.read.parquet(path)
24
25
trajectory = df.groupBy('Grid_index').apply(runDenStream)
26
output_path = cd + '/Trajectories_100/2020021700'
27
trajectory.write.partitionBy('user_group').mode('append').
format("parquet").save(output_path)
Listing 10: Python script to implement the stop location clustering and call the function of Listing 9 in
one grid cell at a time
66
Scalable stop­location detection in large­scale trajectory data streams
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
