==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Visual Place Recognition
Leveraging GPS in Visual Place Recognition with
Deep Learning
Alexander Bøgely Holstrup (s164566)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis we tackle the problem of visual place recognition; The task of matching
an image of a place, with other images of the same place. Currently, the definition
of the ”same place” is when two images are taken within 25 meters of each other,
yet this definition has not been challenged until now. Furthermore, modern place
recognition datasets contain vast amounts of geographical information, but it mostly
goes unused.
This thesis contributes with a new take on place recognition. Through our work
we try to actively utilize the geographical information available, to learn a more
fine-grained representation of images, such that latent distances better represent ge-
ographical distances. To achieve this goal we contribute several novel loss functions
that take geographical information into account. Two of which apply the geographical
distance between images, while the other estimates a field-of-view overlap. We experi-
ment with using our loss functions to train a place recognition model in an end-to-end
manner, and as a post-processing whitening step. Additionally, we contribute with
a technique for mining images during training, that relies on geographical distances
rather than descriptor distances, as is the case with current state-of-the-art methods.
Through extensive experimentation, we show that our loss functions lead to de-
creased performance when used to train models in an end-to-end manner, however
when used solely to train a whitening layer we reach existing state-of-the-art perfor-
mance. In order to assess how well our methods correlate geographical distances with
latent distances we implement several correlation metrics. Through those metrics we
present results showing that our models do not lead to an increase in correlation. We
find that the low correlation is due to the diﬀiculty in accurately estimating fields-of-
view. Lastly, we analyze our results by giving concrete qualitative examples that offer
hints as to why we do not break state-of-the-art or successfully create a correlation
between latent distances and geographical distances. We show how semantic cues
play an important role in establishing a correlation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Engineering (Computer Science and En-
gineering).
This work would not have been possible without mentoring, guidance and insight-
ful discussions with Frederik Warburg. I would also like to thank Søren Hauberg for
supervising this project, and guiding me and Frederik through this research.
Lastly, it wouldn’t have been possible without the love and support of my family.
Alexander Bøgely Holstrup (s164566)
Kongens Lyngby, July 16, 2021
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Visual Place Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Loss Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
GPS in Place Recognition
9
3.1
Field-of-View Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Proposed Loss Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Whitening Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Experiments
15
4.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Training Procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results & Discussion
21
5.1
GPS Loss Functions - End to end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
GPS Loss Functions - Whitening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Intra-class Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Qualitative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
Acronyms
43
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
Appendix
45
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Visual Place Recognition is a computer vision task with the goal of recognizing images
from the same location. The convention is to let two images be from the same location,
if they are taken within 25 meters of each other. Place recognition is particularly
important when designing autonomous robots, because robot navigation often relies
on Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). A critical component of SLAM
is loop closure detection i.e. knowing when an agent has returned to a previously
visited location. For robots relying on camera sensors, visual place recognition can
be a useful component in GPS-denied environments for identifying when the robot
has returned to a previously visited location. Examples of such environments could
be indoors or in urban canyons.
However, despite receiving significant interest in the research community, visual
place recognition remains a diﬀicult problem to solve. Specifically, making a model
robust against appearance changes such as changes in viewpoint, season and time of
day can be particularly challenging.
Query
Positive
Figure 1.1: Three examples of query images, with a corresponding image taken
within 25 meters of the query image. We denote such images as posi-
tives.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Fortunately, the increased attention in the research community has fuelled the
interest for creating new place recognition datasets. Just in the last few years, re-
searchers have published numerous datasets with millions of images[42][25][40]. Some
of which include detailed information on coordinates and viewpoint, yet there has been
little research into how this information could be used during training. Most state-
of-the-art research use methods that are general to image retrieval, which does not
include place recognition-specific information like viewpoint and coordinates. Since
the visual place recognition task is so closely tied to geographical locations, it seems a
missed opportunity not to use geographical information actively when training mod-
els.
This thesis contributes to place recognition research by examining how geograph-
ical information can be used more actively when training place recognition models.
We present three new loss functions that each take advantage of the geographical
information available. Two that compute the exact distance between where images
were taken, whereas the last uses the visual overlap between images. Common for all
losses is the goal of learning a linear relationship between intra-class samples, such
that latent distances better represent geographical distances. In addition to contribut-
ing three loss functions, we introduce a new approach to descriptor whitening, where
we try to enforce intra-class differences when whitening.
To sum up our strides within place recognition research, this thesis will attempt
to answer the two following questions
1. How can geographical information be used more actively in place recognition?
2. How does using geographical information in place recognition impact perfor-
mance?
To the best of our knowledge this is one the first times these questions have been
examined in place recognition research. An example of a previous work is IM2GPS[12],
which examined how to learn GPS coordinates directly from images. Another recent
work[18]1 examined how to use an image similarity measure based on geographical
information in place recognition.
This thesis is structured as follows; In Chapter 2 we present both past and contem-
porary research into the place recognition task. In Chapter 3 we present our approach
to using geographical information to better model the intra-class differences in place
recognition. In Chapter 4 we explain our experimental setup used for producing the
results. In Chapter 5 we document our findings through extensive experiments, and
discuss the results. In Chapter 6 we conclude on our findings, and propose how the
work presented in this thesis could be used for future research.
1Pre-print article published 03/21
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Motivation
3
1.1
Motivation
The contributions of this thesis are motivated by improving state-of-the-art in the Vi-
sual Place Localization task. The visual place localization task, attempts to estimate
centimeter-accurate 6 degrees-of-freedom (6-DoF) camera pose from which the image
was taken. Solving such a task could be useful in a variety of contexts. One example
could be Google Maps’ Visual Positioning System, which uses localization to guide
users to their desired location with augmented reality2.
Visual place localization is related to place recognition because many modern
approaches to place localization rely on place recognition. Methods such as the ones
presented by Sarlin et al.[31][32] rely on place recognition to retrieve candidate images
prior to matching candidate images against the query images.
. . . 
1: Place Recognition
2: Spatial Veriﬁcation
Visual Place Localization
6-DoF Pose 
Estimation
2: Match Database Images
2:  Database Matching
Figure 1.2: Simplified overview of how the visual place localization task can be
solved.
First a place recognition model identifies a set of candidate
images, it believes to be from the same place. Afterwards, a spatial
verification step helps inform a 6-DoF pose estimation.
The purpose of the matching step is to filter out wrong matches, before trying to
estimate the pose. Often this matching is based on comparing the descriptors and
keypoints for the query image with the database images. For the matching step to
work well it is vital that candidate images retrieved by the place recognition step have
a visual overlap with the query image. Since researchers working with place recogni-
tion currently define the ”same place” as images within 25 meters of each other, there
2https://ai.googleblog.com/2019/02/using-global-localization-to-improve.html
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
is no guarantee of visual overlap. Thus our research is motivated by using geographi-
cal information during training, such that a place recognition model retrieves images
with high visual overlap. We expect that higher visual overlap between query and
database image will consequently lead to more accurate 6-DoF pose estimations, since
visual place localization models are highly dependent on matching visual keypoints
between images.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
In this section we will provide an overview of the research related to this thesis. We
will start by introducing traditional methods for approaching place recognition, and
explain the progress made since.
Visual place recognition in modern research is typically cast as an image retrieval
problem. In an image retrieval problem, models are trained to find database images
visually similar to a query image. In visual place recognition, database images taken
within a given distance from a query image, are considered positives. The rest are
considered negatives. This concept of defining image similarity by their geographical
distance makes visual place recognition slightly different from other image retrieval
problems, as this definition is less closely tied to a similarity in appearance [44]. Two
pictures from the same place can be visually dissimilar, while pictures from different
locations can be visually similar.
2.1
Visual Place Recognition
Handcrafted Methods
Traditionally, place recognition used an aggregation of local hand-crafted represen-
tations like GIST [24], Fisher vectors [17], bag of words and VLAD [16]. The under-
lying local representations are typically computed using a locally invariant descriptor
like SIFT [20] or SURF [5]. These methods were particularly prevalent before the
breakthrough of deep learning in computer vision. Currently, CNN-based approaches
are widespread, as they outperform approaches based on hand-crafted features [14].
Off-the-shelf CNNs
The earliest approach using Convolutional Neural Networks, CNNs, in place recog-
nition was presented by Chen et al. in 2014 [7]. In this work, researchers used an
off-the-shelf version of the OverFeat network[34], which consists of five convolutional
stages and three fully connected stages. The network was originally trained on Ima-
geNet to perform image classification, but researches were able to adapt the network
to place recognition by using the feature vectors output at each layer of the network
as descriptors. This novel approach to place recognition significantly outperformed
all other state-of-the-art methods at the time. Like with many other computer vision
tasks, several other works using off-the-shelf CNNs followed, all achieving superior
performance to hand-crafted features [38][37][26]. A survey comparing CNN-based
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Related Work
descriptors to hand-crafted ones, concluded that particularly changes in illumination
make CNNs superior to hand-crafted features [14]. Specifically, hand-crafted features
are highly sensitive to changes in illumination, while CNNs are more robust.
Current Techniques
Upon discovery of the high-performance of CNNs in place recognition, researches
started fine-tuning CNNs on place recognition datasets, as opposed to using them out-
of-the-box from other tasks. Some of the first researchers to do this used the first four
convolutional layers of AlexNet, and appended it with a fully connected layer[9][19].
Their instance of AlexNet had been pre-trained on ImageNet, while the fully con-
nected layer was trained on benchmark datasets like Kitti and Nordland[8][36]. Using
this technique, researchers were able to outperform other state-of-the-art techniques,
due to their model’s robustness to viewpoint and weather changes.
Since the introduction of fine-tuning in place recognition, there has been a focus
on designing layers specifically for place recognition. One modern, and widely used
pooling layer for place recognition, is NetVLAD[3]. This layer attempts to imitate
the original VLAD descriptor in a pooling layer with learnable parameters.
One
important difference between VLAD and NetVLAD is that VLAD stores the sum
of residuals between a descriptor and its corresponding centroid, whereas NetVLAD
computes a soft-assignment of residuals from each descriptor to all cluster centroids.
Another widely used pooling layer for place recognition is the generalized-mean
pooling layer (GeM)[29]. As the name suggests, GeM computes the generalized mean,
which is parameterized by an exponent p. Since GeM is differentiable, p can be set
manually, or learnt during training. Furthermore, GeM is a generalization of global
max pooling (MAC[4][39]), and average pooling (SPoC)[30], such that it becomes max
pooling when p →∞, and average pooling when p = 1. Using GeM, the authors were
able to present new state-of-the-art on several benchmark datasets, in some cases
outperforming NetVLAD by upwards of 20%.
Finally, a common technique used in current place recognition models is to per-
form dimensionality reduction and whitening on the image descriptors. Researchers
Jégou and Chum[16][15] were able to show that performing PCA whitening can pos-
itively impact place recognition performance. In the original papers, NetVLAD and
GeM layers both achieve their highest performance by adding whitening as a post-
processing step. In the case of GeM, the authors propose learning a whitening trans-
formation through the labelled data as a post-processing step, while other works learn
the whitening transformation during training of the place recognition network[10].
Other Approaches
Another related technique, named IM2GPS[12], takes a different approach to place
recognition entirely. In this work researches try to estimate GPS coordinates from
images, by leveraging hand-crafted features such as color histograms, lines in images
and GIST descriptors. Using these features, they found the 120 closest geotagged
images in feature-space, and constructed probability map over the earth. Their results
show that their approach performs 30 times better than random chance. A more
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Loss Functions
7
recent work[41], uses deep learning to tackle IM2GPS but still with low accuracy. For
instance, their results show they are within 25km of the correct GPS-coordinates in
less than 20% of the examples.
Contrastive 
Generalised Contrastive 
Triplet
Figure 2.1: Intuitive comparison of loss functions used in place recognition. Con-
trastive loss pulls positives and pushes negatives beyond a margin. Gen-
eralized Contrastive loss generates both a push and a pull depending
on the continuous similarity to the query point.
Triplet loss pushes
negatives beyond a margin, that is based on the distance to a positive
point.
2.2
Loss Functions
Loss functions for fine-tuning in visual place recognition typically focus on learning
from both inter-class and intra-class samples, such that proximity in latent space
reflects image similarity.
Arguably, the two most common loss functions in place
recognition are Contrastive loss and Triplet loss, with several recent papers exploring
the use of both [29][42][3]. While there has been focus on designing better loss func-
tions in the research community in recent years, there has been little performance
gain. A recent survey found newer state-of-the-art loss functions only marginally bet-
ter than Contrastive loss and Triplet loss[22].
Contrastive loss[11] is a siamese loss, that takes pairs of points and computes the
following loss
LContrastive(xi, xj) = Y · D(xi, xj) + (1 −Y ) · max(0, m −D(xi, xj))2
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Related Work
where the label Y = 1 indicates the two points corresponding to the same class,
D(xi, xj) is a distance measure between xi and xj, and m is a margin. The intuition
behind contrastive loss is, to think of the first term as a stretched spring pulling
inwards and the second term as a compressed spring pushing outwards. The hyper-
parameter m indicates when the pushing should stop i.e. when the label Y = 0 and
D(xi, xj) > m the loss would be LContrastive = 0.
Whether the first or the second term is contributing to the loss depends on Y ,
which is a binary variable indicating whether two points belong to the same class.
Specifically, in place recognition the label indicates whether two points are from the
same location. However, it does not have to be a binary variable. In a recent work
by Leyva-Vallina et al.[18] researchers presented a Generalized Contrastive Loss, that
redefines the the standard contrastive loss to
LGeneralized(xi, xj) = ψi,jD(xi, xj) + (1 −ψi,j) · max(0, m −D(xi, xj))2
where ψi,j is a continuous measure for the ground truth similarity between xi and
xj ranging from 0 (dissimilar) to 1 (similar). In principle, this measure could be
any similarity measure that ranges from 0 to 1. However, the authors present a 2D
Field-of-view similarity measure, which estimates the overlap in field-of-view between
pairs of images by taking their coordinates and angles into consideration.
Another widely used loss function in place recognition is Triplet loss[33], which
operates on triplets of points as opposed to pairs of points. Formally, given a triplet
of points (xq, xp, xn) we compute the triplet loss as:
LT riplet(xq, xp, xn) = max(0, D(xq, xp) −D(xq, xn) + m)
where (xq, xp, xn) denote a query point, a positive point and a negative point respec-
tively. Training with triplet loss therefore attempts to satisfy the constraint that
D(xq, xp) + m < D(xq, xn).
Choosing the right loss function is no simple task, as there are advantages and
drawback to each. Researches usually choose hard-negative mining when using Con-
trastive loss, as this leads to the fastest convergence, whereas with triplet loss it is less
obvious which mining technique is preferred[43]. Hard-negative mining often leads to
a collapsed model when used with triplet loss, so semi-hard negative mining is often
preferred[33]. However, semi-hard negative mining leaves a narrow band to find neg-
atives in, so it often stops making progress early. Generalized contrastive loss uses
a naive mining technique, that does not require computing latent distances, which
makes it far less computationally expensive. The authors present state-of-the-art re-
sults with generalized contrastive loss and naïve mining, but these results have not
been reproduced yet[18].
In addition, triplet loss has the advantage of not requiring a predefined threshold
to distinguish between similar and dissimilar images, like contrastive loss does. This
makes it easier to handle intra-class variance with triplet loss, since it is able to adapt
different amounts of intra-class variance.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
GPS in Place
Recognition
The idea of using geographical information in place recognition seems intuitive, given
that place recognition is the task of identifying images from the same geographical
location. Yet it remains a largely unexplored topic within place recognition research.
The recently published dataset, Mapillary Street-Level Sequences (MSLS), contains
1.68 million images, each labelled with coordinates and compass angles. Through
experiments, we want to explore how all this information can be used in a meaningful
way.
In this section we will therefore introduce three areas where geographical infor-
mation could be used in place recognition to push state-of-the-art place performance.
Firstly, we present how GPS coordinates and angles could be used to compute a more
fine-grained similarity measure between images, as opposed to the binary similarity
measure widely adopted in place recognition.
In addition, we present three rank-
ing losses that take advantage of geographical information. Lastly, we present how
geographical information can be used in a post-processing whitening layer.
3.1
Field-of-View Similarity
Current place recognition techniques simply define image similarity as a binary mea-
sure; Either two images are similar or they are not. Typically two images are consid-
ered similar if they are within 25 meters from each other. However, two images can
be visually very dissimilar if they are close to 25 meters away or facing in opposite
directions. In this thesis, we therefore want to challenge that definition, by providing
a more continuous similarity measure.
One approach could be to compute field-of-view similarities.
The field-of-view
(FOV) refers to the area observable in an image.
A similarity measure based on
FOVs could therefore provide a method of quantifying the visual overlap between two
images. Unfortunately, no place recognition datasets provide the FOV information
for images. Inspired by Leyva-Vallina[18] we will instead estimate the FOV for each
image.
==PAGE:18==
10
3 GPS in Place Recognition
To compute our FOVs we assume the FOV is a 2D circle sector parameterized by
a set of UTM coordinates (UTME, UTMN), a compass angle CA, an angle θ and
a radius. The UTM coordinates and compass angle are given in our dataset, while
the angle and radius are hyperparameters. The radius signifies how far away into the
image we can see, and the angle θ signifies how wide an angle the given camera offers.
It should be noted that the dataset used in this thesis is crowdsourced, so the images
were taken with many different cameras. Thus, there is not a single set of true values
for r and θ.
N
E
CA
θ
(UTME, UTMN)
Figure 3.1: We denote the green circle sector area the FOV. The center of the circle
sector is placed on the coordinate (UTME, UTMN), and it spans an
angle of θ.
In Figure 3.1 we provide an overview of the circle sector that estimates a FOV.
The circle sector is centered in the coordinate (UTME, UTMN), and the sector spans
the angle from [CA −θ
2, CA + θ
2]. To mimic the FOV estimates by Leyva-Vallina [18]
we choose the same θ and r as in their paper, which is θ = 90° and r = 50m.
In this thesis we will experiment with two different distance measures for FOVs,
both ranging between 0 and 1. The first one is based on the Intersection-over-Union
(IoU). For an intersection area AInt and a FOV area AF OV , we compute the DIoU as
DIoU = 1 −
AInt
2AF OV −AInt
The other similarity measure we will use is the Overlap coeﬀicient, also known as
the Szymkiewicz–Simpson coeﬀicient. For an intersection area AInt and a FOV area
AF OV , we compute the overlap coeﬀicient as
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Proposed Loss Functions
11
DOverlap = 1 −AInt
AF OV
Figure 3.2: Example of a query image with two corresponding positives. The posi-
tives have overlap coeﬀicients of 0,64 (middle image) and 0,36 (bottom
image).
3.2
Proposed Loss Functions
In this section we will describe three new loss functions for the place recognition
task, that unlike state-of-the-art methods, all take advantage of the geographical
information available. Common for all of them, is the goal of learning intra-class
similarities better, by taking advantage of geographical information.
3.2.1
Tobit Loss
A Tobit model generally refers to a linear regression model that can estimate rela-
tionships when the dependent variable is censored[2]. This entails that while we can
observe the full range of a variable, the dependent variable can only be observed in
==PAGE:20==
12
3 GPS in Place Recognition
a restricted range. This type of model is often used when studying survival analysis.
For example, researchers may run a study for five years, where they gather data on
how long patients live for. However, certain patients will outlive the study, and thus
their survival time will be capped to five years maximally. This is known as right-
censoring (or censoring from above), because the maximum number of years we can
observe is five. The Tobit model in this scenario allows researchers to still estimate a
linear relationship despite the data being censored.
Why does this matter for place recognition? The aim of this thesis is to train a
place recognition model, that preferentially returns the closest images in geographical
space. One way this could possibly be done, is to train the model to learn a local
linear relationship between geographical distances and latent distances. However, this
linear relationship should only be learnt locally, as learning global distances would be
a task of similar diﬀiculty as IM2GPS. The goal of designing a loss function from the
Tobit model is therefore to learn a local linear relationship, while censoring global
ones. Through our work we try to learn a linear relationship of images up to 25
meters away, while censoring images further away than 25 meters.
Formally, we define the Tobit loss as
Ltobit = −
∑
y<yL
log
( 1
σ φ
(y −ˆyα
σ
))
−
∑
yj≥yL
log
(
Φ
(yL −ˆyα
σ
))
where φ is the standard normal probability density function, Φ is the standard nor-
mal cumulative distribution function. Given two images, we let y be the geographical
distance between the images, ˆy be the euclidean distance between the latent repre-
sentation of the images and yL be the local threshold. In our experiments, we model
the local threshold yL = 25, so it fits with the standard positive / negative definition
in place recognition.
Inspecting the first term of the Tobit loss, it is immediately clear there is a problem
with the scales. Since y represents geographical distances, we expect y’s range to be
y ∈[0, 25], while ˆy represents latent distances in an L2 normalized space, so ˆy ∈[0, 2].
Naïvely subtracting the two would therefore make little sense. Therefore we scale
our latent distances to fit better with geographical distances, using a scaling factor
α. To estimate an appropriate scaling factor, we use the fact that we use a 25 meter
margin to distinguish between positives and negatives. Additionally, contrastive loss
uses a margin, m = 0.7, as a constraint for when negatives contribute to the loss. We
therefore introduce a scaling factor, α, defined as:
α = mGP S
mlat
= 25
0.7 ≃35
In this way when the latent distance, y = 25, we have that 25 −ˆyα = 0 when
ˆy = 0.7.
We present a visual representation of Tobit loss in Figure 3.3. Since we define
positives to be within 25 meters, we see a horizontal split in the visualization, when
the geographical distance is 25. In the upper section of the visualization, we see how
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Proposed Loss Functions
13
Tobit loss produces a loss that depends on the geographical distance while in the
lower section we see how the loss simply decreases as the latent distance increases.
3.2.2
MSE Loss
While Tobit regression might not have been used in deep learning before, other linear
estimators have. Measures like Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean-Squared-Error
(MSE) have been used for tasks like pose estimation and facial landmark detection
[6][21]. The Tobit likelihood and MSE might seem like different approaches to re-
gression, but it can be proven that maximizing the Tobit log likelihood is equivalent
to minimizing the mean-squared error, if only the images from the same place are
considered1.
We use this insight to define another loss function, that uses MSE for regression.
Formally, we define it as
LMSE = Y (y −ˆyα))2 + (1 −Y )max(0, m −ˆyα))2
where Y is a binary variable with Y = 1 indicating a positive sample, and m is
the positive/negative margin (25 meters). Similarly to before, we let y be the true
geographical distance and ˆy be the euclidean distance between the descriptors. As
with Tobit loss, we use a parameter α to appropriately scale latent distances to fit
better with geographical distance. We set α = 35 with the same reasoning as with
Tobit loss. Intuitively, the objective of this loss is therefore to accurately estimate
geographical distances with the latent descriptors from our model.
We present a visual representation of MSE loss in Figure 3.3.
The MSE loss
visualization closely resembles the Tobit loss visualization, but with higher loss values.
In the upper section, when the geographical distance is less than 25 meters, they look
almost identical, while the lower section of MSE loss produces a relatively lower loss
compared to Tobit loss.
3.2.3
FOV MSE Loss
While the two prior loss functions only took advantage of the GPS-coordinates, this
loss functions aims to take advantage of GPS-coordinates and angle information. All
images in the MSLS dataset contains information on the compass angle of the images.
The compass angle denotes the angle between north and the direction in which the
image was taken. For example, a compass angle of 0 means the image was taken
facing north, a compass angle of 90 means the image was taken facing east and so
on. The researchers behind Generalized Contrastive Loss proposed using the compass
angle to reconstruct a FOV of each image, as seen in Figure 3.2. They used this to
compute a continuous similarity measure based on the overlaps in FOV, as opposed
to the binary similarity measure used by standard contrastive loss.
1We include the proof of this in the appendix
==PAGE:22==
14
3 GPS in Place Recognition
We take the use of FOV overlap one step further, by defining a loss that attempts
to learn a linear relationship between FOV similarity and latent distances. Formally
we define the FOV MSE Loss as
LIoU = Y (y −ˆy))2 + (1 −Y )max(0, m −ˆy))2
where Y is a binary variable with Y = 1 indicating a positive sample, and m is a
margin. This loss of course resembles MSE loss quite a lot, with the only difference
being the scaling parameter α.
Figure 3.3: Visualization of how loss functions depend on latent distance and ge-
ographical distance. All losses consider points closer than 25 meters,
positives. Standard contrastive loss produces high loss for close nega-
tives and far-away positives. Tobit loss and MSE Loss act similarly;
enforce a linear relationship for positives, and produces a high loss for
close negatives.
3.3
Whitening Layer
To achieve the best possible results for our place recognition framework, we use a
post-processing whitening step. Many previous works have documented the perfor-
mance benefits of using whitened descriptors as opposed to non-whitened ones. Par-
ticularly the use of PCA whitening has been studied extensively. However, we take
the approach proposed by Radenovic[29], of learning the whitening step with a fully
connected (FC) layer.
We therefore append a FC layer to our place recognition model, which we train
after the place recognition model has converged.
The whitening layer is trained
on the same training data and training procedure, as the place recognition model,
but we vary the loss function used to train the whitening layer. The goal is to use
the whitening layer to improve the descriptors from the base network. Specifically,
making the descriptors better at reflecting geographical distances between intra-class
samples.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments
In this chapter we will explain our experimental setup, and the methods used to get
the results presented in Chapter 5. We introduce the dataset, the network architecture
and mining procedures.
4.1
Dataset
Winter
Spring
Summer
Fall
Figure 4.1: Sample images taken from one of the cities (Tokyo) in the MSLS dataset,
with colorings representing the different seasons.
All experiments in this thesis work was conducted using the Mapillary Street-Level
Sequences (MSLS) dataset[42]. The MSLS datasets aggregates over 1.6 million images
from 30 different cities, making it the largest dataset for place recognition currently
available. The dataset contains images from all seasons, times of day and various
types of areas (urban, suburban etc.), making it a very challenging dataset for place
recognition. Additionally, all images in the MSLS dataset are fully annotated with
UTM coordinates and compass angles, which we will actively use during training.
==PAGE:24==
16
4 Experiments
The Mapillary dataset also provides information about clusters of images, as is
the case with other modern place recognition datasets (e.g.
Oxford105k[28] and
Paris106k[27]). Two images are contained in the same cluster if they are within 30
meters of each other, and difference in their compass angle is less than 40 degrees.
Therefore, images from the same cluster can be visually similar, so clustering infor-
mation can used to achieve more variability if it is used during mining.
4.2
Network
ResNet50
GeM
L2
 Norm
Whitening
L2
 Norm
Input Image
Descriptors
Figure 4.2: The network used for all our experiments consists on three components;
A base architecture (ResNet50), a pooling layer (GeM) and a whiten-
ing layer. After the GeM pooling layer and the whitening layer, the
descriptors are normalized.
For all our experiments we use a siamese network with a Resnet50 backbone [13] and
a Generalized-Mean pooling layer. Specifically, given an image, x ∈R320×240×3, our
network maps x to a descriptor ˆf(x) ∈R2048. In this section we will describe the
pooling layer and the whitening layer in more detail.
4.2.1
Generalized Mean
For all experiments we will use a the Generalized-Mean (GeM) pooling layer intro-
duced by Radenovic et al.
in 2018[29].
They propose a pooling layer, that is a
generalization of the standard average pooling and max pooling. Specifically, for a
set Xk of activations from the k ∈{1, .., K} feature maps, the generalized mean is
f =
(
1
|Xk|
∑
x∈Xk
xpk
) 1
pk
where pk can learnt or assigned manually.
pk = 1 makes GeM equal to average
pooling and pk →∞makes it max pooling. The dimensionality of f is equal to K,
the number of feature maps. In our experiments we use ResNet50 with GeM, giving
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Training Procedures
17
us an output dimension of 2048. We initialize pk = 3, and learn a new pk through
training.
4.2.2
Whitening & Normalization
We will experiment with the use of a whitening layer, as described in Section 3.3.
Thus, for some experiments we will append a whitening layer, to experiment with
different losses and output dimensionalities. After the descriptors have been passed
through the GeM pooling layer, we normalize them with L2 normalization. Addition-
ally, if a whitening layer is used, we also L2 normalize the final descriptors. Therefore,
the descriptors output by the network are always L2 normalized. We use L2 normal-
ization, because computing distances in latent space can be reduced to computing an
inner product of the descriptors, if the descriptors are L2 normalized. This makes
computing distances more eﬀicient.
In addition, L2 Normalization has also been
shown to yield better generalization performance[1].
4.3
Training Procedures
4.3.1
Query & Database
Since the Mapillary dataset is too large to fit in memory, we cannot use all image
at once during training. Instead we use a technique similar to Arandjelovic et al.
[29], where we randomly draw a subset of query and database images every iteration.
Specifically, in our experiments we draw 2000 query images and 20,000 database
images at random, which we use to mine the tuples used for training.
Once the
model has seen all 2000 tuples, we draw a new subset of query and database images,
and create new tuples from those.
4.3.2
Hard-Negative Mining
For the majority of our experiments, we used the hard-negative mining technique
adopted from [29]. We therefore construct tuples of 6 images, where there is one query
image, one positive and five negatives. While the positives are chosen at random,
the negatives are mined using hard-negative mining. Specifically, we choose the non-
matching images, whose descriptors are the most similar to the query descriptor. This
similarity is based on their L2 distances, which can be computed eﬀiciently using an
inner product.
The hard-negative mining is constrained to only using one negative per cluster,
using the clustering information from the MSLS dataset. Compared to hard-negative
mining without clustering information, this has been shown by Radenovic[29], to give
better results on other place recognition datasets, as it gives more variabilitiy in the
negatives chosen.
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Experiments
4.3.3
GPS Mining
While hard-negative mining is a widely used mining technique for the image retrieval
task, it is also computationally expensive. Before new tuples can be constructed, we
need to compute the descriptors for all query and database images.
The aim of GPS Mining is construct tuples based on their relative geographical
distances, by constructing tuples of 8 images, consisting of one query image, one pos-
itive, three geographically close points and three negatives. The three geographically
close points are chosen as the three closest images beyond 10 meters from the query
image. The three negatives are chosen randomly from the database.
This approach is largely adopted from Leyva-Vallina[18] who used a similar ap-
proach based on field-of-view overlaps. In their paper, they reach state-of-the-art per-
formance with a naïve mining technique, where three negatives are chosen randomly
in addition to three points with a field-of-view similarity of 0 < FOVSIM < 0.5.
4.4
Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate our results, we use the two evaluation metrics, top-n recall and mean
average precision (mAP), as these are standard evaluation metrics used in most visual
place recognition research. Top-n recall measures the proportion of query images,
where the place recognition model can return at least one image from the same place.
Thus, top-5 recall (denoted recall@5) measures the proportion of query images, with
at least one image from the correct place, among the 5 images retrieved. Additionally,
we evaluate using mAP, which is computed by calculating the average precision for
each query image, and computing the mean of the average precisions.
Unless otherwise specified, we define two images as taken from the same place, if
they are within 25 meters of each other.
4.4.1
Kendall’s Tau
For evaluating the intra-class correlation, we will use two correlation metrics.
In
this section we present one of those two metrics, Kendall’s Tau. Kendall’s Tau, τ,
is a metric commonly used to measure the ranking correlation between two sets of
data. The metric ranges from -1 to 1, where a score of 1 means both sets of data are
monotonically increasing or decreasing.
Kendall’s Tau is computed by finding the number of concordant and discordant
pairs. Given two pairs of data, (xi, yi) and (xj, yj), the pairs are concordant if xi −xj
and yi −yj both have the same sign e.g. if xi −xj > 0. then yi −yj > 0. A discordant
pair is a pair where xi −xj and yi −yj have different signs e.g. if xi −xj > 0. then
yi −yj < 0
==PAGE:27==
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
19
Once the number of concordant and discordant pairs are found, Kendall’s Tau can
be computed as:
τ = #Concordant −#Discordant
(n
2
)
Where
(n
2
)
is the number of ways to choose 2 elements from a set of n elements.
τ = 1, ρ = 1
τ = 0.87, ρ = 0.91
τ = 0.52, ρ = 0.80
τ = 0.2, ρ = 0.31
τ = 0.0, ρ = 0.27
τ = −0.43, ρ = −0.62
Figure 4.3: Examples of sets of intra-class samples and their correlation scores. We
plot the rank of positive images, against the DOverlap between the posi-
tive and the query image. In the bottom right corner we present an ex-
ample giving a perfect correlation score of 1. As seen in the top-middle
plot, a positive gradient will yield a positive ρ, but not necessarily a
positive τ.
4.4.2
Pearson Coeﬀicient
The second metric we will use for intra-class correlation is the Pearson coeﬀicient.
The Pearson coeﬀicient, ρ, measures the linear correlation between two sets of data.
Similarly to Kendall’s tau, the metric ranges from -1 to 1 where 1 represents a perfect
correlation, and -1 represents opposite correlation.
The Pearson coeﬀicient is calculated by finding the ratio between the covariance
of two sets of data, and the product of their standard deviations. Formally, given a
set of data {x1, x2, ..., xn} and {y1, y2, ..., yn}, we compute the Pearson coeﬀicient as:
ρ =
∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2√∑n
i=1(yi −¯y)2
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Experiments
In this thesis, we will let one set of data X be the rank of the intra-class samples,
and let the other set Y be the field-of-view distance metric, Doverlap. The Pearson
coeﬀicient should therefore be understood as the correlation between the rank of the
intra-class sample, and its FOV distance. We let the rank of an intra-class sample
be its ordering amongst the other retrieved positives, such that the closest positive
retrieved has rank 1, the second-closest has rank 2 etc.
In Figure 4.3 we provide the reader with some visual examples of Kendall’s Tau
and Pearson correlation scores, to give a more intuitive understanding of the correla-
tion metrics used in this thesis.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Results & Discussion
In this chapter we will present the results for our experiments using geographical
information in place recognition. We will first and foremost show how the various
approaches perform within the standard place recognition metrics. Later we will try
to understand those results better with some examples.
5.1
GPS Loss Functions - End to end
Loss
Mining Technique
mAP @ 1
mAP @ 5
Recall @ 1
Recall @ 5
Recall @ 10
Contrastive
Hard-Negative
0.448
0.312
0.448
0.578
0.632
Generalised Contrastive
Hard-Negative
0.402
0.261
0.402
0.513
0.561
Tobit Loss
Hard-Negative
0.321
0.220
0.321
0.459
0.511
MSE Loss
Hard-Negative
0.427
0.286
0.427
0.548
0.606
Contrastive
GPS-Mining
0.257
0.166
0.257
0.389
0.446
Generalised Contrastive
GPS-Mining
0.285
0.180
0.285
0.414
0.476
Tobit Loss
GPS-Mining
0.259
0.171
0.259
0.397
0.460
MSE Loss
GPS-Mining
0.335
0.213
0.335
0.459
0.512
Table 5.1: Results of training place recognition models in an end-to-end manner
varying loss functions, and mining techniques. The results clearly show
contrastive loss with hard-negative mining to be the superior model.
In Table 5.1 we present the results of end-to-end training with varying loss func-
tions and mining techniques. We keep all other parameters like base network, input
size and dataset constant.
5.1.1
Mining Technique Matters
From the results in Table 5.1 it is quite evident that hard-negative mining is superior
to our naïve GPS-Mining technique. All our results, regardless of the choice of loss
function, simply perform better with hard-negative mining. This is not surprising,
as hard-negative mining is a standard mining procedure used in most state-of-the-art
place recognition research, along with semi-hard negative mining [29][3]. Both of those
mining techniques rely on the descriptors to compute a set of appropriate negative
samples for training, while our GPS-mining selects some negatives by geographical
distance and others randomly. As pointed out by Wu et al. [43], sampling randomly
==PAGE:30==
22
5 Results & Discussion
likely obtains negatives a distance of
√
2 in latent space, which would not yield any
loss by any of the four loss functions we tested1.
An argument for why this result is surprising, is when we consider the recent
result by Leyva-Vallina [18].
In their paper, the authors achieve state-of-the-art
performance with generalized contrastive loss using a similar sampling technique to
our GPS-Mining, which uses FOV Similarity rather than geographical distance for
sampling.
Both our results and their results are achieved with the same dataset,
base model and pooling method, yet the results we report for generalized contrastive
loss does not surpass state-of-the-art methods. This discrepancy between our results,
and their results, could be due our use of geographical distance rather than field-
of-view similarity.
Another contributing factor could be, that in our experiments
we use the intersection-over-union to compute FOV similarities, as this is what the
authors claim to do in their paper. However, we subsequently discovered that their
FOV similarities are consistent with the overlap-coeﬀicient, and not intersection-over-
union2. This might seem like a subtle difference, but it means the estimated FOV
overlaps we used are significantly lower. In most cases the estimated FOV overlaps
are 10 −15% lower with IoU than with the overlap coeﬀicient. Since generalized
contrastive loss uses FOV similarities to estimate whether an image is a positive or
negative, underestimating FOV similarities means fewer positives examples.
5.1.2
Evaluation of new losses
The results for our new proposed loss functions, Tobit loss and MSE loss are both good
and bad. Tobit loss performed significantly worse than the other losses. Meanwhile,
MSE Loss achieved better results than generalized contrastive loss, but not quite as
good results as contrastive loss.
Interestingly, MSE loss performs better than contrastive loss with GPS-Mining,
despite performing worse with hard-negative mining. From our experiments, it is not
clear why this is the case. When we compare our result for contrastive loss with GPS
mining with a similar experiment by Leyva-Vallina[18] we see that our results are
similar. For Recall @ 5 and Recall @ 10 our results are within 0.1% of their results.
Our results from contrastive loss with GPS Mining therefore seem reasonable.
The question is therefore, why MSE loss performs relatively well despite the sub-
optimal mining technique. From our experiments it is clear that negatives produce
very little loss despite the choice of loss function, since the negatives mined with a
naïve mining strategy rarely are hard negatives. Our results would therefore seem
to indicate, that MSE loss handles this scenario better i.e. when most of the loss
comes from positives MSE loss is superior to contrastive loss. This could be due to
the fact, that contrastive loss simply pulls all positives closer, while our loss could
push positives away, if the latent distance does not accurately reflect the geographical
1One might say, choosing samples
√
2-away would be irrational
2See Appendix Section 6
==PAGE:31==
5.2 GPS Loss Functions - Whitening
23
distance. However, more experimentation would be needed to confirm or deny this
hypothesis.
Turning to Tobit loss the results indicate that its performance lacks compared to
the other losses tested. One possible explanation for why Tobit loss performs worse
than the other losses, could be due to a sub-optimal choice of parameters. Tobit loss
is parameterized by a value σ, which translates to the standard deviation used in the
normal distribution, and cumulative normal distribution in the Tobit likelihood.
Figure 5.1: Examples of the negative tobit log likelihood for different values of σ.
In the top plot we show the likelihood produced for a positive, while
in the bottom figure we show the likelihood produced by the negative
term. A lower σ yields a steeper curve. For reference we show the loss
curve for contrastive loss.
The choice of σ ultimately affects how much we penalize positives and negatives at
different distances. As seen in Figure 5.1, a low σ will penalize close negatives more,
while penalize negatives further away less than higher values of σ. Thus, choosing an
appropriate σ is not trivial.
5.2
GPS Loss Functions - Whitening
In Table 5.2 we present the results of training a whitening layer, while freezing the
base-model. We let the base model be the best performing model from our end-to-end
experiments, which is the base model trained with contrastive loss.
5.2.1
Dimensionality & Learnt Whitening
Comparing the results in Table 5.2 of varying descriptor dimensionalities, it is evi-
dent that dimensionality matters a lot. Our results indicate, that regardless of the
choice of loss function, the performance is proportional to the descriptor dimension-
==PAGE:32==
24
5 Results & Discussion
Loss
Whitening Technique
Output Dimension
mAP @ 1
mAP @ 5
Recall @ 1
Recall @ 5
Recall @ 10
Contrastive
No Whitening
2048
0.448
0.312
0.448
0.578
0.632
PCA
128
0.264
0.182
0.264
0.413
0.480
-
PCA
1024
0.363
0.264
0.363
0.517
0.584
-
PCA
2048
0.376
0.272
0.376
0.530
0.591
Contrastive
Learnt Whitening
1024
0.416
0.282
0.416
0.539
0.590
Contrastive
Learnt Whitening
2048
0.461
0.325
0.461
0.597
0.642
Generalised Contrastive
Learnt Whitening
1024
0.414
0.279
0.414
0.541
0.596
Generalised Contrastive
Learnt Whitening
2048
0.414
0.288
0.414
0.558
0.621
FOV MSE
Learnt Whitening
1024
0.411
0.277
0.411
0.542
0.596
FOV MSE
Learnt Whitening
2048
0.432
0.326
0.432
0.598
0.644
Table 5.2: Results of training a whitening layer as a post-processing step with differ-
ent techniques and output dimensions. We let all whitening models use
the same base model, whose results are shown in the top row. Our results
show contrastive loss and FOV MSE loss produce the best performance.
ality. This is consistent with the results presented in other state-of-the-art research
works[29][3][18], which indicate that when dimensionality increases, performance in-
creases monotonically as well.
In Table 5.2 we present results for two different schemes of whitening; PCA whiten-
ing and learnt whitening. Of the two, PCA whitening is most commonly used in other
research, as learned whitening is a relatively recent concept3. Despite the popularity
of PCA whitening, our results indicate that it leads to lower performance than learnt
whitening. This is consistent with the work presented by Radenovic[29], who exper-
imented with learnt whitening and PCA whitening on six different datasets. Of the
six datasets, learnt whitening achieved higher performance on all of them. Unfortu-
nately, neither of the datasets tested was MSLS, so we cannot compare our results
directly.
5.2.2
FOV MSE Performance
In Table 5.2 we also present the results for our FOV MSE whitening. When compared
to contrastive whitening, we see results that are quite similar on mAP@5, Recall@5
and Recall@10. Since learnt whitening with contrastive loss is state-of-the-art, our
FOV MSE tangents the current state-of-the-art on aforementioned metrics. Interest-
ingly, there is a 2.9% difference in the mAP@1 and Recall@1 results. This would
seem to indicate that for a query image, q, FOV MSE whitening is good at learning
the neighborhood of points around q, but not as good at learning a correct closest
neighbor.
This low performance on mAP@1 and Recall@1 could be a product of an under-
estimation in FOV overlap. Since the ”pull” FOV MSE loss generates on a positive,
depends on the estimated FOV overlap between query and positive. A low FOV over-
lap yields a high DOverlap, since DOverlap = 1−FOV Similarity. If DOverlap is high,
3Introduced in 2018 by Radenovic[29]
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Intra-class Performance
25
the positive will not be pulled as close, which could explain why FOV MSE performs
worse on the closest points than contrastive loss.
0.33
0.36
0.30
23 m
22 m
21 m
Figure 5.2: Examples of positive images within 25 meters of their corresponding
query image, with low estimated FOV overlap. The left and middle
examples demonstrate examples where we can see beyond the 50 meter
viewing distance. The example to the right demonstrates how a small
change in angle can lower the FOV overlap.
If FOV overlaps are indeed underestimated, then this could be fixed by tuning
the parameters of the FOV estimation presented in Section 3.1. Specifically, a higher
view radius, r, and a higher view angle, θ, will in a lot of cases yield a higher FOV
overlap. For the purpose of our experiments, we chose r = 50m and θ = 90°, since
these were the values used by Leyva-Vallina[18]. In their paper, only examples with a
FOV overlap > 0.5 are considered positives. However, given the qualitative examples
from MSLS in Figure 5.2, one should consider experimenting with other values in
future experiments, as it seems the FOV estimations are at the low end.
5.3
Intra-class Performance
5.3.1
Task Definition
In this section, we use the same base model and whitening models from the previous
section, to evaluate performance using different definitions of the place recognition
task. We compare performance when a positive is an image within 25 meters, with a
==PAGE:34==
26
5 Results & Discussion
positive being defined by its FOV overlap with the query image. We set the threshold
to DOverlap < 0.5.
Figure 5.3: Recall graphs comparing the performance of whitening models with two
different place recognition task definitions. Note, that the y-axes are
slightly different between the two.
In Table 5.3 we present the results of three whitening models, as well as the base
model without whitening, on different task definitions.
5.3.1.1
General Performance
Looking at Figure 5.3 we make the observation that all models achieve higher recall
across all values of N, with the 25 meter definition. In fact, the average performance
difference across all recalls on all models is 5.2%.
The difference in performance can be explained by the fact that the FOV definition
is a stricter definition than the 25 meter definition.
Particularly points with too
much camera angle variation are filtered away, which results in fewer positives per
query image. Across the entire MSLS test dataset, query images have on average
10.1 positives with the 25 meter definition, while there are 5.6 positives on average
with the FOV definition. Given there are almost twice as many positives per query
image with the traditional place recognition task definition, it is not surprising that
performance is higher.
However, the positives with a FOV similarity higher than 0.5, are also expected to
be the easiest positives. Intuitively, it would therefore be surprising that we observe
a 5% performance gap, when the easiest positives are kept, and the harder ones are
filtered away. This may again be related to an underestimation of FOV Similarity
pointed out in Figure 5.2.
If our models pick up those relatively easy positives,
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Intra-class Performance
27
they will count positively towards the performance in the 25 meter definition, and
negatively in the 0.5 FOV definition.
5.3.1.2
FOV MSE Performance
In Figure 5.3 we can also compare our FOV MSE whitening to the other whitening
models. Since the FOV MSE loss directly uses FOV to compute the loss, we expect
this model to perform better, when the task definition directly relies on FOV. Unfor-
tunately, this expectation does not match reality. When using the FOV definition,
we observe that our FOV whitened model is best in recall 1, 5 and 10, but is worse
than the base model for recall @ N, when N > 30. Overall the performance of FOV
MSE whitening drops 4.8 % from the 25 meter definition, to the FOV definition. In
comparison to the base model and contrastive whitening this is better, as we observe
a performance drop of 5.1% and 5.5% on those models respectively.
5.3.2
Overlaps & Distances
In this section we examine what impact our whitening model has on the intra-class
samples, and whether our models learn to better distinguish between positives.
mAO @ 10
mAO @ 25
mAO @ 50
mAD @ 10
mAD @ 25
mAD @ 50
Base Network
0.51
0.49
0.48
11.7
12.0
12.1
Contrastive Whitening
0.52
0.50
0.49
11.6
11.9
12.0
FOV MSE Whitening
0.52
0.50
0.49
11.6
11.8
11.9
Table 5.3: More detailed information about the closest positives. We denote the
mean average FOV overlap between the N closest neighbors, mAO @ N.
Similarly, we denote the mean average geographical distance to positives
within the N closest neighbors, mAD @ N.
In Table 5.3 we present the mean average FOV overlaps (mAO) and mean average
distances (mAD), between the intra-class samples contained in the N closest points.
First and foremost, Table 5.3 reveals a clear picture about our FOV MSE whiten-
ing model; It does not signficantly improve the ”quality” of the intra-class samples
returned, if we define a high-quality intra-class image, as an image with higher FOV
overlap or a lower geographical distance. The average FOV overlap is only 0.01 higher
with whitening, and the average distance is 0.1 −0.2 meters closer with whitening.
While this is not the intent of our whitening model, it is not completely unexpected.
All models have the same base model, so they share the majority of their parameters.
Additionally, in Table 5.2 we can see that the performance of the whitening models
are quite similar. For example, in Recall @ 10, the performance differs 0.02 % between
the contrastive whitening model, and the FOV MSE whitening model.
==PAGE:36==
28
5 Results & Discussion
5.3.3
Ranking Performance
Having learnt that our whitening models return positives with similar FOV overlap
and geographical distance, we are now interested in learning how well our model ranks
and correlates positives. The hope is that our FOV MSE model has learnt to correlate
positives, such that the closest positives are also the images with the highest FOV
overlap.
τ @ 10
τ @ 25
τ @ 50
ρ @ 10
ρ @ 25
ρ @ 50
Base Network
0.252
0.255
0.261
0.319
0.309
0.307
Contrastive Whitening
0.244
0.244
0.248
0.286
0.276
0.278
FOV MSE Whitening
0.212
0.233
0.236
0.282
0.288
0.287
Table 5.4: Cumulated ranking results of the base model, and two whitening models.
We denote Kendall’s Tau of the intra-class samples within the nearest N
points, as τ @ N. We denote the Pearson correlation of the intra-class
samples within the nearest N points as ρ @ N.
In Table 5.4 we present the results for the base model and the two whitening
models, using Kendall’s Tau and the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient. For Kendall’s
Tau we measure the rank correlation between the rank of the returned positives, and
their corresponding FOV overlaps. Similarly, for the Pearson coeﬀicient, we measure
the correlation coeﬀicient between the rank of the returned positives and their FOV
overlaps.
From the results in Table 5.4, it can be seen that, of the three models, our base
model performs best on both metrics. Meanwhile, the FOV MSE whitening model
performs worst on Kendall’s tau, but is slightly better than contrastive whitening on
the Person coeﬀicient.
Intuitively, the results from Table 5.4 seem rather surprising, as the base model
has not explicitly been trained to learn correlations the same way our FOV MSE
whitening model has, and yet it produces a higher correlation. This difference in
correlation could potentially be explained by the results in Figure 5.3. In the first
graph, for the standard place recognition definition, we see the base model performs
better than the FOV MSE whitening model when N > 10. This result could help
explain the lower correlation on the FOV MSE model, assuming that our correlation
metrics are correlated with recall. Specifically, if a model performs well on standard
place recognition metrics, like mean-average precision and recall, then it is also better
at correlating/ranking the intra-class samples.
5.3.4
Whitening Models - Correlation Plots
In this section we will take a closer look at how well each of the whitening models
correlates latent distances with FOV similarities globally across all positives in the
MSLS test dataset.
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Intra-class Performance
29
FOV Distance
FOV Distance
FOV Distance
Latent Distance
Latent Distance
Latent Distance
FOV MSE Whitening
Base Model
Contrastive Whitening
Figure 5.4: Aggregated plot over FOV distances and latent distance of the test
dataset.
The plots aggregate the intra-class samples related to each
query image in the test dataset.
In Figure 5.4 we present three plots for the relationship between intra-class FOV
similarities and the latent distances from the query image. Looking at the figure, it is
clear that while there is a slight correlation in all three, none of them is significantly
more correlated than another. Performing linear regression on the three reveals that
both the base model and the contrastive whitening model have a gradient of 0.09
whereas the FOV MSE whitening model has a gradient of 0.11.
Comparing the base model plot to the contrastive whitening plot, might give us
a clue as to why learnt whitening generally leads to a boost in performance. Even
though the points are not more correlated, it seems they are more compressed and
closer in latent space. Intuitively, this is also what we expect from contrastive loss,
since the positive term in contrastive loss should pull all positives closer.
If the
positives are closer, and the negatives are kept at the same distance, this should
result in higher performance.
Another interesting finding of Figure 5.4 is, that while points are marginally more
correlated in the FOV MSE whitened model, they are also further away and the space
is not as compressed. Thus, FOV MSE whitening seems to have the opposite effect
of contrastive whitening. The higher distances can be explained by FOV MSE not
simply pulling all positives closer as is the case with contrastive loss.
5.3.5
FOV Overlaps
In this section we will inspect how our choice in parameters for estimating FOVs affect
the estimated FOV similarities. For all our experiments, we chose the parameters r =
50 meters and θ = 90 degrees as the parameters for the circle sector that makes up the
estimated FOVs. In Figure 5.5 we present a plot showing the FOV distance measure
Doverlap, as a function of the geographical distance between query and positive.
==PAGE:38==
30
5 Results & Discussion
GPS Distance
GPS Distance v. Overlap Distance (
) 
r = 50,θ = 90
D Overlap
Figure 5.5: Plot over the geographical distance and the FOV distances DOverlap for
the entire test dataset. The green horizontal line indicate the median,
and the green lines show the linear correlation in top cluster of points.
In Figure 5.5 we see that there is a clear negative correlation around the line
going from (0, 1) to (25, 0.3). By applying a Gaussian Mixture Model, and using
linear regression on the topmost cluster, we find the gradient to be −0.028. This
negative trend is as expected, and is explained by the viewing radius r used when
estimating FOVs. The deviation away from this trend, can mostly be explained by
slight changes in viewpoint (CA). The top row of images were also included in Figure
3.2, where we saw there is a difference in viewpoint between query and positive. The
points at the bottom in the plot can be explained by points pointing in the opposite
direction to the query image, as seen in the bottom row of images.
Interestingly, a gap in the data appears when the geographical distance gets
smaller. The most likely explanation for this has to do with the nature of the dataset.
The MSLS dataset contains pictures taken mostly on the street by cars. Since most
streets are two-way streets, the images from a particular road will either be taken in
one direction or the other.
In Figure 5.5 we also plot the median of the visual overlaps, whose value is 0.54.
We find these values to support the hypothesis mentioned in earlier sections: That
the FOV overlap estimations were too low. Particularly for our experiments with
generalized contrastive loss these values are problematic, since this loss uses the FOV
overlap estimations to indicate whether an image is considered a positive.
If the
FOV overlap is < 0.5 the majority of the loss will come from the negative term of
generalized contrastive loss.
Through the median we are able to see that almost
half the images we consider positives in the other loss functions, are not considered
positives when using generalized contrastive loss.
The low median is also problematic for our MSE FOV loss. Since we are trying
to learn a distance between the query and positive, ˆy, such that ˆy = DOverlap, a low
==PAGE:39==
5.4 Qualitative Analysis
31
estimated FOV overlap will yield higher latent distances, which may impact perfor-
mance. It might therefore be worthwhile to experiment more with the parameters for
the FOV, θ and r in future experiments.
5.4
Qualitative Analysis
In this section we will try to look at some specific examples from the dataset, to gain
a better understanding of why our models perform the way they do.
5.4.1
End-to-end Models
In this section we present the outputs of three models trained in an end-to-end manner,
as presented in Table 5.1. In Figure 5.6 we show the output for models trained with
contrastive loss, MSE loss and Tobit loss on five hand-picked query images.
One thing we notice from the results in Figure 5.6 is the similarity between the
models. Only in one out of the five examples, do the three models all return different
images (top row). In the other four, two of the models are in consensus about two
positives or two wrong negatives. Particularly, the consensus on negatives is inter-
esting, as it hints towards the models learning similar representations, despite the
difference in loss function used during training. This may not be surprising given
that MSE loss and contrastive loss uses the same term for negatives, and we can
prove the equivalence between the positive term in Tobit loss to MSE loss. However,
since these examples represent a small subset of all images, it is hard to definitively
conclude anything on the similarity of the learnt descriptors of the three models.
In Figure 5.6 we also notice how MSE loss is the only model, that correctly predicts
a positive in row 4. Looking at the predictions from the two other models, it is clear
the negative returned by both these model, is an extremely diﬀicult negative. This
image is considered a negative because it is further than 25 meters away, even though
it has high visual similarity to the query image. We see this as a clear example of
why there is a need for a better positive/negative definition in place recognition.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Results & Discussion
Contrastive 
MSE 
Tobit 
Figure 5.6: Figure showing five query images and our models top-1 retrieved image.
We show the results from the models trained with hard-negative mining
as presented in Table 5.1.
Positives are marked with a green frame,
while negatives are marked with a red frame.
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Qualitative Analysis
33
5.4.2
Whitening Models
Base Model
Contrastive
Whitening
FOV MSE
Whitening
Figure 5.7: Figure showing five query images and our models top-1 retrieved image.
We show the results from the models trained with output dimensionality
2048 as presented in section 5.2.
Positives are marked with a green
frame, while negatives are marked with a red frame.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Results & Discussion
This section will relate to Section 5.2, where we presented and discussed the results
for different methods of learnt whitening. In Figure 5.7 we present five query images,
along with the top-1 prediction for the base model, the contrastive whitening model
and the FOV MSE whitening model.
Looking at the images, we notice that often when the models return a positive,
they return either the same, or a positive that is visually very similar. Given that
one of the goals of FOV MSE loss was to learn positives with higher visual similarity
to the query image than the other models, this is not quite what we had hoped for.
It does however fit with the results presented in earlier sections. Specifically, in Table
5.4 we observed how MSE loss does not yield more correlation between intra-class
samples, measured on the Pearson coeﬀicient and Kendall’s tau, despite our hopes it
would.
5.4.3
FOV MSE Correlation
In this section we present some qualitative example extracted using our FOV MSE
whitening model, to assess specific scenes and how well our model correlates latent
distances and the FOV distance DOverlap
In Figure 5.8 we present four examples of query images, as well as two selected
positives.
From these examples we see how our FOV MSE whitening model has
a hard time learning to correlate FOV similarity with latent distances in the top
two examples, while the latter two look slightly better. While it is hard to justify
exactly why this is the case, it is noteworthy that the two top images do not show
any buildings, while the bottom two images do. It may very well be the case that
correlating FOV similarities with latent distances is highly dependent on semantic
cues, such as buildings.
Utilizing semantic cues in place recognition has been an
active area of research for many years for a good reason[35][23], as semantic cues
often provide features that are invariant to weather, illumination and season[44].
It is of course not possible to conclude on how dependent, correlating FOV sim-
ilarities and latent distances, is on semantic cues, but it poses questions for future
work within this area. For example, would we have more success correlating FOV
similarities and latent distances, if we only considered urban environments?
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Qualitative Analysis
35
Figure 5.8: Figure showing four examples of query images and two selected positives
marked with red and green.
The first column shows a scatter plot
DOverlap and latent distance ˆy for the positives.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis we set out to thoroughly examine how state-of-the-art place recognition
methods could be improved, by using all the geographical information available in
many modern datasets. Through our literature review we discovered that no pub-
lished research actively uses geographical information.We therefore posed the two
questions: How can geographical information be used more actively in place recog-
nition? And how does using geographical information in place recognition impact
performance? Through extensive experiments, and dozens of iterations, we managed
to produce results to help answer these questions.
How can geographical information be used more actively in place recogni-
tion?
In this thesis we introduced several ways to use geographical information in place
recognition. We designed three novel loss functions, that each use geographical in-
formation to enforce a linear relationship between geographical similarity and latent
distances.
We introduced a novel approach to using the negative Tobit log likeli-
hood as a loss function in place recognition. By analyzing the Tobit likelihood, we
were able to prove the equivalence between maximizing the Tobit likelihood and min-
imizing the mean-squared error.
This led us to define a new loss function using
mean-squared error, to enforce a linear relationship between geographical distances
and latent distances. Lastly, we introduced a loss function that uses mean-squared
error over field-of-view similarities, rather than geographical distances. The perceived
advantage of the three aforementioned loss functions are their ability to perform re-
gression on images considered positives, while still keeping negatives distant in latent
space. To the best of our knowledge, this way of using regression to learn a more
fine-grained representation of positives, is novel in place recognition.
Additionally, we identified two techniques for using the loss functions introduced
in this thesis. One technique is through training a place recognition model end-to-
end using our proposed loss functions. The other technique uses our proposed loss
functions to train a whitening layer after the underlying place recognition has been
trained, and converged.
How does using geographical information in place recognition impact per-
formance?
Through extensive experiments we were able to train our proposed loss functions
in an end-to-end manner, and compare their performance to state-of-the-art. Our
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Conclusion
results clearly indicate that despite our best efforts our loss functions did not beat
existing state-of-the-art losses, like contrastive loss. Particularly, Tobit loss was sig-
nificantly worse than the contemporary methods in place recognition, while MSE loss
was slightly worse. However, through our results we also show that MSE loss per-
forms better than generalised contrastive loss; The only other loss in place recognition
that uses geographical information. Additionally, we conducted experiments using a
GPS-mining technique that if successful, could replace the computationally expensive
hard-negative mining. Through our results, we were able to show that GPS-mining
leads to significantly worse performance across all loss functions.
Given the sub-optimal results from the end-to-end training, we experimented with
training a whitening layer using our FOV MSE loss.
From our experiments with
whitening, we were able to show that the performance of FOV MSE matches the
state-of-the-art performance, making it a good alternative to contrastive loss. By
experimenting with the output dimensions of the whitening layers, we were able to
conclude that lowering the dimensionality of descriptors leads to performance drop,
across all whitening methods we tested.
Additionally, we evaluated our models’ abilities to learn a more fine-grained repre-
sentation of positives, such that our models preferentially return positives with higher
FOV overlap. The results indicate that a whitening layer trained with our FOV MSE
loss does not improve the correlation of positives. In fact, the results indicate that a
base model without whitening is better at correlating positives, than our loss function.
Through our work we were able to examine how geographical information could be
used in place recognition. Although we conducted extensive experiments, we believe
there are still questions left to be answered for future work. Through our work we
concluded that our FOV similarities were underestimated, which might have had an
impact on our results. For future research, it could be interesting to experiment more
with the parameters for FOV estimations, to determine their impact on performance.
Another interesting avenue to explore, is to determine whether learning fine-grained
representations of positives is more feasible in scenes with more semantic cues.
There is still a lot of room left for improvement within place recognition. Hopefully,
this thesis can help inform future research on how geographical information can be
used in place recognition, and how it cannot.
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Selim Aksoy and Robert M Haralick. “Feature normalization and likelihood-
based similarity measures for image retrieval.” In: Pattern recognition letters
22.5 (2001), pages 563–582.
[2]
Takeshi Amemiya. “Tobit models: A survey.” In: Journal of econometrics 24.1-2
(1984), pages 3–61.
[3]
Relja Arandjelovic et al. “NetVLAD: CNN architecture for weakly supervised
place recognition.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. 2016, pages 5297–5307.
[4]
Artem Babenko and Victor Lempitsky. “Aggregating deep convolutional fea-
tures for image retrieval.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.07493 (2015).
[5]
Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. “Surf: Speeded up robust fea-
tures.” In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2006, pages 404–
417.
[6]
Vasileios Belagiannis et al. “Robust optimization for deep regression.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2015, pages 2830–
2838.
[7]
Zetao Chen et al. “Convolutional neural network-based place recognition.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1509 (2014).
[8]
Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. “Are we ready for autonomous
driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite.” In: 2012 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE. 2012, pages 3354–3361.
[9]
Ruben Gomez-Ojeda et al. “Training a convolutional neural network for appearance-
invariant place recognition.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.07428 (2015).
[10]
Albert Gordo et al. “Deep image retrieval: Learning global representations for
image search.” In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2016,
pages 241–257.
[11]
Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. “Dimensionality reduction by
learning an invariant mapping.” In: 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06). Volume 2. IEEE. 2006,
pages 1735–1742.
==PAGE:48==
40
Bibliography
[12]
James Hays and Alexei A Efros. “Im2gps: estimating geographic information
from a single image.” In: 2008 ieee conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. IEEE. 2008, pages 1–8.
[13]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016,
pages 770–778.
[14]
Yi Hou, Hong Zhang, and Shilin Zhou. “Convolutional neural network-based
image representation for visual loop closure detection.” In: 2015 IEEE inter-
national conference on information and automation. IEEE. 2015, pages 2238–
2245.
[15]
Hervé Jégou and Ondřej Chum. “Negative evidences and co-occurences in im-
age retrieval: The benefit of PCA and whitening.” In: European conference on
computer vision. Springer. 2012, pages 774–787.
[16]
Hervé Jégou et al. “Aggregating local descriptors into a compact image repre-
sentation.” In: 2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. IEEE. 2010, pages 3304–3311.
[17]
Hervé Jégou et al. “Aggregating local image descriptors into compact codes.”
In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 34.9 (2011),
pages 1704–1716.
[18]
Marı́a Leyva-Vallina, Nicola Strisciuglio, and Nicolai Petkov. “Generalized Con-
trastive Optimization of Siamese Networks for Place Recognition.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.06638 (2021).
[19]
Manuel Lopez-Antequera et al. “Appearance-invariant place recognition by dis-
criminatively training a convolutional neural network.” In: Pattern Recognition
Letters 92 (2017), pages 89–95.
[20]
David G Lowe. “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints.” In:
International journal of computer vision 60.2 (2004), pages 91–110.
[21]
Jiangjing Lv et al. “A deep regression architecture with two-stage re-initialization
for high performance facial landmark detection.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pages 3317–3326.
[22]
Kevin Musgrave, Serge Belongie, and Ser-Nam Lim. “A metric learning reality
check.” In: European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer. 2020, pages 681–
699.
[23]
Tayyab Naseer et al. “Semantics-aware visual localization under challenging
perceptual conditions.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2017, pages 2614–2620.
[24]
Aude Oliva and Antonio Torralba. “Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic
representation of the spatial envelope.” In: International journal of computer
vision 42.3 (2001), pages 145–175.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
41
[25]
Kohei Ozaki and Shuhei Yokoo. “Large-scale landmark retrieval/recognition
under a noisy and diverse dataset.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04087 (2019).
[26]
Pilailuck Panphattarasap and Andrew Calway. “Visual place recognition using
landmark distribution descriptors.” In: Asian Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer. 2016, pages 487–502.
[27]
James Philbin et al. “Lost in quantization: Improving particular object retrieval
in large scale image databases.” In: 2008 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. IEEE. 2008, pages 1–8.
[28]
James Philbin et al. “Object retrieval with large vocabularies and fast spatial
matching.” In: 2007 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
IEEE. 2007, pages 1–8.
[29]
Filip Radenović, Giorgos Tolias, and Ondřej Chum. “Fine-tuning CNN image
retrieval with no human annotation.” In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence 41.7 (2018), pages 1655–1668.
[30]
Ali S Razavian et al. “Visual instance retrieval with deep convolutional net-
works.” In: ITE Transactions on Media Technology and Applications 4.3 (2016),
pages 251–258.
[31]
Paul-Edouard Sarlin et al. “From coarse to fine: Robust hierarchical localization
at large scale.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019, pages 12716–12725.
[32]
Paul-Edouard Sarlin et al. “Leveraging deep visual descriptors for hierarchical
eﬀicient localization.” In: Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR. 2018, pages 456–
465.
[33]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “Facenet: A unified
embedding for face recognition and clustering.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015, pages 815–823.
[34]
Pierre Sermanet et al. “Overfeat: Integrated recognition, localization and detec-
tion using convolutional networks.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229 (2013).
[35]
Erik Stenborg, Carl Toft, and Lars Hammarstrand. “Long-term visual localiza-
tion using semantically segmented images.” In: 2018 IEEE international confer-
ence on robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2018, pages 6484–6490.
[36]
Niko Sünderhauf, Peer Neubert, and Peter Protzel. “Are we there yet? Challeng-
ing SeqSLAM on a 3000 km journey across all four seasons.” In: Proc. of Work-
shop on Long-Term Autonomy, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). Citeseer. 2013, page 2013.
[37]
Niko Sünderhauf et al. “On the performance of convnet features for place recog-
nition.” In: 2015 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and
systems (IROS). IEEE. 2015, pages 4297–4304.
==PAGE:50==
42
Bibliography
[38]
Niko Sünderhauf et al. “Place recognition with convnet landmarks: Viewpoint-
robust, condition-robust, training-free.” In: Robotics: Science and Systems XI:
(2015), pages 1–10.
[39]
Giorgos Tolias, Ronan Sicre, and Hervé Jégou. “Particular object retrieval with
integral max-pooling of CNN activations.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05879
(2015).
[40]
A. Torii et al. “24/7 place recognition by view synthesis.” In: CVPR. 2015.
[41]
Nam Vo, Nathan Jacobs, and James Hays. “Revisiting im2gps in the deep learn-
ing era.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision. 2017, pages 2621–2630.
[42]
Frederik Warburg et al. “Mapillary street-level sequences: A dataset for lifelong
place recognition.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020, pages 2626–2635.
[43]
Chao-Yuan Wu et al. “Sampling matters in deep embedding learning.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 2017,
pages 2840–2848.
[44]
Xiwu Zhang, Lei Wang, and Yan Su. “Visual place recognition: A survey from
deep learning perspective.” In: Pattern Recognition 113 (2021), page 107760.
==PAGE:51==
Acronyms
FOV
Field-of-view
GEM
Generalized-Mean
GPS
Global Positioning System
MSLS
Mapillary Street-Level Sequences
RANSAC Random sample consensus
SLAM
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
UTM
Universal Transverse Mercator
VLAD
Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors
VPR
Visual Place Recognition
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
Appendix
Link between MLE of Tobit and MSE
In this proof, we will show that the maximizing the Tobit log likelihood for positive
points, is equivalent to minimizing the Mean Squared Error.
The log likelihood for Tobit is given by
log Ltobit(σ) =
∑
yj>yL
log
( 1
σ φ
(yj −ˆyj
σ
))
+
∑
yj=yL
log
(
Φ
(yL −ˆyj
σ
))
Assuming we are given N points where, for all points yi it holds that yi < yL, the
likelihood will be given by:
log Ltobit(σ) =
N
∑
yj
log
( 1
σ φ
(y −ˆy
σ
))
Setting the standard deviation σ = 1
log Ltobit =
N
∑
yj
log (φ (y −ˆy))
Since φ is a standard normal distribution, we can rewrite the likelihood
log Ltobit =
N
∑
yj
log
(
1
√
2π · e−1
2 (y−ˆy)
)
log Ltobit = −N
2 log
(√
2π
)
−
N
∑
yj
(y −ˆy)2
Now we can show that maximum likelihood estimation of the Tobit log likelihood is
equivalent to minimizing the mean squared error:
MLE = Arg Max
W
−
∑
(y −x · W)2
MLE = Arg Min
W
1
N
∑
(y −x · W)2
==PAGE:54==
46
Appendix
MLE = Arg Min
W
MSE
==PAGE:55==
Appendix
47
Note on how FOV similarities are calculated
a
b
Figure 1: (a) Two fields-of-view that originate in the same place, but their compass-
angles are shifted 40 degrees from each other. (b) Two fields-of-view with
the same compass-angle, but 25 meters away from each other.
In the paper by Leyva-Vallina[18], researchers define field-of-view similarity for
two points as the intersection-over-union of their fields-of-view.
A field-of-view is
defined as a slice of a circle, and can therefore be parameterized by a radius and an
angle of the circle slice (360 is a full circle, 180 is half a circle etc.). The radius and
angle can be interpreted as how far away we can see in the picture, and the angle the
camera is able to capture.
In their paper they use the two examples in Figure 1 to rationalize choosing an
angle θ = 90 and a radius r = 50m, by calculating their field-of-view similarities.
The example in Figure 1(a) is two points with identical coordinates but ∆θ = 40.
The example in Figure 1(a) is two points 25 meters away from each other, but with
identical angle. The wish was, that these examples should have close to 50% field-
of-view overlap, and indeed they calculate Figure 1(a) to 55.63% and Figure
1(b) to 45.01%. However, we calculate the same examples to 38.47% and
28.91% respectively.
To verify our results, we calculated Figure 1(a) theoretically. In this example, the
union is θU = 90 + 40 = 130 and the area of the intersection is θI = 90 −40 = 50.
Additionally, the area of a circle slice, can be calculated as:
ACircleSlice = θSlice
360 · (r2π)
Putting in the parameters we compute that
IoU = AIntersection
AUnion
=
50
360 · (r2π)
130
360 · (r2π) = 5
13 = 38.46%
==PAGE:56==
48
Appendix
Which is exactly the result we get. Upon further analysis of the results by Leyva-
Vallina, their results turn out to be exactly equal to
IoU = AIntersection
ACircleSlice
where ACircleSlice is the area of one circle slice with r = 50 m and θ = 90. In our
work, we calculate the the intersection-over-union as
IoU = AIntersection
AUnion
where AUnion = 2 · ACircleSlice −AIntersection.
Extra Figures
This section provides a few more figures, that were left out of the main portion of the
thesis.
Figure 2: Two examples of fields-of-view. The green field-of-view are query images
and the red are database images. While the overlaps in field-of-view are
similar in the left figure, they are not in the right figure. Thus one of the
the database images would have very little visual overlap with the query
image.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix
49
0
5
10
15
20
25
Geographical Distance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Latent Distance
Clustering - Gaussian Mixture Model
Figure 3: Clustering produced by Gaussian mixture model used in Figure 5.5.
==PAGE:58==
50
Appendix
10 m
12 m
11 m
Figure 4: More examples of images with 0 FOV overlap, but within 25 meters.
==PAGE:59==
==PAGE:60==
