==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind 
farm design 
 
 
Yiwen Dai 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0445 
July 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Yiwen Dai 
Title: Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0445 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Ju Feng 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
Upon the completion of this thesis, I am grateful to those who have oﬀered me encour-
agement and support through the project over the whole period.
I would ﬁrst like to show my deepest gratitude to my thesis supervisor Ju Feng. It is
your clear and helpful guidance that has led this research to its successful results. Every
time I encounter diﬃculty, I can always get your enlightening instruction. I sincerely
appreciate your patience and motivation.
Second, particular thanks go to all the teachers who have taught me for your instruction
and generous support during these years.
It is you who have taught me a lot and
enriched my knowledge.
My thanks also go to my friends who have given me help in my study and life. The
company of my friends is the driving force of my happy life.
Last but not least, I want to take the chance to express the most heartfelt gratitude to
my parents for their endless love and selﬂess support all through these years. I hope I
can make you proud.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
At present, various methods have been employed in previous studies to solve the wind
farm layout optimization problem. The purpose of this paper is to compare diﬀerent
algorithms for non-uniform oﬀshore wind farm layout optimization problems. In this
problem, turbine number (integer), turbine type (discrete) and turbine locations (con-
tinuous) are taken into account, which makes it a mixed integer-discrete-continuous
optimization problem. Random search (RS), particle swarm optimization (PSO) and
genetic algorithm (GA) are used to optimize the wind farm layout so as to ﬁnd the
design that minimizes the levelized cost of energy (LCOE). In order to calculate the
LCOE of a wind farm, wind model, wake model, power generation model and cost
model are built. Jensen wake model is utilized for wake calculation, and an empirical
cost model considering four diﬀerent scenarios is adopted for calculating the wind tur-
bine cost. The case study is to optimize a hypothetical oﬀshore wind farm based on
the Horns Rev 1 oﬀshore wind farm in Denmark. Firstly, the optimization results of
the three algorithms reaching the convergence condition in a single run are presented,
and then the optimization results of their multiple runs after the same evaluation times
of the objective function are compared. Finally, through comparison, the wind farm
optimization trend under diﬀerent cost scenarios is obtained, and the performance of
the three algorithms is compared.
Keywords: oﬀshore wind farm; layout optimization; Jensen wake model; levelized cost
of energy; random search algorithm; particle swarm optimization; genetic algorithm
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Models of the wind farm
5
2.1
Wind model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Wake model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Power generation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Cost model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Wind turbine type
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Capital cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.3
Operation and maintenance cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.4
LCOE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Optimization problem and algorithms
17
3.1
Objective function and constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Variable processing of mixed-integer programming . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Random research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Particle swarm optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Genetic algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.1
Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.2
Crossover and mutation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.3
Replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Case study
32
4.1
Wind condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Wind farm description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Random search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Particle swarm optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.3
Genetic algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Results comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Systematic comparison of the three algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
i
==PAGE:6==
5
Conclusion and outlook
51
References
52
ii
==PAGE:7==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Concerns about climate change have increased in recent years, leading to a growing focus
on sustainable energy.
Renewable energy can help achieve sustainable development
goals by providing clean, safe, and aﬀordable energy. As one of the renewable energy,
wind power has gained considerable development. According to the World Wind Energy
Association (WWEA, 2021), the total capacity of the global market for new wind
turbines reached 93 gigawatts, an increase of about 50% from the previous year in
2019, and the most installed year. The total capacity of all wind farms around the
world is now 744 gigawatts, suﬃcient to meet 7% of the world’s electricity demand.
Oﬀshore wind came into existence later than onshore wind, so it has not yet developed
to the maturity of onshore wind, but its advantages make it the future trend of devel-
opment of the wind industry. In terms of wind resources, due to the ﬂat terrain without
obstacles such as buildings or hills, wind speeds tend to be faster oﬀshore than on land
allowing for more energy to be generated at a time. In addition, oﬀshore wind speed is
more stable than land wind speed, so oﬀshore wind farms have the potential to generate
more reliable energy. On the environmental side, oﬀshore wind farms do not occupy
land, have little impact on the landscape and have no noise pollution for residents.
Total oﬀshore wind capacity has now passed 35 GW, representing 4.8% of total global
cumulative installed wind capacity as described in Global Wind Report (GWEC, 2021),
and more than 70 GW new oﬀshore is expected to be installed in 2021-2025.
Many factors can aﬀect the performance of an oﬀshore wind farm, one of the most
important is the micro-siting of a wind farm. Due to the wake eﬀect, the wind speed
of the downstream turbines is more or less reduced. As a result, the energy production
of downstream wind turbines will experience a deﬁcit. In other words, the layout of a
wind farm limits its power generation potential. Therefore, wind farm optimization is
one of the most challenging problems to improve wind farm performance.
The costs for an oﬀshore wind farm for installation, operation and maintenance are
higher than onshore plants. Thus, while reducing the energy loss within the wind farm,
it is also necessary to improve the economy of the project. Even small improvements in
wind turbine placement could result in signiﬁcant savings, so the optimization objectives
Page 1 of 51
==PAGE:8==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
in many previous works were not only to maximize the power generation but also to
consider the cost.
1.2
Related work
Finding the optimal layout of a wind farm on a given area is a complex optimiza-
tion problem. There are diﬀerent approaches for the problem, most of them based on
computing algorithms.
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) has been used in many wind farm optimization
studies. Chowdhury et al. (2012) and Hou et al. (2015) used PSO with the purpose
of minimizing the cost of energy. Hou et al. (2016) proposed a particle swarm opti-
mization algorithm with multiple adaptive methods (PSO-MAM) later. To prevent the
algorithm from being premature, the local search strategy based on diﬀerential evolu-
tion was introduced into Gaussian particle swarm optimization by Wan et al. (2012).
A reﬁnement method by using random search (RS) was proposed by Feng and Shen
(2013), and RS was applied to the Horns Rev 1 wind farm and performed well (Feng
and Shen, 2015). Then an extended RS that can solve the non-uniform oﬀshore wind
farm layout optimization problem was presented (Feng and Shen (2017)), and it was
concluded that RS was capable of considering an unﬁxed number of turbines comparing
to PSO.
The genetic algorithm (GA) is also one of the most commonly utilized methods to
optimize the wind farm layout. Pillai et al. (2017) compared the performance of PSO
and GA in the optimization problem. Chen et al. (2013) and Charhouni et al. (2019)
adopted GA in wind farm optimization with diﬀerent wind turbines types. GA and
GeoSteiner algorithm were combined to optimize the locations of wind turbines and
the layouts of cable in wind farms in the work of Wu et al. (2020).
Apart from these common optimization algorithms, Bansal and Farswan (2017) pro-
posed a solution to this optimization problem using biogeography based optimization
(BBO), a recent unconventional evolutionary algorithm. Imperialist competitive al-
gorithm, which is considered to be the social counterpart of genetic algorithms, was
employed for eﬃcient layout design of a wind farm by Kiamehr and Hannani (2014)
and yielded promising results. The simulated annealing (SA) algorithm can also be suc-
cessfully applied to the wind farm layout optimization problem as concluded by Yang
Page 2 of 51
==PAGE:9==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
and Cho (2019).
1.3
Thesis statement
Among the published studies, various optimization algorithms have been employed to
solve the wind farm layout optimization problem. In this project, in order to explore
which algorithm is appropriate for this problem, the performance of three algorithms
applied to the wind farm layout optimization problem, RS, PSO and GA, is compared.
Wind farm layout optimization problem has been investigated by a large number of
studies, but the majority of them considered only one type of wind turbine, and the
number of turbines is usually ﬁxed. However, if the type and number of turbines are also
optimized, the optimization space can be greatly improved. Therefore, in this study,
the object of optimization is the non-uniform oﬀshore wind farm, which is composed of
multiple types of wind turbines.
In the work of Feng and Shen (2017), RS and PSO were compared, but the number of
wind turbines during the optimization process was ﬁxed when the mixed-discrete PSO
algorithm was adopted. Pillai et al. (2017) concluded that the GA and PSO produced
results of similar quality, but they considered only the turbine positions.
To better compare the optimization performance of these three algorithms for non-
uniform wind farms in this study, when formulating the optimization problem, turbine
number (integer), turbine type (discrete) and turbine locations (continuous) are all
considered as design variables for all of them. These types of variables make the problem
become a mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization problem. As for the objective
function, if only energy production is considered, the trend for optimization will be more
and larger turbines. In the energy sector, the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is the
most commonly used indicator for project economics, so it is decided to be the object
to be optimized for this problem. Then, the three optimization algorithms are applied
to optimize the layout of a given wind farm under the same constraint conditions, and
their optimization results are compared.
Page 3 of 51
==PAGE:10==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
1.4
Thesis structure
The work in this thesis can be divided into three core parts which cover the wind farm
models, the optimization problem and algorithms, and the case study. Finally, there is
the conclusion chapter.
Chapter 2
In chapter 2, a comprehensive model is set up. Firstly, wind model, wake model and
power generation model are established to calculate the annual energy production of a
wind farm. Then a cost model is built, which can calculate the cost of the life-cycle
cost of a wind farm. Combining the generation part with the cost part, the calculation
method of LCOE, the objective of the optimization problem, can be obtained.
Chapter 3
Chapter 3 focuses on the problem formulation and the optimization algorithms. Firstly,
the objective function and design constraints are introduced. Due to the diﬀerence of
algorithms, two optimization variables and optimization objective functions are pre-
sented. Then the process and parameters of RS, PSO and GA optimization algorithms
are described.
Chapter 4
A hypothetical oﬀshore wind farm is designed for the case study in chapter 4 based on
the Horns Rev 1 oﬀshore wind farm in Denmark. The wind data used for estimating
the power production are also local measurements of Horns Rev 1. Three optimization
algorithms introduced in chapter 3 are employed to design and optimize the layout of
the wind farm, and then the results are analyzed and compared.
Chapter 5
In the last chapter, all the important ﬁndings from the case study are concluded and
some suggestions are made for future research.
Page 4 of 51
==PAGE:11==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
2
Models of the wind farm
To optimize LCOE, it is necessary to consider both the power generation and cost of
the wind farm. Rather than comparing cost and energy production separately, LCOE
combines cost and energy production into a single metric. In this section, all the models
of wind farm needed for this optimization problem are presented, including wind model,
wake model, power generation model and cost model.
2.1
Wind model
Wind condition is a signiﬁcant factor in calculating wind power generation. The wind
speed changes constantly, so it is necessary to know the wind speed frequency. In this
study, the wind speed variation for a typical site is described using the two-parameter
Weibull distribution. In order to be more accurate and realistic, several wind direction
sectors are divided, and each sector has its own probability and Weibull distribution
parameters of wind speed. The wind speed probability density function is given by the
following equation:
f(v) = k
c (v
c)k−1e−( v
c )k
(1)
where, v is the wind speed, k is the shape factor which describes how the data are
distributed, and c is the scale factor which stretches or contracts the distribution along
the axis.
2.2
Wake model
In the optimization of wind farm layout, the wake eﬀect is one of the most important
factors aﬀecting the annual power generation of wind farms. Wind turbine obtains
energy from the wind when the wind ﬂows through it, and a wake area with reduced
wind speed is created. If the downstream wind turbine is located in the wake zone, the
input wind speed of the downstream wind turbine is lower than that of the upstream
wind turbine. The wake eﬀect causes the uneven distribution of wind speed in the wind
Page 5 of 51
==PAGE:12==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
farm, which aﬀects the operation condition of each wind turbine in the wind farm, and
further aﬀects the operation condition and energy output eﬃciency of the wind farm.
Jensen wake model is the most widely used model to estimate the energy losses caused
by the wake eﬀect in wind farms. It was developed by Jensen (1983) and improved
by Katic et al. (1987). It is a simple kinematic model suitable for ﬂat terrain and it
is derived from momentum conservation theory. The initial wake radius just behind
the turbine equals the rotor radius, and the wake radius increases linearly with the
downstream distance due to the decrease of the wind velocity (Figure 1).
The eﬀective wind speed of a wind turbine in a wind farm is:
u = u0 −udef
(2)
The velocity loss of a wind turbine under the wake eﬀects of several turbines is calculated
as following:
uj
def = u0
v
u
u
t
Nwt
X
i=1
[(Aij
Ar
)2(1 −
q
1 −CT(uj))2/(1 + kXij
Ri
)4]
(3)
where, u0 is the wind speed of free ﬂow at the hub height of WTj; CT(u0) is the turbine
thrust coeﬃcient under this free wind speed; Aij is the overlapping area between the
wake of WTi and the rotor of WTj; Ar is the swept area of WTj; k is the wake decay
coeﬃcient; Xij is the distance between WTi and WTj along wind direction; Ri is the
rotor radius of WTi.
The wake decay coeﬃcient k is calculated by Equation 4, which is determined by the
hub height of the wind turbine producing wake. z0 is the local surface roughness length.
α = 0.5
ln hi
z0
(4)
k is also used for ﬁnding the wake zone radius of the upstream wind turbine, as shown
in Figure 1. Therefore, when the wake generated by WTi reaches the position of WTj,
Page 6 of 51
==PAGE:13==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
its radius Rij is:
Rij = Ri + kXij
(5)
Figure 1: Jensen wake model (Sun et al., 2019)
X [m]
Y [m]
WTj
WTi
Xr_vec
u_vec
d_vertical
d_horizontal
Figure 2: Vertical and horizontal distances between two wind turbines
In a wind farm, not all the relative positions of any two turbines are along the current
wind direction. Hence, the distance between the two WTs should be decomposed into
Page 7 of 51
==PAGE:14==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
vertical distance dvertical and horizontal distance dhorizontal, as shown in Figure 2.
⃗Xr
is the vector from WTi to WTj, and ⃗u is the wind velocity vector. dvertical is used to
judge the relative position of two turbines, and dhorizontal is used to determine whether
the turbine is aﬀected by the wake.
Thus, using dvertical instead of simple Xij in Equation 3, the velocity loss of WTj is
expressed as:
uj
def = u0
v
u
u
t
Nwt
X
i=1
[(Aij
Ar
)2(1 −
q
1 −CT(uj))2/(1 + kdvertical
Ri
)4]
(6)
In this formula, the overlapping area Aij is calculated according to the rotor sizes of the
two wind turbines and the relative position between them to take into account diﬀerent
situations. Aij of course is 0 if WTi is in the downstream position of WTj because WTj
is not aﬀected by the wake of WTi. When WTi is the upstream turbine, there are three
diﬀerent cases that depend on the distance between the centers of the rotor of WTj and
the wake zone of WTi, the rotor radius and the wake zone radius.
Aij =





πR2
j,
dij ≤Rij −Rj
αR2
ij + βR2
j −2A∆,
Rij −Rj < dij < Rij + Rj
0,
dij ≥Rij + Rj
(7)
where,
α = arccos(R2
ij + d2
ij −R2
j
2Rijdij
)
β = arccos(R2
j + d2
ij −R2
ij
2Rjdij
)
A∆= 1
4
q
(Rij + dij + Rj)(dij + Rj −Rij)(Rij + Rj −dij)(Rij + dij −Rj)
In this case, wind turbines may have diﬀerent hub heights, so both horizontal distance
Page 8 of 51
==PAGE:15==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
and hub height diﬀerence should be taken into account when calculating dij:
dij =
q
∆h2 + d2
horizontal
(8)
The three cases where the rotor of WTj is in full wake, in partial wake or out of wake
of WTi are shown in Figure 3. The green circle is the wake area of WTi, the blue circle
is the rotor of WTj, and the red part is the area of WTj aﬀected by WTi’s wake.
Figure 3: Aﬀected area of WTj’s rotor by WTi’s wake in 3 situations
Due to wind proﬁle, the incoming free wind speed is diﬀerent for wind turbines with
diﬀerent hub heights in a wind farm. When given a reference wind speed uref and a
corresponding reference height href, the wind speed at the hub height h is calculated
as shown in Equation 9, and Equation 10 shows how to get the Hellman exponent α1
using the local surface roughness length z0.
u0 = uref( h
href
)α1
(9)
α1 =
1
ln h
z0
(10)
Page 9 of 51
==PAGE:16==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
2.3
Power generation model
The annual energy production (AEP) is an important part of the optimization objective
function. When the type of wind turbine is given, its power curve and thrust coeﬃcient
curve can be obtained. After wake loss calculation, the eﬀective wind speed received
by a single wind turbine WTi at a certain wind direction θj under an operating wind
speed vk is obtained: vi(θj, vk). The power curve indicates the electrical power output
for the turbine at diﬀerent wind speeds. Instead of calculation, it is directly used to
ﬁnd the power corresponding to the wind speed, so the power output of this turbine
under the eﬀective wind speed can be obtained: Pi(θj, vk). Then, the expected power
of WTi on wind direction θj can be calculated by:
Pi(θj) =
vout
X
vk=vin
Pi(θj, vk) · f(vk)δvk
(11)
The probability density of each wind speed f(vk) is calculated from Equation 1, using
the Weibull distribution parameters of this wind direction. The wind speed range is
between the cut-in wind speed and the cut-out wind speed.
According to the probability of each wind direction p(θj), the power output of WTi
after integrating all wind directions can be calculated as following:
Pi =
X
j
Pi(θj) · p(θj)
(12)
Pi is the hourly energy output of one turbine, so the annual energy production of
the entire wind farm can be obtained by summing the power of all the turbines and
multiplying by the number of hours a year:
Ptot =
Nwt
X
i=1
Pi
(13)
AEP = hour · Ptot
(14)
Page 10 of 51
==PAGE:17==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
With the expected total power produced by the whole wind farm Ptot and the total
install capacity of this wind farm, the capacity factor can be found.
CF =
Ptot
Capacity
(15)
2.4
Cost model
LCOE is an economic indicator which means the total cost per unit of energy produc-
tion. Therefore, considering both power generation and cost, the general objective of
the wind farm layout design is to minimize the LCOE for the entire lifetime of the power
generation project. Since the optimization object of this study is LCOE, it is necessary
to accurately calculate the cost of the wind farm. To reduce the complexity of the prob-
lem, the wind farm costs considered here only include capital expenditure (CAPEX)
and operational expenditure (OPEX), mainly depending on the types of wind turbines
installed.
Several previous studies have proposed diﬀerent cost models for oﬀshore wind farms,
ranging from simple models that consider only the number of turbines to more complex
models that also take components and other installations into account. In fact, the
cost of oﬀshore wind farms is site-speciﬁc. Water depth, oﬀshore distance, type of soil
bed and so on are also inﬂuencing factors. There is some previous work that has taken
these factors into account as well.
In this study, the location of the wind farm is ﬁxed, and only the micro-sitting of the
turbines should be carried out, so the oﬀshore wind farm to be optimized only take
the turbine positions, types and numbers into account. Thus, a cost model combining
the model in the deliverable reports on INNWIND.EU (Chaviaropoulos and Natara-
jan, 2014) and the model in Key Performance Indicators and Target Values for Multi-
Megawatt Oﬀshore Turbines (Chaviaropoulos et al., 2014) is adopted, where there is a
scaling of the costs according to diﬀerent sizes of wind turbines.
Page 11 of 51
==PAGE:18==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
2.4.1
Wind turbine type
Before the cost calculation, the selection of the wind turbine types in the wind farm
should be carried out ﬁrst. Proper wind turbine selection can improve the power gen-
eration eﬃciency of wind farms. Compared with onshore wind farms, oﬀshore wind
farms tend to have larger wind turbines.
Table 1: General parameters of the selected wind turbines
Rated power [MW]
Hub height [m]
Rotor diameter [m]
LW2
2
70
82
LW5
5
90
130
LW8
8
110
164
LEANWIND 8 MW (LW8) is a reference turbine developed based primarily on pub-
lished data relating to the Vestas V164-8 MW turbine (Desmond et al., 2016). Refer
to the selection of turbine types by Feng and Shen (2017), the selected wind turbines
are LW8 and two other smaller turbines downscaled from it, LW5 (5 MW) and LW2
(2 MW). The general parameters of these three turbines are shown in Table 1. The
wake model and power generation model need to use the power curves and thrust co-
eﬃcient of the three types of wind turbines, so these power generation characteristics
are presented in Figure 4 and Table A1.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Power [kW]
LW2
LW5
LW8
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Thrust [kN]
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 4: Power curves and thrust curves of the 3 types of wind turbines
Page 12 of 51
==PAGE:19==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
2.4.2
Capital cost
The capital cost of oﬀshore wind is about twice that of onshore wind as shown in Table 2.
Not only are the turbines more expensive, but oﬀshore wind plants also cost more to
lay cables, build foundations and transportation than onshore plants. In Table 2, the
capital costs of a wind farm include these categories: the turbine cost, civil works, grid
connection costs and other capital costs.
Table 2: Reference values of capital cost breakdown for typical onshore and oﬀshore
wind power systems in developed countries, 2011 IRENA (2012)
Onshore
Oﬀshore
Capital investment costs (USD/kW)
1700-2450
3300-5000
Wind turbine cost share (%)
65-84
30-50
Grid connection cost share (%)
9-14
15-30
Construction cost share (%)
4-16
15-25
Other capital cost share (%)
4-10
8-30
Refer to the model built in INNWIND Deliverable D1.2.2 (Chaviaropoulos and Natara-
jan, 2014), the capital cost can be divided into turbine cost and balance of plant (BoP)
cost. For turbine cost, mass is the main cost driver. As for BoP cost, Innwind.EU only
addresses the oﬀshore foundation system. The reference oﬀshore wind turbine for scal-
ing is a 5 MW turbine, and its turbine cost TCref = 7.5Me, BoP cost BCref = 10Me.
The mean capital cost of a scaled wind turbine can be expressed as:
CAPEXmean =
TCref · (
P
Pref )
λT C
2
+ BCref · (
P
Pref )
λBC
2
P
(16)
The scaling coeﬃcients λTC and λBC depend on how the cost per megawatt of a wind
turbine change with its size. Four cost scenarios have been considered in the optimiza-
tion by Feng and Shen (2017), and the scaling coeﬃcients under these four scenarios
were derived from turbines with diﬀerent levels of innovation in the INNWIND report
(Chaviaropoulos and Natarajan, 2014) and listed in Table 3.
Page 13 of 51
==PAGE:20==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Table 3: Scaling coeﬃcients under four cost scenarios
Scenario
λTC
λBC
1
2
2
2
2.42
1.5
3
2.77
1.75
4
3
2
In scenario 1, the mean CAPEX is constant for any size of turbine. Scenario 2 assumes
that the capital cost per megawatt decrease as the turbine size increases since the new
technologies has the potential to reduce costs while increasing the capacity factor for
wind farms. Scenario 3 and scenario 4 both assume CAPEXmean increases with size.
Scenario 3 arises because it is possible that the technology maturity of smaller turbines
is higher. Scenario 4 uses the same technology for turbines of diﬀerent sizes leads to a
signiﬁcant increase in the cost of large turbines.
2
4
6
8
10
Turbine size (MW)
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
CAPEXmean (MEuro/MW)
S1
S2
S3
S4
Figure 5: Mean CAPEX for diﬀerent turbine sizes under 4 scenarios
Page 14 of 51
==PAGE:21==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
With these scaling parameters, the capital costs per MW for three types of turbines
used in this research are presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Capital cost per MW for the 3 types of wind turbines under four cost scenarios
Scenario
CAPEXmean[Me/MW]
LW2
LW5
LW8
1
3.5
3.5
3.5
2
3.75
3.5
3.43
3
3.3
3.5
3.68
4
2.95
3.5
3.9
Using CAPEXmean of each type of wind turbine, the capital cost of the entire plant
can be calculated, where N t is the number of type t wind turbines and P t
rated is its rated
power:
CAPEXtotal =
Ntype
X
t=1
CAPEXt
mean · N t · P t
rated
(17)
2.4.3
Operation and maintenance cost
Operation expenditure is an important part of the overall LCOE of wind power. It is
considered one of the major barriers to the further development of oﬀshore wind. OPEX
also varies for diﬀerent wind farms, and the main factors are the oﬀshore distance and
wind and ocean climate. Operation and maintenance cost consists of two parts, ﬁxed
and variable. The ﬁxed O&M cost is relatively easy to predict, while it is diﬃcult to
predict the variable component since the repair tasks occur randomly and are aﬀected
by environmental conditions and the age of the power plant.
In this study, an annual operation and maintenance cost estimation model in INNWIND
Deliverable D1.2.2
(Chaviaropoulos and Natarajan, 2014) scaling with the capacity
factor is adopted. The reference annualized OPEX is 106e/kW/year and CFref = 0.4.
Page 15 of 51
==PAGE:22==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
OPEX = OPEXref · Capacity · [1 + 0.5(CF −CFref)]
(18)
2.4.4
LCOE
Capital recovery factor (CRF) is the ratio used to determine the present value of a series
of equal annual cash payments. Present value is the current equivalent value of a set of
future cash ﬂows. CRF is an eﬀective cost analysis tool taking into account the time
value of money, and it is used to calculate the LCOE in Equation 20. It is determined
by the project lifetime Nyear and the discount rate r, as shown in Equation 19.
CRF =
r
1 −(1 + r)−Nyear
(19)
Refer to the recommend values in INNWIND Deliverable D1.2.2 (Chaviaropoulos and
Natarajan, 2014), the discount rate is 5.39% and the lifetime of wind farm is 25 years.
LCOE is calculated by discounting and levelizing the investment and operational costs
over the lifetime of a wind farm to the costs of each year, then dividing the annualized
costs by the annual energy production. Thus, after the CAPEX and the annualized
OPEX are obtained, Equation 20 can be used to calculate the LCOE of the whole
lifetime of the oﬀshore wind farm.
LCOE = CAPEXtotal · CRF + OPEX
AEP
(20)
Page 16 of 51
==PAGE:23==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
3
Optimization problem and algorithms
Diﬀerent optimization algorithms may produce diﬀerent optimization results. In this
section, the optimization objective function and constraints are introduced, as well
as the optimization algorithms used in this study. Three optimization algorithms are
adopted: random search, particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithm.
3.1
Objective function and constraints
The object of this wind farm layout optimization problem is to minimize the LCOE
and ensure the feasibility of the wind farm. In general, wind farm optimization is to
determine the positions of all wind turbines. Besides, turbine types, hub heights and
number of turbines can also aﬀect the amount of energy production of a wind farm.
Hence, a non-uniform wind farm optimization problem is formulated. In the micro-
siting, not only the location of each turbine, the turbine type of each turbine and the
number of turbines are also considered. Accordingly, it is a mixed integer-discrete-
continuous optimization problem. Considering these elements, the layout of the wind
farm can be expressed as L(X, Y, T). In L(X, Y, T):





X = [x1, x2, ..., xi, ..., xNwt]
Y = [y1, y2, ..., yi, ..., yNwt]
T = [T1, T2, ..., Ti, ..., TNwt]
(21)
xi and yi are the coordinates of WTi. Ti is its type code, Ti = 1, 2,or 3 represent LW2,
LW5, and LW8 respectively. The objective function can be expressed as:
min
fobj(L(X, Y, T), Nwt) = LCOE
(22)
There are constraints to wind farm design, such as the boundary and capacity of the
wind farm, the spacing and number of wind turbines, route of ships and planes, noise
and visual impact. While optimizing the objective function, the restriction conditions
should be satisﬁed to make the wind farm feasible. In this study, the optimization
Page 17 of 51
==PAGE:24==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
problem is simpliﬁed and complex issues such as ship, aerial traﬃc and social issues
are not considered. The constraints deﬁned are the boundary of the wind farm, the
total installed capacity, the minimum spacing between wind turbines and the maximum
number of turbines:















(xi, yi) ∈Sfeasible,
i = 1, 2, ..., Nwt
Capmin ≤Cap ≤Capmax
p
(xj −xk)2 + (yj −yk)2 ≥distmin,
∀j ̸= k
Nwt ≤N max
wt
Ti ∈{1, 2, 3}
(23)
All of these constraints need to be satisﬁed when designing a wind farm layout. Sfeasible
is the feasible area of the wind turbine layout, which deﬁnes the boundary of the wind
farm. Capmin and Capmax represent the upper and lower limits of wind farm installed
capacity respectively. distmin denotes the minimum allowable distances between any
two turbines, and N max
wt
is the maximum number of turbines allowed to be installed in
the wind farm.
3.2
Variable processing of mixed-integer programming
For random search, the above design variables and methods are appropriate because
the size of L is allowed to change during the optimization process. For the evolutionary
algorithms, such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) and genetic algorithm (GA),
the other two optimization methods used in this paper, the number of design variables
is assumed to be ﬁxed. This means that the number of turbines in the wind farm
can not be changed if the design variable L still includes only the x-coordinates, y-
coordinates and types of wind turbines. Therefore, the number of turbines also needs
to be added to the optimization individual when employing these two methods for
wind farm optimization. First, according to N max
wt , L is deﬁned to have a dimension
of n = 4 × N max
wt . In addition to the x, y, and T of N max
wt
turbines, a set of binary
codes representing their existence are added. Let the binary variable ei indicate that
WTi is located at this wind farm when it takes value one and zero otherwise. As a
result, the wind farm layout variable used in evolutionary algorithms is then expressed
Page 18 of 51
==PAGE:25==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
as L(X, Y, T, E). After that, the variable becomes:









X = [x1, x2, ..., xi, ..., xNmax
wt ]
Y = [y1, y2, ..., yi, ..., yNmax
wt ]
T = [T1, T2, ..., Ti, ..., TNmax
wt ]
E = [e1, e2, ..., ei, ..., eNmax
wt ]
(24)
A simple example can better illustrate this. If there is a wind farm with a maximum
of 5 wind turbines, and there are also 3 diﬀerent types of turbines to choose from, then
one of its possible layouts is shown in Figure 6. In this layout, only four wind turbines
are installed in the wind farm. It can be seen from the ﬁgure that the four WTs are
WT1, WT2, WT3 and WT5 respectively, and WT4 does not exist. Therefore, the binary
code representing the presence of WT4 is 0. Its coordinates can be any number, and
the turbine type can be any one of the three types.
X [m]
Y [m]
WT1
WT2
WT3
WT5
Type1
Type2
Type3
Figure 6: Wind farm diagram for this example layout
Thus, the corresponding L(X, Y, T, E) is represented as:
Page 19 of 51
==PAGE:26==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design









X = [x1, x2, x3, ex4, x5]
Y = [y1, y2, y3, ey4, y5]
T = [1, 1, 2, eT4, 3]
E = [1, 1, 1, 0, 1]
(25)
In PSO and GA, all variables are assumed to be continuous. Therefore, the values in T
and E may not be integers as new individuals are generated. In this case, for each newly
generated individual, the values in these two terms are converted to discrete values by
rounding oﬀ.
3.3
Random research
Random search is simple, intuitive and easy to implement. In previous studies, an
extended random search algorithm for designing non-uniform oﬀshore wind farm layout
has been developed by Feng and Shen (2017). Based on this, the RS method used in
this study can be constructed and the process is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Flow chart of random search method
Page 20 of 51
==PAGE:27==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
First, an initial layout L0 is given and the corresponding LCOE is calculated. The initial
layout is designed according to Equation 21, and it should be a feasible solution that
satisﬁes all the constraints. For a better comparison of four diﬀerent cost scenarios, it is
the same one for them. The maximum number of evaluations Emax is used as the stop
condition. Before reaching Emax, the wind farm layout is changed by some operations
before each evaluation step.
At each step, Nrepeat actions are taken to change the current layout, and there are
four diﬀerent actions: adding, removing, changing and moving. Diﬀerent from Feng’s
method, changing the turbine type and moving the turbine are two separate actions in
this study. Adding is a random placement of any type of WT within the feasible range
of the wind farm. Removing is to randomly select one of the existing turbines to be
removed from the wind farm. Changing is to randomly change the type of one wind
turbine. When changing the turbine type, the rotor diameter and hub height will be
changed as well as the characteristics of power generation. Moving is selecting a wind
turbine at random and moving a random distance in a random direction. Maximum
step size is set according to the size of the wind farm as the distance limit for the
moving action.
Before each action, a random number p between 0 and 1 is generated to determine which
of the four types of changes to make. When the action is carried out, a feasible wind
farm layout that satisﬁes the constraints is generated. Since the actions are random,
there is no guarantee that a feasible solution will always be generated once, and it
usually takes several attempts. In order to avoid the high time cost caused by making
too many attempts, a maximum number of attempts is set for each action. When this
number is reached but no layout that meets the constraint is produced, jump out of this
action and proceed to the next. When a feasible new design is successfully created after
Nrepeat actions, it is evaluated, and the number of evaluations E = E +1. Evaluation is
the calculation of the new LCOE, and then compare it with that of the current solution.
If the new layout is better than the current layout, the current best solution is updated.
Repeat these steps to reach the maximum number of evaluations to obtain the optimal
wind farm layout design.
Page 21 of 51
==PAGE:28==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
3.4
Particle swarm optimization
Particle swarm optimization is a population-based optimization method, which was pro-
posed by Kennedy and Eberhart (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995). It solves optimization
problems with a population of particles by moving these particles around the search
area to ﬁnd the best location. The movements of the particles are guided by their own
best position and the swarm’s best position.
Xt
i is the current location of particle i. As mentioned above, it is the L0 in Equation 24,
which is deﬁned as a 4×N max
wt -dimension variable, includes x-coordinates, y-coordinates,
turbine types and the binary codes that representing the existence for N max
wt
wind
turbines. The dimension of V t
i is the same as Xt
i.
In the ﬁrst step of optimization, a set of initial solutions, i.e., diﬀerent wind farm layouts,
need to be generated. These are the initial positions of the particles. When initialized,
it is better to make every particle in the initial swarm meet the constraints, which can
improve the performance of optimization and relatively reduce the time required for
convergence.
The process of PSO is shown in Figure 8. During the optimization, each individual i is
moved following the attraction of global best Pg and its own best Pi during the history
of the particle, as described below:
V t+1
i
= ωV t
i + c1γ1(Pi −Xt
i) + c2γ2(Pg −Xt
i)
(26)
Xt+1
i
= Xt
i + V t+1
i
(27)
ωV t
i is the inertia component, c1γ1(Pi −Xt
i) is the cognitive component, c2γ2(Pg −Xt
i)
is the social component.
ω is the inertia weight that is used to control the momentum of the particle. It deter-
mines the contribution of a particle’s current velocity V t
i to its velocity at the next time
step V t+1
i
. The larger the value of ω is, the smoother and gentler the direction change
of the search space is. Thus, large ω facilitates a global search while small ω facilitates
a local search. Linearly decreasing inertia weight is applied in this study in order to
Page 22 of 51
==PAGE:29==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
enhance global search in the early stage and local search in the late stage. Given the
ωstart and ωend, the inertia weight for step t can be calculated using the maximum
number of iterations T. In general, ωstart = 0.9, ωend = 0.4.
ωt = ωend + (ωstart −ωend) · (1 −t
T )
(28)
c1 and c2 are acceleration coeﬃcients and they are generally kept constant. Acceleration
coeﬃcients control how far a particle will move at one step. The coeﬃcient c1 called the
cognitive coeﬃcient has a contribution towards the self-exploration of a particle. The
coeﬃcient c2 is the social coeﬃcient because it has a contribution towards the motion
of the particles in a global direction. If c1 > c2, particle tends to exploit its historical
best position, whereas if c1 < c2, this particle pays more attention to exploit the best
position of the swarm. These two coeﬃcients generally lie in the range [0, 4]. A usual
choice for them is c1 = c2 = 2, but they can be adjusted by testing the performance of
diﬀerent values.
γ1 and γ2 are random variables with values from 0 to 1. They are employed to add
stochasticity to particles movement, which can prevent premature convergence to local
optimal. These random numbers are regenerated for each dimension separately at each
step.
The selection of swarm size is also important. For the majority of PSO algorithms, low
population sizes never perform statistically signiﬁcantly better than the larger swarms
(Piotrowski et al., 2020). However, a larger swarm may increase the number of func-
tion evaluations to achieve convergence, which will make it a time-consuming progress.
Therefore, selecting the appropriate swarm size can improve the performance of op-
timization without taking too much time. Although it also mentioned that the best
swarm size is weakly related to the dimension of the problem, for a problem with a
large dimension like wind farm layout optimization in this study, it is recommended
that the swarm size not be too small. As concluded by Piotrowski et al. (2020), the
swarm size within the [50, 300] range is the safest pick for real-world problems. Hence,
after comparing several diﬀerent population sizes, the swarm size is set to 100.
Diﬀerent from random search, in order to satisfy all the constraints, a penalty function
method is adopted in PSO algorithm. The penalty function is used to transform a
constrained problem into an unconstrained one. Since the maximum number of turbines
Page 23 of 51
==PAGE:30==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
is considered in the optimization variable, and lower and upper bounds for each design
variable are given to limit the wind turbines in the feasible area, only the installed
capacity and turbine spacing are considered in the penalty function.
Figure 8: Flow chart of particle swarm optimization
The inequality constraint that indicates the minimum clearance required between any
Page 24 of 51
==PAGE:31==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
two turbines in Equation 23 can be given by:
g1(L(X, Y, T, E)) =
Nwt
X
j=1
Nwt
X
k=1
max{distmin −
q
(xj −xk)2 + (yj −yk)2, 0}
(29)
The constraint representing whether the total installed capacity is within the required
range can be expressed as:
g2(L(X, Y, T, E)) = max{Cap −Capmax, Capmin −Cap, 0}
(30)
With the penalty term, the objective function with constraints can be transformed into:
min
fobj(L(x, y, T), Nwt) = LCOE + PF · (g1 + g2)
(31)
PF is the penalty factor to ensure the feasibility of the optimized wind farm layout.
The penalty factor should be a large number because a PF that is too small does not
guarantee that the ﬁnal optimization result is feasible. In this study, since LCOE is a
relatively small value, the PF value of 1000 is large enough.
In the end, the algorithm must stop to announce the best wind farm layout in hand.
There are several stop conditions: (1) reach the ﬁxed number of maximum generations;
(2) the standard deviation of the LCOE in the population is less than a predeﬁned
small number for successive generations; (3) no improvement occurs in the best LCOE
value. A combination of the ﬁrst two conditions is used here.
3.5
Genetic algorithm
A genetic algorithm is a search heuristic inspired by Darwin’s theory of evolution. In
the optimization process of using this algorithm, the ﬁttest individuals are selected
for reproduction to produce the next generation.
In the algorithm, the population
undergoes selection, crossover and mutation from generation to generation to produce
the population with higher ﬁtness.
Page 25 of 51
==PAGE:32==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Like the PSO algorithm, GA is one of the evolutionary algorithms. As a population-
based method, it also starts by randomly generating a population of initial solutions.
The diﬀerence between PSO and GA is that PSO is the cooperation between particles,
while GA is the competition between individuals. The size of the population must be
reasonable. If the population size is small, this means little search space is available,
and therefore it is possible to reach a local optimum; If the population size is very large,
the search space is increased but the computational load becomes high. GA and PSO
are similar, so after selecting a reasonable PSO population size, for better comparison,
the population size for GA is set to the same as that of PSO. One chromosome, the
individual in GA, is characterized by a set of variables known as genes. The optimization
variable for GA is also a 4 × N max
wt -dimension variable consists of x and y coordinates,
turbine types and binary codes, the same as that in PSO algorithm. Besides, penalty
function is implemented so the objective function in GA is Equation 31.
To solve real-world optimization problems, the real-coded genetic algorithm (RCGA)
is one of the most common methods. The performance of population-based algorithms
depends on whether the population is capable of wide and deep exploration, so the
selection, crossover, and mutation operations need some improvements over traditional
methods. An RCGA optimization scheme proposed by Chuang et al. (2016) is adopted
here. This RCGA is proven to have a small complexity index and outperform many
state-of-the-art algorithms. The ﬂow of this RCGA is shown in Figure 10, and the steps
are described in detail below.
3.5.1
Selection
In each generation, only a portion of the population can be selected to reproduce, and
parents are selected based on their ﬁtness scores. Individuals with high ﬁtness have
a high probability of being selected, while individuals with low ﬁtness are removed.
Therefore, the ﬁttest individuals can pass their genes to the next generation. Parent
selection is very important for the convergence rate because good parents will promote
individuals to get ﬁtter solutions.
In this study, instead of using the conventional
roulette wheel and tournament selections, ranking selection is adopted.
Individuals
with high ﬁtness are reproduced to replace individuals with low ﬁtness during the
selection process. Chromosomes with a population of N are ﬁrstly sorted according to
their individual ﬁtness value. Every chromosome has a rank depending on its expected
value. The number of chromosomes to be discarded is determined by pr × N. The
Page 26 of 51
==PAGE:33==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
proportional parameter pr is deﬁned as
1
M in this study, where M is the dimension
of the optimization variable. After selection, the total number of chromosomes in the
population is kept constant.
A simple example of the ranking selection is shown in Figure 9.
In this example,
assuming the variable dimension M = 5, so pr = 0.2. The population size N = 10, so
pr ×N = 2. It means 2 chromosomes with relatively worse ﬁtness will be discarded and
two highest-ranking chromosomes will be copied.
Figure 9: An illustration of the ranking selection with pr = 0.2 and N = 10.
3.5.2
Crossover and mutation
The use of the selection process determines the parents used in the crossover and mu-
tation to produce new oﬀspring.
After obtaining the parents to produce the next
generation, the next step is crossover and mutation. The populations are sorted by
ﬁtness scores again and then divided into two equal groups down the middle, resulting
in two groups of N
2 individuals. The probability of crossover pc is a user-deﬁned number
between 0 and 1, which is the chance that a crossover occurs for two chromosomes. It
means that not all matings must reproduce by crossover.
Page 27 of 51
==PAGE:34==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Instead of the conventional method of random pairing, pick up chromosomes from these
two groups consecutively as pairs of parents. Because the population is sorted before
divided, the ﬁtness of any individual in the ﬁrst group is better or equal to that of the
second group. Those with high ﬁtness are assigned as group P A, and those with lower
rankings are assigned as group P B.
P A = {L1, L2, ..., LN/2}
(32)
≡{LA
1 , LA
2 , ..., LA
N/2}
(33)
P B = {LN/2+1, LN/2+2, ..., LN}
(34)
≡{LB
1 , LB
2 , ..., LB
N/2}
(35)
For each pair of parents (LA
i , LB
i ), pc is used to determine whether to undergo crossover
or mutation. First, a random number rc between 0 and 1 is generated. If it is less than
the crossover probability pc and the pair of chromosomes do not have the same ﬁtness,
the crossover operation is performed. Otherwise, the two individuals mutate separately.
The probability for mutation should be set low. If it is set too high, the search will
get reduced to a random search. Moreover, most paired parents can go through the
crossover operation with a big pc. Therefore, pc should be set higher.
Direction-based crossover
Crossover is the most signiﬁcant phase in a genetic algorithm. The crossover of genetic
algorithm is to combine the information from a pair of chromosomes, thus forming two
new individuals. There are several diﬀerent ways to crossover: single point crossover,
multi point crossover, uniform crossover, diﬀerent kinds of arithmetic crossover and so
on. For real-coded genetic algorithm, point crossover and discrete crossover have poor
reﬁnement and low search eﬃciency, so arithmetic crossover should be used as the basic
crossover method in this study. In order to make the oﬀspring of crossover evolve in the
direction of the optimal solution, directed crossover is applied in Chuang et al. (2016).
The crossover direction of the ith pair of parents is deﬁned as:
⃗Di = [Di,1, Di,2, ..., Di,n]
(36)
Page 28 of 51
==PAGE:35==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Each pair of genes has a 50 percent chance of having a direction when doing crossover
operation. For the jth gene on the chromosome, a random number rj is generated. If
rj ≥0.5, this pair of genes move in the direction of the more ﬁt one, the one in group
P A.
Di,j =
(
LA
i,j −LB
i,j,
rj ≥0.5
0,
rj < 0.5
(37)
The crossover step size also varies with each pair of parents. The greater the ﬁtness dif-
ference between the two chromosomes, the greater the step size. Therefore, a parameter
sc,i is implemented to control the step size of the ith pair of parents:
sc,i =
|f(LA
i ) −f(LB
i )|
max{f(P A)} −min{f(P B)}
(38)
max{f(P A)} and min{f(P B)} are maximum ﬁtness and minimum ﬁtness in the current
population, so sc,i ∈(0, 1). With direction and step size, the crossover is carried out
and the oﬀspring chromosomes are generated:
(
LA∗
i
= LA
i + sc,i ⃗Di
LB∗
i
= LB
i + sc,i ⃗Di
(39)
As with PSO, there are boundary constraints that limit the chromosomes, so they do
not move outside the feasible area.
Dynamic random mutation
In evolution, some of the genes can be subjected to a mutation with a low probability,
introducing diversity into the population. Mutation is related to the exploration of
the search space and is essential for the convergence of GA. In order to prevent the
evolution from being trapped in a local search and a case of premature convergence, the
dynamic random mutation is proposed. The mutation starts with a larger search area,
resulting in a greater variety, and the mutation area gradually narrows as the number
Page 29 of 51
==PAGE:36==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
of generations increases. Thus, the mutation step size of generation t is adjusted by the
parameter sm:
sm = 1 −(1 −t
Tmax
)2
(40)
Tmax is the maximum generation number. As t increases, sm decreases.
Each gene on a chromosome mutates independently. When mutating, the step size limit
and direction are determined by another parameter Φ. This is a vector that contains
the random perturbation value φ of each gene. φ is a number randomly generated in
a given range (−φ0, φ0), φ0 ∈(0, 1). Then the oﬀspring produced by dynamic random
mutation can be expressed as:
(
LA∗
i
= LA
i + smΦ(LU −LL)
LB∗
i
= LB
i + smΦ(LU −LL)
(41)
LU and LU are the speciﬁed upper and lower bounds. With the boundary constraints,
the individuals will be located in the feasible area.
3.5.3
Replacement
After the crossover or mutation operation on a pair of parents, two new chromosomes
are generated. Replacement is the comparison of the parents and the oﬀspring, and
then the individuals with worse ﬁtness are eliminated. In order to keep the size of the
population constant, the number of individuals that are eliminated is the same as the
number of those who are left. Therefore, compare the oﬀspring to its corresponding
parent, f(LA∗) to f(LA), f(LB∗) to f(LB) respectively. The chromosomes with better
ﬁtness are reserved to the subsequent generation. After doing this for each parent and
oﬀspring, a new population is created. Select, cross, mutate, replace, and repeat these
operations until the stopping criteria are met. The termination criteria will be the same
as that for PSO, which is the combination of two conditions: (1) reach the ﬁxed number
of maximum generations; (2) the standard deviation of the LCOE in the population is
Page 30 of 51
==PAGE:37==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
less than a predeﬁned small number for successive generations.
Figure 10: Flow chart of real-coded genetic algorithm
Page 31 of 51
==PAGE:38==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
4
Case study
In this study, in order to simplify the problem and make it more realistic, a hypothetical
oﬀshore wind farm is designed for optimization based on the Horns Rev 1 oﬀshore wind
farm in Denmark. Horns Rev 1 is a classic wind farm, and a lot of research has been
done on it.
Horns Rev 1 is located about 15 km oﬀthe westernmost point of Denmark. It is the
ﬁrst large-scale oﬀshore wind farm in the world and the ﬁrst oﬀshore wind farm in the
North Sea. This farm occupies an area of 5 km by 3.8 km and has a rated capacity of
160 MW with 80 Vestas V80-2.0 wind turbines. The spacing between wind turbines is
560 m, which is 7 times the rotor diameter.
4.1
Wind condition
The wind data used for estimating the power production over the wind farm lifetime
is extracted from the wind resource report of Horns Rev (Tech-wise, A/S, 2002). The
reference height for these wind data is 62 m, which is used to calculate the wind speed
at diﬀerent hub heights. The wind resource is divided into 12 sectors in terms of wind
directions, and the probability and Weibull parameters of each sector are shown in
Table 5.
Table 5: Wind resource data for Horns Rev 1 oﬀshore wind farm
Direction
0◦
30◦
60◦
90◦
120◦
150◦
180◦
210◦
240◦
270◦
300◦
330◦
c [m/s]
8.71
9.36
9.29
10.27
10.89
10.49
10.94
11.23
11.93
11.94
12.17
10.31
k [ - ]
2.08
2.22
2.41
2.37
2.51
2.75
2.61
2.51
2.33
2.35
2.58
2.01
p [%]
3.8
4.3
5.5
8.3
8.7
6.7
8.4
10.5
11.4
12.2
13.9
6.1
According to the data, the wind rose diagram for this area is shown in Figure 11.
The probability of each wind direction and the wind speed distribution for that wind
direction are shown in this ﬁgure. As can be seen, the main wind direction at this
location is west, and the wind speed is generally between 4m/s and 12m/s. In addition,
southwest winds are also more frequent, while north winds are less frequent. Rarely
Page 32 of 51
==PAGE:39==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
does the wind speed fall below the cut-in wind speed and almost never exceed the
cut-out wind speed.
E
N-E
N
N-W
W
S-W
S
S-E
2.8
5.6
8.4
11.1
13.9
[0.0 : 4.0)
[4.0 : 8.0)
[8.0 : 12.0)
[12.0 : 16.0)
[16.0 : 20.0)
[20.0 : 24.0)
[24.0 : inf)
Figure 11: Wind rose for wind climate of the site
The fewer sectors are divided, the less time it takes to calculate. However, more sectors
will lead to more realistic results. In the original data, there are only 12 sectors, and the
sector width is 30◦. Therefore, in order to make the results of wind farm calculation
more accurate, they should be subdivided into more sectors. Here, select 1◦as the
sector width, i.e., the wind data is divided into 360 sectors. The Weibull parameters of
each sector are interpolated from the original parameters, and so are their probabilities.
4.2
Wind farm description
As for the basic setup of a wind farm, the boundaries of this wind farm need to be
deﬁned ﬁrstly, which is related to the total installed capacity. Based on the area and
installed capacity of Horns Rev 1 wind farm, each megawatt occupies an average of
about 0.12 square kilometers. Consider the prevailing wind direction in this area, the
hypothetical oﬀshore wind farm in the case study occupies a rectangle area of 4 km ×
Page 33 of 51
==PAGE:40==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
6 km with a maximum installed capacity of 200 MW. The average area is 0.12 square
kilometers per megawatt, close to the value of Horns Rev 1. All wind turbines should
be built within this zone and are allowed on the boundaries. In order to prevent too
few turbines, the minimum installed capacity is set at 120 MW. In addition, the upper
limit on the number of turbines is 30. So the boundary constraints are:
0 ≤xi ≤4000
(42)
0 ≤yi ≤6000
(43)
And the capacity and number constraints are:
120 ≤Capacity ≤200
(44)
Nwt ≤30
(45)
Referring to Horns Rev 1, the minimum distance between two wind turbines is speciﬁed
as 7 rotor diameters, which is also the general rule-of-thumb for wind farm spacing. This
setting is the optimization value after considering the inﬂuence factors such as the wake
eﬀect. Thus, in order to show the inﬂuence of the wake eﬀect, lower minimum spacing
is used. Here, the minimum distance between two turbines is set as 5 rotor diameters of
the larger one. The spacing constraint deﬁned in the previous section can be detailed
expressed as:
q
(xj −xk)2 + (yj −yk)2 ≥5 · max{Dj, Dk}
(46)
Page 34 of 51
==PAGE:41==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
4.3
Optimization results
4.3.1
Random search
The initial design of wind farm L0 is generated and shown in Figure 12. The 24 turbines
are arranged in grid-like layouts with all three turbine types, 4 LW2 WTs, 7 LW5 WTs
and 13 LW8 WTs. The total install capacity of the initial design is 147 MW, within
the limited capacity range [120, 200]. Besides, the boundary and spacing constraints
are satisﬁed as well.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 12: Initial wind farm layout with 24 wind turbines
Based on this feasible initial layout, random search is operated to optimize the wind
farm design under four diﬀerent cost scenarios. After some testing, the objective func-
tion generally converges within a few hundred evaluations, so the maximum number
of evaluations Emax is chosen to be 2000, and Nrepeat is set to 8. The probabilities of
taking adding, removing, changing, and moving actions are 0.15, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.5,
respectively, with the move taking the most. When moving a turbine, the maximum
step size is set to 500 meters to limit the movement distance. The optimization results
of random search are shown in Figure 13∼20 and Table 6.
Page 35 of 51
==PAGE:42==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Table 6: Optimization results of random search under four scenarios
Scenario
LCOE0
[Euro/MWh]
LCOEopt
[Euro/MWh]
imp.
AEP
[GWh]
Capacity
[MW]
CF
Number of turbines
LW2
LW5
LW8
1
65.637
65.255
0.58%
675.211
120
0.642
0
0
15
2
65.182
64.374
1.24%
675.201
120
0.642
0
0
15
3
67.115
66.315
1.19%
663.532
120
0.631
14
12
4
4
68.849
66.019
4.11%
663.543
120
0.631
14
12
4
From these optimized layouts, it can be seen that the installed capacities of the op-
timized designs under four diﬀerent scenarios are all equal to the lowest value of the
capacity constraints. If the total installed capacity of a wind farm is smaller, there are
relatively fewer turbines. Therefore, the power loss due to wake eﬀects is less, which
will slow down the decline of AEP with the decrease of installed capacity. The cost
also falls with the reduction of installed capacity, but it decreases linearly in the cost
model. As a result, the LCOE will decrease as the total capacity of the wind farm de-
creases. According to the convergence histories, LCOE in these four scenarios decreases
signiﬁcantly in the ﬁrst 200 steps and then tends to be stable and slowly converges.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 13: Random search optimized
layout in Scenario 1
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Step
65.25
65.30
65.35
65.40
65.45
65.50
65.55
65.60
65.65
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 14: Random search convergence
histories in Scenario 1
Page 36 of 51
==PAGE:43==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 15: Random search optimized
layout in Scenario 2
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Step
64.4
64.5
64.6
64.7
64.8
64.9
65.0
65.1
65.2
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 16: Random search convergence
histories in Scenario 2
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 17: Random search optimized
layout in Scenario 3
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Step
66.3
66.4
66.5
66.6
66.7
66.8
66.9
67.0
67.1
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 18: Random search convergence
histories in Scenario 3
Comparing Figure 13 and Figure 15, the optimized layouts are similar under Scenario 1
and Scenario 2. There are only 15 LW8 turbines installed in this wind park under both
scenarios, which means the optimization of wind farms tends to select larger turbines
when the capital cost per megawatt of a turbine is constant or when it decreases as
the turbine size increases. This is because if the minimum total installed capacity is
to be achieved, the use of large turbines can reduce the number of turbines to reduce
Page 37 of 51
==PAGE:44==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
the eﬀect of wake ﬂow, and the cost of using large turbines to achieve the same total
installed capacity will not be higher.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 19: Random search optimized
layout in Scenario 4
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Step
66.0
66.5
67.0
67.5
68.0
68.5
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 20: Random search convergence
histories in Scenario 4
The optimization results for Scenario 3 and Scenario 4 are also similar. Most of the
wind turbines in both scenarios are LW2 and LW5 WTs. Diﬀerent from Scenario 1 and
Scenario 2, although they also have a minimum installed capacity of 120 MW, they
have reached the maximum number of turbines. As the mean capital cost increases
with turbine size, the direction of optimization is to use smaller turbines. Although
this requires more turbines and leads to more energy loss, it is more economical than
using large, expensive turbines. Table 6 shows that the annual energy production of
Scenario 3 and 4 is lower than that in Scenario 1 and 2 due to more wake eﬀect.
Therefore, with the same total installed capacity, the capacity factors are lower in these
two layouts.
After the optimization, LCOE is reduced more in Scenario 4, because there is a large
price gap between large and small turbines. The initial wind farm layout has more large
turbines, while there are more LW2 WTs and LW5 WTs in this plant after optimization.
On the contrary, there is not much improvement in scenario 1, because the LCOE is
reduced mainly due to the reduction of wake loss caused by the reduction of total
installed capacity.
Page 38 of 51
==PAGE:45==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
4.3.2
Particle swarm optimization
The acceleration coeﬃcients originally chosen were the recommend values c1 = c2 = 2,
but due to poor performance, they were adjusted to optimize performance, and the
ﬁnal values are decided as c1 = c2 = 1.4. Since the maximum number of turbines is 30,
the dimension of the PSO particle is 120.
As for the stop condition of optimization, two conditions are set. First, the maximum
number of iterations is set to 1200. In addition, when the standard deviation of the
objective function of the particle swarm is less than 10−7 in 30 consecutive iterations,
it can be considered convergent and the optimization is completed.
The optimization results of PSO are shown in Table 7, and Figure 21∼28 show the
optimized layouts and optimization histories. Diﬀerent from random search, since dif-
ferent initial particle swarms are generated during the optimization initialization of each
scenario, their improvement is not compared. Under the four cost scenarios, the total
installed capacity of the optimized wind farm is close to the minimum requirement of
120 MW. The reason for this is the same as for random search.
Table 7: Optimization results of PSO under four scenarios
Scenario
LCOEopt
[Euro/MWh]
AEP
[GWh]
Capacity
[MW]
CF
Number of turbines
LW2
LW5
LW8
1
65.380
707.488
126
0.641
3
0
15
2
64.583
696.767
124
0.641
2
0
15
3
66.593
671.698
121
0.634
9
11
6
4
66.333
669.726
121
0.632
5
19
2
After particle swarm optimization, compared with the RS, the optimized layouts in
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 also have 15 LW8 WTs, but a small number of LW2 WTs
are added, resulting in a slight increase in AEP compared with RS. In general, the
optimization trend in these two scenarios is also to use fewer turbines to satisfy the
minimum total installed capacity. Scenario 1 has a higher AEP than Scenario 2 because
it has one more LW2 WT. Nevertheless, their capacity factors are the same. Because
there are fewer turbines in these two optimized layouts, there is little wake impact.
Judging from the convergence histories, they all need to take at least 300 generations
Page 39 of 51
==PAGE:46==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
to meet the convergence condition. In addition, the LCOE declined rapidly in the ﬁrst
100 generations and then gradually ﬂattened out.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 21: PSO optimized layout in
Scenario 1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Generation
65.38
65.40
65.42
65.44
65.46
65.48
65.50
65.52
65.54
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 22: PSO convergence histories in
Scenario 1
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 23: PSO optimized layout in
Scenario 2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Generation
64.575
64.600
64.625
64.650
64.675
64.700
64.725
64.750
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 24: PSO convergence histories in
Scenario 2
Page 40 of 51
==PAGE:47==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 25: PSO optimized layout in
Scenario 3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Generation
66.60
66.65
66.70
66.75
66.80
66.85
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 26: PSO convergence histories in
Scenario 3
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 27: PSO optimized layout in
Scenario 4
0
100
200
300
400
500
Generation
66.4
66.6
66.8
67.0
67.2
67.4
67.6
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 28: PSO convergence histories in
Scenario 4
Looking at the optimization results of Scenario 3 and Scenario 4, although the total
installed capacity is almost the same as the RS results, the diﬀerence between the
selection of wind turbines is relatively large. Diﬀerent from Scenario 1 and 2, due to
the high cost of large turbines, most of the turbines used are small and medium-sized,
so more turbines are needed. In the optimized layouts in both scenarios, the majority
of the turbines are LW5 WTs. Although the optimal solution of Scenario 3 is quite
diﬀerent from that of Scenario 4, the total number of wind turbines in both of them
Page 41 of 51
==PAGE:48==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
is 26. Scenario 4 has 8 more LW5 WTs than Scenario 3, because it can reduce the
number of LW8 WTs, and the cost of large capacity wind turbines in this scenario is
much higher. The optimal layout for Scenario 3 has a slightly higher AEP, so it can be
concluded that with the same total installed capacity and number of Wind turbines,
more large turbines can generate more power and increase the capacity factor. For these
two scenarios, it will take 500 or 600 generations to reach the conditions of convergence,
which is slower than the optimization in the ﬁrst two scenarios.
4.3.3
Genetic algorithm
For better comparison, GA and PSO have the same population parameters.
Thus,
the population size is 100 as well, and their individuals have the same form. With
N = 100, M = 120, the proportional parameter for ranking selection can be obtained:
pr = 1. This value means that, at each selection session, only the least ﬁt individual is
discarded.
According to the performance comparisons of some designate tests in the work of
Chuang et al. (2016), the probability of crossover pc is set to 0.9.
This represents
that when a pair of parents have diﬀerent ﬁtness scores, they cross 90 percent of the
time and mutate another 10 percent of the time.
To ensure at least half of the search space of each gene can be covered by the mutation
operation, the parameter φ0 for controlling the range of feasible mutation region is set
to 0.5 referring to the value recommended by Chuang et al. (2016).
Table 8: Optimization results of GA under four scenarios
Scenario
LCOEopt
[Euro/MWh]
AEP
[GWh]
Capacity
[MW]
CF
Number of turbines
LW2
LW5
LW8
1
65.370
707.601
126
0.641
3
0
15
2
64.381
720.128
128
0.642
0
0
16
3
66.772
668.064
120
0.636
8
8
8
4
67.142
666.552
120
0.634
5
14
5
With the same termination condition as the PSO, GA runs and the results of the
optimization algorithm are shown in Table 8 and the ﬁgures below. In Table 8, it can
Page 42 of 51
==PAGE:49==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
be seen from the optimized total installed capacity of the four scenarios that, like the
results of the other two algorithms, there is a tendency to use as few wind turbines as
possible to reduce the loss due to the wake eﬀect. As with the PSO, the optimized total
installed capacity in Scenarios 1 and 2 is also higher than the given 120MW.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 29: GA optimized layout in
Scenario 1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Generation
65.375
65.400
65.425
65.450
65.475
65.500
65.525
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 30: GA convergence histories in
Scenario 1
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 31: GA optimized layout in
Scenario 2
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Generation
64.40
64.45
64.50
64.55
64.60
64.65
64.70
64.75
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 32: GA convergence histories in
Scenario 2
The optimal layout of Scenario 1 is very similar to that of the PSO, except that the
positions of the turbines are diﬀerent, so their LCOE is similar. The diﬀerence lies in
Page 43 of 51
==PAGE:50==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
the diﬀerence in AEP caused by the diﬀerence in wake loss. The optimized installed
capacity of Scenario 2 is more than that of PSO, but since it only adds one LW8
WT, more power generation is added but the cost is not greatly increased, so LCOE
is lower, which is close to the result of RS. Although the total installed capacity of
these two optimization solutions is relatively high and can generate more power, the
capacity factor is almost the same as that of the other two algorithms. The optimization
converges in about 700 generations, and they achieve most of the LCOE reductions in
the ﬁrst 200 generations.
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 33: GA optimized layout in
Scenario 3
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Generation
66.78
66.80
66.82
66.84
66.86
66.88
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 34: GA convergence histories in
Scenario 3
−1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
x(m)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
y(m)
Boundary
LW2
LW5
LW8
Figure 35: GA optimized layout in
Scenario 4
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Generation
67.2
67.3
67.4
67.5
67.6
67.7
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
Figure 36: GA convergence histories in
Scenario 4
Page 44 of 51
==PAGE:51==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Scenarios 3 and 4 have optimized layouts with 24 turbines and the same total installed
capacity. The optimized layout under Scenario 3 includes three types of wind turbines
with eight each. In Scenario 4, LW5 WT is the main type, while the other two types
are relatively few. It can be seen that their LCOE is not very low after optimization.
It is because too many LW8 WTs are used, even though the number of turbines has
been reduced and therefore the amount of electricity generated has increased, it has
resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in costs. The same conclusion can be drawn from the
comparison that the number of LW8 WTs used aﬀects the capacity factor when both
layouts have the same number of turbines and installed capacity. In addition, from the
perspective of convergence history, the optimization in these two scenarios have not
reached the convergence state in the 1200 generation, and LCOE still has a downward
trend.
4.4
Results comparison
After obtaining the optimization results of the three optimization algorithms, the sim-
ilarities and diﬀerences between them can be seen through comparison. First, a com-
parison of their characteristics is shown in Table 9. It can be seen that RS is quite
diﬀerent from the other two, while PSO and GA adopt the same parameter setting due
to some similarity of these two algorithms.
Table 9: Comparison of three optimization algorithms
Algorithm
Solution size
Penalty function
Dimension of L
Termination condition
RS
1
No
3 × Nwt
E = 2000
PSO
100
Yes
4 × N max
wt
t = 1200 and std[t −30, t] ≤10−7
GA
100
Yes
4 × N max
wt
t = 1200 and std[t −30, t] ≤10−7
From the point of view of the optimized layout, these optimization algorithms all tend
to reduce the total installed capacity, so as to minimize the wake loss between wind
turbines. In addition, by observing the optimized layouts, although it is not obvious,
the tendency to optimize the layout is that the medium and large wind turbines are
generally placed in the position of the main wind direction of the wind farm.
In Scenario 1 and 2, LW8 WT is chosen as the main turbine by all three algorithms
because the cost of large turbines is lower and the total number of turbines in the
Page 45 of 51
==PAGE:52==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
wind farm is smaller. In Scenario 3 and 4, the optimization direction is to select small
and medium-sized turbines as far as possible under the premise of not exceeding the
maximum number of turbines, because the cost of large turbines is higher, and their
reduced wake loss is not enough to make up for the cost increase. From Table 10, the
capacity factors of the optimal layout generated by the three algorithms are all lower
in Scenario 3 and 4, because they have more wind turbines, resulting in greater wake
loss.
Table 10: Capacity factor comparison of three algorithms under four scenarios
Scenario
Capacity factor
RS
PSO
GA
1
0.642
0.641
0.641
2
0.642
0.641
0.642
3
0.631
0.634
0.636
4
0.631
0.632
0.634
Comparison of LCOE optimized by the three algorithms can be seen in Figure 37, which
includes four cost scenarios. In these four scenarios, the optimized LCOE of RS is the
lowest. The optimization results of the three algorithms in Scenario 1 are similar, and
the diﬀerence of their optimized LCOE in Scenario 2 is also small. However, under
Scenario 3 and 4, the RS method outperforms the other two algorithms as signiﬁcantly
lower LCOE values are achieved. In addition, from the perspective of the evaluation
times required to achieve convergence, RS only needs hundreds of times, while PSO
and GA need tens of thousands of times, especially GA.
The convergence speeds of all three algorithms are relatively slow in Scenario 3 and
4. As mentioned earlier, when the CAPEXmean increases with the turbine size, the
optimization trend is to install more wind turbines in the wind farm. When optimizing,
both the position and type of each turbine need to be adjusted. Therefore, if the number
of turbines increases, the workload will increase, and it will take longer to ﬁnd a better
solution.
Page 46 of 51
==PAGE:53==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
RS
PSO
GA
Algorithm
64.5
65.0
65.5
66.0
66.5
67.0
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
S1
S2
S3
S4
Figure 37: Optimization results comparison of three algorithms
4.5
Systematic comparison of the three algorithms
Because the above comparison of the three algorithms is based on the results after
reaching the convergence condition respectively, the times of evaluation for them to
get the optimal results are diﬀerent.
In this part, in order to compare them more
systematically, the optimization results of the three algorithms after the same number
of evaluations will be compared.
The initial layout may also aﬀect the optimization performance, so for PSO and GA,
six diﬀerent feasible initial populations are generated randomly, and the size of the
population is still 100. From these six groups, one individual of each group is selected
as the initial layout of RS. With these initial layouts, for each of the four scenarios,
each algorithm runs six times.
Although RS can converge in a few hundred steps,
PSO and GA need at least 300 generations. Thus, 30,000 steps are selected as the
stop condition for RS, and PSO and GA are carried out for 300 generations, so that
their evaluation times are all 30,000. The performance of these three algorithms is
summarized in Table 11.
Page 47 of 51
==PAGE:54==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Table 11: Performance comparison of three algorithms
LCOEopt [Euro/MWh]
Scenario
1
2
3
4
RS (6 runs)
min
65.256
64.373
66.241
65.835
mean
65.257
64.374
66.281
66.094
max
65.260
64.377
66.445
66.559
PSO (6 runs)
min
65.303
64.487
66.481
66.636
mean
65.345
64.539
66.632
67.318
max
65.417
64.593
66.790
67.693
GA (6 runs)
min
65.299
64.459
66.566
66.887
mean
65.331
64.499
66.699
67.179
max
65.371
64.573
66.894
67.516
It can be seen that the optimization result of RS is better than that of PSO and GA in
four cost scenarios. In terms of maximum and minimum values, the diﬀerence between
the results of six runs in the ﬁrst two scenarios is not large. However, for Scenario 3
and 4, the optimization results of each group of initial solutions diﬀer greatly, especially
for Scenario 4. In Scenario 4, even the maximum and minimum values of RS show a
relatively large diﬀerence, and they are all the results of convergence, so it can be said
that diﬀerent runs converge to diﬀerent results.
The convergence histories for 6 runs of three algorithms under 4 scenarios are shown
in the following ﬁgures.
From the initial LCOE in these ﬁgures, the initial values
of RS are often higher than those of the other two algorithms, because it adopts an
initial solution randomly selected from the initial population, while PSO and GA only
record the optimal initial solution in the population. Nevertheless, the LCOE after RS
optimization is the lowest.
Page 48 of 51
==PAGE:55==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
65.3
65.4
65.5
65.6
65.7
65.8
65.9
66.0
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
RS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
PSO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
GA
Figure 38: Convergence histories of 6 runs of three algorithms in Scenario 1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
64.4
64.6
64.8
65.0
65.2
65.4
65.6
65.8
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
RS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
PSO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
GA
Figure 39: Convergence histories of 6 runs of three algorithms in Scenario 2
In Scenario 1 and 2, except for the diﬀerence in initial value, the convergence histories
of the six runs of RS almost coincide, i.e. the optimized LCOE obtained by them is
almost the same, and all of them achieve low LCOE in fewer steps. Compared with RS,
the convergence of PSO requires more evaluation times, while GA is the slowest to reach
the convergence state. Many LCOE reductions are achieved early in the optimization
process. However, some runs show that the early convergence of PSO may be premature
because the optimized LCOE obtained by GA is slightly lower than that obtained by
PSO.
Page 49 of 51
==PAGE:56==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
66.2
66.4
66.6
66.8
67.0
67.2
67.4
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
RS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
PSO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
GA
Figure 40: Convergence histories of 6 runs of three algorithms in Scenario 3
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
66.0
66.5
67.0
67.5
68.0
68.5
69.0
69.5
LCOE (Euro/MWh)
RS
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
PSO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of evaluations (x103)
GA
Figure 41: Convergence histories of 6 runs of three algorithms in Scenario 4
In the two scenarios where CAPEXmean is assumed to increase with size, the diﬀerence
between the convergence histories caused by diﬀerent initial solutions is large. For RS,
the number of steps required for convergence of these six runs is about the same, but
the ﬁnal LCOE obtained by some groups is still high. However, it can be seen that the
level of the objective function value of the initial layout does not aﬀect the level of the
optimized result. PSO and GA still converge slowly, especially GA, most of which have
not reached the convergence state. PSO is easy to obtain the local optimal solution.
In Scenario 4, even only one group gets a relatively low optimized LCOE, while the
others converge at a higher value. GA also has several groups with the same problem.
In addition, because the speed of GA optimization is relatively slow, it has not reached
convergence after the same number of evaluation times. Thus, it is reasonable that the
values of the objective function obtained are higher.
Page 50 of 51
==PAGE:57==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
5
Conclusion and outlook
This paper has presented a framework to calculate the levelized cost of energy of the
oﬀshore wind farm with wind turbines of diﬀerent types and adopted three diﬀerent
optimization algorithms to optimize the wind farm layout design, aiming to reduce
the LCOE. The size of the design variable vector of PSO and GA is ﬁxed, so for this
mixed integer-discrete-continuous problem, binary codes are added to make these two
algorithms capable of considering an unﬁxed number of turbines.
On the whole, the layout optimization is mainly to minimize wake loss. Four diﬀerent
cost scenarios are considered when calculating the cost of a wind farm. When the mean
capital cost of a wind turbine decreases or stays constant with the increase in size, the
use of large wind turbines can reduce the number of turbines needed, thus reducing
wake losses.
When the mean capital cost increases with the turbine size, although
selecting more small and medium-sized turbines will reduce the capacity factor of the
wind farm, it will save the cost and obtain a lower LCOE. Moreover, the capacity factor
can be increased by the use of larger turbines, because the higher hub heights allow
them to be subjected to higher wind speeds.
By comparing the optimization performance of the three algorithms, it can be concluded
that RS outperforms the other two algorithms. Because the RS operates on one turbine
per action, while the PSO and GA operate on all turbines in the wind farm, the RS
can ﬁnd a better solution much faster. Diﬀerent initial solutions will also aﬀect the
optimization results, but the inﬂuence on RS is relatively small. Furthermore, PSO and
GA may fall into local convergence, sometimes leading to unsatisfactory optimization
results, making their performance unstable. In summary, RS is a reliable and useful
method for wind farm layout optimization that can ﬁnd better layout designs while
consuming much fewer number of evaluations.
In future work, more complex and important inﬂuencing factors can be taken into
account when establishing the wind farm layout model, so as to make it more realistic.
In addition, some adjustments can be made to the parameters of the algorithms, which
may avoid the above problems and improve the performance of the optimization.
Page 51 of 51
==PAGE:58==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
References
Bansal, J. C. and Farswan, P. (2017). Wind farm layout using biogeography based
optimization. Renewable Energy, 107:386–402.
Charhouni, N., Sallaou, M., and Mansouri, K. (2019). Realistic wind farm design layout
optimization with diﬀerent wind turbines types. International Journal of Energy and
Environmental Engineering, 10(3):307–318.
Chaviaropoulos, P. and Natarajan, A. (2014). INNWIND Deliverable D1.2.2. Deﬁnition
of Performance Indicators (PIs) and Target Values.
Chaviaropoulos, P. K., Natarajan, A., and Jensen, P. H. (2014).
Key performance
indicators and target values for multi-megawatt oﬀshore turbines.
Proceedings of
Ewea 2014.
Chen, Y., Li, H., Jin, K., and Song, Q. (2013). Wind farm layout optimization using
genetic algorithm with diﬀerent hub height wind turbines. Energy Conversion and
Management, 70:56–65.
Chowdhury, S., Zhang, J., Messac, A., and Castillo, L. (2012).
Unrestricted wind
farm layout optimization (uwﬂo): Investigating key factors inﬂuencing the maximum
power generation. Renewable Energy, 38(1):16–30.
Chuang, Y.-C., Chen, C.-T., and Hwang, C. (2016). A simple and eﬃcient real-coded
genetic algorithm for constrained optimization. Applied Soft Computing, 38:87–105.
Desmond, C., Murphy, J., Blonk, L., and Haans, W. (2016). Description of an 8 mw
reference wind turbine. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 753(9):092013.
Feng, J. and Shen, W. Z. (2013). Optimization of wind farm layout: A reﬁnement
method by random search.
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on
Aerodynamics of Oﬀshore Wind Energy Systems and Wakes (icowes2013), pages 624–
633.
Feng, J. and Shen, W. Z. (2015). Solving the wind farm layout optimization problem
using random search algorithm. Renewable Energy, 78:182–192.
Feng, J. and Shen, W. Z. (2017). Design optimization of oﬀshore wind farms with
multiple types of wind turbines. Applied Energy, 205:1283–1297.
==PAGE:59==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
GWEC (2021). Global wind report 2021. Global Wind Energy Council.
Hou, P., Hu, W., Chen, C., Soltani, M., and Chen, Z. (2016). Optimization of oﬀshore
wind farm layout in restricted zones. Energy, 113:487–496.
Hou, P., Hu, W., Soltani, M., and Chen, Z. (2015). Optimized placement of wind tur-
bines in large-scale oﬀshore wind farm using particle swarm optimization algorithm.
IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 6(4):1272–1282.
IRENA (2012).
Renewable energy technologies: cost analysis series.
International
Renewable Energy Agency.
Jensen, N. (1983). A note on wind generator interaction. Number 2411 in Risø-M. Risø
National Laboratory.
Katic, I., Højstrup, J., and Jensen, N. (1987). A simple model for cluster eﬃciency. In
Palz, W. and Sesto, E., editors, EWEC’86. Proceedings. Vol. 1, pages 407–410. A.
Raguzzi. European Wind Energy Association Conference and Exhibition, EWEC ’86
; Conference date: 06-10-1986 Through 08-10-1986.
Kennedy, J. and Eberhart, R. (1995). Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of
ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks, volume 4, pages 1942–1948
vol.4.
Kiamehr, K. and Hannani, S. (2014). Wind farm layout optimization using imperialist
competitive algorithm. Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy, 6:043109.
Pillai, A. C., Chick, J., Khorasanchi, M., Barbouchi, S., and Johanning, L. (2017). Ap-
plication of an oﬀshore wind farm layout optimization methodology at middelgrunden
wind farm. Ocean Engineering, 139:287–297.
Piotrowski, A. P., Napiorkowski, J. J., and Piotrowska, A. E. (2020). Population size
in particle swarm optimization. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 58:100718.
Sun, H., Yang, H., and Gao, X. (2019). Investigation into spacing restriction and layout
optimization of wind farm with multiple types of wind turbines. Energy, 168:637–650.
Tech-wise, A/S (2002). Wind resources at Horns Rev. Tech-Wise A/S.
Wan, C., Wang, J., Yang, G., Gu, H., and Zhang, X. (2012). Wind farm micro-siting by
gaussian particle swarm optimization with local search strategy. Renewable Energy,
48:276–286.
==PAGE:60==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Wu, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, R., Wang, Y., and Feng, X. (2020). A design methodology
for wind farm layout considering cable routing and economic beneﬁt based on genetic
algorithm and geosteiner. Renewable Energy, 146:687–698.
WWEA (2021). Worldwide Wind Capacity Reaches 744 Gigawatts - An Unprecedented
93 Gigawatts added in 2020.
Yang, K. and Cho, K. (2019). Simulated annealing algorithm for wind farm layout
optimization: A benchmark study. Energies, 12(23):4403.
==PAGE:61==
Mixed integer-discrete-continuous optimization for wind farm design
Appendices
Table A1: Power and thrust coeﬃcient of the three types of WTs.
Windspeed
[m/s]
Power [kW]
Ct
Windspeed
[m/s]
Power [kW]
Ct
LW2
LW5
LW8
LW2
LW5
LW8
4
28
69
110
0.92
15
2000
5000
8000
0.24
4.5
88
219
350
0.88
15.5
2000
5000
8000
0.22
5
150
375
600
0.85
16
2000
5000
8000
0.19
5.5
213
531
850
0.83
16.5
2000
5000
8000
0.18
6
285
713
1140
0.82
17
2000
5000
8000
0.16
6.5
373
931
1490
0.81
17.5
2000
5000
8000
0.15
7
475
1188
1900
0.8
18
2000
5000
8000
0.14
7.5
593
1481
2370
0.79
18.5
2000
5000
8000
0.13
8
725
1813
2900
0.78
19
2000
5000
8000
0.12
8.5
875
2188
3500
0.77
19.5
2000
5000
8000
0.11
9
1039
2597
4155
0.76
20
2000
5000
8000
0.1
9.5
1218
3044
4870
0.75
20.5
2000
5000
8000
0.09
10
1408
3519
5630
0.73
21
2000
5000
8000
0.09
10.5
1605
4013
6420
0.71
21.5
2000
5000
8000
0.08
11
1788
4469
7150
0.67
22
2000
5000
8000
0.08
11.5
1903
4756
7610
0.6
22.5
2000
5000
8000
0.07
12
1966
4916
7865
0.52
23
2000
5000
8000
0.07
12.5
1985
4963
7940
0.45
23.5
2000
5000
8000
0.06
13
1993
4981
7970
0.39
24
2000
5000
8000
0.06
13.5
2000
5000
8000
0.34
24.5
2000
5000
8000
0.06
14
2000
5000
8000
0.3
25
2000
5000
8000
0.05
14.5
2000
5000
8000
0.27
Page i of i
