==PAGE:1==
Deep generative models for periodic graphs with
application to crystal structure generation
Frederik Roar Weber s145418
Arghya Bhowmik
Peter Bjørn Jørgensen
July 22, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Computers are not designed to handle inﬁnite sequences, but that doesn’t mean that
inﬁnity cannot be found in the world. Especially with chemical crystal structures,
there’s rarely a known upper bound on how large a given structure is. In chemistry,
the only known way to study materials is to manually ﬁnd, experiment, and measure
every aspect of them manually. This project explores the possibility of using quotient
graphs to represent these inﬁnite crystals structures and explains how that can be
used to solve both issues. Making chemistry teachable to computers can change how
crystals are studied in the future. So far a quotient graph representation of crystals
has been made, and a machine learning model has shown that it is possible to teach
chemistry to a computer. This project aims to combine these two and bridge the
gap between inﬁnite crystal structures and ﬁnite computer processing power. The
project will use a variational autoencoder model to generate new crystal structures.
The validity of these structures and the performance of the model will be discussed to
explain how eﬃcient this approach is. The generated structures will be analyzed on a
variety of diﬀerent criteria, including; chemical stability, distribution of atom types,
structure size, and atomic neighborhood. The results show some promise that this
approach could work, but that a better-focused dataset is needed to achieve a proper
conclusion.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Motivation
3
3
Methods
4
3.1
Vorosym . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Quotient graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
GraphVAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
Validity of structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Dataset
10
5
Experiments
11
6
Discussion
17
6.1
Analysis of structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.2
Connection type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.3
Atom to atom connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.4
Charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5
Most common atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.6
Voronoi analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.7
O relation analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Conclusion
31
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
When searching for new materials, chemist often have to manually search through
known material properties to hypothesize new materials. Because of this, it has in
resent years a way to you machine learning to speed up this process has become very
sought after [1, 2, 3].
Deep generative models are a great way to learn and explore complex data at-
tributes when using unsupervised learning. One model that has shown great potentials
for both learning from data and generating new data is the variational autoencoder
(VAE) [4].
Simonovsky and Komodakis [5] showed that it is possible to use a VAE model to
learn chemical structures and to produce new artiﬁcial structures that are statistically
close to the structures they used to learn from. Kim et al. [1] has previously showed
results for using a GAN (Generative adversarial networks) to solve this.
Hataya,
Nakayama, and Yoshizoe [2] has also generated new molecules using a energy based
approach.
This project aims to further explore the potentials that the VAE can provide for
future chemical research. According to Guo and Zhao [6] this approach should be a
viable solution.
While Simonovsky and Komodakis [5] showed this for organic chemical molecules,
the focus here will instead be on crystal structures. This also brings the main challenge
to the project; whilst molecules are small ﬁnite structures, crystals are periodic and
can be repeating inﬁnitely.
To represent the structures in a way that can be used for machine learning, a way
to represent an inﬁnite crystal structure as something ﬁnite is needed.
Jørgensen et al. [7] showed that it is possible to represent these inﬁnite crystal
structures as ﬁnite quotient graphs.
Quotient graphs can represent an inﬁnite periodic graph as a ﬁnite graph, by
representing only a small portion of the graph [8]. This subgraph can then be repeated
inﬁnitely to recreate an inﬁnite graph.
This will be the main focus of this project. Is it possible to teach a VAE how to
generate valid quotient graphs? and is it then possible to take those graphs and turn
them into a chemically valid crystal structure? and by extension, is it possible for a
VAE to learn what a chemically valid quotient graph should look like?
2
Motivation
Crystal structures are molecular structures of atoms that sit in periodic repeating
patterns. These structures can potentially be inﬁnitely large, which makes them diﬃ-
cult, if not impossible to deal with when it comes to the ﬁnite resources of computers.
Because of this, it is necessary to translate these structures into something ﬁnite so
that a computer or a mathematical model can express them. To do this, quotient
graphs are suitable [7, 9].
3
==PAGE:5==
Quotient graphs can describe what would otherwise be an inﬁnite graph as a
representation in a ﬁnite space [8]. This representation is a repeatable substructure
or sub-graph of the main graph.
Once a structure is represented in a ﬁnite space, a database of these structures
be created and explored. One popular way to explore large data sets is, to create
neural networks (NN) for deep learning. Deep learning methods employ some mathe-
matical model that is capable of learning and interpreting hidden or latent attributes
of some data set [10, 11]. This can even extend to attributes that the model wasn’t
explicitly told to look for (unsupervised learning).
One key feature of some deep
learning methods is that after being taught, they can create new artiﬁcial data points
which did not exist in the original dataset, but are similar enough that they become
indistinguishable from the original data.
In this project, quotient graphs are explained and how they can be used to describe
crystal structures (section 3.2). Then the OQMD database of crystal structures [12,
13] will be described (section 4) and how the quotient graph representation of these
can be derived (section 3.3). After creating the dataset, it should be possible to train
a deep learning neural network model, speciﬁcally a variational autoencoder (VAE)
[4], to recognize the latent attributes of this dataset.
With this model it should hopefully be possible to create new data, that can be
used to successfully describe a quotient graph.
It should then be possible to translate these generated quotient graphs into a
chemically valid crystal structure.
The two main goals that are hoped to be achieved are to successfully train a VAE
model to understand quotient graphs and then for these graphs to also be chemically
valid.
The model should then be able to successfully create never before seen crystal
structures. This model could open up possibilities for a new alternative and eﬃcient
way for chemists and researchers to ﬁnd potential candidates for new crystals and
materials that can be discovered and studied further.
3
Methods
3.1
Vorosym
Vorosym [7] is a tool that can understand and visualize diﬀerent atomic crystal struc-
tures. It uses a 3D version of a Voronoi diagram to interpret and analyze these crystal
structures. By using vorosym it is possible to generate a Voronoi representation of a
crystal, where the relations between the Voronoi cells can be described as a quotient
graph [8].
A Voronoi cell describes a space around an atom that takes up as much space as
possible before it gets intercepted by a diﬀerent Voronoi cell. Once the Voronoi can’t
expand any further, it has met diﬀerent Voronoi cells belonging to diﬀerent atoms in
every direction.
4
==PAGE:6==
Figure 1: Example of a voronoi in 2D
Figure 2:
Example of a voronoi in 3D as
illustrated in [7].
Voronoi cells of BaSnO3.
The cells have been displaced for the visual-
ization. The color of the facets corresponds to
the atomic species of the neighbouring atom
(green for Ba, grey for Sn and red for O neigh-
bours)
A tightly packed Voronoi cell then has some 3D shape. This shape belongs to
a space group that describes how many faces it has and how the shapes diﬀerent
symmetry works. By writing each atom as a node in a graph, then the faces of the
Voronoi are the edges in the graph, where the edge connects the two atoms whose
Voronoi faces are touching. This makes up a graph representation of that Voronoi
diagram.
3.2
Quotient graphs
When presenting inﬁnite graphs for a computer model to use, it has to be represented
as something ﬁnite. To do this the quotient graph representation of inﬁnite graphs
[8] has been used.
This representation deﬁnes a small sub-graph of the inﬁnite graph. The sub-graph
not only has to contain information on how its edges connect its nodes, but also how
the nodes are connected to other repeating copies of the subgraph.
Let’s refer to a sub-graph as a cell. This cell can then be repeated periodically to
recreate the original inﬁnite graph.
For a cell to be able to represent the original graph, it not only needs to represent
the sub-graph it contains, but also information about its relation to its neighboring
identical cells, so reconstruction can be achieved correctly.
To do this, not only does every node have a set of edges pointing to other nodes
in the origin-cell, but also a set of edges that point to nodes outside of the origin-cell.
For every node that is not in the origin cell, it must instead be represented by an
identical twin node that is inside the origin cell. Thereby it is possible for two nodes
5
==PAGE:7==
to share more than one edge It is also possible for a node to share an edge with itself,
but only when its other self belongs to an outside cell.
Figure 3: Example of a quotient graph
in 2D. The ﬁgure shows a cell sur-
rounded by its neighbouring cells. The
black nodes in the center cell at (0, 0)
makes up the origin cell.
The edges
that are colored black are all the edges
that are stored for this graph. The gray
nodes and edges are implicit repetitions
of the main subgraph for visualization.
A cell isn’t necessarily cubic, but for this
project, a cell is interpreted as having 6 faces
in the same way a cube does. With this inter-
pretation, it becomes much easier to describe
a quotient graph as something useful for ma-
chine learning.
This is because that this in-
terpretation can be used directly in ordinary
3-dimensional space.
Let’s interpret a cell as a point in a 3D
space, then the 6 faces of that cell would cor-
respond to the positive and negative direction
of each of the three orthogonal directions x, y,
and z.
A cells’ neighboring cells are then every cell
that is within ± 1 from the origin cell, and ev-
ery cell can be described as a set of directions
(x, y, z) where x, y, z ∈{−1, 0, 1}
When looking at the edges that connect
nodes to other nodes both in and outside the
origin cell, these edges can then be described
by the same vector (xv, yv, zv) of the cell that
the node belongs to. This corresponds to which
faces of the origin cell that the edges pass
through.
This vector is then added to every
edge to describe in which cell the atom that they point towards is in. This informa-
tion tells the quotient graph exactly how each repetition of the sub-graph has to be
connected to itself to create the inﬁnite graph.
3.3
Data structure
The edges in the graph are written as vectors v = (xv, yv, zv). Since these values
can be any combination of {−1, 0, 1}, it gives 33 diﬀerent vectors. This leads to a
problem when trying to parse this information to the VAE (see section 3.4). This
is because for any two nodes a and b there can be a varying amount of edges that
connect them. The set of vectors (S(v)) that describe the edges between a and b can
contain anywhere from 0 to 33 diﬀerent vectors. 0 ≤|S(v)| ≤33 or in other words,
the space used for every pair of nodes is O(|S(v)|, which is not ideal when already
dealing with large data sizes. To remove this term from the data size, the vectors are
converted into a bit-vector with 1 bit for each of the possible vectors.
This should reduce the data required for every pair of nodes to a single vector
of size 27. This is already in constant size space O(1) for every pair of nodes in the
6
==PAGE:8==
graph, but this can still be optimized via the following observation. This notation for
vectors assumes that the graph has a direction, i.e. is a directed graph, but since this
graph is undirected (directionless) this redundancy will be removed. Observe that for
every vector (a, b)(x, y, z) in the graph there exist an inverse but equivalent vector
(b, a)(−x, −y, −z). This should help reduce the space usage of this data structure,
and also help future-prooﬁng against a scenario where a model generates an edge in
one direction but not the other. After this reduction, there’s only 14 diﬀerent possible
unique vectors.
A data point in the dataset then consists of a list of atoms that speciﬁes which
atoms are in the structure, and a list of connections that describes how the diﬀerent
atoms are connected. In terms of graphs, a node n in the graph describes an atom,
and an edge e(n, n1) describes the connection between two atoms. Every edge also
has a vector that describes in which cells the two nodes are.
All of the crystal structures used in this project are obtained from the OQMD
database [12, 13] (see section 4).
When the VAE model generates a new structure, its decoder generates two matri-
ces. The ﬁrst matrix describes what atom type each of the 16 atoms has, with one of
these atom types being an empty type, signifying that this atom isn’t in the structure.
There can be a maximum of 16 atoms in a structure, to limit the output to the same
size as the input. Each row in the matrix corresponds to a separate atom, and there’s
one column for each type of atom. The values in this matrix then correspond to the
probability of that row’s atom being of the type of that column. The type with the
highest probability is chosen as that atom’s type. Since there are 94 diﬀerent atom
types in the training data plus one empty type, this matrix will have a size of 16×95.
The second matrix contains all the information on how to connect the atoms. After
the reduction of possible vectors, there are 14 diﬀerent types of connections that the
nodes can have. As such this matrix will have a size of 16 × 16 × 14. Each value in
this matrix then describes for each pair of atoms a and b, what probability that these
atoms have of having each type of connection connect them. Since there can be more
than one connection between the same two atoms, it’s not the highest probability
that dictates which type the connection has. Instead, each type of connection with a
larger than 50% probability existing is chosen. This also means that if no type has
a probability larger than 50%, then those two nodes won’t share an edge. For the
second matrix, only the rows and columns corresponding to atoms that exist (from
the ﬁrst matrix) are considered.
This data representation is also the one used for input to the VAEs encoder.
3.4
VAE
A variational autoencoder (VAE) [4] is a machine learning method for deep learning
that uses the gradient descent algorithm [14]. It is very useful for learning about latent
data properties and is even able to generate new data based on these properties [5,
6].
7
==PAGE:9==
A VAE consists of two main parts, an encoder, and a decoder. These function in
a similar way to each other, but are used for two diﬀerent things.
The encoder takes some input data-point x and encodes it as a latent vector z.
This z has to be smaller than x so that the encoder has to learn how to compress the
data eﬃciently. Thereby encoding the data.
The Decoder is similar to the encoder, but takes a latent vector z and tries to
reconstruct x. Thereby decoding it.
The challenge is to train a decoder to reconstruct a vector z correctly into the
original vector x. This would be trivial if the encoder and decoder were designed to
do this perfectly by a human. It is however not possible for a human to do this to an
extent where the expected result is correct for every possible input vector.
The solution is to have the encoder and decoder be neural networks (NN) that use
the gradient descent algorithm [14] to iteratively teach themselves to do this. The
approach is to feed the encoder and decoder some data that they then attempt to
encode and decode. The data is fed to the VAE in small increments called batches.
Then for every batch that is fed to the VAE, it updates its internal parameters based on
the distribution of data in the batch. This gradually improves the encoder and decoder
to better encode and decode the data. When there are no more batches, the process
is repeated. Every round is called an epoch. After doing this for enough epochs,
the encoder and decoder should have taught themselves a probability distribution for
what the expected result for any data should look like.
Once the decoder has been trained it can then be fed random data which it will
interpret as an encryption z′ and try to decode it as a graph x′. Since x′ is recon-
structed based on the taught probability distributions inside of the decoder, it should
be similar to the data that the encoder was fed. It is by doing this, that it becomes
possible to generate new data that was previously unseen. This is also the reason why
the decoder in some instances is referred to as a generator.
In this project, the encoder and decoder consist of some layers of fully connected
nodes. These layers are called hidden layers, as the user has no direct inﬂuence on
them aside from their size and complexity. The latent vector z serves as both the
output of the encoder and the input for the decoder.
Each node in a NN has an activation function, that takes its input and determines
what it should output or if it’s deactivated. The encoder uses the sigmoid function as
its activation function. The sigmoid activation is great for probabilities as it’s bound
in the interval 0 to 1, the same as probabilities are.
sigmoid(x) =
1
1 −e−x
(1)
The decoder uses the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function. The ReLU
function simply outputs the sum of its inputs, but only if the sum is positive.
ReLU(x) = max(x, 0)
(2)
If a VAE is trained well, it should be able to approximate a perfect reconstruc-
tion, but since the encoding and decoding are probability-based, it’s not possible to
8
==PAGE:10==
perfectly reconstruct x for every input, and there has to be a loss in the quality of the
reconstruction. The goal when training is to minimize this reconstruction loss.
The loss function of the decoder can be written as −logpθ(x|z) for any data-point
x. Then add a regularization term that describes how close the encoder qφ(z|x) is
to the distribution of z, p(z).
For this the Kullback-Leibler divergence was used.
KLD(qφ(z|x)||p(z)). in total, this gives a loss function for the VAE as
LV AE(φ, θ) = Eqφ(z|x,y)[−logpθ(x|z)]
+KLD[qφ(z|x)||p(z)]
(3)
3.5
GraphVAE
GraphVAE is a VAE model with reinforcement learning and model prediction that
has proven to be able to learn chemical molecules and their attributes to create new
molecules [5]. They achieved these results by training a VAE on data from the ZINC
[15] and QM9 [16, 17] datasets. Both these datasets contain large amounts of organic
molecules. Their VAE managed to generate a lot of new molecules, the majority of
which were valid. Since the molecules were described on smiles-form [18], it was easy
to check the validity of these molecules. Since this implementation of a VAE showed
good results, it was chosen as the base for the development of this project’s VAE.
Note that a crystal structure is diﬀerent from a molecule, in that a molecule is
already a ﬁnite structure by itself. Since it should be possible to use vorosym to create
a dataset of ﬁnite chemical structures, it should also be possible to use the VAE as
presented by [5] to achieve similar results for generating new quotient graphs.
In the original GraphVAE, a molecule was considered valid if it could be recon-
structed as a molecule on smiles-form [18]. For this project, this property isn’t present,
as crystals aren’t complete molecules by themselves and cannot be written in smiles-
form. Therefore a diﬀerent way of validating these structures has been constructed
(see section 3.6).
Another diﬀerence from the VAE as presented by GraphVAE is that its prediction
network has been removed. Originally this helped the VAE estimate its loss function,
but with the more complex and harder to verify data points it has been removed
as it didn’t provide any assistance to this training process, and even showed to be
destructive to the training of this model.
The VAE also had a feature where it could learn speciﬁed properties of the molec-
ular data and create molecules with these properties. The properties that were chosen
for this in GraphVAE were logP and mol −e, but since neither of these two proper-
ties is obtainable from the OQMD database, and no suitable replacement exists, this
feature has been removed.
9
==PAGE:11==
3.6
Validity of structures
In the GraphVAE model, validity was based on chemical and molecular rules, but since
this project focuses on exploring quotient graphs and not molecules, this wouldn’t
apply. Therefore a diﬀerent validity check to try and estimate the generated structures
validity has been created.
To verify whether or not a graph is valid, new checks have been introduced to the
model to verify the graphs without using chemical restrictions.
To be a valid structure (in this model) the following must apply:
• The nodes in the origin cell must be interconnected, or in other words, there must
exist a spanning tree with all nodes of the graph of the origin cell. The reason
for this is, that it otherwise would give rise to cases where two or more separated
subgraphs doesn’t neighbor each other across the cells, thereby implying that
two or more separated crystal structures can be co-dependant and interlocked,
but unconnected and independent at the same time, which is a contradiction.
• There has to be at least one edge in the graph that connects a node in the origin
cell to a node in a neighboring cell. Furthermore, this has to apply to each of
the 3 directions in the cells connectivity space.
As an example of why this is; if no node in the origin cell is connected to a
node in the neighboring cell along one direction, then that would mean that
the resulting crystal structure was atomically thin but limitless in size along
the plane. This does exist [19], but not in the OQMD dataset and it should
therefore be discouraged from the model as it would be too abnormal.
These checks alone are not enough to ensure the validity of the structures. This is
because crystal quotient graphs are a lot more complicated than just these two criteria.
For instance, these two criteria don’t satisfy any validity criteria in terms of how much
space a Voronoi cell should occupy in relation to its neighboring Voronoi cells. Nor
does it satisfy any criteria in terms of how many faces a Voronoi cell realistically
should have. Even if checking for these kinds of properties were doable (which they
might not be), it would likely require a lot more processing power to spend on each
structure, which is not ideal when working with already very large datasets.
This validity check doesn’t ensure the ”true” validity of the structures but gives a
good estimate as to if the results are even remotely close to being truly valid.
4
Dataset
For this project, the OQMD [12, 13] dataset has been used. This dataset contains
435792 crystal structures of diﬀerent sizes, with the largest one consisting of 368
atoms. For this model, only structures with up to 16 were considered, as this contains
95% of all data in OQMD and dramatically reduces the allocated space for each data
10
==PAGE:12==
structure. 80% of the crystal structures in this dataset have no more than 4 atoms,
and 70% is made of exactly 4 atoms.
The heaviest atom in a structure in OQMD is Pu (Plutonium) with atomic number
94, this is also the heaviest atom that will be considered for the training and analysis
of this model.
For this project, only a smaller subset of this larger dataset will be used.
As
mentioned above, only structures that are at most 16 atoms large are considered, as
this makes up the greatest majority of the data.
The dataset will be limited to a subset of structures that all contain O (Oxygen).
Crystal structures that contain O are called oxides and exist in a broad variety. Lim-
iting the dataset to only including oxides should help the model learn how to create
these speciﬁcally.
Removing complex structures can also be a beneﬁt for the model when training.
Because of this, the dataset is further limited to only have structures with at most 4
diﬀerent types of atoms in. Since O will always be one of these, this should hopefully
leave a broad enough variety of data points to learn from without having too many
diﬀerent properties to learn simultaneously.
The ﬁnal dataset consists of 22405 diﬀerent crystal structures.
5
Experiments
The VAE was trained 3 times with diﬀerent hyperparameters so that the best result
could be chosen for further analysis.
Each trained VAE is called a model.
The
hyperparameters can be seen in the table 1. h is the number of nodes in each layer in
the encoder, f is the number of nodes in each layer in the decoder, and z is the size
of the encrypted vector.
h
z
f
Layers
Batch size
Learning rate
Model 1
50
100
500
3
5
0.0005
Model 2
100
200
1000
3
5
0.0005
Model 3
50
100
500
3
20
0.0001
Table 1: Hyperparameters of the three models
As the models are training, they also generate 50000 new structures and evaluate
them every epoch. The evaluation of these structures can be used to show the overall
training evaluation of each of the models. The models are trained for 50 epochs. The
diﬀerent statistics that should indicate how well the models perform are:
• Validity. For this, the aforementioned structural validity (section 3.6) of the
structures on a geometrical level will be used. That is, for each epoch, what
percentage of the generated structures are considered valid.
• Uniqueness, which is measured as the percentage of the valid generated struc-
tures that are unique from all other structures generated in that epoch.
11
==PAGE:13==
• Novelty. Measured as whether the valid generated structures ‘names’ exists in
the original training dataset. Here ’name’ refers to the atoms that compose
the structure. This is diﬀerent from looking at whether the structure was in
the training set or not. Since the name of the structure is a subset of the data
that describes the whole structure, if a diﬀerence is observed in the name, it
would still indicate that the underlying structure was diﬀerent. However two
structures could share a name and still be diﬀerent, so the two properties are
not equivalent.
However, this metric was still chosen to be used, as due to the code design
of the original GraphVAE, this would have exploded the workload in terms
of both time and size to unnecessarily massive proportions. Gavrok [20] was
brieﬂy explored as it features a way to circumvent this issue with a function
that produces a ﬁngerprint or signature, that would be unique for all structures.
But due to lacking documentation on Gavrok, it is not possible to verify how
this function works. Because of this Gavrok was not used. The novelty statistic
should still give an indication of the performance of the models.
• The geometrical mean (Gmean) is also shown. It shows the mean of the three
other statistics and indicates how well the models are performing overall. The
geometrical mean is calculated as:
Gmean =
3p
valid × unique × novel
(4)
The training of the ﬁrst model can be seen in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Training evaluation of the ﬁrst model
The ﬁrst model stays within 80% to 60% validity of the generated structure
12
==PAGE:14==
throughout the training. This should indicate that the model performs to an accept-
able level. However, this is undermined completely when looking at the uniqueness
of the structures. Around the 25th epoch, the uniqueness of the generated structures
drops to a level less than 0.5%. This means that while the model produces 60% valid
structures, they are all identical to each other. This happens because the model has
been overﬁtted. In this case, the model has learned to generate a very small and lim-
ited set of valid structures. This is further enforced when also looking at the novelty
which starts to drop around the same epoch. This would indicate that of the very
small set of diﬀerent generated structures a larger percentage are more and more likely
the same as some structure in the original training set. It’s not unlikely that if the
model had continued to train, it would eventually have learned to produce exclusively
a select few structures that all are identical to structures found in the training set.
The original GraphVAE was designed with much smaller and less complex data
points in mind. In GraphVAE the bonds between atoms could be 1 of 4 diﬀerent
options, but for this model, this was redesigned so that an edge could be as many as
14 diﬀerent options at the same time. This changed the complexity of bonds from 4
diﬀerent possible vectors to 142. The possible atoms in GraphVAE were originally at
most 9 diﬀerent atoms with the ZINC dataset [5, 15]. With the OQMD dataset [12,
13], this has risen to 94 diﬀerent atoms. This further increases the overall size of each
data point.
For the second model, the overall amount of nodes was doubled in the encoder,
decoder, and also in the latent vector. The reasoning for this was that it is a possibility
that with the massively increased size and complexity of the data points, the model
simply wouldn’t have enough nodes to properly encode all the data, which would
decrease the quality of the encryption. The results of this training can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: Training evaluation of the second model
13
==PAGE:15==
The evaluations of this model show that the validity of the generated structures
slowly decreases for each epoch. More alarmingly, the uniqueness of the structures
never exceeds 2% and goes as low as 0.5%. The novelty is sporadic and shows a
tendency to generate knows structures. The fall at epoch 40 also shows that if the
model had learned something useful around epoch 30, this was ultimately lost again.
Overall this model performs worse than the ﬁrst one, as it looks like it never
learned anything properly. This could be because of the number of nodes now being
too great, which could lead to a situation where the properties of the structures aren’t
getting encoded properly, which makes the decoder not have proper data to learn on.
For the third model, a diﬀerent hypothesis was explored. For this model, the batch
size was increased from 5 to 20. Throughout the development of the model, there was
a time where the computer that had to process the models couldn’t handle the size
of the data when training on 20 epochs, therefor it was decreased to 5. Later on in
development, a diﬀerent computer was used which could handle the size of batches
of 20, so this was adjusted. The larger batch size means that the model has to look
through more data before it updates its internal parameters. This should mean that
the model gets a more general look at the data before updating, and that small quirks
in the training data are less likely to solidify themselves as actual properties of the
whole dataset.
The learning rate of this model was also altered. To be one-ﬁfth of the other
models. The learning rate of a model dictates how much the weights of the model’s
parameters change each time they are updated. A too high learning rate may cause
the gradient descent algorithm to ﬁnd a suboptimal weight distribution. These two
things should have the combined eﬀect on the learning that it takes longer to learn
the properties of the dataset, but the learning process should be much less aggressive,
and hopefully settle on a much better solution. The results of this training can be
seen in ﬁgure 6.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: Training evaluation of the third model
Looking at both the validity and the uniqueness of the third model shows that
the model initially performs very poorly but gradually improves in performance for
each epoch. This is the desirable outcome, as it shows that the model is learning for
each epoch and slowly improves as time goes on, which is the intended behavior for
a machine learning model. Since the novelty stays around 99.9%, it can be expected
the model has learned to generate new data points instead of simply outputting data
that is already present in the training set.
By comparing the Gmean of the three models (ﬁgures 4, 5 and 6) it should be
possible to tell which model performs the best. The second model performs a lot
worse than the others, as it starts at 20 but never goes beyond that, and ultimately
ends at 5. The ﬁrst model performs signiﬁcantly better hovering around 65, until
around epoch 25 when it looks like it gets overﬁtted. At the end of the training, the
ﬁrst model has a Gmean of 11.
The best model is the third one, as it outperforms the others by quite a lot.
This model is the only one that showed a steady improvement throughout the entire
training and the ﬁnal Gmean is at 69. The ﬁnal Gmean of this model is higher than
the highest the second model ever reached.
The KLD and reconstruction cost for the three models will also be shown. These
show how well the training is going in relation to how large an error the models have
when reconstructing know data.
Figure 7 shows the results for the ﬁrst model, and ﬁgure 8 for the second model.
Looking at the reconstruction cost for these two, a lot of spikes can be seen. These
spikes happen whenever a change in the VAEs’ parameters has caused it to have a dra-
matically diﬀerent resulting performance. This happens because very small changes
have too much impact on the performance. The spikes are continuously happening
because it is very unlikely that once a faulty change has been made, that it can be
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 7: KLD and reconstruction loss of the ﬁrst model
Figure 8: KLD and reconstruction loss of the second model
Figure 9: KLD and reconstruction loss of the third model
16
==PAGE:18==
reversed and avoided in the future. This causes the model to get stuck around a
certain point in the gradient descent algorithm, which it is very unlikely to break free
from. This was reﬂected in the results seen in ﬁgures 4 and 5.
Figure 9 shows the results from the third model. These results are not spiky at all,
which is probably the result of the lover learning rate causing a much less aggressive
leap for every update. The downward trajectory of the reconstruction cost also signals
that the model is still improving and that it should be possible to further train the
model to improve the results.
Since the third model showed to outperform the others, it will be used for the
remainder of this project and the following analysis. From here on the third model
will be referred to as the model.
6
Discussion
In the following sections, diﬀerent properties of the generated structures will be an-
alyzed and discussed. Only the structures that were considered valid (as described
in section 3.6), will be analyzed. These analyses should help in understanding the
overall performance of the model.
6.1
Analysis of structures
To further analyze the performance of the model, diﬀerent properties of the gener-
ated structures will be looked at and compared to the original structures. Since the
generated dataset is based on a probabilistic distribution of the original dataset, they
should be statistically similar in most aspects.
Let’s start by comparing some simple statistics as shown in table 2.
Mean
connections
O%
Mean(n)
Median(n)
STD
pr. atom
O connections
Original
56.5%
8.568
9
3.28
10.93
46%
Generated
53.3%
10.743
11
1.50
7.89
71%
Table 2: Basic statistics of the two dataset
On table 2, O% is the percentages of atoms that are O. Mean(n) and Median(n)
are the mean and median sizes of the structures. The standard deviation (STD) of
the sizes of the structures is also shown.
The mean number of connections that atoms have in both sets has been calculated
and shown alongside how large a percentage of these that are a connection with an
O. The properties of O are in general interesting as the subset of OQMD chosen to
train the model, all contain O. Aside from O, any of the ﬁrst 94 atoms in the periodic
table can be present. The largest size that a structure can have is 16.
17
==PAGE:19==
The percentage of O atoms in both sets are very close to each other, which makes
it look like that the model has learned the correct amount of O that the data needs to
have. In contrast, it looks like the model generates connections to O more often than
they appeared in the original data. The 48% for the original set shows that about
every other connection contains a O, while for the generated set this number is 71%.
By putting this in relation to the number of O atoms, it shows that half the atoms
are included in half the connections for the original dataset. For the generated set
half of the atoms are included in 3/4 of the connections.
This could mean either of two things. Either the O in the generated set are more
dispersed and are more likely to connect to other atoms rather than more O. Or,
there are fewer connections overall, which could drive up the relative number of O
connections. The latter statement can be backed up by looking at the mean number
of connections pr. atom, which goes signiﬁcantly down for the generated dataset,
despite the mean and median sizes of these being larger.
The mean and median sizes show that the original dataset generally has smaller
structures than the generated set. The STD shows that while the original set has
slightly smaller structures, it also has a larger spread of diﬀerent sizes.
The number of nodes in each structure is counted and shown as a percentage of
the total number of structures in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10: Sizes of every structure
The generated structures have a number of nodes that can best be described as
a normal distribution around 11.
This means that the model generally generates
18
==PAGE:20==
structures that have around 11 nodes and very rarely less than 7 or more than 13
nodes. This correlates with the data shown in table 2. The original data doesn’t
follow this tendency, which is to be expected as they are collected from a larger
dataset (OQMD) and not based on any sort of mathematics at all.
The original set has 30% of its structures have 5 nodes while the generated set has
less than 0.01%. Of the remaining original structures, most have either 9, 10, or 14
nodes. The generated structures are mostly 11 or 12 atoms in size.
The lack of generated structures of size 5 is noteworthy but not unexplainable.
Given the limitation of the structures, it would be relatively simple for a human to
create a valid structure with only a few nodes, but this is likely not the case for a
computer. The diﬃculty would come from the fact that a more limited pool of nodes
also lends itself to fewer opportunities to generate with an edge conﬁguration that
satisfy the validity test from before. Table 2 also showed how the generated structures
tend to have fewer connections despite being larger, which further emphasizes the
diﬃculty of making a valid structure when there are fewer connections to work with.
The lack of data from 5 to 9, could also have caused a situation where there’s
a large knowledge gap in how to construct structures of smaller sizes. Thereby the
model would not have learned how to make structures of these sizes at all. This seems
less likely as the same has not been the case for the gap from 10 to 14.
6.2
Connection type
To further look at some geometrical properties, the distribution of edge types in the
generated graphs has been found. When looking at the edges in the Voronoi cell
space, the edges of the graph travel through diﬀerent axis in the cell space. Grouping
these edges by how many axes they go through can categorize every edge as one of 4
diﬀerent types. Type 0 are edges that go from a node in the origin cell to a diﬀerent
node in the origin cell. Type 1 are edges that go from a cell to a neighboring cell
via just one of the x- y- or z-axis in the cell space. Type 2 uses two of the three
axes, and type 3 uses all three. The reason why this is interesting is that these types
appear in vastly diﬀerent quantities in the original dataset. Since the model is based
on a probability distribution of the original data, properties like these should also be
inherited as a hidden property of the generated dataset.
Figure 11 shows the distribution of edge types across the generated set of data
compared to the equivalent distribution found within the original dataset. The data
is collected by looking at each structure and counting how many of each type of edge
appears in that structure. The mean of which can be seen in ﬁgure 11 along the
vertical axis and the type along the horizontal axis.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 11: Average types of connections pr. structure
Figure 11 shows that the generated structures have type 0 and type 1 connection
in a quantity similar to that of the original dataset. Type 2 connections appear half
as often in the generated data as they do in the original. The original dataset has a
mean type 3 edges of only 1.6 per structure while the generated data has a mean of
0.4, and while this is a lot less relatively, this also is within what’s to be expected as
type 3 edges make up a very small part of all the edges.
From ﬁgure 11 it looks like the model has learned the correct frequency of the
diﬀerent types of edges. In the generated dataset, the lover amount of type 2 edges
can either be because the type 0 and type 1 edges are more preferable for real atomic
structures, or it could be that it is harder to make valid structures with more type 2
edges as that could be more complicated. This shows that the model has learned this
correctly instead of overusing type 2 and type 3 connections.
6.3
Atom to atom connections
To better understand the relation between the diﬀerent atoms, the amount of con-
nections that atoms have to each other will be analysed. This is very interesting as
although O makes up more than half of the datasets, it’s not everything. By looking
at the other atoms it should be possible to see if the model has learned something
about them and isn’t just using them at random.
Figures 12, 13 and 14 shows this relation. The atoms are indicated by their atomic
number. Pick any atom on the vertical axis y and an atom on the horizontal axis x.
The value of (x, y) is then the number of connections that an atom y has to an atom
x on average. The data is gathered by counting all occurrences of a connection (x, y)
for every structure where both x and y are present.
20
==PAGE:22==
The generated data is seen in ﬁgure 12, and the original in ﬁgure 13. Figure 14
shows the diﬀerence between the generated and original datasets. What is expected
is that the original and generated data are almost identical and that there’s so little
diﬀerence between them, that ﬁgure 14 should be colored almost entirely white.
Figure 12: Average connections between atoms in the generated structures
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 13: Average connections between atoms in the original structures
Figure 12 immediately show that there are a lot more empty spaces than in ﬁgure
13. Empty spaces signify that there’s no connection between the two atoms in any
of the structures. This means that there’s a lot of diﬀerent combinations of atoms
that the model won’t produce. While most atoms do appear in the generated set,
a much smaller collection of combinations of atoms do. This is in contrast to the
original dataset where most of the possible atom combinations do appear. There are
22405 diﬀerent structures in the original dataset and 942
= 8836 diﬀerent possible
atom combinations. Given that there’s an almost 1/3 ratio of structures to unique
atom combinations, it’s to be expected that there are very few data points for every
conceivable combination. Even though this is an overestimate of the actual number
of unique combinations in the original dataset, it still puts into perspective how little
data that the model in actuality has to learn from.
Figure 14 shows the diﬀerence between the generated and original datasets. The
large gray areas come directly from the rare datapoints being shown in ﬁgure 13 which
has already been mentioned. The interesting thing to look at is instead all the white
spots around the grid. These show that the diﬀerence between the generated data and
the original data at that point is if not 0, very close to. This indicated that for the
atom combinations that the model does generate, it also knows the correct amount
of edges that should connect these.
The diﬀerence between the dark gray bar at 8 in ﬁgure 13 and the almost black
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 14: Diﬀerence of the two sets connections between every atom
bar at 8 in ﬁgure 12, also shows that the model generates a lot more O connections
than there is in the original dataset.
6.4
Charge
A way to look at the chemical validity of the structures is to look at the charge of the
atoms that compose the structure. Basic chemical laws say that any combination of
atoms in a stable molecule should have a charge of 0, with some atoms having positive
and others negative charges. This should hold in most cases for molecular chemistry,
although not always.
By intuition, it wouldn’t be unrealistic to assume this property holds for most
crystal structures as well. Because of this, the potential charge that the structures
could have will be looked into.
To gather this data, for each atom in a structure, look up the most common
charges that this atom is known to have. With these atomic charges, it should be
23
==PAGE:25==
possible to arrange them to ﬁnd a total charge of 0 for every structure. This approach
isn’t perfect as there are some structures in the original dataset that don’t satisfy
this property. Regardless, the proportion of structures satisfying this criterion should
hopefully be similar for both the original and generated structures.
Table 3 shows the percentage of structures that fulﬁll this criterion.
Original
Generated
65.8%
36.0%
Table 3: Percentage of structures with a possible electrical charge of 0
The percentage of structures in the original dataset is lower than anticipated, with
barely 2/3 of the structures fulﬁlling this criterion. For the generated structures, this
number drops to slightly more than 1/3 of the structures. This massive gap suggests
that the model hasn’t learned the severity of this property. An alternative reason for
this diﬀerence could be that this hypothesis is based on a false assumption. Since the
original structures don’t meet this criterion in a large portion of the data, it’s entirely
feasible that chemical charge can’t be used for this kind of analysis. If this is the case,
it’s not hard to see why this also rarely applies to the generated structures.
6.5
Most common atoms
To further analyze the models’ ability to produce valid structures, the atoms which
appear with the highest frequencies can be looked into. Since O is in every structure,
it will not be looking at for this analysis. This should give an insight into whether the
model is applying atoms with a frequency similar to those found in the original data.
Figure 15 shows the frequencies of each atom as a ratio of how many of an atom
that there is in the datasets for every 1 O. O has been shortened in this ﬁgure, to
better visualize the other atoms. For both the generated and the original datasets O
was at 1.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 15: Ratio of all the atoms to Oxygen in the entire dataset
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 15 show that in the original dataset, most atoms appear in the dataset at
a ratio of 0.01 for every O. For the generated dataset there’s a lot more variety in the
frequencies of the atoms, with 13 atoms appearing more often than the most frequent
atom in the original dataset and 8 atoms seldom appear despite being present in the
original dataset.
Looking at the atoms that don’t appear in the original dataset. In a few rare cases
the model has chosen to use an atom that doesn’t appear in the original dataset, but
these cases are so rare compared to the other atoms, that it is safe to say that the
model has learned that these atoms shouldn’t be used.
The 5 atoms that appear with the highest frequency in the original dataset are
Li (Lithium), Na (Sodium), Sr (Strontium), Ba (Barium), and K (Potassium). For
the generated dataset these are V (Vanadium), Y (Yttrium), Rh (Rhodium), Tb
(Terbium), and Ag (Silver). The generated datasets’ top 5 shares no atom with the
original datasets. This by itself doesn’t say a lot, instead, looking at how often the
original dataset’s top 5 appears in the generated dataset will. Li is the most frequent
atom in the original dataset, but in the generated dataset it is only the 64th, which
is a massive diﬀerence. The diﬀerence isn’t as large for Na and Sr, which instead of
2nd and 3rd most frequent, lies at 6th and 7th respectively. Ba goes from 4th to 12th
and K from 5th to 21.
Looking at just Na and Sr, the diﬀerence is small enough that the model may
have learned how frequent these atoms should appear. The same cannot be said for
Li. The diﬀerence in frequency for Li shows that the model doesn’t know to use these
as frequently as it probably should.
Something else that is noteworthy about the top 5 of the original structures, is
that the 5 atoms are all part of the 1st and 2nd group on the periodic table. All of
the atoms in these two groups have an electrical charge of either +1 or +2. Since O
has an electrical charge of -2, it’s not hard to see how easy it is for atoms to form
chemical structures that pairs atoms from these two groups to O.
The same cannot be said for the generated dataset, as these atoms come from
many diﬀerent groups and have many diﬀerent potential charges. The atomic charge
was of cause, not a value that the model had access to, so any would-be relation should
have been learned purely from how frequent these atom pairs appear. Emphasizing
this property could potentially have improved the overall performance of the model,
and improved the numbers seen in section 6.4.
6.6
Voronoi analysis
To get a better analysis of the model, more complex relations in the structures will
have to be looked into.
Voronoi can have many diﬀerent shapes and symmetries
depending on not only which atoms that the Voronoi represents, but also which other
atoms are present next to it.
Analyzing the shapes of these Voronoi can help to identify if the model has learned
to mimic structures, or if it actually understands the deeper eﬀect that each atom can
26
==PAGE:28==
have on one another.
Voronoi data was not explicitly given to the model since the quotient graph rep-
resentation was used. Because of this, a diﬀerent way to estimate how well the model
performs in this regard is needed.
O is present in all structures and as such can provide a method to estimate this.
The reasoning is that all the atoms should be densely packed, and O should be
uniformly distributed around the other atoms. Atoms that share the same shaped
Voronoi should therefore have the same amount of O next to them. So by counting
the O around each atom it should be possible to detect when an atoms Voronoi has a
diﬀerent shape than it usually would have. The only other factor that would change
the shape of a Voronoi would then be a third type of atom. This shape change should
then be consistent across most, if not all, instances where the two atom types are in
the same structure. Counting the amount of O next to an atom x when that atom x is
also connected to an atom y, should show if the model has learned the more complex
relations that the atoms should have.
Figure 16: Amount of Oxygen that is connected to y whilst also connected to x for the
generated structures. y is an atom on the vertical axis, and x is an atom on the horizontal
axis
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 17: Amount of Oxygen that is connected to y whilst also connected to x for the
original structures. y is an atom on the vertical axis, and x is an atom on the horizontal
axis
Figure 17 shows the eﬀect that each atom pair have on each other in the original
dataset. Figure 16 shows the same statistic but from the generated structures. Figure
18 shows the diﬀerence between ﬁgures 16 and 17 by subtraction. Each value is the
number of O that an atom along the vertical axis has when that atom is also connected
to an atom along the horizontal axis.
Figure 17 shows that for most atom combinations, the most common number of
neighboring O is 4, but that there are some groups of atoms that when next to each
other increases this to 8. All the zeroes stem from atom combinations that don’t exist
in the original dataset.
As mentioned in section 6.3 there’s a strong possibility that some of the data
points in the original data might be very rare. As such, a lot of the data seems to
be plentiful in ﬁgure 17 when in reality is very few points of these data exist. It is
because of this same explanation that it looks like there’s a lot of potential data that
hasn’t been learned and never gets generated by the model as shown in ﬁgure 16.
Instead, look at the values that the data has. Figure 16 has most of its values
being more than 8, with some of them, even going up to a range of 10 to 12 O pr.
atom. This is not the same as the rate of O to other atoms is higher, but rather
this increase most likely comes from the model using a larger variety of connections
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 18: Diﬀerence between the values of ﬁgure 16 and ﬁgure 17
between the same two atoms. This can be seen by looking back at table 2 where
it was shown that the generated structures have a lot more O connections than the
original structures did.
Figure 10 showed that the generated structures have a signiﬁcant portion of its
structures being larger than those of the original dataset, and while that does mean
more atoms in the structures overall. When it is combined with the O% from table 2
being almost the same as the original dataset, it shows that the size of the structures
doesn’t have an impact on the amount of O in them. Thereby it can be said that the
increased values of ﬁgure 16 don’t come from an increased amount of O, but rather
that there’s a much higher rate of connections between atoms and O than there should
be.
This also means that it cannot be seen if the model has learned any of the higher-
level relations between atoms that were wanted. Figure 18 also shows a few empty
white spots, even when not looking at the atom combinations that don’t appear. These
29
==PAGE:31==
show the few instances where the generated and original data agree. If anything, this
shows that the model hasn’t learned the basic relations between atoms to a degree
where it can be expected to also have learned more complex relations.
6.7
O relation analysis
The relations between O and other atoms can still be explored further. By looking
at the frequency of how many O is next to the diﬀerent atoms it should be possible
to see if the model has learned how many O that there should be relative to other
atoms.
Due to the way Voronoi diagrams function, even for the same atom, there might
be a big verity in their shape, which should aﬀect the number of O that are connected
to that atom.
By looking at every atom and counting how many O they are neighboring, it
should be possible to see what is the expected ratio of O to other atoms. This can
then be compared with the generated structures to see if the model has learned this.
This analysis will be limited to a few atoms of signiﬁcance as this should tell more
than looking at every atom in the dataset. The atoms that will be looked at are the
5 most frequent atoms from the original dataset (as shown in section 6.5), and Ti
(Titanium) as this atom could be interesting for further research.
Figure 19 shows the number of O that each of the 6 atoms most often neighbor.
The horizontal axes in ﬁgure 19 show how many O are neighboring the atoms, and
the vertical axes show what percentage of structures with those atoms has this O
neighborhood. The blue color shows the original dataset, while the red shows the
generated dataset.
For the generated dataset, the atoms Li, Na, Sr, K, and Ti all have a spike that
doesn’t match up with their corresponding original dataset. This means that for these
atoms, the model favors giving these atoms a diﬀerent amount of O than could be
expected to be found in the original dataset. Notably, all of these spikes are at 2,
which could indicate that the model prefers to give every atom 2 connections to O.
For Ba the most common number of O found is the same as for the original dataset.
It seems like the model heavily favors pairing this atom with 4 O at 47%, much more
so than in the original data at 23%.
Spikes aside, the data distribution isn’t far from what is shown of the original
dataset. The large outliers do follow a trend. For each of these atoms, it shows that
the model generally prefers to pair these atoms with fewer O than seen in the original
dataset.
From this ﬁgure, it can also be seen that there are almost no structures being
generated with 6 or more O connections, despite especially Na, Sr, Ba, and K having
a large portion of their structures having this. This could indicate that the model
hasn’t learned that it is possible to do this. But it also shows that the model has
learned to generally not overproduce structures where atoms are connected to too few
O.
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 19: Frequencies of number of O connected to Li, Na, Si, Ba, K and Ti
It is possible that the model has been slightly overﬁtted, or is starting to become
so, but it is also close enough to the original dataset, that it is possible that more
training could solve this.
7
Conclusion
While the model does produce 80% valid structures, the quality of these structures is
not as good as it could have been.
What is most likely causing the most problems for the model, is the training data.
It was maybe too optimistic to expect that the model could learn this many attributes.
While the dataset did contain 22405 diﬀerent structures, it also had to account for a
possible 94 diﬀerent atoms. Assume for a moment that every atom always appears
without any other types of atoms, and there’s an equal number of structures with
every atom, which would add up to 238.35 structures per atom which is simply not a
lot of data to teach a NN anything from.
From ﬁgure 15 it was shown how evenly most of the atoms were presented in the
dataset with around 1 percent or less for most atoms, which is less than the naive
238.35 structures from before. This further points towards a lack of data on each
individual type of atom. Alternatively, it could also be said that the atoms that are
appearing the least, just adds noise to the dataset.
This problem can also to some extend be seen in ﬁgures from sections 6.3 and 6.6
31
==PAGE:33==
where the diﬀerence between the original and generated datasets mostly came from
the model never producing certain atom combinations. This likely comes from it not
being taught these atom conﬁgurations enough.
A side eﬀect of this could be, that the model in an attempt to satisfy all require-
ments, never truly learns any of them to their fullest. Cutting away noisy data would
probably be a good idea for future iterations. Removing structures with unique or ex-
tremely rare atoms or atom combinations could remove some noise from the dataset.
This should of course not be too aggressively as that would hurt the models’ chances
of learning from a diverse pool of data.
Alternatively, adding more data to the dataset would also help. Since it’s not
feasible to ﬁnd more data, some artiﬁcial data points could be added to the dataset
instead. The quotient graphs don’t care which node is the ﬁrst one and so on, so
changing the order of the atoms would essentially duplicate that structure without
the model being able to tell the diﬀerence. For this to work the reordering of atoms
would have to be random and unstandardized. This is to avoid that only a small part
of the data is rearranged, and thereby essentially having an almost exact duplicate of
some data points, which would skewer the training process.
Probably the best way to improve performance would be to limit the dataset
further by excluding some less interesting atoms.
It might have helped the model’s performance had there been more chemically
based information stored in the dataset. This could have helped the model recognize
patterns and associate certain atoms with certain shapes and conﬁgurations in the
graphs.
Probably the place where the model fails the most is with how large each structure
should be. Section 6.1 discussed how the model generally produces structures that
are a lot larger than they are in the original dataset.
A possible issue that could be causing a lot of problems is the varying sizes of the
structures. Consider this, most structures in the original dataset consist of 5 atoms,
and almost none are of 6, 7, or 8 atoms. In section 3.3 the matrices that describe
the input and output data were described. Since the input data is ordered, it’s also
known that the atoms are represented in order. Because of this, a structure of size
5 will have some data describing it in the ﬁrst 5 rows and columns of this matrix
whilst the remaining ﬁelds in the matrix are empty. Figure 10 showed that the model
learns a lot of how to make a 5 atom structure, but almost nothing for 6, 7, and
8. So what happens if the model decides to try and make a structure of 6 atoms?
Since an overwhelming amount of information for the ﬁrst 5 atoms concern 5 atom
structures, most likely, the model would generate a perfectly viable 5 atoms structure
with another atom attached to it.
This leaves a structure of 5 atoms connected as if they are a valid 5 atom structure,
and then a 6th atom connecting on top of this substructure. Since the diﬀerence
between a 5 atom structure and a 6 atom structure is far more complex than just
adding an atom, this would produce a 5 atom structure that is trying to be a 6 atom
structure, that is falsely veriﬁed as being valid possible.
32
==PAGE:34==
This isn’t just limited to structures of these sizes, but structures of every size that
is larger than the structures that the model gets taught the most of. Because of this,
unless the smaller structures are substructures of larger structures, small structures
have a damaging eﬀect on the learning of larger structures.
This can explain why there are so many structures of sizes 11 and 12, however,
this is not the case for structures with 6 and 7 atoms. The reason why this is is
exactly the same, just for the opposite case. 13% of the original datasets structures
are of 14 atoms, and there are 5% of structures with 11, 12, and 13 atoms together.
What eﬀect do the structures of size 14 have on the smaller structures? If the model
attempts to generate a structure with 13 atoms, it would know more about 14 atoms
structures and instead generate a 14 atom structure without one of the atoms. Since
13 atom structures aren’t just 14 atom structures without the 14th atom, this would
also generate strange structures. These structures are still likely to be considered
valid since 13 out of 14 atoms are very likely to contain enough information for the
structure to be valid. This likelihood decreases with a smaller-sized structure, as the
chance of losing a critical atom raises. This explains why fewer small valid structures
are generated.
Let’s look at what is being taught to the model. To the model, what is taught
as a 5 atom structure? The answer isn’t just the 5 atom structures from the original
dataset, but every structure that is at least 5 atoms or more, which is 95% of the
structures. As an example; the 9 atom structures has 5 atom that isn’t necessarily
valid by themselves with another 4 atoms connected to it that makes them a valid
structure together. It’s because of this that the 9 atom structures aﬀect how the ﬁrst
5 atoms should behave. The same can be said for every structure larger than 5 atoms.
The resulting training for 5 atom structures would be information on 5 atom
structures, which is based on the 30% structures in the dataset, as well as information
on how to make the ﬁrst 5 atoms of a structure that is larger than 5, of which 65% of
in the dataset is.
The reason why this problem doesn’t exist for the original GraphVAE [5] is, that it
was based on working with molecules. Adding or subtracting atoms from a molecule
in smiles form still leaves the result as a complete molecule. This doesn’t translate to
quotient graphs, where adding and removing nodes can leave the graph incomplete.
Combining these factors leaves a model that has a very confused idea of what small
structures (such as 5 atoms) should look like, but false positives on how to make larger
structures (such as 12 atoms). The best way to avoid this in the future would be to
limit the dataset to only contain structures of a speciﬁc size. This would however also
render it impossible for the model to learn some attributes of some atoms as these
attributes only become apparent when an atom is a neighbor to a variety of other
atoms.
This neither proves nor disproves the hypothesis, but rather shows that a diﬀerent
experiment has to be conducted before a conclusion can be deﬁnitively made. Figure
11 showed that the model has learned how to use the diﬀerent connection types
properly.
Because of this, it looks like that the model has learned at least some
33
==PAGE:35==
aspect of what quotient graphs based on crystal structures should look like. This
shows that it might have been possible for the model to have learned more had it
been given a more speciﬁed dataset.
34
==PAGE:36==
References
[1]
Sungwon Kim et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks for Crystal Structure
Prediction”. In: (2020).
[2]
Ryuichiro Hataya, Hideki Nakayama, and Kazuki Yoshizoe. “Graph Energy-
based Model for Substructure Preserving Molecular Design”. In: (2021).
[3]
Niklas W. A. Gebauer, Michael Gastegger, and Kristof T. Sch¨utt. “Symmetry-
adapted generation of 3d point sets for the targeted discovery of molecules”. In:
(2020).
[4]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In:
(2014).
[5]
Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. “GraphVAE: Towards Generation
of Small Graphs Using Variational Autoencoders”. In: (2018).
[6]
Xiaojie Guo and Liang Zhao. “A Systematic Survey on Deep Generative Models
for Graph Generation”. In: (2020).
[7]
Peter Bjørn Jørgensen et al. “Materials property prediction using symmetry-
labeled graphs as atomic-position independent descriptors”. In: (2019).
[8]
Teresa Bates et al. “The Ideal Structure of the C-*Algebras of Inﬁnite Graphs”.
In: (2002).
[9]
Olaf Delgado-Friedrichs and Michael O’Keeﬀe. “Crystal nets as graphs: Ter-
minology and deﬁnitions”. In: Journal of Solid State Chemistry 178.8 (2005).
Reticular Chemistry: Design, Synthesis, Properties and Applications of Metal-
Organic Polyhedra and Frameworks, pp. 2480–2485. issn: 0022-4596. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jssc.2005.06.011. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S002245960500263X.
[10]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. “Representation Learning:
A Review and New Perspectives”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 35.8 (2013), pp. 1798–1828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
2013.50.
[11]
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview”. In: Neu-
ral Networks 61 (2015), pp. 85–117. issn: 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neunet.2014.09.003. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0893608014002135.
[12]
J. E. Saal et al. “Materials Design and Discovery with High-Throughput Den-
sity Functional Theory: The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD)”. In:
(2013).
[13]
S. Kirklin et al. “The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing
the accuracy of DFT formation energies”. In: (2015).
[14]
L´eon Bottou et al. “Stochastic gradient learning in neural networks”. In: (1991).
35
==PAGE:37==
[15]
Teague Sterling and John J. Irwin. “ZINC 15 – Ligand Discovery for Everyone”.
In: (2015).
[16]
L. C. Blum and J.-L. Reymond. “970 Million Druglike Small Molecules for
Virtual Screening in the Chemical Universe Database GDB-13”. In: J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 131 (2009), p. 8732.
[17]
M. Rupp et al. “Fast and accurate modeling of molecular atomization energies
with machine learning”. In: Physical Review Letters 108 (2012), p. 058301.
[18]
David Weininger. “SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1.
Introduction to methodology and encoding rules”. In: (1988).
[19]
K. S. Novoselov et al. “Two-dimensional atomic crystals”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 102.30 (2005), pp. 10451–10453. issn: 0027-8424.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0502848102. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/content/
102/30/10451.full.pdf. url: https://www.pnas.org/content/102/30/
10451.
[20]
Olaf Delgado-Friedrichs. “The gavrok project”. In: (2019). http://www.gavrog.org/.
36
==PAGE:38==
Appendix
Periodic table
