==PAGE:1==
3D printing of prototype tools for 
sheet metal forming
  
Fabio Tondini  
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
Master Thesis
July,2021
By
Fabio Tondini
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building 425,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering.
I would like also to point out that the results of this project have been also submitted
for publication in two articles, which were written for Metals [1] and for the 9th CIRP
Global Web Conference – Sustainable, resilient, and agile manufacturing and service
operations: Lessons from COVID-19 [2] .
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of sheet metal
forming and additive manufacturing.
Fabio Tondini - s192925
Signature
Date
ii
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
02/07/2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project presents and discusses the potential of additive manufactured polymer
tools in the field of sheet metal forming for rapid prototyping or for small produc-
tion volume. Fused Filament Fabrication and Stereolithography apparatus are the
two 3D printing techniques that are investigated along with the printing materials,
strategies, geometrical accuracies for both tools and workpieces. The forming pro-
cesses tested are V-bending, groove pressing and a more complex shape formed by
multiple tools’ movement. In all cases the repeatability is discussed to show the
potential of tool corrections for obtaining formed parts closer to nominal values.
The metal workpiece evaluated in this study is 1mm thick aluminum 1050 sheet.
In the V-bending process, the geometrical accuracy is evaluated by the springback
angle and the resulting bend radius, while bending to 90° with three different punch
nose radii.
In the groove pressing process, the combined effect between groove heights and
planes’ angularity changes due to springback is shown.
Besides the study of the more complex shape geometrical accuracy and tool ge-
ometry evaluation, the production time and the cost of a tool set among additive
manufacturing and conventional processes such as milling and wire EDM are also
taken into consideration.
Finally, the environmental and sustainable aspects of
3D printing materials and alternative metal tools shall be assessed in relation to
recyclability and biodegradability properties.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude and appreciation to my
supervisors: Chris Valentin Nielsen, Ulfar Arinbjarnar and Alberto Basso for the
continuous support, motivation and patience. Their guidance helped me in all the
steps of my project and writing of the thesis. I want also to thank you for giving
me the opportunity to collaborate with you on the writing of two publications.
Besides my supervisors, I would like to thank every person I had the chance to work
with during these two years here in Denmark. Thanks for the hard work, for the
laughs and for keeping my motivation high.
Special thanks to my closest friends here in Denmark: Lorenzo Giansante, Fer-
nando Tezza, Paula Lumbreras Barrutia, Romina Shkurtaj, Zoé Van Begin, Adrian
Kramer, Varnith As, Tanguy Herbron and Sebastien Roland Berner, for working
together, for the stimulating discussions and for all the fun and good times we have
had in the last two years. Also, I thank my friends back home, for the never end
support along this journey.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank my special family: my parents Angela
and Paolo, and my grandma Adua, this would not have been possible without them.
Thanks for believing in me and supporting me no matter what, and for giving me
the opportunity to move to Denmark and follow my dreams.
iv
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope and limitation of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
State of the art of sheet metal forming by 3D printed polymer tools
3
2.1
Sheet metal forming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Additive manufacturing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Fused Filament Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Stereolithography apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
FFF and SLA comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Combination of sheet metal forming and additive manufacturing . . .
7
3
Experimental equipment and printing materials
9
3.1
Experimental equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Printing materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
FDM and SLA printers geometrical accuracy and surface roughness
13
4.1
Surface roughness approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Geometrical accuracy approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
V bending study
16
5.1
Initial study: FFF and SLA printing settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
FFF and SLA geometrical accuracy and surface roughness results . .
20
5.3
Tool surface roughness in function of the number of strokes . . . . . .
21
5.4
Measurement procedures and strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
LS-DYNA simulation of the V-bending process using FFF tools . . .
23
5.6
Workpiece springback investigation and comparison with printed tool
accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.7
Minimum radius achievable by polymer tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Groove Pressing
31
6.1
Groove pressing tool design and workpiece geometry
. . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Measurement procedures and strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Geometrical accuracy of the plate and tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Complex geometry requiring multiple tools movements
35
7.1
Complex geometry tool design and forming process . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Geometrical accuracy of the complex shape and primary punch
. . .
37
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Economic and sustainability considerations of 3D printing com-
pared to conventional manufacturing processes
39
8.1
3D printed tool cost vs steel tool cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Operator working time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.3
Recyclability of polymers and tool steel considerations
. . . . . . . .
43
9
Conclusion and future work
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
50
A.1
FFF tool defects and failures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.2
SLA tool defects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
vi
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
One of the most popular production methods used in the metal manufacturing field
is sheet metal forming. It is known for its high performance on shaping three di-
mensional geometries from accessible metal sheet by e.g. bending and deep drawing.
On one hand, this method’s major advantages are related to the great mechanical
properties of the formed part for certain applications, to the high production volume
achievable and to the minimal amount of scrap produced. On the other hand, the
sheet metal forming necessitates the use of expensive metal tools, which requires
high designing costs and work hours. For its competitive and dynamic nature and
its current evolution, the manufacturing market demands for more and more per-
sonalized products that need customized production lines [3]. These are the reasons
why there has been a growing interest in the use of alternative methods of design
and production of tools such as Additive Manufacturing (AM). Besides the signif-
icant reduction of tool costs and production time, this alternative allows also the
rapid prototyping (RP) of polymer and metal tools and it facilitates the production
of free form and complex tool’s shape. However, since polymers and resins material
are used for the easy accessibility and environmental reasons, the mechanical perfor-
mance, the tools’ endurance, the forming process capability and accuracy obtained
with 3D printed tools could decrease, and this risk must be assessed and evaluated.
An important aspect is also sustainability and a smaller environmental footprint
that this new technology would bring in comparison to the conventional subtrac-
tive manufacturing processes, especially for small production’s series. It increases
the possibility of using recycled and biodegradable polymers, instead of steel, which
is commonly used. Furthermore, the reduction of raw material and manual work,
followed by the drop of electricity consumption lead to a more sustainable and eco-
friendly tool-making process. Despite that, for large production volume it would be
more costly and it would have a larger impact on the environment.
1.2
Scope and limitation of the study
The scope of this project was to understand and investigate the potential of 3D
printed tools under sheet metal forming conditions. The AM technologies employed
for the tools fabrication were Fused Filament Fabrication and Stereolithography
apparatus. After the printing strategy optimization through V-bending tests and
surface characterization, the optimized printing setting was used to print tools for a
groove pressing process and for a more complex geometry. This allowed to determine
and study the achieved precision of simple and complex formed parts and comparing
them to the tools accuracy. Concluding the research by evaluating the sustainability
and environmental impact of the AM implementation in the tool-making process for
sheet metal forming. However, it is important to point out that this study was
mainly limited by the time assigned for the thesis of 5 months. It would have been
reasonable and interesting to investigate the behaviour of different polymers such as
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
1
==PAGE:10==
ABS as well as sheet metals. Furthermore, the only AM technologies available at
the DTU mechanical department were FFF and SLA.
2
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the art of sheet metal
forming by 3D printed polymer
tools
2.1
Sheet metal forming
Sheet metal forming is a metalworking method that belongs to a larger group of
forming processes called metal forming, which besides sheet metal forming, consid-
ers also bulk metal forming. Sheet metal forming is categorized as shown in Figure
2.1 and it plays an important role in e.g. construction, manufacturing and auto-
motive industries. The workpieces are thin and flat pieces of metal, usually steel
or aluminium, which are reshaped by plastic deformation taking the desired final
geometry without adding or removing material. The tools used for such deformation
are called die and punch.
Figure 2.1: Categorization of sheet metal forming processes.
The sheet metal forming process studied and considered in this project is the 2D
sheet bending method, an example is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
It is defined as
the straining of the metal around a straight axis. During the bending phase, the
metal on the inner side of the neutral plane is subjected to compression, while the
metal on the outer side of the neutral plane experiences tension. Bending causes no
change in the width of the sheet metal, and therefore it can be considered as a plane
strain deformation. Generally the elastic-plastic strain hardening behavior is seen
during the process as well. In addition, an undesired effect known as ’springback’
takes place once the metal workpiece has been formed and removed from the die,
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: 2D bending sheet metal forming process [4].
the elastic deformation will then be released and only the plastic deformation will
remain. This effect is due to the plastic-elastic characteristic of the metal. When a
forming tool is planned and designed to deform a workpiece, the shape imparted by
the tool will be a combination of elastic and plastic deformation. The springback
can be compensated by overbending and bottoming forming. On one hand, the
punch angle and radius are made smaller than the specified angle on the final part
so that the sheet metal springs back to the desired value. On the other hand, the
part is squeezed at the end of the stroke, thus plastically deforming it in the bend
region.
2.2
Additive manufacturing
Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, is a manufacturing process that
consists in the realization of three dimensional objects from 3D model data. It differs
from the conventional manufacturing methods, which can be based on subtraction
of material [5] or not, AM’s working principle is set on a layer by layer fabrication.
There are many different additive manufacturing technologies and according to Gib-
son et al. [6], they can be divided into seven main categories as shown in Figure
2.3.
Figure 2.3: Categorization of additive manufacturing technologies.
The presented technologies facilitate the fabrication and the design of unique cus-
tomized parts and devices that are geometrically complex and have graded material
4
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:13==
compositions. However, the main differences among these processes are in the way
layers are deposited to create parts and in the printing materials as polymers, metals
and ceramics. Each method has its own advantages and disadvantages. The main
concerns in choosing a 3D printing technology could depend on:
• printing speed and accuracy;
• surface quality;
• necessary post-processes;
• 3D printer and printed prototype costs;
• choice and cost of the printing materials.
Regarding all seven categories, the manufacturing process start by designing a part
using a CAD program, and extrapolating the structural information into a Stere-
olithography file(.STL). The STL file approximates the 3D model into a series of
volumetric pixels. Then by the employment of a slicing software e.g. UltimakerCura,
these pixels are then digitally sliced into layers that are stacked along the Z direction
according to the decided printing settings, generating a G-code file. Finally, this file
is read by the printer, that will be able to start the print. For this project, only two
of the seven technologies are applied for tool prototyping for sheet metal forming:
Material extrusion and Vat Photopolymerization, also known respectively as Fused
Filament Fabrication and Stereolithography apparatus.
2.2.1
Fused Filament Fabrication
The Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF), also known as Fused Deposition Modelling
(FDM) is an additive manufacturing process based on material extrusion along the
X, Y and Z axis. It represents one of the most common techniques for prototyping in
AM, due to its versatility [7]. It consists of feeding thermoplastic polymer filament,
which has been unwound from a spool, through a heated nozzle to be extruded onto
a heated building platform, which is placed underneath, as illustrated in Figure 2.4.
The temperature of the plate is set in order to allow the liquefied filament to solidify
upon contact, optimizing the attachment and bonding. The extrusion happens in
the X and Y axis, while the building platform moves incrementally along the Z axis
of a displacement equal to the layer thickness, which was previously set.
The bonding among layers takes place thanks to the heated nozzle, which has re-
sistive heaters that regulates the filament at a temperature just over its melting
point, allowing the layers to solidify together. As soon as the layer is constructed,
the platform lowers and another layer is deposited by the extrusion nozzle, so the
printed object is largely a finished product, without any need for further curing. A
key characteristic feature of FFF printing is the visibility of the printing layers.
2.2.2
Stereolithography apparatus
Stereolithography (SLA) is an additive manufacturing process based upon the pho-
topolymerization of layers of liquid resin into a part through exposure to a laser
beam. The basic working principle is illustrated in Figure 2.5, which consists of
three main components: Computer controlled laser, resin reservoir (also known as
vat) and a movable building platform.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: Schematic presentation of FFF process components [8].
Figure 2.5: Schematic presentation of SLA process components [9].
The liquid resin is contained inside a designed vat, which is characterised by a
transparent window on the bottom face. According to the specifications entered in
the computer, the laser beam is directed by the deflection mirror toward the reservoir
in the X and Y directions, and through the window it hits the resin generating cross-
links. Once the first cross-linked layer adheres to the building platform, which is
submerged within the reservoir, the platform incrementally raises up. The size of the
increment is determined by the layer thickness. Subsequent layers are deposited onto
previously cross-linked resin layers until an entire part has been printed. This SLA
process set up is also called ’SLA reversed printing direction’ or ’resin/glass interface
exposure variant’, which ensures always a flat cross-linking interface. Despite that
the 3D printed component quality also depends on the glass window condition.
Scratches, clouding or distortion of the window could degrade the object quality,
not allowing a proper penetration of the laser into the resin. In addition, mandatory
post processes are required for SLA printing technology. They consist on washing
6
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:15==
the component into an isopropanol solution followed by an UV curing session, that
takes place in a specific oven, guaranteeing the solidification of the entire object.
While these extra steps are time-consuming, the trade-off is that the resolution of
the part is much higher and the bonding among layers is much stronger, with little
percentage of porosity. It is important to point out however, that the entire process
is very expensive and not eco-friendly, the soiled liquid resin generates toxic gas and
must be disposed separately.
2.2.3
FFF and SLA comparison
FFF and SLA have both their advantages, and it is reasonable to present the limita-
tions of both processes. There are numerous categories in which the two techniques
FFF and SLA differ. The main ones are:
• Printing material.
• Precision and resolution.
• Post processing.
• Cost
Considering the FFF process, the resolution and precision of parts are mainly dic-
tated by nozzle size over layer thickness and X-Y movement accuracy. Furthermore,
the printed component does not require post processing, leading to an overall eco-
nomic technology. While SLA printers are limited to photosensitive resin. The gain
of using resin is that the SLA consistently produces higher resolution parts, which
depends mostly by the laser optical size, calibration and layer thickness. Using SLA
is also possible to reach much finer details on the printed component. Removal of
printed parts from the build platform can be a diﬀicult operation because the resin is
viscous and toxic. Finally, as mentioned before, once the parts have been removed,
they must be washed to dissolve any non cross-linked resin, followed by a further
curing process in a UV curing box. Overall, SLA technique is a more expensive
process.
2.3
Combination of sheet metal forming and
additive manufacturing
The combination of sheet metal forming and 3D printed tools by additive manufac-
turing is an innovative solution in the mechanical and manufacturing sheet forming
field. Nowadays, in sheet metal forming one of the major concern is the develop-
ment and production of the forming tools, which is relatively expensive and time
consuming. Generally, the tool is designed by a tool designer and its geometry is
then produced by conventional subtractive manufacturing processes. Before reach-
ing the final shape, during the development phase, the tool may go through one or
more revisions, that would require a new machining each time. This is due mostly
to the increasing complexity of parts and new sheet materials. In the last 20 years,
additive manufacturing has become known as a method of RP, and tool prototypes
can then be useful as a proof-of-concept, or as a tool for small series’ production [10].
This method will reduce the time and money spent on the tool design, and allow
for increased flexibility in sheet metal forming [11]. A large number of researchers
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
7
==PAGE:16==
like Zaragosa et al. [3] and Nakamura et al. [12] has investigated the feasibility of
using 3D printed tools for sheet forming. The former has studied the V-bending
process by 3D printed tool and found the springback to be similar to using fully
metal tools. The latter focused on the accuracy of the final bend angle in V-bending
by using fully plastic tools. He noticed that it is reduced compared to metal tools
due to the increased elastic deflection, nevertheless, the springback was repeatable
for each material. Furthermore, through their studies both researchers agreed on us-
ing ”soft” polymer tools because lead to a better quality surface on the formed part
than using metal tools. Besides the insights were given by Aksenov and Kononov
[13], who fabricated an heat exchanger plates using printed tools and noted that
lubrication was not necessary as the plastic had anti-friction properties. All the
above stated references agree on the potential and the advantages of using additive
manufacturing technologies for rapid prototyping forming tools and for small series’
production.
8
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:17==
3
Experimental equipment and
printing materials
3.1
Experimental equipment
This project was carried out by using different machines and equipment, which
allowed to print the tools, to bend the metal sheets, to analyse the geometrical
accuracy and the surface roughness.
• Press and sub-press: The press, shown in Figure 3.1 used for this project is
electrically driven, with a position control system and maximum capacity of
150 kN. It was designed by IPU [14]. A sub-press was also employed in order
to ensure a proper guidance of the forming tools during the process. It was
designed for use with interchangeable tool inserts as illustrated in Figure 3.2.
All experiments were conducted to fixed end positions, where the punch was
a distance of a single sheet thickness from the die, with a vertical press speed
of 3 mm/s.
Figure 3.1: Press machine.
Figure 3.2: Sub press.
• 3D printers:
– Ultimaker 2+: It is a desktop 3D printer based on the FFF technology
made by Ultimaker, and announced during the CES 2016. Its current
market price is 1700 EUR [15]. This 3D printer, illustrated in Figure
3.3, supports filament of ∅2.85mm of different material such as Poly-
lactic acid (PLA), Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), Co-polyesters
(CPE), Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU), Polycarbonates (PC) and
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
9
==PAGE:18==
Polypropylene (PP). It is characterised by a single extruder with an swap-
pable nozzle, in this case it was used a ∅0.4mm nozzle. The printer has a
building volume of 10,194cm3 [22.3 x 22.3 x 20.5 cm] and by data sheet an
X-Y axis positioning precision of 12.5µm and Z axis positioning precision
of 5 µm [15].
– Peopoly Moai 130: It is a 3D printer based on the SLA technology,
made by Peopoly, and released in 2017.
Its current price is 980EUR
[16]. The printer, shown in Figure 3.4 supports most 405nm compatible
resins. The laser is a UV LED with a wavelength of 405nm and a power
of 150mW. It has a building volume of 3,042cm3 [13 x 13 x 18 cm] and
by data sheet an X-Y axis resolution of 70µm and Z axis resolution of 5
µm (which depends by the resin)[17].
Figure 3.3:
Ultimaker2+ FFF
printer.
Figure 3.4:
Peopoly Moai 130 SLA
printer.
• 3D printing SLA post process:
– Form Washer: It is a machine designed and manufactured by Formlabs,
illustrated in Figure 3.5, with a current market price of 500 EUR [18].
The device automates the print washing in a isopropanol solution.
– Form Cure: It is an UV oven, designed and manufactured by Form-
labs, represented in Figure 3.6, with a current market price of 700 EUR
[18]. This post process maximizes material strength and performance for
stereolithography prints, by combining heat and 405 nm light.
10
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.5: Form washer [19].
Figure 3.6: Form Cure [20].
• Olympus LEXT OLS4000: This confocal microscope, as shown in Figure
3.7, is manufactured and released by Olympus. It is designed for investigation
and accuracy measurement of surfaces’ roughness and geometrical dimension
components through the acquisition of 3D digital images by use of blue laser.
The data collected from the machine were processed using the software SPIP.
• ZEISS DuraMax coordinate measuring machine: This CNC measur-
ing machine is manufactured and released by ZEISS [21]. It is illustrated in
Figure 3.8 and employed for capturing specific contours and freeform surface
measurements on mechanical components, by using ZEISS scanning sensors
and stylus. The measurement program and final analysis report were devel-
oped by the software called ZEISS CALYPSO.
Figure 3.7: Olympus LEXT OLS4000
microscope.
Figure
3.8:
ZEISS
DuraMax
CMM.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
11
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Printing materials
As presented in Section 2.2, among the different additive manufacturing processes,
Fused Filament Fabrication and Sterolithography are extensively used in rapid pro-
totyping field. Their key points are reliability, and high manufacturing speeds. Thus
for this reason, in this project, it was chosen to investigate Polylactic acid (PLA)
and ”Snow White” for FFF and SLA respectively.
• Polylactic acid: Polylactic acid also called PLA, is a thermoplastic polymer
used for a large variety of applications. It is known for its relatively low melting
temperature and low shrinkage, reducing internal residual stresses [22]. PLA
polymer is characterized by the mechanical and technological properties shown
in Table 3.1.
Properties
Unit
Value
Density
g/cm3
1.21-1.25
Tensile strength
MPa
21-60
Young’s modulus
GPa
0.35-3.5
Elongation
%
2.5-6.0
Melting Temperature
◦C
150-162
Hardness Shore D
-
48-87
Table 3.1: Mechanical and technological properties of PLA [23].
• Snow White: The photopolymer resin “Snow White” from the company
“Fun to Do”. This resin is affordable and characterized by a great trade-off
among market price, mechanical and printing properties. It is recommended
by its fast curing time, low shrinkage and low odour during printing. It was
selected for its high hardness after curing compared to similar resins: 83 shore
D hardness. Further properties are shown in Table 3.2.
Properties
Unit
Value
Density
g/cm3
1.05
Solubility
-
Insoluble
in water
Shrinkage
%
0.5
Hardness Shore D
-
83
Table 3.2: Mechanical and technological properties of Snow White resin [24].
12
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:21==
4
FDM and SLA printers
geometrical accuracy and
surface roughness
Two of the aspects of this study is related to the geometrical accuracy of the 3D
printed tools and workpieces, and to the surface roughness examination which has
been assessed on the tool’s critical locations. This section presents the experimen-
tal approach, parameters and geometries employed for the evaluation of the geo-
metrical accuracy and surface roughness investigation achievable by the printers:
Ultimaker2+ and Peopoly Moai 130.
4.1
Surface roughness approach
In order to understand the achievable surface roughness by the two 3D printers,
it was chosen to print and measure a rectangular parallelepiped.
The reference
geometry is shown in Figure 4.1, with dimensions: 25mm (L) x 40mm (H) x 20mm
(W), characterized by a building direction normal to the X-Y plane.
Figure 4.1: FFF and SLA samples measured for the surface roughness examination.
It was decided to evaluate the surface roughness of the printed components by
carrying out five measurements randomly located for each of the four lateral faces,
at 90◦and 0◦angles with respect to the layer orientation. This process was carried
out by the Olympus LEXT OLS4000 microscope presented in Section 3.1 and by
elaborating the 3D images using the software SPIP. In this way, the measurements
were taken as being representative as it was assumed minimal differences due to
the processes used to print the geometries being stable. The parameters selected to
evaluate the roughness are 2D profile parameter and areal surface 3D parameter,
Ra and Sa respectively.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
13
==PAGE:22==
• Arithmetical mean deviation of the roughness profile (Ra): This 2D
profile parameter expresses the arithmetical mean of the absolute values of
Z(x) in a sampling length, see Figure 4.2.
It is one of most widely used
roughness parameter, also referred to as the center line average (CLA). It can
be defined as the average absolute deviation of the roughness irregularities
from the mean line over one sampling length [8].
• Arithmetic mean height (Sa): This is a 3D parameter expanded from the
roughness (2D) parameter Ra. It represents the average of the absolute values
of the height Z(x,y) in the measured area. It is equivalent to the arithmetic
mean of the measured region on the three-dimensional display diagram when
valleys have been changed to peaks by conversion to absolute values [8]. The
effect of a single outlier on the measured value becomes extremely small, thus
stable results can be obtained, see Figure 4.3 .
Figure 4.2: Representation of the Ra
parameter [8].
Figure 4.3: Representation of the Sa
parameter [25].
For the sake of the study, it is important to point out that the Ra mean values
and their standard deviations were computed for each measurement as an average
obtained from all the surface profiles acquired from each location acquisition. In
addition, in order to respect the ISO 4287, it was necessary to set the values of the
noise filter cut-off (λs), cut-off wavelength (λc) and the number of cut-offs equal to
25 µm, 80 mm and 5 respectively.
4.2
Geometrical accuracy approach
The reference geometries involved in this study were different from the ones pre-
sented earlier. They are referred to as: Complex shape geometry and Cylindrical
geometry. The former had the following main dimensions: 35mm (L) x 20mm (H)
x 20mm (W), while the latter’s dimensions were 20mm (outer radius) x 5mm (H).
The printing direction for each geometry was normal to the X-Y plane and each of
them was printed five times, to allow for averaging and investigation, see Figures
4.4 and 4.5.
14
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.4: Complex shape and
cylindrical reference geometries
printed by FFF.
Figure 4.5: Complex shape and
cylindrical reference geometries
printed by SLA.
The measurement process was conducted by using the ZEISS DuraMax CMM pre-
sented in Section 3.1. The dimensions were measured with the purpose of defining
the printing accuracy in X, Y and Z axis and are shown in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 .
Figure 4.6: Complex shape reference
geometries dimensions.
Figure 4.7: Cylindrical shape reference ge-
ometries dimensions.
The measurement programs were developed for each geometry by using ZEISS CA-
LYPSO software. For the sake of the geometrical accuracy results, the geometries
key features were described by the stylus by optimal strategies e.g grid and through
the collection of 100 information points. Given these set specifications, the software
was able to ensure a reliable accuracy of the measurements.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
15
==PAGE:24==
5
V bending study
5.1
Initial study: FFF and SLA printing settings
The initial study of this project concerned the evaluation and the understanding of
the FFF and SLA printing setting in relation to the quality, strength and stiffness
of the final printed component. This section describes the applied strategy and the
results obtained from the investigation for each 3D printing technology by V bending
tests.
According to different research, the mechanical properties of the additive
manufactured component are directly related to the printing parameters. Klimyuk
et al. [11] conducted compressive strength tests on 3D printed FFF components,
showing how printing material, internal infill density percentage, shell thickness and
internal infill pattern have a major impact on the final properties of the printed
part.
In addition, Kuznetsov et al.
[22] carried out a study in relation to the
FFF technology, where he showed the influence of the printing orientation and the
strong relation between the ratio nozzle diameter/layer thickness (N/L) and the
final strength. It was reported that the former is a significant parameter due to the
anisotropy properties of the printed part, which is generated by its layer structure;
while the latter is an extremely important relationship in order to obtain a proper
inter-layer cohesion and therefore the final component strength. It is stated that
when single thread thickness is increased, the shell will be made of a smaller number
of individual threads, raising the likelihood of obtaining a larger total void volume
among them. Thus, according to this study the N/L ratio is recommended to stand
in the range between 2 and 4.
The layer thickness is also a key parameter for the SLA technology, where a smaller
layer thickness ensures complete UV penetration through the layer and a higher de-
gree of polymerization during the printing phase [26]. Furthermore, the laser power
is a second key printing parameter for SLA. It affects directly the laser penetration
depth, which is the length by which the laser is able to penetrate and cure the pho-
topolymer. In order to achieve a high quality prints, the laser penetration depth
needs to be equal to, or more than the layer thickness to ensure bonding between
the layers.
Based on the discussion above, the printing properties listed in Tables 5.1 and 5.2
are studied for FFF and SLA respectively. The printing setting values were set and
elaborated with the software UltimakerCura, which was used to set and to generate
the G-code, as mentioned in Section 2.2.
It is important to point out that the printers have been leveled and calibrated at the
beginning of the study, to guarantee high quality prints. Moreover, the V bending
tests were conducted by using the press and sub-press presented in Section3.1. The
V bending workpiece geometry and the punch and die are shown in Figures 5.1 and
5.2.
16
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:25==
Printing settings
Levels
Building orientation:
Horizontal - Vertical
Infill density [%]:
20 - 50
Layer thickness [mm]:
0.1 - 0.2
Shell thickness [mm]:
1.05 - 2.10
Table 5.1: FFF printing settings.
Printing settings
Levels
Building orientation:
Horizontal - Vertical
Laser power [mW]:
3.44 - 4.04 - 4.69 - 5.23 - 5.76 - 6.43
Initial layer speed [mm/s]:
10 - 20 - 21 - 23 - 26
Post process UV curing:
30min 45◦- 30min heater off
Table 5.2: SLA printing settings.
Figure 5.1: Target geometry formed by V-
bending, with dimensions in mm.
Figure 5.2:
Sub-press with the V
bending tool mounted.
The strength and mechanical properties of the printed components were evaluated
by employing different sheet materials and thicknesses:
• Aluminium EN AW 1050A H14: It is a popular grade of aluminium for
general sheet metal work where moderate strength is required. Alloy 1050 is
known for its excellent corrosion resistance, high ductility and highly reflective
finish. H14 represents the temper type, which the alloy is subjected to. It is
strain hardened by rolling to half hard, not annealed after rolling [27]. The
sample thicknesses used in this project are 1.00mm and 2.00mm.
• Brass CW508L: It is an alloy of Copper and Zinc, known for being ductile
and cold worked. It is characterised by less than 37% of zinc and used when
severe formability properties are required [28]. The sample thickness used in
this project is 1.50mm.
• Stainless Steel ASTM 304/ 304L: It is one of the most versatile and widely
used austenitic stainless steel [29]. The sample thickness used in this project
is 1.50mm.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
17
==PAGE:26==
For a significant and meaningful identification of the optimal printing setting com-
bination for FFF and SLA technology, it was decided the following: for the former
one to apply a full factorial design of experiments, meaning that the total number
of combinations and tests was up to 16. For the latter one, as it is more sensitive
to the parameter variation, the levels for each factor were two or more. For this
reason a ”one factor at the time” (OFAT) variation study was chosen to evaluate
the print’s quality each time before moving on.
Multiple challenges and issues were faced during these tests and processes. On one
side, parts made by FFF technology experienced delamination, permanent defor-
mation and inter-layer detachment, as shown in appendix A.1. In addition it was
also experienced the complete failure of the component during tests, as illustrated
in appendix A.1. On the other side, tools made by SLA technology experienced
warpage condition and detachment from the building platform which the prints
were subjected to, as represented in appendix A.2.
In accordance with the data obtained from the tests, the most appropriate printing
settings combinations that resulted in the highest strength and stiffness of the tools
are shown in Table 5.3.
Printing settings
FFF
SLA
Building orientation
Vertical
Vertical
Infill density [%]
50
100
Layer thickness [mm]
0.1
0.1
Shell thickness [mm]
2.10
-
Laser power [mW]
-
4.69
Initial layer speed [mm/s]
-
21
Post process UV curing
-
30min 45◦
Table 5.3: FFF and SLA optimal printing settings.
• Building orientation: The vertical printing orientation allows the prints
to withstand compressive forces during metal forming with better outcomes
compared to the ones printed in the horizontal way. This condition allows
the layers to be parallel to forces in the vertical direction, meaning that the
load is distributed across the layers and propagates inside the component on
a more uniformly and appropriate way. On the other hand, when tools are
printed in the horizontal direction, the results ends up in delamination as the
layers are pushed apart, causing the failure of the printed tool. In addition for
SLA, the vertical direction led to the printing of a smaller cross section area
of the component, condition that is extremely important for the generation of
lower detachment forces. The smaller these forces are, the most unlikely the
detachment of the component from the building plate is.
• Infill density: The higher the infill density, the larger the amount of material
that the component is made of, and consequently the greater the bonding areas
among layers are. A larger bonding area leads to an adhesion gain among the
layers, reducing the likelihood of delamination and fracture and promoting the
strength of the component. For FFF an infill density of 50% was chosen, as
18
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:27==
a trade off between printing time/material volume and component strength.
For SLA, the infill density is set to 100% in order to guarantee a complete
polymerization and to maximize the bonding among layers.
• Layer thickness: The selected layer thickness is 0.1 mm. In FFF, the thin-
ner layers lead to an improvement of the layer to layer adhesion and higher
densification of the part since the heat from the nozzle, being closer to the
previous layer, helps the layers to bond together. As mentioned earlier, this
condition also helps to decrease the generation of voids, which negatively af-
fects layer adhesion and therefore tool strength.
For SLA, a smaller layer
thickness ensures complete UV penetration through the layer and a higher
degree of polymerization.
• Shell thickness: The shell thickness was fixed to 2.10mm (double of the
default wall thickness of 1.05mm). Firstly the choice fell on this setting because
investigating the influence of the shell thickness on the geometrical accuracy
of the part, it was found that a double wall thickness conducted to a higher
component accuracy [30].
Secondly, the increment of the thickness led to
higher stiffness levels and strength of the component under bending conditions.
• Laser power: For the specific resin used in this project, the optimal value
for the laser power was found to be 5.23mW corresponding to an irradiance of
146W/cm2.
• Initial layer speed: For the above resin, the value of 21mm/s ensured an
appropriate bound to the building platform, avoiding detachment.
• Post process UV curing: Considering the relative large sizes of the 3D
printed tools, 30min at 45◦UV curing setting assured an appropriate poly-
merization of the whole component, reaching also the deeper zones.
From this point on till the end of project, the evaluated workpieces will be Al1050A
H14 1.00mm thick, and the 3D printed tools will be printed with the optimal printing
setting combination just defined for the respective technologies.
Figure 5.3: FFF printed set of tool, using the optimal printing setting combination
and showing the printing direction normal to the X-Y plane.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
19
==PAGE:28==
5.2
FFF and SLA geometrical accuracy and
surface roughness results
Once the optimal printing settings were defined, it was decided to carry out a ge-
ometrical accuracy study of the printers, as presented in Section 4.2 and a surface
roughness measurement study, as presented in Section 4.1. The former is repre-
sented by the deviation from the nominal values. Regarding the complex geometry,
see Figure 5.4, the results show an overall acceptable accuracy of the FFF printer
compared to the SLA printer. On the X axis, larger deviation are reported for the
FFF printer, 0.07 ± 0.02mm, while for the SLA it is 0.05 ± 0.03mm. Considering
the Y axis, the measurements taken in the FFF samples are always smaller than the
nominal value. This is also visible in the figure since the deviation is negative and the
relative standard deviation does not reach the horizontal axis. Opposite behaviour
is noticed in the SLA printer, which Y axis deviation is characterised by positive
value with a quite large standard deviation value, respectively -0.07 ± 0.06mm and
0.03 ± 0.11mm. Concluding by highlighting the worst accuracy result obtained for
the complex geometry of -0.38 ± 0.04mm which represents the Z axis deviation for
SLA printer. This value can be justified by the levelling and calibration procedures
of the printer, which require the tightening and loosening of different screws by hand
to level the vat, and to print specific components which lengths need to be within
a gap of 0.2mm [31]. On the contrary, the Z axis FFF accuracy is reasonably high,
which leads to small deviation, almost ten times smaller than the SLA printer one.
On the other side, considering the cylindrical geometry, the results obtained are in
Figure 5.4: Deviation in X,Y and Z directions from the nominal value of the complex
reference geometry, printed in FFF and SLA.
some cases not consistent with the ones achieved previously. This can be explained
also by considering that, when printing a circle, the laser or nozzle needs to move
on the X and Y axis continuously. While for the complex geometry the X and Y
printing location were changing one at the time. The results shown in Figure 5.5,
represent for FFF printer larger deviation in the X and Y axis of -0.2 ± 0.02mm
and 0.3 ± 0.03mm respectively. Similar behaviour is observed in the SLA printer,
20
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:29==
where the dimensions are always slightly smaller than the nominal, but represented
by larger standard deviation, -0.02 ± 0.1mm and -0.12 ± 0.08mm. Regarding the Z
axis accuracy, in the FFF printer it is reported a deviation of 0.03 ± 0.05mm, while
for the SLA printer the same deviation is measured as previously reported of -0.38
± 0.02mm.
Figure 5.5: Deviation in X,Y and Z directions from the nominal value of the cylin-
drical reference geometry, printed in FFF and SLA.
As above mentioned, once the optimal printing settings were defined, an evaluation
of the surface roughness was carried out, as presented in Section 4.1. Regarding the
FFF samples the Ra average values on the surface roughness at 90◦and 0◦angle
respect to the layer orientation were 2.9 ± 0.3µm and 0.8 ± 0.4µm respectively.
While for the SLA printer these values were lower compared to the ones produced
by FFF, respectively 1.4 ± 0.2µm and 0.8 ± 0.2µm. Finally, the surface roughness
Sa values measured on for FFF and SLA were 10.2 ± 1.5µm and 4.2 ± 0.2µm.
5.3
Tool surface roughness in function of the
number of strokes
The evaluation of the tool surface roughness versus the number of strokes was car-
ried out at the punch and die point were the highest tribological load would occur
during forming, see red mark in Figure 5.9. This study aims to understand how
the geometry and surface texture of the FFF and SLA punch and die change as
the tools were used. The visual investigation was performed using the Olympus
LEXT OLS4000 microscope presented in Section 3.1, with a magnification 20x and
for a maximum number of strokes equal to 30. The FFF punch and die results are
reported in Figure 5.6. The figures showed that the die, compared to the punch,
experienced significant changes to the surface texture. It was visible how most of
the wear occurred in the first five strokes and how a gradual wear of the die surface
took place after the fifth stroke, which might indicate some form of steady state
condition. The reason why the punch did not experience such a significant wear
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
21
==PAGE:30==
was due to the less sliding condition between the metal strip and the punch, than
the one between strip and die. While considering the SLA punch and die results,
which are reported in Figure 5.7, it is possible to detect the same overall behaviour
experienced for the FFF tools. In this case, the gradual wear in the die surface
texture took place from the fifteenth stroke on. This condition was not as evident
as the one in the FFF tools, this might be due to the higher hardness value which
characterised the SLA tools.
Figure 5.6: FFF printed tool visual inspection of the surface over number of strokes.
Figure 5.7: SLA printed tool visual inspection of the surface over number of strokes.
5.4
Measurement procedures and strategy
In order to move on to the geometrical accuracy study of the printed punch and V
bent workpiece, it is necessary to introduce the measurement strategy applied. The
measurements were carried out by using the ZEISS DuraMax, presented in Section
3.1. The nominal geometry of the workpiece formed by V-bending was illustrated in
Figure 5.1. The measurement strategy used to determine the geometrical accuracy
of the formed component, shown in Figure 5.8, consisted of five angle measurements
(M1-M5), which were performed along the arms at equal intervals of 6mm from the
end of the arm, while the radius (R) was measured where the arms met. To evaluate
the geometrical accuracy of the printed punch, as shown in Figure 5.9, the strategy
consists of five angle measurements (M1-M5) located at an equal distance from each
other of 5mm on the tilted surfaces and in five radius measurements (R1-R5) located
at an equal distance of 8mm from each other on the radius.
22
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.8: Measurement strategies for the workpiece formed by V-bending.
Figure 5.9: V-bending tool measurements’ and surface inspection’s locations.
5.5
LS-DYNA simulation of the V-bending
process using FFF tools
In the early stage of this study, it was chosen to evaluate qualitatively the springback
generated during the V-bending process using FFF tools by developing a simulation
using LS-DYNA software. This gave a visual evaluation and helped in the under-
standing of the measurements obtained from the tests in lab. I would like to point
out that this simulation was developed by one of my Supervisor, Ulfar Arinbjarnar,
since it was also part the manuscript written regarding this project [1]. The model
is shown in Figure 5.10 and consists of 15,000 solid 2d-elements in total. The blank
has a geometry of 70mm(L) x 1mm(H) x 30mm(W) and it was characterised by
a mesh of 10 elements through the thickness and based on a plane-strain formu-
lation.The tools were made of PLA and the blank was made of Al1050A H14, the
respective material properties used for the model were take from data sheets [23],[27]
and shown in Table 5.4. In order to obtain results as closer as possible to the real
process, it was decided to model and divide the PLA tools into outer shell and
internal structure, by assigning different material properties. The former has the
material properties presented in Table 5.4, while the internal structure was assigned
half of the shell Young’s modulus. This is a rough approximation, but it is used
to describe a weaker structure to the less dense internal material compared to the
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
23
==PAGE:32==
solid shell. The aluminium blank has a flow stress described by σf = 140ε0.24 [MPa].
To analyze the springback, the data obtained from the simulation were elaborated
into a second model. Figure 5.11 represents the formed workpiece before and after
unloading, showing unexpected springback results. It also shows that the location
M3 seems to be most stable in space. This location is characterized by the smallest
displacement once the punch is released, as it is located in-between two springback
locations that work against each other and is used as a reference when measuring
angles in the following sections. This irregular evident shape of the arm of the fi-
nal component can be caused by a second bend that forms during the V-bending
process, as shown in Figure 5.12. During the first deformation step (a), only one
single bending takes place. The arrows represent the direction where the material
is pushed to. Secondly, it is possible to see how the second bending occurs, and its
opposite direction in respect to the first one. This last band is generated by the
contact between punch and workpiece that takes place far from the punch nose, as
shown in (b) and (c). The conclusion of the forming process is shown in (d) and it
represents the final deformation state.
Material
Density[kg/m3]
E [GPa]
ν[ ]
PLA
1.230
2
0.33
AL1050A H14
2.710
71
0.33
Table 5.4: Material properties used in LS-DYNA simulation.
Figure 5.10: Model geometry for V-bending process in LS-DYNA.
24
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.11: Strip formed in V-bending (left) before and (right) after springback.
Any displacement is scaled by factor of 25 to visualize the springback more clearly.
Figure 5.12: V bending simulation step process. (a) Just before double-bending
begins, (b) at the onset of double-bending, (c) double-bending occurring, and (d)
full stroke indicating final deformation.
5.6
Workpiece springback investigation and
comparison with printed tool accuracy
In the Figures 5.13, 5.14, 5.15 and 5.16 are reported the outcomes obtained from the
springback investigation and geometrical accuracy study of the workpieces formed
by FFF and SLA tools. These results were obtained by the employment of the mea-
surement strategy described in Section 5.4, and by the punches with three different
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
25
==PAGE:34==
radii: 1mm, 2mm and 3mm. Looking at Figures 5.13 and 5.14, it is possible to
notice a reasonable geometrical accuracy of the FFF punches characterised by mean
angles close to 90.2◦with standard deviation not larger than 0.1◦. While the SLA
punches reported a slightly poorer accuracy, with mean values between 90.2◦and
90.8◦and standard deviation not larger than 0.4◦. The figures also indicate that the
angle grows according to where it is measured along the arm of the bent component.
In both cases the deviation from nominal increases towards the radius, proving that
the arms are not flat. This behaviour is mostly evident in the FFF tools rather than
in the SLA ones. Considering the FFF results, this is more evident for the 1mm
radius, where the mean angle grows from 86.1° to 89.8° along the length of the arm.
Whereas, for the SLA tools, as shown in figure, this behaviour is largely reduced.
The mean angles for the three different tools are reported to be between 88.8◦and
90.6◦.
Figure 5.13: Measured angles as function of measurement location for FFF tools
with different nose radii.
As mentioned in Section 5.4, since M3 is the most stable location along the arm, it
was investigated the average angle measured in this location of the workpiece over
five strokes, for the three different radii. The results obtained by FFF and SLA tools
are reported respectively, in Figures 5.15 and 5.16. Considering the former one, the
angles measured are marked by a substantial deviation from the nominal value of
90◦. The largest deviation is found when using the 3mm radius tool after three
strokes, where the measured value is 88.2 ± 0.8◦. While the smallest deviation from
nominal is found when using the 1mm radius tool at the second stroke, where the
measured value is 88.7 ± 0.3◦. This figure also marks the significant accuracy of the
workpieces obtained by forming with the 2mm radius tool. It is possible to see really
small deviations among them and a steady response over the strokes, characterized
by standard deviation of 0.08◦. On the other hand, the results obtained by SLA
tools are much more closer to the nominal value with a more steady response over
the strokes compared to the previous ones. In this case the measured angles are
larger than 90◦, they swing between the maximum of 90.6 ± 0.1◦when using the
26
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.14: Measured angles as function of measurement location for SLA tools
with different nose radii.
2mm radius tool after three strokes and a minimum for 1mm radius tool at 90.3 ±
0.15◦, after four strokes.
Figure 5.15: Measured angle at location M3 as function of no. strokes performed
for FFF tools with different nose radii.
5.7
Minimum radius achievable by polymer tools
A second aspect relevant to the geometrical accuracy of the workpiece is the achiev-
able radius by using 3D printed tools. Three different radii were tested in V-bending,
Figure 5.17 and 5.19 show the results by FFF tools and Figure 5.18 and 5.20 the
results for SLA tools. Firstly, it is evaluated the normalized radius with respect to
the nominal value of formed parts as function of number of strokes. Considering
the nominal measurements obtained by FFF tools it is clear that the tools and the
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.16: Measured angle at location M3 as function of no. strokes performed
for SLA tools with different nose radii.
workpieces are far from the nominal value, except for 3mm radius tool. Among the
printed tools, the largest deviation is reported for the 1mm radius tool which is up
to 29% with a standard deviation of 2%. While the most accurate measured tool is
the 3mm radius one, with a value slightly smaller than nominal of 1.5% and stan-
dard deviation of 1%. Regarding the workpiece formed with these tools, it is evident
that the results are not as steady as expected, as shown in Figure 5.17. Among the
outcomes characterised by the same geometry, there are divergences up to 17% for
the 1mm radius workpieces and up to 21.5% for the 3mm ones. Once again, much
better accuracy results were obtained for the tools and workpieces made by SLA
technology. The printed tool measurements are described by a smaller deviation
from the nominal, reaching maximum value up until 8%. Looking at Figure 5.18, it
is possible to see that the workpieces measurements are described by a more steady
behaviour among them. Overall, the results are within the 15% and 3% deviation,
which are associated with the 2mm radius tool and 3mm one, respectively.
Concluding this study by comparing the radius of the printed tools and the average
radius obtained among 5 workpieces for each of them. The bent parts formed by
using FFF 1mm and 2mm tools, achieved a better geometrical accuracy than those
formed by the 3mm tool. The former ones are not close to nominal value, but it seems
that the formed component acquires the measured nose radius quite closely. Instead,
the workpieces obtained by 3mm radius tool are far from the tool measurement,
which however is really close to the nominal value. The standard deviation that
describes this result is also larger than the ones measured on the tool and the 1mm
and 2mm radius workpieces. One possible explanation may be associated to the fact
that the shape and amount of material which the punch nose is made of, change for
the different radii. As presented in Section5.1, the optimal printing settings has a
shell thickness of 2.1mm, for this reason, as the radius grows larger, the nose will
be less full of material, which means that the internal structure would be taking
up more of the load. For the above reason, it is likely that there is considerably
28
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.17: Workpiece normalized radius as function of no. strokes obtained by
different FFF tools compared to measured punch radius.
Figure 5.18: Workpiece normalized radius as function of no. strokes obtained by
different SLA tools compared to measured punch radius.
more elastic deflection in the 3mm tool, than there is in the 1mm and 2mm tools.
On the other hand, Figure 5.20 shows the measurements obtained by forming with
SLA tools. For all the three tools, it is noticeable how the workpieces acquire the
measured nose radius accurately, even though the tool radii are slightly larger than
the nominal values.
This latter effect can be the result of a slightly overcuring
condition. As these three tools are 100% dense, the theory discussed above which is
related to the FFF tool internal structures is supported by these tests’ results.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.19: Workpiece average radius obtained by three different FFF tools com-
pared to measured punch radius.
Figure 5.20: Workpiece average radius obtained by three different SLA tools com-
pared to measured punch radius.
30
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:39==
6
Groove Pressing
6.1
Groove pressing tool design and workpiece
geometry
The second geometry that was considered in this project, was chosen to be more
complex than a V shape and therefore it was taken into account the groove pressing
process. This geometrical accuracy evaluation is based on the final geometry repre-
sented in Figure 6.1, which is characterised by three grooves and four flat parts. It
was formed by 3D printed FFF tools, shown in Figure 6.2. The initial dimension of
the blank were 90mm (L) x 30mm (W) x 1mm (H), made of Al1050A H14, already
presented in Section 5.1.
Figure 6.1: Target geometry formed by
groove process, with dimensions in mm.
Figure 6.2: Sub-press with the groove
tools mounted.
6.2
Measurement procedures and strategy
The geometrical accuracy of the grooved plate is determined by the applied mea-
surement strategy shown in Figure 6.3. The measurements were carried out by using
the ZEISS DuraMax, presented in Section 3.1. The nominal geometry of the work-
piece formed by groove pressing is illustrated in Figure 6.1. The strategy consisted
of measuring the angularity of the four flat parts (P1-P4) with respect to an outer
tangential plane touching the planes P2 and P3. It also consisted of measuring the
height of the three main grooves (H1-H2-H3) with respect to the outer tangential
plane touching the planes P1 and P2, P2 and P3, P3 and P4, respectively. Finally,
the overall angularity of the workpiece is measured between P1 and P4. To evaluate
the geometrical accuracy of the printed tools, as shown in Figure 6.4, the strategy
consisted of the angularity measurements for each of the four flat parts (P1-P4) and
in the three radius measurements (R1-R3) in order to obtain the groove heights.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.3: Measurement strategies for the workpiece formed by groove pressing.
Figure 6.4: Groove pressing tool measurement locations.
6.3
Geometrical accuracy of the plate and tools
The geometrical accuracy achievable by groove pressing is evaluated by the mea-
surement strategy presented in Section 6.2. The plate and tool set were measured so
that the workpiece measurements investigation can be referred to the tool dimensions
deviation from nominal. Firstly, it was taken into account the height evaluation.
Figure 6.5 shows that the tools are printed with a gradually increasing height from
H1 to H3. This can be due to the levelling method of the FFF printer’s building
platform, which is done manually by tightening and loosening screws underneath
it, leading to levelling and printing inaccuracy. However, considering the heights
nominal value of 3.4mm, good results were reported. The heights of the workpiece
were relatively close to the heights imposed by the tools, which were characterised
by standard deviations between 0.6-1.1% across the three groves, representing high
repeatability.
Secondly, it was considered the angularity of the four flat planes presented in the
geometry, which nominal value is therefore 180◦. Looking at Figure 6.6, it is clear
how the tool measurements are close to the nominal value. The mean angularity
values measured on the workpiece are instead characterised by a high deviation from
it, such a deviation is caused by the springback and geometrical inaccuracy between
the features. As expected, the largest deviation was observed on P4, which has an
average value of 178.3 ± 0.1◦and the smallest one was reported on P3 with a value
of 179.2 ± 0.1◦. Due to the springback effect on the symmetric groove pressing
plate geometry, this behaviour was predictable. After unloading, this effect leads
to an increment of the angularity deviation from nominal with distance from the
32
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.5: Average groove height in workpiece and tools compared to the nominal
height value.
center, explaining why the deviation is larger in P4 than in P3. However, it is also
possible to notice the lack of symmetry in the angularity results for P1 and P2.
With respect to each other, even thought the tools are mostly symmetric in terms
of angularity, the asymmetric angularity results in the workpiece may be caused by
the tool asymmetric groove heights as shown in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.6: Average angularity of workpiece and tools for the four key planes.
Finally, the tools behaviour was also investigated over the number of strokes. In
this case, as mentioned in Section 6.2, the overall workpiece angularity is described
by the angle between P1 and P4 and the reported height is an average value of
H1, H2 and H3. This evaluation is based on the measured dimensions normalized
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
33
==PAGE:42==
with respect to the nominal values, as shown in Figure 6.7. It is possible to see
an overall good response in terms of stability and repeatability.
Thanks to the
normalization, it can be observed that the angularity of the entire part is much
closer to the nominal value than the height of the grooves. The groove height mean
measurement deviations from the nominal value swings between 4% and 6%. This
outcome is clearly linked to the mean deviation of the die, which is equal to 4%
and which could be compensated by tools redesign. Furthermore, the angularity
measurements are more stable and characterised by a smaller standard deviation
of 0.2%, while the height measurements reported standard deviations of both tools
and workpieces of almost 4%.
Figure 6.7: Normalized measurements of workpiece and tool feature dimensions.
34
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:43==
7
Complex geometry requiring
multiple tools movements
One of the purposes of this project was to understand the feasibility of forming
complex shape by multiple moving 3D printed tools. This chapter will discuss the
tools design, the forming process and the geometrical accuracy study of a complex
shape, illustrated in Figure 7.5. The tools were printed by FFF technology, following
the optimal printing setting combination studied in Section 5.1.
The workpiece
selected geometry was based on an initial sheet of 90mm (L) x 30mm (W) x 1mm
(H), made of Al1050A H14, already presented in Section 5.1.
7.1
Complex geometry tool design and forming
process
Figure 7.1: Initial tool design.
As shown in Figure 7.1 and 7.3, the
set of tools consists of four main ele-
ments such as the primary punch, the
secondary punch, the lower tool and the
guiding tool with the addition of four
support springs (RS PRO Steel Alloy
Compression Springs) [32]. In order to
generate the inner feature represented
by the radii Ra and Rb in the Figure
7.6, the tools’ geometries were designed
so that the vertical movement of the pri-
mary punch, combined with the inclined
interface between the secondary punch
and the guiding tool, led to the horizon-
tal movement of the former tool. The
initial tools design is shown in Figure
7.1, but while conducting the tests, it
was noticed that at the beginning of the forming process, the two guiding tool’s
walls were deformed outwards, showing a lack of stiffness and strength of the com-
ponent. In order to overcome the issue, the guiding tool was clamped, as shown in
Figure 7.1, but the devised solution failed because the clamp was not stable and the
possibility to over-tight the printed tool was too high. In addition, a second issue
was observed relevant to the interfaces among the two springs and the secondary
punch. Even though two guiding paths were placed on the bottom face of the sec-
ondary punch, to let the springs move in the horizontal direction, they were not
able to return at the starting position. This was causing a lack of contact between
the components in the inclined interface. In order to overcome the aforementioned
problems, it was decided to design and produce a steel housing, which would have
been placed within the sub-press, as illustrated in Figure 7.2. This component was
designed with the purpose to contain and constrain the guiding tool, in order to
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
35
==PAGE:44==
prevent its deformation. The second issue was solved by redesigning the secondary
punch and the lower tool, as shown in Figure 7.3. In this configuration the springs
were locked during the forming process, since they were constrained on the same
plane, they could only move in the Z direction. For a better comprehension of the
whole process, Figure 7.4 shows the forming operation at selected tool positions.
Figure 7.2: Steel frame aligned to the
sub-press by two guide pins.
Figure 7.3: Final design and relative
tool names.
Figure 7.4: Forming process by multiple tool movements shown by (a) sub-press with
multiple installed 3D printed tools (b) sub-press with multiple installed 3D printed
tools an initial sheet, (c) deformation after 15 mm vertical tool displacement, (d) 22
mm displacement, (e) 29 mm displacement and (f) final tool position after 36 mm
tool displacement.
36
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:45==
Figure 7.5: Final bent components.
7.2
Geometrical accuracy of the complex shape
and primary punch
Figure 7.6: Selected geometry for the study.
The cross-section identifies dimensions for ac-
curacy evaluation.
The complex shape and primary
punch’s key dimensions identified
for this study are:
the width of
the internal shape and three radii.
As shown in Figure 7.6 Ra and Rb
are related to the internal geome-
try created by the secondary punch,
while Rc is related to the radius
formed around the primary punch
when formed in a single step. The
challenges faced during the form-
ing tests for the achievement of the
nominal final complex shape were
various, and mostly due to the RP
tools limitations and metal spring-
back effect. Firstly, the transition
from the upper vertical part to the
curvature characterized by Ra and Rb, which is divided by an horizontal section of
only 1mm, was not achieved during the actual forming tests. Secondly, this issue
was mainly caused by the springback effects which acted in the direction of smearing
out the horizontal feature and by the lack of closure between the primary punch and
the secondary punch. The key dimension measurements were taken on the work-
pieces formed in the first five strokes performed by the tools, using the DuraMax
CMM, see Section 3.1, and presented in Figure 7.7. Furthermore, the figure also
shows respectively the measurements of the primary punch, taken after reaching the
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
37
==PAGE:46==
surface steady-state condition which was achieved after five strokes. For a proper
understanding of the geometrical accuracy and to allow the comparison among the
different features and components, the workpiece and punch key dimensions are re-
ported normalized with respect to their nominal values. It is important to point out
that Rb dimensions are not measured on the primary punch as it is not defined by
it, but rather by the secondary punch.
Concluding, the geometrical accuracy of the primary punch is considered acceptable
as the nominal dimensions stand within a single standard deviation from the mea-
sured value. As expected from these results, the dimensions of the features formed
by the primary punch, the nose radius Rc and the width W are closer to being
nominal. The former maximum measurement was only 2% larger than nominal di-
mension, with a standard deviation of 4%, while the later maximum measurement
was 6% larger than nominal with a standard deviation of 2%. Different conclusions
are drawn from the accuracy evaluation of Ra and Rb radii, which are both related
to the inner geometry, where the largest deviations were measured. The deviation
in the radius Ra is smaller than Rb, nevertheless still important, being up to 20%
larger than nominal and having a standard deviation of up to 10%. As above men-
tioned, the radius Rb is the furthest from the nominal value, being up to 30% larger
than nominal, with a standard deviation of 12%.
Figure 7.7: Geometrical accuracy of the measured primary punch and five formed
workpieces in terms of dimensions’ evaluation identified in Figure 7.6 normalized by
their nominal values. Standard deviations are based on five measurements.
38
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:47==
8
Economic and sustainability
considerations of 3D printing
compared to conventional
manufacturing processes
Up to now, the tool and workpiece geometrical accuracy and the possibility to
implement 3D printed tools in the prototyping phase or in the production line for
small production volumes in sheet metal forming were investigated. However, it
is also important to analyze the sustainability and the economic gain that this
technology could bring to the field. For the above reasons, this chapter assesses the
economic aspect and sustainability of both additive and conventional manufacturing
processes, in relation to the complex geometry analysed in the Section 7.
8.1
3D printed tool cost vs steel tool cost
In order to analyze the different production costs of one set of tools, on one side it
was decided to consider, as 3D printing technologies, the ones used for this project:
FFF and SLA, with the relevant 3D printers: Ultimaker 2+ and Peolpoly Moai 130.
On the other side, two of the most common conventional manufacturing processes:
milling and wire EDM. The cost analysis considers different factors, such as the
cost of raw materials, machine time and electricity consumption. For 3D printed
tools the tool cost is influenced by the raw material and electricity consumption.
Printing settings such as infill density and layer thickness play a significant role
too. The influence of these different parameters in relation to the tool cost will not
be investigated in this project for the following reasons: time constraints and also
because these parameters during the study in Section 5.1, were optimized to achieve
tools with adequate strength and quality for metal forming. To make a comparison
with conventional tools made of tool steel, it was selected the Caldie from Uddeholm,
a chromium-molybdenum-vanadium alloyed tool steel [33]. For the sake of the cost
comparison, it is important to point out that the raw material cost and electricity
consumption cost are based on the Danish market.
Firstly, it was possible to estimate the tool production cost by FFF, presented in
Table 8.1, by considering the printing time, weight, volume of the components and
the following data:
• ”Primacreator” PLA filament cost: 23.3 EUR/kg [34].
• Output Ultimaker 2+ printer: 221W
• Electricity consumption: 0.3 EUR /kWh [35], which lead to 0.07 EUR /1h
printing.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
39
==PAGE:48==
Tool:
Primary
punch
Secondary
punch
Lower
tool
Guiding
tool
All tools
Printing time [hh:mm]:
8:41
2:32
6:18
18:35
36:06
Weight [g]:
49
15
36
108
208
Volume [cm3]:
62.30
15.50
43.50
130
251
Electricity cost [EUR]:
0.60
0.17
0.40
1.23
2.40
PLA filament cost [EUR]:
1.10
0.35
0.84
2.52
4.81
Total cost [EUR]:
1.70
0.52
1.24
3.75
7.21
Table 8.1: 3D printed FFF set of tools cost.
Secondly, it was possible to estimate the tool production cost by SLA, presented in
Table 8.2, by considering the printing time, weight, volume of the components and
the following data:
• ”Fun To Do” Snow White resin cost: 50 EUR/kg [36].
• Output Peopoly Moai130: 221W
• Electricity consumption: 0.3 EUR /kWh [35], which lead to 0.07 EUR /1h
printing.
• The post process time considers 10min of washing and 30min of UV curing at
45◦.
• 1kg of isopropanol cost 95 EUR [37]. It is assumed that it can be used for 100
washing cycles, this value is quoted on a DTU Lab experience estimation.
• The electricity total cost takes into consideration the printing, washing and
UV curing electricity consumption.
Tool:
Primary
punch
Secondary
punch
Lower
tool
Guiding
tool
All tools
Printing time [hh:mm]:
10:05
3:15
8:32
22:50
44:40
Post process time [hh:mm]
00.40
00.40
00.40
00.40
02:40
Weight [g]:
70.80
17.68
49.43
147.70
286
Volume [cm3]:
62.30
15.50
43.50
130
251
Resin cost [EUR]:
3.54
0.88
2.50
7.40
14.32
Isopropanol cost [EUR]:
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.95
3.80
Electricity cost [EUR]:
0.33
0.12
0.27
0.70
1.42
Total cost [EUR]:
4.82
1.95
3.72
9.05
19.54
Table 8.2: 3D printed SLA set of tools cost.
Thirdly, it was possible to estimate the tool production cost by wire EDM, presented
in Table 8.3, by considering the production time, initial ad final raw material volume
of the all components and the following data:
40
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:49==
• Raw material cost of Uddeholm Caldie: 32.4 EUR/kg. Quote for price received
through e-mail from steel producer.
• Cost of wire EDM processes: 120 EUR/hour. Price quoted on a single work-
shop.
• Wire EDM with two trim cuts are assumed to reach a surface roughness (Ra)
of 0.6µm, which is typical for metal forming.
• In order to optimize the production time and therefore to minimize the cost,
the tool assembly was slightly re-designed. In particular the guiding pins (see
Figure 7.3) were mounted by screws after production of the tools instead of
being printed directly.
Tool:
All four tool parts
Initial raw material volume [cm3]:
845 [13.0 x 13.0 x 5.0]
Final tools volume [cm3]:
252
Production time [hh:mm]:
6:45
Wire EDM cost [EUR]:
810
Raw material cost [EUR]:
214
Total cost [EUR]:
1,024
Table 8.3: Production set tools cost by Wire EDM.
Finally, it was possible to estimate the tool production cost by milling, presented in
Table 8.4, by considering the production time, initial ad final raw material volume
of all the components and the following data:
• Raw material cost of Uddeholm Caldie: 32.4 EUR/kg. Quote for price received
through e-mail from steel producer.
• Cost of milling processes: 120 EUR/hour. Price quoted on a single workshop.
• Milling time was estimated in order to reach a surface roughness (Ra) of 0.6µm,
which is typical for metal forming.
• In order to optimize the production time and therefore to minimize the cost,
the tool assembly was re-designed. The tools were split in multiple parts, for
a total of 6 components. This also includes changes such as the guiding pins
(see Figure 7.3) being mounted by screws after production of the tools instead
of being printed directly.
• The initial volume of raw material for milling is smaller than for wire EDM
as the six components are produced separately.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
41
==PAGE:50==
Tool:
All four tool parts
Initial raw material volume [cm3]:
637
Final tools volume [cm3]:
252
Production time [hh:mm]:
23:00
Milling cost [EUR]:
2,760
Raw material cost [EUR]:
162
Total cost [EUR]:
2,922
Table 8.4: Production set tools cost by milling.
Tool:
All four tool parts
FFF cost [EUR]:
7.21
SLA cost [EUR]:
19.54
Wire EDM cost [EUR]:
1,024
Milling cost [EUR]:
2,922
Table 8.5: Summary production set tools cost for the manufacturing processes con-
sidered.
From the data analysis, it is evident how much 3D printed tools are significantly
cheaper compared to the ones manufactured by conventional methods. In terms
of manufacturing time, the FFF and SLA 3D printing processes take more than 5
times and more than 6 times as long as wire EDM and 1.5 times and 2 times as long
as milling, respectively. However, the printing can take place overnight and without
an operator assistance.
The price of the four tool parts, in terms of electricity
and material used, is calculated to be 7.21 euros for the FFF printing and almost
three times more for the SLA one, equal to 19.54 euros.
This is a considerable
savings compared to wire EDM and milling, the total costs of which are 1,024 euros
and 2,922 euros respectively. As mentioned above, the prices quoted here for wire-
EDM and milling are based on a single workshop and may vary from one workshop
to another depending on the majority of the cost being in the production. The
FFF and SLA printing technologies differ from the others for being an almost zero
material waste processes due to the precise control of the extruded material and
to the accurate laser position respectively. Opposite situation for the conventional
subtractive manufacturing methods. Considering the wire EDM for example, as
shown in Table 8.3, the volume of wasted material was up to 594 cm3, which in
terms of direct impact on the cost, it piles to a value of 150 euros. The costs of the
FFF and SLA printers used in this project detailed in Section 3.1 amount to 1,700
euro and 2,200 euros respectively. It should be noticed that these numbers are based
on the Danish market. This means that starting out will be more expensive than
producing a single set of tools by wire EDM. Despite that, as shown in Figure 8.1,
it is profitable as soon as a second set of tools is produced. It is also evident that
the milling production is never profitable compared to the other three processes.
42
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8.1: Production cost as a function of quantity of tool set produced by different
manufacturing processes. FFF and SLA costs consider also the printers and post-
processes costs.
8.2
Operator working time
In comparison to the conventional manufacturing processes, the 3D printing tech-
nologies lead to a significant reduction of the operator working time. In the cost
analysis presented in Section 8.1, the operator cost was not included. Its inclusion
would have only made 3D printing more advantageous, since the process is relatively
hand-free. This is remarkable especially for the production by FFF technology, while
SLA technique requires slightly more assistance due to the post processes. This op-
erator working time saving and economic gain is also highlighted by Srinivasan and
Bassan et al.[38], where they mention that the use of FFF can reduce the manufac-
turing cost and production time considerably.
8.3
Recyclability of polymers and tool steel
considerations
As mentioned previously, the understanding of the environmental impact of 3D
printing materials versus the conventional manufacturing tool steels, is essential
for future works and industrial considerations.
For the above reasons, since the
project focuses on the behaviour of PLA polymer, SnowWhite resin and steel, in
the following paragraphs sustainability and recyclability of those materials will be
discussed.
• PLA: This thermoplastic polymer is favoured for its biodegradability proper-
ties. In fact, it is produced from renewable resources such as corn starch or
sugarcane and it is stable in general atmospheric conditions and will biode-
grade within 50 days in industrial composters and 48 months in water [39].
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
43
==PAGE:52==
There is also an absence of unpleasant odours and toxic fumes when heated,
which make it really handle to use with no needs to print in a specific work
environment.
• Snow White: This UV curable resin is characterised by minimal skin irrita-
tion, which makes it an “user friendly” product [40]. But as most of the avail-
able commercial stereolithography resin it is not biodegradable, and not pro-
duced from recyclable resources, and it has a large impact on the environment.
However, further studies [41] show the possibility of creating biodegradable,
biocompatible and therefore environmental friendly resins for SLA technology
characterised also by significant mechanical properties.
• Steel: This alloy is one of the most sustainable and permanent materials avail-
able on the market. It is characterized by a recycling rate of 90% in packaging
industries, without loss of quality or degradation of properties compared to
the virgin material [42] and [43]. Due to these properties, and for environ-
mental and economic benefits such as raw material conservation and energy
savings, steel recycling has become a priority among steel manufacturers over
the years. Steel production, which can generally be divided into two processes:
an integrated one (produced from iron ore) and an electrical one (produced
from scrap), does have a significant impact on the environment in terms of en-
ergy consumption. Especially the former produces large amounts of unwanted
solid material, liquids and gas emissions during mining and production refining
[44].
In conclusion, the significant biodegradability properties, the possibility of using
renewable resources, and the almost zero raw material waste make the production
of 3D printed tools more sustainable and eco-friendly for rapid prototyping, and
for small series production. The use of PLA tools by FFF technologies is currently
the most affordable, effortless and sustainable choice, reaching the best compromise
from a sustainable point of view compared to SLA tools. However, steel tools are
still more suitable for large production volume of sheet metal forming due to its
resistance against wear and the tool cost distribution over many formed parts.
44
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:53==
9
Conclusion and future work
This project demonstrates the application and the flexibility of additive manufac-
tured tools for sheet metal forming by FFF and SLA techniques, using aluminium
sheets. The potential of these technologies in the sheet forming field is presented by
the application of polymers tools in different forming processes for small series or
prototyping. It also shows that there is room for improvement and further research
in the field. From this study, the following conclusions can be drawn:
• V-bending: First, from the surface roughness analysis, it was noticed that
FFF printed tools achieve a steady-state condition in five strokes for the tool
set with minimal wear detected in following strokes. Instead, for the SLA tool
set this condition is achieved in fifteen strokes. Secondly, regarding the tools
and workpieces geometrical accuracy, it was observed that the springback effect
acts in a more complicated way with angular changes in multiple directions.
This behaviour is due to the elastic deflection of the tools and it is more
evident in the PLA tools, which are softer than the resin ones. In terms of
workpiece radius accuracy, the study shows a correlation with the structure
of the printed tools, highlighting the importance of the shell-thickness setting
for optimal results.
• Groove pressing: By designing and studying the groove pressing process, the
feasibility of employing 3D printed tools is evident for forming more complex
shapes. From a geometrical accuracy aspect, a significant stability on the over-
all angularity plate measurements was reported, even though it was slightly
under the nominal value. Furthermore, it was realized that the groove heights
are driven by the smallest dimension between die and punch. In this case,
it was led by the die. These final features could be improved by springback
compensation since there is low scatter in the final geometries.
• Complex geometry: In designing and forming a complex shape which re-
quire multiple tools movement, from a geometrical accuracy point of view, it
was observed that the features formed by the interaction of moving tools were
characterized by larger deviations from nominal compared to the ones formed
along the primary punch geometry. Considering the economic factor and the
flexibility of the process, it was reported that manufacturing tools by AM is
cheaper than producing them with conventional manufacturing methods, but
it still requires a significant initial investment. The comparison among FFF,
SLA, milling and wire EDM processes showed that, to print one tool set of
the complexity and size similar to the one presented in Section 7, the cost is
less than 20 euros. On the other hand, wire EDM and milling were valued to
be quite expensive. Furthermore, the tool additive manufacturing involves a
longer production time, but it can take place overnight and thus reduces sig-
nificantly the operator’s working time. Finally, considering the environmental
impact of polymer tools, it is clear that additive manufacturing technologies
and materials are more sustainable and eco-friendly for rapid prototyping and
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
45
==PAGE:54==
for small series production than the tool steel and conventional methods.
As presented in this project, the future works in the sheet metal forming field could
move towards the introduction and integration of flexible manufacturing units, as
shown in Figure 9.1. These units could be employed for smaller series’ production,
and to satisfy the ever increasing demand for customized products and individual
parts. The benefits would be substantial: cost reduction, no need for an operator
on site, the production even overnight and nevertheless it has low impact on the
environment.
Figure 9.1: Illustration of a remotely controlled flexible manufacturing unit for sheet
metal forming.
The forming unit presented integrates the 3D printing, sheet metal forming in a sin-
gle step and robotic handling. The process is designed to be completely automated
and remotely controlled. At the center, it is located a robot, which can handle
printed tools and locate them into the dedicated slots into the sub-press. The robot
is expected to move with a precision of 0.1mm. It is also possible to design the
tools with additional features in order to facilitate the robot’s grip. Once the tools
are placed in the sub-press, the robot will take a sheet metal blank to the press
(e.g. by a vacuum gripper system) and bring it back after forming. It will then
replace the formed sheet with a new blank. Cutting of initial blanks could also be
included in the flexible manufacturing unit. As mentioned earlier, the unit would be
completely remote-controlled and for this reason it is essential to consider newer 3D
printer versions for, FFF technology for example, it can be considered the Ultimaker
2+ Connect. This model can be operated through a Wi-Fi or Ethernet connection,
allowing printing to be started from anywhere within company’s network. This of
course comes at a higher price of 2182 euros [45]. Finally, it should be highlighted
that this project was mainly based on forming relatively pliable workpiece mate-
rial (Al1050A H14), whereas other applications may involve harder materials with
smaller thicknesses such as brass, spring steel or stainless steel. The potential of
3D printed tools on these materials was not investigated during this study, and
therefore it can be considered as part of future works.
46
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
F. Tondini U. Arinbjarnar A. Basso and CV. Nielsen. The performance of 3D
printed polymer tools in sheet metal forming. Submitted for Metals, 2021.
[2]
F. Tondini U. Arinbjarnar A. Basso and CV. Nielsen. 3D printing to facilitate
flexible sheet metal forming production. Submitted for presentation at the 9th
CIRP Global Web Conference – Sustainable, resilient, agile manufacturing,
and service operations : Lessons from COVID-19, 2021.
[3]
Zaragosa V.G. et al. Sheet metal bending with flexible tools. Proc Manuf 29,
232–239., 2019.
[4]
IITG R. Ganesh Narayanan. Slide: Metal forming processes. -.
[5]
American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM F2792-10e1. Standard ter-
minology for additive manufacturing technologies. ASTM, 2012.
[6]
I. Gibson, D. Rosen, and B. Stucker. Additive manufacturing technologies: 3D
printing, rapid prototyping, and direct digital manufacturing. Springer, 2014.
[7]
A. Dorigato et al. Electrically conductive nanocomposites for fused deposition
modelling, Synthetic Metals, vol. 226, pp. 7–14, 2017.
[8]
Berrimi Chihab Eddine and Anish Chaparala. Study on the surface topography
and dimensional accuracy of fused deposition modelling. Halmstad University,
2017.
[9]
Additive.blog. “Stereolithography figure”. In: (Accessed on May 7, 2021). url:
https://www.additive.blog/knowledge-base/3d-printers/sla-stereolithography-
dlp-cdlp-clip/.
[10]
P. Zelený, T. Vána, and J Stryal. Application of 3D printing for specific tools.
Mater Sci Forum 862, 316–323, 2016.
[11]
D. Klimyuk, M. Serezhkin, and A. Plokikh. Application of 3D printing in sheet
metal forming. Materials Today Proceedings, 38(4), 1579–1583., 2021.
[12]
N. Nakamura et al. Bending of sheet metals using plastic tools made with 3D
printers. Proc Manuf, 15, 737–742, 2018.
[13]
L.B. Aksenov and I.Y. Kononov. Thin sheet forming with 3D printed plastic
tool. Solid State Phenomena, 299, 705-710, 2020.
[14]
IPU. “IPU consultancy”. In: (Accessed on June 28, 2021). url: https://www.
ipu.dk/.
[15]
Dynamism. “Ultimker 2+ specification and price”. In: (Accessed on May 7,
2021). url: https://www.dynamism.com/ultimaker/ultimaker-2-plus.html.
[16]
Peopoly. “Peopoly Moai 130 price”. In: (Accessed on May 7, 2021). url: https:
//peopoly.net/products/moai- 130- sla- printer- kit- version?_pos=5&_sid=
52110ee24&_ss=r.
[17]
All3dp. “Peopoly Moai 130 specification”. In: (Accessed on May 7, 2021). url:
https://all3dp.com/1/peopoly-moai-130-review-3d-printer-specs/.
[18]
Formlabs. “Form Cure and Wash picture”. In: (Accessed on May 27, 2021).
url: https://formlabs.com/eu/store/post-processing/?Post+Processing=5444.
[19]
Riogrande. “Form Wash picture”. In: (Accessed on May 27, 2021). url: https:
//www.riogrande.com/product/formlabs-form-wash-system-for-resin-models/
701465.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
47
==PAGE:56==
[20]
Get3d. “Form Cure picture”. In: (Accessed on May 27,2021). url: https://
get3d.pl/sklep/akcesoria/akcesoria-formlabs/formlabs-form-cure/.
[21]
ZEISS. “ZEISS DuraMAx specification”. In: (Accessed on May 27, 2021). url:
https://applications.zeiss.com/C1257A26006EFF9E/0/0997A24D4BFED8AAC1257A45002916E3/
%5C$FILE/ZEISS_DuraMax_Specifications_EN.pdf.
[22]
V.E. Kuznetsov et al. Strength of PLA components fabricated with fused de-
position technology unsing a desktop 3D printer as a function of geometrical
parameters of the process. Polymers, 10, 313;.Thin sheet forming with 3D
printed plastic tool, 2018.
[23]
S. Farah. Physical and mechanical properties of PLA, and their functions in
widespread applications. A comprehensive review, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., 2016.
[24]
Caltdynamics. “Snow White properties and characteristic”. In: (Accessed on
May 17, 2021). url: https://www.caltdynamics.com/shop/fun-to-do-snow-
white-resin.
[25]
O.Corporation. “Roughness (3D) parameter.” In: (Accessed on May 27, 2017).
url: https://www.olympus-ims.com/en/knowledge/metrology/roughness/3d_
parameter/.
[26]
D.L. Naik and R. Kiran. On anisotropy, strain rate and size effects in vat
photo polymerization based specimens. Additive manufacturing 2018, 23, 181-
189; 2018.
[27]
Alluminium 1050A H14 Datasheet. Aalco, the UK’s largest independent multi-
metals stockholder, Accessed on June 3, 2021. url: https://www.aalco.co.uk/
datasheets/Aluminium-Alloy-1050A-H14-Sheet_57.ashx.
[28]
Brass CW508L Datasheet. Aalco, the UK’s largest independent multi-metals
stockholder, Accessed on June 3, 2021. url: https : / / www . aalco . co . uk /
datasheets/Copper-and-Copper-Alloys-CW508L-Sheet_114.ashx.
[29]
Stainless steel 304L Datasheet. Aalco, the UK’s largest independent multi-
metals stockholder, Accessed on June 3, 2021. url: https://www.aalco.co.uk/
datasheets/Stainless-Steel-14307-304L-Sheet-and-Plate-Quarto-Plate--CPP-
Plate_344.ashx.
[30]
D. Aslani K.E.and Chaidas et al. Quality performance evaluation of thin walled
PLA 3D Printed parts using the teguchi method and grey relational analysis.
J Manuf Mater Process. 2020, 4, 47; doi:10.3390/jmmp4020047, 2020.
[31]
“Peopoly Moai 130 levelling”. In: (Accessed on March 10, 2021). url: http:
//wiki.peopoly.net/doku.php?id=moai:leveling.
[32]
RS PRO. “RS PRO Steel Alloy Compression Spring”. In: (Accessed on Febru-
ary 20, 2021). url: https://uk.rs-online.com/web/p/compression-springs/
0751584/.
[33]
Uddeholm. “Caldie - tool steel”. In: (Accessed on May 27, 2021). url: https:
//www.uddeholm.com/denmark/da/products/uddeholm-caldie/.
[34]
Primacreator. “Primacreator PLA filament price”. In: (Accessed on March
12, 2021). url: https://primacreator.com/products/primavalueE284A2-pla?
variant=61780175243.
[35]
Statista. “Electricity prices for households in Denmark from 2010 to 2020,
semi-annually”. In: (Accessed on May 2021). url: https://www.statista.com/
statistics/418075/electricity-prices-for-households-in-denmark/.
48
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:57==
[36]
Fun To Do. “Fun To Do Snow White price”. In: (Accessed on May 2021). url:
http://www.funtodo.net/our-3d-resin-blends.html.
[37]
Merck. “1kg isopropanol price”. In: (Accessed on May 28, 2021). url: https:
//www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search?term=w292912&interface=All&N=0&
mode=match20partialmax&lang=en&region=DK&focus=product.
[38]
Srinivasan V and Bassan J. 3D Printing and the Future of Manufacturing
-CSC LEADING EDGE FORUM. 2012.
[39]
Biosciences. “PLA mechanical and technological properties”. In: (Accessed on
May 7, 2021). url: https://www.biosciences.ie/sites/all/modules/backup_
migrate/flavored-water-ysmbpzz/aad54f-what-does-pila-stand-for.
[40]
Fun To Do. “http://www.funtodo.net/our-3d-resin-blends.html”. In: (Accessed
on March 5, 2021).
[41]
Zuying Feng et al. Graphene-Reinforced Biodegradable Resin Composites for
Stereolithographic 3D Printing of Bone Structure Scaffolds. Hindawi Journal
of Nanomaterials Volume 2019, Article ID 9710264, 13 pages, 2019.
[42]
Worldsteel Association. “Steel recycling”. In: (Accessed on May 16, 2021).
url: https://www.worldsteel.org/steel- by- topic/sustainability/materiality-
assessment/recycling.html,.
[43]
Tinwaredirect. “Environmental Impact Of Plastic Vs Metal.” In: (Accessed on
May 16, 2021). url: https://tinwaredirect.com/blogs/tips-advice/environmental-
impacts-of-plastics-vs-metals.
[44]
Norgate TE, Jahanshahi S., and Rankin WJ. Assessing the environmental im-
pact of metal production processes. Journal of Cleaner Production 2006;15:838-
848, doi :10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.06.018, 2006.
[45]
Dynamism. “Ultimaker 2+ Connect.” In: (Accessed on May 2021). url: https:
//www.dynamism.com/ultimaker/ultimaker-2-plus-connect.html?aff=3&utm_
source=all3dp&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=all3dp.
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
49
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
A.1
FFF tool defects and failures
Figure A.1
Figure A.2
Figure A.3
Figure A.4
Figure A.5
Figure A.6
50
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
==PAGE:59==
A.2
SLA tool defects
Figure A.7
Figure A.8
Figure A.9
Figure A.10
Figure A.11
3D printing of prototype tools for sheet metal forming
51
==PAGE:60==
 
==PAGE:61==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 425
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Tlf.: +45 4525 4763
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
July 2021
